RAT TAP IS 6356 : 2021 
Indian Standard 


corte — RAP 
( A TAA) 


Toothpaste — Specification 
( Fourth Revision ) 


ICS 71.100.70 


© BIS 2021 


anda AM SAN 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Tea TH AMT, ay freh 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


November 2021 Price Group 8 


Cosmetics Sectional Committee, PCD 19 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Fourth Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft finalized 
by the Cosmetics Sectional Committee had been approved by the Petroleum, Coal and Related Products Division 
Council. 


This standard was originally issued in 1971 and first revised in 1978 when the changes were made in the 
requirements of fineness and a test for hard- and sharp-edged particles was included in place of test for abrasion. 


In the second revision in 1993, toothpaste was classified as fluoridated and non-fluoridated toothpaste. New 
requirements for toothpaste stability, microbial purity, spreadability, ease of extrusion, fluoride ion for fluoridated 
toothpaste and tube inertness were included. Lower limit for pH was raised in line with International standard, 
keeping in mind the safety aspect of toothpaste. Requirements for expiry date and labelling key ingredients on 
containers were also incorporated in this revised version. 


In the third revision in 2001, considerable help was derived from various overseas standards. 


Relevant parts of these standards were incorporated in the standard, keeping in mind the specific needs in the 
Indian context. Definitions for dentifrice and toothpaste were included from ISO 11609.In line with the new 
emerging technologies, such as use of soft agglomerates/capsules, the fineness specifications and test method were 
modified in this version. 


The toothpaste, when used in a normal manner, shall not cause injury to the teeth, gums, and mucous membrane of 
the mouth or the body in general. The role of toothpaste is to clean the surface of teeth and also to prevent/ reduce 
the incidence of oral dental diseases like caries, gingivitis or periodontal diseases. The use of toothpaste improves 
the oral hygiene. Hence toothpaste with active ingredients like fluoride, triclosan, etc, which help in improving 
oral hygiene are part of this specification. 


Toothpaste formulations are designed to have optimal abrasivity to effect cleaning action without hurting soft 
tissues or tooth enamel by way of excessive abrasivity. Relative dentine abrasivity (RDA) is recognized in most 
of the International Standards as the measure to determine this parameter. RDA is, therefore, recommended as a 
type test in this standard. The abrasivity of the toothpaste shall not exceed the limits specified when tested as per 
procedure given in Annex H. The abrasivity measurement methodology has been based on 1S0 11609.Since RDA 
measurement facility is currently not available in India, a simpler abrasion test using a photographic paper is being 
developed. This procedure may be adopted in future after completing the studies and establishing validation with 
RDA. 


Toothpaste containing fluorides have been unequivocally proven to be effective in caries control but under certain 
conditions excessive ingestion of fluoride may contribute to fluorosis. Keeping both the aspects in mind , the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has imposed a restriction on limit of fluoride ion in toothpaste. While 
retaining the maximum available fluoride level at 1000 ppm for fluoridated toothpaste, a simpler method for 
fluoride analysis was included in the third revision of the standard. 


In the fourth revision of the standard no changes have been made on the maximum limit on heavy metal content 
expressed as lead in tooth paste. However a requirement of Mercury, with a limit of one ppm has been added. 
While a method for estimation of heavy metals expressed as lead has been provided in Annex D of this standard, 
alternate, validated methods, such as Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometry (AAS), Inductively Coupled Plasma 
Mass Spectrometry (ICP-MS) and Inductively Coupled Plasma Optical Emission Spectrometry (ICP-OES) may 
also be used. However, in case of dispute, the method described in Annexure D of this standard will be the referee 
method. 


Requirements for fineness have been modified for both fluoridated and non-fluoridated toothpastes. 


No stipulations have been made regarding the composition of tooth paste, however, it is essential that the tooth 
paste formulations do not contain any ingredient in sufficient concentration to cause a toxic or irritating reaction 
when used in the mouth. Nor shall it be harmful in normal use, keeping in mind that small amounts may be 
ingested inadvertently 


(Continued to third cover) 


IS 6356 : 2021 


Indian Standard 


TOOTHPASTE — SPECIFICATION 
( Fourth Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard prescribes the requirements and the 
methods of sampling and test for toothpaste. 


2 REFERENCES 


The Indian Standards referred in this standard have 
been listed below.. All standards are subject to revision, 
and parties to agreements based on this standard are 
encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying 
the most recent editions of the standard: 


IS No. Title 
264 : 2005 Nitric acid (second revision) 
265 : 2021 Hydrochloric acid (fourth revision) 
460 (Part 1): Test sieves: Part 1 Wire cloth test 
2020 sieves (third revision) 
2088 : 1983 Methods for determination of 


arsenic (second revision) 


IS 3958: 1984 Methods of sampling cosmetics 


(second revision) 


4707 Classification of cosmetic raw 


materials and adjuncts 


(Part 1): 2020 Dyes colours 


(second revision) 


and pigments 


(Part 2): 2017 List of raw materials generally 
not recognized as safe for use in 


cosmetics (second revision) 


14648 : 2011 Methods of test for microbiological 
examinations of cosmetics 
4011 : 2018 Method of test for safety 
evaluation of cosmetics 
(second revision) 
16913 : 2018 Methods of test for cosmetics and 
determination of heavy metals 
(arsenic, cadmium, lead and 
mercury) by atomic absorption 
spectrometry 
3 DEFINITIONS 
3.1 Dentifrice — A dentifrice is any substance or 


combination of substances specially prepared for the 
public for cleaning the accessible surfaces of teeth. 


3.2 Toothpaste — A toothpaste is defined as a dentifrice 
in the form of a smooth, semisolid, homogeneous 
mass containing acceptable ingredients such as 
abrasives/polishing agents, surface active agents, 
humectants, binding agent, and other appropriate 
substances for oral health maintenance. The product 
can be opaque, transparent, or combination thereof, 
coloured or white, packed in a suitable container from 
which it can be extruded in the form of a continuous 
mass. 


4 TYPES 


The toothpaste shall be of either Type | or Type 2: 
a) Type 1 — Non-fluoridated; and 
b) Type 2 — Fluoridated. 


5 REQUIREMENTS 


5.1 Composition 


A toothpaste shall not contain mono or disaccharides, 
for example, sucrose or other readily fermentable 
carbohydrates. All the raw materials used shall 
conform to respective Indian Standards wherever they 
exist. A list of ingredients conventionally used in the 
manufacture of toothpaste is given in Annex A for 
information only. 


The dyes and pigments used in manufacture of 
toothpaste shall comply with the provisions of 
1S 4707 (Part 1). 


Ingredients other than dyes and pigments used in 
formulation of toothpaste shall comply with the 
provisions of IS 4707 (Part 2). 


For safety evaluation of novel ingredients used in 
formulation of a toothpaste, the toothpaste shall comply 
to IS 4011. 


5.2 Dispensing 


The paste shall extrude from the collapsible tube or 
any other suitable container in which it is packed, 
at 27+2 °C in the form of continuous mass with the 
application of normal force, without the application of 
excessive force which would cause injury to the tube or 
the container. It shall be possible to extrude bulk of the 
contents from the container or the tube starting from the 
crimped end of the tube by rolling the tube gradually. 


IS 6356 : 2021 


5.3 Stability 


The toothpaste shall not show any physical sign of 
deterioration during normal conditions of storage 
and use. When subjected to a temperature of 
45+2 °C for a period of 28 days the toothpaste shall 
meet the requirements of the standard. When cooled to 
a temperature of 5 °C for lhour, after taking out and 
pressing tube, the paste shall be found extrudable from 
the tube and meet the requirement of this standard. 


It is not advisable to keep the toothpaste tube without 
the cap. If left open for a long duration, the toothpaste 
might lose moisture on account of evaporation and 
harden. 


5.4 Packaging Material Inertness 


The collapsible tubes or any other suitable container 
used for packaging of toothpaste shall not corrode, 
deteriorate or cause contamination of the toothpaste 
during normal condition of storage and use. When 
subjected to a temperature of 45 + 2 °C for 10 days, 
the paste shall then be examined visually by extruding 
part of the contents. The internal surface of the tube 
shall be examined after slitting it open and removing 
the remaining contents. There should be no sign of 
corrosion, chemical attack or other damage. 


5.5 Acceptance Test 


The toothpaste shall also comply with the requirements 
given in Table 1 when tested according to the methods 
given in Annex B to Annex G, as per reference made in 
col 5 of Table 1. 


5.6 Expiry Date 


Shelf life shall be declared by the manufacturer for all 
types of toothpaste. 


Manufacturing date (month and year) is recommended 
to be mentioned on tube and carton. The declaration 
of expiry date shall be as per requirements of Drugs 
and Cosmetics Act and Rules of India, and any other 
relevant regulation. During the shelf life the product 
will meet the requirement of the standard. 


5.7 Additional Requirements for ECO-Mark 
5.7.1 General Requirements 


5.7.1.1 The product shall conform to the requirements 
for quality, safety and performance prescribed under 
5.7.1.2 to 5.7.1.5. 


5.7.1.2 All the ingredients that go into formulation 
of cosmetics shall comply with the provisions of 
IS 4707 (Part 1) and IS 4707 (Part 2). The product 
shall also meet specific requirements as given in the 
standard. 


5.7.1.3 The product package shall display a list of key 
ingredients in descending order of quantity present. 


5.7.1.4 The product shall not be manufactured from any 
carcinogenic ingredients. 


5.7.1.5 The manufacturer shall produce to 
BIS environmental consent clearance from the 
concerned State Pollution Control Board as per the 


Table 1 Requirements for Toothpaste 
( Clause 5.5 ) 


SI No. Characteristic Requirement for Method of Test 
A Ref to Annex 
Non-fluoridated Fluoridated 
0 (2) 6) (4) (5) 
i) Fineness: B 
a) Particles retained on 150 micron 3.0 3.0 
IS Sieve, percent by mass, Max 
b) Particles retained on 75 micron 3.5 3.5 
IS Sieve, percent by mass, Max 
ii) pH of aqueous suspension 5.5 to 10.5 5.5 to 10.5 C 
iii) Heavy metals (as lead), parts per million, Max 20 20 D 
iv) Arsenic (as As,O,), parts per million, Max 2 2 E or IS 16913 
v) Foaming power, ml, Min " 50 50 F 
vi) Available Fluoride ion, parts per million, Max 50 1000 G 
vii) Mercury (as Hg), parts per million, Max 1 1 IS 16913 
vii) Microbial counts: 
a) Total viable counts per gram, Max 1000 1000 IS 14648 
b) Gram negative pathogens per gram, Max Absent Absent IS 14648 


Applicable to foaming toothpaste only. 


provisions of the Water (Prevention and Control of 
Pollution) Cess Act, 1977 and the Air (Prevention 
and Control Pollution) Act, 1981 along with the 
authorization, if required under the Environment 
(Protection) Act, 1986 and the Rules made thereunder, 
while applying for ECO-Mark. Additionally, provisions 
of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and the Rules 
thereunder shall also be complied with. 


5.7.2 Specific Requirements 


Heavy metals calculated as lead (Pb), arsenic (As,0,), 
and mercury shall not exceed 20 ppm, 2 ppm, and 
1 ppm respectively when tested by the respective 
method prescribed in Indian Standards. 


6 ABRASIVITY (TYPE TEST) 


The toothpaste shall not exceed the limits of dentin 
abrasivity that of 2.5 times when tested as per the 
procedure given in Annex H. It may be noted that type 
test is recommended to be done on the formulation only 
once to pass the above criterion. This test need not be 
done for each and every batch. However, the type test 
is a must again if the abrasive system is changed in the 
formulation. It is not required for the new formulation 
as long as abrasive components are not changed. 


7 PACKING AND MARKING 


7.1 Packing 


Toothpaste shall be packed in collapsible tubes or in 
any other suitable containers like sachets, pumps or 
other suitable dispensing systems. When packed in 
containers, the containers shall be properly sealed 
and have a leak-proof cap or closure. The containers, 
if necessary, may further be packed in cartons or any 
other suitable packaging material. 


7.1.1 The material for product packaging shall meet 
the parameters evolved under the scheme of labelling 
environment friendly packaging/packaging materials. 


7.2 Marking 


7.2.1 The labelling and marking of toothpaste shall 
comply with the statutory requirements under Cosmetic 
Rules, 2020, Legal metrology and any other relevant 
statutory requirement, In addition the tubes and the 
cartons shall be legibly marked with the following 
information: 

a) Name and type of toothpaste; 

b) Name and Address of the manufacturer; 

c) Net mass or volume of the material in the tube; 

d) Batch number, in code or otherwise; 

e) Month and year of manufacture; 

f) Fluoride ion content for Type 2 toothpaste in ppm; 


IS 6356 : 2021 


g) Expiry date or “Best use before. . .. “ (Month and 
year to be declared by the manufacturer); 
NOTE — This requirement is exempted in case of pack sizes 
of 10g/25 ml or less and if the shelf life of the product is more 
than 24 months; and 

h) Foaming/non-foaming; and 

j) List of key ingredients. 
NOTE — This is exempted in case of pack sizes of 30 g or less. 


7.2.2 BIS Certification Marking 


7.2.2.1 The product(s) conforming to the requirements 
of this standard may be certified as per the conformity 
assessment schemes under the provisions of the 
Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and the Rules 
and Regulations framed thereunder, and the products 
may be marked with the Standard Mark. 


7.2.2.2 If the product is covered under ECO-Mark 
(optional), it shall be suitably marked with ECO-Mark 
logo besides Standard Mark. The label may clearly 
specify that ECO-Mark is applicable to the contents or 
the package or both, as the case may be. If the product 
package is not separately covered under ECO Mark 
scheme, it shall be clearly mentioned on the product 
that ECO-Mark label is applicable to contents only. 


8 SAMPLING 


8.1 Representative test samples of the material shall be 
drawn as prescribed in IS 3958. 


8.2 Number of Tests and Criteria for Conformity 


The tests for abrasivity, stability and container’s 
inertness shall be type tests and shall be performed for 
product approval whereas tests for dispensing, fineness, 
pH, heavy metals, arsenic, foaming power, fluoride 
content, mercury and microbial counts shall be carried 
out on each batch for acceptance of the product. 


8.2.1 The type tests shall be repeated in the event of 
change in the basic formulation or whenever there is a 
change in the type of container being used. However, 
the acceptance tests shall be performed on each and 
every batch. 


8.3 A batch may be defined as consisting of any quantity 
of toothpaste manufactured in a single mix at one time. 


8.4 The lot shall be declared as conforming to 
requirements of the specification, if all the test results 
on each individual sample meet the requirements 
prescribed in 5.2 to 5.6. 


9 QUALITY OF REAGENT 


Unless specified otherwise, pure chemicals and distilled 
water (see IS 1070) shall be employed in tests. 


NOTE — ‘Pure chemicals’ shall mean chemicals that do not 
contain impurities, which affect the results of analysis. 


IS 6356 : 2021 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 5.1 ) 
INGREDIENTS CONVENTIONALLY USED IN THE MANUFACTURE OF TOOTHPASTE 


A-1 Raw material used in toothpaste formulation falls 
into the following categories: 


a) Polishing agents; 

b) Surface active agents; 

c) Humectant; 

d) Binding agent; and 

e) Others as per IS 4707 (Part 1) and IS 4707 (Part 2). 


A-1.1 Polishing Agents 


The principal polishing agents generally used are one 
or more of those given below: 


1. Calcium carbonate; 

. Magnesium carbonate; 

. Dicalcium phosphate; 

. Insoluble sodium metaphosphate; 
. Hydrated alumina; 

. Aluminium hydroxide; 

. Aluminium/alumino silicate; 


. Alumina; 


O AND MN FW WN 


. Alumina fumed; 


jawa 
oO 


. Calcium phosphate; 


jawah 
jamaah; 


. Calcium pyrophosphate; 

12. Dicalcium phosphate dehydrate; 
13. Kaolin; 

14. Magnesium silicate; 

15. Potassium metaphosphate; 
16. Silica gel or precipitated; 

17. Silica fumed; 

18. Silica hydrated; 

19. Sodium aluminium silicate; 
20. Sodium bicarbonate; 

21. Sodium metaphosphate; 

22. Hydroxyapatite; 

23. Zirconium silicate; 

24. Sodium polymetaphosphate; 
25. Tungsten carbide; 

26. Pumice; 

27. Silicon carbide; 

28. Magnesium silicate; 


29. Agglomerates (mainly consisting of one or 
more of the polishing agents); and 


30. Others as per IS 4707 (Part 1) and IS 4707 
(Part 2). 


A-1.2 Surface Active Agents 


The surface active agent(s) generally used are one or 
more of those given below: 


1. 


. Sodium ricinoleate; 


— = 
= © 


DEN NU KWH 


Soap; 


. Sodium sulphoricinoleate; 
. Sodium lauryl sulphate; 
. Sodium alkyl sulphoacetate; 


Sodium salt of sulphated monoglyceride; 


. Sodium lauryl sarcosinate; 

. Sodium alpha olefm sulphonate; 

. Coco-amido-propyl-betaine; 

. Sodium dodecyl benzene sulphonate; 
. Sodium lauryl sulphoacetate; 

. Coconut monoglyceride sulphonates; 
. Dioctylsodiurn-sulphosuccinate; 

. Magnesium lauryl sulphate; 

. Sodium alkyl benzene sulphonate; 

. Sodium alkyl sulphate; 

. Sodium lauryl ether sulphate; 

. Coco-betaine; and 

. Others as per IS 4707 (Part 1) and IS 4707 


(Part 2). 


A-1.3 Humectants 


The humectants generally used are one or more of those 
given below: 


Oo AND MN BPW NY 


. Glycerol; 

. Sorbitol; 

. Maltitol; 

. Mannitol; 

. Polyethylene glycol; 

. Propylene glycol; 

. Lactitol; 

. Xylitol; and 

. Others as per IS 4707 (Part 1) and IS 4707 


(Part 2). 


A-1.4 Binding Agents 


The binding agents generally used are one or more of 
those given below: 


1. 
2. 
3. 


Gum tragacanth; 
Gum karaya; 
Sodium alginate; 


. Sodium carboxymethyl cellulose; 
. Gelatine; 


4 
9 
6. Guar gum and its derivatives; 
7. Kanthan gum; 

8. Carraghenates 

9. Carboxy methyl cellulose; 

10. Magnesium aluminium silicate; 
11. Starch; 

12. Hydroxy propyl cellulose; 

13. Hydroxy ethyl cellulose; 

14. Carbopol; 

15. viscarin; 


16. Polymers (propylene 
oxide-blockcopolymer); and 


17. Others as per IS 4707 (Part 1) and IS 4707 
(Part 2). 


A-1.5 Other Substances 


1. Fluorides of sodium and stannous; 


oxide-ethylene 


2. Monofluorophosphate of 
potassium and sodium; 


ammonium, 


IS 6356 : 2021 


3. Sweeteners, saccharine sodium, aspartame; 


4. Petroleum jelly-silicon defoaming compounds 
and mineral oil 5. Colouring agents; 


5. Colouring agents; 

6. Essential oils; 

7. Flavoring agents; 

8. Astringents; 

9. Preservatives; 

10. Antibacterial agents; 

11. Antiplaque agents; 

12. Antitartar agents; 

13. Whitening agents; 

14. Anti caries agents; 

15. Calcium glycerophosphate; 

16. Granules/agglomerates; 

17. Anti gingival agents; 

18. Other as per IS 4707 (Part 1) and IS 4707 
(Part 2); and 


19. Desensitizing agents. 


ANNEX B 
[ Clause 5.5 and Table 1, SI No. (1)(a) ] 
DETERMINATION OF FINENESS 


B-1 OUTLINE OF THE METHOD 


Squeeze the toothpaste and feel the presence of the 
particles/agglomerates/granules. Subject the toothpaste 
suspension to an ultrasonic treatment and pass through 
fineness test. Ultrasonification loosens out the soft 
agglomerates into the constituent materials. 


B-2 APPARATUS 


B-2.1 Ultrasonic Bath — Trans-O-sonic compact 
model or equivalent, (60 + 10 Watts power with 
35 + 5 KHz Ultrasonic frequency, 1-2 Watts/inch 
2 power density, L x B x H : 225 x 125 x 60 mm tank). 


B-2.2 Sieves — 75 and 150-microns [conforming to 
IS 460 (Part 1)]. 


B-2.3 Glass beakers (250 ml, 500 ml) and stirring rods. 


B-3 PROCEDURE 


B-3.1 Determination of Particle Feel on Butter 
Paper 


Extrude the paste about 15 to 20 cm length each from 
at least ten collapsible tubes on a butter paper, test the 
paste by pressing it along its entire length by a finger 
for the presence of particles. The toothpaste suspension 
should be subjected to an ultrasonic treatment followed 
by a fineness test as described in B-3.2 and B-3.3. 


B-3.2 Determination of Particle Size on 150 Micron 
IS Sieve 

Place about 20 g of the toothpaste, accurately weighed, 
in a 250 ml beaker. Add 200 ml of water and allow to 
stand for about 30 min with occasional stirring until 
the toothpaste is completely dispersed free of 


IS 6356 : 2021 


toothpaste/gel flocks trapping the agglomerates. 
Transfer the beaker in an ultrasonic bath. Fill the 
ultrasonic bath (2 litre capacity) to about three-fourth 
height with water. Clamp the above beaker in the 
centre of the bath keeping about 1 cm clearance from 
the bottom of the bath and subject ultrasonification for 
10 min to completely loosen out the constituents. 


Transfer this suspension quantitatively to a 150 micron 
IS Sieve and wash by means of a slow stream of 
running tap water and finally with a fine stream from a 
wash bottle until all the matter that can pass through the 
sieve has passed, let the water drain out and then dry 
the sieve containing the residue in an oven. If there is 
any residue on the sieve, carefully transfer it to a tarred 
watch glass and dry it to constant mass in an oven at 
105 + 2 °C. 


B-3.3 Determination of Particle Size on 75 Micron 
IS Sieve 


Weigh accurately about 20 g of the toothpaste and 
proceed as in B-3.2, using a 75 micron IS Sieve. If there 
is any residue on the sieve carefully transfer it to a tared 
watch glass and dry it to constant mass in an oven at 
105+2 °C. 


B-4 CALCULATION 
Material retained on 150-micron = aa 
IS Sieve, percent by mass. 
where 
M,= mass in g, of residue retained on the sieve; and 
M= mass in g, of the material taken for the test. 


ANNEX C 
[ Clause 5.5 and Table 1, SI No. (ii) | 
DETERMINATION OF pH 


C-1 PROCEDURE 


Dispense 10 g of the toothpaste from the container in 
a 50 ml beaker and add 10 ml of freshly boiled and 


cooled water (at 27 °C) to make 50 percent aqueous 
suspension. Stir well to make a thorough suspension. 
Determine the pH of the suspension within 5 min, using 
a pH meter. 


ANNEX D 
[ Clause 5.5 and Table 1, SI No. (iii) ] 
DETERMINATION OF HEAVY METALS 


D-1 OUTLINE OF THE METHOD 


The colour produced with thioacetamide reagent in test 
solution is matched against that obtained with standard 
lead solution. 


D-2 APPARATUS 

D-2.1 Nessler Cylinders — 50 ml capacity. 
D-2.2 Weighing Scale — 0.0001 g accuracy. 
D-2.3 Volumetric Flasks — 100 ml capacity. 
D-2.4 Platinum Crucible 

D-2.5 Pipette — 2, 10 ml. 


D-3 REAGENTS 


D-3.1 Concentrated Hydrochloric Acid — See 
IS 265. 


D-3.2 Concentrated Nitric Acid — See IS 264. 
D-3.3 Hydrofluoric Acid 


D-3.4 Dilute Acetic Acid — 6 M (342 ml of glacial 
acetic acid diluted to 1 000 ml with water). 


D-3.5 Glycerol Mixture — Take 15 ml of IMNaOH 
and add 5 ml water and 20 ml of 85 percent glycerol. 
Mix well. 


D-3.6 Thioacetamide Reagent — Weigh 80 mg 
of thioacetamide and add 2 ml water to it. Shake to 
dissolve. Add 10 ml glycerol mixture, heat on water 
bath for 20 s, cool and use immediately. 


D-3.7 Lead Nitrate Stock Solution — (100 ppm 
as Pb) — Dissolve 0.1599 g of lead nitrate in water 
containing 1ml of nitric acid and makeup the solution 
to 1 000 ml. 


D-3.8 Standard Lead Solution — (10 ppm as Pb) — 
Dilute 10 ml of lead nitrate stock solution with water to 
100 ml. Each ml is equivalent to 0.01 mg of Pb. 


D-3.9 Acetate Buffer (3.5 pH) — Dissolve 25 g of 
ammonium acetate in 25 ml water and add 38 ml of 
7 M hydrochloric acid. Adjust the pH to 3.5 either 
2M hydrochloric acid or 6 M ammonia and dilute to 
100 ml with water. 


D-4 PROCEDURE 


D-4.1 Place 2g of toothpaste sample accurately weighed 
in a platinum dish and incinerate for about 2 hours at 
525 to 550”C. Cool and add 1 to 2 ml of hydrochloric 
acid and 0.5 ml nitric acid and evaporate to dryness on 
the steam bath. Dissolve the residue in 5 ml hot water, 
evaporate to dryness and treat it with hydrofluoric 
acid. Evaporate again to dryness. Dilute it with water 
(about 50 ml). Filter the solution, if necessary, with 


IS 6356 : 2021 


suction through a fine fritted glass filter and dilute the 
filtrate and washing to 100 ml in a graduated flask. 
This solution shall be used for tests given in D-4.2 and 
E-3 as test solution. 


D-4.2 Transfer 25 ml of test solution prepared in D-4.1 
in a 50 ml Nessler cylinder, add further 2 ml of test 
solution and 2 ml acetate buffer (pH = 3.5) and mix 
well. Add 1.2 ml of thioacetamide reagent, mix, and 
immediately dilute with water to 50 ml and allow to 
stand for 2 min. 


D-4.3 In the second Nessler cylinder, place 1 ml standard 
lead solution (see D-3.8) and add 2 ml of test solution. 
Dilute with water to 25 ml, and add 2 ml acetate buffer 
(pH 3.5). Mix, add 1.2 ml of thioacetamide reagent, 
and immediately dilute with water to 50 ml. Allow to 
stand for 2 min. Compare the colour produced in the 
two Nessler cylinders. 


D-5 RESULT 


The limit prescribed in Table 1 shall be taken as not 
having been exceeded if the intensity of colour produced 
in the test solution is not greater than that produced in 
the second Nessler cylinder which is a control test. 


ANNEX E 
[ Clause 5.5 and Table 1, SI No. (iv) | 
DETERMINATION OF ARSENIC 


E-1 OUTLINE OF THE METHOD 


Arsenic present in a solution of the material is reduced 
to arsine, which is made to react with mercuric bromide 
paper. The stain produced is compared with a standard 
stain. 


E-2 REAGENTS 


E-2.1 Mixed Acid — Dilute one volume of concentrated 
sulphuric acid with four volumes of water. Add 10 g of 
sodium chloride for each 100 ml of the solution. 


E-2.2 Ferric ammonium sulphate solution dissolve 64 g 
of ferric ammonium sulphate in water containing 10 ml 
of mixed acid and make up to one litre. 


E-2.3 Concentrated Hydrochloric Acid — See 
IS 265. 


E-2.4 Stannous Chloride Solution — Dissolve 80 g 
of stannous chloride (SnCl,.2H,0) in 100 ml of water 
containing 5 ml of concentrated hydrochloric acid. 


E-3 PROCEDURE 


Carry out the test as prescribed in IS 2088, adding into 
the Gutzeit bottle, 2 ml of ferric ammonium sulphate 
solution, 0.5 ml of stannous chloride solution and 
25 ml of stannous chloride solution, 0.5 ml of stannous 
chloride solution and 25 ml of sample solution as 
prepared in D-4.1. 


For comparison, prepare a stain using 0.001 mg of 
arsenic trioxide. 


IS 6356 : 2021 


ANNEX F 
[ Clause 5.5 and Table 1, SI No. (v) | 
DETERMINATION OF FOAMING POWER 


F-1 GENERAL 


Strict attention shall be paid to all details of the 
procedure in order to ensure concordant results. 
Particular care should be taken to shake the cylinder 
exactly as described. 


F-2 OUTLINE OF THE METHOD 


A suspension of the material in water is taken in 
a graduated cylinder and given 12 shakes under 
prescribed conditions. The volume of the foam formed 
is observed after keeping the cylinder for 5 min. 


F-3 APPARATUS 


F-3.1 Graduated cylinder (250 ml), glass stoppered; 
with graduations from 0 to 250 ml, with 2ml divisions, 
overall height about 35 cm and the height of the 
graduated portion about 20 cm. 


F-3.2 Graduated cylinder (100 ml), with graduations 
from 0 to 100 ml, with 1 ml divisions. 


F-3.3 Thermometer, of range 0 to 110 °C. 
F-4 PROCEDURE 


F-4.1 Weigh about 5 g of the toothpaste accurately 
in a 100-ml glass beaker, add 10 ml of water, cover 
the breaker with a watch glass and allow to stand for 
30 min. This operation is carried out to disperse the 
toothpaste. 


NOTE — Ensure that the toothpaste is completely dissolved, 
warming the aqueous suspension, if necessary. 


F-4.2 Stir the contents of beaker with a glass rod and 
transfer the slurry to the 250 ml graduated cylinder, 
ensuring that no foam (more than 2 ml) is produced and 
no lump paste goes into the cylinder. Repeat the transfer 
of the residue left in the breaker with further portions 
of 5 to 6 ml of water ensuring that all the matter in the 
beaker is transferred to the cylinder. 


F-4.3 Adjust the contents in the cylinder to 50 ml by 
adding sufficient water and bring the contents of the 
cylinder to 30 °C. Stir the contents of the cylinder 
with a glass rod or thermometer to ensure a uniform 
suspension. 


F-4.4 As soon as the temperature of the contents of the 
cylinder reaches 30 °C, stop the cylinder and give it 
12 complete shakes, each shake comprising movements 
shown in Fig. | in a vertical plane, upside down and 
vice versa. After the 12 shakes have been given, allow 
the cylinder to stand still for 5 min and read the volumes 
of: 


a) foam plus water (V, ml), and 
b) water only (V, ml) as shown in Fig. 2. 


F-5 CALCULATION 


Foaming power, ml= V,- V, 


INITIAL POSITION 
STOPPER UP 


INTERMEDIATE POSITION 
STOPPER DOWN 


FINAL POSITION 
STOPPER UP 


Fic. 1 ONE COMPLETE SHAKE OF CYLINDER 


IS 6356 : 2021 


Fic. 2 MEASURMENT OF FOAM 


ANNEX G 
[ Clause 5.5, Table 1, SI No. (vi) ] 
DETERMINATION OF FLUORIDE ION 


G-1 GENERAL 


This method is suitable for the determination of water 
soluble fluoride species in toothpaste, including free 
fluoride and hydrolysable complexes, for example, 
sodium mono fluorophosphate. 


G-1.1 Principle 


Water soluble species are converted to fluoride ion 
by acid hydrolysis. The fluoride ion activity is then 
determined potentiometrically with the help of fluoride 
ion sensitive electrode. 


G-2 APPARATUS 


G-2.1 pH Meter (Potentiometer) — Scale readable 
to+0.5 m V or better. 


G-2.2 Fluoride Ion Sensitive Electrode — Orion 
94-09 or similar. 


G-2.3 Single Junction Reference Electrode — Orion 
90-0.1, or similar, with filling solution. 


G-2.4 Magnetic Stirrer 


G-2.5 Polythene/Polypropylene Beakers and 


Volumetric Flasks — 100, 250 ml and pipettes. 


G-2.6 Semi-log Graph Papers — 2/3 cycles. 


G-3 REAGENTS 


G-3.1 Sodium Fluoride (Analytical Grade) 

G-3.2 Trisodium citrate (Analytical Grade) 

G-3.3 Sodium chloride (Analytical Grade) 

G-3.4 Hydrochloric acid (Analytical Grade) — | M. 
G-3.5 Sodium Hydroxide — | M. 


G-3.6 Sodium Acetate Trihydrate (Analytical 
Grade) 


G-3.7 Glacial Acetic Acid 


G-3.8 TISAB L (Total Ionic Strength Adjusting 
Buffer) Solution — Dissolve 294 g trisodium citrate, 
29 g sodium chloride and 68 g sodium acetate trihydrate 
in 600 ml of hot water. Cool, adjust to pH 6.4 with 
glacial acetic acid. Dilute to 1 litre with distilled water. 


G-3.9 TISAB LF (TISAB Containing Fluoride) — 
Solution 


Prepare 100 ml of Img F- /100 ml solution as described 
in G-3.8. Dissolve 294 g trisodium citrate, 29 g sodium 
chloride and 68 g sodium acetate trihydrate in 600 ml 
of hot water. Cool, pipette in 10 ml of Img F—/100 
ml solution and adjust to pH 6.4 with glacial acetic 


IS 6356 : 2021 


acid. Dilute to 1 litre with distilled ‘water. Store in a 
polythene or polypropylene bottle. 


G-3.10 Fluoride Blank Solution 


Take 100 ml hydrochloric acid (IM) solution in 1 litre 
flask and then add 200 ml sodium hydroxide (1 M), by 
measuring cylinder. Dilute to 1 litre with distilled water 
and mix well. 


G-3.11 Standard Sodium Fluoride Solution (0.01 mg 
F per ml) 


Dry the sodium fluoride at 110 °C for 4 h and transfer 
accurately 0.222 g to 100 ml volumetric flask. Add 
distilled water to dissolve the sodium fluoride and make 
up to the mark (solution-X). Each ml of solution-X 
contains Img fluoride ion (F`). Take 10 ml of this 
solution-X in 1 000 ml volumetric flask and make 
up this volume to the mark (solution Y). Each ml of 
solution Y contains 0.01 mg fluoride (F`) ion. Transfer 
solution-X and solution-Y to polythene bottles for 
storing. 


G-3.12 Preparation of Standard Solutions of Sodium 
Fluoride 


Take 1, 2, 5, 10, 20, 25 ml of solution-Y (see G-3.11) 
in 100 ml volumetric flask marked A, B, C, D, E 
and F respectively. From solution X (see G-3.11), 
pipette out 0.5 and 1.0 ml and transfer to two separate 
100 mL volumetric flasks marked as G, H .To each add 
50 ml of TISAB L buffer solution and 10 ml of fluoride 
blank solution. Check that the pH is in the range of 
6.4 * 0.1, and if necessary correct with IMNaOH or 
1 M HCl1.Transfer quantitatively to a 100 ml 
polypropylene volumetric flask and make up the 
volume to 100 ml with distilled water. Now the 
solutions A, B, C, D, E, F, G and H are containing 0.01, 
0.02, 0.05, 0.1, 0.2, 0.25, 0.5 and 1 mg of F per 100 ml 
respectively. Transfer the solutions to 150 ml polythene 
beaker for new measurement. 

NOTE — Calibration curve can be plotted using any 

5 consecutive concentrations depending on the expected 

concentration of fluoride from sample. 


G-4 mV MEASUREMENT OF STANDARD 
SOLUTIONS OF SODIUM FLUORIDE 

G-4.1 Preparation of Electrodes 

Remove protective cap and soak the fluoride electrode 
in TISAB L F solution for 15 min. 

G-4.2 Fill the reference electrode with filling solution. 


G-4.3 Rinse the electrodes with de-ionized water and 
keep the tips immersed in TISAB L F solution until 
immediately before use. 


G-4.4 Check that the electrodes are correctly connected 
to the pH meter. 


10 


G-4.5 Rinse the electrodes with deionized water before 
use and carefully blot dry with a paper tissue. 


G-5 mV MEASUREMENT 


G-5.1 Transfer the contents of solution A from 100 ml 
flask into a clean, dry 150 ml polypropylene beaker. 


G-5.2 Immerse the tips of the electrodes in the solution 
while stirring the solution with a magnetic stirrer. 


Ensure that no air bubbles adhere to the electrode 
surfaces. 


G-5.3 Leave until the potential reading is constant. 
This should take approximately 2 or 3 min. 


G-5.4 Record the potential reading in mV and check 
the temperature of the solution. 


G-5.5 Rinse the electrodes with de-ionised water and 
blot dry with a paper tissue. 


G-5.6 Repeat the procedure prescribed in G-5.1 to 
G-5.5 for solutions B, C, D, E and F to record mV of 
these solutions. 


G-5.7 Plot the calibration graph on semi log graph 
paper with the mini volt reading on the linear ordinate 
and the final concentration of fluoride in the standard F 
solution on the logarithmic abscissa. The graph should 
be a straight line with a gradient of -57-59 mV per 
decade change in concentration. 


G-6 TEST SOLUTION 


G-6.1 Discard the first 5 cm of paste extruded from the 
tube and then weigh about 5 g toothpaste to the nearest 
mg. For non-fluoridated toothpaste, use sample weight 
as 10 g instead of 5g . Add approximately 30 ml hot 
(90-95 °C) deionized water, a small amount at a time 
and slurry the paste with a microspatula after each 
water addition. 


Allow to cool. Dilute to 100 ml in a polypropylene 
volumetric flask and mix well. 


G-6.2 Ensure that the dispersion is homogeneous 
and then centrifuge about 60 ml of the dispersion in 
a polypropylene centrifuge tube, closed with a cap to 
prevent evaporation, until clear. This will take about 
20 min at 4 000 rpm. 


G-6.3 Pipette 20 ml of the clear supernatant into a 
250 ml round-bottomed flask. 


G-6.4 Add a few anti-bumping granules then add 
10 ml hydrochloric acid solution (1M approximately) 
by measuring cylinder. Attach a reflux condenser and 
boil gently for 5 min. 


G-6.5 Add, almost immediately, 20 ml of 1 M sodium 
hydroxide via the condenser, rinsing down with 


approximate 20 ml of distilled water. Then transfer 
quantitatively to a 100 ml polypropylene volumetric 
flask and dilute to volume with distilled water. 


G-6.6 Pipette 25 ml of the clear solution prepared above 
into a 100 ml polypropylene beaker, add 25 ml TISAB 
L (solution L) and check pH. If necessary adjust to 
DH 6.4 by addition of approximately | M hydrochloric 
acid or | M sodium hydroxide. Transfer quantitatively 
into a 100 ml volumetric flask and dilute to volume. 


G-6.7 Transfer the contents of 100 ml flask to a clean, 
dry 100 ml polythene beaker, immerse the tips of the 
electrode in the solution while stirring the solution with 
a magnetic stirrer. Ensure that no air bubbles adhere to 
the electrode surfaces. 


G-6.8 Leave until the potential reading is constant (this 
should take two or three minutes). Record the potential 


IS 6356 : 2021 


reading in mV for the test solution. The reading for 
standard fluoride and test solutions should be taken 
simultaneously. 


G-7 CALCULATION 


A graph is plotted for concentration of F- against 
potential mV on a semi-logarithmic paper for standard 
F solutions. The potential mV is plotted on X-axis and 
mg of F- on Y-axis (on logarithmic scale). Read the F 
concentration in test solution for measured mV from 
this graph. 

Concentration of F` in 


toothpaste, parts per million = a 
where 


a= mg of F from calibration graph for test 
solution; and 


M= Mass of sample, in g. 


ANNEX H 
( Foreword and Clause 6 ) 
ABRASIVITY (RDA) MEASUREMENT TEST (HEFFERREN) 


H-1 SCOPE 


This annex identifies the specific procedures for 
determination of dentifrice abrasivity using the 
ADA laboratory method. 


H-2 SAMPLING 


A representative sample shall be taken from at least two 
batches. 


H-3 PROCEDURE 


H-3.1 Standard Reference Abrasive The standard 
reference abrasive is from a specific lot of calcium 
phosphate held by the Monsanto Company”. 

‘Calcium pyrophosphate is an example of a suitable 
product available commercially. This information is 
given for the convenience of users of this standard 
and does not constitute an endorsement by BIS of this 
product. A sample of the material may be obtained 
by contacting the company at the address below and 
requesting the ADA abrasion standard. 

Slight shifts (< 10 percent) in abrasivity between lots 
have been reported. 


Monsanto Company 
Detergent Division 

800N Lindbergh Boulevard 
St Louis MO 

USA 63167 


11 


H-3.2 Apparatus 


H-3.2.1 Brushing Machine — A cross brushing 
machine is the apparatus of choice’. The apparatus 
should have eight positions for holding specimens. A 
toothbrush shall be positioned to pass reciprocally over 
the mounted specimens with a designated tension on 
the brush while immersed in a dentifrice slurry. The 
distance traversed by the brush should not be longer 
than the brush head, so that the specimen does not lose 
contact with the brush. The mechanism for holding 
the dentifrice slurry may vary with difference machine 
designs, but should allow for easy removal of the slurry 
sample. It is important to have some mechanism for 
agitation of the slurry while the brushing is taking 
place. A convenient method to accomplish this is to 
attach rubber mixing vanes just below the brush head. 
As the brushing takes place, these vanes will prevent 
the abrasive from settling to the bottom of the slurry 
container. 


H-3.2.2 Radioactivity Detector The two 
recommended methods for determination of the 
radioactivity of the used dentifrice slurries are a 
Gieger-Muller planchet counter or liquid scintillation 
detector. The use of the Geiger counter requires that the 
samples be dried under defined controlled conditions. 
The liquid scintillation method has the advantage of 
reading directly from the slurry. 


Counting should be done for a period expected to 
reduce the alpha value for counting error to less than 


IS 6356 : 2021 


2 percent. Counting should be performed for a minimum 
of 1 000 counts and at least 1 min. The number of brushing 
strokes may be increased if counting times become too 
long. 


H-3.3 Presentation of Tooth Specimens 
H-3.3.1 Dentin Specimens 
H-3.3.1.1 Selection 


Human root dentin of extracted permanent teeth are 
used as the substrate. Single-rooted teeth that were vital 
at extraction should be selected. An exception, because 
of the small size are, mandibular incisors, these should 
not be used. The specimen should be at least 14 mm 
long and 2 mm wide at the narrow end. All roots shall 
be caries-free and free of anatomical defects. After 
extraction, the roots should be stored in neutralized 
4 percent formaldehyde solution. 


H-3.3.1.2 Preparation 


Scrape the roots clean of all soft tissue and cementum. 
Then remove the crown and the root tips using a 
separating disc under a flow of water 


‘The drawings and blue prints of the machine may be 
obtained from the American Dental Association. 


H-3.3.1.3 Irradiation 


For each set of eight specimens to be irradiated, add one 
or two extra roots for use in correction factors. Pack the 
specimens in 4 percent formaldehyde solution and submit 
to a nuclear reactor for irradiation. The neutron flux 
should be sufficient to produce about Im Ci of 2P beta 
radiation after several hours. Elevated temperatures in the 
reactor should be avoided. It is also advisable to shield 
the samples from fast neutrons and gamma radiation. 
Handling of the irradiated specimens should be done 
with care using good laboratory practice. The specimens 
should not be used during the first half life because of 
excess radiation and should be used before the end of the 
third half- life because of lack of activity. The half-life of 
P is 14.3 days so the usable life-span of a set of teeth is 
4 weeks. 


H-3.3.1.4 Mounting of specimens 


The specimens should be mounted individually in 
cold-cure methyl methacrylate denture resin: the type of 
mould used will depend upon the holder on the brushing 
machine. The specimens should be mounted so that 
they protrude above the resin surface in a buccal/lingual 
orientation by at least 2 mm. The brushing surface of 
the root shall be parallel in buccal lingual orientation 
to the resin holder and situated so that the brushing will 
take place perpendicular to the long dimension of the 
root. Storage of the mounted specimens should be in 
4 percent formaldehyde. 


12 


H-3.3.2 Enamel Specimens 
H-3.3.2.1 Selection 


Selection criteria for the enamel specimens are the 
same as for dentin. The enamel specimens should be 
obtained from human maxillary incisors. 


H-3.3.2.2 Preparation 


The entire labial surface of the specimen is used after 
removing the root. Clean the enamel in the same way 
as the root. 


H-3.3.2.3 Irradiation 


Irradiation of the enamel is identical to the method 
used with the roots. The roots and enamel specimens 
may be packed together for submission to the reactor. 


H-3.3.2.4 Mounting 


Mount the enamel specimens in the same way as the 
roots. The labial surface shall protrude 2 mm and be 
parallel to the resin surface. 


H-3.4 Toothbrushes 


The toothbrushes used should have nylon bristles 
of medium hardness. The bristle ends should lie in 
a plane rather than in separated or end-raised tuft 
design. The bristle length should be about 10 mm. 
A 50 tuft medium-texture brush shall be used. Store 
the brushes in water overnight prior to their first use 
and then keep them in water until they are discarded. 
Use a new set of brushes for each set of teeth. Do 
not remove the brushes from the machine between 
runs but raise the tufts of the specimen so as ‘not to 
bend the bristles. At the beginning of each run, set the 
tension, of the brush on the specimen to 150 g using 
a Chatilon spring gauge or equivalent. This tension 
should be rechecked at least twice daily. The method 
of adjusting the tension will vary depending upon the 
type of mechanism on the brushing machine. 


H-3.5 Reference Diluent 


The diluent is a 0.5 percent carboxymethylcellulose 
(CMC) (7MF) solution in 10 percent glycerine. To 
prepare | litre of the diluent, heat 50 ml of glycerine 
to 60 °C and add 5g of CMC while stirring. After 
the mixture is homogeneous, add another 50 ml of 
heated glycerine and continue stirring for 60 min. 
Transfer the solution to a 1 litre flask and add 900 ml 
of distilled water. Allow to cool but continue stirring 
slowly overnight. To stabilize the viscosity, allow the 
solution to stand overnight before using. This solution 
is used to make up slurries of the reference abrasive or 
any other powder being tested. 


H-3.6 Reference Abrasive Slurry 


The reference material is that described above 
(see H-3.1). Dilute 10 g of the abrasive with 50 ml of 
the diluent (see H-3.5). The same ratio is used for all 
powders. It is possible for the reference abrasive to be 
used as a dentifrice, if that has to be done. It shall be 
made up as a 40 percent abrasive dentifrice with the 
rest of the constituents being conventional dentifrice 
components. The slurry is then made with 25 g of 
reference dentifrice and 40 ml of water. 


H-3.7 Dentifrice Slurries 


To prepare the test slurries, add 40 ml of water to 
25 g of each dentifrice. For the machine, prepare eight 
slurries of each dentifrice. This dilution produces a 
final slurry volume and concentration similar to those 
of the reference abrasive slurry. All slurries reference 
and test should be used shortly after preparation and 
after vigorous mechanical stirring to prevent particle 
setting. 


H-3.8 Preconditioning of Tooth Specimens 


H-3.8.1 Dentin 


To reduce the variation caused by dentin surface 
differences, precondition the specimens prior to 
each use. The preconditioning treatment consists of 
brushing with slurry of the reference abrasive but not 
taking a sample. The first time dentin specimens are 
used, the preconditioning should be for 6 000 strokes. 
Each successive daily run should begin with a shorter 
precondition brushing of 1 000 strokes. The tension of 
the toothbrush on the roots shall be 150 g. Discard the 
preconditioning slurries. 


H-3.8.2 Enamel 


Preconditioning of the enamel is similar to that of the 
dentin, except 10 000 strokes are used prior to the first 
use and 1 000 strokes are given at the beginning of each 
day. 


Discard the preconditioning slurries. 
H-3.9 Test Design 
H-3.9.1 Test Design for Dentin 


The test design may be either a sandwich design or a 
Latin square design. The sandwich design is such that 
a set of reference slurries is run (pre-test), followed 
by a second set of reference slurries (post-test) .This 
second set of reference slurries (post-test). This second 
set of reference slurries then acts as the pre-test slurries 
for the next test group. This continues until all the test 
groups are run. 


The Latin square design is such that a set of reference 
slurries is run first. All the test groups are randomized 
over the eight brushing heads for the next few runs 


13 


IS 6356 : 2021 


(depending on the number of test groups). Then a post 
test reference set of slurries is run as the final procedure. 


In both test designs, the brush tension is set at 150 g 
and brushing is performed for | 500 to 3 000 strokes 
depending on the radioactivity level of the specimens. 


H-3.9.2 Test Design for Enamel 


The test design for enamel is identical to that for 
dentin, except the number of strokes is 5 000 to 
7 500 depending on the activity of the specimens. 


H-3.10 Sampling of Slurries 


The sampling of the slurries following the brushing is 
identical for both dentin and enamel. An aliquot of each 
slurry is removed immediately following brushing. The 
size of the aliquot will depend upon the counting method 
and equipment, but 3 ml is usually adequate to provide 
a detectable level of radioactivity. A convenient method 
for removing the sample is a syringe fitted with a blunt 
needle. Take care to ensure no carry-over between 
samples. This can best be done by a complete rinsing 
of the syringe between samples. It is also important to 
remove the same quantity of sample from each slurry. 
Dry the sample if a planchet counter system if being 
used to detect the radioactivity. If drying is needed, the 
samples should be air-dried for at least 1 h and then 
dried in an oven at 60 °C with forced air overnight. 


H-3.11 Correction Factors 


Correction factors are needed for both dentin and 
enamel abrasion tests when using the planchet counting 
method and are identically prepared in both methods. 
When testing dentifrices with abrasive systems different 
from the reference materials, the self absorption and 
backscattering characteristics of the abrasives for beta 
radiation may also differ. Real differences in abrasivity 
may then be significantly distorted. The correction 
factor is a means to reduce this variable. The correction 
factor is determined differently depending on the 
counting method used. 


H-3.11.1 Preparation of Correction Factor Slurries for 
Geiger-Muller Planchet Counting 


Dissolve one piece of irradiated dentin (or enamel) in 
5 ml of concentrated HC1. Transfer the solution to a 
250 ml volumetric flask and add water to the mark. 
Add 1.0 ml of this radioactive solution to slurries of 
the reference abrasive and to each of the test abrasives 
prepared in the same manner as in the test. To neutralize 
the acid, add 1.0 ml of 0.5 mol/NaOH. Mix the slurries 
thoroughly, sample and dry the samples along with 
those from the test runs. Do not brush with these 
correction factor slurries. 


These samples are counted along with the test samples. 


IS 6356 : 2021 


H-3.11.2 Calculation of Correction Factors 


The correction factor Cf to be applied to all values of 
the test sample is calculated as follows: 


Cf 


Mean counts for 4 reference samples 


Mean counts for 4 test samples 


H-3.11.2.1 Correction factors for liquid scintillation 
counting 


The correction is with regard to the amount of sample 
mixed with the scintillation cocktail. Each sample is 
weighed and the net count per minute (CPM) is divided 
by the mass to get a net CPM per gram of slurry. These 
net CPM per gram of values are then used in calculating 
abrasivity in place of net CPM values in H-3.12, and 
there is no Cf term. 


H-3.11.2.2 Correction factors for liquid scintillation 
detection 


Self-absorption and backscatter are less of a concern 
because of the liquid medium being used. Most modern 
liquid scintillation equipment will automatically 
colour-correct, so this is not a problem. The differences 
in mass of the samples do need to be accounted for 
in the calculation. To do this, each sample taken after 
brushing needs to be weighed to an accuracy of 0.01 g. 


H-3.11.2.3 Applying the correction factor 


Before calculating the relative abrasion values, the net 
CPM of each slurry is divided by the mass of the slurry 
used, to get a net CPM per gram of slurry. These values 
are then used in the calculation of relative abrasive 
values. 


H-3.12 Calculation 
Gieger- Muller Counting 


of Abrasivity Using 


H-3.12.1 Dentin Abrasivity 


The dentin abrasivity of the test dentifrices 
(or abrasives) is calculated as follows: 
Mean Reference net CPM = 
Pre -net CPM + Post — net CPM 
2 


Dentifrice abrasivity = 


Cf x100x test dentifrice Net CPM 
Mean reference net CPM 


14 


H-3.12.2 Enamel Abrasivity 


The enamel abrasivity of the test dentifrices for 
abrasives is calculated as follows: 


Mean reference net CPM = 
Pre -net CPM + Post — net CPM 
2 
Dentifrice abrasivity = 
Cf x10x test dentifrice Net CPM 
Mean reference net CPM 


H-3.13 Calculation of Abrasivity using Liquid 
Scintillation 
H-3.13.1 Dentin Abrasivity 


The dentin abrasivity of the test dentifrices (or 
abrasives) is calculated as follows: 


Mean reference net CPM per gram = 


Pre—net CPM per gram+ Post — net CPM per gram 
2 


Dentifrice Abrasivity = 


100x test dentifrice Net CPM per gram 
Mean reference net CPM per gram 


H-3.13.2 Enamel Abrasivity 


The enamel abrasivity of the test dentifrices (or 
abrasives) is calculated as follows: 


Mean reference net CPM per gram = 
Pre—net CPM per gram+ Post —net CPM per gram 


2 
Dentin Abrasivity = 


10x test dentifrice Net CPM per gram 
Mean reference net CPM per gram 


NOTES 

Centres for measuring toothpaste abrasivity via RDA route: 
1 Indiana University, School of Dentistry 
Oral Health Research Institute 

415 Lansing Street 

Indianapolis, Indiana 46202 

USA 

2 Missouri Analytical grade Laboratories 
Marcus Research Laboratories, INC 
1820 Delmar Boulevard 

St Louis,MO063 103-1798 

USA 


IS 6356 : 2021 


ANNEX J 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Cosmetics Sectional Committee, PCD 19 


Organization 


Drugs Controller General (INDIA), Delhi 


All India Cosmetic Manufacturers Association, 
Mumbai 


Chemstar Limited, Mumbai 


Cavinkare Private Limited, Chennai 


Central Drugs Standard Control Organization 
(CDSCO), Delhi 


Central Drugs Testing Laboratory (CDTL), Chennai 


Consumer Voice, New Delhi 


CSIR Indian Institute of Toxicological Research, 
Lucknow 


Central Drugs Testing Laboratory (CDTL), Mumbai 


Colgate Palmolive (India) Limited, Mumbai 


Consumer Guidance Society of India, Mumbai 


Dabur India Limited, Sahibabad 


Directorate of Food and Drugs Administration, Goa 


Drugs Control Department, Delhi 


Envisbe Solutions Pvt. Limited, Mumbai 
Essential Oil Association of India (EOAI), Noida 


Food Safety and Drug Administration, Lucknow 


Food and Drugs Control Administration Gujarat, 
Gandhinagar 


Food and Drugs Administration Haryana, Panchkula 


Food and Drugs Administration Maharashtra, 
Mumbai 


Fragrance and Flavours Association of India, 
(FAFAT), Mumbai 


Representative(s) 


Dr V. G. SOMANI (Chairman) 


Ms KAJAL ANAND 
DR VIRENDRA V. CHAVAN (Alternate) 


SHRI SUNIL JOSHI 


Dr T. KUMAR 
DR GIREESH KUMAR (Alternate I) 
DR S. SANKAR KALIDAS (Alternate II) 


Dr S. P. SHANI 


Ms C. VIJAYA LAKSHMI 
Dr J. UMA MAHESWARI (Alternate) 


SHRI H. WADHWA 


DR A. B. PANT 
Dr R. S. Ray (Alternate) 


Dr RAMAN MOHAN SINGH 
SHRIMATI S. U. WARDE (Alternate I) 
SHRIMATI SUJATA S. KAISARE (Alternate II) 


Dr MAnas V. VYAS 
SHRIMATI SHRUTI HARDIKAR (Alternate I) 
SHRI PURUSHOTTAM JADHAV (Alternate II) 


DR SITARAM DIXIT 
Dr M. S. Kamata (Alternate) 


DR PRASUN BANDYOPADHYAY 
Dr S. K. LUTHERA (Alternate I) 
SHRI SHIVAJI Rat (Alternate II) 


Ms Jyoti J. SARDESSAI 


Suri A. K. NASA 
SHRI K. R. CHAWLA (Alternate) 


SHRI BENEDICT M. MASCARENHAS 
SHRI AJAY K. JAIN 


DR ANITA BHATNAGAR JAIN 
SHRI DINESH KUMAR TIWARI (Alternate) 


Dr H. G. KosHia 
SHRI V. R. SHAH (Alternate) 


SHRI NARENDER KUMAR AHOOJA 
SHRI MANMOHAN TANEJA (Alternate) 


SHRI O. S. SADHWANI 


SHRI HASMUKH PATEL 


15 


IS 6356 : 2021 


Organization 


Galaxy Surfactants Limited, Mumbai 


Godrej Consumers Products Limited, Mumbai 


Hindustan Lever Limited (HUL), Mumbai 
Hygienic Research Institute Private Limited, Mumbai 


Indian Pharmacopoeia Commission (IPC), Ghaziabad 


ITC R & D Centre, Bengaluru 


Indian Beauty and Hygiene Association (IBHA), 
Mumbai 


Johnson and Johnson Limited, Mumbai 


Kelkar Education Trusts (KETS) Scientific Research 
Centre, Mumbai 


Loreal India Private Limited, Mumbai 


Marico Limited, Mumbai 


Mikasa Cosmetics Limited, Ahmedabad 


Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
(MSME), Delhi 


Ministry of AYUSH, Delhi 
Procter and Gamble, Mumbai 
PETA India, Mumbai 


The Himalaya Drug Company, Bengaluru 


Voluntary Organization In Interest of Consumer 
Education (VOICE), Delhi 


Bureau of Indian Standards, Jammu 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


SHRI R. K. SINGH 
SHRI SAGAR TRAILOKYA (Alternate I) 
SHRI PRAMOD SABAT TRAILOKYA (Alternate II) 


Ms RUPINDER KAUR RAWAT 
Dr MANOJ GAUR (Alternate) 


Ms VRINDA RAJWADE 


Dr JAYASHREE ANAND 
SHRI MANOJ SARKAR (Alternate) 


Dr ANIL KR TEOTIA 
Dr Mano; Kr PANDEY (Alternate) 


DR GURUBASAVARAJA KM 
Dr JAMES BHASKAR (Alternate I) 
Dr JOHN Bosco STANISLAUS (Alternate II) 


Ms MALATHI NARAYANAN 


DR DILIP TRIPATHI 
SHRI RAJNEESH KUMAR (Alternate) 


DR S. S. BARVE 


Ms VEENA BALGI 
Ms RuPALI TURAKHIYA (Alternate) 


Dr MITALI HEDGE 
Dr SUDHAKAR MHASKAR (Alternate I) 
SHRI PRABODH S. HALDE (Alternate II) 


Ms TRUPTI PATEL 


DR ARUN KUMAR 
DR IZZATULLAH (Alternate) 


Dr D. C. KATOCH 
SHRI GIRISH PARHATE 


SHRI MANILAL VALLIYATE 
Ms DirTI M. KAPOOR 


DR SUNDARAM RAMACHANDRAN 
DR KRISHNAN SRIRAMAN (Alternate) 


Dr M. A.U. KHAN 


SHRIMATI NISHA BURA 


SHRIMATI NAGAMANI. T, SCIENTIST ‘E’ AND HEAD (PCD) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-Officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


SHRIMATI D. UMA 
SCIENTIST ‘D’ (PCD), BIS 


16 


IS 6356 : 2021 


Decorative and Miscellaneous Cosmetics Subcommittee, PCD 19:4 


Organization 


Regional Drugs Testing Laboratory, Chandigarh 
Arbro Pharmaceuticals Limited, New Delhi 
Colgate Palmolive India Limited, Mumbai 


Consumer Education and Research Centre, 
Ahmedabad 


Consumer Guidance Society of India, Mumbai 


Dabur India Limited, Sahibabad 


Directorate of Drugs Control, West Bengal, Kolkata 


Food and Drug Administration, Mumbai 


Food and Drugs Control Administration, 
Ahmedabad 


Godrej Consumer Products Limited, Mumbai 


Hindustan Unilever Limited, Mumbai 


Indian Pharmacopoeia Commission, Ghaziabad 


Institute of Chemical Technology, Mumbai 


Johnson and Johnson Private Limited, Mumbai 
Koel Colours Private Limited, Mumbai 
Loreal India Private Limited, Mumbai 


Procter and Gamble India, Mumbai 
Reckitt Benckiser India Private Limited, Mumbai 


In Personal Capacity 


Representative(s) 


Dr R. A. SINGH (Convenor) 
SHRI SOURAB ARORA 


SHRI Manas V. Vyas 
SHRIMATI SHRUTI HARDIKAR (Alternate 1) 
SHRI PURUSHOTTAM JADHAV (Alternate ID) 


SHRI H. S. TRIPATHI 


DR SITARAM DIXIT 
Dr M. S. Kamata (Alternate) 


DR S. K. LUTHRA 
SHRI PRASUN BANDYOPADHYAY (Alternate 1) 
SHRI SHIvAJI Rat (Alternate II) 


SHRI SAJAL KUMAR ROY CHOWDHURY 
SHRI O. S. SADHWANI 


SHRI H.G. KOSHIA 
SHRI V. R. SHAH (Alternate) 


DR RUPINDER KAUR RAWAT 
Dr Manos GAUR (Alternate) 


DR VRINDA RAJWADE 


DR ANIL KR TEOTIA 
Dr MANOJ KUMAR PANDEY (Alternate) 


DR AMIT P. PRADEEP 


Dr DiLIP TRIPATHI 
SHRI RAJNEESH Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI D. DESAI 
SHRI SHAILENDRA SHRIPANNAVAR (Alternate) 


Ms VEENA BALGI 
Ms RuPALI TURAKHIYA (Alternate) 


SHRI GIRISH PARHATE 
DR Pooja SHARMA 


SHRI VINAY KUMAR SINGH 


17 


(Continued from second cover) 


A scheme for labelling environment friendly products to be known as ECO Mark (optional) has been introduced 
at the instance of the Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change (MoEF&CC). The ECO Mark shall 
be administered by the Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 as per 
the Resolution No. 71 dated 20 February 1991 and No. 768 dated 24 August 1992 published in the Gazette of 
the Government of India. For a product to be eligible for ECO Mark it shall also carry Standard Mark of BIS for 
quality, besides meeting additional environment friendly (EF) requirements. For this purpose, the Standard Mark 
of BIS would be a single mark being a combination of the ISI Mark and the ECO logo. The requirements for the 
ECO friendliness will be additional, manufacturing units will be free to opt for Standard Mark alone also. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for formulation of this standard is given at Annex J. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 “Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: PCD 19 (16573). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


