UDC

629'73'023.4-478

: 669'71 : 620-I
Indian Standard

IS : 11642

( Part

2 ) -

1986

( Reaffirmed 2002 )

ALUMINIUM

SPECIFICATION FOR HEXAGONAL HONEYCOMB
PART 2 METHODS OF TESTS core used for requirements,

CORE

1. Scope --Covers the methods of tests for honeycomb aircraft floors. Part 1 of this specification covers the general 2. Classification a) Acceptance b) Type 2.1 tests. tests shall constitute the acceptance tests: of Tests tests, and

sandwich

construction

of

The following a) b) d) Density,

Bare compressive Core shear strength

strength

and modulus, and modulus, (in both and L and

c) Stabilized

compressive

strength and modulus constitute

W directions).

2.2

The following a) b) c) d) Density,

tests shall

the type tests:

Bare compressive Core shear strength Node bond

strength

and modulus, (in both f and W directions), and

and modulus

strength.

3. Test Conditions 3.1 The~roomtemperature and relative humidity for conducting the tests shall be 20fl"C and 50&5 percent, respectively. The testing machine shall be capable of an accuracy of 1 percent of true applied load and shall not deviate by more than 25 percent of the specified speed rate. The test

specimens shall be conditioned 4. Acceptance
4.1 Density Tests Shall be

before commencement of tests.

determined

on

a cubic

metre

in accordance with Appendix A and expressed

in N/m3. 4.2 Bare Compressive 4.3 Stabilized Appendix C
Strength and Modulus and Shall be determined Shall be

in accordance with Appendix
determined

B. with

Compressive

Strength

Modulus

in

accordance

4;4 Core Shear Strength 5. Type
5.1 Tests Shall

and Modulus

-

Shall

be determined

in accordance with Appendix D.

Density

comply

with

4.1. and Modulus Shall -

5.2 Bare Compressive
5.3 5.4 5.5

Strength

Shall comply with 4.2.
comply with 4.4. with Appendix F. E.

Core Shear Strength /j/ode

and Modulus

Bond Strength
of Core -

-

Shall

be determined

in accordance in accordance

Thickness

Shall

be determined

wi_th Appendix

6. Sampling 6.1 For the purpose of lot sampling, a lot may be defined as a group of 20 or less cores of the same cured under the same conditions and manufactured under the type, fabricated from the same Print, same press. 6.2 At least 5 specimens shall be used for tests in 4 and 5 from
Adopted 31 March 1986

each

lot.
Gr 4

0 June 1987, I

BIS

I

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG NEW DELHI 110002

IS : 11642

( Part 2 ) -1986 APPENDIX
( Clause 4.1 )

A
-HONEYCOMB CORES cores. with the of of

TEST A-l. Scope -

METHOD

FOR

DENSITY

OF HEXAGONAL

This method

covers the determination

of density of hexagonal

honeycomb in

A-2. Test Specimen - The test specimens shall be 76 mm in width and 76 mm thickness of the sandwich core required. At least five specimens shall be tested. A-3. Test Conditions - Condition 23fl'l"C and 50+2 percent relative A-4. f0.5 A-5. Procedure percent. Calculations Density where
d = density

length

the core humidity.

material

to constant

weight

at a

temperature

-

Determine

the weight

and also the dimensions

of the specimen

to an accuracy

of core d = F

x IO"

in Newtons

per cubic metre, (Newtons), and millimetre.

w = final weight v = final volume A-6.

after conditioning

after conditioning~cubic

Test report shall contain the following: a) Brief description of the material and size of the test specimen, b) Core designation c) Conditioning d) Density. and number of specimens and tested, procedure,

APPENDIX ( Clause 4.2 )
BARE COMPRESSIVE STRENGTH AND

B
MODULUS TEST

B-l. Scope-This test measures the compressive strength only and is often proposed as an acceptance test for honeycomb cores. This test is for bare cores only; that is, face sheets are not bonded and edges not reinforced as in the case of stabilized block compression tests. B-2. Test Specimen - Specimen shall be for any core thickness (12 mm /Win) and shall be at least 250 x 250 mm in cross-section. The test slice shall be cut so that the thickness does not vary by more than j~O.5 percent. No end coatings shall be used. At least five specimens shall be tested for a type. B-3. Test Apparatus - Any form of standard compression testing machine capable of operation at a constant rate of motion of the movable head. A compression ram at least 65 mm in diameter and large enough for cores having larger cells to include at least one complete cell. B-4. Test Procedure - Support the test slice over its entire area on lower plate of the testing machine and press the compression ram into the slice. Apply the load at a constant rate of movement and at such a rate that the maximum load will occur between 3 and 6 minutes. A suggested rate of ram movement is 0'038 mm per minute. B-5. Calculation the ram. B-6. Test Report Calculate the compressive strength by dividing the maximum load by the area of

The test report shall contain

the following:

a) Core designation; b) Dimensions of test specimens c) Testing conditions, of failed temperature, specimen d) Compressive e) Descriphon

and size of ram; relative including humidity location 2 and speed of testing; and type of failure. values and averages; and

strerrgth, ~individual

IS:11642( A~PPENDIX
( Clause 4.3 ) STABILIZED
C-l. ScopeThe method sandwich honeycomb core. along the axis of the core.

Part2)-1986

C

CORE

COMPRESSIVE

STRENGTH

AND

MODULUS

covers determination of This property is usually

the compressive strength and modulus of determined for design purposes in a direction

C-2. Test Specimen - Test has face sheets bonded to exceeding 10 000 mm2 but the area of specimen shall complete cell. The height of Not less than five specimens

specimens shall be of sandwich construction (that is, stabilized core that the core) and shall be a square of circular cross-section having areas not not less than the following minimum areas. For cells larger than 12 mm be a minimum of 2 500 mm2 or large enough to include at least one the specimen shall not be greater than four times the width or diameter. of a~type shall be tested.

C-2.1 Prepare the test specimens so that the loaded ends will be parallel to each other and perpendicular to the sides of the specimen. In order to avoid local crushing of honeycomb cores at the ends, it is desirable to reinforce the ends with a suitable material. The ends may be cast or dipped in a thin layer of resin (epoxy, potyester or furane resin has been found satisfactory) and cured at room temperature or slightly elevated temperature. It has been f~ound that a depth of resin as little as 2 mm will provide adequate support for many types of cores so as to prevent localized failures.
C-3. Test Apparatus - Any form of standard compression testing machine capable of operation at a constant rate of motion of the movable head, with self-aligning grips shall be used. Suitable means for measuring strains in honeycomb cores consist of filar microscopes focussed on points of fine needles inserted in the core. C-4. Test Procedure - Apply the load to the specimen through a spherical loading block, preferably of the suspended, self-aligning type, in such a manner that the block distributes the load as uniformly Apply the load at a constant rate of as possible over the entire loading surface of the specimen. movement of the movable head of the testing machine ( Note 1 ) and at such a rate that maximum load ( Note 2) will occur between 3 and 6 minutes. Note 1 -A
suggested rate of head movement is 0'003 mm/min/mm of core height. of the core, it will be desirable to test under continuously applied load. For accurate determination of

the properties

Note 2 - For cores without
head-movement is measured

definite maximum load, the maximum load shall b-e the load at 2 percent the maximum load shall be the load at 10 percent total compression.

strain or if

C-5. Calculation - Data for stress-strain curves may be taken to determine the modulus of elasticity. proportional limit stress at 0.2 percent strain offset and the maximum load at 2 percent strain (see Note 2 ). Usually 12 readings are adequate to determine the curve to the proportional limit. Measure deformations to the nearest 0'002 mm using filar microscopes focussed on points of fine needles inserted in the core. The filar microscope shall measure strain over the central portion of the length of the specimen over a gauge length not exceeding two-thirds of the length of the specimen. C-6.

Test

Report

-

The report

shall

include

the following: including materials, resins, adhesives,

a) Complete

description

of the test

specimens

type of end

support,

etc; of test specimens; including temperature,
diagrams; individuals values and averages; of failure. and

b) Dimensions c) Testing
d)

conditions,

relative

humidity

and speed

of testing;

Stress-strain

or load-deformation strength of failed and modulus specimen

e) Compressive f) Description

including

location 3

and type

IS : 11642 ( Part 2 ) - 1986 APPENDIX ( Clause
CORE SHEAR STRENGTH 4.4 ) AND MODULUS TEST
of the

D

D-l. Scope - This method covers the determination of shear strength parallel to the plane honeycomb core and the shearing modulus associated with strains in a plane normal to the The test shall be carried out in both L and W directions. bonded to the honeycomb core.

facings

D-2. Test Specimens - The test specimens shall have honeycomb core thickness of 20 mm i 0'05 mm, width 50 mm rrt 0'25 mm and length 250 mm + 1'0 mm. Steel plates of sufficient thickness depending on the strength of the core shall be bonded to the core, but the plate dimension shall be such that the line of action of direct tensile force shall pass through the diagonally opposite corners of the sandwich as shown in Fig. 1. (It has been found that loading plates having a stiffness of not less than 2'59 ~10~ N. mm'/mm width per millimetre of core thickness have performed satisfactorily,)

t

UPPER FITTING

FIG. 1 ARRANGEMENT

OF TEST SPECIMEN FOR SHEAR TEST IN TENSION

D-3. Test Procedure - Apply the load to the ends of the rigid plates in tension through a spherical bearing block or a universal joint so as to distribute the load uniformly across the width of the specimen. Apply the load at a constant rate of movement of the movable head of the testing machine such that the maximum load will occur within 3 to 6 minutes. (Recommended rate is 0'005 mmimin per mm of specimen length. It is permitted to stop loading head intermittently to obtain deformation data.)
Obtain 12 load-deformation readings, preferably at equal strain increments to define the of the stress-strain diagram. Read the deformation to the nearest 0'002 mm by means of a dial shown in Fig. 2. 4 shape gauge

IS : 11642
DIAL GAUGE

(Part2)-1986

YCQMB CORE FIG. 2 ARRANGEMENT OF DIAL GAUGE TO MEASURE DISPLACEMENT PLATE WITH RESPECT TO OTHER OF ONE

D-4.

Calculations

-

Calculate

the shear stress as follows: f,=

P

Lx6

where fs = shear stress, pascals ( Pa ); P= L= b= Obtain load on specimen, length width of specimen, of specimen, N; mm; and mm. when p equals the maximum load.

the shear strength

of the core by this formula Shear strain

Y = --$-

where r = dial reading or movement other; and C = distance and D-5. shear Test modulus Report between loading of one loading plate of the specimen with respect to the

plates, that is, the thickness fs x c r the following:

of the core.

of core

G, = -

fs = Y

The test report shall include

Core a>

b) 4 Stress-strain or load-deformation 4 Shear strength and shear modulus
4 Description f> Orientation
of specimen failure, of core (L or W).

designation, Dimensions of test specimen,

diagrams; of honeycomb core,

and

APPENDIX
( Clause NODE-BOND STRENGTH 5.4 ) OF HONEYCOMB

E
CORE MATERIAL honeycomb expansion,

E-l. Scope - This method covers determination of node to node core materials. The test is useful in determining whether cores can cutting and machining without delaminating.

bond strength of be handled during

E-2. Test Specimen - The test specimen shall be 130 f 2 mm wide by 260 f 10 mm long with a test section outside the grips of 200 f 10 mm. The specimen width shall be parallel to the nodenode bond areas. The thickness of the core shall be 12'0 + 0'1 or 16'0 f 0'1 mm. A minimum number of five specimens shall be selected from that portion of the material which appears to have a maximum number of distorted cells or misalignment of bond areas. 5

IS : 11642

( Part 2 -) - 1986

E-3. Test Apparatus - The fixture shall be as shown in Fig. 3. The tension testing device capable of slow uniform head motion that may indicate the load at failure to within one percent accuracy with grips of multiple pin type or clamping type shall be used. be For multiple pin types the fixture shall slotted to permit horizontal movement of the pins.

\

STRETCHING

PINS/

PINNED

CELLS

~.

130.+2.

L RIBBON DIRECTION

I
.

11

All dimensions in millimetres. FIG. 3 NODE BOND TEST FIXTURE

E-4. Preparation of Specimens specimen ends can be reinforced coating of resin.

- In the event against crushing

that by

a clamping filling with

type of grip is to plaster or reinforcing

be

used, the with a dip

6

lS:11642(

Part2)-1986

E-5. Test Procedures - Apply tensile load normal to the ribbon so as to produce a constant rate of Failure in the grip shall be considered a grip separation and record the ultimate load developed. satisfactory test provided the test values obtained are equivalent or exceed the applicable specification value. E-6. Calculation Calculate the node-to-node bond strength as follows:

F, = PILT

where
Fu = node-to-node P = L =

bond strength, load, N; mm; and

P,;

ultimate width

tensile

of specimen,

T = thickness

of the specimen,

mm. the following information:

E-7. Test

Report

-

Test report shall contain

a) Core designation, b) Dimensions c) Node-to-node of the test specimen, bond strength and calculated.

APPENDIX
( Clause MEASUREMENT F-l, Scope a) Method b) Method Two methods A B OF THICKNESS 5.5 )

F
HONEYCOMB of flat sandwich CORES honeycomb cores;

OF SANDWICH

are covered to measure the thickness tester tester

Roller type thickness Disc type thickness

F-2. Test Specimen - The test specimen shall be flat but otherwise thickness consistent with the limits of the measuring apparatus. F-3. Test Apparatus

may be any

length,

width,

and

a)

Roller

Type Thickness

work attached. movable in the to a dial gauge above or below that it projects 18 N ( 1'81 kg

Tester - The tester shall consist of a flat table with a rigid yoke frame Two rollers shall be mounted on this yoke, one fixed in position and one vertical direction. The vertical movement of the upper roller shall be translated calibrated in 0'01 mm increments, that registers the amount of variation a pre-set nominal dimension. The lower roller shall be fixed in position so 6 mm above the surface of the table. The upper roller shall exert a force of ) in the core material.

b)

Thickness Tester - The tester shall consist of a flat table with a rigid yoke frameA 25 mm dia presser disc movable in a vertical direction shali be mounted on work attached. The vertical movement of the disc shall be translated to a dial gauge calibrated in the yoke. 0*002 mm that registers the amount of variation above or below a pre-set nominal dimension. Disc type

The disc shall exert a force of 24 N ( 2'4 kg ) on the core material. F-4. Test Procedure - Place a spacer bar of a thickness equal to the desired nominal core between the rollers or beneath the disc, and zero the dial gauge. Remove the spacer bar and Move the core through the rollers back and forth and observe core material to be measured. In the case of disc type, move the core in a saw tooth pattern along the gauge readings. the specimen and observe the dial gauge readings. If the honeycomb sample is excessively and the weight of the presser disc is not sufficient to straighten it, use an additional presser ring concentric with the 25 mm dia presser foot to force the sample to lie flat on base plate. The outside diameter of this ring shall be 120 mm. Care shall be taken as not to exert hand pressure readings. 7 on the core, as this will affect thickness insert the the dial length of wrapped adjustable the metal

the dial gauge

IS : 11642

( Part

2 ) - 1986 EXPLANATORY NOTE
while preparing this part of the specification for

Reference aluminium

has been made to the following

core for use in panels of aircraft floor: B General test methods for sandwich Core material, aluminium, construction and core materials

MIL-STD-401

MIL- C 7438 F ASTM C 273-1961

for sandwich in flatwise

construction of sandwich construction of

Method of shear test sandwich core

plane

ASTM ASTM . ASTM

C 363-1957 C 365-1957 C 366-1967

Test method for delamination Test method for flatwise

strength

of honeycomb strength

type core materials cores

compressive

of sandwich

Test method for measurement for core materials, adhesives,

of thickness

of sandwich

cores

Separate specifications

etc, are under preparation. cores that are used in been drawn up for the

Part 1 of this specification covers the general requirements for aluminium has also sandwich constructions for the floor panel. Separate specification floor panels using aluminium face sheets and cores in their construction.

Printed at Printrade,

New

Delhi,

India

