INATA Ah IS 2469 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


Saa — yreat Ar srearactt 


(GAT FRAT ) 


Gypsum — Glossary of Terms 
( Second Revision ) 


ICS 91.100.10 


© BIS 2023 


YR AH OAT 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Se F MM, 9 FST SITE MHC AMT, Ay feeit - 110002 


MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


August 2023 Price Group 7 


Building Limes and Gypsum Products Sectional Committee, CED 04 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Building Limes and Gypsum Products Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering 
Division Council. 


Gypsum is a well-known building material and is extensively used as a building material in many countries of the 
world. It has the specific advantages of lightness and high fire resistance. 


It is estimated that the various resources for gypsum, generally of natural origin, in this country, when fully 
developed, will yield, in addition to high grade gypsum, large quantities of gypsum of purity 70 percent or less. 
The latter, according to present knowledge, also have prospects of economic use mainly as gypsum plaster as 
building material and various building products, such as, gypsum plaster boards gypsum tiles and gypsum blocks. 


The Building Lime and Gypsum Products Sectional Committee has prepared a series of Indian Standards on 
building gypsum covering specifications, methods of test and codes of practice, with a view to assisting the 
industry, which is steadily growing. This standard on glossary of terms relating to gypsum was first formulated in 
1963 and was revised in 1976 to include additional terms which were in use then. 


In this revision, the existing terms and definitions have been reviewed and updated wherever required, as per the 
latest technological developments, and a number of new terms along their definitions have been added, such as 
featured edge, fineness modulus, glass mat gypsum panel, gypsum core board, perlite aggregate, synthetic gypsum 
and vermiculite aggregate. 


In the formulation of this standard due weightage has been given to international coordination among the standards 
and practices prevailing in different countries in addition to relating it to the practices in the field in this country. 
This has been met by deriving assistance from the following: 


ASTM Designation C-11-18b standard terminology relating to gypsum and related building materials and 
systems. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 2469 : 2023 


Indian Standard 
GYPSUM — GLOSSARY OF TERMS 


( Second Revision ) 


1SCOPE 


This standard defines the terms relating to gypsum 
and gypsum products. 


2 TERMINOLOGY 


2.1 Accelerator — A material that reduces setting 
time 


2.2 Accessories — Products fabricated for the 
purpose of forming corners, edges, control joints, or 
decorative effects. 


2.3 Adhesive — A substance capable of holding 
materials together by surface attachment. 


2.4 Admixture — A material other than water, 
aggregates, hydraulic cementitious material, and 
fiber reinforcement that is used as an ingredient to 
modify properties and is added to the batch before 
or during its mixture. 


2.5 Aggregate — An inert granular material which 
may be added to gypsum plasters. 


2.6 All Purpose Compound — A compound 
formulated and manufactured to serve as both a 
taping and a finishing compound. 


2.7 Anhydrous Gypsum Plaster — A material 
consisting essentially of anhydrous calcium sulphate 
(CaSO4) produced by the dehydration of gypsum, 
the set of which has been suitably accelerated. 


2.8 Arris (of an Arch) — The outside corner or 
angle formed by the meeting of a wall surface with 
the curved surface of an arch (see Fig. 1). 


2.9 Base Coat — Any or all layers of plaster in place 
prior to the application of finish coats. 
NOTE — The first application is normally called a scratch 


coat and the second application is referred to as a brown 
coat. 


2.10 Bedding Coat — That coat of plaster to receive 
aggregate or other decorative material of any size, 
impinged or embedded into its surface, before it sets. 


2.11 Bond Plaster — A calcined gypsum plaster 
specially formulated for application over rough 
monolithic concrete as a bonding coat for a 
subsequent gypsum plaster layer. 


2.12 Bridging — Sections of wood or metal pieces 
used between framing members to stiffen, give 
lateral support, and minimize rotation. 


2.13 Browning Plaster — It is a form of retarded 
hemihydrate plaster and is used as undercoat 
plaster after mixing with sand. 


2.14 Building Construction Joint — A designed 
division of a building that allows movement of all 
component parts of the building in any plane, which 
may be caused by thermal, seismic, wind loading, or 
any other force. The construction of the separation 
is accomplished by one of the following methods: 
(a) manufactured devices suitable for this 
application or (b) by field fabrication of suitable 
materials. 


2.15 Calcined Gypsum — A dry powder, primarily 
calcium sulfate hemihydrate, resulting from 
calcination of gypsum; cementitious base for the 
production of most gypsum plasters: also called 
plaster of Paris, sometimes called stucco. 


ARRIS ( OF AN ARCH ) 


FIG. 1 ARRIS (OF AN ARCH) 


1 


IS 2469 : 2023 


2.16 Calcium Sulfate — The chemical compound 
CaSO, 


2.17 Cement — A material or a mixture of 
materials (without aggregate) which, when in a 
plastic state, possesses adhesive and cohesive 
properties and which will harden in place. 


NOTE — The word 'cement' is used without regard to the 
composition of the material. 


2.18 Check Cracking (in Joint Systems) — Short, 
narrow cracks randomly oriented in the surface of 
the dried joint compound. 


2.19 Coat — A layer of plaster applied in a single 
operation. 


2.20 Combined Water — The water chemically 
held, as water of crystallization, by the calcium 
sulphate dehydrate or hemihydrate crystal. 


2.21 Compressive Strength — The maximum load 
sustained by a standard specimen of a material when 
subjected to a crushing force. 


2.22 Consistency — A property of a material 
determined by the complete flow-force relation. 


2.23 Control (Expansion-Contraction) Joint — A 
designed separation in the system materials that 
allow for movement caused by the expansion or 
contraction of the system. The construction of the 
separation is accomplished by one of the following 
methods: (a) manufactured devices suitable for this 
application or (b) by field fabrication of suitable 
materials. 


2.24 Core (of Gypsum Board) — The hardened 
material filling the space between the face and back 
papers consisting substantially of rehydrated 
gypsum with additives. 


2.25 Core (of Gypsum Panel Products) — The 
hardened material, consisting substantially of 
gypsum with additives, fills the space between the 
face and the back of the gypsum panel product. 


2.206 Cornerbead — An accessory for outside 
corners. 
2.27 Corner Reinforcement, Exterior — A 


preformed section of wire or expanded sheet steel 
for the reinforcement of exterior stucco external 
corners (arrises). 


2.28 Crushed Gypsum — Gypsum subjected to a 
primary crushing operation. 


2.29 Cure (Portland Cement Plaster or Stucco) 
— (a) To provide conditions conducive to the 


hydration process of Portland cement plaster or 
stucco, or (b) to maintain proper temperature and a 
sufficient quantity of water within the plaster to 
ensure cement hydration. 


2.30 Density — The weight per unit volume of a 
material. 


2.31 Dried Sample — A sample devoid of free 
water. 


2.32 Edge (of Glass Mat Gypsum Panels) — The 
bound edge as manufactured. 


2.33 Edge (of Gypsum Board) — The paper-bound 
edge as manufactured. 


2.34 Edge Trim — An accessory to cover exposed 
ends or edges of gypsum board. 


2.35 End (of Glass Mat Gypsum Panels) — The 
end is perpendicular to the bound edge. The gypsum 
core is always exposed. 


2.36 End (of Gypsum Board) — The end 
perpendicular to the paper-bound edge. The gypsum 
core is always exposed. 


2.37 Face — The surface is designed to be left 
exposed to view or to receive decoration or 
additional finishes. 


2.38 Facer — A woven or nonwoven fabric or 
membrane on the surface of a gypsum board or 
gypsum panel product that is an integral part of the 
product. 


2.39 Featured Edge — An edge configuration of 
the paper bound edge of gypsum board that provides 
special design or performance. 


2.40 Fineness Modulus — An empirical factor 
obtained by adding total percentages of a sample of 
aggregate retained on each of a specified series of 
sieves and dividing by 100. The sieve sizes used are: 
No. 100 (150 um), No. 50 (300 um), No. 30 
(600 um), No. 16 (1.18 mm), No. 8 (2.36 mm), 
No. 4 (4.75 mm) 3/8 inch (9.5 mm), 
3/4 inch (19.0 mm), 3/2 inch (38.1 mm) and larger, 
increasing in the ratio of 2 to 1. 


2.41 Finish Coat — The final layer of plaster 
applied over a basecoat or other substrate. 


242 Finishing Compound or Topping 
Compound — A compound specifically formulated 
and manufactured for use over taping or all-purpose 
compounds to provide a smooth and level surface 
for the application of decoration. 


2.43 Fire Resistance Classification — A standard 
rating of fire resistance and protective 
characteristics of building construction or assembly. 


2.44 Flame Spread Classification — A standard 
rating of relative surface burning characteristics of a 
building material as compared to a standard 
material. 


2.45 Flexural Strength — The maximum load 
sustained by a standard specimen of a sheet material 
when subjected to a bending force. 


2.46 Floating — The act of spreading, compacting, 
or consolidating to achieve a specified uniform 
appearance. 


2.47 Framing Member — Stud, plate, track, joist, 
furring, and other support to which a gypsum panel 
product or metal plaster base is attached. 


2.48 Free Water — All water contained by gypsum 
board or plaster in excess of that chemically held as 
water of crystallization. 


2.49 Gauging Plaster —  Calcined gypsum 
plaster used with lime for a finish coat. 


2.50 Glass Mat — Woven or non-woven fabric of 
glass fibers with or without a binder. 


2.51 Glass Mat Gypsum Panel — Gypsum panel 
product with glass mat facers. 


2.52 Grout — Gypsum or Portland cement plaster 
used to fill crevices or to fill hollow metal frames. 


2.53 Gypsum — Calcium sulphate combined with 
two molecules of water, in crystalline form, having 
the approximate chemical formula CaSO4.2H20. 


2.54 Gypsum Backing Board — A sheet or a slab 
having an incombustible core, essential of gypsum, 
surfaced with paper on both sides and designed to 
be used as a base layer or a backing material in 
multilayer construction. 


2.55 Gypsum Board — The generic name for a 
family of noncombustible sheet products 
consisting of a core primarily of gypsum and a 
paper surfacing. 


2.56 Gypsum Concrete — A combination of 
aggregate or aggregates with calcined gypsum as a 
binding medium, which after mixing with water, sets 
into a conglomerate mass. 


2.57 Gypsum Fibre Concrete — Gypsum concrete 
in which the aggregate consists of shaving fibre, or 
chips of wood. 


IS 2469 : 2023 


2.58 Gypsum Formboard — A sheet or a slab 
having an incombustible core, essentially of 
gypsum, surfaced on the exposed side with a 
fungus-resistant paper and on the reverse side with 
paper suitable to receive poured-in-place gypsum 
concrete. 


2.59 Gypsum Lath — Gypsum board used as the 
base for application of gypsum plaster 


a) Insulating gypsum lath — The same as plain 
gypsum lath except that in addition, the back 
surface is covered with a continuous sheet of 
pure bright finished aluminium foil; 
Perforated gypsum lath — A gypsum lath 
having perforations to provide mechanical 
keying of the base coat plaster; 

c) Plain gypsum lath — A gypsum lath without 
perforations; and 

Type-X lath — A gypsum lath specially 
manufactured to provide specific fire 
retardant characteristics. 


b 


wm 


d 


wm 


2.60 Gypsum Base for Veneer Plasters — A 
Gypsum board used as the base for application of a 
gypsum veneer plaster. 


2.61 Gypsum Casting Plaster — A calcined 
gypsum plaster used primarily to form objects, such 
as lamp bases, art ware, novelties, and so forth. 


2.62 Gypsum Coreboard — A 3/4 inch (19 mm) to 
1 inch (25.4 mm) gypsum board consisting of a 
single board or factory laminated multiple boards, 
used as a gypsum stud or core in semisolid or solid 
gypsum board partitions. 


2.63 Gypsum Moulding Plaster — A Material 
consisting essentially of calcined gypsum for use in 
making interior embellishments and cornices as 
gauging plaster. 


2.64 Gypsum Neat Plaster — A calcined gypsum 
mixed at the mill with ingredients to control working 
quality and setting time. 


NOTE — Neat plaster is either fibred or unifibered. The 
addition of aggregate is required on the job. 


2.65 Gypsum Panel Products — General name for 
a family of sheet products consisting essentially of 


gypsum. 


2.66 Gypsum Partition Block (or tile) — A 
gypsum building unit in the form of block (or tile) 
for use in non-load bearing construction in the 
interior of buildings and for the protection of 
columns, elevator shafts, etc against fire. 


2.67 Gypsum Plaster — The generic name for a 
family of powered cementitious products consisting 
primarily of calcined gypsum with additives to 


IS 2469 : 2023 


modify physical characteristics and having the 
ability, when mixed with water. To produce a 
plastic mortar or slurry which can be formed to the 
desired shape by various methods and will 
subsequently set to a hard, rigid mass. 


2.68 Gypsum Sheathing — A Gypsum panel 
products are specifically manufactured with 
enhanced water resistance for use as a substrate for 
exterior surface materials. 


2.69 Gypsum Wallboard — A Gypsum board used 
primarily as an interior surfacing for building 
structures 


a) Foil-backed gypsum wallboard — Gypsum 
wallboard with the back surface covered 
with a continuous sheet of pure bright 
finished aluminum foil; and 

b) Type-X gypsum wallboard — Gypsum 
wallboard specially manufactured to provide 
specific fire-resistant characteristics. 


2.70 Gypsum Wood-Fibered Plaster — Calcined 
gypsum plaster containing shredded or ground wood 
fiber added during manufacture. 


2.71 Hemihydrate — The dry powder, calcium 
sulfate hemihydrate, resulting from calcination of 
CaSO42H»0, calcium sulfate dihydrate. 


2.72 Joining — The juncture of two separate plaster 
applications of the same coat, usually within a single 
surface plane. 


2.73 Joint Compound — Generic term referring to 
all compounds used for taping or finishing gypsum 
hoard, or both. 


2.74 Joint Reinforcing Metal — Strips of 
expanded metal, woven, or welded wire mesh used 
to reinforce corners and other areas of plaster and 
lath. 


2.75 Joint Reinforcing Tape — A type of paper, 
metal, fabric, glass mesh or other material 
commonly used with a cementitious compound to 
reinforce the joints between adjacent gypsum 
boards. 


2.76 Joint Tape — A strip of tape made from paper, 
metal, fabric, glass mesh, or other material, that is 
commonly used in a joint system to reinforce the 
joints between adjacent gypsum panel products. 


a) Glass-mesh joint tape — joint tape made 


from multidirectional glass yarn. 

b) Paper joint tape — joint tape made from 
paper and designed to be embedded in the 
joint compound. 


c) Self-adhering joint tape — a glass-mesh 
joint tape designed to adhere without 
requiring mechanical attachment. 


2.77 Keene's or Parian Cement — Anhydrous 
calcined gypsum plasters, which are characterized 
by being more easily brought to a smooth and true 
finish in a continuous plastered surface, this 
property being associated as well with a slow and 
gradual set. 


NOTE — Keene's cement contains alum or aluminium 
sulphate, whereas parian cement contains borax. 


2.78 Key — The grip or mechanical bond of one 

coat of plaster to another coat or to a substrate. 
NOTE — It may be accomplished physically by the 
penetration of wet mortar or crystals into paper fibres, 


perforations, scoring irregularities, or by the embedment of 
the lath. 


2.79 Load-bearing Partition — Partition designed to 
support a portion of the building structure. 


2.80 Machine Direction — The 5 direction parallel to 
the paper-bound edge of the gypsum board. 


2.81 Manufactured Sand — The fine material 
resulting from the crushing and classification by 
screening or otherwise, of rock, gravel, or blast furnace 
slag. 


2.82 Masonry Cement — A hydraulic cement for use 
in mortars for masonry construction, containing one or 
more of the following materials: Portland cement, 
Portland blast furnace slag cement, Portland-pozzolana 
cement or hydraulic lime; and in addition usually 
containing one or more materials such as hydrated 
lime, limestone, chalk, calcareous shell, talc, slag, or 
clay as prepared for this purpose. 


2.83 Mechanical Bonds — The attachment created 
when plaster penetrates into or through, the substrate or 
envelops irregularities in the surface of the substrate. 


2.84 Members (in Application of Gypsum Panel 
Products) — Framing to which gypsum panel 
products are attached. 


2.85 Mill-mixed Plaster (Ready-Mixed Plaster) — 
Material formulated and  dry-blended by the 
manufacturer, requiring only the addition of and 
mixing with water. 


2.86 Mold-Resistant Gypsum Panel — Gypsum 
panel manufactured or treated to resist mold growth. 


2.87 Mortar — A mixture of gypsum plaster with 
aggregate or hydrate lime, or both and water to produce 
a trowelable fluidity. 


2.88 Metal Lathing Plaster — It is a form of retarded 
hemihydrate plaster and is used as undercoat plaster 
after mixing with sand. It is different from browning 
plaster in that it contains free lime also. 


2.89 Natural Sand — The fine granular material 
resulting from the natural disintegration of rock or 
from the crushing of friable sandstone. 


2.90 Nominal Thickness (of Gypsum Panel 
Products) — The manufacturer stated thickness of the 
gypsum panel products. 


2.91 Normal Consistency — The number of 
millilitres of water per 100 g of gypsum plaster or 
gypsum concrete required to produce a mortar or slurry 
of specified fluidity. 


2.92 Perlite Aggregate — A siliceous volcanic glass 
expanded by heat. 


2.03 Perm — A unit of measurement of water 
vapor  permeance; a metric perm,that is 
1g/(24 h.m?.mmHg) or U.S. unit that is 1 grain/ 
(h.ft?-inch Hg). 


2.04 Permeability — The property of a porous 
material that permits a fluid (or gas) to pass through it; 
in construction, commonly refers to water vapor 
permeability of a sheet material or thickness. Metric 
unit of measurement, metric perms per centimeter of 
thickness. 


2.95 Permeance (Water Vapor) — The ratio of the 
rate of water vapor transmission (WVT) through a 
material or assembly between its two parallel surfaces 
to the vapor pressure differential between the surfaces. 
Metric unit of measurement is the metric perm, 
1g/24 h.m?.mmHg; U.S unit, 1 grain/h-f?-in.Hg. 


2.96 Plaster — see gauging plaster and gypsum 
neat plaster 


2.97 Plaster of Paris — A form of hemihydrate 
without any added retarder of set. 


NOTE — It is manufactured in several grades for 
various industrial uses. 


2.98 Plaster Bond — The adhesion between plaster 
coats or between plaster and substrate. 


2.99 Plastic Cement — A hydraulic cement to 
which one or more plasticizing agents (but not more 
than 12 percent by volume) have been added during 
inter-grinding or blending to increase the 


IS 2469 : 2023 


workability and molding qualities of the resultant 
cement paste, mortar, or plaster. 


2.100 Plasticity — The property of freshly mixed 
paste, mortar, or plaster which determines its 
workability and molding qualities. 


2.101 Portland Cement — A hydraulic cement 
produced by pulverizing clinker consisting essentially 
of hydraulic calcium silicates, and usually containing 
one or more forms of calcium sulfate as an interground 
addition. 


2.102 Portland Cement Plaster — A plaster mix in 
which Portland cement or combinations of Portland 
and masonry cements or portland cement and lime are 
the principal cementitious materials mixed with 


aggregate. 


2.103 Purity — The percentage of CaSO4.1/2H20 in 
the calcined gypsum portion of a gypsum plaster or 
gypsum concrete, for gypsum plasters. The percentage 
of CaSO4,2H50 in the gypsum or the gypsum portion 
of fully hydrated, dry, set gypsum plaster. 


2.104 Ready-Mixed Plaster — calcined gypsum 
plaster with aggregate added during manufacture. 


2.105 Relative Humidity — The ratio of actual water 
vapor pressure to the saturation water vapor pressure at 
the same temperature, expressed as a percentage. 


2.106 Retarder — material that extends setting time. 


2.107 Retarded Hemihydrate — A form of 
hemihydrate which contains an addition of a 
retarder of set. 


2.108 Round Edge — A rounded, paper-bound edge 
formation on gypsum board, commonly used for 
gypsum lath. 


2.109 Saddle-Tie, for Furring — A single or double 
strand of wire used to attach furring members to 
framing members of wall or ceiling assemblies 
(see Fig. 2). 


2.110 Saddle-tie, for Wire Hangers — To attach wire 
hangers to main runners (see Fig. 3). 


2.111 Sample as Received — A representative 
portion of product or material in the state received 
by the testing laboratory. 


2.112 Seratch Coat — The first layer of plaster 
applied over lath or other substrate. 


2.113 Set — The chemical and physical change in 
plaster as it goes from a plastic, workable state to a 
rigid state. 


IS 2469 : 2023 


FURRING 
MEMBER 


FRAMING 
MEMBER 


FIG. 2 SADDLE-TIE FOR FURRING 


WIRE 
HANAER 


SADDLE 
TIE 


MAIN RUNNER 


FIG. 3 SADDLE-TIE FOR WIRE HANGERS 


2.114 Setting Time — The elapsed time required 
for a gypsum plaster to attain a specified hardness 
and strength after mixing with water. 


2.115 Shipment (of Gypsum Panel Products) — 
The quantity of gypsum panel products shipped by a 
manufacturer and included on a single invoice. 


2.116 Smooth-Trowel Finish — A uniform finish 
free of grainy or coarse areas, trowel marks, or other 
avoidable imperfections. 


2.117 Spinout — The continued rotation of a screw 
without further penetration into the substrate. 


2.118 Steel Drill Screw — Self-drilling screw with 
the ability to drill its own hole and form or cut 
mating threads without deforming its threads or 
breaking. 


2.119 Stucco — A material used in a plastic state, 
which may be trowelled to form, when set, a hard 
covering for the exterior walls or other exterior 
surfaces of any building or structure. 
NOTE — The word 'stucco' is used without regard to the 
composition of the material and is defined only with 


reference to its use and location as contrasted with the 
words 'piaster' and 'mortar'. 


2.120 Synthetic Gypsum — A chemical product 
consisting primarily of calcium sulfate dihydrate 
(CaSO4. 2H20) resulting primarily from an 
industrial process. 


2.121 Tapered Edge or Recessed Edge — An edge 
formation of gypsum board which provides a 
shallow depression at the paper-bound edge to 
receive joint reinforcement. 


2.122 Taping Compound or Embedding 
Compound — A compound specifically formulated 
and manufactured for use in embedding of joint 
reinforcing tape at gypsum board joints. 


2.123 Temper — To mix or restore to a workable 
consistency. 


2.124 Texture Finish — Any applied decorative 
finish other than smooth. 


IS 2469 : 2023 


2.125 Three-coat Work — Plaster applied in three 
successive coats with time between coats for setting 
or drying, or both. 


2.126 Veneer Plaster — A calcined gypsum 
plaster specially manufactured to provide high 
strength, hardness and abrasion resistance when 
applied in thin coats over a veneer plaster base. 


2.127 Veneer Plaster Base — A gypsum board 
used as the base for application of a gypsum 
veneer plaster. 


2.128 Vermiculite Aggregate — A micaceous 
mineral that expands with heat. 


2.129 Water Resistant Gypsum Backing Board 
— A gypsum board designed for use on walls 
primarily as a base for the application of ceramic, or 
plastic tile. 


2.130 Wallboard — see gypsum wallboard. 


2.131 Water Absorption — The amount of water 
absorbed by a material under specified test conditions 
commonly expressed as weight percent of the test 
specimen. 


2.132 Water-Repellent Paper — gypsum board paper 
surfacing which has been formulated or treated to resist 
water penetration. 


2.133 Water-Resistant Core — A gypsum board 
specially formulated to resist water penetration. 


2.134 Water Vapor Transmission (WVT) — The rate 
of water vapor flow, under steady specified conditions, 
through a unit area of a material, between its two 
parallel surfaces and normal to the surfaces. Metric unit 
of measurement is 1 g/24 h.m?. 


2.135 Wood Fibre — Material produced by 
grinding or shredding wood. 


2.136 Wood Fibred Plaster — Calcined gypsum 
plaster containing shredded or ground wood fibre 
added during. 


IS 2469 : 2023 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Building Lime and Gypsum Products Sectional Committee, CED 04 


Organization 
School of Planning and Architecture, New Delhi 


AIMIL Ltd, New Delhi 


Archaeological Survey of India, New Delhi 


Building Materials and Technology Promotion 
Council, New Delhi 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Central Soil and Materials Research Station, 
New Delhi 


CSIR - Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


CTS Restoration Products India Private Limited, 
New Delhi 


Delhi Development Authority, New Delhi 


Diamond International Inex Pvt Limited, Gurugram 


Directorate of Mines and Geology, Udaipur 


Eshan Minerals Pvt Ltd, Jalgaon 


Gujarat Engineering Research Institute, 


Vadodara 


Hindalco Industries Limited, Mumbai 


Housing and Urban Development Corporation 
Ltd, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 


Indian National Trust for Art and Culture Heritage, 
New Delhi 


Representative(s) 


SHRIMATI ANURADHA CHATURVEDI (Chairperson) 


SHRI ROHITASH BARUA 
SHRIMADAN KUMAR SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI R. S. JAMWAL 
SHRI C. N. JHA 
SHRI M. K. MALLICK 
SHRI DIVAKAR AGRAWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI U. S. VIDYARTHI 
DR NEELAM PHOUGAT (Alternate) 


SHRI SOUMITRE MAITI 


SHRI ROBERTO BELLO 


SHRI U. C. CHANKKAR 
SHRI DEVENDAR SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI B. B. PURI 
SHRI RAMAN MEHTA (Alternate) 


SHRI S. G. BOHRA 
SHRI N. M. PITLIYA (Alternate) 


SHRI R. K. VISHAMBHARNATH AGRAWAL 
SHRI ESHAN AGRAWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI N. R. MAKWANA 
SHRI K. R. PATEL (Alternate) 


SHRI SELVAKUMAR RAMASAMY 
SHRI PAPPU LAL DHOBI (Alternate) 


SHRI SAMIR MITRA 
SHRI RAJESH SHARMA (Alternate) 


DR A. MEHAR PRASAD 
DR DEVDAS MENON (Alternate) 


SHRI DIVAY GUPTA 
SHRI RUKNUDDIN MIRZA (Alternate I) 
SHRI DHARMENDRA MISHRA (Alternate II) 


IS 2469 : 2023 


Organization Representative(s) 


Institute for Solid Waste Reserch and Ecological DR N. BHANUMATHI 
Balance Insward, Vizag 


Kesarjan Building Centre Private Limited, SHRI KEYUR SARDA 
Ahmedabad 
Knauf India Private Limited, Khushkhera SHRIK. K. SIRPAL 


SHRIMATI NEHA SAINI (Alternate) 


Military Engineer Services, Engineer-in-Chief's SHRIMATI RIVOO MAHENDRU 
Branch, Integrated HQ of MoD (Army), SHRIS. K. MISHRA (Alternate) 
New Delhi 

Ministry of Science and Technology, SHRICHANDER MOHAN 
Department of Science & Technology, 

New Delhi 

National Council for Cement and Building DR PINKY PANDEY 
Materials, Faridabad SHRI SURESH VANGURI (Alternate) 

National Institute of Technology, Warangal DR P. RATHISH KUMAR 


PROF G. RAJESH KUMAR (Alternate) 


National Test House, Kolkata SHRI S. MURALI 
SHRI ANIRBAN CHAKRABORTY (Alternate) 


NTPC Ltd, Noida DR M. MALIK 
SHRIP. D. HIRANI (Alternate) 


Public Works Department, New Delhi SHRI SHALINDERA 
SHRI NITYANAND BHRAMAR (Alternate) 


Rajasthan State Mines & Mineral Ltd, Bikaner SHRIC. L. JAIN 
SHRID. K. AGGARWAL (Alternate) 
Rashtriya Chemicals and Fertilizers Ltd, SHRI V. K. AGRAWAL 
Mumbai SHRI S. B. SAHANE (Alternate) 
Saint-Gobain Gyproc India Limited, Mumbai SHRI GIRISH DASH 


SHRI PRASHANT PATIL (Alternate) 


School of Planning and Architecture, New Delhi DR SHUVOJIT SARKAR 
Shriram Institute for Industrial Research, Delhi DR MUKESH GARG 

SHRI RAHUL (Alternate) 
The Indian Institute of Architects, Mumbai SHRI JATINDER SAIGAL 


SHRI JIT KUMAR GUPTA (Alternate) 
The Institution of Engineers (India), Kolkata REPRESENTATIVE 


Ultratech Cement Ltd, Mumbai SHRI ASHOK K. TIWARI 
SHRI RAHUL GOEL (Alternate) 


In Personal Capacity (C/o Consultant Advisor SHRI V. P. AGARWAL 
Isha Consultants (P) Ltd D-144, Ambedkar 
Colony Andheria Morh, New Delhi 110074) 


IS 2469 : 2023 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity (163C, Express View 
Aparttment, Sector 93, Noida — 201304) 


In Personal Capacity (8-702, Saket Dham, 
Sector-61, E-10 Near Sai Temple, Noida — 
201301) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


SHRI J. K. PRASAD 


DR C. L. VERMA 


SHRI ARUNKUMAR S., SCIENTIST ‘E’/DIRECTOR 
AND HEAD (CIVIL ENGINEERING) [REPRESENTING 
DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
DR MANOJ KUMAR RAJAK 
SCIENTIST ‘D’/JOINT DIRECTOR 
(CIVIL ENGINEERING), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 04 (20482). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central | : 601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRE Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8* Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri | 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


