UDC

621'65

( First Reprint JUNE 1991 ) lridian Standard

IS:10596(

PartI)f Rramnned 1988 ! ( Reaffirmed 2002 ) )

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR SELECTION, INSTALLATION, OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF PUMPS FOR INDUSTRIAL APPLICATIONS
PART 1 SELECTION

1. scopeapplications.

fntends

to

provide

general

guidelines

for

the

selection

of

pumps

for

industrial

1.1 This standard

is not applicable

to pumps for agricultural

applications.

2. Selection - In the process of ordering a pumping unit the person concerned is required to identify system requirements, select the pump type, lay down the pump specification and develop all information necessary for the supplier. 2.1 fluid CharacteristicsPhysical and chemical properties of the fluid to~be handled, such as its chemical stability, volatility, amount of lubricating properties, viscosity, density, corrosiveness, Dependsuspended particles, etc, are of paramount importance in the process of selection of a pump. ing upon the process and .the system, some or all of these properties may have an important influence on pump and system design; for example, the degree of corrosiveness of the fluid will influence the material of construction, while if the fluid contains suspended solid particles, suitable type of pump. seal designs, abrasion resistant pump construction material and type of impeller may have to be considered. The effect of change of temperature, pressure, time, etc. upon the fluid properties are also worth considering with regard to its possible effects on pump operation. 2.1 .I Generally the selection of a centrifugal pump is based on the water equivalent duties that is Fluid characteristics should be considered while total head/effective head and volume rate of flow. calculating water equivalent duties, for example, in case of viscous liquids head, capacity and efficiency Reference should be made is greatly affected and corr,ection factors for these need to be considered. to IS : 5120-l 977 `Technical requirements for rotodynamic special purpose pumps (first revision)' for Similarly for liquids with consistancies more than 3 percent correction for headsuch corrections. Similar considerations need to be applied for liquids with solids. Proper capacity should be applied. correction should be applied for volume rate of flow depending upon solid percentage, nature and size of solids. the pumping system is expected to operate, 2.2 Total HeadA clear picture of the system, wherein Since hydraulic losses are invarishould be kept in mind while calculating total head requirements. ably present in the system due to pipe friction, bends and other fittings, due weightage should~be given to these. Based on the layout of the system and head losses, total head should be determined. 2.2.1 The NPSH requirement in case of centrifugal pump shall be based on water performance on hydrocarbon correction factor. The NPSH required shall be based on 3 percent head drop. 2.3 Volume Rate of Now-A required volume rate of flow. 2.4 Alternate considerations with

pump is designed mainly on the basis of head requirements and Hence exact requirements of vo.lume rate of flow should be calculated. modes of operation of the system are important

Mode 07 Operation - The various when specifying pumping unit. parameter may be determined :

The following

a) Operation of pump - continuous b) Rate~of flow or head - constant c) Difference in flow

or intermittent, or flunctuating,

and flow path.

and head requirements

for different

2.4.1 These and many other questior ,s arising from different modes of operation influence decisions regarding number of pumps and their volume rate of flow and need of booster pumps, to a great To meet variable requirements of flow and head, number of pumps may have to be operated extent.
Adopted 30

June 1983

0 I BUREAU
MANAK BHAVAN.

October INDIAN

1983.

BIS I ST~ANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

~Gr 2

OF

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

IS:10596(Partl)-1983
in series or parallel. In such cases the effect of failure of one of the pumpsshall also have to be considered as rated conditions for indivjdual pumps shall abruptly change because of this and pumps may run on full' open side beyond operating range of pump. The failure of pumping system may occur due to motor failure, power supply failure, and loss of control in electrical power, namely, frequency, voltage, etc. Hence proper importance should be given to these factors and occurrence of these causes sh.ould be evaluated beforehand as a part of selection of pump unit, especially the prime mover. The use of I.C. engines shah have to be~considered. 2.5 WearWear occurs in the system with a lapse of time causing operating characteristics to change. The extent of such wear over the life time of the equipment should be properly assessed and adequate margin provided in the system parameters so that the pump can render satisfactory service even up to the end of the use of the equipment. Where abrasive or suspended material particles are to be handled, pump with replaceable liners should be.specified. These liners may be of resilient material, such as rubber compound or extremely hard alloys of cast iron. Plastic linings including those on impeller are also suitable for such services. 2.6 Expected Future System Changes - The requirements of future system changes should be incorporated taking into consideration the effect on performance of a pump due to its wear and tear if they can Abe predicted with any degree of certainity. 2.6.1 In any event, it should be kept in mind that the equipment must operate satisfactorily in the present. system for which the pumping unit is being specified and this should be a factor in every evaluation being made. 2.7 Selection of Pump -The selection of the pump class and type for a particular influenced by such factors as system requirements, system layout, fluid characteristics, energy consumption, material of construction, code requirements, etc. The behaviour greatly influences the choice of the basic type of pumps. Such as : application is intended life, of the system

a) b) c) 4 e)

the required

volume

rate of flow in volume

and heads at different rate of flow

loads;

the effect of changes the required available

on system head;

head remain steady;

NPSH; and such as :

system details, i) relief value,

ii) surge chambers, iii) expansion joints.

and

These-are 2.7.1

some of the parameters

for which answers are to be found out.

Pump characteristics Centrifugal. pumps are considered suitable. for variable-head, variable volume rate of flow

2.7.1 .l applications.

2.7.1.2 Constant-speed reciprocating pumps find wide application in situations where the required volume rate of flow is expected to be constant over a wide range of system - head variations. This type of pumps is available in a wide range of design pressures, however the volume rate of flow is relatively small for the size of the equipment required. 2.7.1.3 While selecting a reciprocating pump, it should be kept in mind that the output from a reciprocating pump will be pulsating. Where this is objectionable, the use of rotary pumps may be made. However, the application of rotary pumps is limited to low-to-medium pressure ranges only, and are mostly recommended for handling oil and other viscous liquids. _) 2.7.1.4 It is to be noted that while rotary and reciprocating pumps are self-priming, centrifugal pumps are not, unless designed specifically. As reciprocating and rotary pumps are positive displacement type units, they wi,ll continue to build up excessi've pressures on the delivery side if the discharge of liquid from them, while they are in operation, is restricted or stopped either by throttling or completely closing the gate valve in the delivey pipe line or if any other obstruction is produced 2

IS : 10596 ( Part 1 ) - 1983
in the provide pumps back to pipe for restricting or stopping the flow of the liquid. It is, therefore, always necessary to either an inbuilt type or a separate pressure-relieving or relief valve on discharge side of these with arrangements to set them for opening at the desired pressuies and by passing the flow suction.

2.7.1.5 In certain cases the system layout may have a very important bearing on the choice of I pump type. Normally, centrifugal pumps require less floor space for installation than reciprocating pumps and vertical pumps less floor space than horizontal pumps. However vertical pumps may require more head room for maintenance and installation purposes. 2.7.1.6 Where the available NPSH is limited, such as when handling a saturated liquid, and the application calls for the use of centrifugal pump, the engineer may have to investigate the use of providing an inducer in place of the impeller nut in the case of end-suction pumps or a vertical cannedIn certain other cases the designmay call for suction-type centrifugal pump to gain adequate NPSH. the i,nstallation of a pump immersed in the liquid to be handled and hence, the use of a vertical submerged type pump may be advantageous. 2.7.2 Code requirements -The statutory codes of the regulatory bodies may impose certain Such additional requireadditional requirements which can affect both pump rating and construction. ments may affect the selection. 2.7.3 fluid characteristics - Sometimes exceptionally severe service conditions based on fluid For example, the handling of fluids characteristics may rule out some classes of pumps at once. -having high solid content will exclude the use of reciprocating pumps or pumps with close clearances. On the other hand, rotary-type pumps are suitable for viscous liquids and centrifugal pumps for both If it is undesirable for the process liquid to clean and clear fluids or fluids with high solid content. come in contact with the moving parts, diaphragam type pumps may have to be used. Centrifugal pumps are also suitable for handling viscous fluids and also handle liquids with solid contents. 2.7.4 Material - Materials of construction should be selected on the basis of service conditions. Indian Standards on various types of pumps, a list of which is given in Appendix A, give recommendations on suitable materials of construction. Following main aspects should be considered while selecting the material of construction :

a) Liquid handled and its corrosion properties. b) Solids present in the liquid and their abrasiveness 4 Temperature of liquid and effect of the same d) e)
properties. Maximum discharge pressure of the liquid of casting the same. Peripheral speed of the rotating parts.

and wear and tear due to that. on corrosion rate of material and mechanical of the casing and feasibility

in the casing, thickness

2.8 Selection of Prime Mover 2.8.1 Selection of prime mover is as important as selection of the ~pump. Depending on the available energy sources, pumps may be driven by electric motor, I.C. engines, steam engines, gas turbines, steam turbines, etc. Ako, they may be driven at constant speed or at variable speed. 2.8.2 Generally electric motors are used in constant-speed service unless a hydraulic coupling gear I.C. engines are box or other speed varying device is introduced in the system for varying the speed. chosen because of non-availability of power, portability or loss of power back-up requirements. For Moreover they can operate as constant speed prime mover as well as variable speed prime mover. variable speed applications, steam turbines, eddy-current couplings, adjustable speed motors, fluid couplings, gears and belts are frequently used. 2.8.3 In large complex installations where the equipment is to be operated continuously, the decision on the choice of the type of prime mover and variability of the pump speed should be based on the comparison of the total operating and capital costs for the pump system over the intended plant Variable speed operation would usually result in lower life for the several alternatives available. operating costs; however the total first cost of the driving equipment to accomplish this would frequently be higher than for constant speed pump. 2.9 Specifying the Pump in Appendix A. Reference may be made to the Indian Standards, a list of which is given

IS : 10596 ( Part 1 ) - `I983 APPENDIX ( Clauses 2.7.4
tNDlAN IS : 1520-I
IS : 171 O-l

A
and 2.9 )

STANDARDS.

ON PUMPS
revision)

980
972

Horizontal c.entrifugal pumps for clear, cold, fresh water (second Vertical turbine pumps for clear, cold, fresh water (first Sewage and drainage pumps Pumps handling chemicals and corrosive liquids Pumps for process water Pumps for handling volati,le liquids Pumps for handling paper stock Submersible pumpsets for clear, cold, fresh water Horizontal centrifugal self-priming pumps Regenerative self-priming pumps for clear, cold, fresh water
revision)

IS : 5120-I IS : 5600-1970 1s : 5639-1970 IS : 5659-1970 IS : 6536-1972

977 Technical requirements for rotodynamic special purpose pumps

IS : 6596-1972 IS : 8034-1976 IS : 8418-1977 IS : 8472-l 977
IS : 9137-l

978 Code for acceptance tests for centrifugal, Pumps for handling slurry

mixed flow and axial pumps -

Class C

IS : 9201-1979

EXPLANATORY

NOTE

In modern age pumps find a very wide field of applications, such as domestic water lifting, irrigation, fire fighting, hydraulic presses, hydraulic servosystems, mining, chemical and petroleum industries. For proper functioning and life of the pumps two requirements should be met with, namely : a) proper selection of the type suitable to the working conditions; and operation and maintenance.

b) proper installation,

To deal with this situation effectively we will have to recognize the various factors resppnsible This knowledge can be acquired only through long experience for the smooth and efficient working. in the field and through investigations where required. Old users can have the knowledge based on `their long experience in the field w~hile coming across various problems varying in nature. On the other hand new users without any guidelines find life in ttie smooth functioning. Here point of themselves helpless in making use of optimum paramount importance is the proper installation and maintenance of genuine pump selected for the purpose. This code of practice has been prepared only with an intension to provide guidelines for the proper selection, installation, operation and maintenance of pumps excluding agricultural pumps. This code is being issued in the following Part 1 Selection Part 2 Instal!ation Part 3 Operation Part ~4 Maintenance 4 Reprography Unit, BIS, NewDelhi, India four parts for easy reference :

