( Reaffirmed 2003 )

1s; : 7400- 1974

Indian Standard
GUIDE FOR PREPARATION AND PRODUCTION OF TEXTBOOKS
Documentation Sectional
Chairman SHRI B. S. KESAVAN 106 Rabindra Nagar New Delhi Members Representing

Committee,

EC 2

All India Federation of Master Printers, Bombay MR N. J. ARI~ESHIR SHRI R. VENKATESWARAN (Alternate) Publications & Information Directorate (CSIR), SHFU Y. R. CHADHA New Delhi SHRI R. N. SHARMA(Alternate) National Council of Educational Research & SHRI N. CHAKRAVARTTY Training (Publication Unit), New Delhi SHRI C. N. RAO (Alternate) Printing & Stationery Department, Government SHRI A. DAR of Uttar Pradesh, Lucknow ChiefNe:onn;ler of Printing & Stationery, SHRI A. C. DAS GUPTA SHRI P. S. RAMACHANDRAN (Alternate) Sree Saraswaty Press Limited, Calcutta SHRI S. N. GUHA RAY National Archives of India, New Delhi SHRI R. C. GUPTA Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi SHRI Krusn~~ KUMAR Indian Academy of Printing & ~Graphic Arts, SHRI R. KR~SHNAMOORTI~I Bangalore SHRI K. S. RANADE (Alternate) Technical Commission for Scientific & Technical DR S. D. LIMAYE Terminology (Ministry of Education & Social Welfare), New Delhi Publications Division (Ministry of Information & SHRI MADAN GOPAL Broadcasting), New Delhi The Federation of Publishers &_ Booksellers AssoSHRI D. N. MALHOTRA ciations in India, New Delhi National Book Trust, New Delhi SHRI U. K. MALLYA Indian Library Association, New Delhi SHRIJ. C. MEHTA The Times of India, Bombay SHRI A. K. MUKERJI Institution of Engineers (India), Calcutta COL B. T. NAGRANI SHRI R. K. ABROL (Alternate) (Continued on page 2) 0 INDIAN Copyright 1974

This publication is protected reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

STANDARDS INSTITUTION under the Indian Copyright Act (XIV of 1957) and

IS : 7409 - 1974
(Continuedffmn page1)
Members PROP A. NEELAMEGHAN Representing

SHRI G. BHATTACHARYYA IAlternate . Ngtional DR M. C. PANT
SHRI S. PARTWARATHY SHRI R. S. RAWAL SHRI P. B. ROY SHRI DHANPATRAI (Alternate) SHRI S. A. SAPRE

Documentation Bangalore

Research

& Training

Centre,

Council of Educational Research & Training (Department of Science Education), New Delhi Indian National Scientific Documentation Centre (CSIR), New Delhi Thomson Press (India) Ltd, Faridabad Indian Association of Special Libraries & Information Centres, Calcutta

Directorate of Printing & Stationery, Government of Maharashtra, Bombay Defence Scientific Information & Documentation SHRI G. S. SHARMA Centre (Ministry of Defence), New Delhi University Grants Commission, New Delhi SHRI Y. D. SHARMA Office of the Director of Printing, Stationery & SHRI B. P. MALL-J URS Publications, Government of Karnataka, Bangalore SHRI D. NARASIMHAIAH (Alternate) Central Board of Irrigation & Power, New Delhi SHRI C. V. J. VARMA SHRI R. L. QAZI (Alternate) Director General, IS1 (Ex-o$cio Member) SHRI RAM D. TANEJA, Director (Pub) Secretary SHRI P. V. GOP.~LAKRI~HNAN Deputy Director (Pub), ISI

Production

of Textbooks

Subcommittee,
Convener

EC 2 : 11

SHRIB. S. KESAVAN 106 Rabmdra Nagar New Delhi Members All India Federation of Master Printers, Bombay MR N. J. ARDESHIR &RI R. VENICATESWARAN (Alternate) Popular Book Depot, Bombay SHRI SADANAND BHATKAL National Council of Educational Research & SHRr N. CHAKRAVARTTY Training- (Publication Unit), New Delhi SHRI C. N. RAO (Alternate) Director_ate of Advertising. & Visual Publicity SHRI M. L. DWITA GUPTA (.$&xss~ of Informatlon & Broadcasting), ;g1 $N.N.;E Sree Saraswaty Press Ltd, Calcutta Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi The Federation of Publishers & Booksellers Associations in India, New Delhi (Continued on page 11)

SHRI D. N. MALHOTRA

2

IS : 7400- 1974

Indian Standard
GUIDE FOR PREPARATION AND PRODUCTION OF TEXTBOOKS
0. FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 24 May 1974, after the draft finalized by the Documentatictn Sectional Committee had been approved by the Executive Committee. 0.2 A textbook is a type of instructional material which aids the teachinglearning process. It is one of the most widely used instructional media in schools, colleges, universities, and even in the home. The textbook is also used for self-learning by individual students either in the classroom or at the home. Besides immediately helping the learner in revising and reinforcing his previous learning, it stimulates his interest and provides extended and organized learning experiences. 0.3 In view of the unique position of the textbook in the teaching-learning process, the quality of education is significantly influenced by the quality It is, therefore, necessary to lay down suitable guidelines of the textbook. for both the content and the format of the textbook. 0.4 To arrive at a definitive manuscript for the press, it is necessary to adopt a systematic procedure as outlined in Appendix A.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard lays down general instructions for the guidance of authors, compilers, editors and producers of textbooks to facilitate their preparation and production. It includes instructions relating to the planning and preparation of the content of the manuscript, of the illustrations and exercises, It also includes instructions relating and such other aspects of the textbook. to editing and production applicable to textbooks for all stages of education. 1.2 The preparation of a textbook implies all the processes involved in preparing the final press copy. The production of the textbook starts when the press-ready manuscript'ifhande~over~to the printer.F Since'the'production of a textbook also implies the processesJinvolved in preparing"the'fina1 press copy: it'should be borne in mind that preparation and production are not so much sequential as simultaneous operations, 3

Is

: 7400-1974 AUTHOR(S)

2. THE

2.1 The author(s) should have had sufficient experience of teaching that age-group and class-level of pupils for whom the textbook is intended. If this is not so, at least one teacher (more if required) teaching such pupils should be associated with the writing of the book as a co-author or a consultant. Each chapter, as it is written, may be reviewed by this co-author/ consultant and then finalized. 3. GENERAL TEXTBOOK CHARACTERISTICS OF THE CONTENTS OF A

3.1 Prelims or Preliminary Pages of a Textbook - The preliminary pages of a textbook and the sequence in which these constituents appear shall be as follows (see IS : 790-1956*): a) Title-leaf, b) Contents leaf (leaves), and c) Prefatory or introductory leaf (leaves). 3.1.1 Title-Leaf - The information to be given on the title-leaf and on the back of the title-leaf of a book shall be as recommended in IS : 792-1964t. 3.1.2 Contents Leaf (Leaves) - The contents leaf (leaves) shall list the chapters, sections and other parts of the book, with a brief synopsis (or analysis) of each chapter, section, etc,if required. 3.1.3 Prefatoy or Introductory Leajc (Leaves) - The preface or introduction describing the purpose, historical background, scope, etc, of the book shall appear after the table of contents. Whenever ideas or patterns of study and expression are borrowed-from another publication, or whenever excerpts are quoted from other publications, suitable acknowledgement shall -be made by the author in the preface. 3.1.4 Where necessary, a page may be devoted to abbreviations, and notations used in the book. 3.1.5 Pagination - The pagination shall be international numerals, starting from the first number is required when a chapter begins on page number is given, it should be placed at symbols

in the running sequence of page of the text. No page a new page. However, if a the bottom of the page.

3.1.6 For the pagination of the prelims a different set of numerals, preferably Roman sub-numerals, shall be used. 3.1.7 Size of the Book-The size of the book shall conform to the recommendations given in IS : 7160 (Part I)-1974:.
*General structure of preliminary pages of a book (~entatiue). TSpecification for title-page and back of title-page of a book (revised). SGuide for print area, margins and type sizes for textbooks: Part I Textbooks in English.

4

IS : 7400 - 1974 3.2 Substance 3.2.1 Subject 3.2.1.1 of the Textbook Matter to the objectives correct of the curriculum

Selection of content

4 b) cl

The content should be related and to the syllabus. The content should be factually

and up to date.

If the textbook forms part of a series, the content of the book should be planned within the larger framework of the entire series; it should articulate within the series and also with the previous learning and the subsequent expected learning. Repetition learning. should be avoided, unless it is necessary to reinforce should be

4 e)

While giving examples, kept in view. Organization

the clientele

and its environment

3.2.1.2

and presentation

of content of the content, the following

a)

In the organization and presentation should be borne in mind: 1) 2) 3)

The logic and structure of the discipline, The level of comprehension of the pupils, The previous learning of the pupils.

and

b) cl 4 e)

In each chapter the main content may be followed by a summary of the content, or conclusions or generalizations, as the case may be. In chapters where it is found necessary an overview of the relevant portions of the material covered earlier may be given in the beginning. If it is found necessary to divide a chapter into sub-units, these sub-units should articulate with the others. each of

In a non-language subject, the vocabulary, grammatical structures and idiom used should, as far as possible, be within the language attainment of the pupils. A practical guide would be the language used in the language textbook followed by the pupils. new term should be clearly explained where it first occurs.

f-1 Every

3.2.1.3 Illustrations - Illustrations shall conform to the requirements In keeping with modern practice, partiprescribed in IS : 6660-1972". cularly in the case of textbooks, they should not be mere interruptions of text. The following points may also be considered : a) Illustrations should
in books.

generally

be used for situations

where it is not

*Guide for illustrations

5

IS : 7400 - 1974 possible to present a body of knowledge through words either economically or at all in verbal form. They may also be used in situations where reinforcement is required to explain a particular portion of the content. In textbooks intended for very young pupils, say, up to the middleschool stage, illustrations may be used also to make the material For pupils at the primary level it is interesting and attractive. desirable that the style of drawing should be realistic and that details which distract from the main point of the illustration should be avoided. Illustrations should faithfully reflect the idea to be presented. Illustrations shall be authentic.

b) cl

4 4

3.2.1.4 Inters@ersed exercises - Exercises may be interspersed between the different sections or sub-units of a chapter to reinforce the learning of the major concepts, understandings and skills taught in a particular section or sub-unit. 3.2.1-5 preparation Review exercises of review exercises The following may be considered in the and

:
of the contents levels.

4 b) 4

Exercises should reinforce the understanding should be comprehensive in coverage. They should be properly ~graded, covering

the different

They should reflect variety in form; judicious use should be made of both the essay and the objective type of exercises. Among the objective type of exercises, the following forms are commonly employed : 1) Multiple choice, 2) Short answer (free response), 3) True-false, and 4) Matching statements.

4. PHYSICAL 4.1 Guidelines

REQUIREMENTS for Typing

OF THE

MANUSCRIPT

the Manuscript

The copy 2 10 x 297 Extended quotation

shall be typewritten, on one side of the sheet (A4, that is, mm) only, double spaced throughout, including footnotes. quotations should also be in double space but where the begins there should be a double indention in the margin.

b)

A wide margin shall be left on all the four sides of the sheet, the minimum width of the left-hand margin being 30 mm. paper of good quality shall be used. If a sheet or part of a sheet becomes difficult to read because of corrections or additions, it should be retyped. In making revisions, parts of sheets shall not be pasted together in such a way as to make a new sheet of abnormal 6

C>Standard

IS : 7480- 1974
size; instead, two (or more) sheets of normal if neither is completely filled. size shall be made even

The typed letters should be legible and particular care should be taken to see that the ribbon is neither old and dry nor too heavy and moist, that it is properly adjusted so that the top and bottom of such letters as f, 1, k, p, g and j may not be cut off; similarly the keys should be free from any clogging material which may obliterate the difference between c and o, a and s, m and n, etc.

e) f)

The pages should hand corner.

be numbered

consecutively

in the upper

right-

The copy should contain complete material for the preliminary pages (title, contents and prefatory or introductory material), notes, bibliography and appendices. If for any good reason, any other item has to be added in the copy later, this fact should be indicated specifying the approximate extra space needed. Every manuscript should have at the minimum one other copy which faithfully incorporates all the details of the original manuscript. In the typing of the manuscript marks should be allowed. no extra spaces after punctuation

& h)
j)

For an actual quotation, the double quotation mark should be used. But for a quotation, within a quotation the single quotation mark should be used. The single quotation mark should also be used for hypothetical remarks and for ~expressions used in a special sense. Where a quotation spills over a paragraph, it should be indented. Portions deliberately omitted in a quotation or an extract that is cited should be indicated by three open dots if the omitted portion If, however, it is more than a sentence, is one sentence or less. five open dots should be used. with no blank space before

k)

m) A dash should be typed as two hyphens, or after.

n) Diacritical marks, Greek and Cyrillic and such other letters, phonetic symbols and other special characters should be very carefully written in the typescript with pen and ink, unless the typewriter is equipped with special keys. p) A list of all special characters occurring in a textbook on a separate sheet and prefixed to the typescript. shall be written

4.2 Tables - Tables shall be used wherever tabular presentation not only eliminates repetition but also indicates relations clearly. If two or more tables appear in a book, they should be numbered serially, and reference to any table should be by number. 4.2.1 `Breaking' of Tables over from one page to another, `Breaking' of a table, namely, carrying it should be avoided as far as possible. When, 7

IS : 7400 - 1974 however, there is no option but to carry a table from one page to the next, the complete headings of the table and the columns shall be repeated on successive pages. The fact that the material is continued shall be indicated both at the bottom of the page from which the material is continued and at the top of the page on which it is continued. 4.2.2 Annotations - In general, annotations to tables should be avoided. It is often possible to integrate the annotation with the text. Where it is necessary to use annotations to tables, they shall be in smaller type placed immediately above the control line and shall be indented. Suitable space may be given between the last row of data in the table and the first annotation. To indicate references to annotations international numerals shall be used as superscripts. 4.3 Illustrations - Plates and line drawings referred to in the shall be serially numbered. Full plates and text-figures should separate serial numbers, that is, Plate I, II, III, and Fig. 1, 2, 3, plate or figure comprises more than one subject requiring specific these should be marked (a), (b), (c), . . . . textbook be given etc. If a attention,

4.3.1 In the production of a textbook in which each chapter has to have a large number of illustrations, both plate, photographic insert and line drawing, it is advisable to number these illustrations serially chapter-wise. For example, if a particular chapter, say Chapter 5, has 25 illustration& the numbering of the illustrations would be 5.1 to 5.25. 4.3.2 In preparing the illustrations for the copy, the captions shall be typed out or neatly indicated in hand on the verso of the illustrations. The manuscript shall clearly indicate the placement of the illustrations, z&a-z&, the text matter. 4.3.3 Direct writing on the back of half-tone pictures or other illustrations must be avoided. Paper fasteners should never be used; a slip may be attached containing the description of the illustrations. 4.4 Proof-Reading - After the first proofs have been received from the press, they should be carefully checked in accordance with IS : 1250-1958*, which prescribes proof-reading symbols. Authors should be advised that additions and alterations even at the galley stage are expensive but they become prohibitively so at the page-proof stage. 5. TYPOGRAPHY 5.1 Type face and type size are important factors in making reading comfortable. In the selection of types the guidelines recommended in IS : 6298-19717 and IS : 7160 (Part I)-1974: may be followed.
*Proof corrections for printers and authors. tGuide for selection of type and page layout in textbooks. ZGuide for print area, margins and type sizes for textbooks: Part I Textbooks in English.

8

IS : 7460 - 1974 5.2 In type-written matter capitals should be signified by underlining the word(s) thrice, small capitals by underlining twice and italics by underlining once. Heavy or bold face for headings and sub-headings should be indicated by -a wavy line. 6. ADDENDA 6.1 Errata - If it becomes at all necessary to have an errata slip, it should be the very last insertion before the index. 6.2 Glossary of the text. The glossary, wherever necessary, may be given at the end

6.3 Bibliography - Wherever there is a bibliography it can be given at the end of a chapter or at the end of the book after the glossary as may be appropriate. The bibliographic form shall conform to IS : 2381-1963*. 6.4 Index - To make the index really useful, it is necessary that certain standard basic rules are followed in preparing it. For this purpose, IS : 1275-19587 may be used as a guide. 6.4.1 In a dictionary index, as far possible, proper names should be indicated by bold face and titles by italics. 6.4.2 The index may be placed after the bibliography. \

APPENDIX ( Clause 0.4 )
REVISING A-l. PROCEDURE THE ROUGH

A

DRAFT

A-M Revision of the rough draft should be done in a systematic manner. There are many items that have to be checked and this require at least three readings of the draft as indicated below: a) The first reading of the draft should ensure that there isno repetition; that there are no lacunae; that the draft is not swollen by irrelevant material; that it is not verbose; that the draft is logical in structure The text and that it suits the clientele for which it is intended. and illustrations shall be in perfect harmony without the latter being either superfluous or inadequate.

*Recommendations for bibliographical references. TRules for makingyalphabetical indexes.

9

IS : 7400- 1974 b) The second reading should be to see that the draft is free of bias of any sort. It should be devoted to checking quotations, citations, cross-references, dates, spellings of proper names and manufactured products and the accuracy of any scientific or mathematical statements.

c) The final reading should ensure that the style~of exposition is simple; that there is uniformity in the matter of abbreviation, capitalization, use of italics, -parentheses and in the use of mathematical, chemical and graphical language and other symbols; the text is grammatically correct and syntactically elegant.

10

Its : 7400 - 1974
(Continued from page 2) Mem hers SHIU S. K. MALWJT~W SHRI U. K. hfALLYA PROP A. NEE~AMEGHAN SHRI S. A.
SHRI SHRI P. Y. SEN D. %iARMA SAPRE

Refresen ting Indian Paper Makers' Association, Calcutta National Book Trust, New Delhi Documentation Research & Training Centre, Bangalore Directorate of Printing & Stationery, Government of Maharashtra, Bombay The Regional Institute of Printing Technology, Calcutta University Grants Commission, New Delhi Southern Languages Book Trust, Madras

Snm S. K. THAMBA

Panel for Preparation
Convener SHRI SADANAND BHATKAL Members DR A. N. BOSE SHRI N. CHAKRAVARTTY DR R. H. DAVE DR R. G. MISRA DR M. C. PANT SHRI N. R. SUBRAMANIAN

and Production

of a Textbook,

EC 2 : 11 : 1

Popular Book Depot, Bombay

National Council of Educational Research & Training (Department of Science Education), New Delhi National Council of Educational Research 8s Training (Publication Unit), New Delhi National Council of Educational Research & Training (Department of Curriculum and Evaluation), New Delhi National Council of Educational Research & Training (Data Processing and Educational Survey Unit), New Delhi National. Cound of Educational Research & ~e~mnm~Department of Science Education), Tata McGraw-Hill Publishing Go Ltd, New Delhi

11

ENDIAN ON

STANDARDS

DOCUMENTATION

IS: 4-1963 12-1964 18-1970 382-1952 790-1956 791-1956 792-1964 7941956 795-1956 796-1966 1250-1958 1275-1958 1358-1967 2550-1963 3050-1965 3033-1966 3130-1972 4731-1968 6298-1971 6299-1971 6660-1972 6666-1972 7140-1971 7 150-1974 Guide for layout of learned periodicals Guide for drafting Indian Standards Guide for abbreviations (revised) (second revtsion) using Roman alphabet

of words in titles of periodicals arrangement pages of a book (tent&e)

Practice

for alphabetical

General structure Half-title-leaf Title-page

of preliminary

of a book (tentutiue)

and back of title-page of a book (revised)

Practice for table of contents (tentative) Canons for making abstracts Glossary of cataloguing Proof corrections terms (first revision) indexes reference for printers andauthors

Rules for making alphabetical

Practice for layout of library catalogue code (Jirst revision) for bibliographical terms (silver halide) (microfilm Glossary of classification

238 l- 1963 Recommendations

Code of practice for reinforced binding of library books and periodicals Code of practice for the processing of microfilms Code of practice for handling and microfiche) ( f;rstreuision) Guide for preparation Guide for handling, Guide for illustrations Frequency Library and storage of microtransparencies

of manuscript

of an article in a learned periodical photographic prints

Guide for selection of type and page layout in textbooks testing and storage of monochrome in books of illustrations and illustration proofs Part I Text-

notation for periodical publications

Symbols and notations for correction catalogue and abstract card

7160 (Part I)-1974 Guide for print area, margins and type sizes for textbooks: books in English

