**************** 



*■ fe^K 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 3874 (1987): Boxing Gloves [PCD 22: Sports Goods] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



?TR TJ^ ^TT teMHI | ^t ^Tift ^FTT ^f ^TT ^T^?TT \' 

Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC 685*433 



IS : 3874 - 1987 



Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
BOXING GLOVES 

( First Revision ) 



( Reaffirmed 2002 ) 



1. Scope— This standard covers requirements for boxing gloves. 

2. Materials — As given in Table 1 . 



TABLE 1 MATERIALS FOR THE MANUFACTURE OF BOXING GLOVES 



SINo. 

i) 



Item 

Glove body 



Materials 

Leather 



ii) 


Padding 


a) Horse hair 

b) Coarse cotton 


iii) 


Elastic tape 


Silken elastic tape/ 
braided tape 


iv) 


Lining 


Khaki cotton drill 



v) Sewing thread Polyamide/cotton core 

spun 



Requirements 

Conforming to IS : 5597-1970 'Specification for leather 
for boxing gtoves'. It shall be fat lacquered or oiled 
or both and the grain side shall be smooth finished. 
The recommended thickness is 0*7 to 1*0 mm in the 
finished stage. 

In hygienic condition, and curled physically or chemi- 
cally before stuffing. 

Well carded, clean, dry and reasonably free from seeds 
and other extraneous matters. 

Having width between 20 to 25 mm and minimum 
elongation of 250 percent when stretched in a 
normal way. 

The yarn used in the manufacture of drill cloth shall be 
satisfactory in evenness and reasonably free from 
spinning defects. The cloth shall be 3 shaft 2/1 
warp faced twill weave. The cloth when visually 
examined shall be reasonably free from spinning, 
weaving and processing defects. The drill shall also 
generally comply with the requirements of IS : 177- 
1 977 'Specification for cotton drills ( third 
revision)'. 

Tkt - 50 

Nominal count and construction— Nm 50/2, Z/Finishing 
twist 

Finish — Glace 

Single thread breaking load — 2'6 kgf. 



3. Types - The boxing gloves shall be either laced type or elastic-band type. 

4. Mass — Each glove shall weigh 284 g for light-middle to super heavy and 227 g for light-fly to 
welter weight. The leather and padding portions shall each weigh 50 percent. 

5. Shapes — The shapes of the two types of the boxing gloves shall generally conform to Fig. 1 
and 2. 

6. Manufacture and Finish 

6.1 The back, palm and the wrist band shall each be cut from one piece of leather and the thumb in 
two pieces. The shape of the thumb and the top shape shall be attained by pleats, the cut ends of 
pam and back being turned in 5 mm for stitching. The thumb shall be stitched to the body with two 
rows of stitching. For the side pad, a piece of leather cut to shape shall be stitched on the side of the 
palm. The side piece shall be stitched with one row of stitching and the palm pad with two rows of 
stitching. The back, thumb and the palm portion shall be lined with khaki drill. The gloves shall be 
machine stitched; The stitches shall be of even tension throughout with all loose ends secured and 
the number of stitches shall be 3 to 4 per centimetre. The gloves shall be so shaped that the hand 
may be clenched in the glove without effort, the thumb to be over the first and second fingers in a 
natural manner. Adequate protection shall be provided for the thumb when in that position. 

6.1.1 Each laced glove shall be opened up from the wrist towards the centre of the palm for appro- 
ximately 110 mm and provided with 5 holes equally spaced on each side, through which a brown lace, 
1 1 2 mm long and 1 3 mm wide, shall be laced. 



Adopted 23 February 1 987 



© September 1987, BIS 



Gr2 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 



HORSE HAIR 



LEATHER 



ro 



HORSE HAIR 
COARSE COTTON 

KHAKI 
COTTON DRILL 




LEATHER 



WRIST BAND 



COARSE COTTON 



SECTION YY 




W 

m • 

CO 
00 

4» 



00 



FIG. 1 BOXING GLOVES, LACED TYPE 



LEATHER 



HORSE HAIR 



GO 



KHAKI COTTON DRILL 
Y 




HORSE 
HAIR 



COARSE 

COTTON 



LEATHER 




KHAKI COTTON 
DRILL - 

LEATHER 



ELASTIC 
TAPE 



^g"W ^-COARSE 
COTTON 



SECTION YY 



C/> 



00 



FIG. 2 BOXING GLOVES. ELASTIC-BAND TYPE 



CD 
00 



IS : 3874 -1987 

6.1.2 Each glove with elastic band shall be provided with a piece of elastic tape at the wrist, the 
cut ends being stitched together and placed at the back. The top edge of the elastic shall be stitched 
with the wrist only along the back. The edges of the gloves shall be bound all round with leather. 

6.1.3 The regular hitting surface shall be marked on the gloves with a clearly discernible colour. 

6.2 The padding shall be of curled horse hair and shall be evenly distributed throughout the back of 
the hand and thumb; special care shall be taken to ensure a sufficiency of padding over the back of 
the thumb. The horse hair shall be thoroughly dusted with DDT powder before stuffing. The palm pad, 
side pad and wrist band shall be padded with coarse cotton. 

7. Marking — Each boxing glove shall be legibly and indelibly marked on the inside of the wrist with 
the manufacturer's name, initials or recognized trade-mark and its mass. 

7.1 Certification Marking — Details available with the Bureau of Indian Standards. 

8. Packing — The boxing gloves shall be kept in pairs, palm to palm, tip to wrist, and tied with twine 
and packed in accordance with the best trade practice or according to the instructions of the purchaser. 

9. Sampling — Sampling procedure and acceptance criterion for the boxing gloves shall be as agreed 
to between the purchaser and the supplier. A recommended scheme for the same is given in 
Appandix A. 

APPENDIX A 

( Clause 9 ) 
SAMPLING SCHEME AND CRITERION FOR CONFORMITY FOR BOXING GLOVES 

A-1. Lot — In any consignment, all the pairs of the boxing gloves of the same type and mass, 
manufactured from the same raw materials under similar conditions shall be grouped together to 
consitute a lot. 

A-2. Selection of Sample — The number of pairs of boxing gloves to be selected at random from 
each lot shall be in accordance with col 1 and 2 of Table 2. 

TABLE 2 SAMPLE SIZE AND CRITERION FOR CONFORMITY 

( Clauses A-2 and A-3 ) 

Lot Size Sample Size Permissible Number of 

(Number of Pairs of (Number of Pairs of Defective Pairs 

Gloves in the Lot) Gloves to be Selected) 

(2) (3) 

3 

5 

8 

13 

20 1 

32 2 

50 3 

A-2.1 The pairs of gloves in the sample shall be selected at random from the lot and in order 
to ensure randomness of selection, procedures given in IS : 4905-1968 'Methods for random sampling' 
may be followed. 

A-3. Number of Tests and Criterion for Conformity — Each pair of gloves selected according to 
col 1 and 2 of Table 2 shall be inspected for the requirements of materials, mass, shape, and manu- 
facture and finish. A pair shall be considered as defective if it fails to satisfy any of these require- 
ments. The iot shall be declared as conforming to the requirements of this standard if the number 
of defective pairs in the sample does not exceed the corresponding number given in col 3 of Table 2. 

EXP LAN ATOR Y NOTE 

This standard was first issued in 1966. This revision takes into account the latest international 
rules of the game. In this revision, the requirements for mass have been altered and requirements for 
sewing thread have been added besides incorporating certain other modifications. 





(D 


Up 


to 25 


26 


to 50 


51 


to 100 


101 


to 150 


151 


to 300 


301 


to 500 


501 


and above 



Printed at Printrade, New Delhi, India 



