**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 13615 (1993) : Service definition for the association 
control service element in open systems interconnection for 
information processing systems [LITD 14: Software and 
System Engineering] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi f 7ui^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 13615 : 1993 
ISO 8649 : 1988 

Indian Standard 

SERVICE DEFINITION FOR THE ASSOCIATION 

CONTROL SERVICE ELEMENT IN OPEN SYSTEMS 

INTERCONNECTION FOR INFORMATION 

PROCESSING SYSTEMS 



UDC 681-327-901 



© BIS 1993 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN. 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

August 1993 Price Qroup 9 



Computer System and Interconnection Sectional Committee, LTD 36 



NATIONAL FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard which is identical with ISO 8649 : 1988 'Information processing systems- 
Open systems interconnection - Service definition for the association control service element', 
issued by the International Organization for Standardization ( ISO ) was adopted by the Bureau 
of Indian Standards on the recommendation of the Computer Systems and Interconnection 
Sectional Committee and approval of the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. 

In the adopted standard certain terminology and conventions are however not identical to 
those used in Indian Standards. Attention is particularly drawn to the following: 

Wherever the words 'Interhational Standard' appear referring to this standard, they 
should be read as 'Indian Standard'. 



In this Indian Standard, the following 
respective place the following: 

International Standard 



international standards ate referred to. Read in their 



Indian Standard 

IS 12373 (Parti) : 1987 Basic reference 
model of open systems interconnection for 
information processing systems : Part 1 
( Identical ) 

IS 12373 ( Part 3) : 1992 Basic reference 
model of open systems interconnection for 
information processing systems : Part 3 
Naming and addressing 
( Identical ) 

IS 13706 : 1993 Protocol specification for 
the association control service element 
in open systems interconnection for 
information processing systems 
( Identical ) 

IS Connection oriented presenta- 

tion service definition in open systems 
interconnection for information processing 
systems ( under preparation ) 
( Identical ) 

The technical committee responsible for the preparation of this standard has reviewed the 
provisions of the following ISO Standards and has decided that they axe acceptable for use 
in conjunction with this standard: 

ISO/TR 8509 Information processing systems — Open systems interconnection - Service 
Conventions 



ISO 7498 Information processing systems- 
Open systems interconnection — Basic 
reference model 

ISO 7498-3 Information processing systems- 
Open systems Interconncetion — Basic 
reference model — Part 3 Naming and 
addressing 

ISO 8650 Information processing systems — 
Open systems interconnection — Protocol 
specification for the association control 
service element 

ISO 8822 Information processing systems — 
Open systems interconnection — Connec- 
tion oriented presentation service 
definition 



ISO 8326 Information processing systems — Open 
connection oriented session service definition 



systems interconnection — Basic 



ISO 8327 Information processing systems — Open systems interconnection — Basic 
connection oriented session protocol specification 

CCITT Recommendation X. 410: Message handling systems : remote operation and 
seliable transfer server ( 1984 ) 



The text of Amendment No. 1 and Amendment No. 2 to ISO 8649 
the end of this standard. 



1 988 is being given at 



Only the English language text in the international standard has been retained while adopting 
it in this standard. 



IS 13615 : 1903 
ISO 8649 : 1988 



ISO 
8649 



AMENDMENT 1 : Authentication during association 
establishment 



IMOVB THE INTRODUCTION {THE OMGINAL CiAUSiO) TO THE 
FRONT OE THE INTERNA TIONAL STANDARD AS A PRELIMINARY 
ELEMENT, WHEN THIS IS DONE, THE INTRODUCTION \MLL BE ON 
PAGE -^iv^AND THE NUMBERS PRECEDING THE PARAGRAPHS 
OF THE ORIGINAL CLAUSE WILL BE DELETED. ] 

Introduction 

{MODIFY THE FOURTH PARAGRAPH iI.E, THE ORIGINAL 0.41 AS 
FOLLOWS.) 

Or4 This International Standard defines services provided by 
the application service element for application-association 
control: the Association Control Service Element (ACSE). 
The ACSE provides basic facilities for the control of an 
application-association between two application-entities 
that communicate by means of a presentation-connection. 
« The ACSE includes a functional unit for exchanging infor- 
mation in support of authentication during association estab- 
lishment. The ACSE services apply to a wide range of ap- 
plication-process communication requirements.» 

1 Scope 

{INSERT THE FOLLOWING TEXT AS THE NEW SECOND PARA- 
GRAPH OF CLAUSE 1 .) 

Two functional units are defined in the ACSE. Tlhe mandatory 
Kernel functional unit is used to establish and release applica- 
tion-associations; The optional Authentication, functional 
unit provides additional facilities for exchanging information 
in support of authentication during association estab- 
lishment without adding services. The ACSE authentication 
facilities may be used to support a limited class of authen- 
tication methods. 

( END OF INSERTED PARAGRAPH. ] 



2 frNormative»f references 

{INSERT THE FOLLOWING TEXT AS THE NEW PARAGRAPH 
UNDER CLA USE 2 BEFORE THE LIST OF REFERENCES. ) 

The following standards contain provisions which, through 
reference in this text, constitute provisions of this Interna- 
tional Standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to revision, 
and parties to agreements based on this International Stand- 
ard are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying 
the most recent editions of the standards listed below. 
Members of lEC and ISO maintain registers of currently valid 
Intemational Standards. 

{ADD THE FOLLOWING REFERENCES.) 

ISO 7498-2:1 989. in formation processing systems — Open 
Systems Interconnection — Basic Inference Model — Part 
2: Security architecture, 

ISO/IEC 9545:1989, Information technology — Open Sys- 
tems interconnection — Application Layer Structure. 

ISO/IEC 9834-1 \ information technology — Open Systems 
Interconnection — Procedures for the operation of OSi 
f^istration Authorities — Part 1: General procedures. 

{END OF ADDED REFERENCES. ) 

3 Definitions 

3.1 Reference rnocM definitions 

3.1.1 Basic reference model definitions {NgwHiAotMO] 

{MOVE TEXT FROM THE ORIGINAL SUBCLAUSE 3. 1 TO THIS 
SUBCLAUSE AND ADD THE FOLLOWING TERMS MAINTAINING 
ALPHABETICAL ORDER) 

application-function 
(N)-function 



1) To be published. 



If 4Jt1S:1MS 
ISO 8649 : IMS 



{0^$£fi7NeWSUBCLAUS£Xf.2.) 

3.1.2 Security architecturtdellnitlons {Niw\ 

TNs Intemational Standard makes use of the following terms 
defined in ISO 7498-2: 

a) credentials; 

b) password; and 

c) peer-entity authentication. 
{END Of0^S£8rEO SUBCLAUSB 3, 1.2, ) 

3.1.3 Naming and addressing definitions [f>Re/i0USLY 3,2) 
{MOVE TEXT FROM ORfGfNAL 3.2 TO TNiS SUBCLAUSE. ] 

3.2 Service conventions definitions [PREVIOUSLY 3.3) 
{MOVE TEXT FROM ORIGINAL 3.3 TO THIS SUBCLAUSE ) 

3.3 Presentation service definitions {PREVIOUSLY 3.4) 
{MOVE TEXT FROM THE ORfGfNAL 3.4 TO THIS SUBCLAUSE \ 

3.4 ACSE service definitions {PREVIOUSLY 3.5] 

{MOVE TEXT FROM THE ORIGINAL 3.5 TO THIS SUBCLAUSE AND 
ADO THE FOLLOWING DEFINITIONS MAINTAINING ALPHABETICAL 
ORDER.) 

3.4.. authentication: The corroboration of the identity of 
objects relevant to the establishment of an association. For 
example, the^e can include the AEs, APs, and the human 
usera of applications. 

NOTE - This term hss been defined to maice it clear that a wider 
scope of authentication is being addressed than is covered by 
peer-entity authentication in ISO 7498-2. 

3.4.. authentication-function: An application-function 
within an application-entity Invocation that processes and 
exchanges authentication-values with a peer authentication- 
function. 

3.4.^ authentication-value: The output from an authentica- 
tion-function to be transferred to a peer ACSE service-user 
for input to the peer's authentication-function. 

3.4._ authenticatkNi-mechanism: The specification of a 
specific set of authentication-function rules for defining, 
processing, and transferring authentication-values. 

{iNSERT NEW SUBCLAUSE 3.5. ) 

3.5 Application Layer Structure definltione {new\ 

This Intemational Standard malces use of the following terms 
defined in ISO/IEC 9S45: 

a) application-entity invocation; 

b) single association control function; and 

c) single association object. 
{END OF M^SERTEO SUBCLAUSE 3.5.) 



4 Abbreviations 

{ADD THE FOLLOWING ABBREVIATIONS MAINTAINING AL^ 
PHABETICAL ORDER.) 

AEI application-entity invocation 

SACF single association control function 

SAO single association object 

{END OF ' lOEOABBREVIA TIONS. ) 

5 Conventlont {NO CHANGE) 

{NO CHANGE IS MADE TO THIS CLA USE. ) 

6 Basic concepts 

{USING THE ORIGINAL CLAUSE 6 AS A BASE, REPLACE CLAUSE 
6 WITH THE FOLLOWING TEXT.) 

{INSERT NEW HEADING 6. 1. MOVE ORIGINAL PARAGRAPHS 6. 1 
THROUGH 6.4 UNDER THIS NEW HEADING AS PARAGRAPHS 
6.1.1 THROUGH 6.1.4. THEN, INSERT NEW PARAGRAPHS 6.1.5 
THROUGH 6. 1. 7. ALSO, INSERT NEW SUBCLAUSE 6.2) 

6.1 General {new heading) 

S.1.1 The reference model (ISO 7498) represents com- 
munication between a pair of application-processes ( APs) in 
terms of communication between their application-entities 
( AEs) using the presentation-service. The functionality of an 
AE is factored into a number of application-service-elements 
(ASEs). The interaction between AEs is described in terms 
of the use of their ASEs' services. 

e. 1.2 This Intemational Standard introduces the additional 
modeling concepts of application-association and applica- 
tion context. 

e. 1 .3 An appilcation-essodation is a cooperative relationship 
between two AEs. It provides the necessary frame of refer- 
ence between the AEs in order that they may interworic 
effectively. This relationship is formed by the exchange of 
application-protocol-control-information between the ap- 
plication^entities through their use of presentation-services. 

8.1. 4 An appttcetion context is an explicitly identified set of 
application-service-elements, related options and any other 
necessBTY information for the interworking of application-en- 
tities on an application association. 

e.l.S (Mcw) The ACSE service-user is that part of an applica- 
tion-entity that malces use Qf ACSE services. It may be the 
single association control function (S ACPI or an ASE or some 
combination of the two. 

e.l .e (Mcw) An aSE standard does not needto specify the use 
of ACSE siervice primitive parameters that are not relevant 
to the operation of the ASE. It may be assumed that the 
SACF passes such parameters between the ACSE service- 
provider and that part of the AEI to which the parameters are 
relevant. 

e.1.7(Mcw)A8 an example, consider the authentication 
parameters of the Authentication functional unit discussed 
below In 6.2. The SACF may be used to model the passing 
of authenticatfon-values between the authenticatlon-func- 



IS 13615 : 1993 
ISO 8649 : 1988 



Indian Standard 

SERVICE DEFINITION FOR THE ASSOCIATION 

CONTROL SERVICE ELEMENT IN OPEN SYSTEMS 

INTERCONNECTION FOR INFORMATION 

PROCESSING SYSTEMS 



Introduction 

0.1 This International Standard is one of a set of Internation- 
al Standards produced to facilitate the interconnection of in- 
formation processing systems. It is related to other Interna- 
tional Standards in the set as defined by the Reference Model 
for Open Systems Interconnection (ISO 7498). The 
reference model subdivides the area of standardization for 
interconnection into a senes of layers of specification, each 
of mar ageable size. 

0.2 The goal of Open Systems Interconnection is to allow, 
with a minimum of technical agreement outside the intercon- 
nection standards, the interconnection of information 
processing systems: 

— from different manufacturers; 
— under different managements; 
— of different levels of complexity; and 
— of different technologies. 

0.3 This International Standard recognizes that application- 
processes may wish to communicate with each other for a 
wide variety of reasons. However, any communication will 
require the performance of certain services independent of 
the reasons for communication The application-service-ele- 
ment defined herein provides such services 

0.4 This International Standard defines services provided by 
the application service element for application-association 
control: the Association Control Service Element (ACSE). 
The ACSE provides basic facilities for the control of an ap- 
plication-association between two application-entities that 
communicate by means of a presentation-connection. 

0.5 The use of services defined in this International Standard 
is also governed by the use of the presentation-service (ISO 
8822) and the session-service (ISO 8326). 

0.6 It is recognized that, with respect to ACSE Quality ot 
Services (QOS), described in clause 9, work is still in 
progress to provide an integrated treatment of COS across 
all tayers of the OSI Reference Model, and to ensure that the 
indiv dual treatments in each layer service satisfy overall 
QOS objectives in a consistent manner. As a consequence. 



an addendum may be added to this International Standard at 
a later time which reflects further COS developments and in- 
tegration. 



1 Scope and field of application 

This International Standard defines ACSE services for ap- 
plication-association control in an open systems intercon- 
nection environment. The ACSE services are provided by 
the use of the ACSE protocol (ISO 8650) in conjunction with 
the presentation-service (ISO 8822). The ACSE services as- 
sume as a minimum the use of the presentation-service Ker- 
nel functional unit 

This International Standard does not specify individual im- 
plementations or products, nor does it constrain the im- 
plementation of entities ana interfaces within a computer 
system 

No requirement is made for conformance to this Internation- 
al Standard 



2 References 

ISO 7498, Information processing systems - Open Systems 
Interconnection - Basic Reference Model 

ISO 7498-3, Information processing systems - Open Sys- 
tems Interconnection - Basic Reference Model - Part 3 
Naming and Addressing. ^ 

ISO 8326. Information processing systems - Open Systems 
Interconnection - Basic connection oriented session service 
definition. 

ISO 8327, Information processing systems - Open Systems 
Interconnection - Basic connection oriented session protocol 
specification. 

ISO/Th 8509, Information processing systems - Open Sys- 
tems Interconnection - Service conventions. 



1 At present at the stage of draft, publication anticipated in due course. 



r 



18 1361S : 1993 
ISO 8649 : 1988 



tion and the ACSE service-provider. An ASE that references 
ACSE need not be concerned with these parameters. 

6.2 Authentication {/V£W} 

This International Standard includes the Authentication 
functional unit. The functional unit allows APIs, AEIs and 
their related objects to exchange authentication information 
during the establishment of an association. 

6.2.1 Authentication concepts 

This International Standard includes the modeling concepts 
of authentication-function, authentication-mechanism, 
authentication-mechanism ndme and authentication-value. 
Each is discussed below. 

6.2.1.1 Authentication-function 

6.2.1.1.1 For this International Standard, authentication is 
supported by a pair of authentication-functions. An authen- 
Hcation-function is modeled as an application-function (i.e., 
IS an (N)-function as defined in ISO 7498) that is available 
the ACSE service-user. Each is contained within the as- 
sociated AEIs. 

L2.1.1.2 Modeling the authentication-function in this way 
illows ACSE to deal with authentication communication 
equirements without having to understand the semantics of 
he security information exchanged or how it is used. 

^2.1 .2 Authentication-mechanism 
i.2.1.2.1 An authentication-mechanism is a particular 
ipecif ication of the processing to be performed by a pair of 
ipplication-functions for authentication. A specification 
contains the rules for creating, sending, receiving and 
)roces$ing information needed for authentication. 

1.2.1.2.2 Annex B in ISO 8660 is an example of an authen- 
:icat ion-mechanism. It defines the authentication of the 
sending AEI based on its AE title and its password. The 
password is contained in the Authentication-value 
parameter. 

6.2.1 .3 Authentication-mechanism name 

6.2.1.3.1 An authentication-mechanism name is used to 
specify a particular authentication-mechanism. For example, 
the name of the authentication-mechanism specified in ISO 
8650 annex B is assigned (i.e., registered) in the annex. The 
value has the data type of an OBJECT IDENTIFIER. 

6.2.1.3.2 An authentication-mechanism name may also be 
used to specify a more general security mechanism that 
includes an authentication-mochanism. An example of a 
general security mechanism is an ASE that provides security 
facilities to its service-user). 

6.2.1.3.3 Authentication-mechanism names and general 
security mechanism names are subject to registration within 
OSI (see clause 1 2 in ISO 8650). 

6.2.1 .4 Authentication-value 

6.2.1.4.1 An •uthenticatlon-valiie consists of information 
used by a pair of authentication-functions to perform authen- 
tication. It can consist of information such as, credentials, a 
time-stamp, a digital aignature, etc. It can also identify the 



type and/or name of object to be authenticated, such as the 
AE, a human user, etc. 

6.2.1.4.2 The semantic structure of an authentication-value 
is specified by the authentication-mechanism involved. 

6.2. 1 .4.3 An authentication-function provides an authentica- 
tion-value to its AEI to be sent to the peer AEI. The peer AEI's 
authenticatlon-fuTKtion receives and processes this authen- 
tication-value. For example, it may use the value to authen- 
ticate objects at the sending AEI. 

6.2.1.4.4 An authentication-mechanism may be part of a 
ASE that provides security facilities to its service-user. In 
this situation, the authentication-mechanism name iden- 
tifies the ASE; the authentication-value is an APOU of the 
ASE. 

6.2.2 ACSE authentication facilities 

6.2.2.1 The ACSE Kernel functional unit does not support 
authentication. However, AP Title, AE Qualifier, AP invoca- 
tion-identifier and AE invocation-identifier values are option- 
ally transferred during the establishment of an association. 
They may be used to identify the calling, called and respond- 
ing AEIs. 

6.2.2.2 The ACSE Authentication functional unit supports 
the transfer of authentication-values as part of the A-AS- 
SOCIATE service. An authentication-value is treated as an 
atomic item by ACSE. Its semanticr are transparent to the 
ACSE service-provider. 

6.2.2.3 The facilities of the Authentication functional unit 
may be used to convey other security-related information. 
This may be done with the transfer of authentication infor- 
mation during association establishment. 

{ END Of REPLACBO CLA USE 6, ) 

7 Service overview 

{//VS£/?r THE NE^V HEADING 7. /.} 

7.1 ACSE services {NEV^ heading) 

[MOVE THE PARAGRAPHS UNDER ORIGINAL CLAUSE 7 TO THIS 
SUBCLAUSE AND RENUMBER THE PARAGRAPHS ACCORDINGL Y. 
THEN INSERT NEW SUBCLAUSE 7.2. ) 

7.2 Functional units (NEW) 

7.2.1 Functional units are used by this International Standard 
to identify ACSE user requirements during association estab- 
lishment. Two functional units are defined: 

a) Kernel functional unit; and 

b) Authentication functional unit. 

7.2.2 The Kernel functional unit is always available, and 
includes the basic services identified in 7. 1 . 

7.2.3 The Authenticati9n functional unit supports authen- 
tication during association establishment. The availability of 
this functional unit is negotiated during association estab- 
lishment. This functional unit does not include additional 



18 13616:1993 
ISO 8649 : 1988 



services. It adds parameters to the A-ASSOCIATE and A- 
ABORT services. 

7.2.4 Table a shows the services and parameters associatisd 
with the ACSE functional unita. The services and their 
parameters are discussed in clause 9. 

{INSERT NBW TABLE $. RENUMBER THE REMAINING TABLES 
AND ADJUST REFERENCES TO THESE TABLES IN THE TEXT) 

8 Relationship wHh other ASEs and lower layer 
services {NO CHANGE) 

{NO CHANGE IS MADE TO THIS CLA USE, ) 

9 Service definition 

{NO CHANGE TO THE INTRODUCTORY TEXT\ 



9.1 A-ASSOCIATE service 

{NO CHANGE TO THE INTRODUCTORY TEXT) 

9.1.1 A-ASSOCIATE iMramsters 

{TABLE 2 - ADD THE FOLLOWING PARAMETERS AFTER 

Responding AE InvocstkHh-Mentifier. } 
ACSE Requirements U C C C(«) 

Authentication-mechanism Name U C(«) U C(->) 
Authentication-value U C(-) U C(») 

{INSERT NEW SUBCLAUSES 9. 1. 1. 14a, 9. 1. 1. 14b AND 
a ;. /. 14c AFTER SUBCLAUSE 9. 1. /. 14 Responding AE Invoca- 
non-identifier,) 

9. 1 . 1 . 1 4a ACSE Requirements (/vav) 

This parameter is used by the requestor to indicate the 

functional units requested for the association. If not present. 



Table a — Functional unit services and their parameters {he^ 



Functional Unit 


Service 


Parameter 


Kernel 


A-ASSOCIATE 

A-RELEASE 

A-ABORT 
A-P-ABORT 


Mode 

Application Context Name 

Catling AP Title 

Calling AE Qualifier 

Calling AP Invocation-identifier 

Calling AE InvocationHdentlfler 

Called AP Title 

Called AE Qualifier 

Called AP Invocation-identifier 

Called AE Invocation-identifier 

Responding AP Title 

Responding AE Qualifier 

Responding AP Invocation-identifief 

Responding AE Invocation-identifier 

User Information 

Result 

Result Source 

Diagnostic 

Calling Presentation Address 

Called Presentation Address 

Responding Presentation Address 

Presentation Context Definition Ust 

Presentation Context Definition Result Ust 

Default Presentation Context Name 

Default Presentation Context Result 

Quality of Sen^e 

Session Requirements 

Initial Synchronization Point Serial Number 

Initial Assignment of Tokens 

Session-connection Identifier 

Reason 

User Infonnation 

Result 

Abort Source 
User Infonnation 

Providef Reason 


Authentication 


A-ASSOCIATE 
A-ABORT 


Authentication«value 
Diagnostic 



fWflled at Dm Kay PrinlMS. New DiHu, India 



IS 13615 : 1993 
ISO 8649 : 1988 



dniy the Kernel functional unit'is available for the association. 
In supporting this negotiation mechanism^ the ACSE service- 
provider removes values for unsupported functional units 
t)efore issuing the indication primitive to the acceptor. 

This parameter is used by the acceptpr to indicate which of 
the requested functional units the acceptor selects. The 
acceptor shall not select a functional unit in the response 
primitive which was not requested in the indication primitive. 

The value of the parameter in the response primitive is 
delivered unchanged in the confirm primitive. 

This parameter takes on the following symbolic value: 
— authentication. 

9.1 .1 .14b Authentication-mechanism Name {/vfw) 

This parameter is only used if the ACSE Requirements 
parameter includes the Authentication functional unit, if 
present/ the value of this parameter identifies the authentica- 
tion-mechanism in use. If not present, the communicating 
AEis must implicitly know the mechanism in use, e.g., by 
prior understanding. 

NOTES 

1 Some authentication-mechanisms may require this parameter, 
and if so, will state this in their specification. 

2 This parameter may specify a more general authentication 
mechanism. For example, it may specify an ASE that provides 
security facilities to its service-user. 

9.1 .1 .14c Authentication-value {n£W\ 

This parameter shall only be used if the ACSE Requirements 
parameter includes the Authentication functional unit. 

The Authenx\cai\on'ya)ue parameter is used as defined 
below. 

a) If present on the request or the response primitive, it 
contains an authentication-value generated by the 
authentication-function in the AEI that issued the service 
primitive. It is intended for the peer's authentication-func- 
tion. 

b) If present on the indication or the confirm primitive, it . 
contains an authentication-value generated by the 
authentication-function in the AEI that issued the cor- 
responding request or response primitive. It is intended 
for the peer's authentication-function. 

{iND OP INSERTED SUBCLAUSES 9. /. /.a, 9. 1. f.bAND 9. /. /.c.) 

9.1.1.18 Diagnostic 

{REPLACE THE PIRST PARAGRAPH USiNG THE POLLQWING 

TEXT) 

This parameter may be used by the acceptor to provide 
diagnostic information about the establishment of the as- 
sociation. 



{ TO THE LfST OP SYMBOLIC VALUES POR THE ACSE SERVICE- 
USER ADD THE POLLOWING.) 

Authentication-mechanism Name not recognized; 

Authentication-mechanism Uame required; 

Authentication failure; or 

Authentication required. 

{END OP ADDED SYMBOLIC VALUES. ) 

9.1 .2 A-ASSOCIATE procedure {no cHANon 
{NO CHANGE IS MADE TO THIS SUBCLAUSE. } 

9.2 A-RELEASE service {NO change) 
{NO CHANGE IS MADE TO THIS SUBCLAUSE.) 

9.3 A-ABORT service 

{NO CHANGE TO THE INTRODUCTORY TEXT} 

9.3.1 A- ABORT parameters 

{ TABLE 4 - ADD THE POLLOWING PARAMETER APTER Abort 
Source. ) 

Diagnostic U C|») 

{RENUMBER THE ORIGINAL 9.3. 1.2 AS 9.3. U3. INSERT NEY^ 
SUBCLA USE 9. 3. 1.2 USING THE POLLOWING TEXT. ) 

9.3.1.2 Diagnostic 

The requestor may optionally include diagnostic informatior 
on the request primitive. It takes one of the following sym 
bolic values: 

No reason given; 

Protocol error; 

Authentication-mechanism Nantt, not recognized; 

Authentication-mechanism Name required; 

Authentication failure; or 

Authentication required. 

9.3.2 A-ABORT service procedure {no change) 
{NO CHANGE IS MADE TO THIS SUBCLA USE. ) 

9.4 A-P-ABORT service {NO change) 

{ NO CHANGE IS MADE TO THIS SUBCLA USE. ) 

10 Sequencing information {NOCHANGB} 

{NO CHANGE IS MADE TO THIS CLAUSE. ) 



Pnnted at Dee K«y Pnnten, New Delhi, Indii 



IS 13615 : 1M$ 
ISO 8649 : IMS 



ISO 
8649 



AMENDMENT 2: Connectionless-mode ACSE 
Service 



[MOVE THE INTRODUCTION (THE ORIGINAL 
CLAUSE 0) TO THE FRONT OF THE 
INTERNATIONAL STANDARD AS A PRELIMINARY 
ELEMENT, WHEN THIS IS DONE. THE 
INTRODUCTION WILL BE ON PAGE "iV" AND THE 
NUMBERS PRECEDING THE PARAGRAPHS OF THE 
ORIGINAL CLAUSE WILL BE DELETED.) 



-4- Introduction 

[ADD AN ADDITIONAL PARAGRAPH FOLLOWING 
THE FOURTH PARAGRAPH AS FOLLOWS.) 

ACSE provides both conncction-orienicd and connectionless 
mode of service. For its connection-oriented services, the 
ACSE uses presentation connoction-oriented services (ISO 
8822). For the conTiectionlcss service, the ACSE uses the 
presentation connectionless service (ISO 8822/Aind.l). 



1 Scope 

[DELETE THE FIRST PARAGRAPH AND REPLACE 
WITH THE FOLLOWING THREE PARAGRAPHS) 

This International Standard defines ACSE services for 
application-association control in an open systems 
interconnection environment. 

The ACSE connection-oriented services are provided by the 
use of the connection-oriented ACSE protocol (ISO 86S0) 
in conjunction with the connection-oriented presentation- 
service (ISO 8822). These ACSE services assume as a 
minimum the use of the presentation-service connection- 
oriented Kernel functional unit. 

The ACSE connectionless-mode service (A-UNIT-DATA) is 
provided by the use of the connectionless ACSE protocol 
(ISO/IEC 1(X)3S) in conjunction with the connectionless- 
mode presentation-service (P-UNIT-DATA - ISO 
8822/Amd.l). 



2 Normative References 

[ADD THE FOLLOWING REFERENCES) 

ISO 7498/Add.l: 1987, Information processing systems - 
Open Systems Interconnection - Basic Reference Model - 
Addendum I: Connectionless-mode transmission. 

ISO/IEC 10035: 1991, Information technology - Open 
Systems Interconnection - Connectionless ACSE Protocol 
to provide to Provide the Connectionless-mode ACSE 
Service. 

ISO 8822/Amd.I: 1991, Information processing systems - 
Open Systems Interconnection - Connection oriented 
presentation service definition - Amendment 1: 
Connectionless mode presentation service. 



3 Definitions 

3.1 RcfercDce Model DefiDitions 

3,1.1 Basic reference model definitions 

[REPLACE THE SENTENCE UNDER 3.1.1 WFTH THE 
FOLLOWING TEXT) 

This International Standard is based on the concepts 
developed in ISO 7498 and 7498/Add.l and makes use of 
the following terms defined in them: 

[ADD TH£ FOLLOWING TO THE UST OF TERMS 
ACCORDING TO THE ALPHABETICAL ORDER:) 

- connecdonless^mode presenuition-service; 

- (N)-connectionle$s-mode transmission. 

3.3 Presentation service definitions 

[REPLACE THE TEXT UNDER 3,3 WITH THE 
FOLLOWING) 

This International Standard makes use of the following 
terms deOned in ISO 8822 and ISO 8822/Add.l. 



[ADD THE FOLLOWING TO THE UST OF TERMS) 



IS 13615 : 1993 
ISO 8649 : 1988 



ISO 8650, Information processing systems - Open Systems 
interconnection - Protocol specification for the Association 
Control Service Element. 

ISO 8822, Information processing systems - Open Systems 
Interconnection - Connection oriented presentation service 
definition. 

CCITT Recommendation X.410: Message Handling Sys- 
tems: Remote Operation and Reliable Transfer Server 
(1984). 



3 Definitions 

3.1 Reference model definitions 

This International Standard Is based on the concepts 
developed in ISO 7498 and makes use of the following terms 
defined in it: 

a) Application Layer; 

b) application-process; 

c) application-entity; 

d) application-service-element; 

e) application-protocol-data-unit; 

f) application-protocol-control-information; 

g) presentation-service; 

h) presentation-connection; 
I) session-service; 
j) session-protocol; and 
k) session-connection. 

3.2 Naming and addressing definitions 

This International Standard makes use of the following terms 
defined in ISO 7498-3: 

a) application-process title; 

b) application-entity qualifier; 

c) application-entity title; ^ 

d) application-process invocation-identifier; 

e) application-entity invocation-identifier; and 



f) presentation address. 

3.3 Service conventions definitions 

This International Standard makes use of the following terms 
defined in ISO/TR 8509: 

a) service-provider; 

b) service-user; 

c) confirmed service; 

d) non-confirmed service; 

e) provider-Initiated service; 

f) primitive; 

g) request (primitive); 
h) indication (primitive); 

1) response (primitive); and 
j) confirm (primitive). 

3.4 Presentation service definitions 

This International Standard makes use of the following terms 
defined in ISO 8822: 

a) abstract syntax; 

b) abstract syntax name; 

c) default context; 

d) defined context set; 

e) functional unit Ipresentationl; 

f) normal mode Ipresentationl; 

g) presentation context; 

h) presentation data value; and 

i) X.41 0-1 984 mode ipresentationl. 

3.5 ACSE service definitions 

For the purpose of this International Standard, the following 
definitions apply: 

3.5.1 application-association; association: A cooperative 
refatlonship between two application-entitles, formed by 



1 As defined in ISO 7498-3. so application-entity title is composed of an application-process title and an application-entity qualifier. The 
ACSE service provides for the transfer of an application-entity title value by the transfer of its component values. 



IS 13615 : 
ISO 8649 



1993 
:19S8 



their exchange of application-protocol-control-information 
through their use of presentation-services 

3.5.2 application context: An explicitly identified set of ap- 
plication-service-elements, related options and any other 
necessary information for the interworking of application- 
entities on an application-association. 

NOTE — This definition is subject to refinement as a result of on- 
going work in the area of the Application Layer structure 

3.5.3 Associafion Control Service Element: The particular 
application-service-element defined in this International 
Standard 

3.5.4 ACSE service-user: The part of the application-entity 
that makes use of ACSE services 

3.5.5 ACSE service-provider: An abstraction of the totality 
of those entities which provide ACSE services to peer ACSE 
service-users 

3.5.6 requestor: The ACSE service-user that issues the re- 
quest pnmitive for a particular ACSE service For a con- 
firmed service,. It also receives the confirm pnmitive 

3.5.7 acceptor: The ACSE service-user that receives the in- 
dication primitive for a particular ACSE service For a con- 
firmed service, it also issues the response pnmitive 

3.5.8 association-initiator: The ACSE service-user that in- 
itiates a particular association, i e , the requestor of the A- 
ASSOCIATE service that establishes the association 

3.5.9 association-responder: The ACSE service-user that is 
not the initiator of a particular association, i e , the acceptor 
of the A-ASSOCIATE service that establishes the associa- 
tion 

3.5.10 normal mode The mode of ACSE operation that 
results in the transfer of ACSE semantics, using the presen- 
tation-service 

3.5.11 X.410-1984 mode: The mode of ACSE operation 
that allows ACSE service-users to interwork using the 
protocol specified m CCITT Recommendation X 410-1 984 
The use of this mode results in no transfer of ACSE seman- 
tics. 

3.5.12 disrupt: A service procedure is disrupted by another 
service procedure if the second service results in service 
pnmitives not being used as specified for the procedure of 
the first service. 



4 Abbreviations 

The following abbreviations are used in this International 
Standard. 

ACSE Association Control Service Element 

AE application-entity 

ASE application-service-element 

OSI Open Systems Interconnection 

QOS Quality of Service 



5 Conventions 

5.1 This International Standard defines services for the 
ACSE following the descnptive conventions defined in 
ISO/TR 8509 In clause 9, the definition of each ACSE ser- 
vice includes a table that lists the parameters of its primi- 
tives For a given primitive, the presence of each parameter 
IS descnbed by one of the following values 

blank not applicable 

C conditional 

M mandatory 

P subject to conditions defined in ISO 8822 

U user option 

5.2 In addition, the notation { =) indicates that a parameter 
value IS semantically equal to the value to its left in the table 



6 Basic concepts 

6.1 The reference model (ISO 7498) represents com- 
munication between a pair of application-processes (APs) in 
terms of communication between their application-entities 
(AEs) using the presentation-service The functionality of an 
AE IS factored into a number of application-service-elements 
(ASEs) The interaction between AEs is described in terms 
of the use of their ASEs' services 

6.2 This International Standard introduces the additional 
modeling concepts of application-association and applica- 
tion context 

6 3 An application-association is a cooperative relationship 
between two AEs It provides the. necessary frame of 
reference between the AEs in order that they may interwork 
effectively This relationship is formed by the exchange of 
application-protocol-control-information between the ap- 
plication-entities through their use of presentation-services 

6.4 An application context is an explicitly identified set of 
application-service-elements, related options and any other 
necessary information for the interworking of application-en- 
tities on an application association 



7 Service overview 

7.1 This International Standard defines the following ser- 
vices for the control of a single association 

a) A-ASSOCIATE, 

b) A-RELEASE, 

c) A-ABORT,and 

d) A-P-ABORT. 

7.2 The A-ASSOCIATE service causes the start of use of an 
association by those ASE procedures identified by the value 
of Application Context Name parameter 

NOTE — The use of an association by several ASEs is the subject 
of ongoing work. 



IS 1361$ : 1903 
ISO 8640 : 1088 



7.3 The A-RELEASE service/ if successful causes the com- 
pletion of the use of an association by those ASE procedures 
identified by the application context that is in effect without 
loss of information in transit. However, the success of the 
A-RELEASE service may be negotiated. 

7.4 The A-ABORT service causes the abnormal release of 
the association with the possible loss of information in tran- 
sit. 

7.5 The A-P-ABORT service indicates the abnormal release 
of the association as a result of action by the underlying 
presentation-service with the possible loss of information in 
transit. 

7.6 For a particular association, the ACSE services operate 
in one of the following modes: 

a) normal mode; or 

b) X.41 0-1 984 mode. 

7.7 The normal mode of operation allows the ACSE service- 
user to take full advantage of the functionality provided by 
both ACSE and the presentation-service (ISO 8822). In this 
mode the ACSE service-provider transfers its semantics 
using the normal mode of the presentation-service. 

7.8 The X. 410-1 984 mode of operation allows the ACSE 
service-user to interwork with a peer using the protocol 
specified by the CCITT Recommendation X.41 0-1 984. In 
this mode, the ACSE service-provider does not transfer any 
semantics of its own and uses the X.41 0-1 984 mode of the 
oresentation-service. 



8 Relationship with other ASEs and lower layer 
services 

8.1 Other application-service-elements 

8.1.1 The ACSE is intended to be used with other ASEs in 
order to support a specific information processing task. 
Therefore, it is expected that the ACSE will be included in all 
application context specifications. 

8.1 .2 The collection of the ACSE and other ASE(s) included 
in an application context are required to use the facilities of 
the presentation-service in a coordinated manner. 

8.2 Presentation-service 

8.2.1 A one-to-one correspondence exists between an ap- 
plication-association and a presentation-connection. 

8.2.2 The ACSE services require access to the P-CONNECT, 
P-RELEASE, P-U-ABORT and P-P-ABORT services. The 
ACSE services neither use nor constrain the use of any other 
presentation service. 



8.2.3 The requestor and acceptor of the A-ASSOCIATE ser- 
vice determine the mode, the default presentation context, 
and the initial defined context set of the underlying presen- 
tation-connection using the following A-ASSOCIATE 
parameters: 

— Mode; 

— Presentation Requirements; 

— Presentation Context Definition List; 

— Presentation Context Definition Result List; 

— Default Presentation Context Name; and 

— Default Presentation Context Result. 

8.2.4 If the requestor specifies the value "normal" for the 
Mode parameter, the last five parameters above determine 
the presentation context facility for the association accord- 
ing to the rules for the normal mode of the presentation-ser- 
vice (ISO 8822). At the conclusion of the A-ASSOCIATE 
procedure, the requestor and acceptor must have obtained a 
presentation context that supports the abstract syntax 
specified in ISO 8650 for the ACSE application-protocol- 
data-units. 

NOTE — The ACSE service-provider is aware of the presentation 
context that contains its abstract syntax by a local mechanism. 

8.2.5 If the requestor specifies the value "X. 41 0-1 984" for 
the Mode parameter, the ACSE service-provider does not 
transfer ACSE semantics and therefore does not require a 
presentation context for its abstract syntax. However, the 
user information that the ACSE service-provider does trans- 
fer uses the unnamed default presentation context for the 
X.41 0-1 984 mode of the presentation-service (ISO 8822). 

NOTE — Table 2 indicates the A-ASSOCIATE service parameters 
that are not used in the X.41 0-1 984 mode. None of the presen- 
tation context related parameters are used. 

8.3 Session -service 

8.3.1 Using the Session Requirements parameter, the A- 
ASSOCIATE sen/ice requestor and acceptor determine the 
functional units for the underlying session-service (ISO 
8326). 

8.3.2 The rules and the parameter value length restrictions 
of the underlying session-service affect ACSE services. The 
ACSE service-user must be aware of these constraints. 

NOTE — Some examples of these constraints are: 

a) Version 1 of the session-protocol (ISO 8650) imposes user 
data length restrictions which affect ACSE primitive parameters. 
Some special considerations apply to the A-ABORT service (see 
9.3). 

b) The choice of session functional units for a particular associa- 
tion affects the rules for the use of ACSE services. For example, 
the selection of session tokens controls the possibilities of 
negotiated release and release collisions. 



IS 13615 : 1993 
ISO 8649 : 1988 



9 Service definition 

The ACSE services are listed in table 1 . 

Table 1 - ACSE-services 



SERVICE 


TYPE 


A-ASSOCIATE 
A-RELEASE 
A-ABORT 
A-P-ABORT 


Confirmed 
Confirmed 
Non-confirmed 
Provider-initiated 



9.1 A-ASSOCIATE service 

The A-ASSOCIATE service is used to cause the beginning of 
the use of an association; it is a confirmed service. 

9.1.1 A-ASSOCIATE parameters 

Table 2 lists the A-ASSOCIATE service paranneters. In ad- 
dition, groups of paranneters are defined for reference by 
other ASEs as follows: 



a) Calling AE Title is the composite of the Calling AP 
Title and the Calling AE Qualifier parameters; 

b) Called AE Title is the composite of the Called AP 
Title and the Called AE Qualifier parameters; and 

c) Responding AE Title is the composite of the Respond- 
ing AP Title and the Responding AE Qualifier 
parameters. 

The two components of the AE title ( AP title and AE qualifier) 
are defined in ISO 7498-3. 

9.1.1.1 Mode 

This parameter specifies the mode in which the ACSE ser- 
vices will operate for this association. It takes one of the f ol - 
lowing symbolic values: 

— normal; or 
— X.410-1984. 

If this parameter is not included on the request primitive, the 
default value of "normal" is used by the ACSE service- 
provider. This parameter is always present on the indica- 
tion primitive. 



Table 2 - A-ASSOCIATE parameters 



Parameter Name 


Req 


Ind 


Rsp 


Cnf 


Mode 


U 


M< = ) 






• Application Context Name 


M 


M( = ) 


M 


M( = ) 


• Calling AP Title 


U 


C{ = ) 






' Calling AE Qualifier 


U 


C( = ) 






• Calling AP invocation-identifier 


U 


C( = ) 






• Calling AE invocation-identifier 


U 


C( = ) 






• Called AP Title 


U 


C( = ) 






• Called AE Qualifier 


U 


C( = ) 






* Called AP Invocation-identifier 


U 


C( = ) 






* Called AE Invocation-identifier 


U 


C( = ) 






• Responding AP Title 






U 


C(-) 


• Responding AE Qualifier 






U 


C( = ) 


• Responding AP Invocation-identifier 






U 


C( = ) 


• Responding AE Invocation-identifier 






U 


C( = ) 


User Information 


U 


Cl = ) 


U 


CI-) 


Result 






M 


M(-) 


Result Source 








M 


• Diagnostic 






U 


C( = ) 


Calling Presentation Address 


P 


P 






CaUed Presentation Address 


P 


P 






Responding Presentation Address 






P 


P 


• Presentation Context Definition List 


P 


P 






♦ Presentation Context Definition Result List 




P 


P 


P 


• Default Presentation Context Name 


P 


P 






• Default Presentation Context Result 






P 


P 


Quality of Service 


P 


P 


P 


P 


• Presentation Requirements 


P 


P 


P 


P 


Session Requirements 


P 


P 


P 


P 


Initial Synchronization Point Serial Number 


P 


P 


P 


P 


Initial Assignment of Tokens 


P 


P 


P 


P 


Session-connection Identifier 


P 


P 


P 


P 


* • not used In X.410-1984 mode 



IS 13615 : 1993 
ISO 8649 : 1988 



9.1 .1 .2 Application Context Name 

This parameter identifies the application context proposed 
by the requestor. The acceptor returns either the same or a 
different name. The returned name specifies the application 
context to be used for this association. 

NOTE — The offer of an alternate application context by the ac- 
ceptor provides a possible mechanism for limited negotiation. 
However, the semantics and rules for this exchange are entirely 
user specific. If the requestor cannot operate in the acceptor's 
application context, it may issue an A-ABORT request primitive. 

9.1.1.3 Calling AP Title 

This parameter identifies the AP that contains the requestor 
of the A-ASSOCIATE sen/Ice. 

9.1 .1 .4 Calling AE Qualifier 

This parameter identifies the particular AE of the AP that con- 
tains the requestor of the A-ASSOCIATE service. 

9.1 .1 .5 Calling AP Invocation-identifier 

This parameter identifies the AP invocation that contains the 
requestor of the A-ASSOCIATE service. 

9.1.1.6 Calling AE Invocation-identifier 

This parameter identifies the AE invocation that contains the 
requestor of the A-ASSOCIATE service. 

9.1.1.7 Called AP Title 

This parameter identifies the AP that contains the Intended 
acceptor of the A-ASSOCIATE service. 

9.1.1.8 Called AE Qualifier 

This parameter identifies the particular AE of the AP that con- 
tains the intended acceptor of the A-ASSOCIATE service. 

9.1 .1 .9 Called AP Invocation-identifier 

This parameter identifies the AP invocation that contains the 
intended acceptor of the A-ASSOCIATE service. 

9.1 .1 .10 Called AE Invocation-identifier 

This parameter identifies the AE invocation that contains the 
intended acceptor of the A-ASSOCIATE service." 

9.1 .1 .1 1 Responding AP Title 

This parameter identifies the AP that contains the actual ac- 
ceptor of the A-ASSOCIATE service. 



9.1 .1 .12 Responding AE Qualifier 

This parameter identifies the particular AE of the AP that con- 
tains the actual acceptor of the A-ASSOCIATE service. 

9.1 .1 .13 Responding AP Invocation-identifier 

This parameter identifies the AP invocation that contains the 
actual acceptor of the A-ASSOCIATE service. 

9.1.1.14 Responding AE Invocation-identifier 

This parameter identifies the AE invocation that contains the 
actual acceptor of the A-ASSOCIATE service. 

9. 1 . 1 . 1 5 User information . 

Either the requestor or the acceptor may optionally include 
user information. Its meaning depends on the application 
context that accompanies the primitive. 

NOTE - For example, this parameter may be used to carry the 
initialization Information of other ASEs included in the applica- 
tion context specified by the value of the accompanying Applica- 
tion Context Name parameter. 

9.1.1.16 Result 

This parameter^ is provided by either the acceptor, by the 
ACSE service-provider, or by the presentation service- 
provider. It indicates the result of using the A-ASSOCIATE 
service. It takes one of the following symbolic values: 

— accepted; 

— rejected (permanent); or 

— rejected (transient). 

9.1.1.17 Result Source 

The value of the parameter^ is supplied by the ACSE service- 
provider. It identifies the creating source of the Result 
parameter and the Diagnosticparameter, if present. It takes 
one of the following symbolic values: 

— ACSE service-user; 

— ACSE service-provider; or 

— presentation service-provider. 

NOTE — If the Result parameter has the value ''accepted**, the 
value of this parameterjs **ACSE service-user." 

9.1.1.18 Diagnostic 

This parameter^ is only used if the Result parameter has the 
value of "reiected(permanent)'' or "rejected(transient)." 
Optionally, it can be used to provide diagnostic information 
about the result of the A-ASSOCIATE service. 



1 It is recognized that, with respect to this parameter, work is still in progress to provide an integrated treatment across all layers of the 
031 Reference Model. As a consequence, an addendum may be added to this International Standard at a later time that reflects further 
developments and integration. 



IS 13615 : 
ISO 8649 



1993 
1988 



If the Result Source parameter has the va.ue " ACSE service- 
provider". It takes one of the following symbolic values: 



reason given, or 
common ACSE version. 



If the Result Source parameter has the value "ACSE service- 
user", It takes one of the following symbolic values: 

— no reason given, 

— application context name not supported, 

— calling AP title not recognized, 

— calling AE qualifier not recognized, 

— calling AP invocation-identifier not recognized, 

— calling AE invocation-identifier not recognized 

— called AP title not recognized, 

— called AE qualifier not recognized, 

— called AP invocation-identifier not recognized, or 

— called AE invocation-identifier not recognized 

9.1.1.19 Calling Presentation Address 
This parameter is as defined in ISO 8822. 

9.1.1.20 Called Presentation Address 
This parameter is as defined in ISO 8822 

9.1.1.21 Responding Presentation Address 
This parameter is as defined in ISO 8822 

9.1.1.22 Presentation Context Definition List 
This parameter is as defined in ISO 8822 

9.1.1.23 Presentation Context Definition Result List 
This parameter is as defined in ISO 8822 

9.1 .1 .24 Default Presentation Context Name 

This parameter corresponds to the Default Context Name 
parameter defined in ISO 8822 

9.1 .1 .25 Default Presentation Context Result 

This parameter corresponds to the Default Context Result 
parameter defined in ISO 8822. 

9.1 .1 .26 Quality of Service 

This parameter is as defined in ISO 8822 

9.1.1.27 Presentation Requirements 
This parameter is as defined in ISO 8822 

9.1.1.28 Session Requirements 

This parameter is as defined in ISO 8822. 

9.1 .1 .29 Initial Synchroni^tion Point Serial Number 
This parameter is as defined in ISO 8822. 



9.1 .1 .30 Initial Assignment of Tokens 
This parameter is as defined in ISO 8822. 

9.1 .1 .31 Session Connection Identifier 
This parameter is as defined m ISO 8822 
9.1 .2 A'^ASSOCIATE service procedure 

9.1 .2.1 The A-ASSOCIATE service procedure has a one-to- 
one correspondence with the P-CONNECT service defined in 
ISO 8822 When the A-ASSOCIATE service is used, the as- 
sociation IS created simultaneously with the creation of the 
underlying presentation-connection 

9.1.2.2 An ACSE service-user that desires to establish an 
association issues an A-ASSOCIATE request pnmitive The 
called AE is identified by parameters of the request primitive 
The requestor cannot issue any primitives except an A- 
ABORT request primitive until it receives an A-ASSOCIATE 
confirm pnmitive 

9.1.2.3 The ACSE service-provider issues an A-AS- 
SOCIATE indication pnmitive to the acceptor 

9.1 .2.4 The acceptor accepts or rejects the association by 
sending an A-ASSOCIATE response primitive with an ap- 
propriate Result parameter ACSE service-provider issues 
an A-ASSOCIATE confirm pnmitive having the same Result 
parameter The Result Source parameter is assigned the 
symbolic value of "ACSE service user " 

9.1.2.5 If the acceptor accepts the association, the as- 
sociation IS available for use Requestors in both AEs may 
now use any service provided by the ASEs included in the 
application context that is in effect (with the exception of 
A-ASSOCIATE) 

9.1 .2.6 If the acceptor rejects the association, the associa 
tion IS not established 

9.1.2.7 The ACSE service-provider may not be capable of 
supporting the requested association In this situation, it 
returns an A-ASSOCIATE confirm primitive to the requestor 
with an appropnate Result parameter The Result Source 
parameter is appropriately assigned either the symbolic 
value of "ACSE service-provider" or "presentation service 
provider " The indication primitive is not issued The as 
sociation is not established 

9.1.2.8 A requestor in either AE may disrupt the A AS 
SOCIATE service procedure by issuing an A-ABORT request 
pnmitive The acceptor receives an A-ABORT indication 
pnmitive The association is not established 

9.2 A-RELEASE service 

The A-RELEASE service is used by a requestor in either AE 
to cause the completion of the use of an association, it is a 
confirmed service If the session Negotiated Release func- 
tional unit was selected for the association, the acceptor 
may respond negatively (see 8 3 2) This causes the unsuc- 
cessful completion of the A-RELEASE service and the con 



IS 13615 : 
ISO 8649 



1993 
1988 



tinuation of the association without loss of information in 
transit. 

9.2.1 A-RELEASE parameters 

Table 3 lists the A-RELEASE parameters. 



9.2.2 A-RELEASE service procedure 

9.2.2.1 The A*RELEASE service procedure has a one-to-one 
correspondence with the P-RELEASE service defined in ISO 
8822. When the A-RELEASE service is used, the associa- 
tion is released simultaneously with the release of the under- 



Table 3 - A-RELEASE parameters 




Riram«ter nam^^ 


Req 


Ind 


R«P 


Cnf 


• Reason 

♦ User Information 
Result 


U 
U 


C(.) 
C(«) 


U 
U 
M 


C(-) 
C(-) 


• - not used in X.4 1 0- 1 984 mode 



9.2.1.1 Reason 

When used on the request primitive, this parameter identifies 
the general level of urgency of the request. It takes one of 
the following symbolic values: 

— normal; 
— urgent; or 
— user defined. 

NOTE — For example, if the session Negotiated Release function- 
al unit was selected for the association, the value "urgent" may 
be used on the request primitive when the requestor desires to 
urgently release the association. 

When used on the response primitive, this parameter iden- 
tifies information about why the acceptor accepted or 
rejected the release request. It takes one of the following 
symbolic values: 

—normal; 

— not finished; or 

— user defined. 

NOTE — For example, if the session Negotiated Release function- 
al unit was not selected for the association, the value "not 
finished" may be used on the response primitive when the ac- 
ceptor is forced to release the association but wishes to give a 
warning that it has additional information to send or receive. 

9.2.1 .2 User Information 

Either the requestor or acceptor may optionally include user 
information on the request or response primitive, its mean- 
ing depends on the application context that is in effect. 

9.2.1.3 Result 

This parameter is used by the acceptor to Indicate If the re- 
quest to release the association normally is acceptable. It 
takes one of the following symbolic values: 

— affirmative; or 
—-negative. 



lying presentation-connection. 

9.2.2.2 An ACSE service-user that desires to release the as- 
sociation issues an A-RELEASE request primitive. This re- 
questor cannot issue any further primitives other than an A- 
ABORT request primitive until it receives an A-RELEASE con- 
firm primitive. 

9.2.2.3 In order to issue an A-RELEASE request primitive, 
the requestor is required to meet all the requirements for is- 
suing a P-RELEASE request (see 8.2). 

9.2.2.4 The ACSE service-provider issues an A-RELEASE 
indication primitive to the acceptor. The acceptor then can- 
not issue any ACSE primitives other than an A-RELEASE 
response primitive or an A-ABORT request primitive. 

9.2.2.5 The acceptor replies to the A-RELEASE indication 
primitive by issuing an A-RELEASE response primitive with 
a Result parameter that has a value of "affirmative" or "nega- 
tive." The acceptor may give a negative response only if the 
session Negotiated Release functional unit was selected for 
the association (see 8.3). 

9.2.2.6 If the acceptor gives a negative response, it may 
once again use any service provided by the ASEs included 
in the application context that is in effect (with the excep- 
tion of the A-ASSOCIATE service). If it gave a positive 
response, it cannot issue any further primitives for the as- 
sociation. 

9.2.2.7 The ACSE service-provider issues an A-RELEASE 
confirm primitive with an "affirmative" or "negative" value 
for the Result parameter. If the value is "negative", the re- 
questor may once again use any of the services provided by 
the ASEs of the application context that is in effect (with 
the exception of A-ASSOCIATE). 

9.2.2.8 If the value of the Result parameter is "affirmative", 
the association and the underlying presentation-connection 
have been released. 

9.2.2.9 A requestor in either AE may disrupt the A-RELEASE 
service procedure by issuing an A-ABORT request. The ac- 
ceptor receives an A-ABORT indication. The association is 
released with the possible loss of information in transit. 



IS 13615 : 1993 
ISO 8649 : 1988 



9.2.2.10 An A-RELEASE service procedure collision results 
when requestors in both AEs simultaneously issue an A- 
RELEASE service primitive. This can occur only when no 
session tokens are available on the association (see 8.3). In 
this situation, both ACSE service-users receive an unex- 
pected A-RELEASE indication primitive. The following se- 
quence then occurs to complete the normal release of the as- 
sociation. 



a) The association-initiator 
response primitive. 



issues an A-RELEASE 



b) The association-responder waits for an A-RELEASE 
confirm primitive from its peer. When it receives one, it 
then issues an A-RELEASE response primitive. 

c) The association-initiator receives an A-RELEASE con- 
firm primitive 

9.2.2.1 1 The association is released when both ACSE ser- 
vice-users have received an A-RELEASE confirm primitive. 

9.3 A-ABORT service 

The A-ABORT service is used by a requestor in either AE to 
cause the abnormal release of the association. It is a non- 
confirmed service. However, because of the possibility of 
an A-ABORT service procedure collision (see 10.3.5), the 
delivery of the indication primitive is not guaranteed. 
However, both AEs are aware that the association has been 
released. 

9.3.1 A-ABORT parameters 

Table 4 lists the A-ABORT parameters. 

Table 4 • A-ABORT parameters 



Parameter name 


Req 


Ind 


• Abort Source 
User Information 


U 


M 
C( = ) 


• - not used in X.4 1 0-mode 1 



9.3.1.1 Abort Source 

This parameter indicates the initiating source of this abort, 
it takes one of the following symbolic values: 

— ACSE service-user; or 
— ACSE service-provider. 

9.3.1.2 User Information 

The requestor may optionally include user information on the 
request primitive. Its meaning depends on the application 
context that is in effect. 

NOTE — When ACSE is supported with version 1 of the session- 
protocol (ISO 8327), this parameter is subject to length restnc- 
tJons mentioned in 8.3. For use with version 1, the A-ABORT 
service procedure does not transfer any of its own semantics, 



thus allowing the maximum possible length for presentation data 
value(s) of the User Information parameter, in this situation, the 
Abort Source parameter of the A-ABORT indication primitive al- 
ways indicates "ACSE service-user." 

9.3.2 A-ABORT service procedure 

9.3.2.1 The A-ABORT service procedure has a one-to-one 
correspondence with the P-U-ABORT service defined in ISO 
8822. When the A-ABORT service is used, the association 
is abnormally released simultaneously with the abnormal 
release of the underlying presentation-connection. 

9.3.2.2 An ACSE service-user that desires to abnormally 
release the association issues the A-ABORT request primi- 
tive. This requestor cannot issue any further primitives for 
the association. 

9.3.2.3 The ACSE service-provider issues an A-ABORT in- 
dication primitive to the acceptor. The ACSE service- 
provider assigns the value of "ACSE service-user" for the 
Abort Source parameter. The association and the underly- 
ing presentation-connection have been released. 

9.3.2.4 The ACSE service-provider may itself cause the ab- 
normal release of the association because of internal errors 
detected by it. In this case,the ACSE service-provider issues 
A-ABORT indication primitives to acceptors in both AEs. 
The ACSE service-provider assigns the value of "ACSE ser- 
vice-provider" to the Abort Source parameter. The User In- 
formation parameter is not used. 



9.4 A-P-ABORT service 

The A-P-ABORT service is used by the ACSE service- 
provider to signal the abnormal release of the association due 
to problems in services below the Application Layer. This 
occurrence indicates the possible loss of information in tran- 
sit. A-P-ABORT is a provider-initiated service. 

9.4.1 A-P-ABORT parameter 

Table 5 lists the A-P-ABORT parameter. 

Table 5 - A-P-ABORT parameter 



Parameter name 


Ind 


Provider Reason 


P 



Provider Reason: This parameter is as defined in ISO 
8822. 

9.4.2 A-P-ABORT service procedure 

When the ACSE service-provider detects an error reported 
by the underlying presentation-service, it issues A-P-ABORT 
indication primitives to acceptors in both AEs. The associa- 
tion is abnormally released. Requestors in both AEs cannot 
issue any further primitives for the association. 



IS 13615 : 1993 
ISO 8649 : 1988 



10 Sequencing information 

This clause defines the interaction among the ACSE service 
procedures for a particular association. 

10.1 AASSOCIATE 

10.1.1 Type of service 

A-ASSOCIATE is a confirmed service. 

10.1 .2 Usage restrictions 

The A-ASSOCIATE service is not used on an established as- 
sociation. 

10.1 .3 Disrupted service procedures 

The A-ASSOCIATE service procedure does not disrupt any 
other service procedure. 

10.1 .4 Disrupting service procedures 

The A-ASSOCIATE service procedure is disrupted by the A- 
ABORT and the A-P-ABORT service procedures. 

10.1.5 Collisions 

An A-ASSOCIATE service procedure collision results when 
requestors in both AEs simultaneously issue an A-AS- 
SOCIATE request primitive for each other. Both ACSE ser- 
vice-users are issued A-ASSOCIATION Indication primitives 
that represent distinct associations. Both can choose to ac- 
cept or reject the indicated association by issuing an A-AS- 
SOCIATE response primitive with the appropriate value for 
its Result parameter. This will result in the establishment 
of none, one or two associations. 

NOTE — If an AE has several concurrent associations, a local 
mechanism is needed to distinguish between them. 

10.2A-RELEASE 

10^.1 Type of service 

A-RELEASE is a confirmed Service. 

10.2.2 Usage restrictions 

The A-RELEASE service is only used on an established as- 
sociation. 

10.2.3 Disrupted service procedures 

The ArRELEASE service procedure does not disrupt any other 
service procedure. 

10.2.4 Disrupting service proce(dures 

The A-REI^ASE service procedure is disrupted by the A- 
ABORT or A-P-ABORT service procedures. 



10.2.5 Collisioni 

An ArRELEASE service procedure collision results when re- 
questors in both AEs simultaneously issue an A-RELEASE 
request primitive. The processing of A-RELEASE service 
procedure collisions is described in 9.2.2. 

10.2.6 Further sequencing information 

The use of the A-RELEASE service is subject to the con- 
straints on the S-RELEASE service defined in ISO 8326 (see 
8.3). 

10.3A-ABORT 

10.3.1 Type of service 

A-ABORT is an non-confirmed service. 

10.3.2 Usage restrictions 

The A-ABORT service has effect only when used on an as- 
sociation in the process of establishment, on an established 
association, or on an association in the process of being 
released. 

10.3.3 Disrupted service procedures 

The A-ABORT service procedure disrupts the A-ASSOCIATE 
and A-RELEASE service procedures. 

10.3.4 Disrupting service procedures 

The A-ABORT service procedure is disrupted by the A-P- 
ABORT service procedure. 

10.3.5 Collisions 

An A-ABORT service procedure collision results when re- 
questors in both AEs simultaneously issue the A-ABORT re- 
quest primitive. The collision processing is governed by the 
P-U-ABORT service defined in ISO 8822. In this situation, 
neither A-ABORT indication primitive is issued. 

10.3.6 Fijrther sequencing information 

Any use of the A-ABORT service results in the abnormal 
release of the association, or the abnormal termination of 
the A-ASSOCIATE service procedure or the A-RELEASE ser- 
vice procedure with possible loss of information. 

10.4 A-P-ABORT 

10.4.1 Type of service 

A-P-ABORT is a provider-initiated service. 

10.4.2 Usage restrictions 

No restrictions are placed on the occurrence of this service. 



10 



IS 13615 : 1993 
ISO 8649 : 1988 



10.4.3 Disniptad Mrvlce procaduret 10.4.4 Disrupting service procedures 

The A-P-ABORT service procedure disrupts all other service The A-P-ABORT service procedure is not disrupted by any 

procedures. other service procedure. 



11 



IS 13615 : 1003 
ISO 8640 : 1088 



ISO 
8649 



AMENDMENT 1 : Authentication during association 
establishment 



{MOVE THE INTRODUCTION iTHB ORIGINAL CLAUSE 01 TO THE 
FRONT Of THE INTERNA TIONAL STANDARD AS A PRELIMINARY 
ELEMENT, WHEN THIS IS DONE, THE INTRODUCTION WILL BE ON 
PAGE "^iv^AND THE NUMBERS PRECEDING THE PARAGRAPHS 
OF THE ORIGINAL CLAUSE WILL BE DELETED, } 

Introduction 

{MODIFY THE FOURTH PARAGRAPH (I.E. THE ORIGINAL 0,4) AS 
FOLLOWS,) 

Oi4 This International Standard defines services provided by 
the application service element for application-association 
control: the Association Control Service Element (ACSE). 
The ACSE provides basic facilities for the control of an 
application-association between two application-entities 
that communicate by means of a presentation-connection. 
#f The ACSE Includes a functional unit for exchanging infor- 
mation in support of authentication during association estab- 
lishment. The ACSE services apply to a wide range of ap- 
plication-process communication requirements. » 

1 Scope 

{INSERT THE FOLLOWING TEXT AS THE NEW SECOND PARA- 
GRAPH OF CLAUSE t,] 

Two functional units are defined in the ACSE. The mandatory 
Kernel functional unit is used to establish and release applica- 
tion-associations. The optional Authentication functional 
unit provides additional facilities for exchanging information 
in support of authentication during association estab- 
lishment without adding services. The ACSE authentication 
facilities may be used to support a limited class of authen- 
tication methods. 

{ END OF INSERTED PARAGRAPH. ] 



2 ((Normative^ references 

{INSERT THE FOLLOWING TEXT AS THE NEW PARAGRAPH 
UNDER CLA USE 2 BEFORE THE LIST OF REFERENCES. } 

The following standards contain provisions which, through 
reference in this text, constitute provisions of this Interna- 
tional Standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to revision, 
and parties to agreements based on this International Stand- 
ard are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying 
the most recent editions of the standards listed t)elow. 
Members of lEC and ISO maintain registers of currently valid 
International Standards. 

{ADD THE FOLLOWIf>iG REFERENCES. ) 

ISO 7498-2:1 989, Information processing systems — Open 
Systems Interconnection — Basic Reference Model — Part 
2: Security architecture. 

ISO/IEC 9545:1989, Information technology - Open Sys- 
tems Interconnection — Application Layer Structure. 

ISO/IEC 9834-1 \ Information technology — Open Systems 
Interconnection — Procedures for the operation of OSi 
Registration Authorities — f^rt 1: General procedures. 

{ END OF ADDED REFERENCES. ] 

3 Definitions 

3.1 Reference model definitions 

3.1.1 Basic reference model definitions {Niw heading] 

{MOVE TEXT FROM THE ORIGINAL SUBCLAUSE 3. 1 TO THIS 
SUBCLAUSE AND ADD THE FOLLOWING TERMS MAINTAINING 
ALPHABETICAL ORDER) 

application-function 
(N)-function 



1) To be published. 



l$4i61S:1993 
ISO 8649 : 1988 



{INSERT NiW SUBCLAUSE 3. 1,2.] 

3.1.2 Security architecture definitions {New\ 

TNs International Standard makes use of the following terms 
defined in ISO 7498-2: 

a) credentials; 

b) password; and 

c) peer-entity authentication. 
{BND OF INSERTED SUBCLAUSE 3.1.2.} 

3.1.3 Naming and addressing definitions {PREVIOUSLY 3.2) 
[MOVE TEXT FROM ORIGINAL 3.2 TO THIS SUBCLAUSE } 

3.2 Service conventions definitions {PREVIOUSLY 3,3\ 
{MOVE TEXT FROM ORIGINAL 3.3 TO THIS SUBCLAUSE } 

3.3 Presentation service definitions {PREVIOUSLY 3.4) 
{MOVE TEXT FROM THE ORIGINAL 3.4 TO THIS SUBCLAUSE ) 

3.4 ACSE service definitions {PREVIOUSLY 3.5) 

{MOVE TEXT FROM THE ORIGINAL 3.6 TO THIS SUBCLAUSE AND 
ADD THE POLL OWING DEFINITIONS MAINTAINING AL PHABETICAL 
ORDER.) 

3.4._ authentication: The corroboration of the identity of 
objects relevant to the establishment of an association. For 
example, theie can include the AEs, APs, and the human 
users of applications. 

NOTE — This term has been defined to make it clear that a wider 
scope of authentication is being addressed than is covered by 
peer-entity authentication in ISO 7498-2. 

3.4._ authentication-function: An application-function 
within an application-entity invocation that processes and 
exchanges authentication-values with a peer authentication- 
function. 

3.4._ authentication-value: The output from an authentica- 
tion-function to be transferred to a peer ACSE service-user 
for input to the peer's authentication-function. 

3.4._ authentication-meciianism: The specification of a 
specific set of authentication-function rules for defining, 
processing, and transferring authentication-values. 

{INSERT NEW SUBCLAUSE 3.5. } 

3.5 Application Layer Structure definitions {NEW) 

This Intemational Standard makes use of the following terms 
defined in ISO/IEC 9545: 

a) application-entity invocation; 

b) single association control function; and 

c) single association object. 
{END OF INSERTED SUBCLAUSE 3.5.) 



4 Abbreviations 

{ADD THE FOLLOWING ABBREVIATIONS MAINTAINING AL- 
PHABETICAL ORDER.] 

AEI application-entity Invocation 

SACF single association control function 

SAO single association object 

{ END OF ' ODED ABBREVIA TIONS. } 

5 Conventions {NO CHANGE] 

{NO CHANGE IS MADE TO THIS CLA USE ) 

6 Basic concepts 

{USING THE ORIGINAL CLAUSE 6 AS A BASE, REPLACE CLAUSE 
6 WITH THE FOLLOWING TEXT.) 

{INSERT NEW HEADING 6. 1. MOVE ORIGINAL PARAGRAPHS 6. 1 
THROUGH 6.4 UNDER THIS NEW HEADING AS PARAGRAPHS 
6. 1. 1 THROUGH 6. 1.4. THEN INSERT NEW PARAGRAPHS 6. 1.5 
THROUGH 6. 1. 7. ALSO, INSERT NEW SUBCLAUSE 6.2) 

6.1 General {new heading) 

6.1.1 The reference model (ISO 7498) represents com- 
munication between a pair of application-processes ( APs) in 
terms of communication between their application-entities 
( AEs) using the presentation-service. The functionality of an 
AE is factored into a number of application-service-elements 
(ASEs). The interaction between AEs is described in terms 
of the use of their ASEs' services. 

6.1.2 This International Standard introduces the additional 
modeling concepts of application-association and applica- 
tion context. 

6.1 .3 An application-association is a cooperative relationship 
between two AEs. It provides the necessary frame of refer- 
ence between the AEs in order that they may interwork 
effectively. This relationship is formed by the exchange of 
application-protocol-control-information between the ap- 
plication-entities through their use of presentation-services. 

6.1.4 An application context is an explicitly identified set of 
application-service-elements, related options and any other 
necessary information for the interworking of application-en- 
tities on an application association. 

6.1.5 |>vfwj The ACSE service-user is that part of an applica- 
tion-entity that makes use gf ACSE services. It may be the 
single association control function (SACF) or an ASE or some 
combination of the two. 

6. 1 .6 i^fwi An ASE standard does not need to specify the use 
of ACSE service primitive parameters that are not relevant 
to the operation of the ASE. It may be assumed that the 
SACF passes such parameters between the ACSE service- 
provider and that part of the AEI to which the parameters are 
relevant. 

6.1.7 (/vfMO As an example, consider the authentication 
parameters of the Authentication functional unit discussed 
below in 6.2. The SACF may be used to model the passing 
of authentication-values between the authentication-func- 



1813616:1993 
ISO 8649 : 1988 



tion and the ACSE service-provider. An ASE that references 
ACSE need not be concerned with these parameters. 

6.2 Authentication {new\ 

This International Standard includes the Authentication 
functional unit. The functional unit allows APIs, AEIs and 
their related objects to exchange authentication information 
during the establishment of an association. 

6.2.1 Authentication concepts 

This International Standard includes the modeling concepts 
of authentication-function, authentication-mechanism, 
authentication-mechanism ndme and authentication-value. 
Each is discussed below. 

6.2.1.1 Authentication-function 

6.2.1.1.1 For this International Standard, authentication is 
supported by a pair of authentication-functions. An authen- 
tication-function is modeled as an application-function (i.e., 
iS an (N)-function as defined in ISO 7498) that is available 
o the ACSE service-user. Each is contained within the as- 
sociated AEIs. 

L2.1.1.2 Modeling the authentication-function in this way 
illows ACSE to deal with authentication communication 
equirements without having to understand the semantics of 
he security information exchanged or how it is used. 

J.2.1 .2 Authentication-mechanism 
L2.1.2.1 An authentication-mechanism is a particular 
jpecification of the processing to be performed by a pair of 
ipplication-functions for authentication. A specification 
:ontains the rules for creating, sending, receiving and 
Kocessing information needed for authentication. 

>.2.1.2.2 Annex B in ISO 8650 is an example of an authen- 
:ication-mechanism. It defines the authentication of the 
sending AEI based on its AE title and its password. The 
Dassword is contained in the Authentication-value 
parameter. 

6.2.1.3 Authentication-mechanism name 

6.2.1.3.1 An authentication-mechanism name is used to 
specify a particular authentication-mechanism. For example, 
the name of the authentication-mechanism specified in ISO 
8650 annex B is assigned (i.e., registered) in the annex. The 
value has the data type of an OBJECT IDENTIFIER. 

6.2.1.3.2 An authentication-mechanism name may also be 
used to specify a more general security mechanism that 
includes an authentication-mechanism. An example of a 
general security mechanism is an ASE that provides security 
facilities to its service-user). 

6.2.1.3.3 Authentication-mechanism names and general 
security mechanism names are subject to registr9tion within 
OSI (see clause 1 2 in ISO 8650). 

6.2.1 .4 Authentication-value 

6.2.1.4.1 An authentication-value consists of information 
used by a pair of authentication-functions to perform authen- 
tication. It can consist of information such as, credentials, a 
time-stamp, a digital signature, etc. It can also identify the 



type and/or name of object to be authenticated, such as the 
AE, a human user, etc. 

6.2.1.4.2 The semantic structure of an authentication-value 
is specified by the authentication-mechanism involved. 

6.2.1 .4.3 An authentication-function provides an authentica- 
tion-value to its AEI to be sent to the peer AEI. The peer AEI's 
authentication-function receives and processes this authen- 
tication-value. For example, it may use the value to authen- 
ticate objects at the sending AEI. 

6.2.1.4.4 An authentication-mechanism may be part of a 
ASE that provides security facilities to its service-user. In 
this situation, the authentication-mechanism name iden- 
tifies the ASE; the authentication-value is an APDU of the 
ASE. 

6.2.2 ACSE authentication facilities 

6.2.2.1 The ACSE Kernel functional unit does not support 
authentication. However, AP Title, AE Qualifier, AP invoca- 
tion-identifier and AE invocation-identifier values are option- 
ally transferred during the establishment of an association. 
They may be used to identify the calling, called and respond- 
ing AEIs. 

6.2.2.2 The ACSE Authentication functional unit supports 
the transfer of authentication-values as part of the A-AS- 
SOCIATE service. An authentication-value is treated as an 
atomic item by ACSE. Its semanticr are transparent to the 
ACSE service-provider. 

6.2.2.3 The facilities of the Authentication functional unit 
may be used to convey other security-related information. 
This may be done with the transfer of authentication infor- 
mation during association establishment. 

{END OF REPLACED CLAUSE 6.) 



7 Service overview 

[INSERT THE NEW HEADING 7, 1. ) 

7.1 ACSE services [new heading) 

{MOVE THE PARAGRAPHS UNDER ORIGINAL CLAUSE 7 TO THIS 
SUBCLAUSE AND RENUMBER THE PARAGRAPHS ACCORDINGL Y. 
THEN INSERT NEW SUBCLAUSE 7.2. ) 

1,1 Functional units [new\ 

7.2.1 Functional units are used by this International Standard 
to identify ACSE user requirements during association estab- 
lishment. Two functional units are defined: 

a) Kernel functional unit; and 

b) Authentication functional unit> 

7.2.2 The Kernel functional unit is always available, and 
includes the basic services identified in 7. 1 . 

7.2.3 The Authentication functional unit supports authen- 
tication during association establishment. The availability of 
this functional unit is negotiated during association estab- 
lishment. This functional unit does not include additional 



IS 13616: 1993 
ISO 8649 : 1988 



services. It adds parameters to the A-ASSOCIATE and A- 
ABORT services. 

7.2.4 Table a shows the services and parameters associated 
with the ACSE functional units. The services and their 
parameters are discussed in clause 9. 

{fNSBRT NE>A/ TABLE a. RBNUMBER THE REMAINING TABLES 
AND ADJUST REFERENCES TO THESE TABLES IN THE TEXT.) 



8 Relationship with other ASEs and lower layer 
services {NO CHANGE] 

{NO CHANGE IS MADE TO THIS CLAUSE.] 

9 Service definition 

{NO CHANGE TO THE INTRODUCTORY TEXT] 



9.1 A*ASSOCiATE service 

{NO CHANGE TO THE INTRODUCTORY TEXT] 

9.1.1 A-ASSOaATE parameters 

{TABLE 2 - ADD THE FOLLOWING PARAMETERS AFTER 

Responding AE Invocathn-ldenttfler, ] 
ACSE Requirements U C C C(b) 

Authentication-fnechanism Name U C(») U C(b) 
Authentication-value U C(") U C{») 

{INSERT NEW SUBCLAUSES 9. /. /. 14a, 9, 1. 1. 14b AND 
9. /. /. f4c AFTER SUBCLAUSE 9. 1. 1. 14 Responding AE Invoca- 
tion-ldenttfler. ] 

9. 1 . 1 . 1 4a ACSE Requirements {m£w\ 

This parameter is used by the requestor to indicate the 

functional units requested for the association. If not present. 



Table a - 


- Functional unit services and their parameters {new} 


Functional Unit 


Service 


Parameter 


Kernel 


A-ASSOCIATE 


Mode 

Application Context Name 

Calling AP Title 

Calling AE Qualifier 

Calling AP Invocation-identifier 

Calling AE Invocation-identifier 

Called AP Title 

Called AE Qualifier 

Called AP Invocationndentifier 

Called AE Invocation-identifier 

Responding AP Title 

Responding AE Qualifier 

Responding AP Invocation-identifier 

Responding AE Invocation-identifier 

User Information 

Result 

Result Source 

Diagnostic 

Calling Presentation Address 

Called Presentation Address 

Responding Presentation Address 

Presentation Context Definition List 

Presentation Context Definition Result List 

Default Presentation Context Name 

Default Presentation Context Result 

Quality of Service 

Session Requirements 

Initial Synchronization Point Serial Number 

Initial Assignment of Tokens 

Session-connection Identifier 




A-RELEASE 


Reason 

User Information 

Result 




A-ABORT 


Abort Source 
User Information 




A-P-ABORT 


Provider Reason 


Authentication 


A-ASSOCIATE 


Authentication-mechanism Name 
Authentication-value 




A-ABORT 


Diagnostic 



Primed at Dee Kiy Prinicn* Hew Delhi, India 



1813615:1993 
ISO 8649 : 1988 



only the Kernel functional unit'is available for the association. 
In supporting this negotiation mechanism, the ACSE service- 
provider removes values for unsupported functional units 
before issuing the indication primitive to the acceptor. 

This parameter is used by the acceptpr to indicate which of 
the requested functional units the acceptor selects. The 
acceptor shall not select a functional unit in the response 
primitive which was not requested in the indication primitive. 

The value of the parameter in the response primitive is 
delivered unchanged in the confirm primitive. 

This parameter takes on the following symbolic value: 

— authentication. 

9.1 .1 .14b Authentication-mechanism Name \New\ 
This parameter is only used if the ACSE Requirements 
parameter includes the Authentication functional unit. If 
present, the value of this parameter identifies the authentica- 
tion-mechanism in use. If not present, the communicating 
AEIs must implicitly know the mechanism in use, e.g., by 
prior understanding. 

NOTES 

1 Some authentication-mechanisms may require this parameter, 
and if so, will state this in their specification. 

2 This parameter may specify a more general authentication 
mechanism. For example, it may specify an ASE that provides 
security facilities to its service-user. 

9. 1 . 1 . 1 4c Authentication-value {new\ 

This parameter shall only be used if the ACSE Requirements 
parameter includes the Authentication functional unit. 

The Authentication-value pararneter is used as defined 
below. 

a) If present on the request or the response primitive, it 
contains an authentication-value generated by the 
authentication-function in the AEI that issued the service 
primitive. It is intended for the peer's authentication-func- 
tion. 

b) If present on the indication or the confirm primitive, it . 
contains an authentication-value generated by the 
authentication-function in the AEI that issued the cor- 
responding request or response primitive. It is intended 
for the peer's authentication-function. 

{END OF INSERTED SUBCLAUSES 9, 1. 1.9. 9, 1. l.bAND 9, 1. I.e.} 
9.1.1.18 Diagnostic 

{REPLACE THE FIRST PARAGRAPH USING THE FOLLOWING 
TEXT.) 

This parameter may be used by the acceptor to provide 
diagnostic information about the establishment of the as- 
sociation. 



{ TO THE LIST OF SYMBOLIC VALUES FOR THE ACSE SERVICE- 
USER ADD THE FOLLOWING.) 

Authentication-mechanism Name not recognized; 

Authentication-mechanism Name required; 

Authentication failure; or 

Authentication required. 

{END OF ADDED SYMBOLIC VALUES. ) 

9.1 .2 A- ASSOCIATE procedure (/vo chams£] 
{NO CHANGE IS MADE TO THIS SUBCLAUSE. ) 

9.2 A-RELEASE service {NO change) 

{ NO CHANGE IS MADE TO THIS SUBCLA USE. ) 

9.3 A-ABORT service 

{NO CHANGE TO THE INTRODUCTORY TEXT) 

9.3.1 A-ABORT parameters 

{ TABLE 4 - ADD THE FOLLOWING PARAMETER AFTER Abort 
Source. ) 

Diagnostic U C( ^^ ) 

{RENUMBER THE ORIGINAL 9.3.1.2 AS 9.3.1.3. INSERT NEV^ 
SUBCLAUSE 9.3. 1.2 USING THE FOLLOWING TEXT.) 

9.3.1.2 Diagnostic 

The requestor may optionally include diagnostic inf ormatior 
on the request primitive. It takes one of the following sym 
bolic values: 

No reason given; 

Protocol error; 

Authentication-mechanism Name not recognized; 

Authentication-mechanism Name required; 

Authentication failure; or 

Authentication required. 

9.3.2 A-ABORT service procedure \no change] 
{NO CHANGE IS MADE TO THIS SUBCLA USE ) 

9.4 A-P-ABORT service {NO Change) 

{NO CHANGE IS MADE TO THIS SUBCLA USE. ) 

10 Sequencing information {NO CHANGE) 

{NO CHANGE IS MADE TO THIS CLA USE. ) 



Primed at Dee Kay Printers, New Delhi, India 



IS 13615 : 1003 
ISO 8640 : 1088 



ISO 
8649 



AMENDMENT 2: 
Service 



Connectionless-mode ACSE 



[MOVE THE INTRODUCTION (THE ORIGINAL 
CLAUSE 0) TO THE FRONT OF THE 
INTERNATIONAL STANDARD AS A PRELIMINARY 
ELEMENT. WHEN THIS IS DONE. THE 
INTRODUCTION WILL BE ON PAGE "iv" AND THE 
NUMBERS PRECEDING THE PARAGRAPHS OF THE 
ORIGINAL CLAUSE WILL BE DELETED.] 



Introduction 

[ADD AN ADDITIONAL PARAGRAPH FOLLOWING 
THE FOURTH PARAGRAPH AS FOLLOWS.) 

ACSE provides both conncciion-oricntcd and connectionless 
mode of service. For its connccLion-orienicd services, the 
ACSE uses presentation connection-oriented services (ISO 
8822). For the connectionless service, the ACSE uses the 
presentation connectionless service (ISO 8822/Amd.l). 



1 Scope 

[DELETE THE FIRST PARAGRAPH AND REPLACE 
WITH THE FOLLOWING THREE PARAGRAPHS] 

This International Standard defines ACSE services for 
application-association control in an open systems 
interconnection environment. 

The ACSE connection -oriented services arc provided by the 
use of the connection-oriented ACSE protocol (ISO 8650) 
in conjunction with the connection-oriented presentation- 
service (ISO 8822). These ACSE services assume as a 
minimum the use of the presentation-service connection- 
oriented Kernel functional unit. 

The ACSE connectionless-mode service (A-UNIT-DATA) is 
provided by the use of the connectionless ACSE protocol 
(ISO/IEC 1(X)35) in conjunction with the connectionless- 
mode presentation-service (P-UNIT-DATA • ISO 
8822/Amd.l). 



2 Normative References 

[ADD THE FOLLOWING REFERENCES] 

ISO 7498/Add.l: 1987, Information processing systems - 
Open Systems Interconnection - Basic Reference Model - 
Addendum I: Connectionless-mode transmission. 

ISO/IEC 10035: 1991. Information technology - Open 
Systems Interconnection - Connectionless ACSE Protocol 
to provide to Provide the Connectionless-mode ACSE 
Service. 

ISO 8822/Amd.l: 1991, Information processing systems - 
Open Systems Interconnection - Connection oriented 
presentation service definition - Amendment I: 
Connectionless mode presentation service. 



3 Definitions 

3.1 Reference Model DefinitioDS 

3.1.1 Basic reference model definitions 

[REPLACE THE SENTENCE UNDER 3. 1. 1 WITH THE 
FOLLOWING TEXT] 

This International Standard is based on the concepts 
developed in ISO 7498 and 7498/Add.l and makes use of 
the following terms defined in them: 

[ADD THE FOLLOWING TO THE UST OF TERMS 
ACCORDING TO THE ALPHABETICAL ORDER:] 

- connectionless-mode presentation-service; 

- (N)-connectionless-mode transmission. 

3.3 Presentation service definitions 

[REPLACE THE TEXT UNDER 3.3 WITH THE 
FOLLOWING] 

This International Standard makes use of the following 
terms defined in ISO 8822 and ISO 8822/Add.l. 



[ADD THE FOLLOWING TO THE UST OF TERMS] 



IS 13615 : 1903 
ISO 8649 : 1988 



h) connectionless mode (presentation] 

3.4 ACSE service deHnitions 

[REPLACE 3,4,1 WITH THE FOLLOWING TEXT] 

3.4.1 application-association: A cooperative relationship 
between application-entity invocations which enables the 
communication of information and the coordination of their 
joint operation for an instance of communication. This 
relationship is formed by the transfer of application- 
protocol-control-information using the presentation service. 

4 Abbreviations {NO CHANGE] 

[NO CHANGE IS MADE TO THIS CLAUSE,] 

5 Conventions [NO CHANGE] 

[NO CHANGE IS MADE TO THIS CLAUSE,] 



6 Basic concepts 

[REPLACE THE THIRD SENTENCE OF 6.1,3 WITH 
THE FOLLOWING TEXT] 

This relationship is formed by the communication of 
application-protocol-control-information between the 
application-entity invocations through their use of 
presentation-services. 



7 Service overview 

[ADD TO THE END OF THE USTIN 7.1 ] 

e) A-UNTT-DATA. 

[ADD THE FOLLOWING] 

7.9 The A-UNIT-DATA service provides a service for 
information transfer between AEIs using the connectionless- 
mode presentation service. 

8 Relationships to other ASEs and lower l^yer 
services 

8.2 Presentation-service 

[ADD THE FOLLOWING] 



%2jS The A-UNIT-DATA service requires access to the P- 
UNTT-DATA service. 



9 Service definition 

[REPLACE TABLE 1] 

Table 1 > ACSE-serviccs 



MODE 


SERVICE 


TYPE 


Connection oriented 


A-ASSOCIATE 
A-RELEASE 
A'ABORT 
AP-ABORT 


Confirmed 
Confinned 
Non-confirmed 
Provider initiated 


Connectionless 


A-UNIT-DATA 


Non-confirmed 



[ADD THE FOLLOWING NEW SUBCLAUSE 9.5] 

9.5 A-UNIT-DATA service 

The A-UNIT-DATA service is used to transfer information 
between AEIs using connectionless-mode presentation 
services. It is a non-confirmed service. 

9.5.1 A-UNIT-DATA Parameters 

Table 7 lists the A-UNIT-DATA service parameters. In 
addition, groups of parameters are defined for reference by 
other ASEs as follows: 

a) Calling AE Title is the composite of the Calling AP 
' Title and the Calling AE Qualifier parameters; and 

b) called AE Title is the composite of the Called AP 
Title and the Called AE Qualifier parameters; 

The two components of the AE title (AP title and AE 
qualifier) are defined in ISO 7498-3. 

9.5.1.1 Application Context Name 

This parameter identifies the application context which 
applies to this instance of communication. It is nominated 
by the requestor. 



IS 13615 : 1993 
ISO 8649 : 1988 



9.5.1.2 Calling AP Title 

This parameter identifies the AP whose invocation contains 
the requestor of the A-UNTT-DATA service. 

9.5.1.3 Calling AE Qualifier 

This parameter identifies a particular AE within an AP 
whose invocation is involved in the current exchange. The 
associated AE invocation contains the requestor of the A- 
UNIT-DATA service. 

9.5.1.4 Calling AP Invocation-identifier 

This parameter identifies the AP invocation that contains 
the requestor of the A-UNTT-DATA service. 

9.5.1.5 Calling AE Invocation-identifier 

This parameter identifies the particular AE invocation which 
is involved in the current exchange. The associated AE 
invocation contains the requestor of the A-UNIT-DATA 
service. 

9.5.1.6 Called AP Title 

This parameter identifies the AP whose invocation contains 
the intended acceptor of the A-UNIT-DATA service. 

9.5.1.7 Called AE Qualifier 

This parameter identifies a particular AE within an AP 
whose invocation is involved in the current exchange. The 



associated AE invocation contains the intended acceptor of 
the A-U?OT-DATA service. 

9.5.1.8 Called AP Invocation-Identifier 

This parameter identifies the AP invocation that contains 
the intended acceptor of the A-UNIT-DATA service. 

9.5.1.9 Called AE Invocation-identifier 

This parameter identifies the particular AE invocation which 
is involved in the current exchange. The associated AE 
invocation contains the intended acceptor of the A-UNIT- 
DATA service. 

9.5.1.10 User Information 

The user information parameter is mandatory. The meaning 
of this parameter depends on the application context that 
accompanies the primitive. 

NOTE- The amount of user infonnation which can be transferred 
is limited by the underlying presentation service provider. 

9.5.1.11 Calling Presentation Address 

This parameter is as defined in ISO 8822/Amd. 1 . 

9.5.1.12 Called Presentation Address 

This parameter is as defined in ISO 8822/Amd. 1 . 



Table 7 - A-UNIT-DATA parameters 




Parameter Name 


Req 


Ind 


Application Context Name 


M 


M(=) 


Calling AP.Title 


U 


C{=) 


Calling AE Qualifier 


U 


C(=) 


Calling AP Invocation-identifier 


U 


C(=) 


Calling AE Invocation-identifier 


u 


C(=) 


Called AP Title 


u 


C(=) 


Called AE Qualifier 


u 


a=) 


Called AP Invocation-identifier 


u 


C(=) 


Called AE Invocation-identifier 


u 


C(=) 


User Infonnation 


M 


M(=) 


Calling Presentation Address 


P 


p 


Called Presentation Address 


P 


p 


Presentation Context Definition List 


P 


p 


Quality Of Service 


P 





18 13615:1993 
ISO 8649 : 1988 



9.5.L13 Presentation Context Deflnltion List 

This parameter is as defined in ISO 8822/Aindl. 

9.5.1.14 Quality Of Service 

This parameter is as defined in ISO 8822/Amd.l. 

9.5.2 A-UNIT-DATA Procedure 

93.2.1 The A-UNIT-DATA procedure is directly related to 
that defined for P-UNTT-DATA service. 

9.5.2.2 The requestor issues an A-UNIT-DATA request 
primitive. The called AEI is identified by parameters on the 
request i>rimitive. Use of the A-UNIT-DATA service is 
restricted to connectionless operation. 

9.5.2.3 The ACSE service provider issues an A-UNIT- 
DATA indication primitive to the accq>tor. 

9.5.2.4 The acceptor accepts the A-UNIT-DATA 
indication. No response prin)itive is returned. 

10 Sequencing information 

[ADD THE FOLLOWING NEW SUBCLAUSE 10.5) 
10.5 A-UNIT-DATA 



10.5.1 Type Of Service 
A-UNIT-DATA service is a non-confirmed tovice. 

10.5.2 Usage Restrictioiis 

The A-UNIT-DATA service operates completely 
independently from other connection-oriented ACSE 
services. Both forms of communications can occur 
concurrently between any given pair of communicating AE 
invocations. 

10.5.3 Disrupted Services 

The A-UNIT-DATA s^vice does not disrupt any services. 

10.5.4 Disrupting Services 

The A-UNIT-DATA service is not disrupted by any 
services. However, delivery of the A-UNIT-DATA may fail 
without notice because there is no confirmation and failures 
can occur in supporting services. 

10.5.5 Collisions 

The simultaneous issuing of A-UNIT-DATA request from 
two AEIs to each other results in the acceptance of both A- 
UNTT-DATA indication primitives. No collision situation 
results. 



Printed at Dee Kay Priniers, New Delhi- 110015, India 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark 
on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been 
produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system 
of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and 
operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously cheked by 
BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under 
which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or 
producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian standards. 



Birtao of lodiu StMdftras 

BIS if a statutor^r institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards AeU \986 to 
promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality 
certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced 
in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This docs not preclude the free use, 
in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such a^ symbols and sizes, type 
or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director 
( Publications ), BIS 

Revision of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards 
are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review 
indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken 
up for revision Users of Indin Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the 
latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 'BIS Handbook' and 'Standards 
Monthly Additions'. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following 
reference: 

Doc: No. TLD36( 1568 ) 

AmendineBts Issued Since Pabllcatton 

Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 11002 

Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 

Common to all Offices ) 

Regional Offices : Telephone 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 331 01 31 

NEW DELHI 110002 \331 13 75 
Eastern : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola 

CALCUTTA 700054 



r37 84 99, 37 85 61 
\37 86 26, 37 86 62 



f53 38 43, 53 16 40 
I 53 23 84 



Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 

Southern : C. I, T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 -I ' 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) f632 92 95, 632 78 58 



235 02 16. 235 04 42 
235 15 19, 235 23 15 



f 

!« 



BOMBAY 400093 \63278,91, 63278 92 

Branch : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
f^,oU^,5>^,^\.9il^^^^^^^' GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR 
LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Pruted at Piintwell Printers, Alitarb. India 



