EG IPE IE CD IS 16508 : 2017 
Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2022) 


Masten Aura — MAT afer 


Swimming Pool for Public — 
Code of Safety 


ICS 97.220.10 


© BIS 2017 


ada AM sd 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
TT “ad, 9 FGM WAL Bri, ae fereit-110002 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


September 2017 Price Group 5 


Occupational Health and Safety and Chemical Hazards Sectional Committee, CHD 08 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Occupational 
Health and Safety and Chemical Hazards Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division 
Council. 


Number of accidents happen due to non availability of appropriate safety arrangements as well as poor quality of 
maintenance and operation of swimming pools. Provisions for safety parameters like water quality, availability of 
competent swimming coach/qualified instructor, life buoy, life jacket, artificial resuscitator, oxygen cylinder, 
provision of showers, first-aid box, medical attendant, telephone facility; lighting arrangements, etc, are to be 
considered right from the design stage so as to provide safe and quality service to the customers. Further, in India 
most of the cities are facing acute water shortages. Swimming pool thus needs to be designed taking into 
consideration recirculation of water with proper disinfection as well as various safety factors so as to conserve 
water. 


The objective of this standard is to provide recommended minimum guidelines for the design, operation and 
maintenance of the swimming pool. It is also intended to assist the regulatory bodies in the implementation of 
public swimming pool criteria for safe operation. 


There is no ISO standard on this subject. In the formulation of this standard, assistance has been taken from the 
following publications: 
a) ANSI/NSPI-1-1991 Standard for public swimming pool 


b) Public Health Chapter I: Department of Public Health Subchapter N: Recreational Facilities Part 820 
Illinois Swimming Pool and Bathing Beach Code 


c) The Greater Mumbai Swimming Pools (Licensing and Controlling) Rules, 1972 


IS 16508 : 2017 


Indian Standard 
SWIMMING POOL FOR PUBLIC — CODE OF SAFETY 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard prescribes the code of safe practices 
for aspects of design, operation and maintenance of 
public swimming pool, keeping in view general and 
specific safety requirements. 


1.2 This Code is not intended to contravene the 
provision of any of the existing Government 
regulations. It is the responsibility of the user of this 
Code to establish appropriate safety and health practices 
and comply with regulatory and statutory requirements. 


1.3 This Code does not address residential and above 
ground swimming pools. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions which 
through reference in this text constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 


IS No. Title 
3328 : 1993 Quality tolerances for water for 
swimming pools (first revision) 
6494 : 1988 Code of practice for water-proofing 


of underground water reservoirs and 
swimming pools 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard the following 
definitions shall apply. 


3.1 Appurtenance — An accessory facility or feature 
at a swimming pool, such as a diving board, slide, 
wading pool, plunge pool, spray pool. 


3.2 Bather Load — The maximum number of persons 
that may be allowed in the pool area at one time without 
creating undue health or safety hazards. 


3.3 Deep Area — An area of a swimming pool in which 
the water depth exceeds five feet. 


3.4 Diving Pool — A pool designed and intended for 
use exclusively for diving. 


3.5 Drop Slide — A slide with an exit angle exceeding 
11° measured downward from the horizontal. 


3.6 Inlet — An opening or fitting through which 
filtered water enters the pool. 


3.7 Main Drain — The outlet or outlets in the floor 
of the pool. 


3.8 Make-up Water — The water added to a pool to 
replace that which is lost. 


3.9 Manager/Operator — The person or entity 
responsible for the actual daily operation, or for the 
supervision of the operation, of a swimming pool or 
bathing beach. 


3.10 Pool — A swimming pool or other recreational 
water basin utilized in conjunction with or as an 
appurtenance to a swimming pool. 


NOTE — The term does not refer to spas and therapy pools not 
designed or intended for swimming or to basins for individual 
use that are drained after each use. 


3.11 Pool Depth — The vertical distance between the 
pool floor and the water level. 


3.12 Qualified Life Guard — A qualified and trained 
person, stationed at the top of a water slide and 
responsible for ensuring safe use of the slide. 


3.13 Shallow Area — An area in a swimming pool, in 
which the water depth does not exceed 1.5 m at any 
point. 


3.14 Skimmer — A mechanical device connected to 
the recirculation piping which is used to skim the pool 
surface. 


3.15 Transition Point — A location in a shallow area 
of a swimming pool where an area, having a floor slope 
of no more than 30 cm vertical in 3.65 m horizontal, 
adjoins an area where the floor slope exceeds one in 
12. 


3.16 Turnover Period — The time required to 
recirculate a volume of water equivalent to the water 
volume of the pool through the filtration system. 


3.17 Wading Pool — A pool having a water depth not 
exceeding 76 cm. 


3.18 Water Level — The level of the overflow lip of 
a perimeter overflow system or the mid-level of surge 
weirs, if present, or the mid-level of the skimmer 
operating range. 


3.19 Zero-Depth Edge — That portion of the 
perimeter of a zero-depth pool where the pool floor 


IS 16508 : 2017 


intersects the pool water surface. 


3.20 Zero-Depth Pool — A swimming pool where the 
pool floor intersects the water surface along a portion 
of its perimeter. 


4 DESIGN 


4.1 Structure 


The pool should be so designed to withstand all 
anticipated hydraulic structural loadings for both full 
and empty conditions. All appurtenances to the pool, 
such as diving boards and slides, shall be designed to 
carry the anticipated load. Any obstruction creating a 
safety hazard shall not extend into or above the pool, 
or shall not protrude from the floor of the pool. All 
appurtenances like diving boards, ladders, handrails, 
slides, etc. should not have any sharp edges or surfaces. 
Decks and walkways should not have any projections 
from the floor. Designers may refer IS 6494 for 
providing the guidance on the procedures and the 
precautions to be taken during construction of 
swimming pool to ensure the water tightness of the 
structure. 


4.2 Material 


Any suitable materials that are non-toxic and provide 
arigid watertight shell with a smooth, impervious, light 
coloured finish should be used to construct the pool. 
The floor of shallow areas shall have a slip-resistant 
finish. Sand or earth shall not be permitted to be used 
as an interior finish in a swimming pool. 


4.3 Dimensions 


The shape and size of a pool largely depend on the 
usage. Shape should be considered from the standpoint 
of safety and circulation of the pool water. 


NOTES 
1 A long and rectangular pool may be ideal for sports and 


RADIUS 
SLOPE 1 IN 12 


exercise as it gives length and breadth, but the shape of a pool 
for recreation largely depend on the choice of the owners, 
available space for making the pool and the design of the house. 


2 In sports normally the swimming pool are 50 m long, 
minimum 21 m wide and 1.8 m overall depth. 


4.4 Floor Slopes 


Slope of the floor of the pool should be made downward 
toward the main drain. All slopes should be uniform. 
The slope in shallow areas should not exceed 30 cm 
vertical in 3.6 m horizontal except for a slope directed 
downward from a transition point, which shall not 
exceed 30 cm vertical in 1m horizontal. In portions of 
the pool with a depth greater than 1.5 m, the front slope 
of the deep area shall not be steeper than 30 cm in | m. 
The slope requirements are shown in Fig. 1. 


4.5 Transition Point 


Transition points should be marked with a stripe on 
the pool floor having a width of at least 10 cm and a 
colour that contrasts with that of the floor, and with a 
buoyed safety rope with coloured buoys, installed at 
least 30 cm on the shallow side of the transition point. 
In pools having adjoining shallow and deep areas, a 
safety rope with colored buoys shall be installed where 
the water depth reaches 1.5 m. 


4.6 Pool Walls 


4.6.1 Where the pool depth is 1 m or less, pool walls 
shall be vertical to the floor and the junction of the 
wall with the floor shall consist of a cove with a radius 
not exceeding 15 cm. Where the pool depth exceeds 
1 m, pool walls shall meet one of the following criteria: 


a) The wall shall be vertical for a distance of at 
least 1.5 m below the water level, below which 
the wall may angle to the floor; or 

b) The wall shall be vertical for a distance of at 
least 1 m below the water level, below which 


RADIUS OR 
BACK SLOPE 


BOTTOM 
SLOPE 


All dimensions in metre. 


Fic. 1 SLOPE oF POOL FLOOR 


2 


the wall shall form a curve to the floor. The 
curve shall be tangent to the pool wall and 
shall have a radius of curvature at least equal 
to the vertical distance between the centre of 
curvature and the pool floor. 


4.6.2 All junctions between pool walls, and between 
pool walls and the pool floor, shall be coved with a 
minimum radius of 25 mm. 


4.7 Water Depth 


Water depth at the shallow end of the swimming pool 
should be around | m. The beginner’s area of the pool 
shall be visually set apart from, but may be adjoined to 
the shallow area and shall not adjoin to the deep area. 


4.8 Walkways and Deck Areas 


4.8.1 Pools shall be completely surrounded by a deck 
that is at least 1.2 m in width and extends completely 
around and adjacent to the pool. There shall be no 
obstructions or interruptions of the pool deck within 
the 1.2 m adjacent to the pool other than necessary 
structural supports, or appurtenances such as diving 
boards, slides, perimeter overflow systems, or 
handrails. A clear, unobstructed walkway at least 1.1 m 
in width shall be maintained at such obstructions or 
interruptions. 


4.8.2 Structural supports located within the minimum 
required deck width or within 1.2 m of the swimming 
pool shall be no closer than 3 m apart measured parallel 
to the adjacent perimeter of the pool, with the dimension 
of any single support in a plane parallel to the adjacent 
pool perimeter not greater than | m and the sum of all 
such support dimensions no greater than 10 percent of 
the pool perimeter. 


4.8.3 The deck between two adjacent swimming pools 
shall be at least 2.5 m wide. All decks and walkways 
shall have an unobstructed overhead clearance of at 
least 2 m. 


4.8.4 Synthetic material which meets the following 
criteria may be installed for deck coverings: 


a) Non-fibrous that allows drainage such that it 
will not remain wet or retain moisture; 

b) Inert and will not support bacterial or fungal 
growth; 

c) Durable; 

d) Cleanable; and 

e) Provides a slip-resistant finish. 


4.8.5 The decks and walkways shall have a paved 
surface. The surface of the pool deck, and other surfaces 
used for foot contact, such as gratings of perimeter 
overflow systems, shall be slip-resistant. 


IS 16508 : 2017 


4.8.6 The outer perimeter of the deck for outdoor pools 
shall be at least 10 cm higher than the surrounding 
ground surface except where access is provided to 
adjacent turf areas. 


4.9 Ladders, Step-Holes, Steps and Ramps 


4.9.1 Swimming pool shall have at least two means of 
egress, located near opposite ends. A means of egress 
shall consist of a ladder, step-holes and grab rails, stair, 
ramp, or zero-depth edge. Pools of 9 m or more in width 
shall have at least four means of egress that shall be 
located near each end and on opposite sides. The 
distance from any point with a depth greater than 76 cm 
in the swimming pool to a means of egress shall not 
exceed 15 m. At least two ladders or sets of step-holes 
shall be located at the deep area of the swimming pool 
when more than one diving board is provided. 


4.9.2 Step-holes shall have a minimum tread depth 
of 12 cm. Where step-holes or ladders are provided, 
there shall be a handrail or grabrail at the top on both 
sides which extends to the edge of the pool. 


4.9.3 Steps shall be of contrasting color or marked to 
contrast from the pool floor and have uniform size 
treads of at least 30 cm and a rise of no more 
than 30 cm. Steps shall be located where the water 
depth is 1.4 mor less and shall have no pointed or sharp 
edges. One sturdy handrail or grabrail per 4 m of step 
width or fraction thereof, extending the length of the 
steps, shall be provided. 


4.9.4 All ladders, step-holes, and steps shall have slip- 
resistant surfaces. 


4.9.5 Slope of the ramp shall not be more than one in 
twelve. Ramp shall have a slip-resistant surface; 
handrails on both sides and its width shall not be more 
than 1.4 m. 


4.10 Diving Area 


4.10.1 The dimensions of the diving area of a pool 
that has diving boards or platforms of three m or less 
in height shall comply with dimensions given in Table 1 
and shown in Fig. 2. In such pools, the distance from 
the plummet to the pool wall ahead shall be at 
least 11 m. 


4.10.2 Swimming pools with diving facilities in excess 
of three meters in height shall comply with dimensions 
given in Table 2 and illustrated in Fig. 3. If the pool is 
used for swimming as well as diving then transition 
slope from the deep to the shallow end shall not be 
steeper than one in three. 


4.10.3 There shall be no obstruction extending from 
the wall or the floor into the clear area of the diving 
portion of the pool. There shall be an unobstructed 


IS 16508 : 2017 


SLOPE 1 IN 3 


All dimensions in metre. 


Fic. 2 GENERAL POOL WITH DIVING AREA DIMENSIONS 


Table 1 Dimensions of Swimming Pools with Diving Facilities of 3 m or Less in Height 
(Clause 4.10.1) 


SI Minimum distance indicated 
No. 
(69) 2) 


i) A — End wall to Tip of Board 
ii) B — Centre of board to sidewall or adjacent board 


iii) C — Centre of board laterally to point of required 
depth 


iv) D — Depth at end of board and for beyond 3.6 m 


distance of 5 m above the diving board measured from 
the center of the front end of the board, and this 
clearance shall extend at least 2.5 m behind, 2.5 m to 
each side, and 5 m ahead of the measuring point. 


4.10.4 Handrails shall be provided at all steps and 
ladders leading to diving boards. Platforms and diving 
boards which are 1 m or higher shall be protected with 
guard railings. One meter diving board guard rails shall 


< 0.5 m Platform, Min 


1 m Platform, Min 3 m Platform, Min 


m m m 
G) (4) (6) 
1 1.5 1.5 
3 3 3.6 
12 12 1.8 
2.8 3 3.6 


be at least 76 cm above the diving board and extend to 
the pool water’s edge. All platforms or diving boards 
higher than one meter shall have guard rails which are 
at least 76 cm above the diving board or platform and 
extend to the pool water’s edge. Three meter platforms 
and boards shall have a side rail barrier. 


4.11 Starting Platforms 


Starting platforms may be from 0.50 m to 0.75 m above 


IS 16508 : 2017 


Table 2 Dimensions of Swimming Pools with Diving Facilities in Excess of 3 m in Height 
(Clause 4.10.2) 


SI Dimensions Designation 5m 7.5 m 10m 
No. Platform, Min Platform, Min Platform, Min 
m m m 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
i) Length 6.0 6.0 6.0 
ii) Width 1.5 1.5 1.5 
iii) From plummet: back to pool wall A 1.5 1.5 1.8 
iv) Back to platform directly below — 1.5 1.5 
v) From plummet to pool wall at side B 3.9 4.5 5.2 
vi) From plummet to adjacent plummet C — = 3.6 
vii) From plummet to pool wall ahead D 10.5 11.0 13.7 
viii) On plummet from board to ceiling overhead E 3.6 3.6 3.6 
ix) Clear overhead behind and each side plummet F 21 3.0 5.0 
x) Clear overhead ahead of plummet G 5.0 5.0 5.0 
xi) Depth of water at plummet H 4.3 4.5 5:2 
xii) Bottom distance ahead of plummet J 6.0 8.0 12.2 
xiii) | Bottom depth ahead of plummet K 3.3 4.0 4.5 
xiv) Bottom distance each side of plummet L 3.6 4.0 4.3 
xv) Bottom depth each side of Plummet M 4.3 4.5 5.2 


LONGITUDINAL 
CROSS SECTION 


EN and 


Fic. 3 Poo witH DIVING FACILITIES IN ACCESS OF THREE METERS IN HEIGHT 


IS 16508 : 2017 


the surface of water. The maximum height of the 
platform above the water shall be 0.75 m where the 
water depth is 1.2 m or greater and 0.50 m when the 
water depth is less than 1.2 m. The surface area of each 
platform shall be 0.5 m x 0.5 m with a maximum slope 
of not more than 10°. Surface of each block shall be 
covered with non-slip material and with back stroke 
hand grip facility. 


4.12 Electrical Installation — Lighting 


4.12.1 Artificial lighting shall be provided at all indoor 
pools and at all outdoor pools that are open for use 
after sunset in accordance with one of the following: 


a) Underwater lighting of at least 8.35 lumens 
or 5.5 W/m’ of pool water surface area with 
12V SELV supply and located to provide 
illumination of the entire pool floor; plus area 
lighting of at least 10 lumens or 6.6 W/m? of 
deck area. 

b) Ifunderwater lights are not provided, at least 
33.5 lumens or 2.2 W/m? of pool water surface 
area and deck area. 


4.12.2 Where portable electric vacuum cleaning 
equipment is used, electrical receptacles with ground- 
fault circuit interrupter protection shall be provided. 
Separation between receptacles shall be a maximum 
of 30 m. All receptacles installed in the swimming pool 
area shall have waterproof covers and ground-fault 
circuit interrupter protection. 


4.12.3 Lighting controls should not be accessible to 
the public. 


4.12.4 All conductive parts like railings, grab rails, 
handrails, metal parts of electrical equipment of pool 
water circulation system, etc., should be connected to 
system earth. Electrical wiring should follow the 
stipulated regulations which requires the use of SELV 
systems. 


4.13 Ventilation 


Adequate ventilation shall be provided in facilities to 
prevent objectionable odor. 


4.14 Shower and Bathroom 


Separate shower, dressing booth and sanitary facilities 
shall be provided for each gender. This may not be 
applicable for schools and other institutional use where 
a pool may be open to one gender at a time. The rooms 
should be well lit, drained, ventilated, and of good 
construction, using impervious materials. They should 
be developed and planned to ensure maintenance of 
good sanitation throughout the building at all times. 
Floors should have a slip-resistant surface and 
sufficiently smooth to ensure ease in cleaning. All light 


fittings in the shower and bathrooms to be doubly 
insulated and should be completely enclosed. Socket 
outlets in bathrooms or change rooms, if any, to be 
either supplied individually by an isolating transformer 
or by SELV transformer or protected by ELCBs. 


5 SWIMMING POOL WATER TREATMENT 
SYSTEM 


5.1 General 


A water treatment system shall be provided to filter, 
chemically balance and disinfect the swimming pool 
water. The system shall be so designed for the 
recirculation flow rate that turnover period shall not 
exceed 8 h in case of diving pool, 2 h for wading pool, 
and 6 h for other pools. 


5.2 Hair and Lint Strainer 


A hair and lint strainer shall be installed on the suction 
side of the pump except on vacuum filter systems. The 
strainer basket shall be easily removable. Valves shall 
be installed to allow the flow to be shut off during 
cleaning, switching baskets, or inspection. 


5.3 Inlets 


Inlets for filtered water shall be located and directed 
suitably to produce uniform circulation of water to 
facilitate the maintenance of a uniform disinfectant 
residual throughout the entire pool without the existence 
of dead spots, and to produce surface flow patterns that 
effectively assist skimming. 


5.4 Outlets 


Pools shall be provided with a main drain at the deepest 
point. The main drain shall be connected to the 
recirculation system. Openings must be covered by 
grating which cannot be removed without the use of 
tools. Openings of the grating shall be at least four times 
the area of the main drain pipe or have an open area. 
The maximum width of grate openings shall be 3.5 cm. 
Main drains and all other suction outlets installed in 
the pool shall be designed to prevent bather entrapment. 


5.5 Make-up Water 


Make-up water shall be added through a fixed air gap 
of at least 15 cm to the pool, surge tank, vacuum filter 
tank, or other receptacle. When make-up water is added 
directly to the pool, the fill-spout should be located 
under a low diving board or immediately adjacent to a 
ladder rail, grab rail, or fixed lifeguard chair. 


5.6 Filtration 


The design filtration rate in the particular application 
in which the filter is utilized shall not exceed the 


maximum design filtration rate for which the filter was 
installed. 


Wash or backwash water from diatomaceous earth 
filters shall be passed through a separation tank 
designed for removal of suspended diatomaceous earth 
and solids, prior to disposal. 


5.7 Disinfection 


The pool water shall be continuously disinfected by 
suitable disinfecting agent that imparts easily measured 
residual. Gaseous chlorine, chlorine compounds, 
bromine compounds or other bactericidal agents should 
be used to maintain the quality parameters of water as 
specified in 8. 


6 PERSONNEL 


6.1 Pool Manager 


A person who shall be held responsible for the operation 
of the swimming pool facility in accordance with the 
consent letter shall be designated as pool manager/ 
operator. 


6.2 Swimming Coach/Instructor and Life Guard 


Competent swimming coach/instructor shall be 
provided at all swimming pools who has adequate 
knowledge of first aid and artificial respiration. In 
addition lifeguard should be provided when persons 
under the age of 16 are allowed in the pool enclosure 
without supervision by a parent, guardian or other 
responsible person at least 16 years of age. All areas of 
the pool must be visible to a lifeguard. Lifeguard, if 
any, shall be dressed in swimming attire and be 
identified as a lifeguard. A trained lifeguard (with first 
aid training) should be available at the poolside, during 
the hours of operation and as and when people are 
swimming or playing in water. 


7 SPECIFIC SAFETY FEATURES 


7.1 Rescue Equipment 


7.1.1 Atleast one ring buoy or similar floating device 
shall be kept ready with an attached throw rope with a 
length at least equal to the maximum width of the 
swimming pool or 15 m, whichever is less. 


7.1.2 A light strong pole not less than 3.6 m long, 
including a body hook. 
7.2 First Aid Kit 


7.2.1 A swimming pool facility shall have a first-aid 
kit which contains at least the following: 

a) Band-Aids. 

b) Sterile 100 x 100 mm bandage compress. 

c) Self-adhering gauze bandage. 


IS 16508 : 2017 


d) Disposable gloves. 
e) Chemical cold compress. 


7.2.2 The first-aid kit shall be prominently mounted 
in the swimming pool enclosure, or a sign stating its 
location shall be posted near the swimming pool. The 
first-aid kit shall be accessible when the swimming pool 
is open. Items which have a shelf life shall be kept 
current. 


7.2.3 Emergency Telephone and Emergency Contact 
List 


A telephone shall be accessible in the vicinity of the 
swimming pool, in or within 90 m of the pool enclosure. 
The telephone numbers of the local police, state police, 
fire department, physician, ambulance service, and a 
hospital, shall be posted in a conspicuous place near 
the telephone. The location of the emergency telephone 
shall be posted in the swimming pool area unless the 
telephone is located in the pool area. 


7.3 Depth Markers 


7.3.1 The depth of water shall be marked at or above 
the water surface on the wall of the pool and on the 
edge of the deck next to the pool so as to be readable 
by persons entering or in the pool. Depth markings shall 
be provided at the shallow and deep ends of the pool, 
the transition point, and the point of maximum depth, 
and shall be spaced at not more than 7.5 m intervals 
measured peripherally, except that depth markings are 
not required at a zero-depth edge. 


7.3.2 Depth markers shall indicate pool depth in metric 
system, and shall be of a colour that contrasts with the 
background. Numerals indicating depth shall be a 
minimum of 10 cm high. 


7.3.3 In shallow areas, ‘no diving’ markers or symbols 
at least 10 cm high must be located at not more than 
7.5 m intervals around the pool perimeter except at a 
zero-depth edge. 


8 WATER QUALITY 


8.1 Disinfectant Residual 


8.1.1 Where chlorine is used as a disinfectant, the 
chlorine residual shall be maintained between 1.0 and 
4.0 ppm. as free chlorine residual. A free chlorine 
residual of at least 2.0 ppm. shall be maintained when 
the pool water temperature exceeds 30°C. 


8.1.2 Where bromine is used as a disinfectant, a 
bromine residual shall be maintained between 2.0 and 
8.0 ppm. as total bromine. A bromine residual of at 
least 4.0 ppm. shall be maintained when the pool water 
temperature exceeds 30°C. 


8.1.3 Where chlorinated cyanurates are used, the 


IS 16508 : 2017 


cyanuric acid concentration shall not exceed 100 ppm. 


8.1.4 Where silver/copper or copper ion generators are 
used, the concentration of copper shall not exceed 
1.3 ppm. and the concentration of silver shall not 
exceed 0.05 ppm. 


8.1.5 Where ozone is used, the ambient air ozone 
concentration shall be less than 0.1 ppm. at all times 
either in the vicinity of the ozonator or at the pool water 
surface. 


8.2 For all other physical, chemical and bacteriological 
parameters the quality of water used in swimming pools 
in continuous circulation type shall conform to IS 3328. 


9 OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE 


9.1 Pool and Pool Area 


9.1.1 The swimming pool shall be maintained free from 
sediment, lint, dirt and hair. The walls, ceilings, floors, 
equipment and the pool area shall be properly 
maintained so that they are protected from deterioration. 
Cracks and other defects in the pool, if appear, should 
be repaired. All equipment shall be maintained in proper 
condition, with all required components in place. 


9.1.2 Pool decks should be rinsed daily. Indoor pool 
decks shall be disinfected at least weekly. No furniture, 
plants or other furnishings shall be placed within 1.2 m 
of the pool. This area should be kept free of obstructions 
such as chairs and baby strollers and maintenance 
equipment. 


9.1.3 Floats or tubes not in use should be removed from 
the pool. Safety ropes shall be kept in place except 
when the swimming pool is being used exclusively for 
lap swimming or competition. 


9.1.4 Starting Platforms 


Starting blocks shall not be used for any other purpose 
than competitive swimming activities. Starting blocks 
should be securely anchored when in use but removed 
or prohibited from use when not being used in 
conjunction with competitive swimming or training. 


9.1.5 A register should be maintained at the pool, 
recording the user details. The user should sign before 
using the pool. 


9.1.6 Lockers, with locking arrangement (preferably 
number locks) to be provided to the users to keep their 
belongings and valuables. 


9.1.7 Notice boards (one at the entrance and one near 
the pool) should be put up declaring: 
a) The hours of operation of the pool. 


b) The users shall take a shower before entering 
the pool. 


c) The users should be appropriately dressed. 
d) Usage of the pool is at users risk only. 


e) Persons under the influence of alcohol/drugs 
are not allowed to use the pool. 


f) Children under 12 years of age will be 
permitted only, if accompanied by adults. 

g) Persons not knowing swimming are not 
allowed to use the pool independently. 


9.1.8 Usage of swimming pools should be barred 
during thunderstorms. 


9.2 Perimeter Overflow and Skimmers 


The perimeter overflow systems or automatic surface 
skimmers should be kept clean and free of leaves or 
other debris which would restrict flow. The strainer 
baskets for skimmers should be cleaned daily. The flow 
through each skimmer shall be adjusted as often as 
necessary to maintain a vigorous skimming action 
which will remove all floating matter from the surface 
of the water. The pool water should be maintained at 
an elevation such that effective surface skimming is 
accomplished. For pools with perimeter overflow 
systems, adequate surge storage capacity should be 
maintained so that flooding of the perimeter overflow 
system does not occur during periods of peak usage. 


9.3 Inlet Fittings 


Inlets should be checked frequently so that the rate of 
flow through each inlet establishes a uniform 
distribution pattern. Inlets in pools with surface 
skimmers shall be adjusted as necessary to provide 
vigorous skimming. 


9.4 Security 


Doors or gates in the swimming pool enclosure shall 
be kept closed and locked when the swimming pool is 
closed. 


9.5 Bather Loads 


The number of persons within a swimming pool 
enclosure should not exceed the permissible bather load 
as specified in the consent letter. The bather load shall 
be posted at the pool entrance or at a location where it 
can be seen by all patrons and shall be enforced by the 
manager/operator. 


9.6 Electrical Systems 


Electrical system shall be maintained in accordance 
with the National Electrical Code. Wiring Regulations, 
if any should also be maintained. Electrical wiring shall 
follow the stipulated regulations. 


9.7 Diving Equipment 


Diving equipment for swimming pool with diving 


facility shall be maintained in a safe condition, be 
securely anchored, and have a slip-resistant surface. 


9.8 Operation of Mechanical Equipment 


9.8.1 Manufacturers’ instructions for operation and 
maintenance of mechanical and electrical equipment, 
as well as pump performance curves, shall be kept 
available at the pool. All valves and piping in the 
equipment room must be permanently identified as to 
use and direction of flow. A valve operating procedure 
must be provided in the equipment room for each 
operation (for example, recirculation, filtration, 
backwashing, etc). 


9.8.2 Recirculation pumps shall be kept in good repair 
and condition. The pump discharge or inlet supply line 
valve shall be adjusted as necessary to maintain the 
design flow rate. 


9.8.3 Filtration Equipment 


The filtration flow rate shall not exceed the maximum 
filtration design flow rate specified by the filter 
manufacturer for public swimming pool usage. Where 
this rate is not known or has not been determined, the 
flow rate shall not exceed 67 litre per minute per square 
foot of filter area for high-rate sand filters. 


9.8.4 Hair and Lint Strainers 


Hair and lint strainers shall be cleaned to prevent 
clogging of the suction line and cavitations. The pump 
shall be stopped before the strainer is opened to avoid 
drawing air into the pump and losing the prime. 


9.8.5 Flowmeters 


Flowmeters shall be maintained in an accurate operating 
condition and readable. 


9.8.6 Vacuum and Pressure Gauges 


The lines leading to the gauges shall be bled 
occasionally to prevent blockage. 


9.8.7 Gas Chlorinators 


9.8.7.1 The manager/operator shall post the telephone 
numbers of the appropriate emergency personnel to 
contact in the event of a chlorine gas emergency. 


9.8.7.2 Area where gas chlorinators are stored should 
be kept locked at all times and only authorized 
personnel to be allowed into the storage area. Chlorine 
cylinders shall be stored indoors in the area designed 
for that purpose and away from a direct source of heat. 
They shall be chained or strapped to a rigid support to 
prevent accidental tipping. Cylinders shall not be moved 
unless the protection cap is secured over the valve. Gas 
mask, approved for use in a chlorine atmosphere, shall 
be kept outside the chlorine room in a locked PPE Box 
at all times. Only authorized personnel to be allowed 


IS 16508 : 2017 


to use the mask. The gas mask canister shall be replaced 
regularly as per the manufacturer’s recommendations. 


9.8.7.3 Chlorinators, gas lines, injectors, vent lines and 
cylinders shall be checked daily for leaks. In case of a 
chlorine leak, corrective measures shall be undertaken 
only by trained persons wearing proper safety 
equipment. All other persons should be asked to leave 
the dangerous area until conditions are again safe. 


9.8.8 Positive Displacement Feeders 


9.8.8.1 Positive displacement feeders should be 
periodically inspected and serviced. 


9.8.8.2 When a chemical feeder is used with calcium 
hypochlorite solution, to minimize sludge accumulation 
in the unit, the lowest practicable concentration of 
solution shall be used, and in no case shall this 
concentration exceed 5 percent. If liquid chlorine 
solution is used, the dilution with water is not critical 
to the operation of the unit. After first thoroughly rinsing 
with water, a small amount of mild acid solution may 
be fed through the unit periodically, to dissolve sludge 
accumulations. 


9.8.9 pH Adjustment 


9.8.9.1 Soda ash or caustic soda may be used to raise 
the pool water pH. Protective equipment and clothing, 
including rubber gloves and goggles, must be available 
for the handling and use of this chemical. 


9.8.9.2 Sodium bisulphate, carbon dioxide gas or 
muriatic acid should be used to lower pool water pH. 
Carbon dioxide cylinders shall be securely chained or 
otherwise restrained in a manner that will prevent 
tipping. Protective equipment and clothing, including 
rubber gloves and goggles, must be available for 
handling this chemical. 


9.8.10 Miscellaneous Chemicals 


9.8.10.1 Chemicals shall be kept covered and stored 
in the original, labelled container, away from 
flammables and heat and in a clean, dry, well- 
ventilated place which prevents unauthorized access 
to the chemicals. 


9.8.10.2 If polyphosphates are used for sequestering 
iron, the concentration of polyphosphates shall not 
exceed 10 p.p.m. 


9.8.11 Acoustics 


Suitable arrangement should be made to ensure that 
safety instructions can be heard, considering the noise 
level in peak hours. 


9.8.12 Monitoring and Reporting 
9.8.12.1 Operation reports 


The pool manager/operator shall keep the daily record 
of swimming pool or other pool operational data. 


IS 16508 : 2017 


9.8.12.2 Water quality testing 


Disinfectant residual and pH tests shall be made on 
samples collected from the shallow and deep areas of 
each swimming pool, at least twice daily. Where 
chlorine is used as a disinfectant, testing for combined 
chlorine shall be performed at least weekly. In addition, 
where chlorinated cyanurates are utilized as a chlorine 
disinfectant, testing for cyanuric acid concentration 
shall be performed at least weekly. Where ozone is 
utilized, testing to determine the ozone concentration 
immediately above the pool water surface shall be 
performed monthly. 


Necessary testing kits should be available for checking 
the pH and disinfectant residual. The person responsible 
for testing should be thoroughly familiar with the 
procedure for checking. 


9.8.13 Refuse Disposal 


The equipment provided for the storage, collection, and 
disposal of refuse produced at a swimming pool or 
bathing beach shall be such that the creation of 
conditions detrimental to public health, such as rodent 
harborage, insect breeding areas, odors, air pollution 


10 


and accidents are prevented. All refuse shall be stored 
in water-tight, metal or rigid plastic containers having 
tight-fitting lids. Containers shall be provided as needed 
throughout food preparation areas and eating areas to 
provide for enough collection of trash. 


10 SWIMMING POOL USER’S 
RESPONSIBILITY 


10.1 Should not enter the waters of the swimming pool 
without taking a bath and a foot bath in bath room on 
the swimming pool premises. 


10.2 Should not use any oil or any other substances or 
preparation which may rendered the swimming pool 
water turbid or otherwise unfit for use of bathers. 


10.3 Should not pollute the waters of the pool by 
spitting or in any other manner. 


10.4 Not to use the swimming pool when suffering from 
skin disease or any other contagious diseases 


10.5 To avoid choking, users should not chew gum or 
eat while swimming or playing in the pool. Users should 
not take alcohol or consume drugs immediately before 
swimming or playing in the pool. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CHD 08 (2046). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 26 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


