( Reaffirmed 2002 )

IS : 16242 ( Part

2jSec 2 ) -1983

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS IN SHIPS
PART 2 SYSTEM 2 DESIGN

Section

Protection

Electrical Equipment in Ships Sectional Committee, ETDC 62
Chairman SHRI H. K. TANJZJA Members

Representing Indian Register of Shipping, Bombay

SHRIS. CHANDRA ( Alternate to Shri H. K. Taneja ) Central Scientific Instruments Organization SHRI A. N. AGARWAL ( CSIR ), Chandigarh SHRI V. K. SEHGAL ( Alternate ) Garden Reach Shipbuilders & Engineers Ltd, SHRI S. N. BASSO Calcutta SHRI A. D. BHATTACHARYA ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Shipping, Ministry of SHRIN. CHAICRABORTY Shipping & Transport, Bombay SHRIB. B. BADWAL ( Alternate ) The Shipping Corporation of India Ltd, Bombay DR L. R. CHARY SHRI N. N. BAHADURI ( Alternate ) Delton Cable Industries Ltd, New Delhi SHRIS. P. CHAUDHRY SHRI P. MUKUNDAN ( Alternate ) General Electric Co of India Ltd, Calcutta SHRIS. K. DATTA Development Commissioner, Small Scale SHRI A. N. GHOSH Industries, New Delhi SHRI A. BANDYOPADHYAY ( Alternate > Directorate General of Technical Development, SHRI D. P. GUPTA New Delhi Crompton Greaves Ltd, Bombay SHRIT. S. N. IYER SHRIM. G. BHAT( Alternate ) Ministry of Defence ( DGI ), Directorate of CDR B. N. KAUL Production & Inspection ( Naval ) LT V. K. BHARDWA~ (Alternate )
( Continued on page 2 ) @ Copyright 1983 INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act (XIV of 1957) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 10242 ( Part 2/Set 2 ) - 1983 ( Continued from page 1)
Members SHRr K. KISHORE Representing Directorate of Bombay
Electric

Marine

Engineering

Training,

SHRI D. ( Kirloskar K. V. MANJUNATH SHRI N. RAMACHANDRA Larsen SHRI V. MOHAN SHRI A. M. MUNSHI (Alternate > SHRI SHRI P. S. P. ( Alternate The SHRI N. NATH SHRI C. R. BALASUBRAMANIAN

Ltd, Bangalore Ltd, Bombay Ltd, Vishakbapatnam Ltd, Madras

Ltd, Bombay SHRI SHRI R. JAIRAM Mazagon Dock Ltd, Bombay SHRI H. D. PENDSE SHRI W. R. PATWARDHAN Directorate of Warships Projects, New Delhi CDR J. S. POSTWALLA SHRI A. N. PATHAK Jyoti Ltd, Vadodara DR B. RAGHUNATH SHRI R. PALANI ( Alternate ) Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Hyderabad SHRI K. R. RAMUZHANDRAN SHRI S. C. BHARGAVA ( Alternate 1 ) SHRI V. R. GARDE ( Afternate II ) The Indian Cable Co Ltd, Jamshedpur SHRI K. V. R. RAO SHRI S. BHATTACHARYA ( Alternate ) NGEF Ltd. Bangalore SHRI K. P. SARATHY SHRI JAVEED AHMED ( Alternate ) Cochin Shipyard Ltd, Cochin SHRI P. J. C. SERENO SHRI A. K. MUKHERJEB ( Alternate ) The Scindia Steam Navigation Co Ltd, Bombay SHRI B. .I. D' SILVA SHRI J. MANSVKHANI ( Alternate ) Direc.er;p of Standardization ( NHQ ), New CDR R. P. SINOH LT R. P. SINGH ( Alternate ) , SHFUS. P. SACHDEV, Director ( Elec tech ) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-oficio Member )

(Alternate

)

Secretary
SHRI SUKH BIR SINGH Assistant Director ( Elec tech ), IS1

1s : 10242 ( Part 2/&x 2 ) - 1983

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR ELECTRICAL INSTALLATION IN SHIPS
PART 2 SYSTEM DESIGN Section 2 Protection

O.FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian Standard (Part 2/Set 2 ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Jnstitution on 23 June 1983, after the draft finalized by the Electrical Equipment in Ships Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council. 0.2 This standard ( Part 2/Set 2 ) is one among the series of the Indian Standards on electrical installations in ships. This series will have the following parts: Part 1 General, Part 2 System design, Part 3 Equipment, Part 4 Installation and test of completed installation, and, Part 5 Special features. 0.3 In preparing this standard assistance has been taken from the IEC Publication 92-202 (1980) : System Design - Protection, issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission. 0.4 This part of the standard shall be read in conjunction (Part 2/Set l)-1982* and other parts mentioned in 0.2.
0.5

with IS : 10242

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-1960t.
*Specification for electrical installations in ships : Part 2 System General. TRules for rounding off numerical values (revised). design, Section 1

3

IS : 10242 ( Part 2/Set 2 ) - 1983 The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard ( Part 2/Set 2 ) describes the main features of the electrical protective system to be applied to electrical installations for use in ships. 2. DEFINITIONS 2.0 For the purpose of this standard, tbe following 2.1 Over Current full load. 2.2 Overload load. Over currents definitions shall apply.

is an abnormal current greater than the

Overload is the excess of the actual load over the nominal

2.3 Nominal Load, Full Load - Nominal load or full load is the power for which a machine has been designed. 2.4 Short Circuit - A short circuit is the intentional or accidental connecThe term is tion of two points of a circuit through a negligible impedance. often applied to the group of phenomena which accompany a short circuit between points at different potentials. 3. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 3.1 Electrical installations should be protected against accidental overdevices. currents, up to and including short-circuit, by appropriate Choice arrangement and performance of the various protective devices should provide complete and co-ordinated automatic protection in order to ensure as far as possible: a) continuity of service through the discriminative action protective devices to maintain supply to healthy circuits event of a fault elsewhere, and b) of the in the

elimination of the effects of faults to reduce damage to the system and the hazard of fire as much as possible.

Under these conditions, the elements of the system should be designed and constructed to withstand the thermal and electrodynamic stresses caused by the possible overcurrent, including short circuit, for the admissible durations. 4

IS : 10242 (Part 2/Set 2 ) - 1983 3.2 Devices provided for overcurrent protection should be chosen according to the requirements, especially with regard to: a) overload, and b) short circuit. 3.3 Every protective device or switching device included in the power circuit and not intended for short circuit interruption should be adequate for the short-circuit current which can occur at the point of installation having regard to the time required for clearing the short-circuit. 4. SHORT CIRCUIT CURRENTS 4.1 Short-Circuit Current in ac Systems 4.1.1 For the evaluation of the prospective short-circuit current, the equivalent system impedance should be considered, seen from the point of fault. 4.1.2 7 he source of current should include the maximum number of generators which can be simultaneously connected, and the maximum number of motors which are normal simultaneously connected, in the system. The contribution of generators and motors should be calculated on the basis of their characteristics.
NOTE- Where precise information of their characteristics is lacking, the contribution of induction motors for determining the maximum peak value attainable by the short-circuit current ( that is,. the value of the current to be added to the maximum peak palue of the short circmt due to the generators ) can be taken as equal to 8 Z,,, where Z, is the sum of the rated currents of the motors estimated normally when simultaneously in service ( I, is an rms value ).

For more precise calculation, the following rms values may be used: a) At the instant of short-circuit = 6'25 I,,; occurrence ( sub-transient one cycle from two cycles from value )

b) at the instant T, that is, after inception = 2'5 In ; and c) at the instant 2 T, that is, after inception -- L.

short-circuit short-circuit

IS : 10242 ( Part 2,/Set 2 ) - 1983 4.1.3 Alternatively, unless stated otherwise, the following short-circuit currents at the machine terminals may be assumed: a) Ten times full load current for generators normally ( including spare ) - symmetrical rms, and b) Three times full load current service. 4.2 Short-Circuit Current in dc System 4.2.1 The prospective short-circuit current at a definite point of the system should be evaluated by considering the equivalent system resistance seen from the point of fault. 4.2.2 The source of a short-circuit current should include the maximum number of generators which can be simultaneously connected, and the maximum number of motors which are normally simultaneously connected in the system. The contribution of each rotating machine should be evaluated as a function of its characteristics. In the absence of precise information, the contribution of motors in the determination of the maximum value reached by the .short-circuit current can be taken as equal to six times the sum of the rated currents of the motors estimated to be normally in service simultaneously and ten times full load current for generators normally connected. 5. CHARACTERISTICS AND CHOICE OF PROTECTIVE DEVICES WITH REFERENCE TO SHORT-CIRCULT RATING 5.1 Geaeral 5.1.1 Protective devices for short-circuit protection should conform to the requirements of the relevant Indian Standards concerning circuitbreakers and fuses, but it shall be taken into account tbat the conditions of ship installations may differ from the conditions foreseen in those standards, in particular with reference to : for motors connected in

simultaneously

a>the

short-circuit power factor in ac systems in ships, which may be lower than that assumed as a basis for short-circuit rating of normal distribution circuit-breakers; and current.

b) the sub-transient and transient component of the ac short-circuit
6

IS : 10242 ( Part 2/Set 2 ) - 1983 As a consequence, the ratio between rated breaking capacity and the correlated making capacity of circuit-breakers corresponding to the normal conditions of distribution systems [see IS : 2516 (Parts 1 and 2/Set l)-1977*] may be substantially inadequate. In such cases, the circuit-breakers have to be chosen with regard to their short-circuit making capacity, even though their available short-circuit breaking capacity, which complies with normal conditions, may be in excess of the one required for the actual application. 5.1.2 Protection breakers or fuses. against short-circuit should be provided by circuit-

In some cases, and particularly for high voltage ac systems, it should be noted that certain types of fuses have such characteristics for certain overcurrents that they should be arranged to cause an associated switch to trip for these overcurrents. 5.1.3 The use of a circuit-breaker not having a short-circuit breaking and/or making capacity at least equal to the maximum prospective shortcircuit current at the point where it is installed is recognized, provided that it is backed up by a fuse or by a circuit-breaker on the generator side having at least the necessary short-circuit rating and not being the generator circuit-breaker. This arrangement is not acceptable for essential circuits. The characteristic of the arrangement should be such that :

a) when the maximum prospective short-circuit

current is broken, the circuit-breaker having insufficient breaking capacity should not be damaged that it is incapable of further service. prospective short-circuit current, the remainder of the installation in question It is, however, permissible that a cirshould not be dimaged. cuit-breaker with insuffidient making capacity should not be immediately capable of further service,

b) when the circuit-breaker is closed on the maximum

Circuit-breakers with fuses connected to the load side may be used, provided the back-up fuses and the circuit-breakers are of co-ordinated design, in order to ensure that the operation of the fuses takes place *Specificationfor alternating current circuit-breakers : Parts 1 and 2 Requirements
and tests,
revision).

Section

1

Voltages

not exceeding

1 OQQ V ac or

1 200 V dc (first

7

IS:10242( Part2/Sec

2 )- 1983

in due time so as to prevent arcing between poles or against metal parts of the circuit breakers when they are submitted to overcurrents involving the operation of the fuse. 5.2 Rated Short-Circuit Breaking Capacity - The rated short-circuit breaking capacity of every device intended for short-circuit protection should be not less than the maximum prospective current to be broken at that point in the installation. For ac, the rated short-circuit breaking capacity should not be less than the rms value of the ac component of the prospective short-circuit current at the point of application ( for exception, see 5.1.3 ). This implies the ability of the circuit-breaker to break any current having an ac component not exceeding its rated breaking capacity, whatever may be the possible value of the inherent dc component at the beginning of the interruption. The conditions of the circuit which determine the inherent dc component may be more severe in systems on board than those assumed as normal for distribution circuit-breakers. In such an event the ability of the circuit-breaker to break the current corresponding to its ,rated breaking capacity irrespective of the possible value of the dc component should be ascertained under the conditions of the actual installation. 5.3 Rated Short-Circuit Making Capacity - The rated short-circuit making capacity of every mechanical switching device intended to be closed on a short-circuit should be adequate for the maximum peak value of the prospective short-circuit current at the point of installation ( for exception, see 5.1.3 ).
NOTE- The circuit-breaker should be able to make the current corresponding to its making capacity without opening within a time corresponding to the maximum time delay required.

5.4 Co-ordination of Short-Circuit Ratings with Regard Requirements

to Discrimination

5.4.1 Discrimination has the object of ensuring. th?t only the protective ;e$e) nearest to the fault opens the faulty clrcult ( for exception, see . . . 5.4.2 The tripping characteristics be properly co-ordinated. of protective devices in series should

8

IS : 10242 ( Part Z/See 2 ) - 1983 5.4.3 The protective devices should be capable of carrying, without opening, a current not less than the short-circuit current at the point of application for a time corresponding to the opening of the breaker increased by the time delay required for discrimination. 6. CHOICE OF PROTECTIVE DEVICES WITH REFERENCE TO OVERLOAD 6.1 Mechanical Switching Devices - Mechanical switching devices provided for overload protection should have a tripping characteristic (overcurrenttrip time) adequate for the overload ability of the elements of the system to be protected and for any discrimination requirements. 6.2 Fuses for Overload Protection - The use of fuses for overload protection is admissible up to and including 320 A, provided they have suitable characteristics, but the use of circuit-breakers or similar devices is recommended above 200 A. For high-voltage ac systems, the use of fuOes for overload protection is not admissible. 7. CHOICE OF PROTECTIVE DEVICES WITH REGARD TO THEIR APPLICATION 7.1 General - Short-circuit protection shall be provided in each non-earthed line. Overload protection shall be provided in each non-earthed line of a circuit, except that for insulated dc circuits, insulated single-phase circuits and insulated three-phase circuits with substantially balanced loads, the overload protection may be omitted in one line. Short-circuit or overload protective devices shall not interrupt earthed lines, except by multipole switching devices disconnecting all the lines simultaneously. 7.2 Generator Protection 7.2.1 General - Generators arranged for parallel operation and generator rated above 50 kW be protected against short-circuit and load by multipole circuit-breaker. For generators rated 50 kW and multipole fused circuit-breaker or a multipole switch with a fuse in insulated phase on the generator side may be considered. In particular, the overload protection should be adequate thermal capacity of the generator and within the following ments: each overless a each

for the require-

a> [For overloads of less than 10 percent consideration may be given to include an aural alarm signal operated by a time delay relay 9

IS : 10242 ( Part 2JSec 2 ) - 1983 set at a maximum of 1'1 times thz rated current of the generator and with a time delay of not more than 15 minutes. A time delay of over 15 minutes may be adopted if this is required by operating conditions and permitted by the generator design; b) For overloads between 10 percent and 50 percent the circuitbreaker should be [ripped with a time delays corresponding to a maximum of 2 minutes at not more than I.5 times the rated current of the generator; however, the figure of 25 percent and the time delay of 2 minutes may be exceeded if this is required by the operating conditions, and if the construction of the generator permits it; and c) For overcurrents in excess of 50 percent `instantaneous tripping should be co-ordinated with the discriminative protection of the system. Short-time delays may be introduced for discrimination requirements in `instantaneous' tripping devices designed for shortcircuit protection. For large generators and for all high-voltage generators, protection should be provided against faults on the generator side of the circuit-breaker.
NOTE 1 - Consideration should be given to the protective arrangement associated with generators to ensure that they are maintained effective even in the case of substantial reduction of speed.
NOTE 2 - Consideration should be given to the choice of protective devices used for overload protection of generators which will permit the power to be restored immediately after operation of the overload protective device.

1.2.2 Protection Against Short-Circuits on the Generator Side - When generators are intended to operate in parallel, it is necessary to take account of fault currents, which would need to be handled by the generators circuit-breakers if a short-circuit were to occur on the generator side.
should be given to the possible danger of closing circuitNOTE- Consideration breakers controlling a generator when this is out of synchronism with the system to which it is to be connected.

1.2.3 Protective Devices-for Level-Compounded dc Two- Wire and ThreeWire Generators - For dc generators arranged to operate in parallel, the following protective devices should be provided in addition to the protection against overload and short-circuit :
a) For level-compounded

generator, so inter&ked

generators, an equalizer switch for each that it doses before and opens after

IS : 10242 ( Part Z/Set 2 ) - 1983

the contacts of the circuit-breaker with which it is associated or a multipole circuit-breaker breaking all poles simultaneously; and b) In three-wire systems, a switch in the middle wire so interlocked with the generator switch or circuit - breaker connected to the `outers' as to operate simultaneously with them.
7.3 Protection of Essential Services - Where the load consists of essential services and non-essential services, consideration should be given to an arrangement which will automatically exclude non-essential services when any one generator becomes overloaded and which will function to prevent sustained loss of speed.

This load shedding may be carried out in one or more stages, according to the overload ability of the generating sets. 7.4 Protection of Transformes - The primary winding of transformers should be protected against short-circuit by multipole circuit-breakers or by fuses against short-circuits according to the requirements of 5. Disconnecting links for secondary windings should be provided when transformers are arranged for parallel operation.
windings, short-circuit NOTE - Where power can be fed into secondary tion shall need to be considered in the secondary connection. protec-

7.5 Circuit Protection
7.5.1 Each distribution circuit should be protected against overload and short-circuits by means of multipole circuit-breakers of fuses according to the requirements of 5 and 6.
NOTE - Care should be taken to ensure that the protective arrangements effective in the case of smallest generator supplying power in a system using tors arranged for parallel operation.

remain genera-

7.5.2 Cables in parallel formed of conductors not less than 50 mm2 may be considered, from tection, as a single cable.

of nominal cross-section the point of view of pro-

7.5.3 Circuits supplying consuming devices having individual overload protection ( for example, motors, see 7.6 ), or consuming devices which cannot be overloaded ( for example, permanently wired heating circuits ) may be provided with short-circuit protection only. I1

IS : 10242 (Part

2/Set

2 ) - 1983

7.6 Motors Protection 7.6.1 Motors having a power rating exceeding 0'5 kW should be individually protected against overload and short-circuit in each insulated phase with the exception of those detailed in 7.6.2. For dc motors over current relays in one pole can be used.

7.6.2 Fur motors intended for steering gear and similar services the protection against overload should have auto-visual alarm devices. Protection against short-circuit shall also be provided. 7.6.3 The protective devices should be designed to allow current to pass during the normal accelerating period of motors according to the conditions corresponding to normal use. When the time-current characteristics of the overload protective device of a motor are not adequate for the starting period of the motor, tht overload protecting device may be rendered inoperative during the accelerating period provided that the protection against short-circuit remains operative and that the suppression of the overload protection is only temporary. 7.6.4 For continuous duty motors, protective devices should have a time delay characteristics which ensures reliable thermal protection of the motors for overload conditions. 7.6.5 The protective devices should be set to limit the maximum continuous current. to between 105 percent and 120 percent of the rated current of the protected motor. 7.6.6 For intermittent duty motors, the current setting and the delay characteristics ( as a function of time ) for protective devices should be chosen after considering the actual service conditions. 7.6.7 It is recommended to use suitable protective devices against single phasing and excessiv'e temperature-rise of all large capacity three-phase motors. 7.7 Protection of Lighting Circuits - Each lighting circuit should be protected against overload and short-circuit by suitable devices. 7.8 Protection of Shore Power Connection - Permanently fixed cables from the shore connection box to the main switchboard should be protected by fuses or circuit-breakers. In no case should the protection at the shore connection box be omitted,

12

1s : 10242 ( Part i/See i ) - l#j 7.9 Accumulator ( Storage ) Battery Protection - Accumulator ( storage ) batteries, other than engine-starting batteries, would be protected against overload and short-circuits with devices placed as near to the batteries as practicable. Emergency batteries supplying essential services should have short-circuit protection only. 7.10 Protection of Meters, Pilot Lamps and Control Circuits - Protection should be ensured for indicating and measuring devices by means of fuses or current-limiting devices. For other circuits, fuses in circuits, such as those of voltage regulators should be omitted where loss of voltage might have serious consequencies. If fuses are omitted, means should be provided to prevent risk of fire in the unprotected part of the installation. Fuses should be placed as near as practicable supply * 7.11 Protection of Static or Solid State circuits, such as those using thyristors; Devices to the tapping from the

All solid state power

iS : 10242 ( Part i/See i .) - 1983 A fall of 50 percent in the applied voltage should not render the reverse power protection inoperative, although it may alter the amount of reverse power required to open the breaker.
NOTE - The reverse adequate protection. power protection may be replaced by other devices ensuring

8.2 Reverse Current Protection for dc Generators dc generators arranged for parallel operation with one another or with a storage battery should be provided with instantaneous of short-time delayed reverse current protection. Thesetting of protection devices is recommended in the range 2 to 6 percent of the rated power for, turbine and in the range 8 to 15 percent of the rated power for diesel engines. A fall of 50 percent in the applied voltage should not render the reverse current protection inoperative, although it may alter the amount of reverse power required to open the breaker. When an equilizer connection is provided, the reverse current device should be connected on the pole opposite to that in which the series compounding winding is connected.
NOTE- The reverse current protection should be adequate to deal effectively with reverse current conditions emanting from the ship's network (for example, cargo winches ) [ ( see atso IS : 10242 (Part 3/&c l)-1983* ) 1.

9. UNDERVOLTAGE PROTECTION 9.1 ac and dc Generators For generators arranged for parallel operation with one another or with shore power feeder measures should be taken to prevent the generator breaker from closing if the generator is not generating and to prevent the generator remaining connected to the busbars if voltage collapses. In the case of an undervoltage release provided for this purpose, the operation shall be instantaneous when preventing closure of the breaker, but shall be delayed for discrimination purposes when tripping a breaker. *Specification for electrical
Generators and motors. installation in ships : Part 3 Equipment, Section 1

14

IS : 10242 ( Part L&x 9.2 ac and dc Motors 9.2.1 Motors rated 0'5 kW should be provided with either:

2 ) - lh%

a) Undervoltage protection, operative on the reduction or failure of voltage, to cause and maintain the interruption of power in the circuit until the motor is deliberately restarted; or b) undervoltage release operative on the reduction of failure of voltage, but so arranged that the motor restarts automatically and without excessive starting current on restoration of voltage, provided that the starter ( which may be controlled, for example, by thermostatic or hydraulic devices ) still makes the requisite connections for a restart and that the restarting of all motors does not occur simultaneously if it is necessary to avoid, for example, too large a voltage drop or current surge. 9.2.2 The protective devices should allow the motor to start when the voltage is above 85 percent of the rated voltage, and shall without fail intervene when the voltage is lower than approximately 20 percent of the rated voltage, at rated frequency, and with time delay when necessary.
NOTE - Undervoltage protection cannot be proviiied for steering gear motors and other motors which have to be continuously available.

10. OVERVOLTAGE

PROTECTION

10.1 Transformers - Adequate precautions should be taken to prevent any low-voltage system supplied through transformers from being charged by leakage from g high-voltage system of the transformer. Earthing of the low-voltage system is regarded as adequate precaution. 10.2 ac Machines - Adequate precautions should be taken in high-voltage ac system to limit and/o1 cope with overvoltage due to switching, etc, to ensure protection of ac machines.

15

