*•*•*••**•••*•*• 



^ ts:^ 




-A 



^ 



Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 





Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
"Step Out From the Old to the New" 



25Si1 V I i?Sfe555«5s-N5*^ 



>^-^;^V<^>k 



IS 11608 (1986) : Signalling Whistle for Life Saving 
Appliances for Sea-going Ships [TED 19: Marine Engineering 
and Safety Aids] 



K^S£Vff/i3^^Si&:^^ 



sssti V I i>ft!v%ft^>a«^ 



<:>^riV\Vyj=< 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge" v^^^'^* 



v^ 



%^ i). 



% 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 



lir 



■k 



A 



BLANK PAGE 




^<LS££i 




^jji> 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



tS : 11608' 1986 

( Reaffirmed 2002 ) 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

SIGNALLING WHfSTLR FOR 

LIFE SAVING APPLIANCES FOR 

SHA-GOING SHIPS 



UDC 629' 135 5*01 S"£ : 654'923M 




© Copyright 1986 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
UANA& BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SKAH ZAFAR MaKO 

New DELHI 110003 

Gr2 Srptmbtt\m^ 



IS : 11608 ■ 1986 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

SIGNALLING WHISTLE FOR 

LIFE SAVING APPLIANCES FOR 

SEA-GOING SHIPS 



Marine Instruments and Safety Aids Sectional Committee, 

MCPD 4 

Chairman Representing 

Gapt p. S. Bakvb Directorate General of Shipping, Bombay 

Members 

Shei a. K. Prasad ( Alternate to 
Gapt P. S. Barve ) 
Capt S, B. Aga Ericson & Richards, Bombay 

Cdr S. S. Baidwan Directorate of Standardization ( Ministry of 

Defence ) ( DGI ), New Delhi 

Lt a. Bhowmick ( Alternate ) 
Gapt N. N. Ehansali The Company of Master Mariners of India, Bombay 

Shbi a. K. Ghopb a Indian Register of Shipping, Bombay 

Shri S. Chandra ( Alternate ) 
Shri R, Roy Ghowdhury Calcutta Port Trust, Calcutta 

Shri D. K. Banerjeb ( Alternate ) 
Deputy DibeCtob Ministry of Defence ( Naval Headquarters ) 

Lt Cdr a. Anand ( Alternate ) 
Shei K. R. Easwaran Mather and Piatt ( India ) Ltd, Bombay 

Shri D. R. Bap at ( Alternate ) 
Capt S. B. Kt7MT»abgi The Shipping Corporation of India Ltd, Bombay 

Gapt R. Nath ( Alternate ) 
Shbi K. Manoharan Cochin Shipyard Ltd, Cochin 

Shri S. Gopalan ( Alternate ) 
Shri W. R . Patwarbhan Mazagon Dock Ltd, Bombay 

Shri D. C. Kandpal ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. Ramamurthy Hindustan Shipyard Ltd, Visakhapatnam 

Shri P. L. Narasimham ( Alternate ) 
Capt N. H. Sadarangani Indian National Shipowners' Association, Bombay 

Capt A. K. Ranade ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



{§) Copyright 1986 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 J and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



JtS : 11608 - 1986 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Memiers Representing 

Shri Jitbndra a. Salot Vijay Fire Protection Systems Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Shbi p. Raj Kumar ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. A, Shai-aria Shaparia Dock & Steel Go Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Shri C, N. Mistry ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. Soundhibarajan Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 
Shri B. L. Raina, Director General, ISI { Ex- officio Member ) 

Director ( MCPD ) 

Secretary 

Shri V. K. Sehgal 
Joint Director ( MCPD ), ISI 



Life Saving Equipment and Accessories Subcommittee, 
MCPD 4 : 6 

Convener 
Capt a. K. Prasad Directorate General of Shipping, Bombay 

Members 
Shri M. Apparao Mazagon Dock Ltd, Bombay 

Capt N. N. Bhansali The Company of Master Mariners of India, Bombay 

Shri S. Gopalan Aero Marine Industries Pvt Ltd, Madras 

Capt K. V. Hora Meridian Inflatables Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Gapx S. K. Chattsrjee ( Alternate) 
Capt T. S. Khara The Shipping Corporation of India Ltd, Bombay 

Capt S. B. Kundarqi ( Alternate ) 
Capt Mohak Raman Ministry of Defence ( Naval Headquarters ) 

Lt Cdr N- S. Bora ( Alternate ) 
Shri Shareef Moloobhoy Ahmed S. Moloobhoy & Sons, Bombay 

Shri Abib-f Mun"jee ( Alternate ) 
Shri J. K. Nangia Geeta Engineering Works Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Shri S. K. Batba ( Alternate ) 
Shri Fulghand N. Fatei. R. L. & Co, Bombay 

Capt N. H. Sadabangani The Indian National Shipowners' Association, 

Bombay 
Shri P. A. Shaparia Shaparia Dock & Steel Go Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Shri G. N. Mistby { Alternate ) 
Shki S. K. SiNHA Garden Reach Shipbuilders & Engineers Ltd, 

Calcutta 

Shri K. K. Nandi ( Alternate ) 
Shbi V. Srikivasan Swastic Rubber Products Ltd, Bombay 

Shri Y. S. Marathe ( Alternate I ) 

Shri S. Y. Banavalikab ( Alternate II ) 
Shbi K. S. Subbamaniam Institution of Marine Technologists, Bombay 

Shri P. K. Banerjeb ( Alternate I ) 

Shri J. S. Bhatti ( Alternate II ) 

Capt B. D. K atari a ( Alternate III ) 
Shri V. Swaminathan Bharat Traders, Bombay 

CdrS. Verma Ministry of Defence (R & D ) 



IS : 11608 - 1986 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

SIGNALLING WHISTLE FOR 

LIFE SAVING APPLIANCES FOR 

SEA-GOING SHIPS 



0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 24 March 1986, after the draft finalized by the Marine 
Instruments and Safety Aids Sectional Committee had been approved by 
the Marine, Cargo Movement and Packaging Division Council. 

0.2 Signalling whistles are used for audio signalling on lifeboats and 
liferafts of the sea-going vessels. These whistles are also supplied with 
life jackets. 

0.3 In the preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from 
COST 12055-1974 'Lifeboats and liferafts for sea-going vessels. Signall- 
ing whistle', issued by the USSR State Committee for Standards. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard specifies material, dimensions, general requirements 
and testing of signalHng whistles for life saving appliances for sea-going 
ships. 

2. MATERIAL 

2.1 The housing of the whistle shall be manufactured from blown 
polystyrene and the ball from expanded polystyrene conforming to 
IS : 2267-1972* or other equivalent materials. 



♦Specification for polystyrene moulding materials (Jirsi revision ). 



IS : 11608 - 1986 

a. DIMENSIONS 

3,1 The dimensions of the signalling whistle shall be as given in Fig. 1. 
Ui 35.5 — ^ r-HOUSING 





Fig. 1 



All dimensions in milimetres 
Dimensions of Signalling Whistle 



4. GENERAL REftUIREMENTS 

4.1 Surface of whistle shall be clean and smooth. Deformation exceeding 
0*4 mm shall not be permissible. 

4.2 Weight of the whistle shall not exceed O'OIS kg. 

4.3 The level of the sound pressure of the whistle shall not be less than 
105 dB at a distance of one metre, when the input pressure does not 
exceed 300 mm watergauge. 

4.4 The whistle shall be suitable for use within the temperature range of 
-30"C to +66*'G. 

4.5 The whistle shall be capable of functioning efficiently after immersion 
in salt water of specific gravity 1-025 for 24 hours. 

4.6 The whistle shall be provided with a lanyard. 

5. TESTING 

5.1 The whistle shall be subjected to acceptance tests and periodic tests. 

4 



IS : 11608 - 1986 

5.1.1 The conformity of signalling whistle to the requirements of 
clauses 3.1, 4.1, 4.2 and 4.5 shall be checked during acceptance tests. 

5.1.2 Periodic test for checking the conformity of whistle to clause 4.3 
shall be carried out at least once in two years on the whistle which have 
passed acceptance tests. 

5.2 Lot Size — The signalling whistles are inspected in lots. A lot shall 
consist of whistles despatched simultaneously to one consignee. 

5.2.1 From one lot two percent of whistles ( but not less than two in 
number ) shall be taken for carrying out the tests. 

5.2.2 If on checking as per 5.1.1 and 5.1.2 there are whistles which do 
not conform to the requirements of this standard, the entire lot shall be 
rejected for rectification of faults. 

5.2*3 After the rectification, the lot shall be presented for repeated 
tests on 2 percent whistles of the lot ( but not less than two in number ). 

5.2.4 If the results of the repeated tests are not satisfactory, the whole 
lot shall be rejected. 

5.3 Methods of Test 

5.3.1 The whistle shall be immersed in salt water of specific gravity 
1'025 for a period of 24 hours, after which the whistle shall be taken out, 
shaken or blown free of water to carry out the following tests. 

5.3.2 The construction and the dimensions of the whistle shall be 
checked by comparing them with the drawings and measuring their 
dimensions with measuring instruments of the required accuracy. 

5.3.3 The physical appearance of the whistle and the marking shall be 
inspected visually. 

5.3.4 The roughness of the outer surfaces shall be checked by com- 
paring with a standard surface finish. 

5.3.5 Level of sound pressure shall be checked with a sound level 
meter in four mutually perpendicular directions at a distance of one 
metre from the whistle with input pressure not exceeding 300 mm water- 
gauge. 

The level of the outer noise shall not exceed 65 dB. 

Minimum 3 measurements shall be taken at each point. 

Level of the sound pressure of the whistle shall be determined as 
arithmatic mean of the results of measurements at each point. 

5.3.6 Weight of the whistle shall be measured by using a balance with 
an accuracy up to one gram. 

5 



IS : 11608 - 19S6 

6. MARKING 

6.1 Each signalling whistle shall be marked with the manufacturer's 
trade-mark on the outer side of the whistle. 

6.1,1 Signalling whistle may also be marked with the ISI Certification 
Mark. 

Note — The use of the ISI Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of 
the Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act and the Rules and 
Regulations made thereunder. The ISI Mark on products covered by an Indian 
Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the 
requirements of that standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and 
quality control which is devised and supervised by ISI and operated by the producer. 
ISI marked products are also continuously checked by ISI for conformity to that 
standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the 
use of the ISI Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers or processors, 
may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution. 



