Rd HAF IS 4591 (Part 1/Sec 2) : 2020 
Indian Standard 


verartera difeat sth aera 
ATT 1 / SWR 2 Stra Vat 
as ht uniatsie 


( TET JTÜ ) 


Escalators and Moving Walks 


Part 1/Section 2 Guide for Planning 
and Selection 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 91.140.90 


© BIS 2020 


anda AM St 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 serere TH MT, 4 fereft— 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2020 Price Group 5 


Lift and Escalators Sectional Committee, ETD 25 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 1/Sec 2) (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the 
draft finalized by the Lift and Escalators Sectional committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division 
Council. 


This standard contains extracts of “EN 115 : 1995 + A1 : 1998 + A2 : 2004 Safety rules for the construction and 
installation of escalators and passenger conveyors” reproduced with the permission of CEN. 


The guidelines for installation and maintenance of escalators were earlier covered in IS 4591 : 1968. There has 
been tremendous increase in usage of escalators during the past decade. Considering that escalators are being 
used by many without much of knowledge of its operation, it is necessary that safety aspects are taken care in the 
manufacturing of escalators. Keeping this in view and also to align the requirements with international practices, 
this standard is being revised and is being brought out in three sections as follows: 
IS 4591 (Part 1/Sec 1) : 2020 Escalators and moving walks: Part 1/Section 1 Safety requirements 
(first revision) 
IS 4591 (Part 1/Sec 2) : 2020 Escalators and moving walks: Part l/Section 2 Guide for planning and 
selection ( first revision) 
IS 4591 (Part 1/Sec 3) : 2020 Escalators and moving walks: Part l/Section 3 Inspection and Test 
(first revision) 
With the publication of these standards, IS 4591 : 1968 stands withdrawn. 


The objective of this standard is to provide requirements for electric escalators and moving walks that carry 
passengers. 

The contents of this standard are based on the assumption that persons using escalators and moving walks are able 
to do so unaided. However, physical and sensory abilities in a population can vary over a wide range, escalators 
and moving walks are also likely to be used by persons with a range of other disabilities. 

Some individuals, in particular older people, might have more than one impairment. Some individuals are not able 
to use an escalator or moving walk independently and rely on assistance/support being provided by a companion. 
Furthermore, some individuals can be encumbered by objects or be responsible for other persons, which can affect 
their mobility. The extent to which an individual is incapacitated by impairments and encumbrances often depends 
on the usability of products, facilities and the environment. 

The use of wheelchairs on escalators and moving walks can lead to dangerous situations which cannot be mitigated 
by machine designs and therefore should not be permitted. 

The use of lifts is the preferred method of vertical travel for most people with disabilities and in particular 
wheelchair users and persons with guide dogs. 

Additional signs should be provided to indicate the location of other facilities, these facilities should be in close 
proximity to the escalators and moving walks and easy to find. 

It is assumed that negotiations have been made for each contract between the customer and the supplier/installer 
about: 


a) intended use of the escalator or moving walk; 
b) environmental conditions; 

c) civil engineering problems; and 

d) other aspects related to the place of installation. 


If escalators or moving walks are intended to be operated under special conditions, such as, directly exposed to 
the weather or explosive atmosphere, or in exceptional cases serve as emergency exits, appropriate design criteria, 
components, materials and instructions for use should be used that satisfy the particular conditions. 


(Continued on third cover) 


IS 4591 (Part 1/Sec 2) : 2020 


Indian Standard 
ESCALATORS AND MOVING WALKS 


PART 1/SECTION 2 GUIDE FOR PLANNING AND SELECTION 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard (Part 1/Sec 2) is applicable for all 
new escalators and moving walks (pallet or belt type) 
as defined in 3. 


1.2 This standard does not deal with hazards arising 
from seismic activities. 


1.3 This standard is not applicable to escalators and 
moving walks which were manufactured before the 
date of its publication. It is, however, recommended 
that existing installations be adapted to this standard. 


1.4 The requirements for “Semi-outdoor” installations 
of escalator need to be discussed and finalized between 
the customer and manufacturer as these requirements 
impact both the civil design of the installation as well 
as the design of the escalator. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions 
which, through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards. 


IS No. 
3043 : 2018 


Title 


Code of practice for earthing 
(second revision) 


4591 (Part 1/Sec 1) Escalators and moving 
: 2020 walks: Part l/Sec 1 Safety 
requirements 


459] (Part 1/Sec 3) Escalators and moving walks: 


: 2020 Part 1/Sec 3 Inspection and 
Test 
Indian Electricity Act and 
Rules 


3 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS - SYMBOLS 
AND ABBREVIATIONS 


3.1 Terms and Definitions 


For the purposes of this document, the terms and 
definitions given below shall apply. 


3.1.1 Angle of Inclination — Maximum angle to the 
horizontal in which the steps, the pallets or the belt 
move. 


3.1.2 Balustrade — Part of the escalator/moving walk 
which ensures the user’s safety by providing stability, 
protecting from moving parts and supporting the 
handrail. 


3.1.3 Balustrade Decking — Transverse member of the 
balustrade which meets the handrail guidance profile 
and which forms the top cover of the balustrade. 


3.1.4. Brake Load — Load on the step/pallet/belt 
which the brake system is designed to stop the 
escalator/moving walk. 


3.1.5 Comb — Pronged section at each landing that 
meshes with the grooves on steps/pallets/belts. 


3.1.5.1 Comb plate — Platform at each landing to 
which the combs are attached. 


3.1.6 Electrical Safety System — Safety related part 
of the electrical control system as an arrangement of 
safety circuits and monitoring devices. 


3.1.7 Electrical Safety Devices — Part of a safety circuit 
consisting of safety switches and/or fail safe circuits. 


3.1.8 Escalator — Power-driven, inclined, continuous 
moving stairway used for raising or lowering persons 
in which the user carrying surface (for example, steps) 
remains horizontal. 


NOTE — Escalators are machines even when they are out of 
operation, and cannot be considered as fixed staircases. 


3.1.9 Exterior Panel — Part of the exterior side of the 
enclosure of an escalator or moving walk. 


3.1.10 Fail Safe Circuit — Safety related electrical 
and/or electronic system with defined failure mode 
behavior. 


IS 4591 (Part 1/Sec 2) : 2020 


3.1.11 Handrail — Power-driven moving rail for 
persons to grip while using the escalator or moving 
walk. 


3.1.12 Interior Panel — Panel located between the 
skirting or lower inner decking and the handrail 
guidance profile or balustrade decking. 


3.1.13 Decking 


3.1.13.1 Lower inner decking — Profile that connects 
the skirting with the interior panel when they do not 
meet at a common point. 


3.1.13.2 Lower outer decking — Profile that connects 
the exterior panels with the interior panel. 


3.1.14 Machinery — Escalator or moving walk 
machine(s) mechanisms and associated equipment. 


3.1.15 Machinery Spaces — Space(s) inside or outside 
of the truss where the machinery as a whole or in parts 
is placed. 


3.1.16 Maximum Capacity — Maximum flow of persons 
that can be achieved under operational conditions. 


3.1.17 Moving Walk — Power-driven installation for 
the conveyance of persons in which the user carrying 
surface remains parallel to its direction of motion and 
is uninterrupted (for example, pallets, belt). 


NOTE — Moving walks are machines — even when they are 
out of operation — and should not be used as a fixed access. 


3.1.18 Newel — End of the balustrade. 


3.1.19 Nominal Speed — Speed in the direction of the 
moving steps, pallets or the belt, when operating the 
equipment under no load condition (that is, without 


persons), stated by the manufacturer as that for which 
the escalator or moving walk has been designed. 
NOTE — Rated speed is the speed the escalator/moving walk 


moves under rated load conditions. 


3.1.20 Rated Load — Load which the equipment is 
designed to move. 


NOTE — For maximum capacity, see 4.1. 


3.1.21 Rise — Vertical distance between the upper and 
lower finished floor levels. 


3.1.22 Safety Circuit — Part of the electric safety 
system consisting of electrical safety devices. 


3.1.23 Skirting — Vertical part of the balustrade 
interfacing with the steps, pallets or belt. 


3.1.24 Skirt Deflector — Device to minimize the risk of 
trapping between the step and the skirting. 


3.1.25 Stand-by Operation — Mode in which an 
escalator/moving walk can be stopped or operated 
under no load condition with any speed below the 
nominal speed. 


3.2 Symbols and Abbreviations 
For symbols and corresponding units of measurement 


used in this standard see Table 1. 


4 GUIDELINES FOR SELECTION AND 
PLANNING OF ESCALATORS AND MOVING 
WALKS 


4.1 Maximum Capacity 


For traffic flow planning, the maximum number of 
persons that can be carried by an escalator or moving 
walk in one hour is given in Table 2. 


Table 1 Symbol and Corresponding Unit of Measurement Used in this Standard 


( Clause 3.2 ) 


SI No. Symbol Designation Unit Figure 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) b, Horizontal distance between the outer edge of the handrail and a non-continuous obstruction, mm 1 

for example, roof intersection, column 
ii) big Horizontal distance between the outer edge of the handrail and a continuous obstruction, for mm 1 
example, wall 
ili) i Horizontal distance between the handrail of adjacent escalators/moving walks mm 1 
iv) i Vertical distance between the lower edge of the handrail and the balustrade decking mm 4 
v) h, Free height above any point of step surface, pallet or belt over the area between both edges m 1,3 
of handrails 
vi) h, Height of deflector m 3,5 
vii) ho Height of the upper edge of the free space outside the handrail mm 1 
viii) a Angle of inclination of the escalator or moving walk ° (degree) 3 
ix) B Design angle of the teeth of the comb ° (degree) - 


IS 4591 (Part 1/Sec 2) : 2020 


Table 2 Maximum Capacity 
( Clause 4.1 ) 


SINo.  Step/Pallet Width z, Nominal Speed v 
m m/s 
(1) Q) 8) (4) (5) 
0.50 0.65 0.75 
i) 0.60 3 600 persons/h 4 400 persons/h 4 900 persons/h 
ii) 0.80 4 800 persons/h 5 900 persons/h 6 600 persons/h 
iii) 1.00 6 000 persons/h 7 300 persons/h 8 200 persons/h 


NOTE — For moving walks with a pallet width in excess of 1.00 m, the capacity is not increased as users need to hold the handrail, 
the additional width is to principally enable the use of shopping trolleys and baggage carts. 


4.2 Escalators or Moving Walks for Public 
Transport 


For escalators or moving walks which are: 


a) part of a public transport system including 
entrance and exit points, or 


b) suitable for intensive use, regularly operating 
for approximately 140 h/week with a load 


reaching 100 percent of the brake load 
(see IS 4591 (Part 1/Sec 1) 5.4.2.1.3.1 and 
5.4.2.1.3.3) for a total duration of at least 0.5 h 


during any time interval of 3 h, 


it is recommended to install auxiliary brakes also for 
rises /,, less than 6 m. 


The load conditions and additional safety features 
should be agreed between the manufacturer and the 
owner reflecting the traffic levels which exist. 


5 REQUIREMENTS OF ESCALATORS 
AND MOVING WALKS INTENDED TO 
TRANSPORT SHOPPING TROLLEYS AND 
BAGGAGE CARTS 


5.1 Escalators 


The use of both shopping trolleys and baggage carts on 
escalators is unsafe and shall not be permitted. 


The principle reasons why the use of these products 
is considered to be unsafe are foreseeable misuse, 
overloading and width restriction. 


Where shopping trolleys and/or baggage carts are 
available in the area around escalator installations, 
suitable barriers shall be provided to prevent access. 


5.2 Moving Walks 


The use of suitably designed shopping trolleys and 
baggage carts on moving walks is permitted. 


Shopping trolleys or baggage carts which are chosen 
for use on a moving walk shall be specified between 
the baggage cart manufacturer and the moving walk 
manufacturer. If non-specified shopping trolleys or 


baggage carts are available in the moving walk area, 
there is a serious risk of misuse. It is necessary to 
prevent access to the moving walk entrance. 


The width of the shopping trolley or baggage cart 
and its contents shall be at least 400 mm less than the 
nominal pallet/belt width. Passengers shall be able to 
leave the moving walk, even if shopping trolleys or 
baggage carts are on the moving walk. 


For moving walks with an inclination greater than 6°, 
the rated speed shall be limited to 0.5 m/s. 


Combs shall be designed with an angle 
p (refer IS 4591 (Part 1/Sec 1) Fig. 2) of max. 19° 
combined with a diameter of the shopping trolley or 
baggage cart roller of at least 120 mm diameter. 


Additional stops for emergency situations at handrail 
level (taking into account 6.2.2) with a distance 
between 2.0 m and 3.0 m before the pallet reaches the 
comb intersection line shall be provided. The stop for 
emergency situations near the transition curve shall be 
reachable from inside the moving walk and the stops 
for emergency situations at exit(s) shall be reachable 
from outside of the moving walk. 


Shopping trolleys or baggage carts shall conform to the 
moving walk design: 


a) The shopping trolley or baggage cart design shall 
ensure a safe and correct loading. 


b) The maximum weight for a shopping trolley or 
baggage cart shall be 160 kg when loaded. 


c) Shopping trolley or baggage cart shall 
automatically lock themselves on the inclined part 
of moving walks. 

d) Shopping trolley or baggage cart shall be fitted 
with a braking or blocking system. 

e) Shopping trolley or baggage cart shall have 
deflectors (bumpers) to reduce the risk of 
clamping. 


5.2.1 For safe exit from the moving walk, it is necessary 
that the rear rollers of the shopping trolley or baggage 


IS 4591 (Part 1/Sec 2) : 2020 


cart are able to push the front rollers over the comb. 
The front rollers and/or blocking system shall easily 
release from the pallet. 


a) Deflectors and guiding devices shall be added to 
the surrounding area to ensure correct alignment 
of shopping trolley or baggage cart when entering 
the moving walk. 

b) Safety signs about safe and correct use of the 
shopping trolley or baggage cart should be added. 


6 BUILDING INTERFACES 


6.1 General 


The requirements in 6.2 and 6.3 are important for the 
safety of users and maintenance personal. 


If it is not possible for the manufacturers of the 
escalator or moving walk to fulfill these requirements 
(or some of them) due to the fact that, for example, they 
are not installing the escalator or moving walk, those 


Legend 


1 Obstacle (for example, wall or Column ) 


requirements that are not fulfilled have to be part of 
the instruction handbook as an obligation for the owner 
(see 7). 


6.2 Free Space for Users 


6.2.1 The clear height above the steps of the escalator 
or pallets or belt of the moving walk at all points shall 
be not less than 2.30 m (see h, in Fig. 1 and Fig. 3). 


The clear height shall extend to the end of the newel. 


NOTE — The clear height of 2.30 m should also be applied to 
the unrestricted area. 


6.2.2 To prevent collision, a minimum free area 
around the escalator or moving walk is defined as per 
Fig. 1. The height /,,, measured from the steps of the 
escalator or the pallets or the belt of the moving walk 
shall be at least 2.10 m. The distance between the 
outer edge of the handrail and walls or other obstacles 
(see b in Fig. 1) shall under no circumstances be 
less than 80 mm horizontally and 25 mm vertically 


by 1 


hy 


x 


Principal Dimensions Clause Principal Dimensions Clause 
b, = 400 mm 6.2.4 h, = 2300 mm 6.2.1 
b,, = 80mm 6.2.2 h,, > 2100 mm 6.2.2 
b, = 160mm 6.2.3 


NOTE — This figure is not to scale, serves only to illustrate the requirements 


Fic. 1 CLEARANCE BETWEEN BUILDING STRUCTURE AND EscALATOR/MOoviNG WALK UNIT 


IS 4591 (Part 1/Sec 2) : 2020 


NOTE — This figure is not to scale, serves only to illustrate the requirements 


Fic. 2 EXAMPLE OF BARRIERS AT LANDINGS 


lı 


hg 


Principle dimensions Clause 
h, > 2.30 m 6.2.1 
h, > 0.30m 6.2.4 


NOTE — This figure is not to scale, serves only to illustrate the requirements 


Fic. 3 ESCALATOR (ELEVATION) 


IS 4591 (Part 1/Sec 2) : 2020 


below the lower edge of the handrail (see b,, in Fig. 4). 
The area is permitted to be smaller, if by appropriate 
measures, the risk of injury is minimized. 


SLL III I LG S 


o 
^ 


Clause 
6.2.2 


Principal Dimensions 


b, > 25mm 


Fic. 4 EscALATOR/MOVING WALK 
( HANDRAIL-SECTIONAL VIEW ) 


6.2.3 For escalators arranged adjacent to one 
another either parallel or criss-cross, the distance 


between the handrails shall be not less than 160 mm 
(see b,, in Fig. 1). 


6.2.4 Where building obstacles can cause injuries, 
appropriate preventive measures shall be taken. 


In particular, at floor intersections and on criss-cross 
escalators or moving walks, a vertical deflector of not 
less than 0.30 m in height, not presenting any sharp 
cutting edges, shall be placed above the handrail level 
and extend at least 25 mm below the lower edge of 
the handrail, for example, as an imperforate triangle 
(see h, in Fig. 3 and Fig. 5). 


It is not necessary to comply with these requirements 
when the distance b, between the outer edge of the 
handrail and any obstacle is equal to or greater than 
400 mm (see Fig. 1). 


6.2.5 Possibility of overcrowding at destination floor, 
for example, should be considered. There should be 
enough space for passenger movement at entry floor 
and destination floor. The exiting passage at destination 
floor shall have adequate capacity for smooth flow of 
people discharged by the escalator, eliminating the 
possibility of overcrowding at that floor. 


At the exit(s) of each individual escalator or moving 
walk, a sufficient unrestricted area shall be available 
to accommodate persons. The width of the unrestricted 
area shall at least correspond to the distance between 


Legend 


1 anti-climbing device 


2 vertical deflector (6.2.4) 


Principal Dimensions 


Clause 


h, > 0.30 m 


6.2.4 


NOTE — This figure is not to scale, serves only to illustrate the requirements 


Fic. 5 VERTICAL DEFLECTOR 


the outer edges of the handrails plus 80 mm on each 
side. The depth shall be at least 2.50 m measured from 
the end of the balustrade. It shall be permissible to 
reduce it to 2.00 m if the width of the unrestricted area 
is increased to at least double the distance between the 
outer edges of the handrails plus 80 mm on each side. 


For succeeding escalators and moving walks, the 
depth of an unrestricted area shall be determined in 
each individual case depending on for example, type 
of use (persons only or persons with transport devices, 
number of intermediate exits, relative orientation and 
theoretical capacity). 


6.2.6 In the case of successive escalators and moving 
walks without intermediate exits, they shall have the 
same capacity [see also (viii) in IS 4591 (Part 1/Sec 1) 
Table 6]. 


6.2.7 Where it is possible for people to come into 
contact with the outer edge of a handrail at a landing 
and can be drawn into a hazardous situation, such as, 
toppling over a balustrade, appropriate preventative 
measures shall be taken (for an example, see Fig. 2). 


Some examples are: 


a) Prevention of entry into the space by the placement 
of permanent barriers; 


b) Increasing the height of the building structure of 
the fixed balustrade in the hazard area by at least 
100 mm above the handrail level and positioned 
between 80 mm and 120 mm from the outer edge 
of the handrail. 


6.2.8 The surrounds of the escalator or moving walk 
shall be illuminated, especially in the vicinity of the 
combs. 


NOTE — Information should be exchanged between the 
manufacturer and the customer. 


6.2.9 It is permissible to arrange the lighting in the 
surrounding space and/or at the installation itself. The 
intensity of illumination at the landings including the 
combs shall be related to the intensity of illumination 
of the general lighting in the area. The intensity of 
illumination shall be not less than 50 lux at the comb 
intersection line measured at floor level. 


6.3 Machinery Spaces outside the Truss 


6.3.1 A safe access for persons to machinery spaces 
shall be provided. 


6.3.2 Machinery spaces shall be lockable and only 
accessible to authorized persons. 


6.3.3 Machinery spaces shall be provided with 
permanently installed electric lighting on the following 
basis: 


a) A minimum of 200 lux at floor level in working 
areas; and 


IS 4591 (Part 1/Sec 2) : 2020 


b) Aminimum of 50 lux at floor level in access routes 
leading to these working areas. 


6.3.4 Emergency lighting shall be installed to allow 
the safe evacuation of all personnel working in any 
machinery space. 


NOTE — Emergency lighting is not intended for continuation 
of maintenance or other activities. 


6.3.5 The dimensions of machinery spaces shall 
be sufficient to permit easy and safe working on 
equipment, especially the electrical equipment. 
In particular there shall be provided at least a clear 
height of 2.00 m at working areas, and: 
a) aclear horizontal area in front of the control panels 
and the cabinets. This area is defined as follows: 
1) depth, measured from the external surface of 
the enclosures: at least 0.70 m; or 
2) width, the greater of the following values: 
0.50 m or the full width of the cabinet or panel. 
b) a clear horizontal area of at least 0.50 m x 0.60 m 


for maintenance and inspection of moving parts at 
points where this is necessary. 


6.3.6 The clear height for movement shall not be less 
than 1.80 m. 


The access ways to the clear spaces mentioned 
in 6.3.6 shall have a width of at least 0.50 m. This value 
may be reduced to 0.40 m where there are no moving 
parts. 
This full height for movement is taken to the underside 
of the structural roof beams and measured from both: 
a) the floor of the access area; and 
b) the floor of the working area. 


6.3.7 In machinery spaces the clear height shall under 
no circumstances be less than 2.0 m. 


6.4 Electric Power Supply 


Agreements shall be made between the owner and 
the manufacturer about electric supply and electric 
protection requirements (for example, electric shock, 
short circuit, overload, etc). 


The installation shall comply with IS 3043 and /ndian 
Electricity Act and Rules. 


7 ACCOMPANYING DOCUMENTS 
(IN PARTICULAR, INSTRUCTION 
HANDBOOK) 


7.1 Contents 


The instruction handbook or other written instructions 
shall contain among others: 


a) Information relating to transport, handling and 
storage of the escalator or moving walk, for 
example: 


IS 4591 (Part 1/Sec 2) : 2020 


b) 


c) 


d) 


1) storage conditions; 


2) dimensions, mass value(s), position of the 
centre(s) of gravity; and 


3) indications for handling (for example, 
drawings indicating application points for 
lifting equipment). 

Information relating to installation and 

commissioning of the escalator or moving walk, 

for example: 


1) building interfaces (see 6); 


2) fixing/anchoring and vibration dampening 
requirements; 


3) assembly and mounting conditions; 
4) space needed for use and maintenance; 


5) permissible environmental conditions 
(for example, temperature, moisture, vibration, 
electromagnetic radiation, earthquake and 
civil defence); 


6) instructions for connecting to the power supply 
(particularly about protection against electric 
overloading); 


7) advice about waste removal/disposal; and 


8) ifnecessary, recommendations about protective 
measures which have to be taken by the owner; 
for example, additional safeguards, safety 
distances, safety signs and signals. 


Information relating to the escalator or moving 
walk itself, for example: 


1) detailed description of the escalator or moving 
walk, its fittings, its guards and/or protective 
devices; 


2) comprehensive range of applications for which 
the escalator or moving walk is intended, 
including prohibited usages, if any, taking into 
account variations of the original machine if 
appropriate; 

3) diagrams (especially schematic representation 
of safety functions and layout details); 


4) technical 
equipment; 


documentation about electric 


5) documents attesting that the escalator or 
moving walk complies with the relevant 
directives; and 


6) documents specifying the grade of the slip 
resistance. 


Information relating to the use of the escalator or 
moving walk, for example, about: 


1) intended use; 
2) description of manual controls (actuators); 
3) setting and adjustment; 


4) risks which could not be eliminated by the 
protective measures taken by the designer; 


5) interdiction to place merchandise between 
adjacent balustrades or between a balustrade 
and adjacent building structures; 


6) preventing arrangements in the vicinity of 
the escalator/moving walk which encourages 
misuse; 


7) keeping free of unrestricted areas (see 6.2.5); 


8) reasonably foreseeable misuse and prohibited 
usages; 

9) recommendation to not use escalators as 
regular staircases or emergency exits; 


10) recommendation that, for escalators and 
moving walks which otherwise would be 
exposed to weather conditions, the customer 
provides a roof or enclosure; 


11) fault identification and location, repair, and 
restarting after an intervention; and 
12) investigations and necessary corrective actions 


in case of faults requiring manual reset, to be 
taken before reset and restart. 


e) Information for maintenance, for example: 


1) necessity to follow the requirements of 
maintenance for escalators or moving walks; 


2) personal protective equipment which need to 
be used and training required; 


3) nature and frequency of inspections; 


4) instructions relating to maintenance operations 
which require a definite technical knowledge 
or particular skills and, hence, should be 
carried out exclusively by skilled persons 
(for example, maintenance staff, specialists); 


5) instructions relating to maintenance actions 
(for example, replacement of parts) which do 
not require specific skills and hence may be 
carried out by the owner; 

6) drawings and diagrams enabling maintenance 
personnel to carry out their task rationally 
(especially fault-finding tasks); 

7) instructions 
refurbishment; 


relating to cleaning and 


8) necessity for the maintainer to observe a 
complete revolution of the step/pallet band 
before making the escalator/moving walk 
available to the public after maintenance; and 


9) instructions on the necessary use of inspection 
controls during maintenance and repair work. 


Information about periodic inspection and tests to 

ascertain whether the escalator or moving walk is 

safe in operation, including: 

1) electric safety devices with regard to their 
effective operation; 


2) brake(s) according to 42 d of 
IS 4591 (Part 1/Sec 3); 


3 


— 


driving elements for visible signs of wear and 
tear and for insufficient tension of belts and 
chains; 

4 


— 


steps, pallets or the belt for defects, true run 
and guidance; 


5 


— 


dimensions and tolerances specified in this 
standard; 


6 
7 
8 
9 


wm 


combs for proper condition and adjustment; 


— 


interior panel and the skirting; 


— 


handrails; and 


— 


test of the electric continuity of the connection 
between the earth terminal(s) in the driving 
station and the different parts of the escalator 


or moving walk liable to be live accidentally. 
Information for for 


example: 


wa 


g situations, 


emergency 
1) the operating method to be followed in the 
event of accident or breakdown; 


2) use of hand winding device, if any 
[see IS 4591 (Part 1/Sec 1) 5.4.1.4 and 
7.2.1.3]; and 

3) warning about possible emission or leakage of 
harmful substance(s), and if possible indication 
of means to fight their effects. 

h 


wm 


A declaration that the emission sound pressure 
level measured under free field conditions at 
a distance of 1.0 metre from the surface of the 
machinery and at a height of 1.6 metres from the 
floor plate is expected not to exceed 70 dB(A). 


7.2 Presentation of the Instruction Handbook 


a) Type and size of print shall ensure the best possible 
legibility. Warning signs and/or cautions should be 
emphasized by the use of colours, symbols and/or 
large print. 

b 


— 


Information for use shall be given in the 
language(s) ofthe country in which the escalator 
or moving walk will be used for the first time and 
in the original version. If more than one language 
is to be used, each language should be readily 
distinguished from the other(s), and efforts should 
be made to keep the translated text and the relevant 
illustration together. 


c 


wa 


Whenever helpful to the understanding, text 
should be supported by illustrations. Illustrations 
should be supplemented with written details 
enabling, for instance, manual controls (actuators) 
to be located and identified. They should not be 


IS 4591 (Part 1/Sec 2) : 2020 


separated from the accompanying text and should 
follow sequential operations. 


d 


— 


Consideration should be given to presenting 
information in tabular form where this will aid 
understanding. Tables should be adjacent to the 
relevant text. 

The use of colours should be considered, 
particularly in relation to components requiring 
quick identification. 


e 


wm 


f) When information for use is lengthy, a table of 
contents and/or an index should be given. 


g) Safety-relevant instructions which involve 
immediate action should be provided in a form 
readily available to the operator. 


7.3 Advice for Drafting and Editing Information 
for Use 


a) The information shall clearly relate to the specific 
model of escalator or moving walk. 


b) When information for use is being prepared, the 
communication process “see — think — use" should 
be followed in order to achieve the maximum 
effect and should follow sequential operations. 
The questions “how?” and “why?” should be 
anticipated and the answers provided. 


c 


— 


Information for use shall be as simple and as brief 
as possible, and should be expressed in consistent 
terms and units with a clear explanation of unusual 
technical terms. 


d 


— 


Documents giving instructions for use should be 
produced in durable form (that is, they should 
be able to survive frequent handling). It may be 
useful to mark them “keep for future reference". 
Where information for use is kept in electronic 
form (for example, Pen drive, CD, DVD, tape) 
information on safety-related issues that need 
immediate action shall always be backed up with 
a hard copy that is readily available. 


8 MARKING 
At least at one landing, the following shall be marked: 


a) name and full address of the manufacturer and, 
where applicable, his authorized representative; 


b) designation of series or type of the machinery; 
c) serial number; and 


d) year of construction (year in which the 
manufacturing process is completed) shall be 
indicated, visible from the outside. 


IS 4591 (Part 1/Sec 2) : 2020 


ANNEX A 


( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Lift and Escalators Sectional Committee, ETD 25 


Organization 


Central Public Works Department (CPWD), New 
Delhi 


Chief Electrical Inspector, Maharashtra 
Chief Electrical Inspectorate, Tamil Nadu 


Chief Electrical Inspectorate, Maharashtra 


Chief Electrical Inspectorate, Energy & 
Petrochemical Department Government of 
Gujarat 


Electrical Inspectorate, Labour Deptt, 
Govt of NCT of Delhi 


Delhi Metro Rail Corporation Limited 


Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation 
(MIDC) Fire Service 


Electrical Contractors Association of Maharashtra 
Fujitec India Pvt Ltd, Tamil Nadu 


Johnson Lifts Pvt Limited, Chennai 


Kone Elevator India Private Limited, Chennai 


Lerch Bates Private Limited, Mumbai 


Otis Elevator Company (India) Limited, Mumbai 


Schindler India Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


Tak Consulting Private Limited, Mumbai 
Thyssenkrupp Elevator India Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


Suri C. K. VARMA (Chairman) 


SHRI S. R. BAGDE 


Suri T. At. TENAPPAN 
SHRI D. KARTHIKEYAN (Alternate) 


Suri N. G. BEHRAM 
Suet V. H. SHAHARE (Alternate I) 
Suri D. M. Nixuate (Alternate IT) 


Suri HAIDERALI H. KuojA 
SHRI ASHWIN B. CHAUDHARY (Alternate I) 
SHRI GoraL K. PnAjAParI (Alternate II) 


SHRI MUKESH KUMAR SHARMA 
SHRI JOGENDER SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI MANUJ SINGHAL 
SHRI MANJEET Kumar (Alternate I) 
SHRI SUMIT KUMAR SHARMA (Alternate II) 


SHRI SANTOSH S. WARICK 


SHRI ANIL GACHKE 


Suri S. P. Rao 
Suri R. RasesH (Alternate I) 
SHRI ARUNSANKAR M. S. (Alternate IT) 


Suri T. SUBRAMANIAN 
SHRI V. KARTHIKEYAN (Alternate) 


Suri TrpnisP. M. 
SHRI P. Gurumoortny (Alternate I) 
SHRI U. VISWANATHAN (Alternate II) 


SHRI SUMEET MAJUMDAR 
SHRI PRASHANT KULKARNI (Alternate) 


SHRI VIJAY JAYCHANDRAN 
SHRI ABHIJIT DANDEKAR (Alternate I) 
Suet H. N. PRASHANTH (Alternate II) 


SHRI NiMISH DESHPANDE 
SHRI RonniE Dante (Alternate I) 
Suri Nitin KApAM (Alternate IT) 


SHRI TAK MATHEWS 
SHRI WILLIAM REBELLO (Alternate) 


SHRI VISHNU PARASHAR 
Suni RAJESH Josui (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJEEV SHARMA, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (ETD) 


[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


Ms MEGHNA MUDGAL 
Scientist ‘C’ (ETD), BIS 


10 


(Continued from second cover) 


The composition of the Committee, responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: ETD 25 (11982). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi f 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


