*•*•*••**•••*•*• 


^  ts:^ 


-A 


^ 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 


Mazdoor  Kisan  Shakti  Sangathan 
The  Right  to  Information,  The  Right  to  Live" 


Jawaharlal  Nehru 
"Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New" 


25SiM  I  I>ft=55«^t55«^ 


>?<:i^\\i^ 


IS  8485  (1977) :  Copper  powder  for  powder  metallurgical 
applications  [MTD  25:  Powder  Metallurgical  Materials  and 
Products] 


K^!S:Vff/I3^^Si&:^^ 


sssti  V I  i>ft!v%ft^>a«^ 


^i^^r^Wi^^ 


Satyanarayan  Gangaram  Pitroda 
Invent  a  New  India  Using  Knowledge"  v^^^'^* 


v^ 


%^  i). 


% 


Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge  is  such  a  treasure  which  cannot  be  stolen" 


lir 


■k 


A 


BLANK  PAGE 


^<LS££i 


^jji> 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


IS:  8485'  t977 

(Reaffirmed  2002) 

Indian  Standard 

SPECIFICATION  FOR 

COPPER  POWDER  FOR  POWDER 

METALLURGICAL  APPLICATIONS 


UDC    tey- 3-49^-2 


Fric 


©  Qip}'Tigkf  1977 

INPIAN     STANDARDS     INSTITUTION 

MA^AK     JJirAVAW.     9     BAHADUR      SHAH    7 MAR     MARC; 

Gr  J  <yf^fl*ff  J 977 


IS  :  8485  -  1977 

Indian  Standard 

SPECIFICATION  FOR 

COPPER  POWDER  FOR  POWDER 

METALLURGICAL  APPLICATIONS 

Powder  Metallurgical  Materials  and  Products  Sectional  Committee, 

SMDG  30 

Chairman  Representing 

T>Ti  R.  V.  Tamhankar  Ministry  of  Defence  (R&D) 

Members 

Shm  N.  T.  George  (  Alternate  to 
Dr  R.  V.  Tamhankar  ) 
Shri  B.  K.  Banerjee  The   All  India  Automobiles  &  Ancillary  Industries 

Association,  Bombay 
Shri  T.  N.  Chandbamouli  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  S.  K.  Basu  Indian  Oxygen  Limited,  Calcutta 

Shri  R.  Bak-erjeb  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  R.  D.  Bhabgava  Zell  Ate  Limited,  Bombay 

Shri  a.  a.  R^himtulla  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  J.  Bhattacharya  National      Metallurgical       Laboratory       ( CSIR  ), 

Jamshedpur 
Shri  J.  P.  Tiwari  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  P   G.  Bhatt  FIcxicons  Limited,  Bombay 

Shri  B.  G.  Shah  (  Alternate  ) 
Shbi  B.  G,  Biswas  National  Test  House,  Calcutta 

Shri  P.  K.  Ghattbrjbe  Ministry  of  Defence  (  DGI ) 

Shri  P.  K,  Gangopadhyay  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  T.  R.  Gupta  Indian  Hard  Metals  Pvt  Limited,  Calcutta 

Shri  K.  C.  Mittal  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  B.  M.  Kataria  Mahindra  Sintered  Products  Limited,  Pune 

Shri  S.  R.  Sundaram  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  S.  P,  Khosla  Khosla  Metal  Powders  Pvt  Limited,  Pune 

Shri  M,  M.  Kaul  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  Lakshman  Mishra  Directorate    General     of     Technical    Development, 

New  Delhi 
Shri  T.  R.  Mohan  Rao  (  Alter  mite  ) 
Shri  D.  Y.  Moghe  Directorate  General,  Ordnance  Factories  (  Ministry 

of  Defence  ),  Calcutta 
Shri  U.  Mohak  Rao  Bharat  Heavy  Electricals  Limited,  Bhopal 

Shri  A.  Padmanaban  Ashok  Leyland  Limited,  Madras 

Shri  M.  Philip  Indian  Aluminium  Co  Ltd,  Calcutta 

Shri  P.  N,  Phadke  (  Alternate  ) 
Db  R.  V.  Raghavan  Bhabha  Atomic  Research  Centre,  Bombay 

Shbi  S.  V.  Pai  Bhale  (  Alternate ) 

(  Continued  on  page  2  ) 


©  Copyright  1977 

INDIAN  STANDARDS  INSTITUTION 

This  publication    is   protected   under   the  Indian  Copyright  Act  {  XIV   of  1957  )   and 

reproduction  in  whole  or  in  part  by  any  means  except  with  written  permission  of  the 

publisher  shall  be  deemed  to  be  an  infringement  of  copyright  under  the  said  Act. 


IS  :  8485  -  1977 


(  Continued  from  page  1  ) 

Members 

0B  N.  R.  Sakjana 
Db  N.  Sen 

Shri  S.  K.  Sen  Gupta 
Shri  R.  Skinivasan 

Shri  Y.  S,  Bhatt  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  R.  Srinivasan 


Representing 

Sandvik  Asia  Limited,  Pune 
Tata  Iron  &  Steel  Co  Ltd,  Jamshedpur 
Advani-Oerlikon  Private  Ltd,  Bombay 
Widia  (  India  )  Ltd,  Bangalore 


Central  Electrochemical  Research  Institute  (  CSIR  ), 
Karaikudi 
Alternate  ) 

Powder  Metallurgy  Association  of  India,  Hyderabad 
Shbi  S.  K.  Agrawal  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  G.  R.  Rama  Rao,  Director  General,  ISI  (  Ex-officio  Member  ) 

Director  (  Struc  &  Met )  (  Secretary  ) 


Shri  P,  V.  Vasu  Deva  Rao 
PRor  G,  S.  Upadhvaya 


IS  :  8485  -  1977 

Indian  Standard 

SPECIFICATION  FOR 

COPPER  POWDER  FOR  POWDER 

METALLURGICAL  APPLICATIONS 

0.      FOREWORD 

0.1  This  Indian  Standard  was  adopted  by  the  Indian  Standards  Institution 
on  28  June  1977,  after  the  draft  finalized  by  the  Powder  Metallurgical 
Materials  and  Products  Sectional  Committee  had  been  approved  by  the 
Structural  and  Metals  Division  Council. 

0.2  In  the  powder  metallurgy  industry  copper  powder  is  used  for  the 
manufacture  of  sintered  bearings  and  parts,  copper-graphite  brushes  and 
high  density  electrical  contacts.  The  requisite  powder  may  be  produced 
by  a  number  of  methods  like  gaseous  reduction  of  copper  oxide, 
electrolysis  and  atomization.  The  physical  properties  and  chemical 
characteristics  of  the  powder  differ  widely  depending  on  the  method  of 
manufacture. 

0.3  This  standard  contains  clauses  5.1,  6.1  and  8.1  which  call  for 
agreement  between  the  purchaser  and  the  manufacturer. 

0.4  For  the  purpose  of  deciding  whether  a  particular  requirement  of 
this  standard  is  complied  with,  the  final  value,  observed  or  calculated, 
expressing  the  result  of  a  test  or  analysis,  shall  be  rounded  off  in 
accordance  with  IS  :  2-1960*.  The  number  of  significant  places  retained 
in  the  rounded  off  value  should  be  the  same  as  that  of  the  specified 
value  in  this  standard. 


1.  SCOPE 

l.l  This  standard  covers  the  requirements  for  copper  powders  for  use  in 
the  manufacture  of  sintered  bearings  and  parts. 

2.  SUPPLY  OF  MATERIAL 

2.1  General  requirements  relating  to  the  supply  of  copper  powder  shall 
be  as  laid  down  in  IS  :  1387-1967t. 

•Rules  for  rounding  off  numerical  values  (  revised  ). 

tGeneral  requirements  for  the  supply  of  metallurgical  materials  {^first  revision  ). 


IS  :  8485  -  1977 

3.  GRADES 

3.1  The  material  shall  be  of  two  grades,  namely,  Grade  1  and  Grade  2. 

4.  CHEMICAL  COMPOSITION 

4.1  The  chemical  composition  of  both  the  grades  shall  be  as  given  in 
Table  1. 

TABLE  1     CHEMICAL  COMPOSITION 

Percentage 

Copper  98*5  Min 

Hydrogen  loss  0*4  Max 

Acid  insolubles  0'3  Max 

Others  by  difference  0"8  Max 

4.1.1  The   copper  content  shall  be  determined  as  per  the  procedure 
given  in  Appendix  A. 

4.1.2  The   hydrogen   loss   shall   be   determined   in    accordance   with 
15:5644-1970*, 

4.1.3  The   acid   insolubles   shall   be   determined   in  accordance  with 
IS:  7438-19741- 

5.  SIEVE  ANALYSIS 

5.1  The  sieve  analysis  of  the  material  shall  be  carried  out  in  accordance 
with  IS  :  546 1-1969 J  and  shall  be  as  given  below;  for  size  between  —  150 
and  -f  45  microns  shall  be  as  agreed  to  between  the  purchaser  and  the 
manufacturer; 

Sieve  Size  Percent  of  Powder , 

micron  Max 


Grade  1  Grade  2 

+ 180                                 Nil  Nil 

+  150                                  5  5 

-  45                               15-35  35-55' 


♦  Method  for  determination  of  hydrogen  loss  of  copper,  tungsten  and  iron  powder, 
t Method  of  test  for  acid  insoluble  content  of  copper  and  iron  powders, 
tMethod  for  sieve  analysis  of  metal  powders. 


18:8485-1977 

6.  PHYSICAL  PROPERTIES 

6.1  Apparent  Density  —  The  apparent  density  of  both  the  grades 
powder  when  tested  in  accordance  with  IS  :  4848-1968*  shall  be  between 
2*5  and  3*0  g/cm^.  Any  apparent  density  requirement  outside  this  range 
shall  be  specifically  agreed  to  between  the  purchaser  and  the 
manufacturer. 

6.2  Flow  Rate  —  The  flow  rate  of  the  powder  shall  be  tested  in 
accordance  with  IS  :  4840-1968"f.  The  time  taken  for  50  g  of  the  powder 
to  flow  through  the  orifice  shall  be  as  follows: 

a)  For  Grade  1  —  less  than  32  seconds. 

b)  For  Grade  2 —  less  than  40  seconds. 

6.3  Compressibility  —  Unlubricated  powder  when  pressed  with  a 
pressure  of  400  N/mm^  in  accordance  with  IS  :  4857-1968|  shall  attain  a 
green  density  of  7*2  g/cm^,  Min. 

7.  SAMPLING 

7.1  The  sampling  of  powders  for  conducting  the  various  tests  shall  be 
done  in  accordance  with  IS  :  6492-1972§. 

8.  PACKING 

8.1  The  material  shall  be  supplied  packed  in  suitable  containers  in 
quantities  mutually  agreed  to  between  the  purchaser  and  the 
manufacturer, 

9.  MARKING 

9*1  Each  container  of  copper  powder  shall  be  suitably  marked  to  identify 
the  name  or  trade-mark  of  the  manufacturer,  grade  and  mass. 

9.1.1  The  container  may  also  be  marked  with  the  ISI  Certification 
Mark. 

Note  —  The  use  of  the  ISI  Certification  Mark  is  governed  by  the  provisions  of 
the  Indian  Standards  Institution  ( Certification  Marks )  Act  and  the  Rules  and 
Regulations  made  thereunder.  The  ISI  Mark  on  products  covered  by  an  Indian 
Standard  conveys  the  assurance  that  they  have  been  produced  to  comply  with  the 
requirements  of  that  standard  under  a  well-defined  system  of  inspection,  testing  and 
auality  control  which  is  devised  and  supervised  by  ISI  and  operated  by  the 
producer.  ISI  marked  products  are  also  continuously  checked  by  ISI  for  conformity 
to  that  standard  as  a  further  safeguard.  Details  of  conditions  under  which  a  licence 
for  the  use  of  the  ISI  Certification  Mark  may  be  granted  to  manufacturers  or 
processors,  may  be  obtained  from  the  Indian  Standards  institution. 


♦Method  for  determination  of  apparent  density  of  powders  for  powder  metallurgical 
purposes. 

fMethod  for  determination  of  flow  rate  of  powders  for  powder  metallurgical  purposes. 
JMethod  for  determination  of  compressibility  of  ductile  metal  powders. 
§Method  for  sampling  of  powders  for  powder  metallurgical  purposes. 


ISi8485-1977 

APPENDIX     A 

(  Clause  ^,\,l  ) 

DETERMINATION  OF  COPPER  CONTENT  OR 
COPPER  POWDER 

A-1.  TEST  PROCEDURE 

A-l»l  Weigh  approximately  1  g  sample  and  take  it  in  a  250-ml  beaker. 
Dissolve  the  sample  in  10  ml  of  nitric  acid  of  specific  gravity  1'18  and 
36*5  percent  mjm.  Partially  cover  the  beaker  with  a  watch  glass  and 
allow  the  contents  to  fume  on  a  hot  plate.  When  the  fumes  stop  coming, 
remove  the  beaker  from  hot  plate  and  wash  down  the  watch  glass  and 
sides  of  the  beaker  with  distilled  water.  Add  3  ml  of  sulphuric  acid  of 
specific  gravity  1*84  and  98  percent  wz/m  to  the  solution  and  electrolyse 
copper  for  a  period  of  45  minutes  at  room  temperature  at  a  current 
strength  of  400  A/m^,  and  5-6  volts,  using  an  electrode  whose  mass  is 
pre-weighed  correct  to  O'l  mg.  After  45  minutes  of  electrolysis  the 
plated  electrode  is  washed  with  distilled  water  in  such  a  manner  as  to 
ensure  that  the  wash  falls  into  the  beaker  containing  the  solution.  Then 
the  electrode  is  rinsed  in  a  beaker  containing  methylated  spirit,  taken 
out  and  dried  with  a  suitable  drier  till  the  mass  of  the  electrode  is 
constant  within  0*1  mg.  The  diflference  between  the  masses  of 
electrode  prior  to  plating  and  after  completion  of  plating  divided  by  the 
exact  weight  of  sample  and  multiplied  by  100  will  give  the  percentage 
copper  content  of  the  powder. 


