NAT HA IS 16723 : 2020 
Indian Standard 


are Hast & fet DT 


( Teel FRAT ) 


Combination Lock — Specification 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 13.310 


© BIS 2020 


anda AM SAN 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 TEE TH HM, ay Redi 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2020 Price Group 4 


Security Equipment Sectional Committee, MED 24 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Security Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering Divisional 
Council. 


This standard is used to test the ability of Mechanical Combination Locks to resist unauthorized opening of the 
Combination Locks by sense of sight, touch, or hearing. Combination locks covered by these requirements may 
or may not have integral protection against entry by force. 


A product that contains features, characteristics, components, materials, or systems new or different from those 
covered by the requirements in this standard, and that involves a risk of fire, electric shock, or injury to persons 
shall be evaluated using the appropriate additional component and end-product requirements to determine that the 
level of safety as originally anticipated by the intent of this standard is maintained. 


In the formulation of this standard considerable assistance has been taken from UL 768:1999 COMBINATION 
LOCKS. 


This standard was first published in 2018 and is revised in 2020. The major changes in this revision are: 
a) Classification of combination locks is modified to remove class-A with Radiological Resistance. 
b) The remaining categories are re-arranged as Class-I, II & III, in increasing order of security. 
c) Requirement of test for Radiological resistance is removed. 
d) Total number of samples required for testing is revised in line with test requirements. 
e) Operation test and manipulation test are specified separately. 


f) Environmental conditions for cooling after aging-stress distortion test and drying after moisture 
absorption test are modified to suit Indian conditions. 


g) New clause added for specifying re-testing frequency. 
h) Exception removed and a note added to simplify the requirement of date marking location. 
The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex B. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final 
value observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test, should be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2:1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 16723 : 2020 


Indian Standard 
COMBINATION LOCK — SPECIFICATION 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard covers the requirement of combination 
locks intended for attachment on door of Safes, Chests, 
Vault Doors etc., to provide a means of locking the 
bolt work which restrict the opening other than by 
authorized person. 


2 REFERENCE 


The following standard contains provision, which 
through reference in this text constitutes provision of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the edition 
indicated was valid. All standards are subject to revision 
and parties to agreements based on this standard is 
encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying 
the most recent edition of the standard indicated below: 


IS No. Title 


IS 9844 Methods of testing corrosion resistance 
of electroplated and anodized aluminium 
coatings by neutral salt spray test 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard the following definitions 
apply and the terms are illustrated in the Fig. 1. 


3.1 Drive Cam 


a) A circular component connected directly to the 
spindle; its drive pin transfers rotation to the 
wheels, and its gate is shaped to accept the lever 
nose. 


b 


= 


The drive cam screws onto the spindle within the 
lock case. It shall be locked into position snugly, 
by means of a positive drive (e.g. spline key, 
square shaft, etc.) Once locked in position on the 
spindle, the drive cam’s purpose is to transmit the 
drive to the wheels and also to withdraw the lock 
bolt. The drive from the Drive Cam to the third 
wheel is transmitted via a small drive pin on the 
cam. 


c) Pin on Drive Cam should be integral part of Cam. 


3.2 Drive Pin — A pin extending from the underside of 
the drive cam and from all but the first wheel in a wheel 
pack; it transfers motion to the next component in the 
wheel pack. 


3.3 Fence — A part of lever (see 3.5) projecting across 
the periphery of the wheels that fit into the wheel gates, 
permitting the lever nose to engage in the drive cam. 


3.4 Gate — The cutout in the periphery of the tumbler 
that is engaged by the fence on the lever assembly. 


3.5 Lever (Drop Lever) 
a) Connects bolt and drive cam during lock operation. 


b) Serves to retract the bolt when the proper 
combination has been aligned. 


c) The drop lever attaches to the bolt via a pivot 
screw or post. Attached to the lever is a fence 
(see 3.3) that drops into the wheel gate when 
they are correctly aligned. The nose of the drop 
lever rides on the drive cam, dropping into a gate 
in the drive cam when the wheels are correctly 
positioned. When the combination wheels of the 
lock are properly aligned, the fence of the lever 
enters the wheel pack only after the drive cam gate 
is positioned at the lever nose. Once the lever nose 
has entered the drive cam gate and the lever fence 
has entered into the wheel gates, the locking, 
or blocking bolt of the lock is capable of being 
withdrawn by further rotation of the lock dial. 


3.6 Tumbler Pack — Set of wheels, flys, and isolation 
(spacing) washers, may be supported by a torque 
adjuster or a wave washer and secured with a retainer. 


3.7 Wheel Post — A component, usually cast as part 
of the lock case or cover, on which the wheel pack is 
assembled and about which the wheels rotate. 


3.8 Wheel — Assembly, usually in the form of a 
circular disc, having a gate and drive pin Integral part 
of wheel, whose locations are set to selected positions 
to permit combination change. 


4 GENERAL 


4.1 Components 


4.1.1 Except as indicated in 4.1.2, a component of a 
product covered by this standard shall comply with the 
requirements for that component. 


4.1.2 A component need not comply with a specific 
requirement that involves a feature or characteristic 


IS 16723 : 2020 


not needed in the application of the component in the 
product covered by this standard. 


4.1.3 Specific components are recognized as being 
incomplete in construction features or restricted 
in performance capabilities. Such components are 
intended for use only under limited conditions and shall 
be used only under those specific conditions for which 
they have been recognized. 


5 CLASSIFICATIONS 


Combination Locks will be classified as Class I, II and 
III. 


5.1 Class-I : Class-I locks shall have 1 working hour of 
resistance to manipulation attack (see clause 9.3). 


5.2 Class-II : Class-II locks shall have 2 working hours 
of resistance to manipulation attack (see clause 9.3). 


5.3 Class-IIl Class-HI locks shall have 20 
working hours of resistance to manipulation attack 
(see clause 9.3). 


6 CONSTRUCTION 


6.1 General 


The edges of all exposed parts of lock shall be protected 
by smoothening or grinding to eliminate burrs, and 
sharp edges. The locking mechanism shall operate 


1 CASE 11 
2 WHEEL PACK ASSEMBLY 12 COVER 

3 LOCK WASHER 13 

4 CAM 14 CHANGE KEY 
5 BALL SPRING 

6 BALL . 

7 RELOCKER SPRING 

8 BOLT 

9 LEVER : 

10 LEVER SPRING 


smoothly without binding or jamming of parts. The 
lock shall function smoothly and as intended. 


6.2 Lock mounting holes may have standard footprint, 
as per Fig. 2 so that lock can be retrofitted. 


6.3 A lock shall present a user with a minimum of 
1000000 (one million) separate enterable codes or 
combinations. Although a combination lock may 
provide for a choice of 1000000 codes or combinations, 
there may be some codes or combinations that the user 
is advised not to use. The instructions with the lock 
shall advise the user of these cautions and conditions; 
for example: 


a) The same digit or character for each input; 

b) Digits or characters in rising or descending order 
with spacing of 5 or less digits or characters 
between each entry; 

c) Telephone numbers and birth dates; 

d) Digits or characters that associate with a company 
or individual name; 

e) Simple combinations such as 20-40-60; and 

f) An original factory combination or code. 

On mechanical dial-type combination locks, there is 
a segment of numbers that cannot be used as the last 
number in a sequence since the use of numbers in that 
segment will cause inconsistent operation of the lock. 


Fic. | GENERAL ARRANGEMENT OF A-3-WHEEL COMBINATION LOCK 
(REPRESENTATIVE SKETCH) 


IS 16723 : 2020 


Fic. 2 STANDARD DIMENSIONS OF LOCK 


NOTE — Dimensions 66.60, 41.20, 60.60, 7.80 shall have 
tolerance of +/- 0.1 mm. All other dimensions are indicated as 
nominal. 


7 NON-METALLIC PARTS 


Factors taken into consideration when determining 
compliance with the requirements of non-metallic parts 
(see 10) are as following: 

a) Mechanical strength; 

b) Resistance to impact; 

c) Moisture absorptive properties; and 


d) Resistance to distortion of the material under 
conditions of normal or abnormal usage. 


8 CORROSION PROTECTION 


All working parts of the lock mechanisms shall 
be constructed of brass, bronze, stainless steel, or 
equivalent corrosion-resistant materials, or shall have 
a protective finish that permits the lock mechanism to 
comply with 9.6. 


9 TESTS 
CONFORMITY 


AND CRITERION FOR 


9.1 Sample Selection 


Number of total samples shown in Table 1 shall be 
submitted for respective tests. 


9.2 Operation Test 


9.2.1 Operation test of combination locks consists 
of setting the wheels to various combinations and to 
determine that the lock operates as intended but does 
not open with the dial turned beyond the tolerances 
specified in clause 9.2.3, for the type of lock. 


9.2.2 The lock shall operate as intended on the code or 
combination to which it is set. 


9.2.3 A three-wheel combination lock shall not open 
when the dial is turned more than one full graduation 
mark on either side of the set number for any of the 
wheels. A four-wheel combination lock shall not open 
when the dial is turned more than 1 full and 1/4th 
graduations mark on either side of the set number for 
any of the wheels. 


IS 16723 : 2020 


Table 1 Number of Samples for Various Test 
( Clauses 9, 10 and 11 ) 


SL Class Sample for Manipulation Punching Salt Aging-Stress Moisture Vibration Total 
No. Study and and Endurance Attack Spray Distortion Absorption No. of 
Operation Test for Polymer for Polymer Samples 
Material Material 
OO) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) 
i) I 1 3 1 1 2 1 9 
ii) II 1 3 1 1 2 1 9 
iii) HI 1 3 1 1 2 1 9 


9.2.4 The test for a three-wheel lock is to be conducted 
by applying the combination one number at a time in 
the following manner: 


a) Dial the combination with the first number one 
graduation lower than set, and the second and 
third numbers as they are set; 


b) Then dial the combination with the first number 
one graduation higher than set, and the second and 
third numbers as they are set; 


c) Then dial the combination with the second number 
one graduation lower than set, and the first and 
third numbers as they are set; 


d) Then dial the combination with the second number 
one graduation higher than set, and the first and 
third numbers as they are set; 


e) Then dial the combination with the third number 
one graduation lower than set, and the first and 
second numbers as they are set; and 


f) Then dial the combination with the third number 
one graduation higher than set, and the first and 
second numbers as they are set. 


9.2.5 A four-wheel lock is to be tested in the same 
sequence as described in 9.2.4 except that the change 
is to be 1 full and 1/4* dial graduations lower or higher. 


9.2.6 If the lock opens as a result of any of these 
attempts, the trial is to be repeated with the number 
changed 1/4* dial of a graduation more. The lock shall 
not open on that trial. 


9.3 Manipulation Test 


9.3.1 Manipulation tests on Combination Locks shall 
be conducted by a person (or persons) familiar with 
lock construction and operation. The samples as shown 
in Table 1 shall be set on different combinations and 
sealed by manufacturer in such a manner, that if the 
locks are disassembled, it will get noticed. 


9.3.2 Manipulation Tests on Combination Locks may 
involve manipulation techniques, as follows: 


a) Walking the wheels; 


b) Feeling the wheel gates; 
c) Sighting variations on the dial; or 


d) Any other technique that develops as a result of 
the examination. 


9.3.3 Manipulation tests on combination locks shall not 
include the following: 


a) Entering of combinations or codes on the 
probability that the correct combination will be 
entered and 


b) Leave any physical evidence that an attempt was 
made to open the lock cover. 


9.3.4 Two ofthe three sealed locks tested shall not open 
as a result of manipulation test. 


9.3.5 A successful opening of the lock by manipulation 
shall result in the determination of the code or 
combination which can then be used to open the lock 
again. 


9.3.6 The combined weight of the instruments or 
detection devices used in this test shall not be more 
than 25 kg and may include the use of listening devices, 
visual aids, portable computers, and other similar 
equipment. 


9.3.7 Combinations Locks of various classes shall 
resist unauthorized opening for a period as indicated 
below, when subjected to the manipulation techniques 
specified in 9.3.2. 


SI. No. Class of Lock Time of Resistance 
to Manipulation 
(minimum) 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Class-I 1 Working Hour 
11) Class-I 2 working Hours 
111) Class-III 20 Working Hours 


NOTE — Time period specified in column (3) may include one 
person working entire period, two persons working together 
for half the period or equivalent combinations. This time limit 
does not include time spent on unsealed sample. 


9.3.8 Manipulation Test on a lock shall be considered 
invalid, if the seal on the sample lock for Manipulation 
Test is found to be tampered. 


9.4 Punching Attack Test 


9.4.1 Punching attack test on a Combination 
Lock consists of knocking out the Back Cover 
(item 12 in Fig. 1) when lock is in locked condition 
(Lock Bolt extended out), by punching on Dial or 
Spindle from front side of mounted lock with the help 
of a Punch and a Hammer. 


9.4.2 Any attempt to dislodge cover of the lock shall 

result in immobilization of lock bolt, by activation of a 

Built-in mechanism (e.g. Re-Locker getting activated). 
NOTE — Immobilization by mechanical means is not required 
on an offset-spindle-type lock in which punching of the spindle 
does not defeat the locking action. 


9.5 Endurance Test 


9.5.1 The lock shall operate for 10 000 complete opening 
and closing cycles of running the set combination at a 
speed not exceeding 3 cycles per minute. 


9.5.2 After completion of the 10 000 cycles, the lock 
shall successfully operate manually for 10 cycles by 
setting different combinations. 


9.5.3 This test shall be conducted using a cycling 
machine that will turn the lock in both directions for 
required number of times to simulate entering of a 
combination. 


9.6 Salt Spray Corrosion Test 


9.6.1 A Combination Lock shall be tested for corrosion 
resistance by exposing it to salt spray as described in 
the standard for Salt Spray (Fog) Testing (see IS 9844). 


9.6.2 A combination lock shall operate as intended 
(see 9.2) following a 72 hours exposure to salt spray. 


9.6.3 During this test, the lock shall be operated once 
during each 24-hour period. 


9.6.4 Following the exposure, the lock shall be 
allowed to dry for 24 hours in a room having ambient 
temperature and then shall be tested for operation as 
per 9.2. 


10 TESTS OF POLYMERIC MATERIAL 


10.1 Strength 


10.1.1 The mechanical strength and resistance to 
impact of parts made of polymeric material are to be 
considered as acceptable for the intended use, on the 
basis of satisfactory performance in tests as given in 9. 


IS 16723 : 2020 


10.2 Aging-stress Distortion 


10.2.1 There shall be no warping to the extent that 
intended functioning will impaired when two locks 
using polymeric material are aged for 7 days in a 
circulating air oven maintained at 90 °C + 5 °C. 


10.2.2 The apparatus for aging of specimens shall have 
heating elements within insulated chamber and shall 
have provision for circulating air within the aging 
chamber at high velocity. A portion of the air may be 
re-circulated, and fresh air shall be admitted 
continuously. The exhaust ports of the oven may 
be adjusted to achieve approximately 200 complete 
fresh-air changes per hour. The blower or other means 
for circulating the air shall be located entirely outside 
the aging chamber. 


10.2.3 For this test two lock samples shall be placed 
in the oven. Following the 168 hours aging period, the 
samples shall be removed, permitted to cool to ambient 
temperature and tested for intended functioning as 
per 9.2. 


10.3 Moisture Absorption 


10.3.1 The two locks previously conditioned as 
described in 10.2.1 to 10.2.3 shall function as intended 
after exposure for 10 days to warm humid air having a 
relative humidity of 98 + 2 percent at a temperature of 
60°C + 5 °C. 


10.3.2 The apparatus for warm humid air exposure 
shall consist of: 


a) An insulated specimen chamber having a 
temperature-controlled water reservoir with a 
pump, 

b) Aspray chamber for humidifying the air; 

c) An air circulating fan; 

d) Provision for heating the air; 

e) Specimen supports; and 

f) The necessary means of control. The dry bulb 
temperature of the chamber is to be maintained 
at 60 + 1 °C (140 + 2 °F) for the duration of the 
exposure. The relative humidity is to be maintained 
at 98 + 2 percent throughout the test. 


10.3.3 Following the 10 days exposure, the samples shall 
be removed, permitted to cool to ambient temperature 
and tested for intended operation as per 9.2. 


11 VIBRATION TEST 


11.1 One sample of the lock shall be mounted on a 
6.0 mm x 150 mm x 200 mm steel plate. The sample 
shall be vibrated at amplitude of 0.25 mm at a frequency 
that is varied from 5 to 50 Hz in increments of 1 Hz 


IS 16723 : 2020 


until a resonant frequency is obtained. The sample shall 
then be vibrated at the maximum displacement resonant 
frequency for a period of 2 hours. If no resonant 
frequency is obtained, the sample shall be vibrated at 
50 Hz for 2 hours. 


11.2 For the purpose of these requirements, amplitude 
is defined as the maximum displacement of sinusoidal 
motion from a position of rest or one-half of the 
total table displacement. Resonance is defined as the 
maximum magnification of the applied vibration. 


11.3 The combination lock shall operate as intended 
(Clause 9.2) following the vibration test described 
in 11.1 and 11.2. 


12 RE-TESTING FREQUENCY 


The tests specified in clauses 9, 10 and 11 shall be 
considered as type tests and shall be carried out for 
initial approval of design or when any subsequent 
change in the design of the lock is made. Subsequent to 
the type approval, these tests shall be carried out once 
in 7 years in such a manner that each class of lock, for 
which the manufacturer has obtained approval, is tested 
at least once in 7 years. 


13 MARKING 


13.1 Each combination lock shall be marked with: 


a) The manufacturer’s (or other party responsible for 
the product) name, trademark, or other identifying 
mark; 


b) The model, style, or catalog designation; 
c) The designation Class-I, Class-I or Class-III and 


d) The date of manufacture by month and year in a 
location that is visible after installation. 
NOTE — The location of marking shall be at such place as to 
be able to read without removing the lock from its mounting 
on the security container or other security product on which it 
is used. 


13.2 BIS Certification Marking 


13.2.1 Each combination lock may also be marked with 
the Standard Mark. 


13.2.2 The use of the Standard Mark is governed by 
the provisions of Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 
and the Rules and Regulations made there under. The 
details of conditions under which the license for the use 
of Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or 
producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian 
Standards. 


ANNEKA 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Security Equipments Sectional Committee, MED 24 


Organization 


Reserve Bank of India, Mumbai 
Bank of India, Mumbai 
Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


Central Bank of India, Mumbai 
EMTAC Laboratories Private Limited, Hyderabad 


Godrej & Boyce Manufacturing Company Limited, 
Mumbai 


Guardwel Industries Private Limited, Mumbai 
Gunnebo India Private Limited, Thane, Mumbai 


Indian Banks Association, Mumbai 
Indian Overseas Bank, Chennai 
Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay, Mumbai 


Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority, 
New Delhi 
Methodox Systems Limited, Indore 


NCR Corporation India Private Limited, Mumbai 
Punjab National Bank, New Delhi 


Safeage Security Products Private Limited, Mumbai 
Sherni Locks Manufactures Private Limited, Pune 


Shriram Institute for Industrial Research, Delhi 
State Bank of India, Mumbai 


Tata Consultancy Services Limited, Mumbai 


Voluntary Organization in Interest of Consumer 
Edcuation, New Delhi 


In Personal Capacity (Plot No. 41, Block No. 5, Mehta 


Cottage, Dr Raut Road, Shivaji Park, Dadar, 
Mumbai) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


Suri D. KuMAR RAGHU (Chairman) 
Capt AKHILESH KUMAR 


Dr Suvir SINGH 
Dr Rajiv Kumar (Alternate) 


CoL A. K. JHA 


SHRI C. K. MAHESHWARI 
SHRI SUPRIYO GANGULY (Alternate) 


SHRI P. CHOUTHKANTHIWAR 
SHRI PUSHKAR GOKHALE (Alternate) 


SHRI JOHN DMELLO 
SHRI LEON GEORGE (Alternate) 


SHRI R. SRINIVASAN 
SHRI ASHUTOSH SATPUTE (Alternate) 


SHRI K. UNNIKRISHNAN 
Capt P. VENKATESAN 
Pror P. P. DATE 

SHRI T. S. NAIK 


Suri S. K. SINGH 
SHRI KARN KATARIYA (Alternate) 


Suri ASHOK SHANKAR 


Capt B. K. Tyacı 
SHRI ARUN Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJAN VASANOI 
SHRI NARESH PANCHAL (Alternate) 


SHRI FAROKH KUTAR 
SHRIMATI ARTI GUPTA (Alternate) 


Dr TARSEM SINGH SIAN 


Capt ARUN THAKUR 
Capt SusHIL SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI AJIT MENON 
Suri R. K. RAGHAVAN (Alternate) 


SHRI M.A. U. KHAN 


SHRI AJIT G. NARAVANE 


IS 16723 : 2020 


SHRI RAJNEESH KHOSLA, SCIENTIST “E? AND HEAD (MED) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


Ms KHASHBOO KUMARI 
SCIENTIST ‘C’ (MED), BIS 


7 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 24 (16206). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


