IS 10096 (Part 3) :2002

Indian Standard RECOMMENDATIONS FOR INSPECTION, TESTING AND MAINTENANCE OF RADIAL GATES AND ROPE DRUM HOISTS
PART 3 AFTER ERECTION

(Second Revision )

ICS 93.160

0 BIS 2002

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

May 2002

Price Group 4

Hydraulic Gates and Valves Sectional Committee, WRD 12

FOREWORD This Indian Standard (Part 3) (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Hydraulic Gates and Valves Sectional Committee had been approved by the Water Resources Division Council. Noting lack of adequate systematic information on procedures for inspection, testing and maintenance of radial gates and their hoists after erection, the Hydraulic Gates and Valves Sectional Committee decided that a set of recommendations on this subject be drawn up for reference and guidance of the personnel engaged in these duties. This standard has accordingly been prepared @ provide guidelines for radial gates. This standard has been published in parts. Part 1 deals with inspection, testing and assembly at manufacturing stage. Part 2 deals with inspection, testing and assembly at the time of erection. Part 3 deals with inspection, testing and maintenance after erection. This standard (Part 3) was first published in 1982. In the first revision in 1992, the provision in respect of inspection was elaborated in detail. This second revision of standard had been taken up to incorporate the knowledge gained during use of this standard. In this revision an additional clause has been added regarding maintenance of gates to be operated in winter. There is no 1S0 standard on the subject. This standard has been prepared taking into consideration the practices prevalent in the field in India. The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2: 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)'. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

IS 10096 (Part 3) :2002

Indian Standard RECOMMENDATIONS FOR INSPECTION, TESTING AND MAINTENANCE OF RADIAL GATES AND ROPE DRUM HOISTS
PART 3 AFTER ERECTION

(Second Revision )
1 SCOPE This standard (Part 3) lays down the recommendations for inspection, testing and maintenance of radial gates and their rope drum hoists after erection. 2 REFERENCE The Indian Standard given below contains provisions which through reference in this text, constitute provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, the edition indicated was valid. All standards are subject to revision, and parties to agreements based on this standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent edition of the standard indicated below: IS No. 7718:1991 Title Recommendation for inspection, testing and maintenance of fixed wheel and slide gates (/irst revision) gates, they should be maintained recommendations contained in M 7718. 4 INSPECTION 4.1 Periodical inspection of gate installations should be carried out to detect normal wear and tear, defects, if any. It should be done as and when necessary, but at least thrice in a year, one being prior to the onset of monsoon and one immediately after the monsoon and one at other times. The gates should be operated up and down several times to make sure that everything is in order. 4.2 Inspection work may consist of visual inspection of exposed surfaces of embedded parts, such as sill beam, wall plate including seal seats, gate leaf, arms, trunnion assembly, trunnion girders, hoisting equipment, hoist supporting structures and checking of important dimensions. In cases of inaccessible parts, inspection may be necessary by other means like divers, etc. 4.3 Inspection of Radial Gates No piece of equipment, however well designed and sturdy, will run efficiently unless it is well kept and maintained. Therefore the details of inspection to be done and the schedule of maintenance are given here. 4.3.1 Periodical Inspection In order to detect normal wear and tear, defects, if any, periodical inspection of gate installation should be carried out. The periodical inspection of gates and hoists should be done as and when necessary, but at least thrice a year and corresponding to the periods when the water level in the reservoir is at its highest and lowest levels. as per

3 GENERAL 3.1 Drain holes in the horizontal girders and arms should be checked so that they do not get clogged with silt causing accumulation of water in the horizontal girders and arms. 3.2 Rope drums, pulleys and rope connection should be checked. 3.3 Functioning of the limit switches, interlocking devices, indication lamps, etc, should be checked for proper working. 3.4 The operating systems of the gate should be checked for their proper functioning. 3.5 Where stoplogs are provided upstream of radial

1

1S 10096 (Part 3) :2002 In short, premonsoon and post-monsoon inspections should be done and the following checks be exercised: Points to be Inspected (1) 1 Inspection of yoke girder, thrust bloc~ trunnion assembly and anchorage 1. Check Nuts and bolts : Trunnion assembly a) b) Trunnion bracket to yoke girder c) Nuts of horizontal and vertical anchorage d) Trunnion pin lock plates e) Check shear key if provided behind the trunnion bracket Nuts of the main tie rods f) Check the weld between yoke girder and main ties Check whether yoke girder and thrust block is covered so that water does not accumulate in the slots. Check whether trunnion pin ends are covered with anticorrosive jelly whether flexible sheath cover is provided to prevent entry of debris in the trunnion assembly Check the welds of thrust block (with magnifying glass) (also ensure that the inside is concreted) Check if the oval holes are free Check grease in trunnion assembly Check the flexible cover Check for torque do do Check tightness Check for cracks Check for tightness and torque For soundness Cover with 3 mm thick M.S. plates if not already covered Cover it if not already covered do Check for cracks. Rectify accordingly Remove debris or other accumulated material Take steps for greasing after removal of dirt, if any Replace, if necessary and clean dirt from pin surface below the same Compliance (2)

2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9.

II Arms 1. 2. 3. Check welding joints of arm to horizontal girder (with magnifying glass, preferably on joints/stiffeners) Check whether drain holes provided in the arms are clear of debris. Check nuts and bolts of arms to horizontal girder Check for cracks: rectify accordingly Clear them if choked up Check for tightness and torque

III Horizontal girder 1. Check welding of a) Stiffeners of horizontal girders b) c) d) Horizontal girder to stiffeners of skin plate Locking arrangement brackets of skin plates Check drain holes of horizontal girder Check for crack and other defects and rectify accordingly do Check for weld crack Clear them if choked and clean the debris accumulated regularly

IV Skin plate assembly and rubber seals 1. Check the following welding joints: a) b) c) d) `T' and skin plate and ribs Vertical joints of skin plate from upstream side and downstream side Check lifting bracket and lifting pins for its soundness Latching brackets to skin plate Check for crack and other defects and rectify, if necessary

Check welding with a magnifying glass and rectify, if required

IS 10096 (Part 3): 2002 Points to be Inspected (1) 2. Theskin plate should beobserved forpitting, scaling and corrosion on upstream side: a) b) c) Check the condition of side and bottom rubber seal corner joint and observe leakage All the nuts and bolts fixing rubber seal to skin plate Check if there 1sany undesirable material in between seal and stainless steel plate, seal and seal base Check for deformation of seal Check soundness of cladding in case of cladded rubber seals Check whether there is abnormal abrasion on seal seat Compliance (2) Scaling formation should be removed. Pitting should be tilled with weld and grinded for finish. For corrosion clean it and apply paint. If condition is poor, replace same. Check the cause of undue wear also before replacement Check for wear and tear, tightness and replace, if required. Remove it (All debris should be periodically removed from the seal surface) Study the cause of deformation and recti& it do Study the cause of abrasion and rectify it

d) e) f)

V Sill beam and wall plates 1. Check the following joints : Wall plate to sill beam a) b) Joints between two segments c) Stainless steel to structural steel Check wall plate and sill beam for pitting and rusting and general conditions Check for crack and other defects and recti~ Rectify the joints using proper welding rods and grind, as necessary do Pitting is to be tilled in by welding. Rusted portion should be painted after cleaning

2.

VI Guide roller 1. 2. Check the roller for its movements and setting Check the nuts and bolts of guide roller assembly Make the roller free. If jammed, clean and grease Check for wear and tear and tightness

VII Latching arrangement 1. 2. 3. Check whether latching device fimctions well Check nuts and bolts and studs of locking devices Check the drain holes Check the fimction by operating lever. Recti& the same if movement is not smooth Tighten the bolts if required Clean them if required

VIII Wire ropes, hoist, pulleys, sheaves, etc 1. Check for following : a) Check condition of wire rope If the condition is poor, then replace the wire rope and if 10 percent broken wires are within the length of one meter and more than 20 percent broken wire within the length of 10 m wire ropes should be replaced Check the condition of pins and every year these should be removed, cleaned and refitted afler lubrication Check for rusting, jamming in the turn buckles, and check if the number of threads holding the rope are adequate Adjust both wire ropes for equal tension If found loose, tighten the studs provided for Lubricate ropes

b)

Check pulley, sheave assemblies and sockets

c)

Check turn buckles

d) e) f-)

Check tension of wire ropes Check if end of wire rope is properly fastened to drum Check for lubrication of wire ropes, if required
3

IS 10096 (Part 3) :2002

Points to be Inspected (1)
IX Gear train assembly

Compliance (2)

1.

Check the following: a) Check the condition of gear and pinions b)
c)

Check position of gears and pinion Check shaft and couplings used for connecting drive unit and gear train

Check uneven wear and contact, adjust properly Bring them to correct position if found shifted to either side Visual inspection and coupling nuts to be checked

X Drive unit

1.

Check the following: a) Check the condition and functioning of electromagnetic brake

b)

Check all electrical connection of hoist motor, brake, starter, limit switch, etc. Also check remote control systems, if provided

Replace worn out liner, adjust brake shoes carefully, so that both the shoes hold the drum when supply is cut off or both the shoes should move out simultaneously if switched on. Brake drum and liner should always be free from grease, oil, etc Check for loose connection, proper insulation (rats and crabs damage the insulation) Overload relay of the starter is to be adjusted, for correct position and should not be disturbed

c) d) e)

Check the connecting arrangement from adjacent motor Check the condition of position indicator and all its accessories Reduction gear box (worm reducer)

Check for its proper function and rectifi Check for smooth operation and check oil level Check for wear and tear and tightness Tighten if required or replace if undue wearing noticed Inspect for cracks in housing and replace, if needed check foundation bolts and tighten if required

XI Check nuts and bolts of the following:

a) b) c) d) e) f)

Hoist frame Drive unit } Gear boxes Flange coupling } Bearing housing Foundation bolts of hoist bridge }

4.3.2 General

5 TESTING
5.1 The gate should be tested for its travel up and down to see that it moves smoothly without excessive sway throughout the length of travel. 5.2 The operation should be trouble-free and there should not be any unusual sound. There should not be any undue pressure or extra efforts when the gate is operated under no load condition. Any extra current being taken by the motor should be taken note of. 5.3 On load (that is, when there is water) there should be no undue vibrations in the gate and structure during operation of the gate. In case vibrations are noticed, the positions of gate openings and water levels should be noted and the reasons thereof should be investigated. 5.4 Based on the inspection and testing, suitable remedial measures should be taken (see 6).

Inspection to check that: The gate operation should be trouble free and there should not be unusual sound, b) On load (that is, when there is water) there should be no undue vibrations in the gate and the structure. c) Observe the current drawn by motor at the time of lifting of gate. If any excessive current drawn is noticed, operation of hoist should be stopped immediately and reason for the same may be investigated for lubrication of various parts of gates and hoists and rectified. d) Check the supply voltage. e) Check the lubrication at various points. 0 Check the condition ofpaintihg of vaiious parts. a)

IS 10096 (Part 3) :2002 5.5 Trouble Locating Chart

Trouble (1) 1. Gate does not rise 1.2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9.

Probable Reasons (2) No supply or low voltage (supply) Obstruction in rubber seals Obstruction in guide rollers Fault in electric motor Fault in wiring Blown out fuse Brake shoes jammed Wire rope broken Malfimctioning of electrical contacts due to any reason 1; Lack of lubrication in trunnion and guide rollers 2. Rope length not identical on both sides 3. Lack of lubrication or fault in wire rope pulley sheave arrangements 1. No Sllpply 2. Starter not in order 3. Blown out fhses in switches 4. Low voltage 5, All fuses are not working 1. No supply to starter 2. Fixed and moving contacts not in order 3. Limit switch engaged Verify the spot and attend to the following: 1, Mis-alignment of any particular component 2. Shearing of connecting bolts and nuts 3. Lack of lubrication 4. Entry of any extraneous matter into guide roller assembly or pulley sheaves or trunnion assembly. should be thoroughly cleaned and repainted when required. While deciding about repainting, the original painting system adopted should be kept in view. c) Trunnion bearing should be greased wherever required. Keeping trunnion bearings in perfect working condition is very important. All other bolted connections should also be checked for proper tightness. d) Bolts and trunnion bearing housing should be tightened wherever required. e) The seals of the gate should be checked for wear and tear and deterioration. These should be adjustedheplaced, as and when necessary. o Wire ropes should be properly greased. g) Oil level in the worm reduction unit should 5

2.

Gate vibrates or produces noise

3.

Motor does not function

4.

Starter not working

5.

Unusual sound

6 MAINTENANCE
6.1 The maintenance of radial gates and their hoists mechanism should be done regularly. Reference should be made to manufacturer's instructions for detailed maintenance and servicing of hoists. Proper record of inspection, testing and maintenance should be made by the project authorities.

6.2 The following maintenance attended to: a)

works should be

b)

Defective weld should be chipped out and it should be rewelded. Damaged nuts, bolts, rivets, screws, etc, should be replaced, Any pitting should be filled up by welding and finished by grinding, if necessary. The gate leaf, exposed embedded metal parts, hoists and hoist supporting structure, etc,

IS 10096 (Part 3) :2002 be maintained by suitable replenishment. Oil seals should also be replaced, if required. Lubrication of other parts of the hoists, such as chains, position indicators and limit switches should also be done. The stroke of the brake should be reset to compensate for lining wear. Worn out brake linings should be replaced in time. Flexible couplings should be adjusted, if required. Repairs and replacement of electrical relays and controls should be attended to. Maintenance of alternative sources of power, such as diesel generating sets and alternative drives wherever provided should be carried out. The list of essential spare parts to be kept available should be reviewed and updated periodically. The availability of essential spare parts should be ensured. The condition of spares should be checked periodically and protective coating given before use. Lubrication details: v) Rope drums vi) Line shaft bearings vii) Matching teeth of gear box assembly Once before rainy season or as required 2) Cardium compound Application points: Wire ropes Once in every season after cleaning of wire ropes or as required 3) H.P. 90 Gear oil Application points: i) Reduction gear box Level up the gear box before operation 4) Mobil oil Application points: i) All rubbing surfaces and oiling points ii) At points located in brass/metal bushes Once/twice a year. 6.3 In case of gates to be operated during winter, generally water leaking through water tight parts gets frozen and grows to be ice lumps. Chances are that such ice lumps adhere to the gate leaf or embedded parts causing troubles. Therefore in case of such gates following remedial measures shall be taken in addition to the maintenance work given in 6.2. a) b) Water leakage shall be prevented. Ice at gate leaf and embedded parts may be removed by the manual or by any antifreezing method without damaging gate components.

h)

j) k) m)

n)

P)

1) Grease -- Multipurpose -- Bearing grease Application points: i) Pulley sheaves ii) Pulley brackets iii) Guide rollers iv) Trunnion assembly

IS 10096 (Part 3) :2002

ANNEX A

(Foreword)
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION

Hydraulic Gates and Valves Sectional Committee, WRD 12
Organization
In Personal Capacity (2047, Pocke/ 2, Sector D, k'asant Kunj,

Representative(s)
SHroN. VlsmvANAmAN (Chairman)

New Delhi 110 070) Bhakra Beas Management Board, Narrgal
DEPUTY CHIEF ENGINEER EXECUTIVE ENGINEER (Alternate)

Bharat Heavy Electncals Ltd, Bhopal

SHIU A.S. SRIVASTAVA SHrGS.R. RATHORS(A/ternate)

Central Water and Power

P.esearch Station, Pune

SHFG R. M. KHATSUP.IA SHRIR.M. SINNARKAR (Mfernute)

Central Water Commission, New Delhi

DIRECTOR (GATES- E&NE) DIRECTOR (GATEs-NW&S) (Alternate)

Cimrnco Ltd, Bharatpur

EXECUTtVE PRESIDENT SR MANAGER (DESIGN)(Mrernate)

Gea Energy System (India) Ltd, New Delhi

SHRIK.C. BAHETV SHIU A. G. K. MURTY(Alternate)

Haryana State Minor Irrigation (Tubewell), Chandigarh

SHSU S. P. GUFTA

SHat R. S.CHAUHAN (Afternate) Himachal Pradesh State Electricity Board, Sundemagar
CHIEF ENGINEER (DESIGN) DIRECS'OR (PLNG) DESIGN CIVILII (Alternate)

Irrigation Department, Govt of Maharashtra, Nasik Irrigation Department, Govt of Punjab, Chandigarh

%U

v.c. %5LKE
DIRECTOR (M&E) (Alternate)

CHIEF ENGINEER [RSDD]

Irrigation Department,

Govt of Uttar Pradesh, Roorkee

CHIEF ENGINEER (DESIGN) ANDDIRECTOR SUPEIUNTENDSNG ENGINEER (Alternale)

National Hydroelectric Power Corporation Ltd, Faridabad

SHRI A. K. SACHDEVA SHRIG. S. SHARMA (Alternate)

Orissa Construction Corporation Ltd, Bhubhaneshwas

DIRSCTOR [MECHANICAL] SEmortMANAGER (DESIGN)(Affemate)

Public Works Department, Government ofTamil Nadu, Chennai

SHIU M. DURAUSAJ SsnGT. KSUSHANASWAMY (Alternate)

Texmaco Ltd. Kolkata

SHRIS. R. S.INHA SHSU UDAYANBANERJEE (Alternate)

Triveni Structural

Ltd. Allahabad

SHFU J. P. M[SHRA SHRIB. P. SINOH (Alternate)

Tungabhadra Steel Products Ltd, Bellary

G.S.ANNIGEJU SHSU
SHRtN. KANNAIAH NAIDU(Alternate) PROF GOPAL CHAUHAN Siira S.S. SETHI,Director & Head (WRD) [Representing Director General (Ex-oflcio)]

Water Resources Development Training Centre, RGGrkee BIS Directorate General

A4ember-Secretaw
Stnu KULDEEP SIR;SU

Deputy Director (WRD), BIS

7

Bureau of Indian Standards

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.
Copyright

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications maybe reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS.
Review of Indian Standards

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Catalogue' and `Standards: Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from
I)OC No. :WRD

12 (285).

Amendments

Issued Since Publication

Amend No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones :3230131, 3233375,3239402 Regional Offices : Central Eastern Northern Southern Western Branches : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi KOLKATA 700054 : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093 Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone 3237617 { 3233841 3378499,3378561 { 3378626, 3379120 603843 { 602025 2541216,2541442 { 2542519,2541315 8329295, 8327858 { 8327891, 8327892

: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD, GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD, JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. NALAGARH. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.
Printed at Simco Printing Press, Delhi

