( Reaffirmed 2005 )

Indian Standard

GLOSSARY OF TERMS IN INVENTORY CONTROL (First Revision )

UDC 658'787'3 : 001'4

6

BIS 1992

BUREAU
MANAK

OP

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR 110002 Price Group 2 MARG

BHAVAN,

NEW DELHI December 1992

Management

and Productivity

Sectional

Committee,

MSD 4

FO_REWORD This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted draft finalized by the Management and Productivity Management and Systems Division Council. This standard was first published in 1983. by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the Sectional Committee had been approved by the

Organizations in developing economies generally tend to have excessive inventories at all stages, namely, finished goods, goods in transit, in-process inventories, pre-use inventories, and inventories awaiting disposal being surplus/obsolete. Inventory control is a function ~of materials management which helps in optimizing stocks consistent with requirements. This glossary is intended to minimize confusion by rationalizing existing terms and their meanings. for other functions of

The terms defined in this standard materials management.

are to be linked

with the terms

defined

IS 10400 : 1992

Indian Standard
GLOSSARY OF TERMS IN INVENTORY CONTROL ( First Revision )
1 SCOPE 1.1 This standard relating to inventory 2 BASIC TERMS gives defiuitions control. of terms 3.1.3 Stores in Transit Stock that has left the premises but has not reached the buyer. 3.2 Work-in-Progress Partly manufactured/processed material awaiting further manufacturing/processing between two operations and are in the process of being tfabricated or assembled into finished products, including materials lying with sub-contractors and material lying in shop floor for further processing or assembly. 3.3 Finished Goods 2.2 Inventory Control A functional activity the objective of which is to minimize the total costs of maintainitrg inventories and of acquiring them in order to render the stipulated level of service. This term is also referred to as stock control. 2.3 Inventory Management That aspect of the overall management implements and that determines policies. 2.4 Inventory Policy function inventory The complete units and the assemblies carried in stock ready for delivery to customers or for transfer to other plants or for own use. Generally, they are items that have been produced by the organization, although they may include complete items purchased for resale. 3.4 Maintenance, (MRO) 3.4.1 Consumables Repair and Operating Supplies of the supplier,

2.1 Inventory Inventory refers to the stock on hand at a given point of time ( a tangible asset which can be seen, weighed or counted ). It refers to the stock in hand and work-in-progress. In the most general The financial sense, inventory is an idle resource. expression is inventory in number of days.

Materials which are required for use in the process but are not the inputs for finished goods, like coolants, lubricants, cleaning materials, solders, fluxes, etc. 3.4.2 Expense Items

A definitive statement regarding the philosophy of inventory management; a policy stating when to procure and how much to procure, usually to ensure that the sum of all costs associated with Criteria the inventory process will be minimized. other than cost are also sometimes used, for example, goodwill etc. 3 INVENTORY CLASSIFICATION

Frequently used items of small unit [value and also small aggregate consumption value. Generally very limited control is called for issue of such items, for example, cleaning agent, pencil, pins, etc. 3.4.3 Insurance Spares

3.1 Incoming Materials 3.1.1 Raw Materials

Basic materials for processing/conversion into finished goods, for example, pig-iron, coke, lime stone, iron ore, MS rods, PVC resin, paper, etc. 3.1.2 Bought-out Components

Spares of items of prohibitive high stock-out costs but likely to be rarely required during the normal working life of the machine, equipment, assembly or any other thing of which the spare forms a part, for example, tail stock of a lathe machine. 3.4.4 Spares

manufactured/fabricated by the Items not organization but used with or without further processing and/or packing the finished product. 1

A duplicate kept or carried in reserve of an item or of a sub-assembly or component thereof, for example, fan belt, stepany, etc.

IS 10400 : -199z 4 INVENTORY ANALYSIS 5.2 Average Iuventory The average level of inventory during the period under consideration. For an accounting order, it is worked out as the sum of 12 consecutive monthly averag,c inventory values divided by 12. 5.3 Consumption Actual consumption Rate of an item per unit of time. ( EOQ )

4.1 A B C Analysis The technique used to classify items into three classes A, B and C based on annual usage value. Class A covers about 10 percent of the items with highest annual usage value which in aggregate generally account for over 70 percent of the total annual Gage value of all items. Class C! covers about 70 percent of the items which account for up to 10 percent of the total annual usage value. The remaining about 20 percent items are classified as class B. 4.2 F S N Analysis The technique used to classify items into three classes in the descending-order of their frequency of issue from stores in terms of the number of transactions made per unit time. Here, F stands for fast moving, S for slow moving and N for non-moving items. 4.3 H M L Analysis The technique used to classify items into three classes in the descending order of their unit cost. Here, H stands for high, M for medium and L for low unit cost items. 4.4 S D E Analysis The technique used to classify items into three classes in the descending order of `ease of availability' with which supplies can be obtained. Here, S stands for scarce, D stands far difficult and E stands for easily available items. 4.5 V E D Analysis The technique used to classify items into three classes in the descending order of their criticality for the organizations, performance as a whole. The criticality may be either technical or environmental. Here, V stands for vital items in the absence of which the stock out costs would be very high, E for essential and D for desirable items. 4.6 X Y Z Analysis The technique similar to ABC analysis, but the basis is actual stock position at the time of analysis. If the stock values are very high, they are classified as X-class ( over 70 percent of stock value ) and need special efforts to reduce the inventory level. Y-class and Z-class items have medium stock and low stock values respectively. 5 REPLENISHMENT 5.1 Annual Usage SYSTEM

5.4 Economic Order Quantity The quantity ordered at one ordering costs term `optimum The EOQ may equation:

of a product which should be time so as to minimize the sum of The and inventory carrying costs. lot size' is also used sometimes. be calculated from the following 2AS cI

EOQ = where A= s= I= c= NOTES Annual Ordering

J

consumption

in units, of

Cost in rupees per order,

Inventory carrying cost as a fraction the average inventory, md Unit cost

1 Sometimes the ordering costs includes only those components of costs which vary directly with the increase in thr: number of orders and the inventory carrying cost includes only those constituents of costs which very directly with the increase in average inventory cost. `The EOQ so calculated, does not change significantly from the above value and may be used for the purpose of inventory control. 2 If `A' is taken as annual consumption value, the EOQ in terms of value is then calculated as follows: EOQ ( Value ) = 2AS 1

J-

5.5 Inventory Carrying Cost The cast of holding inventories. The major constituents are the costs of capital locked up in form of inventories, deterioration, obsolescence, space, personnel, insurance, security and other related costs. This is usually represented as a percentage. 5.6 Lead Time ( -LT ) The actual or expected time between initiation and fulfilment of an indent. The LT consists of several sub-LTs, such as suppliers/manufacturing LT, transportation LT, administrative LT. Some of the sub-LTs constitute the external LTs and some constitute the internal LT. 5.7 Maximum Level

Number of units of an item consumed during accounting year. This term is also used denote the value of such usage.

the to

The sum of the safety stock and consumption during lead time and review period of an item. 2

IS 10400:1992 5.8 Ordering Cost where R = Rate of consumption, L = Maximum lead time, and 1 = Normal lead time

The cost incurred in placement of a purchase order from the time demand is received in the purchase department to the time Items are taken in the stores ledger and includes salaries, freight, insurance, handling, clearing, forwarding, inspecIt is expressed tion and other incidental charges. as rupees per order. 5.9 Periodic Review System

There are other statistical formulae which may be used if wide uncertainty both in demand and lead time is predicted. 5.13 Stock Out Non-availability indented for. of materials or products that are

Under this system, certain number of items are reviewed for ordering at fixed intervals called This is also called `P' system. review period. It is calculated as Optimum Review Period = 288 S ACT

5.14 Stock Out Cost The total costs incurred due to non-availability of a particular material or product when needed. In the case of finished goods, this includes customers, goodwill and/or the net profit lost. Stockouts of in-process and the pre-use materials may result in stock-outs of the finished goods besides the costs of under-utilized capacity. 5.15 Two-Bin System

J

5.9.1 Periodic Review System with Variable Order Quantity Under this system, an order of quantity equal to the difference between the maximum level and the quantity at hand is placed at the time of review. 5.9.2 Periodic Quantity Review System with Fixed Order

Under this system, an order equal to a fixed quantity, i.e., EOQ is placed at the time of review if the quantity at hand is below the reordering limit. If the quantity at hand is above the reordering limit, no order is placed. Reordering Limit = Safety Stock + Consumption during lead time + Consumption during half review period

A type of reorder level system in which inventory is carried in two bins, one is called service bin and the other one is called working bin. A replenishment quantity is ordered when the working bin is empty. When the supply is received the service bin is refilled first and the excess is put into the working bin. This term is also sometimes used to describe any fixed order system even when physical `bins' do not exist. This method is usually adopted for low annual usage value ( AUV ) items. 6 STORES PRICING SYSTEM

6.1 FIFO ( First-in First-out ) 5.10 Re-ordering Level ( ROL ) In this method, the costs of material ferred to the item in chronological receipt. 6.2 LIFO ( Last-in First-out ) transorder are transorder of

The sum of the safety stock and the consumption during normal lead time. It represents the stock level at which action is initiated to re-order the item. 5.11 Re-ordering Level System

In this case, an order is placed for the quantity equal to the economic order quantity as soon as the stock level reaches re-ordering level. This is also sometimes called fixed order system. 5.12 Safet) Stock/Buffer Stock

In this method, the costs of material are ferred to the item in reverse chronological of receipt. 6.3 Standard Pricing System

The inventory kept to provide protection against the fluctuations in demand and in lead time or fulfilling cycle time. Buffer stock is a synonym for safety stock. Sometimes it is also called minimum level. In case the demand remains almost steady the safety stock may be calculated as: Safety Stock = R ( L 1) 3

A method of valuation by which items are priced at a predetermined standard rate for a predetermined period. 6.4 Weighted Average Method This method consists of recalculating an average price each time a new consignment is received at a new price. Both the quantities and prices are considered for calculation, since the prices fluctuate and the order quantities vary.

IS 10400:1992 7 OTHER TERMS 7.11 Obsolete Inventory

7.1 Bin Card It is perpetual inventory record card which gives a continuous account of the incoming material, The outgoing material and the balance on hand. card is normally tagged to the bin where the material is stored or filled in at a central place in stores with the actual location of the corresponding material clearly marked on it. 7.2 Catalogue A systematic list of items description, price, etc. 7.3 Codification A form of the identification of reference which serves the dual purpose of establishing in a systematic manner the unique and complete identity of an individual item and/or bringing out its It may consist of similarity with other products. a brief and systematic combination of letters, numerals and/or symbols. A systematic code used in conjunction with a key for decoding and assisting identification of an item will enable its characteristics to be known. 7.4 Goods Received Note ( GR Note ) A written intimation acknowledging/certifying the receipt of materials. It is also called materials receipt note ( MR Note ). 7.5 Indent A prescribed form describing the indentors requirements of inventory items ( see also 7.13 ). 7.6 Indentor The person, department raises the indent. 7.7 Inventory The annual inventory. Turn-Over sales turn-over or organization who giving part number,

Inventory which has lost its usefulness or worth to the current possessor as a result of changing over to different and/or more economical products, or change in technology. 7.12 Shelf Life The expected period of time during which an item when stored in the specified manner will retain its quality/performance. 7.13 Stores Requisition Authorization usually in a prescribed the stores for issue of material. 7.14 Stores A place designated 7.14.1 Raw Material designated Store for keeping in-process goods for keeping Store for keeping raw material inventories. form to

A place inventory. 7.14.2

In-process

A place designated inventory. 7.14.3

Finished Goods Store designated for Stores for keeping inventories of keeping finished goods

A place inventory. 7.14.4

Quarantine

A place designated disputed items. 7.15 Stock Taking

A process of physically verifying inventory in order to check whether the actual quantities tally with the documented figures. This is also called stock verification. 7.15.1 Perpetual Stock VeriJication

Ratio divided by the average

7.8 Just-in-Time

( JIT )

Stock"`verification wherein inventory is checked continuously rather than once a year. Normally, it may be taken when an item reaches its reorder level or when new stock is received or on regular basis, usually more frequently for high value or fast moving items and less frequently forl.low value or slow moving items. 7.15.2 Annual Stock Taking inventory it is taken is checked at the end

JIT is an integrated system of managing the flow of resources in such a manner that the resources reach the user at the time of use. 7.9 Lumpy Demand Demand in lumps at a time. Planning

Stock verification wherein once in a year. Normally of the financial year. 7.16 Stock Verification

Report

( SVR )

7.10 Material

-Requirement

It is a technique which uses the bill of material to explode the master schedule for products or end items to develop a plan for production or procurement of components or materials needed to support the master schedule. It uses the bill of material, lead time, lot sizing rules and inventory availability information. 4

A report filled in by the stock verihers at the time of stock varification. It indicates variations, if any, between the physical stock and the ledger record. 7.17 Surplus Inventory

When the quantity of an item in stock is more than the predetermined maximum level, the excess holding is surplus inventory.

Standard Mark The use of the Stahdard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau qf Indian Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and ~Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity Details of conditions under which a licence for the to that standard as a further safeguard. use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization. marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright No part of these publications may be reproduced in BIS has the copyright of all its publications:, any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be.addressed to the Director ( Publications ). B-IS. Revision of Indian Standards

: lndian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the the latest amendments or edition, following reference : Doc:No MSD 4(2) `, Amendments .. * Amend No. Issued Since Date of lssue Publication Text Affected

i

BUREAU Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Telephones: 331 01 31. 331 13 75

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Marg,`New

Delhi

I I0002 Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone

Regional Central

Offices: : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur NEW DELHI I10002 Shah Zafar Marg

Eastern

: l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. 1. P. Road, CALCUTTA 700054 : SC0 445-446,

Maniktola

378499, 37 86 26, 53 38 43, 53 23 84 235 02 16, { 235 15 19. 632 92 95, i 632 78 91,

378561, 37 86 62 53 16 40, 235 04 42, 235 23 15 632 78 58, 632 78 92

Northern

Sector 35-C. C~HANDIGARH

160036

Southern : C. 1. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 Western : `Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol. Andheri ( East 1 BOMBAY 400093, Branches : AHMADABAD, BANGALORE, BHOPAL, BHUBANESHWAR, FARIDABAD, GHAZIABAD, GUWAHATI, HYDERABAD, LUCKNOW, PATNA, THLRUVANANTHAPURAM.

COIMBATORE, JAlPUR, KANPUR.

Printed at Printrade,

New Delhi, India

