Is 15170:2002 lSOflR 10949:1996

Indian Standard

FOR HYDRAULIC FLUID POWER -- METHODS CLEANING AND FOR ASSESSING THE CLEANLINESS LEVEL OF COMPONENTS

ICS 23.100.60

@ 61S 2002

BUREAU
MANAK BHAVAN,

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS
SHAH 110002 ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR NEW DELHI

Ju/y 2002

Price Group 4

Basic Fluid Power Sectional

Committee,

BP 14

NATIONAL

FOREWORD

This Indian Standard which is identical to lSO/TR 10949:1996 `Hydraulic fluid power -- Methods for cleaning and for assessing the cleanliness level of components' issued by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation of Basic Fluid Power Sectional Committee and approval of the Basic and Production Engineering Division Council. In hydraulic fluid power systems, power is transmitted and controlled through a liquid under pressure within an enclosed circuit. To ensure long life and satisfactory performance of hydraulic fluid power systems, the cleanliness of the system is of paramount importance. One factor affecting that cleanliness is the degree of contamination which is present in the system components after manufacture. This standard has been prepared to give guidance to manufacturers for producing clean components and to select the most appropriate of three alternative procedures for assessing the level of cleanliness as delivered to the user. As it is not always clear what level and type of cleanliness would be beneficial for improved performance and life on a cost-effective basis, the actual quantitative levels can only be set in relation to other parameters and should be agreed between the manufacturer, the supplier and the user. The text of the ISO Standard has been approved as suitable for publication as Indian Standard without deviations. Certain conventions are, however, not identical to those used in Indian Standards. Attention is particularly drawn to the following: a) b) Wherever the words `International read as `Indian Standard'. Standard' appear, referring to this standard, they should be while in Indian

Comma (,) has been used as a decimal marker in the International Standard Standards, the current practice is to use a point (.) as the decimal marker.

In the adopted standard, reference appears to certain International Standards for which Indian Standards also exist. The corresponding Indian Standards which are to be substituted in their place are listed below along with their degree of equivalei ;ce for the editions indicated: International Standard Corresponding Indian Standard Degree of Equivalence Identical

ISO 3722:1976 Hydraulic fluid power -- Fluid sample containers -- Qualifying and controlling cleaning methods ISO 3938:1986 Hydraulic fluid power -- Contamination analysis -- Method for reporting analysis data ISO 4021:1992 Hydraulic fluid power -- Particulate contamination of fluid analysis -- Extraction samples from lines of an operating system ISO 4402:1 9911) Hydraulic fluid power -- Calibration of automaticcount instruments for particles suspended in liquids -- Methods using classified AC fine test dust contaminant

IS 13569-1993 Hydraulic fluid power -- Fluid sample containers -- Qualifying and controlling cleaning methods IS 13542:1992 Hydraulic fluid power -- Contamination analysis -- Method for reporting analysis data IS 13570:2000 Hydraulic fluid power -- Particulate contamination of fluid analysis -- Extraction samples from lines of an operating system IS 13571:1992 Hydraulic fluid power -- Calibration of automaticcount instruments for particles suspended in liquids -- Methods using classified AC fine test dust contaminant

Modified

Identical

do

I) Since replaced by ISO 11171 : 1999 Hydraulic fluid power -- Calibration of automatic particle counters for liquids.

(Continued

on third cover)

IS 15170:2002 lSO/TR 10949:1996

Indian Standard

HYDRAULIC FLUID POWER -- METHODS FOR CLEANING AND FOR ASSESSING THE CLEANLINESS LEVEL OF COMPONENTS

1

Scope

This Technical Report recommends methods of clearung hydraulic fluid power components and dealternative procedures for assessing the scribe cleanli t ess of the components as delivered by the manufacturer to a system constructor or user. It IS not Intended to cover complete systems or procedures for cleaning and assessing solld pipework.

ISO 4402:1991, Hydraulic fluid power -- Calibration of automatic-count instruments for particles suspended in liquids -- Methods using classified AC Fine Test Dust contaminant. ISO 4405:1991, Hydraulic fluid power -- Fluid contamination -- Determination of particle contamination by the gravimetric method. ISO 4406:--1 ), Hydrau/ic f/uid power -- F/uids -- Code for defining the level of contamination by solid particles. ISO 4407:1991, F/ydrau/ic f/uid power -- Fluid contamination -- Determination of particulate contamination by the counting method using a microscope. 1S0 5598:1985, Fluid power ponents -- Vocabulary. systems and com-

2

Normative

references

The followlng standards contain provisions which, through reference in this text, constitute provisions of this Technical Report. At the time of publication, the editions mdlcated were valid. All standards are subject to revision, and parties to agreements based on this Technical Report are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent editions of the standards Indicated below. Members of IEC and ISO maintain registers of currently valid International Standards. ISO 3722:1976, containers -- methods. Hydrau/ic fluid power -- F/u/d sarnp/e Qualifying and controlling cleaning

ISO 6072:1986, Hydraulic fluid power -- Compatibility between elastomeric materials and flulds.

3

Definition's
Report, the defi-

For the purposes of this Technical nitions given in ISO 5598 apply.

4

Contamination

control

ISO 3938:1986, Hydraulic fluld power -- Contamination analysls -- Method for reporting analysis data. ISO 4021:1992, Hydrau/ic f/uicf power -- Particulate contamination analysis -- Extraction of fluid samples from hnes of an operating system.

Creating and maintaining a clean component is primarily a manufacturing responsibility but the customer or user must also accept responsibilities. Care with cleanliness is needed at all stages of production. by the manufacturer

1) To be published. (Revision of ISO 4406:1 987)

IS

15170:2002
10949:1996

lSO/TR

The manufacturer --

is responsible

for:

-- --

wipe with lint-free cloths;
oven-dry or dry with dry filtered compressed air

cleaning component assembly flushing,

parts prior to assembly;

--
-- -- --

in a clean area; if this operation is needed;

When cleaning components, special care should be taken to ensure that cored passages and deep holes
are cleaned, and it should be remembered that items with designed sharp edges, such as grooved spools, can collect quantities of "finger dirt". Assembler's hands and benches should be kept clean and cleaning materials should be lint-free.

cleanliness during testing; preparation for packing, corrosion prevention, sealing etc.; adequate packaging, the customer or user is port

--

On receipt of the component, responsible for: -- -- care in unpacking; keeping the component tective plugs, etc.; installing the component condition.

clean after removing

pro-

--

in the system

in a clean

Ultrasonic cleaning of components can be very effective, providing the manufacturer's instructions for the ultrasonic cleaner are carefully followed. This process relies mainly on the effect of vapour bubbles imploding on the surface of components; it is important that the bath and component temperature are correct for this action to be fully effective. Adequate time shall, therefore, be allowed for components to reach working temperature after immersion. The design of containers and spacing of components is also critical and adequate flow paths shall be allowed for the sonic waves to reach all parts of all components. Baskets made of perforated sheet may tend to attenuate the sound waves, as will tightly packed parts. Open wire mesh baskets are normally satisfactory.
A further important point is that if the bath fluid is even slightly contaminated with oil or dissolved preserving agent (grease for example), traces of this grease may be left on the components. Components which require subsequent treatment, such as plating or the use of some sealants, should be cleaned in a vapour bath. It should be noted that some vapours, particularly some chlorinated hydrocarbons, can promote very rapid corrosion even if the components are subsequently coated with oil soon after cleaning.

5 Cleaning and parts
5.1 Cleaning

and assembly

of components

To ensure that an adequate standard of cleanliness of flnlshed units is achieved, it is essential that all parts which make up a component are thoroughly cleaned before assembly. An appropriate procedure shall be implemented, for each component or component element, to remove such residues as chips, sand, filings, rust, weld spatter and slag, elastomers, sealants, water, aqueous products, chlorine, oil, acid, detergent, etc. This cleaning procedure damage to the finished flushing or testing. is essential to ensure that no component will occur during

5.2

Assembly

Components should, ideally, be assembled immediately after cleaning as even short storage periods can allow corrosion to start or airborne dust to settle on them. Components which are not required for immediate assembly should be adequately protected. Assembly should be done in a clean area, well away from contaminant-generating operations such as grinding, welding and machining. Air jets used for cleaning in the vicinity of the assembly should be avoided as these jets can project contaminant many metres. If adhesives or PTFE tape are used during assembly, care should be taken to avoid entrapment within the unit. If grease is used, it is important that it be kept clean and it should be used sparingly as it may not be soluble in the system fluid and may block filters.

The cleaning procedure can be carried out as follows:

--

shot blast or chemically clean castings to remove casting sand and scale prior to machining, and then carefully deburr and wash them before assembly; remove manufacturing residues, burrs, etc. by mechanical, ultrasonic, vibratory, chemical means, etc.; remove cleaning residues using chemical means, solvents, dry filtered compressed air, etc.;

--

--

2

Is

15170:2002 10949:1996

lSO/TR

After assembly, all joint surfaces and ports should be covered unless the unit is to be tested immediately. Cover plates and other closures, such as plastic plugs, should be as clean as the unit. Closures which have been used for this purpose will probably be oily and should be cleaned before re-use. A list of some of the means of protecting a component is given in table 1. If further cleansing of an assembled component is required, the component should be flushed on a specifically designed flushing rig prior to testing. WARNING -- Test plant should primary cleaning station. not be used as a

6.1.1

Fluid-conveying

components

The preferred procedure involves circulating a fluid through the component under defined conditions of flow and temperature. The fluid flow shall be turbulent (f/e >4 000) and calculated from the nominal diameter of the component supply ports:

Re=K
v

X103

where is the Reynolds number; is the nominal diameter metres; is the linear velocity per second; of the ports, in milli-

Table 1
Nature of protection Cleaned components'J

Re d

Pressed-on metalhc plug or cap
Screwed cylindrical with seal metallic plug

T
R R T R F F Ff

v

of the fluid,

in metres

Flanged plate with seal Pressed-on plastlc plug

v

Screwed male plastic plug
Self-cutting Anti-corrosive plastlc plug Kraft paper

is the kinematic viscosity of the fluid, in centistokes (cSt) 2).

Plastic packaging Filling with hydraullc fluld clean compatible inhibitor

R R By agreement R R

For the flowrate to achieve a Reynolds number 4000, the flowrate, in Iitres per minute, must greater than 0,189 vd.

of be

Contact corrosion for spare parts Vacuum-tight Pressure-tight 1) 2)

volatlle

6.1.2

Non fluid-conveying

components

envelopez} envelopezl T = tolerated; plugs.

R = recommended; In addition to
Poit

F = forbidden,

Flushing may be carried out by filling the components with a suitable fluid, and by flushing them completely several times until the fluid cleanliness, as measured at regular intervals, reaches the required level.

6.2

Flushing

installation

6
6.1

Flushing Principle

In order to achieve satisfactory conditions, it is recommended that an installation which meets the requirements given in 6.2.1 to 6.2.4 is used. CAUTION -- Special care shall be taken when mounting the component onto the flushing installation to check that the fluid sample taken for cleanliness determination is the same fluid as that conveyed by, or stored in, the component during the flushing operation.

The principle of flushing is to apply sufficient energy to the contaminants in order to dislodge them and to wash them away from the component for subsequent collection in a filter.

2)

1 cSt = 1 mm2/s

3

IS

15170:2002 10949:1996

lSO/TR

6.2.1 The flushing properties:

fluids

shall

have

the

following

a)

monitoring production

the contamination test rig (see 7.2);

level of fluid

in a

they shall be compatible with the components, the seals and the fluld for final use; thev shall have a viscositv which minimizes wall effects. Empirically, such `effects are acceptable as long as viscosity does not exceed 40 cSt, 6.2.2 The tank shall be sealed to prevent ingress of external contamination and shall include a breather with a filtration efficiency compatible with the required cleanliness class. 6.2.3 -- The filter shall: allow the maximum to pass through it; flowrate, as defined in 6.1.1,

b)

the flush test method to determine level flushed out (see 7.3); the strip-wash test method taminant removed (see 7.4)

contaminant

c)

to determine

con-

One or more of these methods should be used by component manufacturers as part of their quality assurance programme,

It is not recommended that these tests be performed by customers. If a customer considered N essential to conduct either the flush or strip-wash test, he should only do so by prior agreement with the manufacturer, as tests of this nature will certainly invalidate the warranty on the units concerned. Monitoring the component test fluld will give a very good average indication of the level of fine particulate remaining In all components, but the flush and strlpwash tests will demonstrate the quantity and nature of larger particles present in a component,

--

have a filtration efficiency which easily allows the required cleanliness class to be reached; include a blocking indicator.

--

6.2.4 A sampling valve or contamination monitoring port shall be fitted downstream of the component to be flushed.

7.2 6.3 Flushing procedure
7.2.1

Production
Commentary

test rig method

The time required for flushing is dependent on the component complexity, on the required cleanliness and on the equipment performance. Flushing should be continued -- either the contamination quired value, or until level reaches the re-

This method is suitable for most components and subassemblies, such as gasket-mounted modules and multiple valves, provided adequate fluid flow IS directed through all active flow paths, If possible In both directions during test, and that sufficient time IS allowed for thorough flushing. There are limitations to this method as some urms contain blind passages which will not be cleaned out by this process, e.g. passages between a pilot valve and the ends of a second stage spool. The housings of piston pumps and motors may also contain addNional contaminant which may not be removed due to the flows into these cavities. This test gives an Indication of the level of cleanliness of the flow passageways of components m production.

--

a speclfled time is reached, determined experimentally for a given installation and a given component when developing the method.

The moving parts of the component shall be operated for the whole duration of the flushing process. In addition, pumps, motors and cylinders shall be operated at their maximum permissible continuous speed or stroke.

7 7.1

Measurement General

methods

Units that use the test rig to cut themselves In, for example gear pumps, can be checked by this method.
NOTE 1 It is recommended that the specified level of cleanliness be established after consultation between the customer and the manufacturer due to the special conditions that exist.

As appropriate, the following three methods should be used to assess the level of contaminant remaining in components or sub-assemblies:

4

1s

15170:2002 10949:1996

lSO/TR

7.2.2 a)

Procedure By this method, the oil in a suitable final rig is used to quantify the cleanliness level of the complete unit by using oil which is cleaner than the contaminant level stated in the catalogue or the "as-shipped" specification of the unit. The contaminant Ievel-+hould be stated in accordance with ISO 3938 and ISO 4406. The test rig should not be used as a means of cleaning the parts that make up the final assembly. Monitoring of the fluid condition should be recorded in order to optimize the frequency of checking and predict the probable deterioration of cleanliness levels to a point where other actions may be needed in the rig. Oil samples should be taken from sampling valves positioned in an active part of the circuit to give a realistic contaminant count and in a manner that does not introduce outside contaminants to the sample, or the sample containers; i.e. in accordance with ISO 4021. Satisfactory methods of monitoring the levels of contamination include automatic particle counters, gravimetric analysis, comparison membranes and several other proprietary methods. Related standards are ISO 3722, ISO 4402, ISO 4405 and ISO 4407,

7.3.2

Procedure Clean all external surfaces with solvent to remove extraneous contaminant from the sample. Remove shipping plugs carefully to prevent adding contaminant such as plastic plug shavings. Clean each port, if necessary, with a bottle brush. Do not remove permanent plugs which remain in the component during service. Place the component in a clean collecting tray. This tray, and all other apparatus used, should be precleaned to a level such that any contamination released from it should have no significant effect on the final test result. Select a solvent which is compatible with all the materials used in the components, includlng seals and the working fluid (see ISO 6072) and filter to better than the required cleanliness level of the component, The required level should be stated in accordance with ISO 4406 and ISO 3938. Valves, hoses and similar components should have their lower ports plugged, half filled with solvent and the remaining plugs refitted. Thoroughly agitate the half-filled component. Valves v~ith manually operated spools should, where practicable, be agitated with the spool in each position. Hoses should be flexed 10 times during agitation. Remove shipping plugs and drain solvent into the collecting tray. Ideally, this entire procedure should be repeated two or three times.

a)

b)

b)

c)

c)

d)

d)

e)

e)

7.3 7.3.1

Flush test

method

Commentary

f)

In this method, the outside of the component is first thoroughly cleaned, then the internal surfaces are carefully flushed with a suitable solvent whilst being agitated as strongly as possible. The solvent is subsequently filtered to separate out the contaminant for inspection. It is a simple and easy-to-perform quality control test and will give a good indication of the quantity and nature of the larger particles remaining in the component. However, it is unsuitable for very large components and suffers from the disadvantage that some components have cavities which cannot be adequately flushed. It is, however, essential to take extreme care vent external contamination being added sample. After flushing, all surfac& should wetted with clean hydraulic oil or preservative vent corrosion or damage during initial use. to preto the be reto pre-

Pumps and motors should have all shipping plugs removed, and the inlet port filled with solvent. The drive shaft should then be rotated 1,5 times in the correct direction. Repeat this three times. After the fourth filling, rotate the shaft three times. Pumps and motors with a separate case cavity should have this cavity rinsed as for valves. Remove any remaining shipping plugs and drain all remaming solvent into the collecting tray.

g)

Pour the contents of the collecting tray into a funnel containing a suitable filter paper or membrane. Wash the tray with solvent and pour the contents into the funnel. Dry the filter paper or membrane and remove it for inspection, either visually, gravimetrically (ISO 44o5) by electronic particle counting, or by microscope.

h)

IS 15170:2002 lSO/TR 10949:1996

1)

Re-lubricate tect It from

the cover,

Inside or

of the in transit

component and stora~e.

to proLubri-

corrosion

cate and ports.

plug the joint

surf~ces

and

removing the covers. This will reduce the risk of adding contaminant to the sample from blind tapped holes. Such contaminant, if present, would not affect the operation of the component. f) If practical, demagnetize hardened components to 100 VT (microtesla) to facilitate the removal of particles which are adhering due to magnetism, Carefully wash those parts of all components which are normally in contact with the hydraulic fluid. If practical, use a pressure jet of solvent to clean out cored passages, hollow spools, pistons, etc. Place washed parts in a second clean tray for later re-assembly. Pour the contents of the collecting tray into a funnel containing a suitable filter paper or membrane, wash the tray and pour the washings into the funnel, Dry the filter paper or membrane and remove it for inspection, either visually, gravimetrically (ISO 4405) or by microscope. Re-assemble the component. Subject the component to a full normal test.

7.4
7.4.1 In first

Strip

and wash

test method

Commentary method, the outside of the component completely carefully washed is dis-

this

g)

thoroughly

cleaned,

It is then surfaces

assembled in a suitable

and all internal solvent. a quallty

It IS essentially

control

test

and will

give

an of

h)

accurate measure of the total contaminant particles remaining The solvent IS subsequently for Inspection. IS essential added to

quantity and nature in the component. filtered to

remove

the

1)

contaminant
Extreme tamination

care being

prevent

external

con-

to the sample

and care should

also be taken to prevent the addltlon of contaminant from bllnd cawtles, such as the bottom of screw holes which would normally be excluded from the hydraulic fluld After flow.

j)

k) 1)

a component has been checked. by this method, It IS essential that It IS retested after re-assembly. Most pumps and motors w!II need to be "bedded in" as It IS unlikely that all parts, such as pistons or vanes, WIII be replaced in exactly the!r original positions.

8
8.1

Post-test
General

precautions

7.4.2 a)

Procedure Clean all external surfaces with solvent to remove extraneous contamination from the sample. Remove all external parts such as solenolds, manual levers, etc. which are not part of the wetted volume of the component, Place the component in a clean collecting tray. This tray, and all other apparatus used, should be precleaned to a level such that any contamination released from It shodd have no slgnlflcant effect on the final test result. Select a solvent which IS compatible with all the materials used In the component, Includlng seals and the working fluid, and which has been filtered to better than the required cleanliness level of the component. Dis-assemble the component taking care not to damage the seals, all of which should be removed. It is preferable to replace the coverretalnlng screws into their respective holes after

The standard

of cleanliness

maintained

during

the as-

b)

sembly of the urw by the manufacturer can easily be compromised if care is not also exercised during finishing operations, such as during painting and packing.
NOTE 2 Once the product has been shipped from the for maintaining manufacturer's works, the responsibility cleanliness IS transferred to the distributor, installer and

c)

end-user. Precautions are still essential at these points to ensure that the service performance of the unit does not fail to meet the customer's expectations because of contamination.

d)

8.2

Finishing, packing and despatch

e)

The following recommendations reflect good practice for maintaining product cleanliness after assembly and test.

6

IS 15170:2002 lSO/TR 10949:1996

8.2.1

Drain the unit after test in a clean area. If required, inhibit corrosion inthelnsldeof the unit during transit and storage by adding a clean preservative fluid according to the manufacturer's instructions. Re-seal all ports, carefully avoiding the regress of contaminationwhilst doing so. Protect breather filters with clean plastic film.

9.3

Customizing

8.2.2 If the product is to be painted after testing, check that all ports are still sealed. Breathers should be protected from becoming blocked with paint. Moving parts, such as cylinder rods, which may provide a route for paint particles to enter the components, should also be shielded from paint. 8.2.3 it is prudent for manufacturers to warn their customers about the harm which can result from alIowlng contaminants to be introduced into a unit after receipt. This may be done by methods such as: a)
information in the product literature (e.g. appli-

Customizing is often necessary to adapt a standard unit to a particular system. Perhaps the most common example is the altering of relief valve ranges. This will entail opening the unit, for example, when springs have to be changed, or a complete cartridge exchanged. All such work should be carried out in clean conditions, and common sense precautions observed to deny entry of contamination. The unit should not be left open any longer than necessary.

9.4

Inspection

cation, installation, structions); b)
information supplied

start-up

and maintenance

in-

Customers should not internally examine units as part of their quality assurance programme, even on a percentage sample basis. If they insist on doing this, they should be advised of all the procedures for correct reassembly, corrosion-inhibition, packaging, and how to avoid introduction of contaminant. They should also be advised on any reduction in warranty conditions which will be the result of their actions. It may be in the interest of both parties for the customer to permanently mark inspected units in a suitable manner.

warning unit.

such as a not!ce on the box or on a label tied to the
with the product,

9.5 Such information might usefully refer to the standard or product cleanliness clalmed by the manufacturer. For example, "During assembly the parts in this unit were carefully cleaned and the unit was tested using a fluld with a contamination code of x/y/z in accordance with ISO 4406. Do not remove any protection until Immediately before the unit is ready for installation. Clean and careful handling will help to prolong its working hfe".

Installation

Common sense measures to prevent contamination should be observed during system building, etc. are as follows: a) ports, joint. faces, etc. should be examined carefully wiped clean with a lint-free cloth; and

b)

hoses and pipes are also components which should be carefully cleaned as they can introduce contamination into a system; plugs should be removed just before use and steel pipes cleaned free of rust, weld spatter, etc.

9
9.1

Customer
General

handling

precautions

c)

It IS possible to identify five common stages at which contamination can be inadvertently introduced into a fluid power component after it has left the manufacturer's care. These are mentioned in 9.2 to 9.6.

9,6

Servicing

9.2

Storage

The manufacturer's recommendations regarding the storage of any components should always be followed, including maximum duration of storage.

It is frequently overlooked that contamination introduced into fluid power systems during servicing operations (whether preventative or fault finding) can seriously impair continuing satisfactory performance. Of course, the benefits of regular preventive maintenance, conscientiously earned out, far outweigh such risks. However, it is important that appropriate measures be observed during maintenance and servicing.

7

(Continued

from second

cover)

International

Standard

Corresponding

Indian

Standard

Degree Equivalence

of

ISO 5598:1985 systems and Vocabulary

Fluid

power

IS

10416:1992

Fluid

components

--

systems Vocabulary

and components (first revision)

power --

Identical

ISO 6072:1986 Hydraulic fluid power--Compatibility between elastomeric materials and fluids

IS 15179:2002 Hydraulic fluid power--Compatibility between elastomeric materials and fluids (under preparation)

do

The technical committee responsible for the preparation of this standard has reviewed the provisions of the following ISO Standards and has decided that they are acceptable for use in conjunction with this standard: 1s0 4405:1991 Hydraulic fluid power -- Fluid contamination contamination by the gravimetric method -- Determination of particle

ISO 4406:1999

Hydraulic fluid power -- Fluids -- Method for coding the level of contamination by solid particles Hydraulic fluid power -- Fluid contamination -- Determination contamination by the counting method using a microscope of particulate

1s0 4407:1991

Bureau

of Indian

Standards

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of hdian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of stardardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending
Copyright

to connected

matters

in the country.

BIS has the copyright of implementing designations. Review

of all its publications.

No part of these publications details, such as symbols

may be reproduced and sizes, type

in any

form without the prior permission the standard, Enquiries

in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of necessary or grade BIS. be addressed to the Director (Publication),

relating to copyright

of Indian

Standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are

Amendments

are issued to standards

also reviewed periodically;

a standard along with amendments

is reaffirmed when such review indicates

that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards: Monthly Additions'. edition by referring to the latest issue This Indian Standard has been developed from DOC: No. Bp 14 (o1 73).

Amendments

Issued

Since

Publication Text Affected

Amend

No.

Date of Issue

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones: 3230131,3233375,3239402 Regional Offices: Central Eastern Northern Southern Western Branches : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 : 1/1 4 C.I.T. Scheme Vll M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi KOLKATA 700054 : SCO 335-336, : C.I.T. Campus, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 160022 600113 3237617, 3378499, { 3378626, Telegrams: Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone 3233841 3378561 3379120 603843 { 602025 2541216,2541442 { 2542519,2541315 8329295, { 8327891, COIMBATORE. 8327858 8327892 FARIDABAD.

: Manakalaya, E9 MlDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093 : AHMEDABAD. GHAZIABAD. NALAGARH. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BI-IUBANESHWAR.

GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. VISAKHAPATNAM.
Printed at Simco Printing Press, Delhi

