NAT HA IS 17368 : 2020 
Indian Standard 


wena — afas ch TRA IHM 
CURIEL 


Geosynthetics — Determination of 
Damage to Geosynthetic Caused 
During Installation 


ICS 59.080.70 


© BIS 2020 


anda AM A 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Te TH HM, ay fref — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


January 2020 Price Group 4 


Geosynthetics Sectional Committee, TXD 30 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Geosynthetics 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textile Division Council. 


The geosynthetic which is used for roads, RE walls and other installation goes under severe compressive and 
shearing action during installation and results in damage to geosynthetics due to compressive and rubbing action 
of aggregates and gravels etc. This damage causes loss in its required strength. To quantify the damage, a loss in 
strength is determined by this method. 


Keeping view of the damage caused during installation or loss in strength the safety factor (reduction factor) is 
calculated. Based on the reduction factor the required strength (nominal strength x reduction factor) is demanded 
by the user. 


In the formulation of this standard, assistance has been drawn from the following International Standards/ 
Publications: 


International Standard/ Title 
Other publication 

ISO 10722 : 2019 Geosynthetics — Index test procedure for the evaluation of mechanical damage 
under repeated loading — Damage caused by granular material (laboratory test 
method) 

ISO 13437 : 2019 Geosynthetics — Installing and retrieving samples in the field for durability 
assessment 

BS 8006-1 : 2010 Code of practice for strengthened/reinforced soils and other fills 


The preparation of installation of geosynthetic sample on site is in accordance with this standard, however actual 
amount of fill and loading may vary which may be agreed by the user. It is sole responsibility of the user to 
exhume the geosynthetic sample carefully without damaging it further. The evidence of installation and exhuming 
geogrid sample is must and can be provided by the user. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex B. 


In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or 
calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 “Rules for rounding off numerical 
values ( revised )’. 


IS 17368 : 2020 


Indian Standard 


GEOSYNTHETICS — DETERMINATION OF 
DAMAGE TO GEOSYNTHETIC CAUSED 
DURING INSTALLATION 


1 SCOPE 


This test method describes the procedure for installation 
of geosynthetic sample as per site specific requirements 
and exhuming it without further damage for testing in 
laboratory. Mainly tensile strength is determined before 
and after damage during installation. The strength 
retained after installation is determined. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A contain provisions 
which through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards. 


3 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given in 
SP 45 and IS 13321 (Part 1) in addition to the following 
shall apply. 


3.1 Geogrid — A synthetic planar structure formed 
by a regular network of tensile strength elements 
with apertures of sufficiently large size to allow for 
interlocking with the surrounding soil so as to perform 
the primary function of reinforcement. Geogrids are 
commonly used to reinforce retaining walls, as well as 
sub-bases or sub-soils below roads or structures. 


3.2 Geosynthetics — Geosynthetic is a planar product 
manufactured from a polymeric material that is used 
with soil, rock, or other geotechnical-related material as 
an integral part of a civil engineering project, structure, 
or system. 


3.3 Apertures — The open spaces formed between the 
interconnected network of longitudinal and transverse 
ribs of a geogrid. 


3.4 Ribs — Rib is a single element of geogrid in 
transverse and longitudinal directions which hold the 
grid structure together providing dimensional stability. 


3.5 Longitudinal Ribs — The continuous elements 
of a geogrid which are in the machine direction as 


manufactured, or in the major principal stress direction 
as placed in the field. 


3.6 Transverse Ribs — The continuous elements of 
a geogrid which are in the cross machine direction as 
manufactured, or in the minor principal stress direction 
as placed in the field. 


3.7 Strike-Through — The ability of the soil backfill 
to be continuous through the apertures of the geogrid 
allowing for bearing capacity against the transverse 
ribs. 


3.8 Junctions (or Nodes) — The interconnections 
between the longitudinal and transverse ribs of a 
geogrid which hold the grid structure together providing 
dimensional stability and load transfer mechanisms. 


3.9 Connections — The connections made between 
separate geogrid rolls or between geogrids and wall 
panels or other parts of the structural system. 


3.10 Design Strength — The design, or required, 
strength of a geogrid needed for successful functioning 
of the system. It is often arrived at by an appropriate 
geotechnical design model. 


3.11 Ultimate Geogrid Strength — The ultimate or 
maximum geogrid strength, as determined by a short- 
term strength test either by single rib or multi rib 
method. 


3.12 Allowable Geogrid Strength— The long- 
term, allowable strength, Tallow, to be used in design 
taking into account all of the phenomena which could 
influence the geogrid during its service lifetime. 


3.13 Reduction Factors — A set of numeric values 
each of which is focused on a particular phenomenon 
which may adversely impact the geogrid’s performance. 


4 SITE DAMAGE TEST 


4.1 General 


Coarse backfills and heavy compaction loads can 
damage geosynthetic, causing an immediate reduction 
in strength. The effect is referred to as installation 
damage and the corresponding reduction factor as 
RF 


ID’ 


IS 17368 : 2020 


The purpose of the site damage test shall be: 


a) to place the geosynthetic under a range of fills 
that conform to the grading limits and to compact 
those fills in accordance with and in excess of the 
required specification; 


b) to recover the geosynthetic and measure its tensile 
strength and estimate the site damage; and 


c) quantify any loss of strength of the geosynthetic 
due to the construction process. 


4.2 Test Site 


4.2.1 Measurement of the effect of installation 
damage on geosynthetic reinforcement strength and 
deformation shall be determined from the results of 
installation damage tests. The installation damage tests 
shall simulate the installation conditions (conditions 
of service) as closely as practicable to the installation 
conditions anticipated in the geosynthetic structure. The 
installation conditions to be simulated shall include, as 
a minimum: 


a) the nature of the backfill both below and above 
the sample, particle size distribution, hardness and 
angularity; 

b) the depth at which the sample is installed; 


c) whether the material is driven over by vehicles 
before compaction; and 


d) method and degree of compaction. 


4.2.2 Test results from damaged specimens shall 
be compared to tensile test results obtained from 
undamaged specimens taken from the same lot, and 
preferably the same roll, of material as the damaged 
specimens. 


4.2.3 The specimens shall be large enough to be 
used for wide-width tensile testing (see IS 16635). 
Consideration shall be given to increase the number of 
specimens to ensure that they are fully representative 
of the damaged material. In case of geogrid, it is 
desirable that multi-rib tests, with at least four ribs, 
shall be used for installation damage evaluation. 
With single rib testing it may be difficult to assess the 
effect of severed ribs on the strength and modulus of 
damaged materials, and the effect of differences in 
degree of damage between ribs on the overall tensile 
strength of the product. Single ribs of geogrids are 
generally unsuitable for installation damage testing. 
If this cannot be avoided, for example, for very high 
strength materials, then it shall be demonstrated that 
the strength of the single ribs is representative of the 
full product. 


4.2.4 A level site shall be prepared and laid out in nine 
bays each 3.5 m x 3.5 m as shown in Fig. 1, leaving 
working space for construction plant to gain access 
around the test area without crossing the bays. 


4.2.5 Where the reinforcement is planned to be 
used within a zone of compacted fill, for example, a 
reinforced soil retaining wall or fill slope, a 150 mm 
thick layer of material (or 1.5 times the maximum 
fill size, whichever is the greater) shall be placed 
and compacted in each bay prior to the installation 
of the reinforcement. This material shall be the 
same as that to be placed in the layer above the 
reinforcement. 


Where the reinforcement is planned to be used 
beneath a zone of compacted fill, for example, a basal 
reinforced embankment on soft soil, a 150 mm thick 
layer of the typical foundation soil (or 1.5 times the 
maximum fill size, whichever is the greater) shall 
be placed in each bay prior to the installation of the 
reinforcement. 


4.3 Arrangement of the Reinforcement 


Sufficient portions of reinforcement each 10.5 m long 
(or as appropriate) shall be prepared. These shall be 
placed across each bay as shown in Fig. 1. No tension 
shall be applied to the reinforcement. The QC roll 
number and/or batch number of the reinforcement shall 
be recorded. Sufficient unused reinforcement from this 
batch shall be retained and prepared for tensile testing 
as control samples. 


4.4 Fill Materials 


Three different gradings of the fill material proposed 
for use shall represent the coarse, medium and fine 
fill. The fill material may be frictional fill, cohesive 
frictional fill or other materials as specified in the 
relevant product standard. Each layer of material shall 
be compacted to a thickness of 150 mm or 1.5 times 
the maximum particle diameter, whichever is greater. 
Particle size distribution for each type of fill shall be 
determined by dry sieve analysis. Fill shall not be end 
tipped onto the reinforcement but shall be spread over 
by bulldozer. 


4.5 Compaction 


Compaction of the fill shall be carried out as per guide 
line or specifications. The roller mass per metre width 
and number of passes shall be selected as per guide 
line or specifications (generally 10 ton vibratory 
type roller is used which imparts 30 ton load with 
10 passes). 


4.6 Site Testing 


The reinforcement shall be subjected to a variety 
of fill materials and compactive efforts as shown in 
Fig. 1. Levels shall be taken on a 1 m? grid within 
each bay after completion of each layer to determine 
the mean layer thickness. Variations in surface levels 
of the compacted fill shall not exceed 30 mm and 
20 mm of the true finished level as measured on 
a lm? grid. 


IS 17368 : 2020 


Medium size fill| fine size fill 


Coarse layer 


Reinforcement 


ne $ 


TS = = RE 


Fic. 1 SCHEMATIC LAYOUT OF TEST Bays 


4.7 Preparation of Samples b) The number of retrievals depends on the expected 


Three specimens shall be prepared from each length of service life of the geosynthetics. 


the geosynthetic for visual assessment of site damage c) The following schedule shall be observed unless 


and tensile testing. The following general guidelines otherwise agreed: 

shall be followed unless otherwise agreed by the parties 1) prepare durability testing samples and take 

concerned: control samples on delivery of material; and 

a) The number of samples is determined by the 2) make a first retrieval directly following 

dimensions of the structure, the physical variations construction. 
in the environment in which the geosynthetic is d) The samples shall be subjected to the same 
installed, and the repercussions that a failure of physical environment to which the geosynthetics 
the geosynthetic function would cause. is exposed in the structure. 


IS 17368 : 2020 


e) The dimensions of the durability testing samples 
shall be in accordance with dimensions and type 
of grip in tensile testing machine. Avoid folding 
or cutting if possible. A copy of the geosynthetics 
identification, date and structure reference, 
product delivery reference label is to be placed 
along with sample. 


4.8 Recovery of the Reinforcement 


After completion of the site testing, the compacted fill 
shall be manually removed from all bays. Those pieces 
of reinforcement that are accidentally damaged by 
spades shall not be used in subsequent tests. 


4.9 Visual Assessment of Site Damage 


A visual assessment of the site damage to each sample 
shall be made and recorded. Damage shall be classified 
into following categories. 


a) General Abrasion — This describes the condition 
of the reinforcement when damaged by contact 
with many small stones which leave the surface of 
the reinforcement covered in small scratches and 
abrasions. 


b) Splits, Cuts, Bruises and Coating Removal — This 
describes the damage caused by the action of 
larger particles. 

1) A split shall describe the region of a strip or 
rib when locally split into a number of small 
strands so that light passes through. 


2 


wa 


A cut shall describe the rib or strip when a 
sharp indentation is made across or along the 
reinforcement, such that fibres are cut or the 
cross-section of the rib is reduced. 


3) A bruise shall describe the rib or strip when 
flattened but no light passes through. 


4) Coating removal applies when the coating or 
sheath has been removed locally, leaving the 
reinforcing fibres visible. Visual inspection 
of the coatings of metallic reinforcements 
shall be same as that made for polymeric 
reinforcements. 


4.10 Reinforcement Test Method 


The reinforcement shall be tested in accordance with 
the method specified in IS 16635. For reinforcements, it 
is sufficient to cut parallel specimens. Both the control 
samples and damaged samples shall be tested. 


The tensile strength, peak extension and the classified 
damage shall be reported for each site damaged 
specimen and comparisons made with the properties of 
the control sample. 


NOTE — In case of uni-axial geogrid testing shall be done in 
machine direction only and in case of extruded (or bi-axial) 
geogrid, testing shall be done both in machine as well as cross 
machine direction. 


5 TESTING AND ANALYSIS 


5.1 Testing on Retrieval Samples 


Wash the samples carefully under running cold tap 
water and place them horizontally to dry. Tensile 
strength test in accordance with IS 16635 shall be 
performed on the sample. 


5.2 Compare the results of these tests with those 
obtained on control specimens that is, determine the 
strength retained (in percentage) after damage during 
installation. 


6 TEST REPORT 
The test report shall include: 


a) Sample details like, grade, type, manufacturers 
name, lot number, roll number etc; 


b) Project details, location (site); 

c) Type of soil/sand, gravel, aggregates used; 
d) The identification of the initial conditions; 
e) The retrieval operation; 


f) The laboratory report (strength retained and 
reduction factor); and 


g) Any other information required by the user. 


IS 17368 : 2020 


ANNEX A 


( Clause 2 ) 


LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 


IS No. 


13321 (Part 1) : 1992 
16635 : 2017 
SP 45 : 1988 


Title 


Glossary of terms for geosynthetics: Part 1 Terms used in materials and properties 
Geosynthetics — Wide width tensile test 


Hand book on glossary of textile terms 


ANNEX B 


( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Geosynthetics Sectional Committee, TXD 30 


Organization 


The South India Textile Research Association Council, 
Coimbatore 


Ahmedabad Textile Industry’s Research Association, 
Ahmedabad 


Best Geotechnique Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 

Central Coir Research Institute, Alappuzha 

Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 

Central Soil and Materials Research Station, New Delhi 


Charankattu Coir Mfg Co (P) Ltd, Kerala 


Central Water Commission, New Delhi 


Department of Jute and Fibre Technology, Kolkata 


DKTE Centre of Excellence in Nonwovens, Ichalkaranji 


Ganga Flood Control Commission, Patna 


Garware Wall Ropes Ltd, Pune 


Geosynthetics Testing Services Pvt Ltd, Ahmedabad 


ICAR- National Institute of Natural Fibre Engineering & 
Technology, Kolkata 


Representative(s) 


Dr A. N. Desai (Chairman) 


SHRIMATI DEEPALI PLAWAT 
SHRI JIGAR DAVE (Alternate) 


SHRI SATISH NAIK 
Dr D. ANITA RAVINDRANATH 
SHRIMATI SUMY SEBASTIAN (Alternate) 


SHRI SUDHIR MATHUR 
Suri Jar BAHAGWAN (Alternate) 


Dr R. CHITRA 
SHRI MAnisH Gupta (Alternate) 


Suri C. R. DEVRAJ 

Suri C. D. ATHUL Ras (Alternate) 
REPRESENTATIVE 
DR SWAPAN GHOSH 

Pror (DR) A. K. Samantha (Alternate) 
SHRI ANIKET S. BHUTE 
SHRI A. K. SINHA 

SHRI Manos Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI TIRUMAL KULKARNI 
SHRI RAJENDRA GHADGE (Alternate) 
Dr DEEPAK MANJUNATH 


SHRI MANIK BHOWMICK 
Dr SansoyY DEBNATH (Alternate) 


IS 17368 : 2020 


Organization 


Indian Institute of Technology, Gandhinagar 
Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi 


Indian Jute Industries’ Research Association, Kolkata 


Indian Jute Mills Association, Kolkatta 


Indian Technical Textile Association, Mumbai 


International Geosynthetics Society, India Chapter, 
New Delhi 


Kusumgar Corporates, Mumbai 


Macaferri Environmental Solutions Pvt Ltd, 
Navi Mumbai 


Megaplast India Pvt Ltd, Daman 


Ministry of Road Transport & Highways, New Delhi 


Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai, Thane 


National Highways Authority of India, Ghaziabad 


National Jute Board, Kolkatta 


Office ofthe Jute Commissioner, Kolkatta 


Office ofthe Textile Commissioner, Mumbai 


Premier Polyfilms Ltd, Ghaziabad 


Reliance Industries Ltd, New Delhi 


Strata Geosystems (I) Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


Techfab India, Mumbai 


Texel Industries Limited, Gandhinagar 


The Bombay Textile Research Association, Mumbai 


The Synthetics & Art Silk Mills Research Association, 
Mumbai 


Representative(s) 


PROF AMIT PRASHANT 
Pror A. K. GHOSH 


Dr MAHUYA GHOSH 
SHRI KousHik Das (Alternate) 


Suri S. K. CHANDRA 
Suri J. K. BEHERA (Alternate) 


Dr Anup RAKSHIT 
SHRIMATI Rucuita Gupta (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
Suri Y. K. KUSUMGAR 
Dr M. K. TALUKDAR (Alternate) 
Dr RATNAKAR MAHAJAN 
Suri C. V. RAJESH 
SHRI HEMENDRA BEHERA (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJIV KUMAR 
Dr VISHAL RAMESH THOMBARE 
SHRI MANDAR BHALCHANDRA PINGLE (A/ternate) 


SHRI RAKESH PRAKASH SINGH 
Suri Mupit GARG (Alternate) 


Suri P. K. CHOUDHURY 
Suri M. Dutta (Alternate) 


Suri R. K. Roy 
SHRI SOUMYADIPTA DATTA (Alternate) 


SHRI AJAY PANDIT 
SHRI SANJAY CHARAK (Alternate) 


SHRI AMITAABH GOENKA 
SHRI PRAVEEN KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI MAHESH SHARMA 
SHRI V. RAVIKANTH (Alternate) 


SHRI NARENDRA DALMIA 
SHRI SHAHROKH BAGLI (Alternate) 


SHRI ANANT KANOI 
SHRI SAURABH Vyas (Alternate) 


SHRI SHAILESH R. MEHTA 
SHRI NARESH R MEHTA (ALTERNATIVE) 


SHRI V. K. PATIL 
DRANJAN K. MUKHOPADHYAY (Alternate) 


Dr MANISHA MATHUR 
SHRIMATI ASHWINI SUDAM (Alternate) 


IS 17368 : 2020 


Organization Representative(s) 
In personal capacity [Bhakta Nivas, 12-1-170/46 P, Dr G. V. Rao 
Hanuman Nagar, Jaipuri Colony, Nagole, 
Hyderabad 500 068] 
In personal capacity [104, Kanchanban, A. W. Vartak Suri V. N. GORE 
Marg, Vile Parle (East), Mumbai 400 057] 
BIS Directorate General Suri A. K. Bera, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (TXD) 


[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio ) ] 


Member Secretary 
Suri J. K. Gupta 
Scientist ‘D’ (TXD), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part ofthese publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
“BIS Catalogue” and “Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TXD 30 (14513). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


