NAT HIAF IS 17440 : 2020 
Indian Standard 


a sh — ANTO 


Carbon Black — Specification 


ICS 83.040.20 


© BIS 2020 


anda AM SAN 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Te TH AMT, ay Redi 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


August 2020 Price Group 8 


Inorganic Chemicals Sectional Committee, CHD 01 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Inorganic 
Chemicals Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division Council. 


Carbon black is a paracrystalline form of carbon. It has high surface area to volume ratio. However, its surface area 
is lower than that of activated carbon. Carbon black is a material generally commercially produced by incomplete 
combustion of heavy petroleum products such as coal tar, FCC tar or ethylene cracking tar. It is majorly used as a 
coloured pigment in plastics, inks, paints and as a reinforcing filler in tyres and other rubber products. 


Furnace black method is one of the most widely used method for producing carbon black. There are two methods 
for producing carbon black that is, furnace black or thermal black. Carbon black in its finished form is > 99 
percent pure and this differentiates it from a commonly known “soot” (solid material formed from the incomplete 
combustion of diesel and wood). 


The list of experts who had made significant contribution to the formulation of this standard is given at Annex O. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ).’ The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 17440 : 2020 


Indian Standard 
CARBON BLACK — SPECIFICATION 


1 SCOPE 


This standard prescribes requirements for different 
varieties of carbon black for applications in paints, 
plastics, inks, tyres and rubber products. It also 
describes various test methods for the determination of 
Ash content, pH value, acetone extract, tinting strength, 
pour density, iodine adsorption number, particle size 
determination, total and external surface area by 
nitrogen adsorption. 


2 REFERENCES 


The Indian Standards given below contain provisions 
which through reference in this text, constitute 
provision of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards. 


IS No. Title 


460 (Part 1): 1985 Test sieves: Part 1 Wire cloth 
test sieves (third revision) 


9788 : 1981 Specification for titanium 


dioxide, rutile for paints 


3 REQUIREMENTS 


The material shall be of such a composition as to satisfy 
the requirement of this standard. The material shall be 
free from foreign matter like wood, metal and fibres. 
Carbon black shall also comply with the requirements 
prescribed in Table 1. 


4 PACKAGING AND MARKING 


4.1 Packaging 


The material shall be supplied in bags. The net mass of 
each bag shall be 25 + 0.5 Kg. The bags shall be shaped 
to facilitate stacking in pellets by slight ironing. 


4.2 Marking 


4.2.1 Each package shall bear legibly and indelibly the 
following information: 


a) Name and grade of the material, 

b) Indication of the source of manufacture, 
c) Mass of the material in the container, 

d) Date of packing, and 

e) Batch number. 


4.2.2 BIS Certification Marking 


The product(s) conforming to the requirements of 
this standard may be certified as per the conformity 
assessment schemes under the provisions of the Bureau 
of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and the Rules and 
Regulations framed thereunder, and the products may 
be marked with the Standard Mark. 


5 QUALITY OF REAGENTS 


Unless specified otherwise, pure chemicals and distilled 
H,O shall be employed in the tests. 


NOTE — ‘Pure Chemicals’ shall mean chemicals that do not 
contain impurities. 


IS 17440 : 2020 


Table 1 Requirements for Carbon Black 


( Clause 3 ) 
SI No. Name of the Test Paints Inks Plastics Tyres Abrasion Annex 
a) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) 
i) Ash content (percent by 0.2 0.1 0.5 0.75 0.75 A 
mass), Max 
ii) pH value 4.0-6.0 6-8 7-10 6.5-7.5 6.5-7.5 B 
iii) Acetone extract, percent by 0.5 2.0 C 
mass, Max 
iv) Tinting strength (percent) 58-60 110-120 98-130 104 120+5 
v) Pour density(kg/m*) 355 +40 340 + 40 420 + 40 376 + 30 316-380 E 
vi) Iodine adsorption Number 121+5 30-85 - 140-160 143-158 
(mg/g) 
vil) Particle size determination - 75 - - - G 
(millimicrons), Max 
viii) Nitrogen surface aream’/kg 112-126 x 10° 114-124 x 10° - 78-88 x 10° - H 
ix) Sieve residue 
45 micron IS sieve, percent 0.05 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 J 
by mass, Max 
500 micron IS sieve, percent 0.05 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.001 
by mass, Max 
x) Loss on Heating, percent by 23 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.5, K 
mass, Max 
xi) Toluene Discolouration, 90 85 85 80 80 M 
percent by mass, Min 
xii) Fines content, percent by 15.0 15.0 15.0 15.0 15.0 N 


mass, Min 


IS 17440 : 2020 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 3, Table | ) 


A-1 ASH CONTENT 


A-2 PURPOSE 


Ash content in carbon black is determined to know 
the amount of non-carbon compounds present after 
combustion. 


A-3 APPARATUS 


A-3.1 Muffle Furnace — Capable of temperature 
regulation of +25°C at 550°C. 


A-3.2 Silica or Porcelain Crucible — High form, 
capacity 15 ml, with cover. 


A-4 PROCEDURE 


Ignite the crucible and cover in the muffle furnace as 
550 + 25°C for 1 h. Place the crucible and cover in a 
desiccator and allow to cool at room temperature and 
then weigh to nearest 0.1 mg. Dry an adequate sample 
of carbon black for 1 h at 125°C and weigh accurately 
approximately 2 g of the dried sample into previously 
ignited crucible. Place the crucible with the cover 
removed into furnace and leave for 16 h at 550 + 25°C. 
Remove from furnace and replace cover and cool in a 
desiccator to room temperature. Weigh to the nearest 
0.1 mg. 


NOTE — In the case of channel blacks the heating shall be 
done at 950 + 25°C for a period of 4 to 5 h. 


A-5 PRECAUTIONS 


A-5.1 Keep the door of the furnace open about 6 mm to 
admit air to support the combustion of organic matter. 


A-5.2 Take care in removing ashed sample from 
furnace to desiccator. 


A-5.3 Always keep the cover on the crucible when 
transferring it to and from the desiccator to prevent loss 
of ash due to air currents. 


A-5.4 After the sample has cooled in the desiccator, 
admit air slowly to avoid loss of ash from the crucible. 


A-6 CALCULATION 


Ash b P 400 
sh, percent by mass = CB 


where 
D = mass ofthe crucible and ash, 
B = mass ofthe crucible, and 
C= mass ofthe crucible and sample. 
Report the average of at least two determinations. 


ANNEX B 
( Clause 3, Table 1) 


B-1 PH VALUE 


B-2 APPARATUS 


B-2.1 pH Meter — Equipped with glass and calomel 
electrodes, having an accuracy of 0.05 pH. 


B-2.2 Beakers and Watch Glasses — Made of neutral 
glass and of sufficient size to accommodate the sample 
used. 


B-2.3 Hot Plate 


B-2.4 Glass or Porcelain Plate and Spatula or 
Mortar and Pestle 


B-2.5 Container — Stainless steel or copper, for 
boiling distilled water. 


B-3 PROCEDURE 


Crush any pelleted or lumpy carbon black to a fine 
powder, using either the spatula and plate or mortar and 
pestle. 


Add 10 ml of boiling distilled water to each gram of 
carbon black weighed into the beakers. To facilitate 
wetting of unpelletized carbon black, add a few drops 
of pure ethanol or acetone. 


For large samples of 1 g or more of carbon black, 
boil the mixture for 15 min, but do not allow to go to 
dryness. 


For small samples of 0.1 to 0.5 g of carbon black, use 
50 ml beakers and boil the mixture on the hot plate until 
a sludge remains, but do not allow to go to dryness. 


IS 17440 : 2020 


Let the mixture cool to room temperature in an 
atmosphere free from chemical fumes which might 
contaminate the samples. Decant off any supernatant 
liquid. 

Place the electrodes in the sludge and rotate the beaker 
gently in alternate direction until a constant pH is 
obtained. 


Repeat the procedure on a second sample. 
B-4 PRECAUTIONS 


B-4.1 To prevent contamination of the sample during 
boiling, a clean watch-glass may be used over the beaker. 


B-4.2 Standardize the pH meter with a reliable buffer 
in pH range of the carbon black samples to be tested. 


B-4.3 The distilled water used in the test should be as 
pure as possible. 


B-4.4 The pH of the freshly boiled distilled water shall 
be 6.9 to 7.1. 


B-5 REPORT 


The report shall include the results obtained from the 
two individual determinations and their average. 


ANNEX C 
( Clause 3, Table | ) 


C-1 ACETONE EXTRACT 


C-2 APPARATUS 


C-2.1 Soxhlet Extraction Apparatus — With 20 to 
30 ml cup. 


C-2.2 Flat-Bottomed Flask — 150 ml. 


C-2.3 Whatman Type Paper Extraction Thimbles — 
25 x 100 mm. 


C-3 REAGENT 
C-3.1 Acetone 


C-4 PROCEDURE 


Weigh the cleaned and dried 150 ml flask. Weigh 
into a paper extraction thimble accurately to nearest 


0.001 g, about 5 g of the sample. Cut six pieces of 
filter paper slightly larger than the internal diameter 
of the thimble and press each one into place on top of 
the sample. Place the thimble in a soxhlet extractor 
and reflux for four hours with 100 ml of acetone in 
the flask. After four hours remove the thimble and 
distil off most of the acetone from the flask. Evaporate 
the remaining solvent with compressed air, dry the 
flask at 95°C in an oven, cool in a desiccators and 
weigh. 


C-5 CALCULATION 
Acetone extract, percent by mass = A/M x 100 
where 


A= mass of residue from the sample determination, 
and 


M= mass of sample. 


ANNEX D 
( Clause 3, Table 1) 


D-1 RELATIVE TINTING STRENGTH 


D-1.1 Principle 


A dispersion of the coloured pigment under test, 
prepared under known conditions on an automatic 
muller, is mixed in a known ratio with a dispersion of 
white pigment. The intensity of colour and hue of the 
resulting paste is compared with that of a similar paste 
made under the same conditions from the approved 
sample of coloured pigment and the same dispersion 
of white pigment. 


D-1.2 The degree of development of tinting strength of 
a coloured pigment is dependent on the amount of work 
done in the preparation of the dispersion. Therefore, 
in determining the relative tinting strengths of two 
coloured pigments it is necessary for the comparison to 
be carried out at the level of maximum development of 
colour. In this method, which uses an automatic muller, 
the development of tinting strength is influenced by the 
force applied, the number of revolutions, the medium, 
the volume of the mix, and the rheology of the mix. 
By following the procedure described in D.4.1, the 


conditions are determined under which a practical 
maximum of tinting strength may be obtained on the 
automatic muller. When these conditions are known for 
a particular pigment, there is no need to carry out the 
procedure described, in D-4.1. 


D-1.3 Of the factors listed in D-1.2, the following can 
be specified without difficulty: 


a) The force applied, which shall be the maximum 
available; 


b) The medium to be used, which is linseed stand oil; 
and 


c) The volume of the mix of pigment and medium 
which shall be about 2 ml. 


D-1.4 The remaining factors to be determined which 
shall be chosen according to the level of 


tinting strength of the coloured pigment under test, are 
the following: 


a) The ratio of pigment to medium, 
b) The number of revolutions to be used, and 
c) The ratio of coloured pigment to white pigment. 


D-1.5 The appropriate ratio of pigment to medium, by 
mass, depends not only on the oil 


absorption of the pigment but also on the viscosity of 
the mix during the mulling operation. As a first step, 
all pigments can initially be allocated to one of the 
following three groups: 


a) Pigment of low medium requirements-average 
mulling concentration 66.7 percent of pigment by 
mass; 


b) Pigments of intermediate medium requirement- 
average mulling concentration 40 percent of 
pigment by mass; and 


c) Pigments of high medium requirement-average 
mulling concentration 25 percent by mass. 


The quantities to be used in the test for the three groups 
defined above shall be the following: 


1) 3.0 g of pigment and 1.5 g of the linseed stand 
oil. 

2) 1.0 g of pigment and 1.5 g of linseed stand 
oil. 

3) 0.5 g of the pigment and 1.5 g of the linseed 
stand oil. 

NOTES 

1 If the mixture chosen is found to be unsuitably stiff or fluid 

for use on the muller, one of the other ratios should be used as 

appropriate. 

2 If the diameter of the muller plates is at the top end of the 


range specified in D-1.1, it may be necessary to increase the 
amounts specified in order to reduce wear on the plates. 


IS 17440 : 2020 


D-2 APPARATUS 


D-2.1 Automatic Muller 


With ground glass plates, preferably water cooled, 
of diameter 180 to 250 mm to which a variable but 
known force of up to about 1 000 N may be applied. 
The driving glass plate shall have a speed of rotation 
of between 70 and 120 revolutions per minute and the 
apparatus shall have an arrangement for presetting the 
number of revolutions in multiples of 25. 


D-2.2 Palette Knife or Spatula — Of steel or plastic 
material. 


D-2.3 Glass Slides — Slides of glass or other 
transparent, colourless, non absorbent substance. 


D-2.4 Film of Plastic Material — Transparent and 
colourless 


D-2.5 Film Application — Suitable for applying two 
or three films side by side of wet paste, thickness 50 to 
100 um. 


D-2.6 Balance — Accurate to +0.001 g 
D-3 REAGENTS 


D.3.1 Linseed Stand Oil 


D-3.2 White pigment Paste-with the following 
composition: 40 parts by mass of titanium dioxide 
rutile (see IS 9788) and 60 parts by mass of linseed oil. 
Mix well so as to achieve preliminary wetting of the 
solids, then grind on a triple roll mill, until the particle 
size is less than Sum when tested on a fineness of grind 
gauge. Store in airtight containers, preferably tubes 
with screw caps. 


D-4 PROCEDURE 


D-4.1 Determination of Conditions for Preparing 
Dispersion of Coloured Pigments 


D-4.1.1 Weigh an appropriate quantity of medium 
and transfer it to the lower plate of the muller: weigh 
the corresponding quantity of the approved sample of 
the coloured pigment and sprinkle it carefully on the 
medium. Mix the pigment with the medium by means 
of the spatula, but do not grind. Spread the mixture 
in approximately circular patch, of diameter about 
100 nm, in the centre of the lower plate and clean the 
spatula as much as possible by wiping it on the upper 
plate of the muller. Close the plates and carry out the 
grinding in stages of 50 revolutions; after each stage 
collect the paste from both plates with the spatula and 
spread it out in an approximately circular patch on the 
centre of the lower plate, wiping the spatula on the 


IS 17440 : 2020 


upper plate as before. After a total of 200 revolutions, 
remove a small portion (about one-quarter of the 
total volume) of the collected paste, set this aside and 
continue grinding the main bulk. Remove similar small 
portions after totals of 300 and 400 revolutions: set 
these also aside and then clean the muller plates and 
spatula. 


D-4.1.2 Place on the lower muller plate 3 + 0.01 g of 
white pigment paste and an amount of the coloured 
pigment paste which has been ground for 200 
revolutions which contains 0.12 g of coloured pigment 
(see D-3.1.4 ) and mix the two pastes with the spatula 
as homogeneously as possible, without grinding. 
Spread the mixture in an approximately circular patch 
in the centre of the lower plate of the matter, wipe the 
spatula on the upper plate, close the plates and grind for 
four stages of 25 revolutions each with the minimum 
applied force; after each stage collect the paste in the 
centre of the lower plate as described previously. Then 
remove the paste from the muller and set aside for later 
assessment. 


Repeat this operation with the same mass of each of the 
portions of coloured paste which have been ground for 
300 and 400 revolutions, respectively. 


D-4.1.3 Apply each of these reduction pastes in order, 
side by side, with touching edges on a sheet of glass or 
transparent film of plastics material so that the intensity 
of colour can be judged visually. Record the minimum 
number of revolutions necessary to obtain the sample of 
coloured pigment paste which produces the maximum 
intensity of colour and use the number of revolutions 
for the test itself. 


D-4.1.4 The amount of coloured pigment paste which 
contains 0.12 g of coloured pigment will, when mixed 
with 3 g of white pigment paste, give a reduction ratio 
of 1 : 10. This ratio should be modified to for example, 
1:5 or 1:20 (to suit weak pigments or strong pigments, 
respectively ) in order to produce a colour on reduction 
of intensity which is suitable for assessing the intensity 
of colour and hue of the reduction -pastes. 


D-4.2 Preparation of Dispersion of Coloured Sample 


Prepare a dispersion on the automatic muller of the 
approved sample of the coloured pigment as described 
in D-3.1, by carrying out the grinding in stages of 
50 revolutions to the full number of revolutions 
previously decided without removing any of the paste, 
but gathering and spreading the paste after each stage. 
When the grinding has been completed, collect the paste 
and store. Clean the muller and spatula, and repeat the 
operation with the same quantities of the test sample of 
pigment and oil and using the same procedure on the 
same muller. Collect the coloured pigment paste from 
this sample and store. Clean the muller and spatula. 


D-4.3 Mixing of Dispersions of coloured Pigment 
and White Pigment 


Place on the lower muller plate 3 +0.01 g of white 
pigment paste and an amount of the coloured pigment 
paste which has been ground for 200 revolutions and 
which contains the mass of coloured pigment to give the 
chosen reduction ratio, and mix the two pastes with the 
spatulas homogeneously as possible, without grinding. 
Spread the mixture in an approximately circular patch 
in the centre of the lower plate, wipe the spatula on the 
upper plate, close the plates and grind for four stages of 
25 revolutions each with the minimum applied force; 
after each stage collect the paste in the centre of the 
lower plate as described previously. Then remove the 
paste from the muller for later assessment and store 
in a suitable receptacle. Repeat the operation using 
the coloured pigment dispersion paste prepared from 
the test sample of coloured pigment, thus producing a 
comparative reduction paste. 


D-4.4 Comparison of Colour on Reduction and 
Determination of Relative Tinting Strength 


D-4.4.1 Place a quantity of each of the two reduction 
pastes obtained as described in D-4.3 side by side on a 
glass plate or plastics film, and with the film applicator 
draw them down to form two uniformly thick strips 
not less than 25 mm wide with touching edges not less 
than‘40 mm long. Compare for intensity of colour and 
for hue the two strips immediately after application by 
examining them in diffused daylight through the glass 
or film of plastics material. 


Where good daylight is not available; make the 
comparison in artificial light. 


If the intensities of colour are equal and the hues are 
the same, the colours on reduction are the same, and 
the relative tinting strength of the sample under test is 
100 percent. However, if the intensities of colour are 
equal but the hues are not the same, and there is also a 
difference in colour on reduction; note the difference 
and its nature. 


D-4.4.2 If the intensities of colour are not considered 
to be equal, and, therefore, the colours on reduction 
are not the same, repeat the operations of D-4.3 and 
D-4.4.1, but weighing and using a quantity of the 
coloured pigment dispersion of the test sample which 
is estimated to give an intensity of colour equal to that 
of the original mass taken of the coloured pigment 
dispersion of the approved sample. 


For example, if it is considered that the, sample under 
test is 15 percent stronger than the approved sample, 
in the repeat test, the mass of coloured test Pigment 
dispersion used shall be15 percent less than that taken 
for the first test, but the mass of coloured pigment 
dispersion of the approved sample shall be the same as 


that originally used. If there is also 9 difference in hue, 
note the difference and its nature. 
D-4.5 Calculation 

bx100 


Relative tinting strength = ———— gives percent of the 
approved sample a 


IS 17440 : 2020 


where 
a= parts of the test sample that produce the same 
intensity as approved sample, and 
b= parts of the approved sample. 


NOTE — It is important to include the percentage sign ( 
percent), and to note that the tinting strength is relative to that 
of the approved sample as 100 percent. 


ANNEX E 
( Clause 3, Table 1) 


E-1 POUR DENSITY 


This method is essentially based on ISO/R 1306-1970 
‘Pelletized carbon black for use in the rubber industry. 
Determination of pour density’ and ASTM D 15 13-60 
‘Pour density of pelletid carbon black’ . 


E-2 APPARATUS 


Cylindrical container without any pouring lip or 
deformation of wall and of 1 000 ml capacity. 


E-3 PROCEDURE 


Pour the carbon black into the centre of the tared 
container from a height of not more than 50 mm, from 
the rim. A large excess should be used to form a cone 


above the rim of the cylindrical container, Level the 
surface with a single sweep of a straight edged spatula, 
held perpendicular to and in firm contact with the lip of 
the container. Determine the mass of carbon black in 
the container to the nearest gram. Repeat the procedure 
on two additional samples. 


E-4 CALCULATION 
D=M,-M, 
where 
D= pour density in g/ l; 
M,= mass in g, of the sample and the container; and 


M = mass in g, of the container. 


ANNEX F 
( Clause 3, Table 1) 


F-1 IODINE ADSORPTION NUMBER 


F-1.1 Principle 


Iodine number is defined as the milligrams of 
iodine adsorbed by one gram of the material when 
the iodine residual concentration of the filterate is 
0.02 N. IAN is related to the surface area of carbon 
black and therefore it measures the quality of the 
base material. If high contents of volatile or solvent 
extractable substance is present, IAN decreases. As 
carbon black is used as a filler material in plastics, 
rubber and inks, it requires certain IAN in order to 
reach and maintain the physical properties of the end 
product. 


F-2 APPARATUS 


F-2.1 Vials — Optically clear type with polyethylene or 
ground-glass stopper of 45 ml capacity. Alternatively, 
tall form weighing bottles of 30 ml capacity with 
ground-glass stoppers may be used. 


F-2.2 Oven — capable of maintaining a temperature 
of 105 + 2°C. 


F-2.3 Burette — 25 ml, graduated upto 0.05 ml; or 
10 ml, graduated upto 0.02 ml. 


F-2.4 Pipettes — 25 ml and 20 ml, calibrated to the 
nearest 0.01 ml. 


F-2.5 Centrifuge — Capable of speed above 1000 rev/ 
min. Ifa centrifuge is not available then porcelain filter 
crucible may be used. 


F-2.6 Balance — Analytical, with a sensitivity of at 
least 0.1 mg. 


F-3 REAGENTS 


F-3.1 Iodine Solution — 0.0473 N — Dissolve 6 g 
of iodine and 57 g of potassium iodide (KI) weighed 
to the nearest 0.1 mg in 30 ml water, dilute to 1 litre 
in a volumetric flask when solution is complete and 
standardize against sodium thiosulphate solution. 


IS 17440 : 2020 


F-3.2 Standard Sodium Thiosulphate 
Solution-0.0394 N — Dissolve 9.781 0 g of sodium 
thiosulphate pentahydrate ( Na,S,O.. 5H,O ), weighed 
to the nearest 0.1 mg in 500 ml of water in a 1 litre 
volumetric flask. Add 5 ml of n-pentanol and shake to 
mix thoroughly. Dilute to 1 litre and standardize with 
0.1 N potassium dichromate solution. 


F-3.3 Starch Indicator Solution — Stir 2-5 g of starch 
and 2 mg of mercuric iodide in 25 ml of water. Add 
the suspension immediately to | litre of boiling water, 
boil for 5 min. With stirring, cool and store in bottles. 
A suitable soluble starch indicator may also be used. 


F-4 PROCEDURE 


Dry an adequate representative sample for 1 hour at 105 
deg C. The pellet shall be crushed before drying. Weigh 
accurately into a glass vial or bottle approximately 0.5 
g of dried sample for expected iodine numbers under 


in one smooth motion into a 50 ml beaker, leaving the 
black at the bottom of the vial. Then immediately pipette 
20 ml of this solution into a 100 ml conical flask and 
titrate with the standard sodium thiosulphate solution 
until a pale yellow colour remains. Add approximately 
5 ml starch indicator or approximately 0.1 g soluble 
starch indicator and continue the titration until one 
drop of thiosulphate causes the blue colour to change 
to colourless. Read the burette to the nearest 0.01 ml. 


Carry out a blank determination using 20 ml of iodine 
solution following the above procedure. 


F-5 EXPRESSION OF RESULT 


= (B-s) Š x 158.64 


I= iodine absorption number in mg of iodine per 
gram of carbon black; 


Gand e had, 135 to 500 B= volume in ml of sodium thiosulphate solution 

AG Re BOR OCINE BU DEN EON.. O ASY required for titration of blank (the average of 
all weights being to the nearest 0.1 mg. Pipette 25 ml two determinations); 
of the iodine solution into the glass vail or bottle and . . ; i 

; : . : S= volume in ml, of sodium thiosulphate solution 
stopper immediately. Shake the mixture for one minute ired för titráti f le (th f 
at not less than 120 strokes per minute. If a mechanical ae pyres oo sample (ibeavemer © 
shaker is used, 240 vigorous strokes per minute are two determinations); 
recommended. Thorough mixing N= normality of standard sodium thiosulphate 
of the carbon black and iodine solution is necessary. gelation, 
Centrifuge immediately for at least one minute at over M= massing, of the sample taken for the test; and 
1000 rev/min after shaking. Immediately after the 158.64 = dilution factor x equivalent weight of 
centrifuge has come to rest, decant the iodine solution iodine. 2> «126.91 
20 
ANNEX G 


( Clause 3, Table | ) 


G-1 PARTICLE SIZE DETERMINATION 
(ELECTRON MICROSCOPY) 


G-1.1 Significance 


The morphology of carbon black should significantly 
affects the transient and end use properties of systems 
as carbon black loaded polymer. One of the most 
important property of carbon black is its particle size 
distribution. It relates to the degree of blackness and 
reinforcement. Size of the aggregate and its shape also 
affect end use performance of a carbon black. 


The preferred method to determine the particle size is 
Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) preferably 
using ‘lacey carbon grid’. 


G-2 APPARATUS 


Transmission type electron microscope with point to 
point resolution of 1 nm or better. Desired resolution 
is achieved at high operating voltage. Voltage range 


recommended is around 60 to 120 KV. For better 
resolution, 300 kV instrument can also be used. 


G-2.1 Image Analysis System 


It consists of a TEM-interfaced camera which is 
capable of 640 x 480 pixel or better resolution. The 
computer is equipped with a hardware to capture TEM 
images digitally, and software in order to perform 
morphological operations. 


G-2.2 Two Roll Mill 


G-2.3 Vacuum Evaporator — For preparation of 
carbon films as substrates for electron microscopy. 


G-2.4 It should be capable of reducing the absolute 
pressure to 1.3 MPa. It should also contain the necessary 
apparatus for a-c glow discharge. 


G-2.5 Ultrasonic Generator — Probe which provides 
sufficient energy for sufficient dispersion. 


G-2.6 Dry Box 


G-2.7 Analytical Balance — With an accuracy of 
0.5 mg. 


G-2.8 Electrically Heated Tube Furnace — It should 
have the capability to heat to 800-900 °C under an inert 
environment. It should have a ability to introduce and 
remove the sample without allowing oxygen intrusion. 


G-2.9 Pyroprobe — Capable of being heated from 150 
to 1 000 deg C in an inert environment. 


G-2.10 Carbon Rods and Carbon Rod Sharpener 
G-2.11 Glass Microscope Slides, 25 by 75 mm 


G-2.12 Test tube, transfer pipette, rubber bulbs, glass 
vials, buchner funnel, filter paper, carbon coated 
electron microscope, wire screening with openings 
approximately 1 mm, wire screening, tweezers, 
spatulas, fluorocarbon duster, lens tissue, porcelain 
boats, centrifuge, beakers. 


G-3 REAGENTS AND MATERIALS 


G-3.1 Chloroform, reagent grade 

G-3.2 Tetrahydrofuran, R.G 

G-3.3 1,2-Dichloroethane, R.G 

G-3.4 Ethyl Acetate, R.G. 

G-3.5 Poly (Vinyl Formal) Resin 

G-3.6 Cellulose Acetate Butyrate Resin 


G-3.7 Pthalate Type Plasticizer (such as sanitizer) 


G-4 SAMPLE PREPARATION-DISPERSION 
PROCEDURES 


G-4.1 Dry Carbon Black (Sonic Bath) 


Weigh carbon black (8 to 10 mg) into a test tube 
containing 1 cm” of solvent (preferably isopropyl 
alcohol). Adjust the ultrasonic bath power for 
maximum agitation. This requires adjustment of water 
level. As the water is heated by ultrasonic energy, ice 
can be added to control the temperature in order to 
maintain maximum dispersive capability. Place this test 
tube containing carbon black and solvent mixture into 
the most intense part of ultrasonic field and allow the 
mixture to agitate for 3 to 5 min. Hold the test tube with 
tongs and mount it in a simple wire holder. Transfer 
a small portion of carbon black solvent mixture in 
some another test tube containing | cm” of solvent. If 
the particle size increases, the amount of concentrate 
required also increases. Sample is transferred between 
the transfer pipette and the test tube. Cork the test tube 
and ultrasonic dispersion is done. The concentration of 
the diluted dispersion is checked by collecting a small 


IS 17440 : 2020 


amount in a pipette. The sample is viewed against a 
white background. 


For carbon black of tread grade, the dispersions shall 
be transparent becoming somewhat darker with the size 
of the particle. The diluted dispersions of very coarse 
carbon black will be on the threshold of complete 
opacity. Adjust the concentration by adding more 
solvent or concentrate if required. Permit the sample 
for ultrasonic agitation. The volume of carbon black 
solvent mixture should be maintained at 1 cm? In case 
the dilution is required and the excess of volume above 
1 cm? should be discarded. Place a specimen grid along 
with the substrate. Remove diluted dispersion with 
the help of fresh pipette and place one drop on the 
grid close to the centre at a height of 12 mm. Dry the 
specimen for 1 min on a filter paper. In case the relative 
humidity in the room exceeds by 30 percent, the above 
specimen preparation procedure should be performed. 
For TEM grids, place them in a sample holder and then 
place it in a pyrolysis chamber. In order to prevent 
the oxidation of the sample, purge the chamber with 
inert gas. Pyrolyse the specimen grid at a temperature 
around 550 °C. 


G-4.2 Dry Carbon Black (Ultrasonic Probe) 


Weigh carbon black (5 to 10 mg) into a 30 cm’ glass vial. 
Add to it 20 cm” of solvent. Keep the vial containing 
solvent and carbon black in an ice bath. Insert the probe 
into a vial at a depth of around 2.5 cm. Ultrasonicate 
at 40 to 50 watts for 10 min. Transfer small amount of 
carbon black/solvent mixture into another vial and add 
20 cm? of fresh solvent. Sonicate for 3 min additionally. 
Check concentration by extracting small amount into a 
pipette and place one drop on filter paper. Dispersions 
should be transparent for tread grade carbon black, 
becoming darker with particle size. Add more solvent 
or concentrate in order to adjust the concentration. 
Maintain the volume of carbon black solvent to around 
20 cm’. 


Place the specimen grid along with a thin carbon 
substrate when the final dispersion drop on the filter 
paper is in an acceptable colour range. Remove small 
amount of final dispersion with the help of fresh pipette 
and place the specimen grid with carbon substrate on 
a piece of filter paper. Now take a small amount of 
dispersion with the help of pipette and place a drop on 
the grid close to the center. Allow the grid to dry for 
1 min on the filter paper and place it under the 
microscope and examine the dispersion. 


G-5 TEM ANALYSIS PROCEDURE 


Set the beam intensity to proper level for the analysis 
of the image (with the specimen removed). Correct for 
any shading in the blank image. Place the carbon black 
specimen under an electron microscope, locate it at the 
center of the stage of microscope and adjust to encentric 
height. In order to acquire the good microscopy 


IS 17440 : 2020 


practices, focusing and stigmating of the images, 
higher magnification is recommended. Near one side 
of a grid opening, start the measurements. Continue 
to select and measure adjoining fields of carbon black 
aggregates in a straight line pattern of tracking, moving 
towards the centre. Repeat if necessary until data 
of 2 000 aggregates is recorded. 


G-5.1 Image Analysis 


Each image analysis system has its own method for 
processing the images it receive from the camera. 
Thresholding can be accomplished with the help of 
an automated process, manually for each field and 
with a use of preset threshold if thickness of carbon 
film and morphology are consistent and other imaging 
conditions are not altered. Image analysis with the 
help of software should be configured to perform noise 
reduction and edge smoothing. Erosion followed by 
dilution can help in edge smoothing. It can smooth the 
“noise”, which is associated with particle boundaries 
without the alteration of the real data. Attempts for 
noise reduction in order to eliminate the measurements 
of objects which are not carbon black are made. In many 
cases, software may be configured to reject objects 
which are less than 50 pixels in area. The results will 
tend to be bias in case all aggregates that touch image 
or guard frame boundaries are rejected. Such effects 
can be minimized in case appropriate magnification/ 
resolution is done. Analysis for standard carbon black 
sample is repeated with a similar particle size suitable 


Parameters Derived: 


V= aggregate volume (unit = nm’) = (8/3) A’/P 
D= Area equivalent aggregate diameter (nm) = 
4 (A/II)!? 
a isthe aggregation factor = 13.092(P?/A)°” 
dp = average particle size for single aggregate (nm) 
= (alIA)/P 
V,= Volume of a particle (nm) = IIdp */, 
< ; V, 
n= particles present in an aggregate = A 
2 
Distributional Properties for Particles and 
Aggregates 
n= Èn for all aggregates measured or total number 
of particles 
m= mean particle size (nm) 
¿7 standard deviation in the size of particle (nm) 
=[ 2(n*dp*)/(n- 1)]'” 
W_,= weight of the mean particle size (in nm) = 
[2(n*dp*)]/[Zn*dp*)] 
hi = Heterogenity index of the particle size 
d „= Surface mean diameter of the particle size 


(nm)= [2(n*dp*)]/[(2n*dp’)] 

EMSA =electron microscope surface area (m?/g) = 
6000/(p*d_.) (where p = 1.8 g/cm’, assume 
density of carbon black ), 


for appropriate magnification. Perimeter (P) and Area Nt = number of aggregates measured 
(A) of the projections of aggregate are to be measured M= mean aggregate size (nm)==DIN, 
for use in morphological property calculations. a : 
SD = Standard deviation of aggregate size (nm) = 
G-6 CALCULATIONS [2 (D-M) (N-1)]'” 
; h WM= Weight of mean aggregate size (nm) = 
Single Aggregate: EDVED? 
Parameters Measured: HI= Heterogeneity index of aggregate size = 
P= aggregate perimeter WM/M 
A= aggregate area (nm?) 
ANNEX H 
( Clause 3, Table 1) 


H-1 TOTAL AND EXTERNAL SURFACE AREA 
BY NITROGEN ADSORPTION 
H-1.1 Summary 


This method is used to determine the total and external 
surface area of carbon black based on nitrogen 
adsorption. The nitrogen surface area measurement is 
based on the B.E.T theory. 


H-2 APPARATUS 


10 


H-2.1 Multipoint Static Volumetric Gas Adsorption 
Apparatus with Dewar flasks and Accessories 
Required 


H-2.2 Sample Cells 
H-2.3 Analytical Balance 
H-2.4 Heating Mantle 
H-2.5 Oven 


H-3 REAGENTS 

H-3.1 Liquid Nitrogen, 98 Percent or Higher Purity 
H-3.2 Ultra High purity Nitrogen Gas 

H-3.3 Ultra High Purity Helium Gas 


H-4 SAMPLE PREPARATION PROCEDURE 


Dry carbon black sample at a temperature of 125°C for 
about | h. This step can be omitted in case the sample 
is subsequently free from moisture. Empty sample is 
conditioned for 10 min at conditions which are intended 
for degassing the sample. Weigh the cell to nearest 
0.1 mg and record the mass. Weigh 0.4 g of carbon 
black into the sample cell. 


H-4.1 Flow Degassing 


Open gas control valve and insert delivery tube into the 
sample tube. Allow purging with nitrogen or helium 
for a minute. Place some heat source around sample 
cell. Degas the sample at 300 + 10 degree for half an 
hour or longer in order to ensure that moisture traces 
are absent. Degassing time that gives a stable surface 
area may be used for degassing. Once the degassing 
time has been determined , samples can be degassed 
on time basis alone. Less than half an hour is required 
by some sample in case the exposure to moisture 
is minimum. Minimum time required in order to 
give a stable surface area is used for the process of 
degassing. After the degassing process, the tube 
containing the sample may be directly moved to the 
analyzer. Else, remove the tube from the source of heat 
and continue the purging gas flow till it is ready for 
analysis. 


H-4.2 Vacuum Degassing 


Keeping the apparatus at atmospheric pressure, keep 
the sample cell containing carbon black with degassing 
apparatus. Start the process of degassing as appropriate 
for the apparatus. Place a heating mantle or some other 
heat source around sample cell. Degas the sample at 
300+10 degree C for about half an hour or more as 
required. Hold a pressure at <1.4 Pa (10 um Hg). Once 
degassing times are determined, future samples can be 
degassed on time basis alone. Allow sufficient margin 
of excess time. Some samples requires <1/2 h in case 
the moisture exposure is minimal. Minimum amount of 
time that gives a stable Surface Area may be used for 
degassing. 


H-5 PROCEDURE 


Refer user’s manual and instructions for multipoint 
gas adsorption analyzer so that one can become 
familiar with the procedures. Number of instruments 
are available that offer a variety of saturation vapour 
pressure (P,) measurement options and Dewar size. 
Dewar flask is filled with liquid nitrogen and allow it 


11 


IS 17440 : 2020 


to reach temperature equilibrium. At every hour fill the 
Dewar flask. This should also be done between each 
analysis. 


H-5.1 Small Dewar 


Cover the Dewar after filling it for a minimum of 2 h. 
Dewar should be dry and clean at the end of each day. 


H-5.2 Large Dewar (21L) 


Cover the Dewar for 16 h prior to use, unless continuous 
P, measurements are employed. For continuous 
Po, use Dewar equilibration for 2 h. Once we have 
reached equilibration, a large Dewar can maintain this 
equilibration for several days if it is kept covered and 
filled. The frequency of cleaning is left to the direction 
of the operator, but is not to exceed once per week. 


List of P measurement options: 


Continuous P, (measurement at each relative pressure 
point): The method is one of the best practice, however, 
the method generally increases analysis time. 


H-5.3 Single P, per Analysis 


This value can be measured before, during, or after 
the run, aP value measured at the end of the analysis 
is preferred since STSA (specific surface area that 
is accessible to rubber) is calculated from last data 
points. This is significantly influenced by P, values. P, 
value in this method is determined prior to initiating 
measurements to ensure equilibrium of the Dewar. 


H-5.4 Daily P, 


The method is used in case the evidence of stable Dewar 
is present and no changes in atmospheric pressure that 
is, greater than 0.13 kPa (1mm Hg) occur. 


H-5.5 Calculated P 


Value of P is calculated by atmospheric pressure 
measurement and adding a value between 1.3 and 
2.6 kPa (10 mm and 20 mm Hg). In order to determine 
the constant, operator is responsible, most commonly 
used pressure is 15 mm Hg. 


With exceptions to continuous P, measurements, it 
is recommended that P value be determined prior to 
NSA/STSA analysis. P, value between 10 to 20 mm 
Hg which is above atmospheric pressure and two 
consecutive P values differing not more than 0.13 kPa 
(1mm Hg) over 10 min time period are indications of 
stable Dewar. 


Expected difference in P and atmospheric pressure in 
lab is taught to the operator by experience. Free space 
of the sample cell is determined by measurement with 
helium or by calculating assumed carbon density of 
1.9 g/cm’. 


Obtain around five data points evenly spaced in relative 
pressure (P/P ) range of 0.1 to 0.5. In order to increase 
the accuracy of measurement, it is recommended to 
take two additional data points. 


IS 17440 : 2020 


Mass of the cell is determined with dry sample to 
nearest 0.1 mg. This is done before or after measuring 
nitrogen adsorption. 


Avoid use of helium inconsistently, as a buoyancy error 
of 1 mg/cm? of cell volume can occur. Alternatively, 
mass of carbon black may be determined directly by 
pouring it into weighing pan from the sample cell. 


H-6 CALCULATION 


At the completion of the analysis, most automated 
instruments will perform the following computation. 
Verification of the internal computations by the user 
must be verified conforming to the following method. 
H-6.1 Mass of the Sample 
Dried Sample Mass 
(Mass of the cell + sample)-(Mass of the cell) 
Record the mass to nearest 0.1 mg 
Nitrogen Adsorbed (Volume) 
Volume of adsorbed Nitrogen per gram of sample- 
V= Volume of Nitrogen (in cm*)/Mass of the sample 
in (g) 
H-6.2 Surface Area 


Using B.E.T plot, Nitrogen surface Area can be 
determined using Brunauer, Emmett and Teller 
equation: 


P/V (P-P) = 1/ V C + C-1/V C x P/P, 


where 
= manometer pressure in kPa; 
¿= standard vapour pressure of nitrogen (kPa); 
m= Nitrogen volume in gram which covers one 
monomolecular layer in standard cm?/g; and 
C= B.E.T constant. Numerical value depends on 


heat of adsorption of monomolecular layer. 


Plot P/V (P-P) on the Y-axis and P/P on X axis for data 
sets with P/P in 0.05 to 0.30 range. 


Three or more data points which gives best straight 
line are used to calculate the slope and Y-intercept. 
The Y-intercept and the slope are used to calculate the 
surface area. 


12 


Negative Y-intercept in B.E.T plot, may indicate the 
presence of micropores (< 2 nm diameter), but other 
factors can also produce negative intercept. 

Calculate Nitrogen Surface Area to the nearest 0.1 m*/g 
as follows: 


Surface Area (m?/g) = Vm x 4.35 


where 
Va = 1 
B+M 
B = Y axis intercept, + 10° 
M = slope of straight line, +10° and 
4.35 = Area which 1 cm” of nitrogen occupy = 


(6.02 x 10%) (16.2 x 102°)/22 400 


6.023 x 10 * = Avogadro’s Number 

16.2 x 10” = Nitrogen molecule area (in m°) 

22400 = Number of cm? occupied by one mole of gas 
at STP 

H-6.3 Statistical Thickness Surface Area (STSA) 


Determine STSA of carbon black using a plot of 
Nitrogen gas adsorbed volume per gram of the sample 
at STP (V,) versus the statistical layer thickness (t). 


Prepare V-t plot by plotting t (nm) on the X-axis versus 
V, (dm?/kg at STP) on the Y-axis with data sets having 
P/P equally spaced in the range of 0.2 to 0.5. 


where 

t= statistical layer thickness of carbon black = 

088 (P/P )? + 0.645 (P/P _) + 0.298 
Slope can be determined by the use of standard linear 
regression. 
Calculate STSA to nearest 0.1 m?/g as follows: 
STSA=M x 15.47 
where 
M= slope of V -t plot; and 

15.47=a constant for the nitrogen gas conversion 


to liquid volume and conversion of units to 
m?/g. 


IS 17440 : 2020 


ANNEX J 
( Clause 3, Table | ) 


J-1 SIEVE RESIDUE 


This method is essentially based on ISO/R 1437-1970 
Carbon black for use in the rubber industry.Method 
of test for sieve residue’ and ASTM D15 14-60 Sieve 
residue from carbon black’. 


J-2 APPARATUS 


The apparatus consists of a metal funnel terminating at 
the foot in a short cylindrical outlet in which is inserted 
a shallow removable cup. To the bottom of the cup, wire 
mesh of a suitable aperture size is soldered. Water under 
a pressure of 2.10 + 0.35 kgf/cm? is supplied by a tube 
fitted with a nozzle designed to discharge a spreading 
jet through the sieve and the tube is so arranged that the 
distance of the orifice from the sieve can be adjusted. 
The tube is provided with a mesh (37 micron aperture ) 
filter to exclude any solid particle from the water. The 
area of this filter should be sufficiently large to prevent 
loss of water pressure. 


A similar arrangement is required for another tube 
which is used to supply a gentler stream of water for 
wetting the powder and washing the sample off the 
sides of the funnel. 


J-3 PROCEDURE 


Fit a suitable size sieve to the base of the funnel. 
Allow water from the jet to pass through the sieve cup 
at full pressure for 3 minutes. Examine the sieve for 
particles and if there are none the apparatus is ready for 
use. Turn on the main jet and add 100 + 1 g of sample 
slowly to the funnel, taking care to prevent plugging 
of the sieve. Using a gentle stream of water from 
the subsidiary supply, wash down any of the sample 
adhering to the sides. Continue the flow of water until 
the water leaving the sieve is clear. Turn over off the 
water, remove the sieve cup and rub the residue lightly 
with the finger to break up any agglomerates. Replace 
the sieve cup and wash for a further two minutes 
with the subsidiary supply. Any grit remaining on the 
sieve should be transferred to a watch-glass dried at 
105 °C, and weighed. 


NOTE — If necessary the sample can he first dispersed in 
water using a high speed stirrer and a wetting agent. 


J-4 CALCULATION 
Sieve residue, percent by mass = A/M x 100 
where 

A= mass of residue, in g; and 

M= mass of sample in g. 


ANNEX K 
( Clause 3, Table | ) 


K-1 LOSS ON HEATING 


This method is based on NO/R 1126-1969 ‘Carbon 
black for use in the rubber industry -Determination 
of loss on heating’ and ASTM D1509-‘Heating loss of 
carbon black’. 


K-2 APPARATUS 


K-2.1 Oven — Capable of temperature regulation 
of + 2°C at 105°C. 


K-2.2 Weighing Bottle — Suitable low form with 
stopper. 


K-3 PROCEDURE 


Dry the weighing bottle and stopper at 105°C for 
30 min. Cool in a desiccator and weigh to the nearest 
0.1 mg. Weigh accurately approximately 2 g of sample 
into weighing bottle with stopper on. Place the weighing 
bottle in the oven, remove the stopper and leave for 
1 hour at 10.5 + 2°C. Transfer to a dessiccator, replace 


13 


stopper, cool to room temperature and reweigh to the 
nearest 0.1 mg. 


K-4 PRECAUTIONS 


Take the sample of carbon black in a tightly stoppered 
glass bottle. Allow the closed container to reach room 
temperature before starting the test. 


Keep the stopper on the weighing bottle when 
transferring to and from the desiccator to prevent loss 
of carbon black due to air currents. 


K-5 CALCULATION 
L heati b = 8-9 x100 
oss on heating, percent by mass = (B-A) 
where 
B= mass of weighing bottle with stopper and 
sample before heating, 
C= mass of weighing bottle with stopper and 
sample after heating, and 
A= mass of weighing bottle with stopper. 


IS 17440 : 2020 


ANNEX M 
( Clause 3, Table 1) 


M-1 TOLUENE DISCOLOURATION 


This method covers the determination of the degree 
of discolouration of toluene by carbon back by means 
of a spectrophotometer. This method is not applicable 
to high extract thermal type blacks. This method is 
essentially based on ASTM D 1618-81 ‘Carbon black 
extractable’. 


M-2 APPARATUS 


M-2.1 Spectrophotometer — 20 nm maximum 
spectral band pass capable of measuring transmittance 
in the 425 nm range. 


M-2.2 Absorption Cells — With an optical light path 
of 10 mm ( light path of the toluene and not the outside 
of the cell ) for the spectrophotometer. 


M-2.3 Analytical Balance — Sensitivity 0.01 mg. 


M-2.4 Oven — Gravity convection type capable of 
temperature regulation of +1 deg at 105°C. 


M-2.5 Filter Paper — Whatman No. 41 or equivalent, 
diameter 150 mm. 


M-2.6 Mechanical Shaker — Capable of 240 strokes/ 
minute. 


M-2.7 Mortar and Pestle 
M-2.8 Glass Filtering Funnel 
M-2.9 Beaker 


M-2.10 Erlenmayer Flask 


14 


M-3 REAGENT 
M-3.1 Toluene — Analytical grade 
M-4 PROCEDURE 


M-4.1 Standardization of Apparatus 


Clean the absorption cell with the lense tissue. Allow 
the sepectrophotometer to warm up at least 10 minutes 
before standardization. Rinse the cell twice with clean 
toluene, wipe the outside surface with lens tissue. 
Adjust the transmission value to 100 percent on the 
spectrophotometer, using the wave length of 425 nm. 


Crush pelleted samples using mortar and pestle or 
equivalent. Dry an adequate amount of crushed carbon 
black sample at 105°C for 60 minutes using the oven. 
NOTE — An infra-red lamp must not be used for drying 
sample as it could vapourize some of the extractible materials. 
Allow sample to cool to room temperature in a closed 
container. Weigh 2.0 g of sample and transfer to a 
125 ml Erlenmeyer flask. Add 20 ml of toluene to the 
sample in the flask and stopper. Without delay, begin 
shaking the mixture in the mechanical shaker for 
60 seconds. Immediately pour as much of the mixture 
as possible into the glass funnel with filter paper 
which has previously been prepared and inserted into 
a 125-cm? Erlenmeyer flask. Check standardization of 
spectrophotometer at 425 nm. Using the same cell as 
used to standardize before testing, rinse the cell twice 
with the same filtrate to be tested. Fill the absorption 
cell with the filtrate and determine the percentage 
transmission on the spectrophotometer at 425 nm. If 
necessary larger quantities of sample and toluene may 
be used, keeping the ratio 10 ml of toluene per gram of 
back unchanged, to a maximum of 5 g/50 ml of toluene. 


IS 17440 : 2020 


ANNEX N 
( Clause 3, Table 1 ) 


N-1 FINES CONTENT 


This method is based on ISO/R 1435-1970 ‘Pelletized 
carbon black for use in the rubber industry - 
Determination of fines content’, and ASTM D 1508-60 
“Fines content of pelletid carbon black”. 


N-2 APPARATUS 


N-2.1 Test Sieves — Three, conforming to IS 460 
(Part 1) with apertures of 125 microns, and three sieve 
of any size wihch are used only as spacers. 


N-2.2 Five Separator Receivers 
N-2.3 One Sieve Cover 
N-2.4 One Bottom Receiver Pan 


N-2.5 Mechanical Test Sieve Shaker 


N-2.6 Alternative Test Sieve Shakers — may be used 
as long as they give the same results as the ro-tap. 


15 


N-3 PROCEDURE 


Stack the sieves in the following order from bottom to top 
: Bottom receiver- 125 micron sieve, separator receiver 
- 125micron sieve, separator receiver- 125micron sieve 
and three additional separator receivers and sieves 
placed alternately on top. The top sieve is covered with 
the sieve cover. Three 25 g representative samples shall 
be weighed to the nearest 0.1 g and transferred to each 
of the 125 micron sieves. Transfer the assembly to 
the mechanical shaker and allow to shake for 5 mins. 
Weigh the contents in each receiver to the nearest 0.1 g. 


N-4 CALCULATION 
Fines content, percent by mass = A/M x 100 


where 
A= mass in g, of the sample in receiver; and 
M= mass in g, of the original sample; 


Report — The report shall include the results obtained 
from the three individual determinations and their 
average. 


IS 17440 : 2020 


ANNEX O 
( Foreword ) 


EXPERTS WHO MADE SIGNIFICANT CONTRIBUTION TO THE 
DEVELOPMENT OF THIS STANDARD 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Inorganic Chemicals Sectional Committee, CHD 01 


Organization 


Central Salt and Marine Chemicals Research Institute, 


Bhavnagar 
Aditya Birla Chemical (I) Ltd, New Delhi 
Alkali Mfrs Association of India, Delhi 


Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 


Central Drugs Standard Control Organization 
DGQA, New Delhi 


Geological Survey of India, Kolkata 
Grasim Industries Ltd, Nagda 


Gujarat Alkalies and Chemicals Ltd, Vadodara 
Hindustan Lever Ltd, Mumbai 


In personal capacity 
In personal capacity 
Industrial Carbon Pvt.Ltd, Ankleshwar 


Indian Institute of Chemical Technology, Hyderabad 


Ministry of Defence (DGQA), Kanpur 
Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers 


National Chemical Laboratory, Pune 

National Metallurgical Laboratory, Jamshedpur 
National Mineral Development Corporation Ltd, 
Hyderabad 


National Physical Laboratory, New Delhi 


National Test House (NR) 


Nirma Chemicals, Ahmedabad 


16 


Representative(s) 


Dr KANNAN SRINIVASAN (Chairman) 


SHRI ALOK SINGH 


SHRI K. SRINIVASAN 
SHRI SUBHASH TANDON (Alternate) 


DrA. V. R. Reppy 
Dr S. N. Acuary (Alternate) 


Dr RAMAN MOHAN SINGH 


Dr GURBACHAN SINGH 
Suri B. S. Tomar (Alternate) 


Dr D. K. Das 
Dr SuBHAS CHANDRA (Alternate) 


Suri R. S. BAGHEL 
SHRI PANKAJ Gupta (Alternate) 


Dr SUNIL SINHA 


VRINDA RAJWADE 
SHRIMATI PoorNAKALA (Alternate I) 
SATYAMOORTHY (Alternate II) 


Dr A. N. BHAT 
Dr T. S. KATHPAL 


SHRI ROHIT KUMAR MADHAVJI 
SHRI SATYAN Ronit Kumar (Alternate) 


Dr PRAVEEN R. LIKHAR 
Dr RAJENDER Reppy (Alternate) 


SHRI R. N. APARAJIT 
Dr Rouit Misra 


Dr DARBHA SRINIVAS 
Dr ParesH DHEPE (Alternate) 


Dr TRILOCHAN MISHRA 
SHRI DEVBRATA MISHRA (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJAN KUMAR 
Dr PRASHANT SHARMA (Alternate) 


Dr NAHAR SINGH 
Dr S. P. SINGH (Alternate) 


Dr Y. C. NITHAWAN 
Dr (Ms) A. Biswas (Alternate) 


SHRI R. A. JOSHI, 
Dr K. C. Patuak (Alternate) 


IS 17440 : 2020 


Organization Representative(s) 
Office of the Development Commissioner (MSME), SHRIMATI SHIMLA MEENA 
New Delhi SHRI SANTOSH Kumar (Alternate) 
Reliance Industries Ltd, Navi Mumbai SHRI DHANAVADAN MODI 
Shriram Institute for industrial research, Delhi Dr. (Ms) LAKMIRAWAT 
SHRI B. GovinDAN (Alternate) 
VOICE, Delhi Suri H. WADHWA 
Suri K. C. CHAUDHARY (Alternate) 
In Personal Capacity SHRI D. K. JAIN 
Vaibhav Analytical Services, Ahmedabad SHRI GAURANG OZA 
Directorate General, BIS SHRI A. K. LAL, Scientist E AND Hean (CHD) 


[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


SAGAR SINGH 
Scientist ‘C?’ (CHD), BIS 


17 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CHD 01 (15163). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


