( Reaffirmed 2006 )

Indian Standard

PNEUMATICMEASUREMENT
PART 3 PARAMETERS OF INSTRUMENTS WORKING ON HIGH PRESSURE

UDC

531'71'082'32

@ BIS 1992 MANAK lmy 1992

BUREAU

BHAVAN,

OF

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR

MARG Price Group 1

Engineering Metrology Sectional Committee,

LM 05

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Engineering Metrology Sectional Committee had been approved by the Light Mechanical Engineering Division Council. Air gauging has been gaining wider acceptability in industry because of its accuracy, consistancy and reliability. These can be used for on line measurement of parts as they dare being machined and take corrective actions. This standard specifies the various parameters required for high It is not possible to specify the for dimensional measurements. It basically forms differ with different measuring instruments. right measuring instrument. The values and the testing have practices of the manufacturers. This Indian Standard has been published below: Part I Part 2 Part 4 General information in four parts. pressure range pneumatic values of all parameters, a guideline for the user to been specified based on parts of this standard instrument since they choose the the general are listed

Other

on principles and methods,

Design features of instruments working in high pressure range, and General information and examples of application.

In the preparation of this standard considerable assistance has been derived from DIN 2271 ( Teil3 )-76 `Pneumatic Length Measurement ( Air Gauging ) Parameters of Instruments Working in the High Pressure Range Requirements Testing' issued by the Deutsches Institut fur Normung ( DIN 1.

IS 12257 ( Part 3 ) : 1992

IndianStandard

PNEUMATICMEASUREMENT
PART 3 PARAMETERS OF INSTRUMENTS WORKING ON HIGH PRESSURE 1 SCOPE This standard covers the parameters of pneumatic instruments used for dimensional measurement which operate with a system pressure >50 kPa ( 0.5 bar ). 2 REFERENCE IS 2092 : 1983 `Plunger type dial gauges (Jirsi revision )' is necessary adjunct to this standard. 3 TERMINOLOGY 3.1 Supply Pressure The supply pressure is the pressure that exists before the pressure regulator of pneumatic length measuring instrument. 3.2 System Pressure The system pressure is the pressure that exists after This may ako be termed the pressure regulator. as primary pressure. 3.3 Secondary Pressure In the case of instruments which use the pressure measuring method, the secondary pressure is the pressure that exists between the pilot jet and measuring jet. 3.4 Air Consumption The air consumption is the quantity of air flowing from the instrument in a specified time. 3.5 Setting Time The setting time refers to the period of time which is required to adjust instrument so that the indicated value remains within 1% of the measuring range that is, the time taken in transition of free air flow to measuring value flow. 3.6 Sensitivity The sensitivity is the ratio of the change in the indication to the change of the quantity to be measured, which causes this change. When changing the sensitivity, the elements which govern the sensitivity must be changed. These are: a) In the case of column instrument - gauing element measuring tube with floating body and scale b) In the case of indicating instruments gauging element, pilot jet and scale 3.7 Measuring Force The measuring force is the force which the gauging element exerts on the object being tested. With gauging elements which operate without contact with the work surface the measuring force is created by the air flowing out of the jet onto the object being tested. This measuring force in most of the cases can be neglected. With-mechanical contact type of gauging element it is the force exerted by the contacts on the object under test and this must be taken into account. 3.8 Cumulative Error The cumulative error is the ordinate distance between the highest and the lowest point on the curve of the actual variations of the indicated value over the measuring range. 3.9 Repeatability The repeatability is the difference between the maximum and the minimum indicated value with repeated measurements at a specific point of the measuring range. 4 REQUIREMENT 4.1 Parameters Parameters given in Table 1 shall be specified in the technical literature of each manufacturer. Table 1 Parameters Parameter
Measuring range Scale value Sensitivity Supply pressure System pressure Air consumption Setting time

Unit
pm pm Pa Pa m3/h s

4.t Permissible Deviation Permissible deviations of the indicating instrument including the gauging element given in Table 2 apply when the indicating instrument is in normal position and the gauging element mounted directly on the instrument. 4.3 ScaIe 4.3.1 The scale shall be graduated with well defined lines which are legible and clearly visible. 4.3.2 The width of the graduation lines should be about 10% to 15% of the spacing between them. 1

IS 12257 ( Part 3 ) : 1992 4.3.3 The distance between the centres of adjacent

given in Table 2. 5.3 Repeatability The repeatability niay be determined at any position on the measuring range by 5 measurements . The maximum difference thus obtained shall not exceed the value given in Table 2. 5.4 Hysteresis of the Measured Value In the case of pneumatic length measuring instruments, the hysteresis of the measured value is determined from 5 measurements in the middle of the measuring range. The arithmetic mean value shall not exceed the values given in Table 2. If nevertheless these values are exeeded, the indicating instrument shall be verified with a jet measuring probe since this is a negligible small hysteresis of the measured value. The difference between the hysteresis of the measured value of the pneumatic instrument and that of the indicating instrument then gives the hysteresis of the measured value sensor. 5.5 Measuring Force and Hysteresis Measuring Force
of the

graduations shall be at -least 4 mm in the case ~of column type units and at least 2 mm in the case of indicating instruments. 4.3.4 The scale value shall be, clearly marked on the dial with the numerical value and the,, units. ,. 5 TESTING 5.1 The indicating instrument shall be checked with a selected open jet measuring probe as a test standard. 5.1.1 The gauging element, that is, the air plug or air ring is tested with a calibrated indicating instrument. 5.2 Cumulative Error 5.2.1 In the case of pneumatic instruments which are used with a mechanical contact air probe gauging element in a manner similar to dial gauges as per IS 2092 : 1983, the cumulative error is determined by moving measuring pins in steps ~of IO seal divisions under the eontact point starting from middle of the range on both sides. 5.2.2 In the case of pneumatic instruments using all other types of gauging elements shall be checked by at least 3 setting standards. The sizes of the setting standards shall be such that 2 of them lie within the maximum measuring range limit and others are equally distributed over the measuring range. The observed values should not exceed the value

In the case of mechanical contact gauging elements the measuring force and hysteresis of the measuring force are measured over the whole measuring range by moving the setting standard points. This shall not show values more than specified in Table 2.
Variations

Table 2 Range of Permissible

( Clauses 4.2, 5.3, 5.4 and 5.5)
Parameters Range of Permissible Variations r----_-A_._-_--_ Mechanical Contas Non-Contact Gauging Element Gauging Element Error without compensation Error with compensation of the measured of the measuring of movement value force force for the same 1'5 div 1 div 0'5 div 0'5 div Negligible Negligible 1'5 div 1 div 0'5 div 0'5 div 0'2 N 0'2 N

a) Cumulative b) Cumulative c) Repeatability d) Hysteresis e) Hysteresis direction

f ) Maximum change of measuring

2

Standard

Mark

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.
Act,

Bureau of Indian Standards

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureuzr of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.
Copyright
NO part of these publications may be reproduced in BIS has the copyright of all its publications. any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), RIS.

Revision of Indian Standards

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving of the latest amendments or edition. the following reference: Dot : No. LMD 05 ( 5152 )
Amendments Issued Since Publication

Amend No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi I10002 Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Regional Offices: Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : 1'14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH Southern : C.I.T Western Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 160036 600113

Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to ~a11Offices ) c'

1331 1375

331 01 31 37 86 62 53 38 43 235 02 16 632 92 95

: Manakalaya,

E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) BOMBAY 400093 BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. GUWAHATI. GHAZIABAD. LUCKNOW. PATNA. SRINAGAR.

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. FARIDARAD. COIMBATORE. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

Printed at Progresive Printers, Shahdara. Delhi,

India

