IS : 4575- 1983 (Reaffirmed 2005)

Indian Standard
CODE FOR HANDLING OF FIBRE ROPES (

Second Revision )
First Reprint FEBRUARY
1989

UDC

677.711/718.00'+.5

@ Copyri,Fh/

1984 STANDARDS
SHAH llooO2 ZAFAR

BUREAU
MANAK

OF

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR DELHI

BHAVAN,

MARQ

NEW

Gr

3

January

1984

IS t 4575 - 1983

Indian Standard
CODE FOR HANDLIWG OF FIBRE ROPES

( Second Revision)
Cordage Sectional Committee, TDC 14
Chairman SHRI P. K. SUR Members SHRI P. K. GUPTA ( AZterrz&e to Shri P. K. Sur ) Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals SARI A. T. BASAK ( Inspection Wing ), New Delhi Rail ~~;~~mtcal & Economtc Services Ltd, SE& A. BISWA~ Office of the Jute Commissioner, Calcutta Smu B. N. BASU Calcutta Port Trust, Calcutta COL A. K. BHATTAWYA SHRI S. K. MUICHERJEB ( AZternate ) Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) LT-COL ASHOK G~KWAR SHRI S. P. CHAKRABOWY ( Alternate ) Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) D~~rrrv CHIEP MECHAMCAL ENGINEER( MARINE), NORTH EASTERN RAILWAY, PATNA Ministry of Defence ( DPIN ) SHRI T. N. GHABRU STO/JSO ( CHEMICAL ) OF GINS (B) ( AIternate ) National Test House, Calcutta SEIRI A. GHOSH Eskaps ( India ) Pvt Limited, Calcutta Shri SBICHAR GUHA SHRI N. B. SENOUPTA ( Alternate ) Ministry of Defence ( R & D ) SHRI A. C. MATHUR Snar R. GHOSH ( Alternate ) Garware Nylons Ltd, Bombay SEW G. V. MEDHI SHRI K. N. MISRA Syntex Filaments Pvt Ltd, Vadodara Coir Board, Eranakulam SHRI G. N. PRABHU SHRI V. ABDUL MAJEED ( Alternate ) The Scindia Steam Navigation Co Ltd, Bombay CAPT B. R. RAO M. M. Tayebally, Calicut REPREWNTATIVE ( Continued on page 2 ) BUREAU @ Copyright 1984 GF INDIAN STANDARDS Representina The Ganges Rope Company Limited, Howrah

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act (XIV of 1957) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 1575- 1983 ( Continued from page 1 )
Members SHRI VIJAY SATKALMI Representing
Neomar Limited, Vadodara Indian Rope Manufacturer's Association, Calcutta

SHRINIRMALK. SOMANI SHRIT. BHAXTACHARYA ( Alternate ) CAPT V. SUBRAMAN~AN Shipping Corporation of India Ltd, Bombay CAPT S. B. KUNDERGI ( Alternate ) SHRI H. C. TANEJA Naval Headquarters ( Ministry of Defence ) SHRI R. VISHVANATH (Alternate ) Garware Wall Ropes Ltd, Bombay SHRI R. M. TELAN~ SHRIA. K. KAPUR( Alternate ) SHRIKANT~LAL G. THANAWALA M. Best Cotton Rope Manufacturing Co, Bombay SHRI MADHUKANT G. THANAWALA ( Alternate ) SHRIS. M. CHAKRABORTY, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) Director ( Tex )

Secretary
SHRI A. R. BANBRJEE Senior Deputy Director ( Tex ), ISI

2

Is 148%

l

1983

Indian Standard
CODE FOR HANDLING OF FIBRE ROPES

( Second Revision)
0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian Standard ( Second Revision ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 29 November 1983, after the draft finalized by the Cordage Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textile Division Council. 0.2 In this revision, the physical properties of man-made fibres used for manufacturing cordage and recommendations on safe working loads for natural and man-made flbre rope slings ( see IS : 9944-1981* ) have been introduced. 1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard examines the causes responsible for damage ropes and suggests measures for their care and safe use. 2. PERIODIC INSPECTION 2.1 Ropes made from any material are liable to wear and other mechanical damage, and can be weakened sometimes to a great extent by various agencies, such as chemicals, heat, light, wind and weather. Ropes made from man-made filaments are less prone to gradual loss of strength through use than ropes made of natural fibres. Nevertheless, whatever be the material of manufacture ( whether natural fibre or man-made fibre ), regular inspection is necessary to ensure that the rope is still serviceable, taking into account its safety factor for the particular use. 2.2 No matter what agency has weakened the rope, the effect will be more serious on the smaller sizes than on the large sizes of ropes. Consideration should, therefore, be given to the relationship of the surface area of the rope and the rope cross section. *Recommendationson safe working loads for natural and man-made fibre rope slings. 3 of fibre

IS:4575

-1953

2.2.1 No hard and fast ru:e can be laid, but general experience shows that interval of inspection of ropes depends much upon the purpose of use and circumstantial conditions under which it -is being used; for example, moving or stationary part for heavy hazardous lifts or lifts under normal working and continuous cr occasional loads. A thorough inspection at an interval of three months duirng the first half life of a rope and monthly inspection thereafter may be considered satisfactory for ropes made of man-made fibres. In case of ropes made of natural fibre, those used for heavy lifts and those in use involving hazardous work need to be inspected more frequently. In fact, in such cases ropes should be inspected each time before being taken into use.

2.3 Examination of about 300 mm of ropes at a time is desirable. The rope being turned to reveal all sides and the strands being untwisted slightly to allow examination between the strands. Points to be watched during inspection are external chafe and cutting, internal wear between the strands and still more important that no deterioration of the fibre has set in.
2.4 To define a standard of acceptance or rejection is much more difficult than to describe the method of inspection. There can be no well-defined boundary between ropes which are safe and those which are not because this depends on the stresses that are likely to be developed on the ropes during its normal usage or in an emergency. The decision whether to continue to USC a rope or replace it should be based on an assessment of the general conditions of the rope and also environmental working conditions. This is necessary because many of the conditions which will guide the examiner cannot be exactly described, only stated in general terms. If after examination there should be any doubt about its safety, it should be withdrawn from service. It is again emphasized that the effect of wear and mechanical damage is relatively greater on thinner ropes, which acquire more stringent standards of acceptance.

3. CAUSES OF DAMAGE AND SUGGES.TIONS FOR CARE
3.1 General External Wear - External wear due to dragging over rough surfaces and sharp edges causes filamentation. This is the most readily noticeable cause of weakness, particularly if a new rope is available for comparison. In the extreme case, the strands become so worn out that their outer faces are flattened and the outer yarns severed. In ordinary use, some disarrangement or breakage of the fibre on the outside of the rope is unavoidable and harmless, if not-too extensive. 3.1.1 Care should be taken to ensure that the surface of capstans, bits, warping drums, cleats, sheaves, fair leads and similar handling equipments are as free of abrading media as possible. Deliberate efforts should be made to remove rust or scale, and the sharp edges of burns pits, notch= and scratches from the equipment.

4

Is : 4575 - 1983 AbFa$qo - This may be cause4 by the passage of rope over sharp edges wilst under tension and may cause serious loss of strength. Slight damage to the outer fibres and an occasional torn yarn may be considered harmless but serious reduction-in the area of one strand or somewhat less serious damage to more /than one strand should merit rejection. Protection at points where excessive abrasion niay occur is economic. 3.21 As far as possible, an angle lift or pull should be avoided as this throws undue load on the rope. When it is necessary to pull on the rope Ft an angle to the lift, care should be taken to avoid the rope coming in contact with the edges of the blocks or sheaves. 3.3 Fraying - Fraying may start from the ends of the ropes and may gradually spread. Frayed ends shall be cut off and new ends properly whipped before bringing into use the frayed end of a rope. 3.3.1 The ends of ropes should be prevented from, fraying by a whipping. In the case of man-made filament ropes. fraying may be prevented by beating the ends to a molten state and then cooling. 3.4 Cuts, Contusions, Etc - These may cause internal as well as external damage. They may be indicated by local rupturing or loosening of the yams or strands. 3.4.1 Where tackle is employed, no rope should be reeved through blocks where the width of the grooves of the sheaves is less than the diameter of the rope, and at the same time care should be taken to ensure that the grooves ,of the sheaves are free from--roughness and are suitably rounded to provide efficient seating for the rope. Sheaves with too wide or too narrow groove have the same effect of shortening life of the rope; in the first case by allowing the rope to flatten and consequential internal friction, and in the second case by wear due to external friction. There should be no undue projections, rough or sharp edges on the blocks which might cut or chafe the rope The ratio of the diameter of the sheave to that of the rope should be adequate and. in general not less than 6:l measured at the bottom of the rope groove. The groove should be such that it fits and supports the rope as it travels round the sheave. 3.5 Internal Wear - This is caused by repeated flexing of the rope particularly when wet and by grit particles picked up. The internal--wear may be indicated by excessive looseness of strands and yarns. In the case of man-mede filament ropes, the' presence of powdered fibre is an indication of internal wear. 3.5.1 Care should be taken to avoid repeated flexing of the rope and to ensure that'grit particles are not picked by ropes,

3:2 bpl

IS t 4575 - 1983 3.6 Safe Working Load -

The optimum use of any rope in sling form depends upon the safe working load derived from breaking load of the cope. mode factor for the type of the sling and the basic cope safety factor. 3.6.1 Recommendations for safe working loads for manila, sisal, polyester and polypropylene cope slings ace as given in IS : 9944-1981*.
polyamide,

3.7 Overloading - The resistance of man-made filament copes to damage due to repeated overloading is excellent, but a gradual permanent elongation tends to occur and thus the extension available in an emergency is reduced. 3.7.1 If the original length of the man-made filament rope is known exactly, a check measurement made under exactly the same conditions will indicate the total extension of the cope but may not reveal local extension of parts of the cope. Measuceinents of the distance between regularly spaced indelible markers on the cope may help to reveal severe local parmanent elongation which may cause breakdown on subsequent loading. 3.8 Mildew - The man-made filaments ace not attacked by mildew. But copes made from the natural fibces like cotton, coic, sisal and manila ace susceptible to mildew rot, particularly due to stowing away wet or when subjected to extremes of heat and damp. 3.8.1 Care should be taken to store copes in a cool dry atmosphere ( see IS : 41451967t 1. This is particularly important in the case of copes made from natural fibces. 3.9 Chemical Attack - Chemical attack of a sufficient degree may be indicated by local weakening of the cope so that surface fibces can be plucked or rubbed off. In the case of man-made filament copes, powdered fibtes ace formed in extreme cases. The copes made from natural fibces are attacked by acidic substances. Polyamide filament copes ace resistant to chemicals, but solution of mineral acids cauces rapid weakening. Polyamide filament cope is unaffected by alkalis at normal temperature and by many oils, although it swells in contact with certain organic solvents. Polyester ,cope has good resistance to acids particularly to sulphucic acid although the concentration of this should not be allowed to be approximately 80` percent. Thus, even dilute solutions of sulphucic acid should not be allowed to dry off on a cope. If any contamination is suspected, the cope should be immediately washed out well in cold water. Polyester cope has good resistance to hydrocarbon oils and common organic solvents, although they may swell in certain chlorinated solvents. Attacks by coixerntrated phenols are severe on polyester copes and contacts should be avoided.
SliIlg9.

*Recommendations on safe working loads for natural and mau-made fl& rope. Code of practice for storage of ropes. 6

IS : 4575 - 1983 3.9.1 Care should be taken to keep ropes away from deleterious chemicals and their fumes. If the ropes are susptcted of having been in contact with them, the inspection by a competent person should be intensified. 3.9.2 Care should be taken against ropes becoming contaminated with cleaning compounds used in buildings, ships, etc, as chemical action not, only attacks the rope but in some cases completely destroys it. 3.10 Ifeat - In the case of man-made filament ropes, heat may cause fusing in extreme cases. Any signs of this would obviously merit rejection, but a rope may be damaged by heat without any such obvious warning. 3.10.1 Care should be taken not to dry a rope in front of fire or store it near sources of heat. 3.11 strong Suolight - In the case of man-made filament sunlight may cause weakening of the rope filaments. ropes, strong

3.11.1 Care should be taken to avoid ropes from exposure to sunlight. 3.12 Disturbance of Lay - This may cause variation property at the disturbed portion. in the elongation

3.12.1 Taking new ropes out of the coils needs the greatest care. It should be done in an anticlockwise direction from the inside of the coil for Z-lay ropes and should be coiled down in clockwise direction to avoid disturbing to~lay of the rope.
, 3.13 Kioks or Cockles -

Kink or cockle is an abrupt bend or loop in a rap.: resulting from the unbalanced twist relationship in the rope. Kinks or cockles in rope cause permarent deformation in the rope structure and affect the strength and utility of the rope. 3.13.1 It is essential tnat excessive rope turns be removed: a) by allowing the free length of rope to untwist inclination, or in its natural

b) by stretching the rope for lengthening the rope turn to bring the rope turn and strand turn more into balance. 3.13.2 While removin& rope from the coil, the inside end of the coil is usually pulled out in a manner so that the usual Z-twist rope leavesthe coil turning about in an aoficlockwise direction. In this way the rope kinks will pot be formed. 7

&

IS :4575-1983

3.133A wet rope after drying becomes slightly loose which makes it more sensitive to the development of strand cockles during handing. To eliminate this condition, the rope should be coiled in an anticlockwise direction and when the end of the rope is reached, the end should be poured down through the centre of the coil and recoiled in a clockwise direction.
4. PRECAUTIONS FOR SAFE USE 4.1 Have as few men as possible in the vicinity of all ropes under strain, particularly man-made filament ropes. 4.2 Never stand in the bight of a rope or in the path strain. of a rope under by the

4.3. Ensure that all splices are intact, as all the tucks recommended rope makers are necessary for safety.

Noiz 1 - In splicing man-made fibre ro es to revent the strands from disturbing ects w Ren the load is applied, each strand and to minimize the rolling and slipping e !# is hammered hard after each tuck. Smaller ropes may be given one additional reverse tuck to minimize the slippage of the splices. NOTEZ- When ropes are connected together, they sholild be of the same dirtion of lay, whatever the material or type of construction is.

4.4 Never allow a wire to cross a fibre rope on a bollard and this shall be particularly avoided for a man-made filament rope. 4.5 Ensure the type of man-made fibre ropes in use with the help of the physical properties of man-made fibres as given in Table 1 and also in IS : 667-1981*. 4.6 Man-made filament ropes are slippery and as such the end of Such ropes should be properly fast on bits or .bollards. Similarly, extra care should be exercised when marking any knots or splices on such ropes. 4.7 Man-made filament ropes, unlike natural fibre ropes, when approaching breaking point, give no audible or visual warning. Stretch imparted to. man-made 5bre ropes is recovered almost instantaneously with the release of tension and with considerable recoil if the fracture of the rope occurs. Polypropylene ropes, however, have less recoil effect than polyamide or polyester ropes. 4.8 Ensure that the knots are proper. The surface smoothness and relative hardness of the man-made filament ropes may dreate difficulty with respect to the condition to retain knots. With the changing stresses of service, knots will tend to loosen and create hazards to life and property. `I&S ~?@y be overcome by providing additional loops in knots before securing the knots to increase the retaining friction.
*Methods for identification

of textile fibres, 8

TABLE 1 RAW MATERIALS

: FIRRES PROPERTIES

( CZuuse 4.5 )

PIIYSIoAL PROPERTY

POLYPROPYLENE PoLYmHYLENs POLYA~IIDE ( NYLON ) POLYxsTxa -_-----\ --AMULTI~LAM~N~ MULTIpILAMxNr MONOpKAMxNT c-Multifilament Monofilament Fibrillated Film Soft and silky Bright llistre Circular 1'14 250 4'0 Over 8.8 Soft and silky Bright lustre Circular 1.38 260 0.4 Over 6-O Wiry like bristle Surface smooth Circular 0.95 135 Less than 0.01 Over 5.5 Soft and silky W$$ Bright lustre Circular @91 165 0.1 Over 8.0 Surface smooth Circular 0.91 165 0.1 Over 5.0 Harsh like straw Surface smooth Tape 0.91 165 0.1 Over 4.5

Texture Finish Cross-sectional shape (0 Specific gravity Melting point, OC Moisture ret& psrceut Tenacity g/den.

Nor111 - Moisture regain : The mass of moisture present in a textile expressed as percentage of the oven dry mass. NOTE2 - Tenacity : The fibre breaking stmugth in grams divided by the denier. NOTE3 - Denier : The mass in grams of 9 000 metres of fibre.

Is a 4!m

l

1983 of the work, often been in

4.9 Ensure that the tension in the rope never exceeds one-sixth specified minimum breaking load of the new type. For hoivting where protection of life is paramount, a factor of safety of 15 is employed. The rope slings for which safe working loads have recommended in IS : 9944-1981* shall be followed. 4.10 Cover the sharp edges of goods to be lifted to protect contact with the goods from damage.

the rope

4.11 Should there be any doubt as to whether or not a rope is fit for use, replace it at once. Never risk danger to life or damage to property. 4.12 Fatigue generally shows itself in a reduction of the size of the rope below its specified size. It means the rope has stretched under load and has failed to return to its normal condition. Such rope might have lost considerable proportion of its initial tensile strength and shall only used with great caution. 4.13 If a rope is not showing any signs of damage, rot or fatigue, it is unlikely to be below its strength. But, however, a prudent user will still give some consideration to its age and previous history of such factors which may cause to weaken its fibres, or loosen their grip on one another. Weakening could be by any of the factors, such as (a) mishandling, ( b ) poor maintenance, ( c ) improper storage, ( d ) constant stretching under heavy load, and ( e ) surging or sudden jerks under heavy stress. 4.14 lust as extreme heat may cause damage, extreme cold is also liable to to affect the flexibility of rope. Extreme cold, such as in the higher regions, can make th.e ropes brittle and cause apparently sound ropes to part without warning. This should be kept in mind when working hoists in cold weather. However, the effect of cold is not permanent and rope will regain its pliability when in normal temperature. 5. GENERAL CRITERIA FOR PERFORMANCE 5.1 The criteria for performance OF ROPES

of ropes are determined by the following:

a) Compactness of the twisted rope, b) Properties of the fibre used, and c) Nature of the finishing agents and lubricants used. *Recommendationson safe working loads slings.
10
fQr

natural and man-made fibre rope

Is : 45% - 1983 5.2 For a specific type of service, the best suitable combination of these factors can only be arrived at by trial and error based on actual experience. However, the following principles relating to performance of ropes may form a useful guide in the selection of ropes:

4 In the case of service involving surface abrasion, there is need
for maintaining a compact structure of rope and consequently cable-laid rope performs better than plain-laid rope. stresses, performance

c) For service involving power transmission,

will improve with hardness of lay. the performance will improve with the hardness of lay and with the increase in the number of strands. 4 The hardness of lay encourages rope deformation ( kinks ). e) For ease in handing, performance improves with softness of lay. f) Softness in lay encourages strand deformation ( cockles ). g) Jn specifying the breaking load of a rope, the following should be kept in view: 1) The working load should provide for factor of safety (see 4.9); 2) When a rope is bent over a free turning sheave, there is increase in tension in the rope, due to friction by about 10 percent; and 3) In the transmission rope where speed is a factor ( over 30 metre per minute ) due to acceleration and internal stresses, the allowable working load should be reduced significantly. h) For stabilizing the handling characteristics of ropes exposed together preliminary wetting, drying and pre-stretching will assist. PROCEDURES

t-9In the case of service involving surging loads and bending

6.

INSPECTION

6.1 Generally the rope surface is dark or dirty with the result the actual changes associated with chemical or microbiological deterioration which may not be readily apparent on examination of the surface of the rope. Therefore, the rope should be back-twisted till the clear areas of the inner portions of the strands are visible. In area which is localized, black, brown, yellow or red colour should be suspected for deterioration. In such area, the strands should be separated so that the inner yarns can be examined to find out whether the deterioration has extended to within the strands. Sour or musty odour or excessive fibre brittleness accompanies such deterioration . A complete yarn, if deteriorated, will tear apart with little effiort when a small file or a nail is used as a lever. In case of complete deterioration, merely striking a bent strand will break it. 11

ti z 4575 - 1983 6.2 Rot due to mildew of ropes can be detected by observing fuzzy mildew growth in the `contline' between the strands. Through colour indicators and pH measurements , acid or alkaline contamination can be verified. 6.3 Powdering between strands or within the strands to the extent that small grooves between the yarn are filled with powder fibre residue, is an indication that the rope has undergone considerable internal stress. In such cases, its continued use shall be examined critically. 6.4 When it is observed that the inner centre yarn of a particular strand are frayed or partially broken, this condition should be considered as an indication that the rope is overloaded short of breaking point and its use is undesirable. In such cases, the increase in the length of the lay or decrease in the circumference will also be observed. When it is observed that the circumference of the rope is reduced by. about 25 percent from its nominal dimension and a strand cross section is changed from circular to practically triangular shape, replacement is necessary.

12

BUREAU

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS

Headquarters :
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002

TeleDhones : 3 31 01 31,3 Regional Offices :
*Western tEastern Northern Southern

31 13 75

Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone
Andheri ( East

; Manakalaya,
BOMBAY

E9 MIDC, 400093

Marol,

)

6 32 92 95 36 24 99

: I/14

C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. Maniktola, CALCUTTA 700054 Sector 35-C 160036 MADRAS 600113

P. Road.

: SC0 445-446, CHANDIGARH : C. I. T. Campus,

2 18 43
31841 41 24 42 C :; `2;::

Branch Offices :
Pushpak,' Nurmohamed Shaikh AHMADABAD 380001 `F' Block, Unity BANGALORE Marg, Khanpur, Square, Road, T. T. Nagar, 751002

C

Bldg, Narasimharaja 560002 Floor, Road,

2 63 48 49 22 48 05 6 27 16
5 36 27 -

Gangotri Complex, 5th BHOPAL 462003 Plot No. 82183, Lewis

Bhadbhada

BHUBANESMWAR

53/5 Ward No. 29, R. G. Barua Road, 5th Byelane, GUWAHATI 781003 5-8-56C L.,N. Gupta Marg. HYDERABAD 500001 R14 Yudhister 11714188 Patliputra Marg, (Nampallv Station Road),

22 10 83 6 { 6 21 { 21 6 34 98 68 82 71 32 76 92

C Scheme, Nagar, Estate,

JAIPUR

302005

Sarvodaya Industrial

KANPUR PATNA

208005

800013 Road,

23 05 52 27

Hantex Bldg ( 2nd Floor ). Rly Station TRIVANDRUM 695001

inspection Office ( With Sale Point ):
Institution PUNE of Engineers 410005 ( India) Building. 1332 Shivaji Nagar, 5 24 35

*Sales Office in Bombay is a: Novelty Chambers. Grant Road, Bombay 400007 tSaleo Office in Calcutta is al 5 Chowinghee Approach. P. 0. Princsp Street. Calcutta 700072

89 66 20 n 68 00

Reprography Unit, BE,

New Delhi, India

