IS 13971 ( Part 1 ) : 1994

( Reaffirmed 2003 )

Indian Standard

ROUGH

TERRAIN FORK LIFT TRUCKS CODE OF PRACTICE FOR SAFETY
PART 1 APPLICATION, OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE

UDC

621*868*2585-00434

: 614.8

@ BIS 1994

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN, 9

INDIAN
BAHADUR DELHI NEW

STANDARDS
SHAH 110002 Price Group 4 ZAFAR MARG

April 1994

Industrial

Trucks Sectional

Committee,

TED 23

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, wafter the draft finalized by the Industrial Trucks Sectional Committee had been approved by the Transport Engineering Division Council. The purpose of this standard is to promote safety in the design and construction of rough This standard terrain fork lift trucks which may cause injury, if improperly used or maintained. may be used as a guide by authorities desiring to formulate safety rules and regulations. This standard is also intended for use by industries associated with manufacturing or utilizing rough terrain forklift trucks. In the preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from ANSI B 56*6- 1978. `Safety Standard for powered industrial trucks - Rough terrain fork lift trucks', issued by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers and ISO/DIS 8379 `Rough terrain lift trucks - Stability test' issued by the International Organization for Standardization. This standard Part 1 Part 2 The committee is being issued in the following two parts: Application, operation General requirements responsible and maintenance ofthis standard is given in Annex B.

for the preparation

In reporting the results of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ).

IS 13971 ( Part 1 ) : 1994

Indian Standard
ROUGH TERRAIN FORK LIFT TRUCKS CODE OF PRACTICE FOR SAFETY
PART 1
1 SCOPE 1.1 This standard defines safety requirements relating to application, operation and maintenance of rough terrain fork lift trucks.

APPLICATION,

OPERATION

AND MAtNTENANCE

out by. the user without manufacturer's prior authorization. Where such authorization is granted, capacity, operation and maintenance instruction plates, tags or decals shall be changed accordingly.

1.2 This standard intended primarily road hauling. 2 REFERENCES

does not cover vehicles for earth moving or over the

The following Indian Standards adjuncts to this standard:
IS No.

are necessary

4.1.2 If the truck is equipped with front el?d attachments, the identification oi" the attachments, combined weight a!lJ capacity of the truck with attachmezlts shall be in accordance with IS 13971 ( Part 2 ) : 1994. 4.1.3 All nameplates, caution and instruction markings shall comply with 3 of IS 6305 ( Part 2 ) : 1980. 4.2 Stability conditions for rough terrain fork lift trucks shall be in accordance with IS 13302 : 1992. 4.2.2 Trucks equipped with attachments be considered as partially loaded trucks operated without a load. 4.3 Safety Gua ds 4.3.1 Rough terrain fork lift trucks shall fitted with an overhead guard manufactured accordance with IS 7621 : 1974. be in shall when
4.2.1 The stability

Title

4660 : 1993

Glossary of terms relating tD powered industrial trucks ( third revision ) Safety code for powered industrial trucks, Part 2 Manufacture ( first revision ) Code of practice lighting for industrial of

6X)85( Part 2 ) :

6665 : 1972 7621 : 1974 13302 : 1992 lWi~( Part 2 )

Test for overhead guards powered industrial trucks Rough terrain fork - Stability test

lift trucks

Rough terrain fork lift trucks - Code of practice for safety Part 2 General requirements ( under print )

4.3.1.1 For special operating conditions, a stronger guard, or one having , openings ~of smaller size shall be agreed upon between purchaser and supplier, except for the following :
Excepf ions

3 TERMINOLOGY

For the purpose of this standard, the terms and definitions given in IS 4660 : 1993 in addition to the following shall apply. 3.1 User The user is defined as the owner/the company to whom the truck belongs. 4 GENERAL SAFETY PRACTICES and 4.1 Modifications, Capacity Nameplates, Markings person/

obstructions limit the a) Where overhead lowest height of the trucks normal overhead guard height and the vertical clearance under the guard may be reduced to permit safe operation with a guard. b) The truck may be operated without the overhead guard provided all of the following conditions are met:

1) Lift height is restricted to 1 800 mm or 2)
1 less from the ground. The truck shall operate area where: only in an

4.1.1 Modifications and additions which afiect capacity or safe operation shall not be carried

IS 13971 ( Part 1) : 1994 load i> The bottom of the top tiered is not higher than 1 800 mm and the top is not more than 3 000 mm from the ground when tiered. interlocked, ii) Only stable, preferably loads are or container unit handled. against falling iii) There is protecticn objects from adjacent high stack areas. 4.3.2 Load Backrest Extension 4.7.2 The truck may also be equipped with additicnal sound producing or visual ( such as lights or blinkers ) devices if agreed to between purchaser and supplier. 4.8 Lifting of Personnel Whenever l%llowing protection a truck is used to lift personnel, preca,utions shall be taken for of the personnel being elevated: carriage platform secured and/or forks. to the the the

a) Use a work
lifting

A load backrest extension shall be used to guard against the I?ad, or part of it, from falling towards the op:rator. 4.4 Fuel Handling and Storage 4.4.1 Liquid Fuels ( Such as Gasoline Fuel ) and Diesel

b)

Prr:vide such falling objects the operating staitdard lanyard.

overhead protection from as indicated necessary by conditions.

C>Provide d)

a slip resistant floor, toe boards, guardrails or a safety belt and

4.4.1.1 Trucks shall be refuelled only at locations designated for the purpose and from approved dispensing pumps. Safe outdoor locations are preferable to those indoors ~4.4.1.2 Engine refuelling. shall be stopped during the truck

Have an operator in the control station on the truck or in the immediate area or pr;-,vide truck controls, including powershut-off, on the elevatable platform. means to render inoperative all operating controls other than those on the elevatable platform when the controls on the elevatahle platform have been selecte.,l fOi use. Only one location of controls shall be capable of being operated at one time. Make sure that the operating smoothly. lifting mechanism is

e) Provide

4.4.1.3 Emergency refuelling shall be from approved safety cans. Safety cans shall be inspected regularly for damage to closures and for leaks; faulty cans shall be replaced. The area shall be made free from smoke and naked light. 4.4.1.4 Spillage of fuel or over filling the vehicle fuel tank shall be avoided. 4.5 Lighting for Operating Areas

f)

g) Place mast vertical and the fixed tilt platform forward or rearward when elevated.

4.5.1 Adequate lighting shall be provided in accordance areas in with operating IS 6665 : 1972. 4.6 Control of Noxious Gases and Fumes

h) Place truck in neutral
brake.

and smoothly

apply and

parking with

0 k)

Lift and caution. Watch other

lower

4.6.1 Ventilation shall be provided in enclosed where internal combustion powered areas, equipment is used to minimize the accumulation of exhaust gases in air-line combination. This includes the atmosphere within the truck cab where a cab is provided. 4.6.2 The degree of concentration and method of sampling to ascertain the conditions shall be carried out periodically. 4.7 Warning Device 4.7.1 Every truck the following: shall be equipped with one of

for overhead than

obstructions. of controls

ml Keep hands

and feet clear those in use.

4

Never transport personnel platform from one location

on the work to another.

for personnel in their P) Provide protection working position from moving parts of the truck that represent a hazard. 5 OPERATING RULES AND PRACTICES 5.1 Operator Qualifications 5.1.1 Only trained shall be permitted fork lift truck. 2 to and authorized operators operate a rough terrain

Audible warning devices such as horns, whistle, gong or any other sound producing device(s).

IS 13971 ( Part 1 ) : 1994 51.2 Proof of operator's qualification shall in pmossession of the operator at all times. 5.2 Operator's Instruction Manual shall be as given be Do not use an open flame to check level, of fuel electrolyte or or for leakage Do not use open pans of fuel coolant. or flammable cleaning fluids for cleaning parts.

Operator's instl,uction in Annex A. 6 MAINTENANCE 6.1 Maintenance

manual PRACTICES

f-1Ventilate S>Handle

work area, exhaust keep shop clean and dry.

fumes

and

Provision

Rough terrain trucks may become hazardous if maintenance is neglected. Therefore, maintrained personnel and tenance facilities, procedures shall be provided. 6.2 Maintenance, Repair and Inspection of all trucks shall to the manufaA typical schedule mai!?tenance, system shall

LP gas tanks with care. damage, such as dents, scrapes may dangerously weaken the make it unsafe for use.

Physical or gauges tank and

h)

Maintenance and inspection be perfc;imcd in accordance cturcr's rec~jmmendations. shall be as fc"llows:

Brakes, steering mechanism;, warning devices, stabilizers, lights, governors guards and s,f!:i over-load devices, devices, lift-tilt mechanism and other frame members shall be carefully and regularly inspected :!nd mairitained in a safe operating condition. Fuel systems shall be checked for leaks and condition of parts. Extra special consideration shall be given in the case of leak in the fuel system. A11 hydraulic systems shall be regularly inspected and maintained in good conditions. Tilt cylinders, values and other similar parts shall be checked to assure that `drift' or leakage has not developed ro the extent that it would create a hazard. manufacturer's truck capacity operation and maintenance instruction plates, tags or labels shall be maintained in legible condition.

A scheduled preventive a> lubrication and inspection be followed.

j>

b)

Only qualified and authorized personnel shall be permitted to maintain, repair, adjust and inspect industrial trucks. starting inspection and repair of truck: 1) Raise drive wheels free of floor or disco!;nect battery and use chocks 01 positive truck positioning other devices. means, inner2) Block load er,gaging most(s) or chassis before working on them.

6

C) Before

The m> details,

4

3)

4j

Before disconnecting any part of the engine fuel system or gasoline powered trucks with gravity feed fuel systems, take precaution to eliminate any poisibility of unintentional fuel leaks. Before disconnecting any part of the engine fuel system of LP gas-powered trucks, close LP tank valve and run the engine until fuel in system is depleted and engine stops.

Trucks shall be kept in a clean condition to minimize fire hazards and facilitate detection of loose or defective parts. and additions which affect safe truck operation shall out unless agreed to betand suppliers changes of then capacity, operation instruction plates, tags be changed accordingly.

P) Modifications capacity and not be carried ween purchasers agreed upon and maintenance or labels shall

d)

Operation of the truck to check performance shall be conducted in an authorized area where safe clearance exists. tection area. tyre hazards and have fire proequipment present in the work

e) Avoid

that all q) Care shall be taken to assure replacement parts are interchangeable with the original parts and OF a good quality. r) When removing tyre, deflate it completely While assembling prior to removal. tyres on multi-piece rims, use a safety cage or restraining device while inflating.

ES1397-1 ( Part 1) : 1994

ANNEX A ( Item 5.2 )
OPERATOR'S A-l GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS INSTRUCTION MANUAL and fire A-1.14 Fire aisles, access to stairways equipment shall be kept clear.

A-l.1 The operator shall develop safe working habits and also be aware of hazardous conditions to protect himself, other personnel, the truck and other material. A-l.2 He shall be familiar and function of all controls with the operation and instruments. the truck operator's always and keep

A-1.15 An overhead guard is intended to offer protection from falling objects, but cannot protect against every possible impact. It shall not be considered a substitute for load-handling. A-2 OPERATOR RESPONSIBILITY

A-l.3 He shall not start or operate from any place other than from the position. A-l.4 inside Hands and feet shall operator's compartment. be

kept

A-2.1 Safe operation is the responsibility of the operator. Truck operators shall read and be familiar with the operator's manual for the truck beiirg operated; they shall also abide by the safety rules and practices as given A-l and A-4 to A-6. A-3 OPERATOR TRAINING

A-l.5 Understand truck the truck under control.

limitations

A-l.6 Safeguard pedestrians at all times. not drive a truck up to any one standing front of a fixed object.

Do in

A-l.7 He shall not allow anyone to stand or pass under the elevated portion of any truck, whether loaded or empty. A-1.8 He shall not put any part of the body between the uprights of the mast, the reach mechanism or outside the operator compartment of the truck. A-l.9 shall Before leaving truck; in neutral; the operator's position; he

A-3.1 An effective operator training programme shall centre around user company's policies, conditions and operating trucks. The prcgrammc shall b: presefited completely to all new operators and may be csndensed for those with previous experience. An operator training of the following: proz:amml: _ shall consist

selection a) Careful considering physical attitude and aptitude.

of the operator, qualifications, job

a) Stop

Emphasis on safety of stock, equipment, operator and other personnel. City safety rules and why they were formulated.

controls b) Place directional Apply the parking brake; c> d) Fully unless lower the supporting

cl

load engaging means an elevated platform; stop and

e> When leaving the truck unattended the engine or turn off the controls; f) Block the m-heels if truck A-1.10 Check clearance under electric lines, leaving buildings.

Instruction in basic fundamentals of truck and component design as related to safety, that is, Nm loading, mechanical limitations, centre of gravity, stability, etc. Introduction to equipment, control locations and functions, and explanation of how they work when used properly and encountered when used problems improperly. practice on operating course remote from normal activity and designed to simulate actual in-plant operations, lumber stacking, elevating that is, shingles to the roof, etc. Oral, written and operational performance and evaluations during and at tests completion of the course.

d)

is on an incline.

carefully before driving bridges, or entering or

A-l.11 Unauthorized passengers shall not be permitted to ride on powered industrial trucks. A safe place to ride shall be provided for authorized passengers. A-1.12 Report all accidents. or modify the truck shall not

e) Supervised

f)

A-1.13 Addition be permitted.

4

IS 13971 ( Part 1 ) : 1994 courses which may be cong) Refresher densed versions of the primary course, and periodic `on job' operator evaluation. A-4 TRAVELLING
A-4.1 On trucks equipped

A-4.15 Slow down on wet and slippery surfaces. Operate at speed which are compatible with the conditions encountered. A-4.16 Avoid running over loose objects on the roadway surface. A-4.17 While negotiating turns, reduce speed to a safe level, turning hand steering wheel in a smooth sweeping motion. Except when maneuvering~at a very low speed, turn the hand steering wheel at a moderate, even rate. A-4.18 loads. cannot A-4.19 of the Handle only stable or safety arranged When handling off-center loads which be centered, operate with extra caution. Handle loads only within the capacity truck.

with individual wheel brake pedals, lock pedals together for simultaneous operation before travel on public roads or when changing job sites.

A-4.2 For truck equipped with differential lock, the lock shall not be engaged when driving on If the road or at high speeds or when turning. the lock is engaged when turning, there may be loss of steering control. A-4.3 Observe ail traffic regulations including authorized speed limits. Maintain a safe distance. based on speed of travel, from the vehicle ahead and keep the vehicle under control at all times. A-4.4 Yield the right of way to pedestrian, ambulances, fire trucks or other vehicles in emergency situations. A-4.5 DO not pass another truck the same direction at intersections, or at other dangerous locations. travelling in blind spots

A-4.20 On all grades the load and load engaging means shall be tilted back, if applicable, and raised only as far as necessary to clear the road surface. A-4.21 Trucks steered with their rear wheels have exaggerated trail swing. Operator familiarity with this feature is necessary for safe operation. A-5 LOADING INSTRUCTIONS A-5.1 Improper use of stabilizer controls ( if so equipped ) could cause truck upset. Stabilizers are to be used for additional stability only. Do not use them for Ievelling or raising the front of the machine. A-5.2 For the leveling: trucks equipped with lateral

A-4.6 Slow down and sound the audible warning devices(s) at locations where vision is obstructed. If the load being carried obstructs forward view, travel with the load trailing or use a signallman to give directions. A-4.7 Railroad tracks shall be crossed at an angle wherever possible. Do not park closer than 1 800 mm to the nearest rail of a railroad track. A-4.8 Keep a clear view of the path and watch for other traffic, personnel clearances. A-4.9 Operate with caution on grades. A-4.10 Take special care when required on grades, ramps or inclines. to turn of travel and safe

a) Always level the frame before raising the boom or mast with or without a load. b) Lateral levelling shall not be used to position an elevated load;, instead lower the load and reposition truck. A-5.3 Handle loads exceeding the dimensions used to establish truck capacity with extra caution otherwise stability and maneuverability may be adversmely affected. A-5.4 When attachments are used, extra care shall be taken in securing, manipulating, positioning and transporting the load. Operate trucks equipped with attachments as partially loaded trucks even when not handling a load. A-5.5 Completely engage the load with the load engaging means and where tilt is provided, carefully tilt mast backward or tiltable forks upward to stabilize the load. Caution should be used in tilting backward with high or segmented loads.

A-4.11 Under all travel conditions the truck shall be operated at a speed that shall permit it to be brought to a stop in a safe manner. A-4.12 Travel with load engaging means or load low and, where possible, tilted back. Do not elevate the load except during stacking. A-4.13 Make starts, stops, turns or direction reversals in a smooth manner so as not to shift load and/or overturn the truck. A-4.14 Do horseplay. not indulge in stunt driving or

IS 13971 ( Part 1 ) : 1994
extension shall be used when necessary to guard against the load, or part of it, from falling toward the operator. A-5.7 Use extreme care when tilting load forward or backward particularly when high Do not tilt forward with load engagrng tiering. means elevated except to pick up or deposit a load over a rack or stack. When stacking or use only enough backward tilt to tiering stabilize the load. A-5.8 The handling of suspended loads by means of crane arm ( `boom' ) or other device, can introduce dynamic forces affecting the stability of a truck that are not considered in the ability criteria. Sudden starts, stops and turns can cause the load to swing and cr'eate a The following precautions shall be hazards. suspended loads: taken when handling manufactua) It shall not exceed the truck rer's load rating of the truck as equipped for suspended loads. b) The load shall only be lifted vertically and never dragged horizontally. with the c) The load shall be transported bottom of the load and the mast as low as possible. the truck with load elevated d) Maneuvering slowly and cautiously shall be done and only to the extent necessary to permit lowering to the transport position. A-6 OPERATOR CARE OF THE TRUCK

A-5.6 A load backrest

a) Tyres b) Warning
C) Lights

devices

lift system including ing means, chains, cable switches. f > Brakes g) Steering mechanism

4 Battery e) Tilt and

load engagand limit

h) Overhead

guard

and

load

backrest

extension.

while starting of shift A-6.3 If the . truck operatron or durtng operatton is found to be m need of repairs or in any way unsafe or contributes to an unsafe condition, the matter shall be reported immediately to the designated authority, and the truck shall not be operated until it has been restored to safe operating condition. refuelling A-6.4 Before LP gas-powered trucks, close the LP gas-cylinder valve. If the system does not include a self sealing disconnect coupling, run engine until fuel in system is depleted and engine stops running. A-6.5 The engine shall operator shall not be refuelling. be on stopped and the the truck while

A-6.6 Spillage of oil or fuel shaI1 be carefully washed away or completely evaporated and fuel tank cap replaced before restarting engine. A-6.7 Smoking is not permitted while refuelling. with a leak

~-6.1 It is not advisable to make repairs or adjustments unless specifically authorized to do so. A-6.1.1 Do not attempt repairs that need help. A-6.2 check to: Before operating its conditions, the truck on each shift, giving special attention

A-6.8 Truck shall not be operated in the front fuel system.

A-6.9 Open flames shall not be used when checking electrolyte level in storages batteries or liquid level in fuel tanks.

IS 13971 ( Part 1 ) : 1994

ANNEX

B

( Foreword )
COMMITTEE Industrial
Chairman
SHRI

COMPOSITION Committee, TED 23

Trucks

Sectional

Representing Macneill (Alternate to Dirg;y;;te Alternate ) Escorts ) Directorate Alternate ) ) Research, Designs & Standards Railways, Lucknow Voltas Ltd, Bombay Bombay Port Trust, Bombay Organization, Ministry of of Tech Dev Sr Production ( Air ), New Delhi Ltd, Faridabad of Standardization, Ministry of Defence, New Delhi Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals ( DGS & D ), New Engineering Ltd, Calcutta

J.

A. KHAN MPnlbers RAY CHAUDHARI

SHRI S.

SHRI J. A. KHAN ) SHRI S. C. ANAND SHRI 5. M. MUNJAL (

SHRI S. K. CHAUDHARY SHRI V. K. JADON ( Alternate ) BRIG V. S. DHAWAN SHRI P. T. CHAUBAL ( .4lternate SHRI S. K. GULATI SHRI D. GANGOPADHYAYA (

JT

DIRECTOR STDS ASSTT DESIGN ENGINEER (

Alternate )

SHRI V. KAUSIK SHRI K. B. NAIR (.IZternate
SHRI N. L. KODNANEY

SHRI N. G. KAMAT SATOSKAR( llternatz SHRI A. KONAIC SHRI M. E. MADHUSUDAN SHRI K. K. TIWARI ( Alternate )
SHRI M. MURASHETTY SHRI S. G. DHARVEKAR (

)

Alternate

) )

SHRI N. S. NINDI SHRI A. C. BHATTUX~RYYA

Calctitta Port Trust, Calcutta Directorate General of Tech Dev ( Management Support Sect ion ), New Delhi Directorate Genzral of Factory Advice Service & Labour, ( CLI ), Bombay Punjab Tractors Ltd, Chandigarh Mahindra & Mahindra Ltd, Bombay Jest's Engineering Co Ltd, Bombay Godrej & Boyce Mfg Co Pvt Ltd, Bombay

Institute

(Alternate

SHRI V. G.

PARANJPE

SHRI K. R. PRP~SAD SHRI B. NATH ( Akernate SHRI

) H. F. RAGINA SHR~ D. B. VIJAYAKAR ( Alternate

) Texmaco ) Ministry of Railways (Railway Board ), New Delhi Ministry of Defenc,e (R &D ). Ltd, Calcutta

SHRI S. M. SUN

SHRI NIRMALYASENGUPTA(Alternate
SHRI R. C. SHARMA SHRI LOVE DEV RAJ (

Alternate

) ) Vehicle, Research Ahmednagar Director General Secretary
SHRI T. M. MAJUMDAR

SHRI V. P. SULAKHE SHRI M. N. SRIVASTAV~( Actsmate SHRI N. S. VIJAYARAGHAVAN, Director (Transport Engg )

& Pev Estt,

BIS ( Ex-o,fficio Member )

Director

( Transport

Engg ), BIS

7

Boreao of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards harmonious development of the activities of stadardization~, marking certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.
promote

Act, 1986 to and quality

Copyright the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type Enquiries relating to or grade designations. copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS.
BIS has

Revision

of Indian Standards

Amendments

are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the up for revision. latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards Monthly Additions'.

This Indian

Standard

has been

developed Amendments

from

Dot

: No. TED

23 ( 902 ).

Issued She of Issue

Publication Text Affected

Amend

No.

Date

BUREAU Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75

OF INDlAN Marg,

STANDARDS 110002 Telegrams ( Common : Manaksanstha to all Officer Telephone )

New Delhi

Regional Central Eastern

Offices : ,Mlaak

: Bhavan, 9 Bdhxlur 110002 VII M, V. I. P. Rosd, Maniktola 37 84 99, 37 86 26, 153 38 43, 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 700054 Sector Shah Zdfar Marg

{ 33101

31

NEW DELHI CALCUTTA Northern : SC0 4t5-446,

331 13 75 37 85 61 37 86 62 53 16 40

: l/14 C. 1. T. Scheme

I 53 23 84 235 02 16, c 235 15 19, 632 92 95, 632 78 91, 235 Do442 235 23 15 632 78 58 632 78 92

Southern Western

: C. I. T. Campus, : Manakalaya, BOMBAY

IV Cross

Road,

MADRAS Andheri

600113 )

E9 MIDC, 400093

Marol,

( East

Branch

: AHMADABAD. FARIDABAD. LUCKNoW.

BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

COXMBATORE. JAIPUR. KANPUR

Printed

at Printwell

Printers,

Aligarh,

India

