IS 4225:2004 $m9n7m

( m'u?!?~w)
Indian Standard

RECOMMENDED PRACTICE FOR STRAIGHT BEAM ULTRASONIC TESTING OF STEEL PLATES ( Second Revision)

ICS 77.040.20,77.140.30

(0 BIS 2004

BUREAU
MANAK

OF

IN DIAN

STANDARDS
MARC

BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR NEW DELHI 110002

October

2004

Price Group

2

Non-destructive

Testing Sectional Committee,

MTD21

FOREWORD This Indian standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Non-destructive Testing Sectional Committee had been approved by the Metallurgical Engineering Division Council. Steel plates for use in boilers, pressure vessels and similar critical applications are ultrasonically tested to find out discontinuities such as pipes, ruptures laminations, etc. This standard was first published in 1967 and revised in 1979. This has now been revised on the basis of experience gained since its first revision and accepted current practice. More details regarding the test procedure, including the scanning technique have been incorporated in this revision. Aithough the method recommended in this standard is generally applicable to all thickness, special accessories may be necessary for lower thicknesses wherein the depth occupied by the initial pulse is to be evaluated for defects. This standard does not prescribe any acceptance criteria for plates, which should be as agreed to by the contracting parties. However, a general guideline for the acceptance is mentioned in this revision as Annex B for guidance only. in the preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from the following publications:

BS 5996: 1980 `Method for ultrasonic testing and specifying quality grades of ferritic steel plates' issued by the British Standards Institution ASTM A 435/A 435 M-92 `Standard specification for straight beam ultrasonic examination plates' issued by the American Society for Testing and Materials of steel

ASTM A 578 M-96 `Standard specification for straight beam ultrasonic examination of plain and clad steel plates for special applications' issued by the American Society for Testing and Materials AMS 2632 `Ultrasonic inspection Material Specification AMS 2630A `Ultrasonic inspection Material Specification For the purpose of deciding whether observed or calculated, expressing IS 2:1960 `Rules for rounding off the rounded off value should be the -- Products less than 0.5" (12.5 mm) thick' issued by Aerospace

-- Products over than 0.5" ( 12.5 mm) thick' issued by Aerospace

a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with numerical values (revised)'. The number of significant places retained in same as that of the specified value in this standard.

IS 4225:2004

Indian Standard

RECOMMENDED PRACTICE FOR STRAIGHT BEAM ULTRASONIC TESTING OF STEEL PLATES ( Second Revision)
1 SCOPE This standard prescribes the procedure for carrying out straight beam, pulse echo ultrasonic examination of rolled carbon and alloy steel plates. 2 REFERENCES The following standards contain provisions, which through reference in this text, constitute provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, the editions indicated were valid. All standards are subject to revision, and parties to agreements based on this standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent editions of the standards indicated below: IS No. 2417:2003 12666:1988 Title Glossary of terms relating to ultrasonic testing (jirst revision) Methods for performance assessment of ultrasonic flaw detection equipment General standard for qualification and certification for non-destructive testing personnel The probe shall be of straight beam type (single orTR) using size and frequency capable of detecting the reference reflector with a signal to noise ratio better than 12 dB. 4.2.1 Other probes may be used for evaluating or pin pointing the indications, if required. 5 TEST CONDITIONS 5.1 The test should be carried out in an area reasonably free from any vibrations that may interfere with proper functioning of the ultrasonic equipment. 5.2 The surface of the plate, under examination, shall be cleaned and smoothened sufficiently to carry out the inspection with reference to the reference reflector so that the transfer correction is reduced to minimum possible, local rough surfaces shall be conditioned grinding to ensure proper contact of the transducer to the plate surface. 5.2.1 Any specified identification marks which may be removed when grinding to achieve proper surface smoothness, should be restored after testing. 6 PERSONNEL REQUIREMENTS 4.1.1 Calibration The ultrasonic apparatus shall be adjusted and calibrated prior to inspection as described in IS 12666. 4.2 Probe

13805:2004

3 TERMINOLOGY For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given in IS 2417 shall apply. 4 EQUIPMENT 4.1 Ultrasonic Apparatus

The apparatus shall be of straight beam pulse-echo type, which shall provide vertical linearity within * 5 percent upto at least 80 percent of full screen height and a horizontal linearity within t 1 percent of the range. It shall be capable of producing, receiving and displaying high frequency electrical pulses at the required frequency and energy levels, with high degree of accuracy, sharpness, ultra high resolutions and stability. The equipment shall have a calibrated attenuator or gain control. It also should have the provision for double crystal (TR) probe operation. The equipment should also have the sufficient range capacity for the required testing purposes.

Personnel performing ultrasonic testing, in accordance with this standard shall be suitably qualified (Level I, 11or 111)as per guidelines of IS 13805 and be familiar at least with the following: a) Ultrasonic terminology; b) Instrument calibration; c) Effect of transducer material, size, frequency and mode on test results; d) Effect of material structure on test results; e) Effect of non-linearity on test results; f) Effect of thickness and discontinuities on test results; and @ Effect of surface condition on test results.

IS 4225:2004 7 TEST PROCEDURE 7.1 Ultrasonic examination should be carried out on either major surface of the plate by anyone of the following methods: a) Direct contact; b) Immersion; or c) Liquid column coupling. 7.1.1 If required by the purchaser due to higher width of transmitted pulse, the plate shall be inspected from the opposite side or by TR probe or high frequency highly damped probe. Plates ordered in the quenched and tempered condition shall be tested after heat treatment. 7.2 Couplant The couplant used may be water, soluble oil, glycerine, light machine oil or greases. The coupling medium shall be non-corrosive and adequate precaution shall be taken to ensure that any coupling medium which may be deterious to the material or which may interfere with its subsequent processing is completely removed after completion of the test. 7.3 Test Frequency The nominal test frequency shall be chosen taking into consideration of the material (grain size, microstructure, etc), thickness of the material and the minimum size of the flaw that is looking for, the extent of dead zone, noise leveI, etc. This optimum frequency shall be used for testing and evaluation. 7.4 Scanning 7.4.1 Reference Setting for Scanning Back reflection method or reference reflector method shall be used depending on the purchaser requirement. 7.4.1.1 With reference to reference rejlector 7.4.1.2 Wherever scanning is not called for with reference to a reference reflector then the general scanning can be carried out with an instrument adjustment that will produce a first reflection from the opposite side of a sound area of the plate at least 80 percent of the full screen height plus 6 dB. In this case minor sensitivity adjustments may be made to accommodate for surface roughness. Damping or reject control of the equipment should be kept minimum. 7.4.2 The extent of scanning shall be depending on the purchaser requirement. It can be either grid scanning or it can be 100 percent surface scanning. 7.4.3 When a discontinuity indication is observed during the general scanning, the instrument should be adjusted to produce back the reference setting with transfer comection. This setting shall be maintained during evaluation of the discontinuity indications. 8 RECORDING DICATIONS OF DISCONTINUITY IN-

8.1 All discontinuity indications, complete loss of back reflection and loss of 50 percent or more back reflection shall be recorded. The user may use the acceptance levels given in Annex A or specify as per requirement and manually acceptance to manufacturer. 8.2 When grid scanning is performed and discontinuity indications as in 8.1 are detected along a given grid line, the entire surface area of the squares adjacent to these indications shall be scanned. When loss of back reflections are indicated, the entire surface giving this loss of back reflection centered on these indications shall be scanned. The boundaries of these discontinuities shall be established by the technique given in 8.2.1. 8.2.1 The probe shall be moved away from the centre of the discontinuity until the height of the discontinuity y indication becomes half of its original maximum value. The plate should be marked at a point equivalent to the centre of the probe. This operation should be repeated to establish the boundaries of the discontinuity. If the acceptance criteria mentioned in Annex A is followed, then the measurement of linear discontinuity may be carried out using a very small diameter probe for improving the accuracy of measurement. 9 ACCEPTANCE CRITERIA

Scanning shall be carried out with an instrument adjustment which is 6 dB higher than the required reference sensitivity level. The reference level shall be set by adjusting the first reflection from the reference reflector at minimum metal distance up to at least 80 percent of the full screen height and noting down the subsequent first reflection from the remaining reference reflector metal distances. It should be noted that the reflection amplitude from the reference reflector at the maximum metal distance should be kept greater than 20 percent of full screen height. Sensitivity adjustments shall be made to accommodate for transfer correction from the reference block to the material under test. Reference level can also be set by using DGS diagram or DGS scales for specific probes with proper attenuation and transfer correction if required. If attenuation and transfer corrections are required, they are to be carried out for proper evaluation of flaw size.

Ultrasonic acceptance criteria for plates should be based on the design requirements of the product into which the plate is further processed or a realistic appraisal of the service requirements and the quality that may normally be obtained in the production of a particular type of plate.

2

IS 4225:2004 10 RECORD OF TEST DATA at the j) Ultrasonic indications and description of discontinuity; and k) UT operator's name, his level and date of test. 10.2 The test report should be prepared containing the following information: a) Date of testing; b) Reference number of the plate; c) Amplitude of the defect indications, reduction in back echo amplitude, depth of the defect and location of the defect with respect to point; and d) Sketch showing the location of the flaw indications on the scanning surface.

10.1 The following data should be recorded time of each test for future reference:

a) Identification, material specification and size of the plate; b) Condition of the surface of the plate; c) Reference sensitivity; d) Make and model of the test unit; e) Amplification or gain control of the equipment; f) Description of the probe; g) Couplant used; h) Mode of scanning;

ANNEX

A

(Clauses 8.1 and 8.2.1)
ACCEPTANCE Quality Single Discontinuity FBH Size (2) 1.2 1.2 CLASSES FOR STRAIGHT Multiple Discontinuities Size (3) BEAM TESTING Loss of Back Reelection Percent, Max (5) See 8.1 See 8.1 See 8.1 See 8.1

FBH

Linear Discontinuity, Max (4)

(1) AA Al A B

0.4
0.8 1.2

0.4 FBH response
for 3 mm 0.8 FBH response for 6.4 mm 1.2 FBH response for 12.7 mm FBH response 2.0 for 25.4 mm

2.0
3.2 As established

2.0

c

by the purchaser and the vendor for specific part and use

NOTE -- Diameter of flat bottom hole in millimetres.

3

ANNEX

B

( Foreword)
DETERMINATION OF THE TYPE OF DEFECT B-3 When making an assessment it is essential to consider the back echo pattern rather than the effect on the first back echo in isolation. The information given in Table 1 may be used as a guide in this assessment, but should not be regarded as a substitute for ultrasonic skill and knowledge.

B-1 The first step in any detailed plate examination is determination of the type, approximate size and nature of the defect since this affects the beam form and equipment response. B-2 The amount of probe movement, behaviourof the defect signal and back echo clearly indicate the type of defect when used in conjunction with other factors. Table 1

Guide to Defect Assessment (Clause B-3)
Effect on Back Echo on Transmission (3)
Zero at atl test frequencies

sl
No. (1)

Defect Echo Type (2)

Assessment (4)
Lamination exceahng probe

i) Large descrete, persisting with probe movement. No substantial movement of echo on time base ii) Small to medhm, persisting with probe movement. Some movement of echo on time base. More than one echo interconnected

Attenuated or rem at all frequencies

Irregular cavity defect with planes inclined to plate surface. Present only in plate with low reduction Isolated laminations of width less than beam width Region of imperfection containing small Iaminar defects

iii)

Medium to large, descrcte not persisting with probe movement

Attenuated, recovering with probe movement Fluctuating with probe

iv)

Small to large, fluctuating with probe movement. No substantial movement of echo on time base

v) Many small echoes fluctuating and extending in depth through the plate

Considerable attcnuation depending on frequency

Distributcd small defects Inclusion clusters. Dirty plate

4

Bureau

of Indian

Standards of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote marking and quality certification of goods

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau harmonious development of the activities of standardization, and attending to connected matters in the country.

Copyright
B1S has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments `BIS Catalogue' and `Standards: Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed of comments. Standards are also reviewed such review indicates that no changes are up for revision. Users of Indian Standards or edition by referring to the latest issue of

from Doc : No. MTD 21 (4241).

Amendments Amend No.

Issued Since Publication Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters : Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone 23237617 { 23233841 23378499,23378561 { 23378626,23379120 603843 { 609285 22541216,22541442 { 22542519,22542315 [2832 9295,28327858 1 28327891:28327892

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones :23230131, 23233375,23239402 Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi KOLKATA 700054 : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022

Eastern

Northern

Southern

: C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI

600113

Western

: Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093

Branches

: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. NALAGARH. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. VISAKHAPATNAM.
Printed at Prabhat Offset Press, New Delhi-2

