**************** 



*■ fe^K 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 10810-0 (1984): Method of test for cables, Part 0: 
General [ETD 9: Power Cables] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UOC 621; 315*2 :8C0»f 



IS * 1011 ft ( Part©)- 1984 





Indian Standard 
DS OF TEST FOR CABLES 

PART • GENERAL 



0. Foreword 

0.1 A large number of Indian Standards have been published covering the requirements of electric 
cables. In order to avoid repetition and to bring uniformity, this standard has been brought out to 
consolidate methods for various tests at one place. 

0.2 This standard is being issued in diflerenV parts, each part dealing with a particular test, in 
detail. The idea is that, besides {he consolidation of details at one place, the option should be 
open to the users of dKfereni*tandfcrds to procure whatever parts are relevant to their activities. 

0.3 The format and main clauses, as listed below, have been kept the same in all parts (except 
part ' General ' ) for the sake of uniformity and to avoid the possibility of missing any details: 

1. Scope + 

2. Significance 

3. Terminology ** 

4. Apparatua^ff 

5. Material >* " \ ^ \ 

6. Test specimen 2 . 

7. Conditioning *. 

8. Procedure 

ft. Tabulation of observations 

10. Calculation 

11. Report ;*♦* 

If any clause is not applicable In a particular case, it Is indicated accordingly. 



ituting this standard is given in 
Identified, their methods will be 



0.4 A list of various tests covered in Individual parts 
Appendix A for reference purposes. Whenever other test' 
covered in subsequent parts. 

0.5 In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final 
value, observed or calculated, Is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1900 
1 Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )'. 

1. Scope — This standard, Issued In different parts, prescribes methods of tests for electric cables, 
wires and cords in finished stage as well as their components, such as conductor, insulation, 
sheath and armour. 

2. Terminology — In addition to those given in IS :1BS5 (Part J2)-1071 ■ Electrotechnicai 
vocabulary : Part 32 Cables, conductors and accessories for electrical supply ', the following 
definitions shall apply. Additional definitions, wherever applicable, are given in individual parts. 



finished cable lengths to demonstrate 



2.1 RoiHine Tests — Tests made by the manufacturer on al 
the integrity of the cable. 

2*2 Type Tests — Tests required to be made before supply on a general commercial basis a type of 
cable in order to demonstrate satisfactory performance characteristics to meet the intendedwplica- 
tion. w 

Not*— Thaaa taata ara of such « natura that after thay nova baan mada thay naed not be rapaatad anlasa 
thanoes ara mada in the cabla matarials or datlon which might chanoa tha parformance charactsffatlca. 



Adopted 14 March 1984 



April 19S5, ISI 



mm — 



INDIAN STANDARD^ INSTITUTION 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARS 
•* NEW DELHI 110001 



IS : 10810 ( Part 0)- 1984 

2.3 Acceptance Tests — Tests carried out on sam piss taksn from a lot for ths purposs of acceptance 
of the lot. 

2.4 Median Value — When several test results have been obtained and ordered In an Increasing or 
decreasing succession, the median value Is the middle value if the number of available values is 
odd, and Is the mean of the two middle values If the number Is even. 

3. General Notes on Teste 

3.1 These methods of tests have been, primarily laid down for electric cables. However, these 
methods may also be used, with or without modification, for testing other types of cables ( such as, 
telecommunication cables), cable joints and terminations, if referred to in the Individual product 

specification. 

3.2 Full test conditions ( such as temperatures, durations, voltages) and full test requirements are 
not specified in this standard. It is intended to specify such details in the standard dealing with 
the relevant type of cable or its component 

3.3 The details given In this standard may be modified by the relevant product standard to suit the 
needs of a particular type of cable. In case of any deviation between this standard and the 
individual product standard, the provisions of latter shall apply. 

3.4 For multi-core cables and cords, not more than 5 cores ( of different colours, If any ) shall be 
tested, unless otherwise specified In the individual part of this standard or relevant Indian Standard 
on cables. 

3.5 Unless otherwise specified, tests shall be made at ambient temperature. 

3.t When a number of tests are performed on one cable, the format for report may be suitably 
modified to include all the tests in such away that the basic Information required in accordance 
with this standard Is not missed. 

APPENDIX A 

(Clause 0A) 

LIST OF METHODS OF TEST FOR CABLES 

Test Part Number 

of IS: 10810 

Annealing Test for Wires Used as Conductors 1 

Tensile Test for Aluminium Wires 2 

Wrapping Test for Aluminium Wiree 3 

Persulphate Test of Conductor 4 

Conductor Resistance Test 

Thickness of Thermoplastic and Elastomeric Insulation and Sheath $ 

Tensile Strength and Elongation ak Break of Thermoplastic and 7 

Elastomeric Insulation and Sheath 

Breaking Strength and Elongation at Break for Impregnated Paper insulation 8 

Tear Resistance for Paper Insulation 9 

Loss of Mass Test 10 

Thermal Ageing in Air If 

Shrinkage Test 12 

Ozone Resistance Test 13 

Heat Shock Test 14 

Hot Deformation Test 15 

Accelerated Ageing Test by Oxygen Pressure Method ( under preparation ) 16 

2 



I3J1M10 (Part 0)-1M4 



Tear Resistance Test for Heavy Duty Sheath ( under prep*r*tk>n ) 

Colour Fastness to Daylight 

Bleeding and Blooming Test 

Cold Bend Test 

Cold Impact Test 

Vicat Softening Point 

Melt Flow Index 

Water Soluble Impurities Test of Insulating Paper 

Conductivity of Water Extract Test of Insulating Paper 

pH value of Water Extract Test of Insulating Paper 

Ash Content Test of Insulating Paper 

Water Absorption Test ( Electrical ) 

Environmental Stress Cracking Test 

Hot Set Test 

Oil Resistance Test 

Carbon Content Test for Polyethylene 

Water Absorption Test ( Gravimetric ) 

Measurement of Thickness of Metallic Sheath 

Determination of Tin In Lead Alloy for Sheathing 

Dimensions of Armouring Material 

Tensile Strength and Elongation at Break of Armouring Materials 

Torsion Test on Galvanized Steel Wires for Armouring 

Winding Test on Galvanized Steel Strips for Armouring 

Uniformity of Zinc Coating on Steel Armour 

Mass of Zinc Coating on Steel Armour 

Resistivity Test of Armour Wires and Strips and Conductance Test of Armour 
(Wires/Strips) 

Insulation Resistance Test 

Spark Test 

High Voltage Test 

Partial Discharge Test 

Impulse Test 

Dielectric Power Factor Test 

Heating Cycle Test 

Bending Test 

Dripping Test 

Drainage Test 

Flammability Test 

Static Flexibility Test 



Pert Number 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 
27 
28 
29 
30 
31 
32 
33 
34 
35 
38 
37 
38 
39 
40 
41 
42 

43 
44 
45 

48 
47 
48 
49 
50 
51 
52 
53 
54 



*rtat* *t Km OE Pffmmg Nw, K»iirft,1»4» 



