**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 12826-1 (1989) : Code of practice for ordering, testing 
and acceptance of industrial furnaces. Part 1: purchaser's 
data sheet for ordering of industrial furnaces [MTD 26: 
Industrical Fuel Fired Furnaces] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&Vi ilW^K-^i^^^ T ^bi^ nVF^f 



::^^s^\n%i9^j^/;s^>^^^^ 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 12826 (Parti): 1989 

(Reaffirmed 2000) 

Indian Standard 

ORDERING, TESTING AND ACCEPTANCE 

OF INDUSTRIAL FURNACES — 

CODE OF PRACTICE 

PART 1 PURCHASER'S DATA SHEET FOR ORDERING 
INDUSTRIAL FURNACES 



UDC 65871 re (083-22) : 66-041 



© BIS 1990 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

April 1990 P"«« Groop 1 



AMENDMENT NO. 1 JUNE 2011 

TO 

IS 12826 (PART 1) : 1989 ORDERING, TESTING AND ACCEPTANCE OF 

INDUSTRIAL FURNACES — 
CODE OF PRACTICE 

PART 1 PURCHASER'S DATA SHEET FOR ORDERING 
INDUSTRIAL FURNACES 

[Page 1, clause 4.1(vii)] — Add the following at the end of second column: 

'temperature uniformity desired in furnace and in charge material to be heated.' 

[Page 1, clause 4.1(viii)] — Add the following at the end: 

'for continuous furnace the reference charge dimensions, material specification and charge weight are to be 
furnished.' 

[Page 1, clause 4.1(ix)] — Add the following at the end: 
'type of quenching if any, with quenching media and system' . 

[Page 1, clause 4.1(x)] — Add the following at the end: 
'Natural air cooling, forced air cooling or water spraying after the heat treatment if required.' 



(MTD 26) 



Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 



Industrial Fuel-Fired Furnaces Sectional Committee, MTD 26 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard ( Part 1 ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 15 December 
1989, after the draft finalized by the Industrial Fuel-Fired Furnace Sectional Committee had 
been approved by the Metallurgical Engineering Division Council. 

Industrial Furnaces for various applications including heat treatment are required to be designed 
and supplied for individual applications. In order that the purchaser is able to project his needs 
and to help the manufacturers of furnace in providing the optimum furnace to the user, it is 
important that the purchaser spells out his requirements explicitly. This Part 1 of the code would 
help the purchaser in preparing his tender documents for his needs. 

The general supply conditions will differ depending on whether the supplier is asked only to 
supply the material for the furnace or to supply the material together with the project design 
with or without the operational assembly and installation of furnace. This part of the Code 
will enable the purchaser to be specific about such requirements while placing orders/floating 
tender enquiries. 

This Code is being prepared in following three parts to facilitate the ordering, supply and 
acceptance testing of the industrial furnaces; 

Part 1 Purchaser's data sheet for ordering of industrial furnaces 
Part 2 Supplier's data sheet for the supply of industrial furnaces 
Part 3 Testing and acceptance of industrial furnaces 



IS 12826 ( Part 1 ) : 1989 



Indian Standard 



ORDERING, TESTING AND ACCEPTANCE 

OF INDUSTRIAL FURNACES — 

CODE OF PRACTICE 

PART 1 PURCHASER'S DATA SHEET FOR ORDERING 
INDUSTRIAL FURNACES 



1 SCOPE 

1.1 This standard covers the various parameters 
that the purchasers of industrial furnaces should 
specify in their instructions for calling of tender 
and placing the orders for industrial furnaces. 

2 REFERENCE 

2.1 The Indian Standard listed below is a 
necessary adjunct to this standard: 

IS 8849: 1978 Glossary of terms relating to 
fuel-fired industrial furnaces 

3 TERMINOLOGY 

3.1 For the purpose of this standard, the defi- 
nitions given in IS 8849 : 1978 shall apply. 

4 INFORMATION TO BE GIVEN IN THE 
TENDER DOCUMENTS 

4.1 The purchaser shall indicate the parameters 
necessary to identify the furnace to be ordered 
and shall indicate following parametrers in 
particular: 

i) Type of furnace required ( if already 
established in use). 

ii) Details of materials/change to be treated 
( characteristics, dimensions and weight 
of the individual pieces, thicknesses, 
etc ). Enclose dimensional sketch/ 
drawing wherever possible. 

iii) Type of treatment, that is, heating/ 
reheating, heat treatment, etc. 

iv) In case of heat treatment, specific time 
versus temperature cycle. 

v) Desired furnace atmosphere, namely, 
air atmosphere or any other extraneously 
prepared atmosphere. Specify the type 
of such atmosphere. 

vi) Method of working required ( conti- 
nuous/intermittent campaigns, with 
indication of the daily or weekly time 
of work or length of the campaigns ). 



vii) Required production 



- Batch loading 
capacity in kg 
or t 

Output rate kg, 
h, or t/h 



viii) Source of heat to be provided (solid, 
liquid or gaseous fuel or electrical 
energy, etc). 

ix) Types and characteristics of the fuels to 
be used. 

x) Characteristics of the electrical current 
available ( thermal traction and 
services ). 

xi) Any heat recuperation required ( hot 
air, hot gas, etc). Extent of pre-heat 
temperature for air/gas can be specified. 

xii) Desired safety arrangements. 

xiii) Available spaces and locations, enclose 
layout wherever possible with utility 
locations. 

xiv) Accessories required ( for service of fuels, 
cooling, supply, loading and unloading 
of materials). 

xv) Type of controls/regulation 

a) Manual/automatic controlling of 
process parameters 

b) Preference 

xvi) Automation systems, if any. 

xvii) Existing restrictions ( of space, unload- 
ing, gas, fuses, dust, vibrations, noise, 
etc ). 

xviii) Location of the installation ( locality, 
characteristics of the terrain, approaches 
and communications ). 

xix) Ambient conditions ( atmospheric 
pressure, temperature, relative humidity 
and wind velocity taken as reference 
for possible contractual guarantee and, 
if necessary, their limit values). 



IS 12826 ( Part 1 ) : 1989 



xx) Any conditions of installation that have 
influence on the movement of air around 
the furnace, sources of heat in the 
neighbourhood, etc. 

xxi) Limits/scope of the supply. 

xxii) Assistance required from supplier ( erec- 
tion and assembly starting, any techno- 
logical assistance, etc). 

xxiii) Place and mode of consigning and trans- 
port of the matrials of the installation 



and its parts, insurance and risks. 

xxiv) Quantity and characteristics of the 
available water, light, gas, steam, etc, 

xxv) Availability of labour and erection 
equipment ( tools/tackles, etc ). 

xxvi) Hygienic requirements of the place of 
work. 

xxvii) Supply and delivery deadlines. 

xxviii) Performance Guarantee Parameters. 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards 
Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products 
covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with 
the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality 
control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked 
products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safe- 
guard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted 
to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



Bareaa of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards AcU 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification 
of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in 
any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in 
the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, tyfie or 
grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed ro the Director ( Publications ), 
BIS. 

Revision of Indian Standards 

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, 
are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in 
possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent 
to BIS giving the following reference: 

Doc: No. MTD26(3I21 ) 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 

Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



Headquarters: 



Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones : 33i Oi 31, 331 13 75 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 

( Common to all Officei ) 

Regional Offices: 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg /331 01 31 

NEW DELHI 110002 1331 13 75 

Eastern : 1/14 G.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola 37 86 62 

CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 2 18 43 

Southern : G.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 41 29 16 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 6 32 92 95 

BOMBAY 400093 

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. 
COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD, GUWAHATL 
HYDERABAD- JAIPUR. KANPUR. PATNA. TRIVANDRUM. 



Printed at Arcee Preii. New Delhi, India 



