IS 15642 (Parts 1 and 2)r :2rrr006 rreaffirmed 2011

(Reaffirmed 2011)
-&

TrFr'Fm

.,* m W41il +i WRlfkb"r mdhJ3fa-ERii
Indian Standard

WR7#vmw

QUICK METHODS FOR DETECTION OF ADULTERANTS/CONTAMINANTS IN COMMON FOOD PRODUCTS

ICS 67.050

0 BIS 2006

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

February

2006

Price Group 5

Woodgrains, Starches and Ready-to-Eat

Foods Sectional Committee,

FAD 16

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Foodgrains, Starches and Ready-to-Eat Foods Sectional Committee had been approved by the Food and Agriculture Division Council. Food is an essential and basic requirement for nourishing and sustenance of human life. Preparation of food products from the raw agriculture produce to their final stage ofconsufiption is a big business worldover. Food is adulterated by unscrupulous persons from time immemorial and is continued even today for certain commercial benefits. With the development of food science and technology, the techniques of adulteration have also changed and contamination is often observed due to unhygienic practices, chemicalization of technology, etc. Food adulteration may lead to innumerable health hazards. Food adulteration is thus a punishable offence under the provisions of the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954 and the Rules made thereunder. Consumer awareness regarding the quality of food and alertness in detection of common type of food adulteration can help in arresting this menace and provide a healthy and wholesome food to the consumers. Therefore, simple methods to detect adulteration/contamination of various foods at the household level will be useful to the consumers to select a right type of food or to avoid foods of doubtful quality. Keeping this in view this standard has been formulated. This standard includes methods involving visual examination, physical methods and methods involving the use of certain chemicals and reagents. Part 1 of this standard covers methods where only visual examination or physical tests are involved while Part 2 covers tests where simple chemical reactions are involved. The test methods contained in this standard are very simple and quick, thereby making them useful for school children, housewives, social workers, etc, or any other person for detecting food adulteration and contamination. Based on these methods, certain quick test kits can also be developed which maybe used by schools for imparting basic education in detecting adulteration or contaminant ion or by housewives, women organizations or-voluntary consumer organization for detecting adulteration in foods. However, these quick methods are only indicative of possible adulteratiordcontamination in food items, and need to be confirmed by other detailed methods. While formulating this standard, assistance has been drawn from the information provided by the National Institute of Nutrition, Hyderabad, Ramakrishna Bajaj -- CFBP Consumer Education and Testing Center, Mumbai and CONCERT, Chennai a Voluntary Consumer Organization. Annex A, which is informative standard. only, contains the botanical names of the plants which find reference in this

IS 15642 (Part 1) :2006

Indian Standard

QUICK METHODS FOR DETECTION OF ADULTERANTS/CONTAMINANTS IN COMMON FOOD PRODUCTS
PART 1 PHYSICAL
1 SCOPE This section prescribes physical methods for detection of adulterantslcontaminants in common food products. 2 APPARATUS a) b) c) d) e) f) g) Cotton -- absorbant; Dropper; Filter paper -- ordinary or blotting paper; Forceps; Glass beakers -- 100 ml and 250 ml capacity; Magnet -- a powerful magnet; A4agnz$ing glass -- with a handle of about 7.5 cm length and having magnification of 10 x; Matchstick; and with lactometer jar. Foodgrains meant for human consumption shall be fkee from poisonous and harmful seeds like Datura, Argemone mexicana, Khesari (Lathyrus sativus) and Khesari dal in any form. Argemone mexicana seeds contain alkaloids-sangunarine and dihydro sangunarine which are toxic and cause epidemic dropsy. Khesari seeds are flat and yellow and light grey in colour. Khesari/Khesari dal contains a toxic amino acid BOAA (Beta oxalyl amino alanine) which causes crippling paralysis. Datura seeds are intoxicants. 3.3.2 Procedure Spread about 25 g of foodgrains on a white paper. Using a magnifying glass visually examine the grains closel y. Datura seeds look like chilly seeds, Argemone seeds Iook like mustard seeds but it contains a spike and grainy rough surface while mustard seeds have a smooth surface. Also Argemone seeds are black in colour. When crushed, mustard seeds are yellowish inside while Argemone seeds are white. Khesari Dal can be detected by their physical appearance which is wedge shaped having a slant cm one side and appear square as compared to other dais. 3.4 Detection of Iron Yilings in Rava and Tea Dust 3.4.1 General

METHODS

3.2.2 Procedure Spread approximately 50 g of bigger size and 25 g of small size woodgrains on a white paper. Using a magnifying glass examine the grains closely. The ergot affected grains will be purple black in colour and slightly longer in size than the normal size. These can be separated out using forceps, 3.2.3 The ergot affected grains can also be detected by taking 20 percent common salt solution in a beaker and adding some affected grains to this. The ergot affected grains will float on the top while the healthy grains wi 11settle at the bottom. 3.3 Detection of Datura Seeds/Argenlone Khesari and Khesari Dal in Woodgrains 3.3.1 General Seeds/

h) j)

Milk lactometer

3 TEST METHODS 3.1 Detection 3.1.1 General of Foreign Matter

Foodgrains meant for human consumption shall be whole or broken kernels of cereals and pulses. Small stones, marble chips identical to woodgrains and pulses are mixed or get mixed, if good agricultural practices are not followed. Rodent hair and excreta of animals are also found in foodgrains, if not properly stored. These inorganic foreign matters may irritate the mucus membrane of human digestive system. Similarly, the excreta of animal origin may carry harrnfhl bacteria. 3.1.2 Procedure

Spread approximately 100 g of smaller size foodgrains like rice, ragi, bajra, etc, and 250 g of bigger size foodgrains like wheat, pulses, oil seeds, etc, on a white paper. Using the rnagnifiing glass visually examine the foodgrains closely. Any foreign matter in foodgrains will be clearly visible and can be picked up by using forceps. 3.2 Detection 3.2.1 General of Ergot Effected Grains

Wheat and bajra are affected by ergot which is a fungus and can liberate toxins in the affected grains. 1

Suji or rava means a product obtained by grinding and

1S 15642 (Part 1) :2006 bolting of wheat free from rodent hair and excreta while tea means, a product exclusively obtained from the leaves, buds and tender stems of plant Camellia genus. Iron tilings get into rava and tea during the manufacturing process. Due to the constant wear and tear of the machinery, fine particles of iron may enter into the food product. If the iron particles go unnoticed it may damage the digestive system and, therefore, shall be removed before the consumption of the food. 3.4.2 Procedure while chicory powder will sink with a brownish colour to the bottom of the beaker. 3.7 Detection 3.7.1 General Cinnamon .(Dalchini) means the dried pieces of the inner bark of Cinnamomum zey[anicum Blume. Cassicl (Rj) means dried pieces of bark of Cinnamomum cassia blume. Offering or substituting Cassia bark in place of CiHnamon, (which is a common trade name) is an act of deceiving the consumer. Cassia can be sold only in the name of Cassia and not as Cinnamon. 3.7.2 Procedure Cinnamon barks are very thin and can be rolled. It can be rolled around a pencil or pen. It has a distinct smell. Whereas cassia bark are very thick and stiff and cannot be rolled. Cassia bark comprises of several layers in between the rough outer and inner most smooth layers. On examination of the bark closely, a clear distinction can be made. 3.8 Detection 3.8.1 General Black pepper is a common spice used in household both for flavoring and for its medicinal value. IL is obtained from the dried berries of Piper nigrum L. It is commonly adulterated with dried Pappaya fruit seeds which have similar appearance. Substituting pepper with pappaya seeds is an act of adulteration. Apart from financial loss, a consumer may not get the value of medicinal effect, which he normally expects fi-om this valuable spice. "Inaddition, the pappay%seed may create or add to the digestive problems. 3.8.2 Procedure Spread the spice on a white paper. Closely, observe the appearance of the sample, using the magnifying glass. Black pepper is brown to black in colour. It has wrinkled surface and has a characteristic smell and pungent taste. The pappaya seed has shrunken smooth surface and ovai shape. It is greenish brown or blackish brown in colour and has a repulsive flavour. 3.9 Detection of Added Colour and Brick Powder in Chilli Powder 3.9.1 General Chilli powder (Lal Mirchi) means the powder obtained by grinding clean dried chilly pods of Capsicnm jhtescens L/Capsicum annum. Chilli powder is widely used as a condiment in every household. To increase the bulk and to appear better, chilli powder is adulterated with brick powder and water soluble coal 2 of Pappaya Seeds in Black Pepper of Cassia Bark in Cinnamon red

Spread about 50-100 g of ravaltea dust on a white paper. Plough the magnet through the food item several times. The iron tilings will stick to the magnet and can be easily detected. 3.5 Detection of Artificially Mixed with Genuine Tea 3.5.1 General Coloured Tea Dust

Tea being a cheap beverage and a product of mass consumption has a potential of adulteration. Genuine tea is mixed with the used tea which is collected from tea shops. This tea collected from the tea shops is sprinkled with water soluble coal tar dyes and dried under sun or air and mixed with the genuine tea. Tea is also sometimes coloured to get a dark coloured decoction for giving an impression that the tea is of good quality. 3.5.2 Procedure

Take about 5 .g of tea leaves/dust and place it in the center of a filter paper. Using the dropper, add water drop by drop at the heap of the tea leavesldust. If the genuine tea is adulterated with a coloured tea, water will dissolve the added colour and leave streaks of colour on the filter paper. 3.6 Detection 3.6.1 General of Chicory Powder in Coffee

Coffee powder means a material made from freshly roasted and ground pure coffee beans while chicory powder means the material prepared by roasting and grinding of cleaned and dried chips of chicory roots. The addition of chicory to the coffee is not allowed unless the product is labelled as coffee-chicory mixture. The chicory root has a characteristic structure and dissolves in cold water due to the presence of inulin. This feature can be made use of in distinguishing chicory from coffee. 3.6.2 Procedure

Take about 50 ml of water in a beaker and sprinkle the doubtful coffee powder on the surface of water. Pure coffee powder will float on the surface of the water

1S 15642 (Part 1) :2006 tar colour respectively. The colour is also added to mask the added starch and to increase the brightness in the case of a substandard chilli powder. The coal tar colour may be injurious to health. The brick powder may irritate the stomach and damage the teeth and intestinal lining. 3.9.2 Procedure 3.12 Detection 3.12.1 General of Sugar and Water in Honey

Sprinkle 25 g of chilli powder on the surface of water in a glass beaker. Artificial colorants will descend as coloured streaks. Brick powder will settle down at the bottom due to its heaviness. 3.10 3.10.1 Detec-tion-of Dried Maize Fibres in Saffron General

Pure honey is a natural sweet substance produced by honey bees from the nectar of blossoms or from secretions of plants which honey bees coIlect, transform and store in honey combs for ripening. However,.tbere is a common practice to adulterate honey with sugar dissolved in water. Though it may not cause any harmful health effect, yet it remarns an unethical way ofnmking commercial profits. 3.12.2 Procedure

Saffron means the dried stigmata or tops of styles of ('rocus sativus. Saffron is a food classified under spices and condiments. It is one of the costlier natural flavoring and colouring agent with rare nutritional quality. Due to its high cost, it is adulterated with dyed tendrils of maize cob and coloured paper strips. 3.10.2 Procedure

Take some cotton and make a wick out of it. Dip the wick in the honey and burn it with the help of matchstick. The cotton wick, dipped in honey adulterated with water and sugar will either not burn or burn with a cracking sound. 3.13 Detection 3.13.1 General of Artificial Coloured Green Peas

Take some saffron and spread it on a piece of paper and observe closely with the help of the magnifying glass. `rhe magnified structure of the plant part like stigma, style can be easily identified while the paper strips will be seen flat and thin. The genuine saffron will not break easily while the spurious saffron will break. Also take some saffron sample and dissolve it in water taken in a beaker. The separation of colour wi II indicate the presence of spurious saffron prepared by soaking maize cob in sugar and colouring it with coal tar colour. 3.1 I Detection 3. i 1.1 General Water is the most common adulterant in milk. [ts addition straight away adds to the volume and goes unnoliced because there is no change in colour of the milk because of its addition. However, pure milk has a normal specific gravity between ] .030 and 1.034 at room temperature (27 C'C).Any addition of water to milk will disturb the specific gravity of milk. This fact can be used to detect adulteration of milk with water. 3.11.2 Procedure of Water in Milk

Green peas in their natural form may vary from light green to dark green in colour. However, to make them look fresh and attractive the peas are artificially coloured with coal tar dyes. Sometimes, they are coloured with non-permitted dyes like malachite green, cong,o red and yellow aniline dyes. 3.13.2 Procedure . .

Take little amount of green peas in a 250 ml beaker add water to it and mix well. Let it stand for half an hour. Clear separation of colour in water indicates adulteration. 3.14 Detection Sound Cloves 3.14. I General Cloves (Laung) means the dried, unopened flower buds of Eugerria caryophy//zfs (C. ,sprengeo. Cloves have characteristic smell of Eugenol. Genuine Clove contains not less than 15 percent v/w volatile oil which has medicinal value. It is used as a strong natural flavoring agent in cookery. The abundant volatile oi I is extracted folly or partially and the exhausted with genuine ones. 3.14.2 Procedure cloves are mixed of Exhausted/Deoiled Cloves in

Take milk in a Iactometer jar and slowly immerse the Iactometer in milk. The Iactometer reading which is indicative of the specific gravity of the milk shall be between 1.030 and 1.034. The Iactometer reading less than 1.030 is an indication of the addition of water in milk.

Using the magnifying glass, observe the individually spread cloves closely. Exhausted cloves can be identified by its small size and shrunken appearance. The characteristic pungent taste of genuine cloves is less pronounced in exhausted cloves.

1S `15642 (Part 3.15 Detection Silver Leaves 3.15.1 General

1) :2006 of Aluminium Leaves Being Sold as 3.15.2 Procedure

Pure silver leaves in a very fine thinness are extensively used to give good appearance to Indian sweets as wel I as are used in paan (betel leaves). Silver leaves have some medicinal values also. However, because of silver leaves being costly, aluminium leaves obtained to very fine thinness are often passed on as silver leaves.

Take some portion of dw leave and crush it between two fingers. Pure silver leaves will be easily crushed and crumble t,o the powder form while aluminium leave will only break into smaller shreds. Further, take the suspected silver leaves and make it in the form of a ball and burn it with the help of a flame. Pare silver leaves burn away completely leaving glistening balls whi Ie aluminium leaves are reduced to grey ash.

IS 15642 (Part 2) :2006

Indian Standard

QUICK METHODS FOR DETECTION OF ADULTERANTS/CONTAMINANTS IN COMMON FOOD PRODUCTS
PART 2 CHEMICAL
1 SCOPE This section prescribes chemical methods for detection ofadulterants/contam inants in common food products. 2 APPARATUS a) b) c) d) e) f) :) h) Cotton; Filter paper -- ordinary; Gas burner/spirit Litmus paper; Matchstick; Milk Iactometer with Iactometer jar; Tea spoon; and Test (ube -- 150 x 18 mm. 4 TEST METHODS 3 REAGENTS a) b) Acetonitrile Reagent -- prepared by mixing acetonitrile and water in 7:3 ratio; Alcoholic Potash -- prepared by dissolving 8.6 g of potassium hydroxide in 100 ml alcohol; Ammonium Molybdate Solution -- prepared by dissolving 1 g ammonium molybdate in 100 ml concentrated sulphuric acid; Antimony Trichloride -- dissolving 40 g of antimony 100 ml of chloroform; Chloroform; Concentrated Concentrated hydrochloric nitric acid; acid; prepared tricbloride by in 4.1 Detection of Non-edible Gum/Resin in Asafoetida (Ifing) . 4.1.1 General Pure asafoetida gives a milky white solution in water. However, if the asafoetida is adulterated with other resins, the adulterants have to be detected by certain chemical methods. Colophony is a resin obtained as a residue after the distillation of turpentine oil. This is one of the adulterants in asafoetida. Colophon! forms a coloured complex when shaken with rectified spirit and ferric chloride. 4.1.2 Procedure 4.1.2.1 Method I lamp; s) t) u) v) w)

METHODS
@ Potassium Chromate Solution -- prepared by dissolving 5 g of potassium chromate in 100 ml water; Potassium Iodide -- prepared by dissolving 10 g of potassium iodide in 100 ml water; Recti~ed Spirit -- 95 percent ethyl alcohol; Resorcinol Solution -- about 2 percent; 1g Rosa/it Acid -- prepared by dissolving rosalic acid in 100 ml of ethyl alcohol; Silver Nitrate Solution -- 0.1 N; and Starch Solution -- freshly prepared dissolving 1 g starch in 100 ml water boiling it. by and

r)

c)

d)

e) f)

g) 11) Dilute Hydrochloric Acid -- 1:1 {prepared from concentrated hydrochloric acid); 1) k) m) Ferric Chlorideprepared by dissolving 6 g ferric chloride in 100 ml of water; Hexane; Iodine Solution -- prepared by dissolving 12.69 g of iodine and 24 g of potassium iodine in I 1itre water; p-Dimethyl Amino Berualdehyde 1.6 percent in ethyl alcohol 10 percent hydrochloric acid; Petroleum ether; 5 Reagent -- containing

Powder a gram of asafoetida and take it in a test-tube. Add one tea spoon of water. Mix thoroughly by shaking. Milky white solution with no sediments represents pure asafoetida. Further, a small amount of powdered asafoetida, taken in a spoon and burnt on a gas flame, burns with a bright flame like camphor, which is an indication of pure asafoetida. 4.1.2.2 Method II

n)

P)

Take 1 g of asafoetida, powder it thoroughly and trike it in a test-tube. Add some rectified spirit and filter/ decant the solution. Take 5 ml of filtrate and add few drops of ferric chloride soIution. Olive green colour shows the presence of adulteration with other resins.

[S 15642 (Part 2) :2006 4.2 Detection of Starch in Milk KIIoya, Butter and Cheese 4.2.1 Genera[ Products Like 4.4.2 Procedure

Starch is a common adulterant in milk products as it gets easily mixed up with these products because of the similarity in the colour. Starch adds to the weight of the products, and is, therefore, a cheap source of adulteration. The adulteration of these products with starch can be detected by addition of iodine to these products which results in the formation of a blue colour. The blue colour is due to the formation of an inclusion complex between iodine and the amylose. The amylose coils into the spiral and the iodine molecule aligns within the centre of this spiral and causes light absorption which gives a blue colour. 4.2.2 Procedure

`rake 5 ml of milk in a test-tube and add 5 ml of p-dimethyl amino benza]dehyde reagent to it. The appearance of a distinct yellow colour indicates the presence of added urea. The appearance of slight yellow colour may be ignored which may be because of the presence of natural urea in milk. 4.5 Detection of Sodium Chloride in Milk 4.5.1 General Lactometer is a simple device which can be used to detect adulteration of milk with water. Addition of water alters the density of milk which can be read on the Iactometer scale. Hence, to increase the density of milk, adulterant like sodium chloride is added. 4.5.2 Procedure Take 2 ml of milk in a test-tube and add O.I ml of 5 percent potassium chromate solution and 2 ml of 0.1 N silver nitrate to it. The appearance of a yellow colour indicates the presence of added sodium chloride in the milk while the appearance of a brick red precipitate indicates the absence of added sodium chloride in the milk. 4.6 Detection of Metanil Yellow in Sweets 4.6.1 General To make a sweet attractive, various colours are added to sweet preparations. As per the PFA Act, onlinatural food colours or permitted artificial food colours can be used in sweets. Metanil yellow is a cheap textile dye which is commonly used in colouring sweets which amounts to adulteration. The metanil yellow is carcinogenic. 4.6.2 Procedure Take about 5 g of the sweet sample in a test-tube and add hot water to bring the sample in pure solution. Separate the coloured matter by filtration and add few drops of concentrated hydrochloric acid. The appearance ofa pinkish red coiour shows the presence of metanil yellow. 4.7 Detection of Washing Soda in Bur(l Sugar 4.7.1 General Bura sugar is obtained by grinding plantation white sugar and finds extensive use in sweetmeat preparations and also for direct consumption. Its white colour makes it easily adulterable with washing soda which is harmfhl to the body, if consumed. 4.7.2 Procedure There w-e two methods by which presence of washing soda in ha-a sugar can be detected. 6

Take about 2 g of milk product in a test-tube and add about 5 ml water to it. Boil for a few minutes on the gas burner. COOI and add iodine solution to the testtube. The formation of a blue coloration shows the presence of starch. 4.3 Detection 4.3.1 General of Neutralizers in Milk

Milk sold in the cities is being transported from a longer distance. If the milk is not transported at a low temperature, there is every likelihood of its getting spoilt because of bacterial action. Neutralizers are added in the milk to avoid spoilage of milk but their addition to milk is not permitted under PFA Ru/e.s. Common neutralizers used are sodium hydroxide, sodium carbonate and sodium bicarbonate. The presence of neutralizers can be detected by use of alcoholic rosalic acid solution, Addition of this reagent givesa red ~olour if bicarbonates and carbona~s are present while a deep rose red colour -will appear, if sodium hydroxide has been used as a neutralizer. 4.3.2 Procedure

Take 5 ml of milk in a test tube and add 5 ml of rectified spirit to it. Then add four drops of rosalic acid solution, The appearance of a red colour, or a deep rose red colour indicates the presence ofa neutralizer while a brownish coloration shows absence of any neutralizer. 4.4 Detection 4.4.1 General of Extraneous Urea in Milk

Ahhough addition of urea is prohibited under the PFA Ru/es, still it is added to the milk by unscrupulous persons to increase its viscosity thereby giving a feeling of rich milk.

IS 15642 (Part 2) :2006 4.7.2.1 Method I hydrochloric acid. Add a little sugar and shake vigorously. Let it stand for 5 min. The appearance of crimson red colour shows the presence of vanaspati. 4.10 Detection of Mashed Starches in Ghee/Butter 4.10.1 General Potatoes and Other

Take about half tea spoon of bura sugar in test-tube and add some water to bring it to solution. Dip a strip of red .Iitmus paper in the solution. The appearance of a blue colour on the litmus paper shows the presence of washing soda. 4.7.2.2 Method II

Take about half tea spoon of bura sugar in a test-tube and add few drops of 1:1 hydrochloric acid. The immediate appearance of small bubbles (effervescence) indicates the presence of washing soda in bura sugar. 4.8 Detection of Chalk Jaggery/Common Salt 4.8.1 General bura sugar, to increase of calcium is injurious Powder in Bura Sugar/

Mashed potatoes and edible starches are one of the adulterants in ghee/butter as these, without hampering the colour appeal ofghee/butter will add to the weight of gheelbutter. 4.10.2 Procedure

Chalk powder is added to food items like jaggery and common salt as an adulterant the weight. Chalk powder is carbonates which is insoluble in water and if consumed to health. 4.8.2 Procedure

Take some ghee/butter in a test-tube and warm it. Add few drops of iodine solution to the sample. The appearance of a blue colour will indicate the presence of mashed potatoes and edible starches to gheelbutter. 4.11 Detection 4.11.1 General of Argemone Oil in Edible Oils

There are two methods for detection of chalk powder in adulterated foods like bura sugar(jaggery/common salt. 4.8.2.1 Method 1

Argemone oil is a common adulterant m edible oils particularly mustard oil. Argemone oil contains the alkaloids sanguanarine and dihydro sanguanarine which are toxic and cause epidemic dropsy. 4.11.2 Procedure 4.11.2.1 Method I

Dissolve about 10-15 gof a sample in water in a beaker. Allow to settle for 5 min. The unadulterated samples will dissolve completely while the presence of any sediment at the bottom of the beaker will indicate the presence of chalk powder in the sample. 4.8.2.2 A4ethod II

Take small quantity of oil (4 to 5 ml) in a test-tube and add an equal quantity of concentrated nitric acid. Shake carefully avoiding any contact with the skin. The appearance of a red or reddish brown colour in the acid layer indicates the presence of argemone oil. 4.11 .2.2 Method II

Take some sample of the food item to be examined in a test-tube and add few drops of 1:1 hydrochloric acid. The appearance of bubbles (effervescence) will indicate the presence of chalk powder in the sample. 4.9 Detection 4.9.1 General of Vanaspati.in Ghee and Butter

Take small quantity of oil (4 to 5 ml) in a test-tube add some dilute hydrochloric acid to it. Mix well add few drops .of ferric chloride solution. appearance of reddish brown precipitate indicates presence of argemone oil. 4.12 Detection 4.12.1 General of Mineral Oil in Edible Oils

and and The th~

Ghee and butter has been used in the Indian homes from times immemorial. The introduction ofva}~aspati into the Indian market has opened ways for adulteration of ghee and butter with vanaspati. The presence of vana.spati in ghee and butter can be checked indirectly by checking the presence of sesalme oil which is normally one of the constituents of oils going into the manufacture of vanaspati. 4.9.2 Procedure

Mineral oil because of its colorless property is an easy adulterant with edible oils. Its presence in edible oil can be detected by a simple chemical reaction. Mineral oil which originates from petroleum are not saponifiable by alcoholic potassium hydroxide. They also give turbidity on addition of water. 4.12.2 Procedure

Take a little amount of melted ghee or butter (1 to 2 g) in a test-tube and add equal amount of concentrated

Take about 2 ml of the sample in a test-tube and add 2 ml of alcoholic potash to it. Warm'the sample on a

1S 15642 (Part

2) :2006 in wax polishes. However, it has also been found that it is being used to give shineness to the chilli pods which ultimately find its way into chilli powder. 4.16.2 Procedure

low flame burner for about 10 min and add water to it. The appearance of turbidity shows the presence of mineral oil. 4.13 Detection 4.13.1 General of of Karmja Oil (Ptmgam Oil)

Karanja oil (Pungam oil) is a cheap source adulteration in mustard oil and groundnut oil. 4.13.2 Procedure

Take a little amount of mustard oil or groundnut oil in a test-tube and add few drops of antimony trichloride solution in chloroform and mix well. The appearance of a canary yellow or orange colour indicates the presence of karanja oil in mustard oil or groundnut oil. 4.14 Detection 4.14.1 General of Castor Oil in Edible Oils

Take 1 g of suspected chilli powder in a test-tube and add 2 ml ofhexane to it and shake well. Let it settle for some time and decant the clear sohrtion to another test tube. Add 2 ml of aceto-nitrile reagent and shake well. The appearance of a red colour in the lower aceto-nitrile layer is an indication of the presence of Sudan 111. 4.17 Detection of Presence of Iodine in the Iodized Salt 4.17.1 General

Castor oil is another source of adulteration in edible oils. It gets mixed with edible oils very well and is not not iceable because of its colour. 4.14.2 Procedure

Because of the medicinal reasons, ionization of the edibIe salt is being carried out in the country. As per the current regulation in force, salt containing less than 30 -ppm of iodine is considered to be adulterated. 4.17.2 Procedure

Take 1 ml of the sample and 10 ml of acidified petroleum ether to it. Shake for 10 min and add a drop of ammonium molybedate to it. The appearance of a white turbidity shows the presence of castor oil. 4.15 4.15.1 Detection General of Added Dyes in Turmenic Powder

Take about 5 g of salt in a test-tube and add 5 ml of water. Add 10 ml of 10 percent sulphuric acid solution. To this, add 10 ml of 10 percent potassium iodide solution followed by few drops of starch solution. Appearance of a blue colour indicates that the salt is iodized. 4.18 Detection 4.18.1 General of Chicory Powder in Coffee

Yellow aniline dyes are added to turmeric powder as these are cheap source of adulteration and go unnoticed in its physical form. 4.15.2 Procedure

Take some turmeric powder in a test-tube and add water to bring it to the solution form. Add 1 to 2 ml of rectified spirit. An immediate separation of yellow colour in the rectified spirit will indicate the presence of added dyes. +16 4,16.1 Detection General of Sudan III in Chilli Powder

Coffee powder means a material made from freshly roasted and ground pure coffee beans while chicory powder means the material prepared by roasting and grinding of cleaned and dried chips of chicory roots. The addition of chicory to the coffee is not allowed unless the product is labelled as coffee-chicory mixture. While a simple method involving physical means is described in Section I, another method involving a chemical reaction is described in 4.18.2. 4.18.2 Take about 2 g of the sample in a test-tube with 25 ml of water and boil. Filter and collect about 10 ml of the filtrate in another test-tube. Add 2 ml of resorcinol solution and boil. Appearance of a cherry red colour indicates the presence of chicory.

Sudan III is an artificial colour which finds much use

8

IS 15642 (Parts

1 and 2) :2006

ANNEX

A

(F<)iwol"(,q
BOTANICAL N No. (1) i) ii) iii) iv) v) vi) vii) viii) ix) x) xi) xii) xiii) xiv') xv) Ivi) xvii) xviii) xix) xx) xxi) xxii) xxiii) NAMES OF THE 1'LANTS REFERRED .--. Common Nu171c (2) Argemone Asafoet ida (Hing) Bajru Black pepper Cassia (Tej) Chicory Chilli Cinnamon Clove Co f'ffe .!W1lIJ"U .Jaggery Khc.rk-i dul Maize Papaya Peas Pot atoes Pun_gam oi I Rava Saffron Tea Turmeric Wheat (Da/c/ii17i) --_ Botonica[ Name (3) Argenrone mmicam Fcrul[z,fbcti(ia Pcnnisctutn Cinnamomum Cichoriun typhoideum tamla Piper liigtwm it7tyhus IN THE STANDARD

C'apsicwm annuum C'innanlumun7 zeylanicutn SJcygiun7 arornaticum Cc!fltia arabica and cojjba caenophora Lklura innoxia S( lc`charum (!~t'ivarum Lolhyrus sa(ivus zi?a nlu]ls ( `arica ixzpaya Pi,~um sativutn Solarium tuvero.sum Pongamia pinnata Trit icum uestiwtn Crocus sutiws Cam illia si17enLTiiT or Thea sinensis Curcuma domist icu Triticmn aes~ivum

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau harmonious development of the activities of standardization, and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BI S has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments `BIS Cataiogue' and `Standards : Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed of comments. Standards are also reviewed such review indicates that no changes are up for revision. Users of Indian Standards or edition by referring to the latest issue of oj_ Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote marking and quality certification of goods

from DOC: No. FAD 16 (163 1).

Amendments Amend No.

Issued Since Publication Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters : Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone 23237617 { 23233841 23378499,23378561 { 23378626,23379120 S26038 ~26092 22541216,22541442 { 22542519,22542315 28329295,28327858 { 28327891,.28327892 43 85

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones :23230131,23233375,2323 9402 Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Nlarg NEW DELHI 110002 : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi KOLKATA 700054 : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022

Eastern

Northern

Southern

: C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600

13

Western

: Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093

Branches

: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHI BANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. NALAGARH. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. VISAKHAPATNAM,
Pmted at Prabhat Offset Press, New Ddhi-2

