INRI AAF IS 14681 : 2021 
Indian Standard 


saa Tet — gufa, afea vat 
FAUSATSHeA ae hr Set tfa 


( Teel JAGET ) 


Automotive Vehicles — Fuel Tanks 
for Two Wheelers, Three Wheelers 
and Quadricycles 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 43.140 


© BIS 2021 


anda AM Sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Teg TH HM, ay Reef — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


March 2021 Price Group 5 


Automotive Body, Chassis, Accessories, Springs and Suspension Systems Sectional Committee, TED 06 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft finalized by 
the Automotive Body, Chassis, Accessories, Springs and Suspension Systems Sectional Committee had been 
approved by the Transport Engineering Division Council. 


This standard was first published in 1999. The revision of this standard has been taken up to align with other 
International Standards. The first revision of this standard has been aligned with the Global Technical Regulation 
GTR 17, formulated by UNECE, for which India has voted in favour of Further, the committee also proposed that 
the technical requirements of EU Regulation EU 44/2014 shall also be included appropriately in this standard. 


In preparation of this standard considerable assistance has been derived from: 
a) EU 44/2014 as amended by EU/2016/1824 & EU/2018/295. 


b) Global technical regulation No. 17 ‘Global technical regulation on the measurement procedure 
for two- or three-wheeled motor vehicles equipped with a combustion engine with regard to the 
crankcase and evaporative emissions’ An additional Hydraulic test for fuel tank is added to align 
with GTR 17. The technical specifications for type approval and some editorial corrections are also 
incorporated for better clarity in this standard. 

The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex C. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 14681 : 2021 


Indian Standard 


AUTOMOTIVE VEHICLES — FUEL TANKS FOR TWO 
WHEELERS, THREE WHEELERS AND QUADRICYCLES 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard specifies requirements of fuel tanks 
for following vehicle categories which are defined in 
IS 14272 : 2011. 


1.2 L1, L2 and L5 category of vehicles. 


1.3 L7 category of vehicles with fuel tank capacity up 
to 15 litres. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions which 
through reference in this text, constitute provision of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 


IS No. Title 
14272: 2011 Automotive vehicles — Types — 
Terminology 
15547: 2005 Automotive vehicles — Plastic fuel 
tank for four wheelers 
3 DEFINITIONS 


For the purpose of this standard, the following terms 
and definitions shall apply. 


3.1 Tank — It is the tank(s) designed to contain the 
liquid fuel, as defined in 3.2 used primarily for the 
vehicle excluding its accessories (filler pipe if it is a 
separate element), gauge, connections to the engine or 
to compensate interior excess pressure, etc. 


3.2 Liquid Fuel — It is a fuel which is liquid in normal 
ambient conditions. 


3.3 Type of vehicle with regard to fuel storage’ means a 
category of vehicles which do not differ in such essential 
respects as shape, size and material characteristics, and 
the method of mounting and location of the fuel tank 
on the vehicle. 


4 TECHNICAL 
TANK 


SPECIFICATIONS OF FUEL 


4.1 Technical specifications as relevant to fuel tank 
shall be declared by manufacturer and shall contain at 
least the details given in Annex A. 


5 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 


Fuel tanks of vehicles fitted with one or more of these 
shall meet the following general requirements: 


5.1 Fuel tank shall be made of materials, the thermal 
mechanical and chemical behaviour of which shall be 
suitable for its intended conditions of use. 


5.2 Fuel tanks and attachment systems shall be so 
designed, manufactured and installed as to fulfil their 
function in all driving conditions. 


5.3 Fuel tanks and the adjacent parts shall be so 
designed as not to generate any electrostatic charge 
which is likely to cause sparking between the tank and 
the chassis of the vehicle which is likely to ignite the 
fuel/air mixture. 


5.4 Fuel tanks shall be made in such a way as to 
withstand corrosion. 


5.5 Any excess pressure or any pressure exceeding 
the service pressure shall be automatically released 
by appropriate devices (orifices, safety valves, etc) the 
ventilation orifices shall be designed in such a way as to 
preclude any risk of ignition of air and fuel. 


5.6 Fuel tanks shall be so designed that any fuel that 
may leak when they are being filled cannot fall on the 
vehicle’s exhaust system, engine or other drivetrain 
parts or on the inside of any passenger or luggage 
compartment, but is channeled to the ground. 


5.7 Fuel shall be unable to flow from the filler cap or 
any devices fitted in order to release excess pressure, 
even if the tank is fully inverted. Dripping is tolerated 
to a maximum of 30 g/min, to be verified by means of 
the test described in points 6.1.1 to 6.1.4. If the leakage 
rate does not appear to be constant in nature, it shall 
be ensured that maximum leakage rate is determined 
within a one minute timeframe (that is, not averaged 
over a longer timeframe). 


IS 14681 : 2021 


5.8 No tank shall be situated in, or form, a surface 
(e.g. floor, wall, roof or bulkhead) of the passenger 
compartment or other compartment integral with it, if 
the vehicle is fitted with bodywork. 


5.8.1 For the purpose of 5.8, a vehicle is deemed to 
have a passenger or other compartment integral with it 
if it is fitted with safety glazing, side doors, a rear door, 
side pillars and/or a roof creating an enclosed or partly 
enclosed compartment. 


5.9 The fuel filler port shall not be situated in the 
passenger compartment, luggage compartment or 
engine compartment, if any. 


5.9.1 Further to point 5.8.1 above, a vehicle is deemed to 
have an engine compartment or a luggage compartment 
if it is fitted with side panels in combination with a 
bonnet/hood lid and/or a boot/trunk lid creating an 
enclosed or partly enclosed compartment. 


5.10 Fuel tanks shall pass the leak-tightness tests carried 
out with an internal pressure equal to twice the relative 
service pressure (design pressure) or an overpressure 
of 30 kPa, whichever is higher, as described in points 
6.2 to 6.2.1. Any orifices may be blocked for the 
purpose of this test. The fuel tank shall not crack or leak 
during the test, but may remain permanently deformed. 


5.10.1 Fuel tanks made of materials other than metal 
are considered as meeting this requirement if they have 
passed the test described in 7.1 to 7.6. 


5.11 Fuel tanks made of materials other than metal shall 
be subject to the tests in accordance with points 7.1 to 
6.6.1.1 in addition to those described in points 6.1 to 
6.1.4. 


5.12 Vehicles fitted with one or more fuel tanks shall 
meet the following general requirements: 


5.12.1 Fuel tanks shall be fitted and installed in such 
a way as to fulfil their function in all foreseeable 
operating conditions. 


5.12.2 All parts and components of the vehicle’s fuel 
supply system shall be adequately protected by parts 
of the frame or bodywork against contact with possible 
obstacles on the ground. Such protection shall not be 
required if the relevant parts or components located 
beneath the vehicle are further from the ground than 
the parts of the frame or bodywork which are located 
immediately ahead of them. 


5.12.3 All parts and components of the vehicle’s fuel 
supply system shall be designed, manufactured and 
installed in such a way as to withstand the effects of any 
internal and external corrosion to which it is exposed. 
No motion due to torsion, flexing and vibration of the 
vehicle structure, engine and transmission shall subject 
any part or component of the fuel supply system to 
abnormal friction or stress. 


6 FUEL TANK TESTS 


6.1 Overturn Test 


6.1.1 The tank and all its accessories shall be mounted 
onto a test fixture in a manner corresponding to the 
mode of installation on the vehicle for which the 
tank is intended. This also applies to systems for the 
compensation of the interior excess pressure. 


6.1.2 The test fixture shall rotate about an axis lying 
parallel to the longitudinal vehicle axis. 


6.1.3 The test shall be carried out with the tank filled to 
30 percent of its total rated capacity and also 90 percent 
of its total rated capacity with a non-flammable liquid 
having a density and a viscosity close to those of the 
fuel normally used, or with water. 


6.1.4 The tank shall be turned from its installed position 
90° to the left. The tank shall remain in this position 
for at least five minutes. The tank shall then be turned 
90° further in the same direction. The tank shall be held 
in this position, in which it is completely inverted, for 
at least another five minutes. The tank shall be rotated 
back to its normal position. 


Testing liquid that has not flowed back from the venting 
system into the tank may be drained and replenished if 
necessary. 


The tank shall be turned from its installed position 
90° to the right. The tank shall remain in this position 
for at least five minutes. The tank shall then be turned 
90° further in the same direction. The tank shall be held 
in this position, in which it is completely inverted, for 
at least another five minutes. The tank shall be rotated 
back to its normal position. 


The 90° rotations shall take place at one to three minute 
intervals. 


6.1.5 Fuel tank leakage test is exempted for fuel tanks 
not having a vent hole, and venting is through a one 
way valve (for example, compliance to evaporative 
emission regulation). 


6.2 Hydraulic Test 


6.2.1 The fuel tank shall be subjected to a hydraulic 
internal pressure test which shall be carried out on an 
isolated unit complete with all its accessories. The fuel 
tank shall be completely filled with a non-flammable 
liquid having a density and a viscosity close to those 
of the fuel normally used, or with water. After all 
communication with the outside has been cut off, the 
pressure shall be gradually increased, through the pipe 
connection through which fuel is fed to the engine, to 
the internal pressure equal to twice the relative service 
pressure (design pressure) or an overpressure of 
30 kPa, whichever is higher and this pressure shall be 
maintained for at least 60 seconds. 


6.2.2 The fuel tank shall not crack or leak during the 
test, but may remain permanently deformed. 


7 SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS AND TESTS 
FOR FUEL TANKS MADE OF MATERIALS 
OTHER THAN METAL 


7.1 Permeability Test 


Permeability test to be carried out on completely new 
fuel tank. 


7.1.1 Test Method 


7.1.1.1 The fuel tank shall be tested at a temperature 
of 40 + 2 °C. The test fuel to be used shall be either 
the reference fuel used during emission test or 
commercially available fuel on motor vehicles. 


7.1.1.2 Prior to test, the tank shall be filled up to 
50 percent of its rated capacity with test fuel and kept 
in the temperature condition of 40 + 2 °C at least 
for 4 weeks or until there is a constant weight loss 
(pre-storage period). 


7.1.1.3 The tank shall be emptied and then refilled to 
50 percent ofits rated capacity with test fuel after which 
it shall be closed and then stored under the stabilizing 
conditions at a temperature of 40 + 2 °C. The fuel tank 
is then sealed. The pressure rise in the tank during the 
test may be compensated. 


7.1.1.4 The weight loss due to diffusion shall be 
determined during the eight-week test. During that test 
a maximum quantity of 20 g may escape, on average, 
every 24 h. If the diffusion losses are greater, the fuel 
loss must also be determined at an ambient temperature 
of 23 + 2 °C, all other conditions being maintained 
(pre-storage of 40 + 2 °C). The loss determined under 
those conditions shall not exceed 10 g per 24 h. The 
permeability evaporation test results shall not be 
averaged between the different tested fuel tanks, but 
the worst-case diffusion loss rate observed of any one 
of those fuel tanks shall be taken and compared. 


7.1.1.5 When the test is conducted with internal 
pressure compensation, which must be mentioned in 
the test report, the fuel loss resulting from the pressure 
compensation must be taken into account when the 
diffusion loss is established. 


7.2 Shock Test 
Shock test to be carried out on a fuel tank which has 
undergone the permeability test. 


7.2.1 This test shall be applicable only if the fuel tank 
is fully exposed. 
7.2.2 Test Method 


7.2.2.1 The fuel tank shall be filled up to its nominal 
capacity with a mixture of 50 percent water and 


IS 14681 : 2021 


50 percent ethylene glycol or with any other coolant 
which does not attack the fuel tank material, the 
freezing point of which is lower than -30+2 °C. 


7.2.2.2 The temperature of the substances contained 
in the fuel tank during the test shall be —20 + 2 °C. 
The tank is cooled down to a corresponding ambient 
temperature. The fuel tank may also be filled with a 
suitably refrigerated liquid provided after ensuring that 
the fuel tank is left at the test temperature for at least 
one hour. 


7.2.2.3 A pendulum shall be used for the test, its impact 
head shall take the form of an equilateral triangular 
pyramid having a radius of curvature of 3 mm at its 
peaks and edges with a mass of 15 kg + 0.5 kg and 
the exerted the pendulum’s energy may not be less than 
30 J, for each impact on the fuel tank and as close as 
possible to that value. 


More than one fuel tank may be used for the completion 
of all impacts, provided that all fuel tanks to be used 
have undergone the permeability test. 


7.2.2.4 It is recommended that while designing the 
pendulum following aspects may be considered: 


a) The center of percussion of pendulum shall 
be as close as possible to centre of gravity 
of pyramid, 


b) The distance of centre of gravity of pyramid to its 
axis of rotation shall be 1 m, 


c) Total mass of the pendulum referred to its centre 
of percussion shall be 15 kg, and 


d) The tank shall be mounted on a fixture as it is 
mounted on the vehicle. 


7.2.2.5 The points on the fuel tank to be tested shall be 
those considered at risk as a result of the fitting of the 
tank and its position on the vehicle. There must be no 
liquid leakage following a single impact at any of tested 
points. 


7.3 Mechanical Strength Test 


Mechanical strength test to be carried out on a fuel tank 
which has undergone the permeability test. 


7.3.1 Test Method 


7.3.2 The fuel tank shall be filled up to its rated capacity, 
the test liquid used being water at 53 + 2 °C. The tank 
shall then be subjected to an internal pressure equal to 
twice the relative service pressure (design pressure) or 
an overpressure of 30 kPa, whichever is higher. 


7.3.3 The tank shall remain closed for a period of 
5 hours at an ambient temperature of 53 + 2 °C. 


7.3.4 The fuel tank shall not show signs of leakage and 
any temporary or permanent deformation which may 
arise shall not render it unusable. Account shall be 


IS 14681 : 2021 


taken of specific fitting conditions if the deformation of 
the tank is to be assessed. 


7.4 Fuel-resistance Test 


Fuel resistance test to be carried out on samples of a 
completely new fuel tank and samples of a fuel tank 
which has undergone the permeability test. 


7.4.1 Test Method 


7.4.1.1 Six tensile-test pieces of approximately the 
same thickness shall be taken from the flat pieces or 
nearly flat faces of the completely new fuel tank. Their 
tensile strength and elastic limits shall be established 
at 23 + 2 °C at an elongation rate of 50 mm/min. The 
obtained values shall be compared with the tensile 
strength and elasticity values obtained by similar tests 
using a fuel tank that has already been stored for the 
pre-storage period. The material shall be considered to 
be acceptable if there has been no difference in tensile 
strength of more than 25 percent. 


7.5 Fire-resistance Test 


Fire resistance test to be carried out on samples of a 
fuel tank which has undergone the permeability test 


7.5.1 Test Method 


7.5.1.1 The tank material shall be tested and comply as 
per Annex B. 


7.6 High Temperature Test 


High temperature test to be carried out on samples of 
a fuel tank which has undergone the permeability test. 


7.6.1 Test Method 


7.6.1.1 The fuel tank shall be fitted to a representative 
part of the vehicle and filled to 50 percent of its total 
rated capacity with water at 20 + 2 °C. The test setup 
including the fuel tank shall then be placed in an ambient 
temperature of 70 + 2 °C for 60 minutes, after which the 
fuel tank shall not display any permanent deformation 
or leaks and shall be in fully usable condition. 


8 GUIDELINES FOR DECIDING TESTS FOR 
EXTENSION OF TYPE APPROVAL 


8.1 The type approval granted to any vehicle model in 
accordance with this standard, shall be extended to its 
variants/new models in following cases: 


a) In variant/new model, the material, the mounting 
arrangement, size and shape of fuel tank is same 
as type approved. 


b) In variant/new model, the arrangement of fuel 
filling system is same as that of vehicle model 
already type approveds. 


8.2 The extension of type approval to variants/new 
models as mentioned in 8.1 shall be granted irrespective 
of change in the model name. 


8.3 If the type approval already granted to a vehicle 
model cannot be extended to variant/new model due 
to design change mentioned in 8.1(a) and 8.1(b) only 
the checks/tests relevant to that design change shall 
be carried out and extension shall be granted if these 
checks/tests are satisfactory. 


Following guidelines may be followed: 
a) Design Change Checks/Tests to be Conducted 


1) Material of fuel tank in case of plastic 
(non-metallic fuel tank) All tests as per 7, as 
applicable; 


2 


— 


Mounting arrangement of fuel tank Shock test 
as per 7.2, if applicable; 


3) Arrangement of fuel filling system Check as 
per 4.8, 4.11; 


Fuel tank of a model type approved is relocated 
or used at a relocated position in other 
variants/new model. If tank is made of 
non-metallic material tests as per 7 as 
applicable. Iftank is made of metal no tests are 
required; and 


4 


NS 


5 


wm 


Design change size and shape of fuel tank tests 
as per 4.11, 7.2 and 7.3 to be repeated. 


IS 14681 : 2021 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 4.1 ) 
INFORMATION TO BE SUBMITTED BY MANUFACTURER 


A-1 GENERAL A-3 DRAWING OF THE TANK(S) WITH 
)N f fact (trad f CONNECTIONS AND LINES OF THE 
= a Pa manutacturer \irade name Ol BREATHING AND VENTING SYSTEM, 

mantras), LOCKS, FASTENING DEVICES 

b) Address of manufacturer; and 
c) Address(es) of assembly plant(s). A-4 DRAWING CLEARLY SHOWING THE 

POSITION OF THE TANK(S) ON THE 

A-2 FUEL TANK(S) VEHICLE 
a) Capacity of fuel tank; and 
b) Materials used. 

ANNEX B 


( Clause 7.5.1.1 ) 
FIRE RESISTANCE TEST METHOD 


B-1 TEST EQUIPMENT 


B-1.1 Test Chamber 


A totally enclosed laboratory fume test chamber with a 
heat resistant test-observation window. A mirror maybe 
used in certain test enclosures in order to provide a rear 
view of the sample The fume extractor fan shall be shut 
down during the test and restarted immediately after 
the test in order to remove combustion products. 


Alternatively the test may be carried out inside a metal 
box placed beneath the fume test chamber with the 
extractor fan operating. 


The top and bottom walls of the box shall incorporate 
ventilation holes enabling sufficient air for the 
combustion to pass through while not subjecting the 
burning sample to a drought. 


B-1.2 Supporting Base 

A laboratory supporting base including two grips which 
can be set in any position by means of swivel joints. 
B-1.3 Burner 


A gas-fired Bunsen (or Tirill) type with a 10-mm nozzle 
such that flame can come indirect contact with test 
piece. The nozzle shall not be fitted with any accessory. 


B-1.4 Metal Mesh 


A metal screen with a mesh size of 20 and overall 
dimensions of approximately 100 x 100 mm shall be 
provided. 


B-1.5 Timer 


A timer or similar device with divisions not greater than 
one second. 


B-1.6 Water Bath 


A water bath with suggested dimensions of 
approximately 150 x 75 x 30 mm shall be provided. 


B-1.7 Graduated Scale 
Graduation scale (in millimeters) shall be provided. 
B-1.8 Sliding Caliper 


A sliding caliper (with an accuracy of at least 0.05 mm) 
or equivalent measuring device shall be provided. 


B-2 TEST SAMPLE 


B-2.1 At least 10 test samples 125 + 5 mm 
long x 12.5 + 0.2 mm wide must be taken direct 
from a typical fuel tank which have undergone the 
permeability test. 


B-2.2 However, if obtaining such test samples is 
prevented by the design characteristics (that is, shape) 
of the fuel tank, it is deemed acceptable for the purpose 
of this test to prepare one or more special tanks with 
similar characteristics but with more flat or nearly 
flat surfaces incorporated in the walls. The overall 
thickness of all samples shall be within + 5 percent of 
the thickest sample. 


IS 14681 : 2021 


B-2.3 Two lines, one at 25 mm and the other at 100 m 
from one end shall be marked on each sample. 


B-2.4 The edges of the test samples shall be sharply 
defined. Edges obtained by sawing shall be fine-sanded 
down in order to obtain a smooth finish. 


B-3 TEST METHOD 


B-3.1 A sample is attached to one of the grips on the 
base by the end closest to the 100 mm mark, with its 
longitudinal axis horizontal and its transverse axis at 
45° to the horizontal. Below the test sample, a clean 
woven metal screen is attached to the second grip and 
located 10 mm horizontally below the edge of the 
sample such that the sample protrudes approximately 
13 mm beyond the end of the screen (see Fig. 1). A bath 
full of water shall be placed on the fume hood table 
in such a way as to receive any incandescent particles 
which may fall during the test. 


B-3.2 The air supply to the burner shall be set in such 
a way as to obtain a blue flame with an approximate 
height of 25 mm. 


B-3.3 The burner shall be placed so that its flame 
touches the outer edge of the test sample (see Fig. 1) at 
the same time the timer is started. 


B-3.4 The flame is held in contact for 30 s. If the 
sample deforms, melts or shrinks away, the flame shall 
be repositioned in order to maintain contact with it. 
However, significant deformation of the sample during 
the test may invalidate the result. 


The burner shall be withdrawn after 30 s or when the 
flame-front reaches the 25 mm mark, whichever occurs 
first. The burner shall be moved away at least 450 mm 
from the sample and the fume hood shall be closed. 


B-3.5 When the flame front reaches the 25 mm mark, 
the indicated time in seconds shall be noted as time t1. 


B-3.6 The timer is stopped when combustion (with 
or without flame) stops or reaches the mark 100 mm 
from the free end. The indicated time shall be noted as 
time t. When a sample is reignited by burning material 
deposited on the woven metal screen, the test result 
may be invalidated. 


B-3.7 If the combustion does not reach the 100 mm 
mark, the unburnt length from the 100 mm mark along 
the lower edge of the sample is measured and rounded 
up or down to the nearest millimetre. The burnt length 
is thus equal to 100 mm minus the unburnt length 
expressed in mm. 


B-3.8 If a sample has burnt up to or beyond the 
100 mm mark, the combustion speed shall be calculated 
as follows: ((75)/(t-t1)) and expressed in mm/s. 


B-3.9 The test described in points B-3.1 to B-3.8 shall 
be repeated on different samples until three samples 
have burnt up to or beyond the 100 mm mark or ten 
samples have been tested. 


B-3.10 If only one sample out of ten burns up to the 
100 mm mark or beyond, the test described in points 
B-3.1 to B-3.8 shall be repeated on a maximum of ten 
new samples. 


B-4 EXPRESSION OF RESULTS 


B-4.1 The test report shall contain at least the following 
detailed information: 


a) Number of samples tested, and concerning each of 
the individual samples; 


b) Means of identification; 


Comments: 
(1) TS = test sample; 


(2) WMF = woven metal fibre. 


c) Method of preparation and storage; 


d) Thickness measured in each third of the sample’s 
length (mm with at least one decimal); 


e) Combustion time (s); 
f) Combustion length (mm); 


g) Statement and reason where a sample does not 
burn up to the 100 mm mark (for example, because 
it drips, runs or breaks up into burnt particles); and 


h) Statement when a sample is reignited by burning 
material deposited on the woven metal screen. 


B-4.2 If at least two samples have burnt up to or beyond 
the 100 mm mark, the average speed of combustion 
(expressed in mm/s and as derived from the multiple 
results calculated in accordance with the formula in 
point B-3.8 Shall be determined. The average speed 
of combustion is thus the average of the combustion 
speeds of all of the samples that have burnt up to or 
beyond the 100 mm mark. This value shall be compared 
against the requirement in points B-5 to B-5.1 and the 
calculations and verification referred to in point B-4.3 
shall not be carried out. 


B-4.3 The average combustion time (ACT) and average 
combustion length (ACL) shall be calculated if no 
sample out of ten or no more than one out of 20 has 
burnt up to the 100 mm mark. 


ACT =>, - (t; —30)/(n)) 


IS 14681 : 2021 


Where, n is the number of samples. 


The result is rounded up or down to the nearest 
five-second increment. However, an ACT of 0 seconds 
shall not be used (that is, if the combustion lasts 
between less than 2 s and 7 s, the ACT is 5 s; 1f the 
combustion lasts between 8 and 12 s, the ACT is 10 s; 
if the combustion lasts between 13 and 17 seconds, the 
ACT is 15 s, etc.). 


ACL (mm)= Y - ((100—unburnt length, ) / (n)) 


i=1 


Where, n is the number of samples. 


The result is expressed in relation to the nearest 5 mm 
increment (that is, “less than 5 mm’ shall be stated if the 
combustion length is less than 2 mm and thus in no case 
can an ACL of 0 mm be given). Where a single sample 
out of 20 burns up to or beyond the 100 mm mark, the 
combustion length (that is, the value of (100 — unburnt 
length i) for that sample) shall be taken as 100 mm. 
The average speed of combustion is thus (ACL/ACT) 
(expressed in mm/s). 


This value shall be compared against the requirement 
as laid down in points B-5.1. 


B-5 REQUIREMENTS CONCERNING 
THE FIRE RESISTANCE OF FUEL TANK 
MATERIALS OTHER THAN METAL 


B-5.1 The fuel tank material shall not burn at an 
average speed of combustion greater than 0,64 mm/s as 
determined in accordance with the test procedure laid 
down in points B-1 to B-4.3 of this Annex B. 


IS 14681 : 2021 


ANNEX C 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Automotive Body, Chassis, Accessories, Springs and Suspension Systems Sectional Committee, TED 06 


Organization 


Automotive Research Association of India, Pune 


Asahi India Glass Ltd, Dist Rewari 
Ashok Leyland Ltd, Chennai 


Association of State Road Transport Undertakings, 
New Delhi 


Automotive Component Manufacturers Association, 
New Delhi 


Bajaj Auto Ltd, Pune 


Central Institute of Road Transport, Pune 


Central Farm Machinery Training & Testing Institute 


(CFMTTD, PO Budni (M P) 


Controllerate of Quality Assurance (BEML), 
Bengaluru 


Force Motors Ltd, Pune 


Gabriel India Ltd, Pune 
Hero Motocorp 
Honda Cars (R&D) India 


Honda Motorcycle & Scooter India Pvt Ltd 
ICAT, Manesar 


Jamna Auto Industries Ltd, New Delhi 
Maharashtra State Road Transport Corporation, 
Mumbai 

Mahindra & Mahindra Ltd, Nashik 


Maruti Suzuki India Ltd, Gurugram 


Mahindra Trucks and Buses Limited, Pune 


Ministry of Heavy Industries & Public Enterprises, 
New Delhi 


Representative(s) 


Suri M. SREENIVASULU (Chairman) 
Suri A. AKBAR BADUSHA (Alternate 1) 
Suri B. S. YAMGAR (Alternate II) 


SHRI DEVEN Kumar JALLY 
SHRI PANNEERSELVAM ARUMUGAM (Alternate) 


SHRI FAUSTINO V. 
Suri M. Ravi (Alternate) 


SHRI R. CHANDRABABU 
Suri ULLAS Basu (Alternate) 


Suri Upay HARITE 


SHRI R. NARASIMHAN 
Suri A. V. KUMBHAR (Alternate) 


SHRI S. N. DHOLE 
SHRI SANTOSH GUTTE (Alternate I) 
Suri D. H. PENDHARKAR (Alternate II) 


SHRI J. J. R. NARWARE 
Suri C. V. CHIMOTE (Alternate) 


CONTROLLER CQA 
Suri M. K. KesHava Prasan (Alternate) 


SHRI P. R. SHIVARAMAN 
Suet L. B. ParıL (Alternate) 


SHRI HARIKRISHNA 
NOMINATION AWAITED 


SHRI FEROZ KHAN 
Suri S. MUTHU Kumar (Alternate) 


NOMINATION AWAITED 


SHRI ASHISH KUMAR 
SHRI VIJAYANTA AHUJA (Alternate) 


SHRI SUNIL LAROIYA 
SHRI ANUJ SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI VASANT BABURAO GAIDHANI 
CHIEF ENGINEER (Alternate) 


SHRI PRADEEP BANSODE 
SHRI T. VISWANATHAN (Alternate) 


SHRI JITENDRA MALHOTRA 
SHRI DEEPAK PANDA (Alternate) 


SHRI K. NAGARAJU 
Suri V. G. KULKARNI (Alternate) 


Suri B. N. DAs 
Suri R. K. JaiswaL (Alternate) 


Organization 

Ministry of Road Transport & Highways, New Delhi 
MSME, Delhi 
Ordnance Factory Board, Vehicle Factory, Jabalpur 
Ruby Bus Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 
Renault Nissan, Chennai 
Society of Indian Automobile Manufactures (SIAM), 

New Delhi 


Tata Motors Ltd, Pune 


Tata Autocomp Systems Limited-Technical Center 


Toyota Kirloskar Motors Ltd, Bengaluru 

Vehicles Research & Development Establishment, 
Ahmednagar 

Volvo India Pvt Ltd, Bengaluru 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 14681 : 2021 


Representative(s) 


DIRECTOR RT 
SHRI DHARKAT R. Luikang (Alternate) 


SHRI K. L. Rao 
Suri K. K. Funpa (Alternate) 


SHRI P. K. ARORA 
Suri A. K. Maurya (Alternate) 


SHRI PANKAJ D. KAPASHI 
Suri V. M. Burse (Alternate) 


SHRI K. THANGARAJ 


SHRI P. K. BANERJEE 
SHRI AMIT Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI P. S. GAURISHANKAR 
SHRI SHARAD GOLE (Alternate) 


Dr MILIND MHALGI 


SHRI REVADI CHANNAPPA 
Suri Rasu M. (Alternate) 


SHRI S. MUTHUKRISHNAN 
SHRI SAM SHAIKH (Alternate) 


SHRI KARTHIK SARMA 
Suri P. K. Hucar (Alternate) 


Suri R. R. SINGH, Scientist “E” AND HEAD (TED) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


SHRI NAVINDRA GAUTAM 
SclENTIST ‘E’ (TED), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TED 06 (13298). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


