IS:12309(Part

2)-1988

lndian Standard

( Reaffirmed 2003 )

CODE OFPRACTICEFORINSTALLATIONAND MAINTENANCEOFAERODROME LIGHTINGFITTINGS
PART 2 MAINTENANCE

UDC

656.71 : 628.971.8.004-5

v'

0

Copyright 1989

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARC

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

Gr 7

March 1989

IS : 12309(Part 2 ) - 1988

Indian Standard

CODE OFPRACTICEFORINSTALLATIONAND MAINTENANCEOFAERODROME LIGHTINGFITTINGS
PART 2 MAINTENANCE

0.

FOREWORD
or inset type for installation in pavement. This code covers good engineering practices for the installation and maintenance of both these types of fittings. 0.3 This code of practice the following two parts: Part 1 Installation, ~has been prepared in

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part 2 ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 29 February 1988. after the draft finalized by the Illuminating Engineering and Luminaires Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council. 0.2 Aerodrome lighting fittings marker lights to give visual pilot. These lighting fittings may for installation on ground or on are provided was guidance to the be elevated type suitable support,

and

Part 2 Maintenance.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This code of practice covers the guidance for maintenance of airport lighting fittings and their associated control and distribution equipment. 1.1.1 This code of practice does not cover the maintenance of electric substation and generating sets feeding the aviation ground lighting ( AGL ) system. 2. NEED FOR A HIGH MAINTENANCE STANDARD OF

2.1 However carefully designed and installed, no installation will give a good service unless special care is taken in their subsequent ~mainten-ante. The precautions taken during initial installation regarding alignment, water-tightness, etc, have to be continued during maintenance operations to ensure reliability of the lighting A high degree of reliability and safety systems. is required out of these systems since they provide a positive visual guidance to aircrafts in poor visibility conditions. The unserviceability of ground light fittings may lead to costly diversion of aircrafts or to serious accidents, etc. The ground lighting facilities, therefore, call for a high standard of maintenance and adoption of a systematic maintenance programme. 3. NATURE OF MAINTENANCE ACTIVITY

various factors, such as the lighting systems provided, type of equipment, frequency of operation of aircraft, availability of second runway, climatic conditions, etc. The nature of maintenance activity is the same irrespective of the size and development of the airports. The maintenance activities may be of routine preventive nature, performance, minor whereby the adjustments, etc, are checked for the components of the system to avoid interruptions to the facilities, or be of a nature of repair and overhaul called breakdown maintenance. Activities of preventive maintenance to be carried out are grouped as daily, weekly, monthly, etc, and may need minor changes in periodicities in some airports depending upon the prevailing conditions. 4. AIDS TO EFFICIENT MAINTENANCE

3.1 Although the quantum of maintenance activities and the organization, there for, may vary from airport to airport depending on the 1

4.1 The various factors which contribute to efficient and high standard of maintenance are indicated below. 4.2 Record of Insta7lation.s Maintained - Up-todate drawings showing location of all lights, pipe crossings, cable runs, control circuits and wiring diagram of each piece of equipment, layout of power supply arrangement, etc, shall be kept handy. One copy of each should be permanently fixed to the wall of the contractor panel room or centralized control position and one copy be kept separately with a cloth pasted behind for field use. The locations of cable joints must also be clearly indicated. Entries should also be made about any additions and alterations to the installations.

IS : 12309 ( Part 2 ) - 1988 4.3 Manufacturer's Maintenance Manual and Instructions - The technical literature, operation and maintenance manuals, wiring diagram of control equipment, etc, for the installed equipments and test equipments shall be kept up by the maintenance personnel. Maintenance schedules laid down by the manufacturers shall be strictly adopted. The information in this standard shall supplement the same. 4.4 Personnel - The maintenance operations shall be carried out only by qualified persons with adequate knowledge of the equipments and Periodical training should be the systems. arranged to the maintenance personnel. 4.5 Safety Procedures - Since the AGL systems are high voltage installations, all standard procedures and practices applicable to high voltage installations shall be followed. Repair and replacement activities at site on cables, regulators, etc, shall be done only after switching off the supply and displaying near the against accidental notice suPPlY* a caution switching on of' the supply. Before a cable work involving testing and cuttings is started, the cable must be earthed first using an insulated earthing handle. All safety procedures shall b: strictly observed [ see IS : 5216 ( Part 1 )-1982" 3. in Operational Areas - No 4.6 Maintenance maintenance activity in the operational area shall be carried out without prior permission of the control tower personnel. The maintenance personnel should be fully conversant with the procedures prescribed in individual airports, like flag or light indication from the tower, ~etc, for working in the operational areas. done should be watchful and alert while working in the operational areas so as not to cause hinderance to the aircraft operations. ~The maintenance vehicles should be parked well outside the pavements at not less than 10 m from the edge light, while working in the field. Whenever any digging work is done in operational areas, all concerned authorities should be consulted before commencing the work. Adequate precaution should be taken to ensure that existing power and communication cables encountered enroute are not disturbed. 4.7 Equipment for -Maintenance -- To properly maintain and effect quick repairs on airport lighting systems, the following items must be available with the maintenance personnel: a) Split core type ammeter, b) Multimeter, c) Megger, of safety procedures and practices
(first revision ).

d) Earth

megger,

e) Test lamp, f) Manually g) Petromax operated light, device and for VASI for installacable pump,

h) Levelling/siting tions, j) Equipments jointing, and

materials and other

k) `Men working' Caution Boards.

necessary

4.8 Tools aud Plant for Maintenance - The following equipments and tools should preferably be available which help in enhancing the efficiency and standard of maintenance: A a> vehicle,

b)

Bipper or short range portable transreceiver for issue to tradesmen for issuing instructions while in field or vice-versa, fault locator,

Cable c>

4

A small trolly mounted generating set of 1.5 kW for field lighting and carrying out minor welding work/soldering work, and tightening ). tool ( pneumatic or electric

e) Torque

4.9 Spare Parts - In view of the operational requirement of the installation, an adequate stock of spare parts should be built up in every airport sufficient for proper maintenance. The number and types of spares required would depend on many factors like the make and type of equipment, life of installation, operation density of the airport and hence the hours of operation of the lighting systems, climate, etc. Keeping the above factors in view, the requirements of spares should be planned in advance, by a proper study of the consumption of the various items of spares in the previous years. Particular attention is necessary in respect of fast moving items of spare parts like grease, gaskets, jointing tapes, materials, carbon tetrachloride, glass cleansing agent, etc. The storage of all spare parts should be in a good condition and the spares should be easily accessible to authorized persons at times of need. 4.10 Preventive Maintenance Schedules

4.10.1 Preventive maintenance schedule shall be planned in advance and executed systematically. Recommended schedule is indicated in 6. 4.10.2 The preventive maintenance checks should be carried out during day time when the visibility is good so that any defects noticed are rectified before sunset. 2

*Recommendations
in electrical work:

Part 1 General

IS : 12309 ( Part 2 ) - 1988 410.3 Record of' Maintenance Constant improvement in the quality of maintenance and reliability of equipment would be possible only with a proper record of maintenance activity. Record of periodical maintenance, namely. daily, as typically shown in weekly, etc, checks Appendix A, shall be maintained. A register should be maintained for each component of the system, namely, lamp, CCRs, cables fittings, etc, wherein details should be periodically recorded to provide the following information ( sre Appendix B for typical format ): a) Replacements/repairs made ( details, cost, reason for failure, etc ); b) Premature failure ( the probable causes ); c) Maintenance etc, of faults d) problems ); and ( nature, cause, of In case of VASI units, the system flight checked, after reinstallation their accidental displacement due to As such, vehicle drivers should be keep away from the unit to avoid disturbance to their alignment. should be in case of any cause. warned to damage or

Performance of particular equipment and cables,

makes

5.3 Isolating Transformers and Cables - The condition of insulation should be checked by megger test periodically. Cable joints and terminations should be inspected to ensure their reliable service. Absorption of moisture into the sheating of the cable should be checked, especially for polynear the terminal ends, chloroprene ( neoprene ) cables, by looking for any abnormal bluges. The CI transformers housing boxes should be kept dry using manually operated pumps, if necessary, and a special attention is needed in pre-monsoon and postmonsoon season in this regard. Two essential precautions in keeping the system water tight are: to the mating a) A special grease is applied ends of connectors before jointing. Further HT sealing tape should be applied over the jointed connectors, app!ying sufficient pull on the tapes. b) The gasket below the fitting checked whenever the fitting and replaced, if necessary. should be is removed

Annual to provide engineers.

review of the register shall be made future guidance to the maintenance

5. PREVENTIVE REQUIREMENTS

MAINTENANCE

5.1 The important points to be checked up during inspection of ground lighting facilities are briefly enumerated below for the various components of the system. 5.2 Elevated Light Fitting -- The elevated fitting consist of hardware including frangible coupling, sockets, lamp and lens, with or without colour filter, day marking cone, etc. The hardware needs to be painted to prevent corrosion and numbered annually for ease of maintenance. The condition of gaskets, tightness of fixing bolts and stiffness in lens clips, etc, should be checked. Sometimes the fixing bolts may get sheared. In such cases, a fresh hole is drilled and tapped to the next higher size for fixing the fitting. Such bolts may be painted with a different colour to distinguish from the standard size adopted in other fittings. Occasionally, the lens and filters may get broken due to blast-propelled stones, hail-storm, sudden temperature changes ( hotfilters and lens chilled by sudden cold rain ), etc. These must be replaced immediately. The lens and filters may get dirty due to dust, bird-falls or exhaust blasts and should be kept clean so as not to reduce the light output. Fused lamps should be immediately replaced. The fitting as a whole should remain in proper alignment with reference to the pavement and in level to give the light output in desired angles. Growth of grass around the fittings should be checked, as it would otherwise obscure the light output from the fittings. 3

5.4 Constant Current Regulators ~- The regulators can be of resonant type moving coil type, thyrister type or magnetic amplifier type. Particular attention is needed in checking the oil leakages, oil insulation values and oil level in the case of oil-filled regulators. All moving parts should be lubricated periodically. Condition of input, output and control terminals/ connectors, lightning arrestor ( where provided ), operation of relays ( including overload and open circuit relays ) and contactors in the unit for free action, and positive closing of contacts and their condition are the most essential items of check in a regulator. ~Fused lamps in back indication circuit must be replaced immediately. 5.5 Earthing - The earth resistance and earth continuity should be checked periodically and the results recorded. . 6. PREVENTIVE 6.1 Daily Checks 6.1.1 Light Fittings 6.1.1.1 With the circuit charged, look for burnt out lamps and record observations for necessary replacements. Replace such lamps before sunset. Record in the replacement register. Check for the fixtures out of alignment. Record the fixtures locations and correct at the earliest possible. MAINTENANCE CHECKS

IS-: 12309 (Part

2 ) - 1988 ensure stabilization of the system. After stabilization is assured, this check could be done weekly. Keep a~record of all angular settings made to the VASI system together with dates on which such settings were made. Check that there is no obstruction in the light path. 6.1.2 Constant Current Regulators externally, after

N~TIZ 1 - Sometimes a lamp's failure to light up may be due to loose seating of the lamp in the holder or short-circuit in the isolating transformer, or its secondary leads or earth fault on both sides of the fittings. burnout of all lamps in a circuit NOTE 2 -The should also occur due to an abnormal power surge. Check the regulator for the overload cut-off opera+ion in such cases.
NOTE 3 - In case of premature lamp burnouts, output current of CCR may be checked and remedial measures taken. NOTE 4 - Check lamp sockel and electrical contact for pitting before replacing the lamp. Clean contacts if with carbon tetrachloride or liquid ammonia, necessary. (Do not apply sand paper. ) Visually examine the condition of the lens gasket, while re-lamping. NOTE 5 - In the case of VAST installations, the complete lamp assembly should be taken out of the unit if there is a lamp failure and should be replaced with a prealigned unit from the store. The removal and replacement of fused lamp should be done The according to manufacturer's recommendations. connecting wires should be checked at the time of lamp replacement. Extreme caution should be taken to align the lamp properly and the cover should be closed only thereafter.

6.1.2.1 Clean the regulator switching off the supply.

6.1.2.2 Switch on the circuits, in turn, to check proper functioning of the regulators including a noiseless operation. 6.1.2.3 Check the of all steps of brightness 6.2 Weekly 6.2.1 Checks regulator for operation on remote control.

Light Fittings and clean dirty lenses exterLook for any crack in the the lens,

6.2.1.1 Check nally with duster. lens or filter.

6.1.1.2 Check for dimly burning lamps Lamps should burn dim due to ageing or due to earth leakages in the fitting, transformer or cable. Verify the life of the lamp from the previous reclamping date from the replacement register. Replace the lamp, if necessary. Rectify the fault if it lies beyond the lamp and this may not need lamp replacement. Portions of lights in a circuit may burn dim or may not burn at all due to low circuit insulation resistance to ground at more than one location. Locate the ground fault and correct the fault or replace cable as required. 6.1.1.3 Visually examine the light fixtures for any damages that is knocked or displaced fitting, or broken lens, replace or rectify as may be required. If lens is broken, remove the glass pieces from site. 6.1.1.4 monsoon Additional check for jttings for

6.2.1.2 Check clips/screws holding correct/replace as may be required.

6.2.1.3 Check for vegetation obscuring lights and remove them. Preferably stabilize the area round the light unit to prevent such growth. 6.2.2 Additional Check for VASl Units

6.2.2.1 Check aiming device after the stabilization 6.3 Monthly Checks 6.3.1 Light Fittings Check base

angle with aiming of the system.

6.3.1.1 if required.

plate

bolts and tighten, of the entire out, wherever and clean

6.3.1.2 Air-borne inspection lighting system should be carried possible.

a) Visually check for evidence of lightning strikes and replace damaged parts immediately after rains or thunder storm. b) Dry out water trapped inside box and paint varnish. that might have been the transformer housing the box with insulating

6.3.1.3 Check for prop_er alignment orientation of light fittings and lenses, fixtures and sockets, as required. 6.3.2 -4dditional Checks for VASI Unit

6.3.2.4 Check mechanical parts for cleanliness and structural defects such as chipping, cracking, bending and serviceability of threads. 6.3.2.2 Check and take corrective for damage action. done by aircrafts the conreplace/ and

c) Check for grass, dirt and weeds around lighting units. Vegetation should not block the Pilot's view of the light. 6.1.1.5 Additional check for new VASI Make daily checks of the approach angle of VASI installation in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions in new installation t0 4

6.3.2.3 inspect units for checking ditions of plugs. sockets and connections, renew as may be necessary. insect 6.3.2.4 Check infestations. for any water

leakages

IS : 12309 ( Part 2 ) - 1988 6.3.2.5 Clean filters and speaker agent. 6.3.2.6 tilt switch. Check optical surfaces like lamps, glasses with suitable cleaning levelling Current and operation of .ree growth, obstacles. new towers, pole lines or other panel

6.4.2 Control Panel - Check the control `or loose component and connections. 6.4.3 Underground Cables

6.3.3 Constant

Regulators

-6.3.3.1 Check input voltage and current. If they are not within designed voltage limits, take corrective actions. 6.3.3.2 In the case of oil-filled regulators, check oil~level and oil leakage, top up, if necessary. 6.3.3.3 Check the regulator load. Ensure that load does not exceed given kw rating of the regulator. 6.3.3.4 Check contactor panel for abnormalities for heating, chattering, etc. any

6.4.3.1 Disconnect the cable sections on 30th ends of every run and check insulation resistance of the cable to earth with megger. 6.4.3.2 In the case of feeder cables, check, in addition, the insulation resistance between the two cables using a megger. 6.4.3.3 Visually examine the cable ends for any moisture entry within the sheathing ( with moisture entering the cable end, it will be observed to have swollen or blistered ). earth 6.4.3.4 fault. Check each circuit for any single

6.3.3.5 Check the operation through all stages of brightness using local control. Check output current on each brightness step. Compare results with the tolerances for them. Consult manufacturer's instructions book. 6.3.4 Underground Cables

6.4.3.5 Check proper earthing of cast iron box by conducting an earth test with megger. 6.5 Half-Yearly Checks

6.5.1 Light Fittings 6.5.1.1 if necessary. 6.5.1.2 tions. 6.5.1.3 lights. Check angle of elevation structure for of approach integrity for of Clean units inside and outside Realign, check all electrical paint, connec-

6.3.4.1 De-energize the regulator, disconnect the cable leads at regulator and connect one lead of the megger 2 500 V to the cable and the other lead to earth. Megger reading thus obtained should be recorded. Check such readings by comparing with initial values. If these reveal progressive deteriorations or faults, corrective steps, including -replacing cable pieces, where required, should be taken promptly. 6.4 Quarterly Checks 6.4.1 Light Fittings 6.4.1.1 Remove the light fixtures from the base and check the transformer housing box for presence of water which might have entered due to defective water tightening arrangement. Bale out water and replace fitting gasket, if deteriorated. Grease base plate bolts and refix the light fixture. Particular care should be taken for positioning the lens correctly. and 6.4.1.2 Check connection of plugs sockets with isolating transformer leads. Renew the old tapes. 6.4.1.3 In order to maintain maximum efficiency of light units, leases and filters should be removed and washed with a suitable cleaning agent, and refixed in position.
NOTE - When the cleaning liquid is used, care should be taken so that the liquid does not drop on the gasket and the glass is thoroughly dried before fixing.

6.5.1.4 Check approach lights. 6.5.1.5 obstruction 6.5.2

Check approach area of approach light. Current Regulators

any new

Constant

6.5.2.1 Check the contacts of contactors/ rotary switches on control panel for pitting or burning. Clean, if necessary, the contacts with liquid ammonia or carbon tetrachloride. Lubricate the bearings, if any. 6.5.2.2 Check the relays proper functioning. and contactors for

6.5.2.3 Check the relay rocker arms for movement and spring tension. 6.5.2.4 Check electrical and mechanical interlocks, if any, in CCR unit for proper functioning. 6.5.2.5 tions. 6.5.2.6 Check the ~open circuit protection device for proper functioning by creating an open circuit on load side with circuit charged. Clean and adjust dashpots. 6.5.2.7 With~load disconnected, and watch the regulator once 5 energize the open circuit Check all the wirings and termina-

VASI-Check approach which

integrity of obstacle should not be obstructed

free from

IS : 12309(

Part ~2) - 1988
the regulator 6.6.3.5 Replace defective bushings.

protector to see that it de-energizes within 2 or 3 seconds. 6.5.2.8 6.5.3 Test the earthing CabIes insulation

of CCRs.

Underground

6.5.3.1 Check ground cables.

resistance pump

of underout any

6.6.3.6 Visually check regulator for burnt relay contacts, burned insulation and loose connections. If contacts are burnt or pitted completely, they should be replaced. If they are slightly pitted or dirty, clean them. Realign the contacts before fitting. 6.6.3.7 Make a dielectric strength test of the oil. Take one litre of oil sample through oil sampling valve at the base of regulator tank. If the oil is dirty or the dielectric stength is low, it should be replaced or filtered and dried to restore its dielectric strength. Sludge deposits on the core and coil assembly, and in the tank should be washed out with clean dry oil, fill with the oil to proper level. 6.6.3.8 Short-circuit circuit test as follows: a) Turn off power test Make a short-

6.5.3.2 Open manholes, trapped water and clean.

6.5.3.3 Megger all control circuits and if any circuit is found defective, spare circuit provided may be used temporarily. Corrective action may then be taken return all circuits to operating conditions. 6.5.3.4 Check the cable route and that the route markers -are in position. 6.6 Annual Checks to

ensure

6.6.1 Light Fittings 6.6.1.1 Remove the fittings to store in groups and provide in their place new fittings from store to avoid absence of light in such places. Dismentle the fitting into its various components and clean them. Check the electrical parts such as connections leads, terminations, etc, and replace the worn-out damaged components before reassembly. Check and replace all gaskets on a leaky light units with new gaskets. Paint all the fittings externally with aviation yellow ( No. 356 of IS : 5-1978" ). Paint in order to prevent them from rusting. The fitting numbers on the body of fittings should also be remarked. 6.6.2 Additional Check jbr VASI Units

to regulator; with wire of inten-

terminals b) Short the output minimum 2.5 mm2 size; c) d)

Turn on the regulator and advance sity through each step;

Read the output current on each step, the output current should be within limits : Twe 20 A 5 Step Lirni ts 19.5 -20.5 15.41-16.2 12.09-12.71 10.54-l 0.56 8.29- 8.71 s-056.304.954.173.596.475.074.003*222.738.43 6.70 5.25 4.43 3.81 6.7 5.33 4.2 3.49 2.87

8 A 5 Step

6.6.2.1 Check the actual elevation setting of the units by means independent of the checking stick, that is, clinometer or theodolite. Check the levels of all units and checking stick plinths with a surveyor's level and verify that checking sticks still give valid indications. 6.6.3 Constant Current Regulators of the

6.6 A 5 Step

6.6.3.1 Clean the interior assemblies regulator other than oil filled types. 6.6.3.2 Where moving used, take out oil sample the recommendation of IS or replace, depending upon 6.6.3.3 Check celain and replace, 6.6.3.4 Check panel, etc.

6-6 A 3 Sten

coil type regulator is and test according to : 1866-1953t. Filter test results.

6.4 - 6.8 5.34- 5.67 4.66- 4.97

If the e>check

for cracked or broken porif necessary. label markings on control

current output is not within limits, if input voltage is within 15 percent of rated voltage; off the regulator; short and and reconnect It should output be per-

f> Turn
g)

Disconnect cables.

*Colours for ready mixed paints revision ).

and enamels ( third

6.6.3.9 Open circuit test formed as given below: a) 6 Turn off power

?Code of practice for maintenance and supervision of mineral insulating oil in equipment ( second revision ).

to regulator,

IS : 12309 ( Part 2 ) - 1988

b)

Disconnect

cables

from output

terminals,

c>Turn
d) e) f) g)

on power, brightness selector suitch tu any turn

manner turers.

as may

be

prescribed

by the manufac-

Advance step,

6.8 Maintenance Lightings 6.8.1 Earthing

of Other Miscellaneous System

Airport

Open circuit protective device should off the regulator within 2 seconds, Repeat steps steps, and (c)

to (e) for all brightness supply and recon-

Turn off the regulator nect the output cables.

6.8.1.1 Check all lighting system connections for tightness and check the earthing system to determine that the designed resistance to ground is maintained. 6.8.2 Obstruction Lights

6.6.4 Isolating Transformers Measure the insulation resistance of secondary of isolating If the insulation resistance is less, transformers. replace the transformer unit. 6.6.5 Underground Cables condition wherever terminations of compound in accessible. Check of cables number and tabs

6.8.2.1 Replace all the obstruction lamps at regular intervals after they have been in operation for `75 percent of their normal life. The lights should be checked daily for burntout lamps and broken lenses. 6.8.2.2 Check the lamp voltage at the lamp socket to ensure that the rated lamp voltage corresponds to ( or is within 3 percent higher than ) the average voltage across the lamp during the normal hours of operation and provides satisfactory output. Clean all lenses, reflectors and clean out the fixtures. 6.8.2.3 Obstruction lights installed at an overall height greater than 45 m above ground or water, if so situated, shall be controlled by a light sensitive device or shall operate continuously. Check each light sensitive control device to ensure that it will turn on at about 3 lux and turn off at about 8 lux when oriented towards a north sky light intensity. IJnder normal conditions, either a light sensitive control device or an automatic time control switch may be used to control the construction lighting. 6.8.2.4 The obstruction light should be checked for all cracked (3r broken lenses and Check the fixtures for these should be replaced. Check control serviceability and cleanliness. relays for proper operation, condition of contacts and electrical connections. Check condition of mountings ( poles, towers, columns, etc ). Take required corrective action. 7. MEASURES TO DEAL WITH OF GROUND LIGHTING FAILURE

6.6.5.1 Check cable end boxes, cable insulation. 6.6.5.2 Check renew tappings.

6.6.5.3 Check circuit and renew, if required.

marking

6.6.5.4 Check terminations of multicore cables in thimbles and renew tapping. Replace thimbles required but cutting of strands should not be resorted to. 6.7 Though the schedule for maintenance given -above is to be followed throughout the year, certain additional checks are necessary before and after monsoon as outlined below. 6.7.1 Pre-monsoon Checks for

6.7.1.1 Check cable ducts and manholes proper drainage of water.

6.7.1.2 Test cables with HT megger and look for any weak points. Joints may be repaired if required. 6.7.1.3 Check fitting is clear. that the drain hole in the

6.7.1.4 Check soundness of gaskets the lens and base plate of fittings. 6.7.1.5 Point the iron box with bitumen. 6.7.1.6 the fittings. inside portion

below

of the cast

7.1 The failure of lights to come up may be due to a variety of reasons such as:

Check tightness Checks

of the fixing bolts of

6.7.2 Post-monsoon

6.7.2.1 Open out the manholes of cable runs and the cast iron box of fittings. Remove collected water, if any, using manually operated pumps and after drying, cover up as before. 6.7.2.2 A general overhauling of equipment should be carried out every four years in the 7

4 b) Cl 4

supply defective

failure

to the control equipment;

equipment;

control

open circuit short-circuit

in the cabling; in cables; and usually in cable transformers and

earth faults e> terminations,

( occuring isolating the cable proper ).

While the causes of failure of incoming supply to regulator could be easily dealt with as

IS : 12309

( Part 2 ) - -1988
Disconnect the output terminals of the CCR after

in the case of internal electrical installation, defects in control equipment could be checked in a sequential order as below: With the series circuit connected to the regulator, turn the control switch on. The operation of open circuit protection relay would indicate an open circuit in the load circuit and no fault in the regulator. The regulator should be switched on only after attending to the open circuit fault. On the other hand, tripping of input contactor would indicate defect within the regulator. Possible defects in a regulator are indicated below: a) Defective relay, b) Defective overload contactors and relay or open circuit

switching off the input supply. Loop out the two cable ends and connect to the live wire of a 230 V
supply. Check the presence of voltage by test lamp at various locations ( cable to ground ). Absence of supply would indicate the location of open circuit. is possible to make use of a search or capacitance bridge to locate open circuit faults. The method of search coil/detector, however, is open to inaccuracies due to the signal being picked up by adjacent cables and carried across
NOTE 2 -It coil/detector

the fault. Reasonably, reliable results may be obtained on more isolated airport lighting circuits of
smaller airports.

7.3 Locating Earth Faults in Airport Cables - The type~of earth faults occurring in an airport cable installation can broadly be classified as: a) b) Earth Earth fault at two or more locations, fault at one location, resistance these and to earth. faults is out-

or selectors,

c)

Low insulation

c) Fuse failure, d) Puncture

of condenser. locate the defect

The method lined below.

of locating

Check these components, and rectify/replace.

7.3.1 Earth Fault nt Two or More Locations case of such a>Tn circuit between a fault, the section(s) of the earth faults will be bridged out by a low resistance to earth. Depending upon the fault resistance, lamps in the section(s) may go out or appear dim. Inspect the section(s) in Replace the which lights are off or dim. first and last lamps to ensure that the fault is not due to lamp failure. ( This check is particularly intended for smaller sections of failure involving say 2 or 3 lamps. ) Switch off supply to CCR and attach a danger plate to prevent accidental closing. ~Lift out the isolating transformer supplying the first lamp off/dim from its base casting. and visually inspect the same for any sign of insulation failure or absorption of moisture in the rubber moulding. Place the isolating transformer on a rubber mat or a piece of dry timber. Disconnect the earth wire from the transformer casing and measure insulation resistance from HT terminal to the casing. Low insulation reading will indicate that the shortcircuit to earth is due to faulty transformer. first transformer is not the adjacent transformer ing the last lamp normal ) as above and if this transformer defective, the earth fault will be the cable connecting the two. defective, ( supplydescribed is also not found in

7.2 Locating Open Circuits in Series Cables The method for locating the fault location of an open circuit fault in the series circuit cable is indicated below: Switch a>attach off power supply to regulator and a danger plate to prevent accidental closing. Disconnect one end of cable from regulator and connect it to the station tarthing bus bar. Half way down the circuit, megger the earthed half of the cable, conductor to earth ( megger ) high insulation reading will indicate that the open circuit fault is on that portion of the cable ( that is, earthed side of the circuit ). Zero reading will indicate that the fault is in the portion of the cable which has not been earthed. again half way down the faulty section. Eventually the fault position will be narrowed down to a cable length connecting two adjacent lamp fittings. Examine both ends of the cable to ensure that the cable connections to the isolating transformers are sound. Replace the cable, if necessary. Remove the earth from the cable at regulator and restore power supply. the fault report.
method of shocking open

b) c)

b)

d) Megger

e)

If the c>check

f1

g> Record

NOTE 1 - An alternate circuits is as follows:

d)
8

Disconnect the cable and check the insulation resistance of the cable alone.

1s : 12309 ( Part 2 ) - 1988 To e>short determine the locations of second repeat step (a), (b) and (c) for transformer supplying the last lamp off/dim and first lamp normal and cable connecting the two. Replace defective transformers cable with new ones. and/or f ) Lift out the series isolating transformer supplying the last lamp out ( dim ) from its base casing and visually inspect the same for any sign of insulation failure or absorption of moisture in the rubber mould. Place the isolating transformer in a rubber mat or a piece or dry timber. Disconnect the earth wire from the transformer casing and measure insmation resistance from HT terminal ( or load ) to the casing. Low insulation reading will indicate that short-circuit to earth is due to faulty transformer.

f) g) h)

Check insulation resistance to earth of the complete circuit after necessary repairs have been made. Record the fault report.

1.3.2 Eurth Fault in One Location -With single earth fault, the lamps will be burning normally and, therefore, in the monthly schedule of maintenance test for this fault should be invariably carried out to prevent sudden failure of the system with the development of a second fault.

8)

Should the condition of the transformer in question be good, check the condition of the same circuit in the adjacent fitting which is normal in the same way as described in (f). If the condition of both the transformers is good, short-circuit to earth will be found in the cable connecting the two. Disconnect the cable from both the transformers and check the insulation resistance of the cable alone. Replace defective with new one. Check circuit insulation and restore transformers or cable

a) Switch off power supply to regulator.

h)

b) c)

Earth one of the cable ends by connecting it to the station earth bus bar ( without disconnecting it from CCR ). Select 100 percent brightness in regulator and switch the power on and note the last lamp out ( or dim ) in the circuit ( only if the fault resistance is less than about 1 000 ohms, a difference in lamp brillance will be observed ). If the fault resistance is higher ( as in earth leakage ), a cable and farthest from the fault should be earthed to achieve higher voltage between the two earth connections, with subsequent larger earth current. Hence, if there is no difference in lamp brightness, the earth connection from the first cable end should be removed and second cable end should be earthed, and the test repeated. Switch off power supply to regulator and attach a danger plate to prevent accidental closing. Remove earth connection at the CCR room. from the cable

j) k)

resistance of entire power supply.

m) Record

the fault report.

7.3.3 Low Insulation Resistance to Earth -. When the cable insulation resistance to earth is within the range of 1 000 to 100 000 ohms at one location, the appropriate approximate position of the fault may be found by varely loop HT cable fault locator method, which calls for a bridge megger for testing.
though very reliable for NOTE - This method, power circuits, may not give accurate position of fault as resistance of series circuit includes contact resistance of the mating parts of plug and receptacle, and may even give misleading results.

4 4

IS : 12309 (Part 2 ) - 1988

APPENDIX ( Clause 4.10.3 )
PREVENTIVE A-l. DAILY Lighting Sl
NO.

A

MAINTENANCE

SCHEDULE

CHECKS System : ApproachlRunwaylTaxiway and Apron/VASI Dates of Month ~-_-__-_-_-___-__-_--~ 5 6 7 8 1 2 3 4

Items to be Checked

9

. . . 31

Light Fittings 1. Check for lamps not burning 2. 3. 4. 5. Check For dimly burning lamps

Check failure

of part or whole of circuit

Visually examine for damages and displacement of fittings and broken lens Check for fixture the fixture location possible Additional a) Visually strike check check out of alignment. Record and correct at the earliest for monsoon: for evidence of lightning

6.

b) Dry out water, if any, present in cast iron box of any of the damaged fittings. Paint such cast iron boxes black with insulating varnish c) Check for grass, lighting units 7. Additional a) Check dirt and weeds around

check for new VASI installation: approach angle of VASI in the

b) Check that light path Constant 1. Clean supply 2. Check steps

there is no obstruction

Current Regulators CCR for externally noiseless after switching of regulator off in

operation

3. Check regulator for operation brightness on remote control 4. Check back indication Remarks

of all steps of

lamps of CCR

NOTE 1 - The records for the maintenance checks should be maintained separately for each lighting system, namely, approach lighting system, runway lighting system including threshold and turning pad lights ( one for

each runway circuit ), taxiway and apron lighting

system ( one for each taxiway circuit ), etc.

NOTE 2 - On completion of the maintenance checks, the respective columns should be ticked and wherever some replacements/repairs are carried out, their number should be indicated below and `tick' mark and details of replacements recorded in the Replacement Register.

10

IS : 12309 ( Part 2 ) - 1988 A-2. WEEKLY CHECKS

Lighting System : Approach/Runway/Taxiway/VASI
Items to be Checked Lighting Fittings Date and Fitting No.

1. Clean dirty lens externally

with duster. out any crack in lens or filter

Look

2. Check clips, screws holding the lens for 3. Check
any

for

vegetation

growth. Remove it, if

4. VASI

Check aiming angle with aiming device Serial No. of the fittings checked in the particular ing `Fitting No.' above. system should be indicated under the head-

NOTE 1 - The records for the maintenance checks should be maintained separately for each lighting system, namely, approach lighting system, runway lighting system including threshold and turning lights ( one for each runway circuits ), taxiway and apron light system ( one for each taxiway circuit ), etc.

NOTE 2 - Serial numbers `fitting numbers' above.

of

the fittings checked in a particular

system should-be

indicated

under the heading on that

NOTE 3 - On completion of the weekly checks for complete installation, date so that the particular week could be distinguished from others.

a firm line should be drawn

NOTE 4 - On completion of the maintenance checks, the respective columns should be ticked and wherever some replacements/repairs are carried out, their number should be indicated below the `tick' mark corresponding to the check concerned and details of replacements recorded in the Replacement Register.

A-3. MONTHLY

CHECKS

Lighting System : Approach/Runway/Taxiway
Name M%th Items CYeZed _-h__7 T-_-_~_"--_7 Light Fita ngs VASI

and Apron/VASI
Constant Current (__-h_ Regulator Underground Cables -h-y Remarks

Air Check base borne plate inspecbolts tion and of tighten, approif reach and quired edge lighting

Check mechanical parts for &&;;

Check mechanical yo;ts chipping, bending and serviceab%ty threads

Clean optical surof Plug flares and tonnelamp ctors fit;r a suitable cleansing agents (7) (8)

Check condition

Check oil level a;z;il

Check Check Fhick Check such conthe the circuit cable tactor operacircuit for any panel tion for through insula- single earth age tion abnorall fault ~( for maliti- stty by 011 megger es that filled is, brightand regurecord heatness lators ing, value using only ) chatlocal tering, control (9) `(`:o", (11) (12) (13) (14)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

\ \

Fitting \ Date'\

No.

:.
3 `31

11

IS : 12309 ( Part 2 ) - 1988
NOTE 1 - The records for the maintenance checks should be maintained separately for each lighting system, namely, approach lighting system, runway lighting system including threshold and turning pad lights ( one for each runway circuit ) taxiway and apron lighting system ( one for each taxiway circuit ), etc.
NOTE 2 - Serial No. of the fittings checked `Fittings No.' above.

in a particular

system

should

be indicated

under

the heading

NOTE 3 - On completion of the maintenance checks, the respective columns should be ticked and wherever some replacements/repairs are carried out, their number should be indicated below the `tick' mark corresponding to the check concerned and details of replacements recorded in the Replacement Register. NOTE 4 - Take necessary remedial action in case the progressive deterioration is noticed.

A-4. QUARTERLY

CHECKS

Lighting System : Approach/Runway/Taxiway
I/ems to be Checked

and Apron/VASl
First Quarter r____h_--7 Second, Third and Fourth Quarter

Date
Light Fittings

Fitting No.

(______J Date

`------a Fitting No.

1 (4 Check for presence of water in transformer
boxes by removing water, if any Replace C-J) water tight squeeze arrangement or fitting gasket, if deteriorated

the fitting. Remove

(cl Grease base plate bolts before refixing
the fitting

2 (a> Check connections

of plugs land sockets with isolating transformer leads

(b) Renew old tapes with PVC tapes
3.

Remove lens and filters, etc, and wash with suitable cleansing agent

Control Panel

Check for loose components and tighten them, if necessary
Underground Cables

and connections.

Check earth resistance 1000 V megger

~of cables with 500/ of feeder cables

Check insulation resistance with megger

Visually examine cable ends for any moisture entry in the sheathing Check earth resistance on CI boxes by megger
Remarks
NOTE 1 - The records for the maintenance checks should be maintained separately for each lighting system, namely, approach lighting system, runway lighting system including threshold and turning pad lights ( one for each runway circuit ), taxiway and apron lighting system ( one for each taxiway circuit ), etc. NOTE 2 - Serial No. `Fitting No.' above. NOTE 3 October. of the fittings checked in a particular be carried system should be indicated of January, under the heading July and

The quarterly

checks should preferably

out in the months

April,

12

IS : 12309 ( Part 2 ) - -1988
NOTE 4 - On completion of the maintenance checks, the respective columns should be ticked and wherever some replacements/repairs are carried out, their number should be indicated below the `tick' mark corresponding to the check concerned and details of replacements recorded in the Replacement Register.

A-5.
SI

HALF

YEARLY

CHECKS May Date November Date

Items to be Checked

No. Ekevated Light Fittings 1. Clean 2. Realign, units inside check and out, paint, if necessary

all electrical

connections light lights of approach light

3. Check 4. Check 5. Check

angle of elevation structures approach

of approach

for integrity

of approach

area for new obstruction

Constant

Current Regulators

1. Check for any pittings or burning of contacts of contactors, rotary switches. Clean the contacts, if necessary, with liquid N3 or carbon tetrachloride 2. Lubricate 3. Check the bearings, if any, of contactors for proper or rotary functioning switches

the relays and contactors of relays

4. Check the contacts 5. Check the relay tension 6. Check proper 7. Check 8 (a) (b) mechanical functioning wiring

rockerarms and

for free movement electrical interlocks,

and spring if any, for

and terminations protection device for proper of open circuit ~functioning protection

Cheek

open circuit

Clean and adjust the dashpot ( for moving coil only ) open circuit protector

9. Check

with load disconnected

10. Test the earthing Underground 1. Clean Cables

of CCR by megger

the manholes perform megger in position test and

2. For multicore control cable, record insulation resistance 3. Check : cable route to ensure

route makers

Remarks

NOTE 1 - The record for the maintenance checks should be maintained separately for each lighting system, namely, approach lighting system, runway lighting system, threshold and turning pad lights ( one for each runway circuit ), taxiway and apron lighting system ( one for each taxiway circuit ), etc. NOTE 2 - On completion of the maintenance checks, the respective columns should be ticked and wherever some replacement/repairs are carried out, their number should be irdicattd below the `tick' mark corresponding to the check concerned and details of replacement recorded in the Replacement Register.

13

IS : 12309 ( Part 2 ) - 1988 A-6. ANNUAL Lighting Sl CHECKS : Approach/Runway/Taxiway and ApronlVASI

System

Items-to be Checked Lighting Fittings

Date

Fitting
NO.

Date

No.

Fitting No.

1. Remove the fittings new ones from store 2.

in groups

and

replace

Dismmentle the fittings and clean them. Replace the worn out/damaged parts before reassembly removed externally. Re-mark on body of the fitting setting by clinometer

3. Paint all fittings the fitting No. Check actual or theodolite

elevation

Constant Current Regulator
1. Clean the interior assembly of the ( other than oil filled type ) regulator

2. Test the oil sample. Filter or replace depending on results ( for moving coil type CCR ) 3. Check for cracked or broken porcelain

4. Cheek label markings 5. Check 6. Peiform test and replace

for legibility bushing open circuit

defective

a short-circuit

test and

Isolating Transformer
Measure the insulating resistance of secondary of isolating transformer ( if resistanceless, replace the transformer unit )

Underground Cables
1. Check boxes 2. Check tapings condition termination circuit marking if required of compound of cable number in cable and tags and renew and renew

3. Check renew,

4, Check thimbles tapping replace

of multicore cable and thimbles, if required

Remarks :
The records for the maintenance checks should be maintained separately for each lighting system, NOTE Inamely, approach lighting system. runway lighting system including threshold and turning pad light ( one for each runway circuit ), taxiway and apron lighting system ( one for each taxiway circuit ), etc. NOTE 2 - Serial No. of the fittings checked in a particular `Fitting Nos.' above. system should be indicated under the heading

NOTE 3 - On completion of the maintenance checks, the respective columns should be ticked and wherever replacements/repairs are carried out, their No. should be indicated below the `tick' mark and details of replacement recorded in the Replacement Register.

14

IS : 12309 ( Part 2 ) - 1988 A-7. ADDITIONAL SI No. PRE-MONSOON AND POST-MONSOON CHECKS

Items to be Checked Pre- monsoon Checks

1. ~Check cable ~ducts and manholes drainage of water 2. Test cables with any weak points 3. Check clear 4. 5. HT megger hole in

for and the

proper look fitting the for is lens with

that the drain

Check soundness of gaskets and base plate of fittings Paint the inside portion bitumen the tightness

below CI

of the

box

6. Check fitting

of the fixing bolts of the

Post-monsoon Checks In addition to the checks (2) and (3), open out the manholes of cables runs, and the CI box cf fittings. Remove collected water, if any, using manually operated pumps and after drying, cover up as before Remurks :

APPENDIX ( Clause 4.10.3 )
PROFORMA
Name SI No. of System : Approach FOR REPLACEMENT

B
REGJSTER and Apron Make of Defective Jtem Replaced Lighting/VASI Reasons for Replacement Date Any When Other Last Remarks RePk"J'-

Lighting/Runway

Lighting/Taxiway CCR Name of ComPonent CabIes

Date I.arnp Filter Lens Fitting ( Give Fitting No. )

Isolating Transformer

NOTE1 NOTE2 -

A separate Replacement Register should be maintained

for each system.

periodically

Each register should give the details of costs of various components on the first page and should be updated.
Date cost Date cost

Component

15

BUREAU
Headquarters: Manak Bhavan. 9 Bahadur Shah

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS

Zafar

Marg,

NEW DELHI

110002 Telegrams

Telephones

: 3 31 01 31, 3 31 13 75

: Manaksanstha
to all Offices Telephone )

( Common
Regional Central *Eastern Northern Offices:

: Manak : l/1-4,

Bhavan, 9 Bahadur NEW DELHI 110002

Shah

Zafar

Marg,

-C 331

01 1375 31

C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola, CALCUTTA 700054 Sector 35-C, 160036 MADRAS 600113 g

36 24 99

: SC0 445-446,
CHANDIGARH

{ 2 3 18 16 43 41 (41 24 42 2r59::

Southern tWeste:n Branch

: C. I. T. Campus, : Manakalaya.
BOMBAY Offices:

E9 MIDC, 400093

Marol,

Andheri

( East ),

6 32 92 95

`Pushpak'. Nurmohamed Shaikh AHMADABAD 380001

Marg,

Khanpur,

2 63 48 2 63 49 138 138
T. T. Nagar, 751002

Peenya Industrial Area, 1st Stage, Bangalore Tumkur Road, BANGALORE 560058 Gangotri Complex, 5th B HOPAL 462003 Plot 53/5, No. 82/83, Lewis Floor, Road, Bhadbhada -Road,

49 55 49 56 6 67 16 5 36 27

BHUBANESHWAR

Ward No. 29, R. G. Barua Road, 5th Bylane, GUWAHATI 781003 (Nampally Station Road), 23 10 83 6 34 71 { 6 98 32 21 68 76 { 21 82 92 6 23 05 I6 21 04 1621 17

5-8-56C. L. N. Gupta Marg HYDERABAD 500001 RI4 Yudhister Marg,

C Scheme, JAIPUR Nagar, Estate, KANPUR PATNA

302005

117/418B
Patliputra

Sarvodaya Industrial

208005

800013 Road,

Hantex Bldg ( 2nd TRIVANDRUM Inspection Offices

Floor ), Rly Station 695001 ( With Sale Point ):

Pushpanjali, 205-A West High Court Bharampeth Extension, NAGPUR Institution PUNE of Engineers 411005
in Calcutta in Bombay

Road, 440010 1332 Shivaji Nagar,

2 51 71 5 24 35

( India

) Building,

*Sales Office Calcutta 700072 t.Sales Offxe Bombay 400007

is at 5 Chowringhee is at Novelty

Approach, Grant

P. 0. Road,

Princep

Street,

27 68 00 89 65 28

Chambers,

Printed

at Kapoor

Art Press, New

Delhi,

India

