( Reaffirmed 2005 )

IS : 5503 ( Part II ) - 1969

Indian Standard
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR SILOS FOR GRAIN STORAGE
PART II GRAIN HANDLING EQUIPMENT ACCESSOR I ES AND

Storage and Marketing Structures for Agricultural Committee, AFDC 28
Chairman SHRI SHRI KRISHNA Members

Commodities

Sectional

RePresenting Central Public Works Department

Indian Produce Association, Calcutta SHRI V. S. AGGARWAL RAI BAHAIXJRG. S. SWAIKA ( Alternate ) AGRICULTURAL ENGINEER( IMPLE- Directorate of Agriculture, Government of Punjab
MENTS) The Builders' Association &RI B. V. APTE SHRI K. K. MADHOK ( Alternate )

of India, Bombay

SHRI S. K. BEDEKER

Directorate of Marketing and Inspection ( Ministry of Food, Agriculture, Community Development & Co-operation ), Faridabad SHRI R. N. CHATURVEDI( Alternate) Quartermaster General's Branch, Army Headquarters COL B. M. CHENGAPA COL R. R. RAO ( Alternate ) Chamber of Commerce, Hapur SHRI RAMESHWARDAYAL SHRI BHAGWATIPRASADJAIN ( Alternate ) DIRECTOR. (STORAGE & INSPEC- Directorate of Storage and Inspection (Ministry of Food, Agriculture, Community Development & TION) Co-operation ) Farmaids Corporation, New Delhi SHRI V. K. GUPTA Directorate of Plant Protection, Quarantine and DR D. S. KATHURIA Storage ( Ministry of Food, Agriculture, Community Development & Co-operation ), Faridabad National Co-operative Development Corporation, SHRI S. T. KHUSHALANI New Delhi SHRIJ. P. MITAL ( Alternate ) Agriculture Department, Government of West Bengal SHRIJ. N. MAHALANOBIS SHRI T. K. MAJUMDAR( Alternate) Central Food Technological Research Institute SHRI S. K. MAJUMDER ( CSIR ), Mysore Planning Commission SHRI K. V. NATARAJAN Indian Agricultural Research Institute ( ICAR), DR S. PRADHAN New Delhi DR RATTAN LAL ( Alternate ) ( Continued on &age 2 )

INDIAN
MANAK

STANDARDS
BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR NEW DELHI

INSTITUTION
SHAH ZAFAR MARG

1

ISr5503(PartlI)-1969 (Continuedfrom
&RI 1.c. &RI

page 1 ) Representing ) Food Corporation of India, New Delhi Corporation, New Delhi

Members SHRI 0. N. BAJPAI ( Alkrnak &RI P. RAYDA8

Andhra Pradesh Rice Millers' Association, Vijayawada SHRI ADUSUMILLI SUBBA RAO Directorate of Standardization. Ministry of Defence SHRI SHUMSHER SINGH DR H. G. KHAISA ( Alternate) Agriculture Department, Government of Tamil Nadu STATE MARKETING OFFICER ASSISTANT MARKETING OFP~CER
S"PP+R!~:;:%) %JRVEYOR WORKS ( FOOD) SHRI M. L. TANEJA SHRI S. S. VIRDI SHRI S. L. RAINA ( Alternate ) SHRI S. P. VIRMANI
OF

Central Warehousing

Central Public Works Deuartment . Ministry of Food, Agriculture, Community ment & Co-operation National Seeds Corporation, New Delhi The Roller Flour New Delhi Millers' Federation Develop-

of

India,

DR HARI BHAGWAN,

DR D. V. KARMARKAR ( Alkrnate ) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-ojicio Deputy Director ( Agri & Food )

Member)

Secretary
SHRI MANOHAR T. SANTWANI Assistant Director ( Agri & Food ), IS1

Mechanically Convene7

Operated

Storage Structures Subcommittee,
Public Works Department

AFDC 28 : 4

SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER( ELEC- Central TRICAL) ( FOOD STORAGEELECTRICAL CIRCLE)

Members
SHRI R. K. ADYA SHRI M. S. ASTHANA

SHRI S. V. BHAT SH~I D. GANGULY ( Alternuts ) DIRECTOR OF ENGINEERING

Martin Burn Ltd, Calcutta Ministry of Food, Agriculture, Community ment & Co-operation (Department operation ) Larsen & Toubro Ltd, Bombay

Developof Co-

Ministry of Food, Agriculture, Community Development & Co-operation ( Department of Food ) Community DevelopDIRECTOR ( STORAGE & INSPEC- Ministry of Food, Agriculture, mcnt 82 Co-operation TION ) Dynacraft Machine Company Private Limited, SHRI NAZAR R. N. FUTEHALLY Bombay Associated Cement Companies Limited, Bombay MAJ-GEN HARKIRAT SINGH SHRI A. S. A~TALA ( Alternate ) The Roller Flour Millers' Federation of India, SHRI JAYANT V. KANJI New Delhi Government Engineering Workshop, Nilokheri SHIU V. p. S. KUHYAP ( Contintrcdon pug: 13 )

2

Is:5503(PartII)-1969

Indian Standard
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR SILOS FOR GRAIN STORAGE
PART II GRAIN HANDLING ACCESSORIES EQUIPMENT AND

0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part II ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 22 December 1969, after the draft finalized by the Storage and Marketing Structures for Agricultural Commodities Sectional Committee had been approved by the Agricultural and Food Products Division Council.
0.2 Handling and storage of grain in structures like silos requires the use of mechanical and electrical equipment, such as elevators and conveyors and accessories, like drying equipment, aeration equipment and fumigation pumps. The mechanical and electrical equipment is generally housed in a head house attached to a silo. Therefore, this standard, covering the requirements for mechanical and electrical equipment and accessories generally used for handling of grain in a silo, has been formulated to assist the planning and construction of silos. It is felt that such a readily available guide would expedite the execution of various silo projects in the country. 0.3 This standard is not intended to restrict the initiative of design and construction engineers. and ingenuity

0.4 In this standard it has been assumed that the work of installation of various equipment would be according to the prevalent codes for installation and, therefore, the engineering practices ordinarily observed in the installation of these equipment have not been covered. However, wherever it has been considered desirable to elaborate on any such practices, care has been taken to include such elaboration in this standard. 0.5 In the formulation of this standard, assistance has been derived from the following publications: ASA Z 12.4-I 953 Code for the prevention of dust explosion in terminal grain elevators. American National Standards Institute. ASA Z 12.13- 1959 Code for the prevention of dust ignitions in country grain elevators. American National Standards Institute.

KETCHUM (M

The Design of walls, bins and grain elevators. S). 1929. Ed 3. McGraw-Hill Book Company Ine., New York and London. 3

IS : 5503 ( Part II ) - 1969
GRAIN & FEED JOURNALS CONSOLIDATED. Grain America. USA. elevators of North

0.6 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard ( Part II ) deals with the important types of mechanical and electrical equipment and accessories used in a silo for handling of grain in bulk. It also prescribes safety precautions to prevent dust explosions and to minimize fire-hazards. 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose of this standard, ( Part I )-1969-t and IS : 4240-1967f, "PPIY, 2.1 Aeration - The process by pressure is moved through grain. 2.2 Drying which a small content quantity of air under the terminology given in IS : 5503 and the following definitions shall

A process by which moisture EQUIPMENT

of grains is reduced.

3. GRkN

HANDLING

3.0 General - Hoppers, conveyors and elevators form an important unit The hoppers for receipt, conveying, storage and issue of grains in a silo. feed the grain by direct spouting or through conveyors to elevators, which carry the grain to automatic cleaning and weighing machines and finally to the conveyor in the distribution gallery, where the grain is diverted to various bins ( see Fig. 1 ). 3.1 Choice of Conveyors - There are various types of conveyors in use, common among them being belt, chain, screw and pneumatic type The choice of conveyors depends upon the type of grain to be conveyors. handled in bulk, type of duty to be performed, distance to be conveyed, handling capacity required, availability of space, number and position of charging and discharging points, and the capital and operating costs. These factors are discussed in the following clauses. *Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). TGeneral requirements for silos for grain storage : Part I Constructional requirements. $Glossary of conveyor terms and definitions. 4

IS : 5503( Part II ) - 1969

REFERENCES

1. 2. 3. 4. 3. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12.

Pneumatic Longitudinal Garner Automatic

discharge

( marine

tower )

conveyor

Cross conveyor weighing equipment

Bucket elevator Storage block Distributing Collecting conveyors conveyor

Garner for delivery of grains Conveyor for delivery of grains Conveyor for distribution of

grains to

baggmgequipment and
Bagging equipment Sewing machine
Conveyor

bulk despatch

for bags

Bulk despatch equipment 3leaning equipment 3rying equipment Conveyor for grain-intake and rail cars from lorries

FIG. 1

A TYPICAL GRAIN FLOW DIAGRAM 5

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

ISt5503(PartII)-1969 3.1;1 Tyfle of Duty Performed - All type of conveyors, such as belt, screw, The chain, or pneumatic may be used for horizontal straight conveying. belt conveyor may be worked up to an inclination of 15" to the horizontal. The screw conveyor may be worked at an inclination, but the capacity would be reduced proportionately to the degree of inclination; an inclination at 15' and 25" may reduce the capacity to 70 and 40 percent respectively. For stiff inclination the helix should have a short pitch and the trough Chain designed may be worked at any inclination may be made tubular. and even in vertical positions restricted to 45". The pneumatic conveyor may be worked for horizontal, vertical and inclined conveying. Where permanent installations of conveyors are desired, it would be advisable to select belt, screw or chain conveyors. If, however, the position of receiving and discharging points vary, consideration may be given to pneumatic or portable type of conveyors. The drive may be by electric motor or by petrol or diesel engine, if electricity is not available. 3.1.2 Distance to be Conveyed- Belt conveyors may be employed for conveying on long distances. Screw `conveyors may be restricted to distances up to 30 to 40 metres. In case of the chain conveyors, the distance depends upon the tensile strength of the chain, and is normally less than 30 metres. The capacity of pneumatic conveyors falls rapidly with increase in distance, and its use for distances over 50 metres should be carefully considered. 3.1.3 Handling Cajacity Required - For small handling capacities up to about 80 tonnes per hour, screw conveyors may be used. For high handling capacity, the belt chain or pneumatic conveyor may be used. In the latter case, the belt conveyors may be used up to capacity of about 200 tonnes per hour. For higher handling capacities, a number of conveyor units may be used. 3.1.4 Availabilify of Space - Where the space available is limited, the use of screw, chain, or pneumatic conveyors may be considered, whereas, if sufficient space is available, the use of belt conveyors may be considered. 3.1.5 Number and Position of Charpt'ngand Discharging Points - In the case of belt, chain, and screw conveyors, the charging and discharging may be done at several points,, while in case of pneumatic conveyors, the charging and discharging points are normally at one place, which may be shifted from place to place. 3.1.6 Capital and Operating Cost - The belt conveyor is the most economical, since running expenditure is less compared to other type of conveyors. The screw conveyor is more expensive than belt conveyor. The initial cost is higher in case of chain conveyors, which also need more of the running and maintenance cost. The initial cost, running and maintenance expenditure are the highest.in case of pneumatic conveyors;

IS:5503(PartII)-1969 -Generally, separate elevators should be employed for receipt and issue of grain into and from the bins or other storage structures. Elevator has a leg with boot for receiving the grain at the bottom and elevator head for discharging the grain at the top. The bucket type of elevator is the most common, and is quite economical and efficient with the least running and maintenance expenditure. The buckets carrying the grain may be made of mild steel, and may be either carried on a chain or a flat belt of synthetic textile and rubber. 3.2 Elevators

3.2.1 The bucket elevators may be self-supporting type to sustain alk working loads and self weight unless installed in a head house, where they shall be adequately supported. 3.2.2 Leg casings and connecting spouts shall be dust-tight. 3.2.3 The elevator boots shall be above the floor rather than in pits and be provided with adequate clean-out doors. However, if the pits are necessary, ample room shall be provided for cleaning, oiling and repairing boots. Pits shall be adequately lighted with fixed lights and be accessible by permanent iron ladder or stairway. 3.2.3.1 The elevator boots shall be so constructed as to minimize the probability of chokes and be provided with covered hoppers into which spill and clean-up can be shovelled back into the boot. 3.3 Layout of Conveyors -While considering the layout of the different type of conveyors, it is advisable to find the shortest course with minimum possible bends. The free flow of the grain from one conveyor to the other, or to the portions where gravity flow is made, should be given consideration. All possible restrictions and choking points should be considered and layout It is necessary that all gravity flows for a smooth flow should be decided. through spouting shall have adequate cross-sections and suitable inclinations with the horizontal. Hoppers or garners should be introduced wherever there is possibility of accumulation of grain in the flow. 3.4 Requirements for Installations

3.4.1 All structural members, whether of reinforced cement concrete or steel or of any other construction, employed in conveyors, as well as those supporting them shall have adequate strength, considering all static and dynamic loads to which they may be subjected. 3.4.2 The belt conveyors [see IS : 1891 ( Part I ) - 1968 * ] and bucket elevators shall have tensioning arrangement of the screw type or of the gravity type. 3.4.3 All the parts of the installations shall be accessible for maintenance and inspection.
*Rubber conveyors and elevator belting: Part I General purposebelting (firs: r&ion). 8

IS:5503(PartII)-1969 3.4.4 There shall be sufficient space all round the machinery head-room for working purpose. 4. ACCESSORIES 4.0 General - Besides the main handling equipment as given in 3, cleaning machines, drying equipment, aeration fans, fumigations pumps, manlift and temperature detecting devices form essential accessories to the handling equipment. 4.1 Cleaning Machines -The grain brought from field may contain a variety of foreign materials, like straw, insects, stones and dust. Cleaning machines should generally be employed to clean the grain by sieving and should be connected with large dust collectors, which remove the dust by suction. Overall capacity of the cleaning machines may match the capacity of the elevators. 4.1.1 All cleaning, or other grain combustible construction. processing machinery shall be of nonand also clear

4;2 Drying Equipment - Grain with more than 14 percent moisture is When the grain with high amount not recommended for storage in silo. of moisture is received, it shall be dried either in sun or, if the moisture The drying equipment should content of grain is high, drier should be used. be generally housed in a drier house attached to a silo. It may consist of a chamber in which the grain should be allowed to fall in a zigzag fashion through baffles placed in a line and hot air blown from the sides of the chamber. It may be a continuous process allowing the grain to pass through it several times depending upon the amount of moisture to be removed. 4.3 Temperature Detection Equipment - The deterioration of grain is shown by development of hot spots at different places in a bin. It is, therefore, necessary to provide for a temperature detection equipment in order The system to detect any rise in temperature at different points and pitch. shall consist of temperature sensing devices placed vertically inside the bins from bottom to top at vertical intervals of l-5 m. At least one sensing device The should be provided for a radius of 3 metres in the horizontal plane. device shall be connected by cables and led to reading instruments suitably located outside the bins. The cable insulation inside the bin shall be resistant to abrasions, moisture and chemicals. 4.4 Aeration Equipment - The grain in storage may require periodical aeration to keep it in satisfactory condition to prevent increase in temperature and development of hot spots on grains. The process may consist The floor of of blowing air through grain either from below or from above. the bin should be perforated and the chamber below the floor be used as a plenum. Alternatively, air may be blown through a tunnel having a number of ducts leading to all directions at the floor level, or aeration vents

9

IS : 5503 ( Part II ) - 1969 may be provided to hopper-bottom bins. The net area of perforations The air required may normally be about 15 percent of the gross floor area. for aeration shall be roughly calculated on the basis of 75 ml/litre/minute. 4.5 Fumigation Pumps - Fumigation of stored grain may be necessary to protect it from insects. Fumigation of grain may be done either by tablets, which may be placed on the conveyor and carried to a bin, or by liquid fumigants. For use of liquid fumigants, a fumigation pump for spraying the liquid fumigant over the entire top surface of the stored grain isnecessary. A galvanized iron pipe of 12.5 mm diameter and fitted with a number of spray-nozzles should be fixed below the ceiling of the bin. A pump should be connected to the pipe outside the bin. To develop necessary pressure required for spraying, a reciprocating pump should be used which The may be driven by an electric motor or by a diesel or petrol engine. pump may be of a portable type and may be shifted from one bin to the The pump cylinder, piston and other other for fumigation purpose. accessories required in this operation shall be corrosion resistant. Aeration equipment may be suitably modified to convert it into recirculation system for effective fumigation and economical considerations. 4.6 Weighing and Bagging Machines - It is necessary to have arrangements of weighing machines for weighing incoming grain, in the head house. They may generally be installed close to cleaning machines,so that the cleaned grain may be weighed before storage. Weighing machines Similarly, bagging .and stitching may also be installed at the issue point. machines may also be installed in the silo. 4.7 Man Lift - Normally, the mechanical and electrical installations and the accessories of silo require frequent trips of staff for maintenance, An electrically operated man lift with a capacity repairs and inspections. of two to three passengers may be necessary. The lift shall be installed in the head house which should go up to the last stage of the head house. 4.8 Telephone - In a silo installation, where a number of conveyors work in a line, it is frequently required to be communicated from a control room For this purpose an internal with the staff posted at different stations. telephone exchange is considered necessary. However, where, for economic considerations, provision of telephone may be considered difficult, a system of sounding hooters or sirens may be arranged. This may help to warn people to be on the guard as the conveyors and other equipment, on which The telephone may also be necessary for they are working, are started. calling outside help in emergency. 4.9 Fire-Fighting Equipment - It is necessary to provide for fire-fighting equipment in a silo. Selection of the equipment depends upon the type of conveyors to be handled. Arrangement of right type of fire extinguishers should be made ( see IS : 3594-1967* ). It may be advisable to have *Code of practice for fire safety of industrial buildiige : General storage and warehousing including cold storages,

10

IS:5503(PartII)-1969
provision of one or two types of fire extinguishers supplemented by firehydrants running throughout the area of the silo. The following information may be useful in selecting the right type of fire extinguishers ( seeIS : 16411960*, IS : 164%1961t and IS : 2190-1962t ): Material Paper, wood, rubber articles requiring quenching and general cooling and Fire Extinguishers Soda-acid and extinguishers foam type

Burning liquid, such as gasoline, paint, oil or grease, requiring smothering for quick extinguishment Live electric wires from motors, electric appliances, etc, where nonconducting extinguishing agent is needed

Carbon dioxide, as also chemica1 type extinguishers or foam type extinguishers Carbon dioxide, as also chemica1 type extinguishers

4.10 Control Room - A large silo installation, where the grain is handled by a number of conveyors working in a line, requires provision of a control room, suitably located with an illuminated board by which the flow of the grain taking place at any time in a particular way, can be reflected on a panel. It is also called a ` mimic indicator ' and is especially necessary when there are a number of silo bins to be filled or emptied simultaneously, SOthat the control room operator would have full control over the machines. An automatic audio-visual bin-level indicator may also be considered as a good adjunct to a silo installation. 4.11 Safety Precautions - Safety precautions in regard to the dust pollution and operation of various mechanical and electrical equipment, described above, shall be observed strictly, and inspection and necessary cleaning of the whole structure shall be carried out periodically to avoid fire-hazard, explosions and other accidents, which may result in loss of valuable grain, equipment and human life. The following safety precautions shall be observed. 4.11.1 Dust Pollution of Atmosphere and Dust Explosion - High concentration of dust in air may catch a spark or fire at any place and may cause simultaneous ignition of particles and finally an explosion. Hence, it is important that dust should, as far as possible, be kept under control. *Code of practice for fire safety of buildings ( general) : General principles of fiie grading. tCode of practice for fire safety of buildings ( general ) : Fire-fighting equipment and its maintenance including construction and installation of fireproof doors. $Code of practice for selection, installation and maintenance of portable first-aid fire appliances.

ISr5503(PartII)-1969 4.11.1.1 All feeding and discharging points where dust is likely to be raised, aspirators with dust catching cyclones shall be provided in order to . . mmtmize the nuisance. 4.11.1.2 kept clean. The area all round the machinery and the conveyors shall be

4X.2 All electrical wirings, fittings, fixtures and electric drive motors installed in dust-laden atmosphere, except in the open and in offices and similar locations so occupied and segregated as to be reasonably free from In case of electric motors installed in open, the dust, shall be flame-proof. same may be of totally enclosed type. 4.11.3 Trailing cables of all portable type of conveyors shall be closed *by flexible metal conduits throughout and rigidly fixed at both ends. All portable motors shall be connected to two distinct earths. 4.11.4 All fast moving parts of the installation shall be protected by guards or covers, while the running belt of a belt conveyor need not be All bucket elevators shall be provided, wherever provided any protection. necessary, with automatic back-stop arrangement, so that in case of power failure during the full load, running of the elevator in the reverse would not be possible. 4.11.5 All elevators shall be equipped with an automatic mechanical or electrical tamper-proof device to shut off driving power leg, in case leg belt slows down. An interlocking device should simultaneously shut off power on all contributory screw or belt conveyors which feed the elevators. 4.11.6 The possibility of a choke-up arises when the grain flows in a number of conveyors in line. It is, therefore, essential that all the conveyors working in a line shall be interlocked so that the stoppage of any one but the first conveyor will make all the conveyors after it, inoperative. 4.11.7 down. A distinctive alarm or signal shall notify operator in case of shut

4.11.8 Spouts introducing grain into bins shall be arranged, where possible, to prevent grain stream striking the side of bin on account of the possibility of tramp iron striking a spark on contact with side. 4.11.9 Boards prohibiting smoking and use of naked lights shall be fixed at all prominent places in the area of silo installation. 4.11.10 Adequate hygienic precautions shall be taken for handling grains in all types of conveyors. 4.11.11 Protection against lightning shall be provided in accordance with IS : 2309-1969*. *Code of practice for the protection of buildings and nliied structures against lightning (jirsl rtiion ) . 12

IS:5503(PartlI)-1969 4.11.12In case the silo is located near airways, the aviation obstruction lights shall be provided in accordance with the Civil Aviation Standards.
4.11.13 While handling suppliers and manufacturers fumigants, precautions shall be exercised. as prescribed by the

4.11.14 Workers shall be provided in a dust-polluted air.

with masks, when they have to work with industrial safety

4.11.15 Staff and workers shall also be provided helmets ( see IS : 2925-1964* ).

4.11.16 Main storage of lubricating oil and grease shall be outside. Storage of lubricating oil and grease in the head house shall be limited to a maximum of 5 barrels and shall be in an oil-room of non-combustible construction. 4.11.17 Act. Lift installations shall be in accordance with the Indian Lift

*Specification for industrial safety helmets.

( Continued from page 2 ) Members Rqhwnting G. MEHTA Federation of All India Foodgrains Dealers' Association, Bombay Elton Engineering Works, Vallabhanagar, Anand Central Warehousing Corporation, New Delhi Andhra Pradesh Rice Millers' Association. Vijayawada

SHRISANMUKHLAL SHRIB. I. PATEL

SHRI P. RAMLDAS SHRI ADIJSUMILLI SUBBA RAO*

MR S. R. ROESSLER MR T. J. JEORGE ( Alternate )

Howe I India 1 Private Limited. New Delhi

SUPERINTENDING SURVEYOR OF Central Public Works Department WORKS ( FOOD ) Triveni Structurals Limited, Naini. UP SHRIR. SWARU~ SHRIV. SUBRAMANYAM ( Alternate ) The Commissioner for the Port of Calcutta SHRIJ. B. TALATI
SHRI M. R. SAHA ( Altcrnak

)

SHRIFERNANDO VIEGAS

Port Trust, Bombay

*He is also alternate to Shri Sanmukhlal G. Mehta, representing Federation of All India Foodgrains Dealers' Association, Bombay.

13

.

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ON

Storage and Marketing Structures for Agricultural Commodities
IS: 600-1955 601-1955 602-1955 603-1960 607-1965 609-1955 610-1955 611-1955 631-1961 1497-1959 1787-1961 1788-1961 2059-1962 2821-1961 3453-1966 Code of practice for construction of B UKHARZ type rural food grain ... storage structure ... ... ... ... Code of practice for construction of KOTHAR type rural food grain ... storage structure ... ... ... ... Code of practice for construction of MORAZ type rural food grain storage structure ._. . .. ... ... ... Code of practice storage structure for construction of underground ... ..a ... rural food grain ... ... Rs 1.50 1.50 1.50 2.00 450 1.50 3.00 2.00 2.50 4.50 3.00 2.50 3.00 1.50 3.50 5.00

Code of practice for construction of bagged food grain storage struc... tures suitable for trade and government purposes ( revised) Code of practice for improvement of existing structures intended to be used for food grain storage . . . ... Code of practice storage . .. for storage of food grain and its protection used or ... during

. ..

. ..

. ..
...

.. . . ..
...

. .. .. .
...

Code of practice for handling ,Qf food grain in transit Aluminium Layout for food grain storage bins regulated market

yards for agricultural

commodities

Layout for regulated market yards for fruits and vegetables Layout for regulated market yards for cattle Layout for regulated market yards for tabacco Thermo-sampler ... .,. .., ...

. ..
...

. ..
...

. ..
...

Code of practice for construction of hexagonal masonry bins for bulk storage of food grains

type concrete-cum... ... storage

5503 ( Part I )-1969

General requirements for silos for grain Constructional requirements ( w&r p&t ) . . .

. ..

: Part I . .. : Part II
...

General requirements for silos for grain storage 5503( Part II )-1969 Grain handling equipment and accessories . . . ...

