( Reaffirmed 2003 )

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR MAINTENANCE AND PRESERVATION OF STONES IN BUILDINGS
Stones Sectional Committee,
Chairman SHRI S.G. %ALEKuNDRY Members Builders' Association df India, Bombay SHRI K. K. AQRAWALA SHRI K. K. MADEOK ( A&malt ) Delhi Marble Association, New Delhi SERI R. K. BA~~SAL Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters, SERI J. K. CHARAN New Delhi SERI K; KAMLANATHAN ( Allcrnutc ) Central Public Works p,epartment, New Delhi CHIET ARCHITECT Public Works Department, Government of Rajas_ CEIEB ENGINEER ( B & R ) than, Jaipur National Test House, Calcutta SERI G. c. Dns SERI P. R. DAS ( Alternate ) Department of Geology & Mining, Government of SHBI Y. N. DAVE Rajasthan, Udaipur SHRI R. G. GUPTA ( Alternate ) DEPUTY DIRECTOR ( RESEARCH ), Public Works Department, Government of Orissa, Bhubaneshwar CONTROL & RESEARCH LABORATORY DEPUTY D~ECTOR. ( RESEARCH ), Public Works Department, Government of Uttar Pradesh, Lucknow PWD RESEARCH INSTITUTE Cent;ralhpd Research Institute ( CSIR), New DR M. P. DHIR SHRI R. L. NANDA ( Alternats ) Central Water Commission, DIREOTOR ( CSIMRS ) DEPUTY DIRECTOR ( CSMRS ) D~n~c~o~`~`$% New Delhi Government of

BDC 6

Reprsscnting Public Works & Electricity Department, Government of Karnataka, Bangalore

9 NASIK

OFFICER, RESEARCH MATERIAL TESTINQ DIVISION, MERI, NASIK ( Alternate )

Irrigation & Power Department, Maharashtra, Bombay

( Cotiinued on page 2 ) @ Copyright 1978 STANDARDS INSTITUTION

INDIAN

This publication is protected under the Indian Cop@& Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

X3:8759-1977
( Continued

from page 1 )
Rcprescnting Public Works Department, Government of Gujarat, Vadodara Himalayan Tiles and Marble Pvt Ltd, Bombay Engineering Research Laboratory, Government of Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad

Members DIRECTOR, GERI, VADODARA
SHRI M. K. GVPTA

DR IQBAL ALI

SHRI A. B. LINQAM ( Alternate ) Institution of Engineers ( India ), Calcutta SHRI J. P. JAC+US Ministry of Shipping & Transport ( Roads Wing ) SHRI R. C. JAIN Department of Geology & Mining, Government SHRI PREM SWARUP of IJttar Pradesh, Lucknow SERI A. K. AQARWAL ( Alfcrnatc ) Geological Survey of India, Calcutta SRRI B. RAMCHANDRAN SHRI S. R. PRADHAN ( Alternate ) National Buildings Organization, New Delhi DR A. V. R. RAO SHRI J. SEN GUPTA ( Alternate ) SUPFCINTENDINO E N c I N E E R Public Works & Electricity Department, Government of Karnataka, Bangalore ENQINEER Public Works Department, Government of Tamil S:P%-%&)ING Nadu, Madras ( DESIQN ) DEPUTY CEIEF ENQINEER ( I & D ) ( Alternate ) SUPERINTENDINQE N Q I N E E n Public Works Department, Government of Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad (DESIQN & PL_~NNINQ) SUPERINTENDIXQ E N Q I N E E R Public Works Department, Government of West Bengal, Calcutta ( PLANNING CIRCLE ) STJPERINTENDINQ SURVEYOR OF Public Works Department, Government of Himachal Pradesh, Simla WORKS Director General, ISI ( Ex-&cio Member ) SHRI D. AJITEA SIMBA, Director ( Civ Engg )

Secretary SHRI K. M. MATHVR Deputy Director ( Civ Engg ), IS1

2

IS : 8759- 1977

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR MAINTENANCE AND PRESERVATION OF STONES IN FUILDINGS

0. FOREWORD
0.1 This
Indian Standard Institution on 30 November Sectional Committee had Division Council. was adopted by the Indian Standards 1977, after the draft finalized by the Stones been approved by the Civil Engineering

0.2 The durability of stones depends mainly upon its physical structure and chemical composition. The deterioration takes place when their inherent properties are changed by the action of various unavoidable external agencies. It is always desirable, therefore, to use a good durable stone in the very first instance. 0.3 This code of practice has been framed to enumerate those principal factors which cause decay of stone in buildings and to suggest preventive The preventive measures included are measures for their least decay. based on the practice being followed in this country and are applicable to sedimentary rocks, particularly porous stones which are not plastered. The Indian Standards on some of the preservatives recommended in this standard are given in Appendix A. 0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : Z-1960". The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that ofthe specified value in this standard.

1. SCOPE

,
for maintenance and preser-

1.1 This standard lays down the practice vation of stones in buildings.

*Rules for rounding off numerical valves ( rcnised ).

3

IS : 8759 - 1977 2. GENERAL 2.0 Generally atmospheric agencies bring about physical and chemical changes in building stones and cause its deterioration. For maintenance and preservation of stones in building it is desirable, therefore, to know the agencies which deteriorate the stones in buildings. The following are the main agencies which cause deterioration of stone. wetting and drying due 2.1 Rain - The stone is subjected to alternate to rain and sun, causing temperature stresses and weathering. The rain water contains different gases and acids which also disintegrate stone. 2.2 Temperature Variation - At places where the temperature of atmosphere changes, the stones are subjected to alternate heating and cooling due to variation in the ambient temperature. At such places stresses are induced in the stone which cause its disintegration or cracking. In thinner walls of single stone, temperature variation may not be much. 2.3 Wind - Stones subjected to strong winds suffer abrasion due to grit and dust. Strong winds also accelerate weathering due to variation in moisture content and help in consequent disintegration of stones. present in atmosphere gets 2.4 Frost - In very cold places moisture deposited on stones and fills the pores. On reaching the freezing temperature, the water in the pores expands and causes disruption. 2.5 Atmospheric Impurities - In an industrial town the atmosphere is generally polluted with smoke and acid gases. Limestones, calcareous sand stones and those containing carbonate of lime are greatly affecte,' wben used in such places. 2.6 Movement of Chemicals - If limestone and sandstone are laid close to each other in a structure, the chemical formed by the reaction of the atmospheric gases with the limestone, enters the sandstone and causes its disintegration. 2.7 Binding Material that they adversely affect The nature the stones. of certain binding material is such their

p

2.8 Vegetable Growth - Certain roots in the joints of stones in search

trees and creepers penetrate of food and for their stability.

2.9 Damage Due to Iron Fixtures - Some damage occursto buildings with the use of iron or steel clamps and dowels. These get rusted and in the process expand and fracture the stone. Hence anti-corrosive paint or other suitable coating should be applied to these fixtures for prevention of rust.

IS:8759-1977 3. MAINTENANCE OF STONE

3.0 The principal factors in the decay of stone being the action of atmospheric agencies, the preventive measures must aim at denying access to the stone of these destructive agencies. The use of preservatives is to check their action by: a) filling the pores of the stone, b) providing a coating to the surface of the stone to prevent access of moisture to its interior, and c) reacting with constituents of the stone to form a hard durable surface. the and

3.1 Surface Coating Preservatives - These are applied to the surface, after expelling the moisture by sun-drying from the surface of the stone. The usual types are: The preservatives should be applied before sunset. a) Coal tar, bitumen. colourless or unmixed with paint. appearance of the stone and b) A solution of silicate of the stone. of potash paraffin oil, linseed oil either mixed These interfere with the pleasing require constant attention. or soda which hardens the surface

3.2 Preservatives Which Impregnate the Stone Without Chemical type is silicone based products which repels Action - The important water by soaking into the capillary pores of stones and providing water repellent film both on the surface and in depth. It is diluted in a toluene or white spirit mixture and applied either by brushing, dipping or This method has given successful results on museum exhibits spraying. Polyvinyl acetate and polymethyl kept indoors under dry conditions. methacrylate are also used. 3.3 Preservatives Which Act by Chemical These include barium hydroxide and magnesium Action with fluosilicate. Stone -

3.3.1 Silicon ester has `no more than a temporary influence on the normal processes of weathering and decay. Impregnation with silicon ester may be helpful on occasion for consolidating special features, if these can be dismantled for saturation by immersion or can be dealt with by feeding the solution through holes drilled through the friable zone into the core. 3.3.2 Silicones water-repellent treatments used are, either a solution of a silicone in an organic solvent or a solution of a metallic siliconate ( usually sodium siliconate) in water. The siliconate decomposes on exposure to the air, releasing the silicone with the formation of sodium carbonate ( or sulphate ) as a by-product. In appropriate circumstances silicones promise to be useful for reducing grain penetration through leading walls and on occasion for controlling staining of stone work from various causes.

and other remedial measures afford useful 3.4 Paints - Painting measure of protection but are inacceptable for monumental and historical buildings because they mask the colour and texture of stones. 3.5 Limewash - Limewash though `widely used in the belief that it would help to preserve the stone, is not recommended as it spoils the appearance of old buildings. 3.6 Limewater - Appreciable strengthening effects are now reported to have been obtained on friable stone by repeated applications of clear The intention is to deposit calcium carbonate by reaction limewater. with carbondioxide in the air, though under present conditions of air pollutions some part of the product may be expected to be calcium sulphate. Lime is so slightly soluble in water, that 30 to 40 applications This would not be practicable on a large scale and it has are needed; not yet been proved that the ultimate effects warrant the time and effort required. of stones also forms an 3.7 Cleaning of Stones - The cleaning Cleaning is essential to restore the important part of maintenance. natural look and to remove the unwanted deposition which may subsequently cause the deterioration of stones. This is done by washing the stone with water or steam, sand blasting or using suitable chemicals.

APPENDIX ( Clause 0.3 )
INDIAN IS: * STANDARDS

A

ON PRESERVATIVES

-75-1973 \ 212-1961 381-1972 702-1961 1083-1975 4654- 1968 60 15- 1970

Linseed oil, raw and refined ( second revision ) Crude coal tar for general use ( revised ) Sodium silicate (Jirst revision ) Industrial bitumen ( revised ) White oil, light technical Paraffin wax Barium hydroxide

