IS 12949 : 2013 
(Reaffirmed 2018) 


IAA Ae 
еї wem «їі Фф remp H хы чїч ТЧЧ ch fo 
STE т GRANT, vum эй var — faya vu 
WIS чет Heat ww fee — Ufa aed 
( Vem Farrar ) 


Indian Standard 
INSTALLATION, MAINTENANCE AND OBSERVATION OF 
INSTRUMENTS FOR PORE PRESSURE MEASUREMENTS 
IN EARTH AND ROCKFILL DAMS — VIBRATING 
WIRE TYPE ELECTRICAL PORE PRESSURE 
CELL — CODE OF PRACTICE 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 93.160 


© BIS 2013 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 


December 2013 Price Group 6 


Hydraulic Structures Instrumentation Sectional Committee, WRD 16 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Hydraulic Structures Instrumentation Sectional Committee had been approved by the Water Resources Division 
Council. 


The soil mass is composed of solid soil particles and voids filled with water and air. The constructed embankment 
will always contain a certain volume of air and water within the voids. The air is compressible while water is 
highly incompressible. Hence when embankment settles due to compaction by rolling, or due to self-weight, the 
void space contract. This causes pressure in the pore fluid comprising air and water. Thus the inter-granular 
pressure is reduced due to opposing pore pressure and therefore the shear strength which depends upon inter- 
granular pressure becomes less. 


Pore pressure is also caused due to the seepage of water through an embankment. The initial energy head of 
percolating water at entrance into the dam is greater than the energy head at any point in the interior. The difference 
represents the loss of energy due to friction forces of percolation. The potential of the water decreases as it seeps 
through the dam. Pore pressure due to percolation is determined by subtracting the corresponding elevation from 
the flow potential at that point being considered. Thus pressure at any point in a dam at any time is the function 
of compaction, consolidation and seepage. 


This standard was first published in 1990; however, the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard 
decided to revise it based on the experience gained during the last decade as well as technological development 
in the field. In this revision, new clauses for typical instrumentation scheme (see 3), verification and calibration 
(see 4), transducer constants (see 7.1) and temperature correction (see 8) have been included. Procedure for 
installation of pore pressure cells have been expanded for different conditions. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised) . The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 12949 : 2013 


Indian Standard 
INSTALLATION, MAINTENANCE AND OBSERV ATION OF 
INSTRUMENTS FOR PORE PRESSURE MEASUREMENTS 
IN EARTH AND ROCKFILL DAMS — VIBRATING 
WIRE TYPE ELECTRICAL PORE PRESSURE 
CELL — CODE OF PRACTICE 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard covers details of installation, maintenance 
and observation of vibrating wire type electrical pore 
water pressure cells for earth and rock-fill dams. 


2 VIBRATING WIRE PIEZOMETERS 


2.1 Operating Principle 


The vibrating wire piezometer contains a magnetic, high 
tensile strength stretched wire, one end of which is 
anchored and the other end fixed to a diaphragm. The 
diaphragm deflects in response to applied pore water 
pressure, changing the tension in the wire and its 
resonant frequency. 


Calibration of the piezometer establishes the relationship 
between pore water pressure and resonance frequency. 


To operate the piezometer, the wire is plucked by 
sending a broadband signal down the piezometer cable 
to a coil magnet assembly beside the wire. When the 
plucking signal is turned off, the wire continues to 
vibrate at its resonance frequency, which induces an 
alternating current in the coil magnet. This signal can 
be read at the other end of the cable and then converted 
to units of pressure. 


The relationship between wire tension and resonant 
frequency is given by the following equation: 


f= [og/p]!2/2L Hz 


where 
f = resonant frequency of wire, in Hz; 
G = tension of wire, in kg/cm?; 
g = 980cm/s^ 
p = density of wire, in kg/cm?; and 
L = length of wire, in cm. 


The resonant frequency is directly proportional to the 
square root of wire tension and inversely proportional 
to the length of the wire. 


2.2 Accessories 
2.2.1 Housing 


For application in dams, the above mechanism should 
be sealed in heavy duty stainless steel housing, 
preferably with vacuum or inert gas inside it to prevent 
the corrosion of wire. 


2.2.2. Thermistor 


A thermistor should be incorporated in the sensor for 
temperature sensing and if necessary, to make the 
temperature correction in the zero reading. 


2.3 Cable 


Cable used should be suitably protected to prevent 
water seepage through it. Cables may be terminated in 
an intermediate junction-cum-switch box or directly 
routed to the observation room. A typical vibrating wire 
piezometer is shown in Fig. 1. 


4-Core cable —^ 


A "n 
`— Piezometer 


" Z 
Cable housing — 


Cable gland 


Fic. 1 TYPICAL VIBRATING WIRE PIEZOMETER 


IS 12949 : 2013 


2.4 Cable Identification Tags 


After connecting cable to pore pressure cell, the free 
end of cable should be marked or identified with a 
permanent tag. A minimum of 3 tags should be used in 
the cable which should be placed at a maximum spacing 
of 10 m over the entire exposed length of cable with 
non-corrosive material or plastic tags engraved or 
embossed with appropriate transducer numbers. 
Permanent identification should be used to prevent 
errors in identifying pore water pressure cells and their 
connecting cables. 


2.5 Junction-cum-Switch Box 


Multi position junction-cum-switch box suitable for 
connecting and switching inputs from group of sensors 
to the readout unit should be provided. It should be 
water proof and made of non-magnetic material. 


2.6 Cable Splicing Kit 


Cable jointing should be avoided to the extent possible. 
In case, it becomes necessary cable splicing kit should 
be used to make a water resistant sealed joint between 
two cable ends properly gripping the armouring. 


2.7 Read-Out Indicator 


The read-out unit should be portable and suitable for 
reading all types of vibrating wire sensors. 


3 TYPICAL INSTRUMENTATION SCHEME 


A typical instrumentation scheme of an earth dam is 
shown in Fig. 2. The cables have been routed to the 
downstream side in temporary observation rooms and 
will be connected later on to a central data acquisition 
system on the top of the dam. 
NOTE — The arrangement shown for cable routing in Fig. 2 
is typical for an earth fill dam and is not to be universally 
used. Various methods of cable routing are used depending 
upon the location, size and the design of the dam. The 
designers and the consultants are the appropriate person to 


determine the layout for cable routing from the sensors to the 
observation room. 


4 VERIFICATION AND CALIBRATION 


Each piezometer should be verified and calibrated 
before it is installed in the dam or its foundations. The 
following procedure should be followed for this 
purpose. 


4.1 Boil the Filter 


Remove the filter from the piezometer and boil it in a 
large vessel for at least 15 min, so that its air goes out 
and it gets saturated with water. Allow the water to cool 
down to the room temperature. 


4.2 Re-assemble the Piezometer 


Take out the de-aired filter and re-assemble the 
piezometer. Ensure water enclosed between diaphragm 
and filter does not leak out of sensor when it is tilted 
or turned around. 


4.3 Quick Zero Check 


Ideally, this test should be conducted in a draft-free 
room where the piezometer can be kept at a constant 
temperature. At minimum, the piezometer should be 
placed in a location that is out of direct sunlight and 
allowed to reach thermal equilibrium with the surface 
it 18 resting on and the surrounding air. This may take 
an hour. The piezometer should not be handled during 
this time or during the test. 


Connect the signal cable to readout and obtain a 
frequency reading. Readings should be checked and 
ensured for their repeatability. Apply calibration factors 
to convert the frequency to a pressure reading in ‘Pa’. 


If the local elevation is above sea level, the pressure 
reading that obtained will most likely be negative 
because the sensor calibration is referenced to one 
standard atmosphere (sea level). To calculate an 
approximate correction for elevation, allow 0.1 kPa for 
every 10 m of elevation above sea level. Add the 
correction to the reading. 


The working of piezometer may be considered 
satisfactory if the difference between the corrected 
pressure and zero is within 2 percent of the full scale 
of the piezometer (2 MPa for a 100 MPa piezometer). 
To make a more precise check, corrections should be 
done for the true altitude, the barometric pressure, and 
the temperature. 


NOTE — For example, if the elevation is 1000 m, add a 
correction of 10 kPa to the pressure reading. 


4.4 Down Hole Pressure Check 


This test is conducted in a water-filled borehole or 
standpipe piezometer. Sensor calibration record is 
required for this test. 


Mark signal cable at two depths, one at a shallow depth 
and the other as deep as possible (within the range of 
the piezometer). Measure from the location of the 
diaphragm: 23 mm from the tip of the borehole 
piezometer; 112 mm from the tip of the push-in 
piezometer, and 51 mm from the tip of the embankment 
piezometer. Pull the filter off the piezometer, fill it with 
clean water and replace the filter. Hold the filter end 
up until the piezometer is placed in the water. 


Lower the piezometer to the shallowest mark on the 
signal cable. Clamp the cable in position and wait at 
least 30 min for the piezometer to adjust to the 


150.00 


140.00 


130.00 


120.00 


110.09 


ELEVATION(m.a.s.l.) 


100.00 


90.00 


EMBANKMENT 


CONTROL ROOM ON DAM TOP 


(1 m BELOW RIP-RAP) FR 


AN 
| Х ONE MULTI-CORE CABLE 
LN 


( 


11500 УР911 УР912 VP913 VP914 УР 915 


— |] Ула Ул IV | 


OM 


TS 3 TO CONTROL ROOM 


TEMPORARY OBSERVATION 
VAR STATION (TS 3) 


THREE MULTI-CORE CABLE 


1 m BELOW RIP-RAP) FROM 


TS 1 & TS 2 TO CONTROL ROOM 


TEMPORARY OBSERVATION 
STATION (TS 2) 


TEMPORARY OBSERVATION 
STATION (TS 1) 


117.00 


7. W 91 


107.50 L—— —[—142800— | | \ 
/ M M RE X xv 
У, V V Vv V 
FP 923 FP 924 FP 925 
95.00 

X n 

м м 
ЕР 911 ЕР 912 


TYPICAL INSTRUMENTED DAM CROSS SECTION 


DAM AXIS 


FP 921 
VP 913 


TEMPORARY OBSERVATION 
STATION (TS 1) AT 117.00 


SECTIONAL PLAN 
AT EL 115.00 


Fic. 2 TvPiCAL PLAN ОЕ INSTRUMENTATION IN AN EARTH РАМ 


NOTATIONS 


SIGN DESCRIPTION 
ASPER 


PROJECT 
PIEZOMETER-VIBRATING 
КЕШЕ WIRE (VP) REQUIREMENT 
3 g FOUNDATION 
PIEZOMETER (FP) 


[жа] ТШШЕН 
MULTI-POSITION JUNCTION 
CUM SWITCH BOX 
4 - CORE CABLE FROM 
SENSOR TO SB 

I— | MULTI - CORE CABLE 

7 [А | 

NOTE :- 

4 - CORE CABLE FROM EACH INSTRUMENT WILL BE CONNECTED 

TO SWITCH BOX LOCATED IN TEMPORARY OBSERVATION 


FROM SB TO DAS 
l 
STATION. FROM EACH SWITCH BOX A MULTI CORE CABLE WILL 


GEODETIC BENCHMARK 
RUN UPTO " DAS" IN CONTROL ROOM AT DAM TOP. 


: ӨР6СІ SI 


е10с 


IS 12949 : 2013 


temperature of the water. Connect the piezometer signal 
cable to the readout device. Readings should be checked 
and ensured for their repeatability. Record the frequency 
reading and the temperature reading at the shallow 
depth. 


Lower the piezometer until the other mark on the signal 
cable is lined up with the same reference used for the 
shallow position. Allow the piezometer to adjust to 
temperature at that depth. Readings should be checked 
and ensured for their repeatability. Then record the 
frequency reading, and the temperature reading. 
Convert both readings to units of pressure by applying 
calibration factors. Subtract the shallow pressure from 
the deep pressure. 


Convert both pressure values to feet or meter of liquid 
head and compare to the distance between the two 
marks made on the signal cable. Many factors 
indicating the positioning errors, the specific gravity 
of water, the temperature of the piezometer at each 
depth, affect the accuracy of this test. Correction should 
be made for these. 


NOTES 

1 It is done to avoid altitude correction. 

2 The real purpose of the test is to verify that the piezometer 
gives roughly the reading that was expected. 


5 INSTALLATION 


5.1 Saturating Filters 


The filter from piezometer should be removed and 
soaked or boiled in water for about 15 min or until the 
filter is saturated with water. The filter can be removed 
by opening the locking nut with a spanner wrench. In 
some models the filter is removed by pulling out the 
filter holder. In some other models the filter can be 
removed by unscrewing the conical tip. 


Before replacing the filter, the end of the piezometer 
should be filled with water. With the filter end of the 
piezometer facing up, the filter should be replaced. A 
small amount of water may squeeze through the filter 
stone as this is done. 


Assembled piezometer should quickly be inserted into 
a bottle or bucket of water, keeping it submerged while 
it is transported to the field. Water enclosed between 
diaphragm and filter should not leak out before 
installation of the piezometer. А saturated filter with 
no air gap should be ensured for accurate readings. 


5.2 Installing Piezometers in Open Standpipes 


This procedure may be used for the installation of 
piezometers, which are in the vicinity of the dam-site 
but are located outside the foundation area. For 
monitoring water level in an open standpipe, sufficient 
time should be allowed for level to stabilize after 


lowering piezometer assembly into the borehole. 


5.3 Installing Piezometers in Foundations 


The procedure described herein can be used for 
installing piezometers in the foundation of the earth 
and rock-fill dam. A typical piezometer cable assembly 
before installation is shown in Fig. 3. A traditional 
borehole installation requires that the total depth of 
the hole be drilled to one meter past the planned 
piezometer installation depth. Installation procedure 
should be as follows: 


a) Flush the borehole with water or 
biodegradable drilling mud. 


b) Create a sand zone using a tremie to drop wet 
sand to the borehole bottom. Elevate casing 
to maintain casing above the sand level. 


c) Tie piezometer to signal cable suitably. 


d) Lower the piezometer into the borehole when 
the desired sand level is achieved. 


e) After piezometer is lowered to the desired 
depth, add sand with a tremie and continue 
pulling the casing until it is above piezometer. 
Continue filling with sand until at least 150 
mm of sand has been layered above the 
piezometer (see Note). 


f) Isolate the piezometer by creating a bentonite 
clay seal above the piezometer sand zone 
created in step ‘e’. Installation specifications 
should be referred for thickness of seal. 
Typical seal thickness is a minimum of 300 
mm. Bentonite chips should be used and the 
seal should be created slowly to ensure that 
no disturbance takes place in the piezometer 
placement. Continue to pull casing up to 
complete this step. 


g) Bentonite Setup Time — Maintain a water-filled 
borehole while the bentonite sets up. Typical time 
for the bentonite chips to set up and form a seal 
is 2 to 3 h. Bentonite supplier's directions should 
be consulted for recommended time intervals. 


h) Completely fill remaining borehole with 
suitable grout mixture. 


j) Mark piezometer cable at surface with stake 
or flag. Terminate wires and connect to 
vibrating-wire readout. If the vibrating wire 
readout is weather proof it may not need any 
further protection from the elements. 


k) Start taking periodic reading. Initial pressure 
readings typically shall be high. 


m) Continue to evaluate readings as installation 
stabilizes. Installation stabilization is 
contingent on local conditions, including soil 
permeability. Complete datum readings after 


installation stabilizes; this period сап be hours 
or days depending on local conditions. 


NOTE — It is done by placing a piezometer into a canvas 
bag filled with sand and tying the top of the bag by a 
suitable string and placing the same in the bronze metal 
screen and subsequently the same is lowered. 


Tie string — | 


wre Sensor cable 


_7— Open top 


a. 


25---- Tie wire 


) 


` s*—— Bronze metal screen 


шә 


— ———- Water saturated 
clean sand (2-4 mm) 


Length varies 


=> Vibrating wire 
iN Pore pressure cell 
III 


2 EM 
5 Cloth bag 


—— Tie wire 


70 


АП dimensions in millimetres. 


Fic. 3 PIEZOMETER CABLE ASSEMBLY BEFORE 
INSTALLATION 


5.4 Grouted Borehole Installation 


Certain situations may require the boreholes to be 
grouted after the installation of the piezometers. A 
grouted borehole installation requires that the total 
depth of the hole be drilled to 1 m past the planned 
piezometer installation depth. The following 
installation procedure should be followed: 


a) Flush the borehole with water or 
biodegradable drilling mud. 

b) Tie piezometer to signal cable suitably. 

c) Lower piezometer into borehole. Add 
additional weight (sand bag) if necessary. 

d) Completely fill remaining borehole with 
suitable grout mixture. The requirement of the 
grout mix is that it should have the same 
stiffness as the surrounding ground. 

e) Mark piezometer cable at surface with stake 


IS 12949 : 2013 


or flag. Terminate wires and connect to 
Vibrating-Wire Readout. The weatherproof 
vibrating wire readout may not need any 
further protection from the elements. 


f) Start taking periodic reading. Initial pressure 
readings shall be high. Continue to evaluate 
readings as installation stabilizes. Installation 
stabilization is contingent on local conditions, 
including soil permeability. Complete datum 
readings after installation stabilizes; this 
period can be hours or days depending on 
local conditions. 


5.5 In-Situ or Push-in Installation 


Sometimes it may be desirable to push the piezometers 
in rather than drill and install them. This installation 
method requires a cone-head piezometer. It provides 
the advantage of readings from an instrument placed 
directly into the native formation. However, it also 
requires extra precaution to prevent twisting of the 
signal cable or damaging the piezometer by exerting 
too much force while driving it into position. 


The piezometer has a right-hand thread. A disposable 
adapter is needed to thread onto to the piezometer to 
make the drill rod connection. The following 
installation procedure should be followed: 


a) Assemble the adapter to the piezometer. 


b) Attach a coupling pin to the bottom of the 
drill rod and feed signal cable through the drill 
rod. Continue assembling the drill rod string 
while threading the cable. Cable length should 
be adequate for total installation depth plus 
surface distance requirements. If borehole 
depth requires drill rod be added as 
piezometer is lowered, it should be ensured 
that no twisting of cable occurs. 


c) Connect the vibrating wire readout to the 
cable. Begin taking readings as piezometer is 
pushed into the borehole bottom. Ensure that 
pressures do not exceed the maximum range 
(capacity) of the piezometer shown on the 
calibration certificate. If pressure exceeds this 
maximum, slow or halt the piezometer push- 
in until the excess pressure dissipates. 


d) Detach drill rod. 


e) Completely fill remaining borehole with 
suitable grout mixture. 


f) Wait for pressure readings to stabilize. 
Excessive pore water pressure caused by the 
push-in is typical immediately after 
installation. Installation of a bentonite cap 
may cause a reverse pressure effect as the 
bentonite draws water away from the 
piezometer. 


IS 12949 : 2013 


g 


h) 


Mark piezometer cable at surface with stake 
or flag. Terminate wires and connect to 
vibrating wire readout. 

Start to collect periodic readings. Initial 
pressure readings typically will be high. 
Continue to evaluate readings as installation 
stabilizes. Installation stabilization is 
contingent on local conditions, including soil 
permeability. Complete datum readings after 
installation stabilizes; this period can be hours 
or days depending on local conditions. 


5.6 Embankment Installation 


The following installation procedure should be 
followed for the piezometers that will be installed in 
an embankment as it is being constructed: 


a) 


b) 


с) 


4) 


е) 


g) 


Form a shallow horizontal trench or slot for 
the piezometer. Carefully place the 
piezometer into the trench. Avoid kinking the 
cable during installation. 

Place a bentonite seal over the installation to 
isolate the piezometer. Continue to build the 
embankment over the piezometer. 

Continue to protect the cable from sharp 
bends along its path. Avoid crossing cables. 
If necessary to cross cable paths, isolate cables 
with fine material between them. 

Bury cable using fine embankment materials, 
compacting lightly. Continue process creating 
layers over the cable until it is covered with 
at least 0.5 m of material. Use only light 
tamping equipment. 

Build water stops as specified. 

Mark piezometer cable at surface with stake 
or flag. Terminate wires and connect to 
vibrating wire readout. 

Start to collect periodic readings. Initial 
pressure readings typically shall be high. 
Continue to evaluate readings as installation 
stabilizes. Installation stabilization is 
contingent on local conditions, including soil 
permeability. Complete datum readings after 
installation stabilizes; this period can be hours 
or days depending on local conditions. 


5.7 Laying of Cables 


5.7.1 General Precautions 


Careful and skilled cabling is required in installation 
of piezometer as sensor/cable joint and a large part of 
cable is permanently embedded and no future access 
is available for any maintenance and corrective action. 


The procedure for laying cable differs with individual 
installations. In general, however, all installations have 


the following common requirements: 


a) 


b) 


с) 


4) 


е) 


Cable should be protected from damage by 
angular and sharp particles of material in 
which it is embedded. 

Cables may be spliced without affecting 
sensor reading; nevertheless splicing should 
be avoided, wherever possible. If necessary, 
use special cable jointing kits available from 
factory. 

In earth/rock embankments and backfill, cable 
shall be protected from stretching due to 
differential compaction of embankment. 
Cable shall also be protected from damage 
by compaction equipment. 

Cables should be protected against prolonged 
exposure to sun and mechanical damage. It 
is, therefore, necessary that the cable is 
properly covered at all times. 

Cable should be earthed at suitable locations. 


5.7.2 Cable Trenches 


a) 


b) 


с) 


4) 


At any cross-section, filling of dam is allowed 
to continue to an elevation of around 0.5 to 
] m higher than where piezometers are to be 
mounted. Positions where piezometers 
(whether foundation or embankment) are to 
be mounted should be carefully marked. 
Offset trenches as per Fig. 4 and Fig. 5 to reach 
correct required elevation are dug at these 
positions. 

Material around sensor should be placed by 
hand shovel and compacted with a light duty 
pneumatic or petrol backfill tamper. First 
layer of material over sensor should be around 
250 mm high and compacted properly. 
Similar layers of material should be put over 
this and compacted properly until at least 500 
mm of material has been placed. Rubber tyre 
equipment can cross the location, but no 
vibratory rollers should be permitted over the 
sensor until a compacted thickness of at least 
1 mis laid. 

A cable trench around 400-800 mm wide and 
up to 900 mm deep maximum is dug along 
the offset trenches, as shown in Fig. 4 and 
Fig. 5. Depth and width depends upon number 
of cables trench has to carry. Based upon cable 
layout design, the trench runs into abutment 
and then along abutment to downstream side 
or directly to downstream side towards 
observation room. These cable trenches carry 
the individual cables from piezometers to 
observation room. 


Before laying cables, trench should be 


properly cleaned and levelled with 30 mm of 
fine sand at bottom of trench along the path. 
Any sharp rocks should be removed to prevent 
cable from accidentally getting damaged. 
Centre distance between successive cables 
should be kept at around 25 mm. A distance 
of 100 mm must be left free from sides of 
trench. To take care of any increase in length 
due to settlements, cable should be zig-zagged 
by providing a uniformly distributed slack of 
around 0.5 m in a 15 m length of each cable. 

e) Ininstances in which more than one layer of 
cables are placed in a given array, the cables 
should be separated from each other by a 
vertical interval of not less than 75 mm of hand 
compacted sand or selected fine embankment 
material. 


f) Bentonite plug [a mixture of 5 percent 
bentonite and 95 percent embankment material 
(by volume)] should be placed at 15 m 
intervals, or midway between the piezometer 
tips whenever, distance is smaller. 


6) In rockfill dams with earth fill cores, it is 
convenient to install sensors and cables in 
trenches in core and fine filter zones and in 
ramps in coarse filter and compacted rock fill 
shell zones. A typical installation of cable in 
the rockfill region is illustrated in Fig. 6. 
Carefully graded rockfill should be used 
around the cable trench. While routing of 
cables through rockfill, the main trenches 
carrying cables should be filled with coarse 
sand completely passing 5 mm sieve. The 
relative spacing between individual layers of 
cables as shown in Fig. 6 may be maintained. 
The graded material surrounding the main 
trench should be provided with properly 
graded layers to prevent migration of sand 
filling in the main trench. 


5.7.3 Vertical Routing of Cable 


In some embankment dams vertical routing of signal 
cables from sensors should be avoided as far as 
possible. However, in some cases, vertical routing of 
cable is convenient or unavoidable. In such cases the 
cables should be routed vertically only through the 
filter. Figure 7 schematically shows preferred method 
for vertical routing of instrumentation cables through 
the filter. 


5.8 Cable Care 


Cable problems are a common cause of bad data in 
geotechnical measurement programmes. Following 
precautions should be taken to reduce the chances of 
cable damage in the project: 


IS 12949 : 2013 


a) Cable should be protected from sharp objects, 
which can cut through the jacket and into the 
conductors. If the cable has to be buried, fine 
sand or clay should be used as the burial 
material, not rocks or sharp stones. If this is 
not possible, the cable should be protected by 
enclosing it in conduit. 

b) To prevent tension of buried cable resulting 
from ground settlement, the cable should be 
routed with a zig zag pattern. A horizontal zig 
zag of 0.5 m in every 15 m may be provided. 

c) Ifmultiple cables are routed in the same trench, 
they should be separated by 25 mm or more. 
Crossing of cables should be avoided. 


d) Cables should be tagged at regular intervals 
to make for easy identification in the field. 

e) Cables should be kept away from chemical 
solvents, as certain solvents can attack the 
plastic jacket and insulation. 


6 TAKING READINGS 


The easiest way to take readings from the vibrating- 
wire piezometer is by using the portable readout unit. 
The portable readout reads the piezometer, displays 
the reading, and stores for subsequent downloading to 
the computer. Reference should be made to the user's 
manual given by the manufacturer for complete details. 


For situations where continuous logging of piezometer 
output is required, a single-channel logger, or a multi- 
channel datalogger may be used. Reference should be 
made to the user's manuals of these products given by 
the manufacturer for operational details. 


6.1 Initial Reading 


In any vibrating wire piezometer, when wire is plucked, 
it has an initial frequency reading when no pressure is 
exerted on its diaphragm. It is therefore necessary that 
an initial zero reading be accurately determined for 
each piezometer, as this reading shall be used for 
subsequent data reduction. The reading prior to 
installation, when no pressure has been applied, should 
be taken as initial reading. 


Special consideration should be given to the following: 


a) Make sure that piezometer temperature 
reaches thermal equilibrium. Temperature 
variation across body of piezometer results 
in temperature transients and consequently 
error in reading. Allow 20-25 min for 
piezometer temperature to stabilize. Take 
particular care that sunlight does not fall on 
any surface of piezometer. 

b) Makesure that filter is fully saturated with water. 
Reading shall be seriously affected due to 


IS 12949 : 2013 


surface tension effects in pores of filter in case 
filter is not fully saturated. At low pressures 
below 50 kPa, the problem is more acute. 

c) Make sure that temperature and barometric 
pressure are recorded at the time of taking 
Zero reading. 


6.2 Taking of Readings 


The observations of the pore pressure cells should 
begin as soon as the instruments are covered and may 
continue at gradually increased time intervals as 
recommended by the designer(s). During construction 
stages, the readings with time and date are stored in 
the read-out and should be transferred to the computer 


Piezometer cables 12 mm apart 
Trench 


Hole for 
Foundation type tip 


Offset trench 


Offset trench 


Place embankment 
tips in offset trench 


Suitable Grout 


300, Length varies ,300, 500 


at regular intervals. After construction is over, it is 
advisable to store and process the readings directly in 
a data acquisition system. 


7 CONVERTING FREQUENCY READINGS TO 
PRESSURE 


Many of these functions can be performed automatically 
by the devices described above. After installation of the 
piezometer in the field, it should be allowed to reach 
thermal equilibrium (typically 20-25 min) before taking 
the first reading. Temperature gradients through the body 
of a piezometer can cause reading errors. Calibration 
values are generally given in the calibration certificate 
provided with each piezometer. 


To terminal well 


12 min. (Ен 


600-800 


400-800 Main trench 


Compacted 
earth fill 


900 max. 


o00090 
pooodoo 


Selected fine material 
Cables 


P ore pressure cell assembly 


Clean saturated sand 
9100 min. drill hole 


АП dimensions in millimetres. 


Fic. 4 TYPICAL INSTALLATION OF PIEZOMETER IN FOUNDATION OF DAM 


IS 12949 : 2013 


! 


A Varies 


300 300 


SOPORE 52 
Offset trench 

с 
[i 


ҳе —i 
X t =ч 


= 


Cables x4 | 


- 8 | X с ra 
A [к> =l š Main trench | 
— Bentonite plug 
| 300 
м. л — = | 
| | 
B 


450 600 100 
La == = be 
300 
аа 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


Manually compacted back fill — zxiEmbankmeni level 


Selected fine material — is Ж 
- q = Ра === 
К ` 
ч N 2? 
| Ë | 
\ X - È 8 
е вче, алан op 
т 0000000 ---- 
(por осочооо - 
= П "Y ə 9 
3 8 
сч 
1 
199. 600 SES 450 =| “Cables 
A-A 
300 450 300 
Ед | 
| H Т th тәуе? 
Main trench -— | 
' b! des 
Y ШЫ” 
= ' ' Y 2. 
Embankment soil ----- | | ! | 
' 4 wo 
p N REN ET 59 
Selected fine material ------------- g 000000 4 _ | 
Cables SSS 000000 UE 
аа x 7 1 
zs PE 
Bentonite plug e 
OIM | 
| араш J ка TX 
B-B 
Hand compacted earth mp лүш - 
fill іп main trench — | 450 | 
f w ` ° 
| E " 
Embankment soil --- ! | | 
—' DLL 
Selected fine material —— — — o ooo 1 
Cables SSS 000000 e el | 
Lt, MM LZ Z2 LC verd — 


C-C 
(Cross Sections A-A, B-B and C-C) 


All dimensions in millimetres. 
Fic. 5 TYPICAL INSTALLATION OF PIEZOMETER IN EMBANKMENT OF DAM 


9 


IS 12949 : 2013 


Rock fill 


"e. 


Graded material 


=] 
hy. 
а"; 


Sand finer than 5 mm. 


Fic. 6 CABLE ROUTING IN ROCKFILL REGION 


Sensors 
Core 


Cable 
Filter zone 


Fic. 7 VERTICAL ROUTING OF CABLE THROUGH FILTER 


7.1 Transducer Constants C = coefficient of temperature, in Н22/°С; 
The value of calibration factor K, constant C and A, A, = atmospheric pressure at the time of 
are provided by the instrument manufacturer by calibration, in kPa; 
calibrating the instruments in the factory. The pore A = atmospheric pressure at the time of 
pressure P (in kPa) at any time can then be determined installation, in kPa; 
as follows: t, = temperature of instrument at the time of 
calibration in °C; and 
P-K[Qg?2-f)-C(t—-0]-(A,-A) s Р 
h t = temperature of instrument at the time of 
Were Observation, in ?C. 
К = calibration factor, in KPa/Hz^; The value of K and f, are fed into the read-out unit or 
= zero frequency, in Hz at t °С; data acquisition system which then give the pore 
о 4 M o q y в р 
f = frequency, in Hz at °C: pressure reading directly in engineering units. 


10 


7.2 Presentation of data 


Data from piezometers should be duly processed and 
presented in the following graphical formats: 


a) Construction Stage — Plot to be drawn for 
pore pressure and embankment height versus 
time. 


b) Operation Stage — Pore potential, reservoir 
level versus time. 


8 TEMPERATURE CORRECTION 


Thermistor for temperature measurement should be 
integrated with all vibrating wire piezometers. The 
thermistor gives a varying resistance output related to 


IS 12949 : 2013 


the temperature and can be calculated by using the 
following equation: 


T = 1А + B(LnR) + C(LnR)] - 273.2 


where 


Т = temperature, in °С; 
LnR = natural log of thermistor resistance; 
A = constant; 
B = constant; and 
C = constant. 


The resistance is measured with an ohmmeter. The cable 
resistance is subtracted from the ohmmeter reading to 
get the correct thermistor resistance. The value for the 
constants is generally given by the manufacturer. 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Hydraulic Structures Instrumentation Sectional Committee, WRD 16 


Organization 
Central Soil & Materials Research Station, New Delhi 
AIMIL Ltd, New Delhi 


Andhra Pradesh Power Generation Corporation Limited, Hyderabad 


Bhakra Beas Management Board, Nangal Township 


Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


Central Soil & Materials Research Station, New Delhi 


Central Water & Power Research Station, Pune 


Central Water Commission, New Delhi 


Consulting Engineering Services (I) Ltd, New Delhi 


Damodar Valley Corporation Ltd, Bihar 


Encardio-Rite Electronics Pvt Ltd, Lucknow 


ПТ, Roorkee, Uttarakhand 


Irrigation Department, Government of Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad 


Irrigation Department, Government of Gujarat, Vadodara 


Irrigation Department, Government of Maharashtra, Nasik 


Irrigation Department, Government of Punjab, Chandigarh 


Irrigation Research Institute, Roorkee 


11 


Representative(s) 
Suni Murari RATNAM, Director (Chairman) 


Suri S. P. Gupta 
SHRI SANJAY Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI D. SUDARSHAN 


DIRECTOR (DAM SAFETY) 
EXECUTIVE ENGINEER (Alternate) 


ӛнкі AJAY CHAURSIA 
SHRI JALAJ PARASHAR (Alternate) 


SHRI S. L. GUPTA 
Suri R. K. Матнов (Alternate) 


SHRI S. GOVINDAN 
ӛнкі R. Au (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR (INSTRUMENTATION) 
DIRECTOR EMBANKMENT (N&W) (Alternate) 


SHRI S. S. NARANG 
Suri P. K. Durra (Alternate) 


CHIEF ENGINEER (CIVIL) 
SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER (CIVIL) (Alternate) 


SHRI Амор GUJRAL 
Sarı K. K. Елі (Alternate) 


Dn R. P. SINGH 
Dr Nayan SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI M. ASHOK KUMAR 
SHRI А. MANOJ Kumar (Alternate) 


Director (GERI) 


SHRI R. К. BAMANE 
Suri P. P. Вікар (Alternate) 


CHIEF ENGINEER (DAM DESIGN) 


CHIEF ENGINEER DESIGN 
SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER (Alternate) 


IS 12949 : 2013 


Organization Representative(s) 


Karnataka Power Corporation Ltd, Karnataka CHIEF ENGINEER (Суп. DESIGNS) 
PRorECT ENGINEER DesiGns (Alternate) 


Kerala State Electricity Board, Kerala Suri PHILIP ZACHARIAH 
EXECUTIVE ENGINEER (Alternate) 
NHPC Ltd, Faridabad Suri A. К. JAIN 


Suri H. V. S. Ruprappa (Alternate) 


NTPC Limited, Noida, U.P. Suri R. С. SENAN 
SHRI MADHUKAR AGARWAL (Alternate) 


Pubic Works Department, Government of Tamil Nadu, Tamil Nadu ENGINEER IN CHIEF (WRO) AND CHIEF ENGINEER (G1) 
SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER (Alternate) 


Satluj Jal Vidyut Nigam Limited, New Shimla SHRI BRIJESH KUMAR GUPTA 


Tamil Nadu Electricity Board, Chennai Suri V. SANTHANAKRISHNAN 
Suri S. SIVAKUMAR (Alternate I) 
SHRI V. GOPALAKRISHNAN (Alternate П) 


Uttarakhand Jal Vidyut Nigam Limited, Dehradun ӛнкі Vyas DEV AJMANI 
Suri N. K. MAHESHWARI (Alternate) 
In personal capacity (C-3/3188, Vasant Kunj, New Delhi 110070) Dn A. K. DHAWAN 
BIS Directorate General Suri J. C. Arora, Scientist ‘F & Head (WRD) 


[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
Dr R. К. DasH 
Scientist “С” (WRD), BIS 


12 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: WRD 16 (0504). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern. : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.L T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. KOCHI. 
LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


