( Reaffirmed 2004 )

k5 : 827% ( Part H) m 1976 [ Sssp&edix~gIS: 2032(PartI)-1962-J

Indian Standard
GUIDE FOR PREPARATION OF DIAGRAMS, CHARTS AND TABLES FOR ELECTROTECHNOLOGY
PART I DEFINITIONS Standards AND Sectional CLASSIFICATION Committee,
Representing
Bharat Bijtee Ltd, Bombay; and Rotating Sectional Committee, ETDC 15, IS1 Machinery

Electrotechnical
Chairman SEIU J. S. Zavzar Members SHRI H. V. BADRINATW
SWRI V. K. BATRA DR A. S. BHADURI SHRI M. R. BHAT SHRI V. S. BHATIA

ETDC

1

Wireless Planning & Co-ordination Wing, Ministry of Communications, New Delhi National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi National Test House, Calcutta Con$ctoo; & Cables Sectional Committee, ETDC Switchgear & Controlgear Sectional Committee, ETDC 17. ISI Indian Electrical Manufacturers' Association, Bombay

SHRI V. W. CHEMBURKAR Soar R. M. NANAVATI ( Al&mate ) Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) BRIQ N. DAYAL LT-COL S. S. SINCHAL ( Alternate ) Central Electricity Authority ( Department of Power), DIRECTOR ( TED ) Ministry of Energy DEPUTY DIPJC~OR ( TED ) ( Rftnnatc ) Directorate General of Posts & Telegraphs (Ministry GENERAL MANAGER of Communications ), New Delhi DIRECTOR ( TRANSMISSION ) ( Alternate ) Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Bhopal SHRI K. C. KAUL Electronics & Radar Development Establishment COL C. D. h{ALANEY ( Ministry of Defence ), Bangalore SHRI V. L. SASTRY ( Alternate ) Electronic Equipment Sectional Committee, LTDC SHRI S. N. MITRA 4, ISI General Nomenclature & Symbols Subcommittee, PROP R. C. NARAYANAN ETDC 1: 3, IS1 Transformers Sectional Committee, ETDC 16, IS1 SHRI U. K. PATWARDHAN Central Eiectrochemical Research Institute ( CSlR), SHRl R. RADHAKXISHNAN Karaikudi SHR~ H. N. VENKOBARAO ( Alternate )

Q Copyright
INDIAN STANDARDS

1977
INSTITUTION

This publication is p:otected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an iofringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS:8270(Partf)-1976
( Coniinusd~om pugs 1 )
Members
SHRl K. N. RAMASWAMY

Rcjnsenting Electrical Wiring Accessories Sectional Committee, ETDC 44, ISI Relays Sectional Committee, ETDC 35, IS1 Institution of Engineers ( India ), Calcutra Secondary Cells & Batteries Sectional Committee, ETDC 11, ISI Semiconductor Devices & Integrated Circuits Scctional Committee, LTDC 10, IS1 Director General, IS1 ( hk-ojicio Member ) Secretary

DR T. S. M. RAO DR S. M. SEN DR H. V. K. UDUPA
DR B. H. WADIA

SHRIS. P. SACHDEV,

Director ( Elec tech )

SHRIJAQDLSH CI~ANDIU
Assistant Director ( Elec tech ), IS1

General

Nomenclature

and Symbols Subcommittee,

ETDC

1:3

Convmer
PROP R. C. NARAYANAN Members
SHRI V. K. BATRA SHRI V. S. BHATIA

Delhi College of Engineering, Delhi

National Physical Laboratory ( CSlR ), New Delhi Siemens India Ltd, Bombay SARI N. K. JAYARAMAN ( Alternate ) Central Electricity Authority ( Department of Power ), DEPUTY DIRECTOR ( TED ) Ministry of Energy Department of Communications ( Posts & Telegraphs SHRI M. N. MATHIIR Board )., New Delhi Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi SHRI S. RAMABHADRAN
SHRI N. C. TANDAN Voltas Limited, Bombay

2

IS:8270(PartI)-1976

Indian Standard
GUIDE FOR PREPARATION OF DIAGRAMS, CHARTS AND TABLES FOR ELECTROTECHNOLOGY
PART I DEFINITIONS AND CLASSIFICATION

0. 0.1This

FOREWORD

Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 26 November 1976, after the draft finalized by the Electrotechnical Standards Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council. 0.2 A number of standards have been published on graphical symbols for use on diagrams in the field of electrotechnology ( see various parts of IS : 2032*). After having covered most of the needs for graphical symbols, with the cxccption of those for new fields of electrotechnology still under consideration, it has been found advisable to supplement the standards on symbols with standards for the preparation of diagrams. 0.3 This standard will include definitions and classification of diagrams, charts and tables; guiding principles for: (a) use and combination of graphical~symbols; (`o) for preparation of diagrams; (c) for supplementing or replacing diagrams by charts and tables; item designation; etc. 0.4 This standard is being brought out in five parts as follows: Guide for preparation of diagrams, charts and tables technology: Part I Definitions and classifkatibn Part II Part III Part IV Part V 0.5 This Item designation requirements diagrams diagrams and tables. IS : 2032 ( Part I )-1962t. I ) supersedes for diagrams General Circuit for electro-

Interconnection ( Part

standard

0.6 In the preparation of this standard assistance has been derived from IEC Pub 113-l ( 1971 ) ` Diagrams, charts, tables: Part 1 Definitions and classification ' issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission. *Graphical symbols used in clectrotechnology. tGraphica1 symbols used in electrotechnology: Part I Classification and definitions of diagrams and charts. 3

IS : 8270 ( Part I ) - 1976 1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard ( Part I ) covers the definitions grams, charts and tables used in electrotechnology tions or show connections and to give information lation and maintenance.
1.2 Two kinds of classification a) b) classification classification according according have been adopted to purpose, to method and of representation. and classification of diain order to explain funcfor manufacture, instal-

:

NOTE- In practice, the type of diagram is determined by its purpose, the method(s) of representation being chosen for convenience.

2. DEFINITIONS 2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall apply.

2.1 Diagram - A diagram may show the manner in which the various parts of a network, installation, group of apparatus or items of an apparatus are interrelated and/or interconnected. 2.2 Chart a) b) c) 2.3 Table A chart may show the interrelation between: different operations operations operations, and time, and physical quantities, and a diagram or a chart.

d) the states of several items. A table replaces or supplements

3. CLASSIFICATION 3.1 a) b) c) explanatory explanatory wiring

ACCORDING are : ( see 3.1.1 diagrams charts

TO PURPOSE ), ), ), and ). ( see 3.1.3

The main classifications

or tables or tables

( see 3.1.2 ( see 3.1.4

diagrams diagrams

or wiring

tables

d) location

3.1 .l Explanatory Diagrams - Explanatory diagrams are intended to facilitate the study and understanding of the functioning of an installation or equipment. Three types are defined in 3.1.1.1 to 3.L1.3. 3.1.1.1 Block diagram - Relatively simple diagram to facilitate the understanding of the principle of operation. It is a diagram in which an installation or equipment together with its functional interrelationships are represented by symbols, block symbols or pictures without necessarily showing all the connections. 3.1.1.2 Circuit diagram - Explanatory diagram intended to facilitate the understanding of the functioning in detail. It shows by symbols an 4

IS : 8270 ( Part

1~) - 1976

installation or part of an installation and the electrical connections and other links concerned with its operation. 3.1 .1.3 Equivalent circuit diagram - Special type of circuit diagram ~for the analysis and calculation of circuit characteristics. 3.1.2 Explanatov Charts or Tables - Explanatory charts or tables are intended to facilitate the study of diagrams and to give additional information. Two examples are given below: a) Sequence chart or table - Gives the successive operations in a specified order, and b) Time sequence chart or table - Is one which in addition takes account of the time intervals between successive operations. 3.1.3 Wiring Diagrams or Wiring Tables - Wiring diagrams are intended to guide the making and checking of the connections of an installation or equipment. For an equipment, they show the internal or external connections or both. The diagrams may sometimes show the layout of the different parts and accessories, such as terminal blocks and the wiring between them. 3.1.3.1. Unit wiring diagram within a unit of an installation. Diagram representing representing all connections
the

3.1.3.2 Interconnection diagram - Diagram between the different units of an installation.

connections and the

3.1.3.3 Terminal diagram - Diagram showing the terminals internal and/or external conductors connected to them.
NOTE -

Any of the wiring diagrams may be replaced or supplemented by a -table.

3.1.4 Location Diagrams or Tables - A location diagram or table contains detailed information about the location of parts of the equipment, for cxample, terminal blocks, plug-in units, sub-assemblies, modules, etc. It shows the item designations used in related diagrams and tables.
NOTE 1 A location diagram need not necessarily be to scale. NOTE Z(Applicable to 3.1.1 to 3.1.4) - Several types of diagrams may be combined into a single diagram, forming a mixed diagram. The same drawing may -form both an explanatory and wiring diagram.

4. CLASSIFZCATION

ACC0RDII'JG

TO MEi'H0D

OF

REPRESENTATION 4.1 The method of representation is distinguished by: al the number of conductors, devi.ces or elements represented by a single symbol ( see 4.1.1 ); the arrangement of the symbols representing the elements or b) parts of an item of apparatus ( for example, detached or assemtled ) ( see 4.1.2 ); and 5

ISr6!270(PartI)-1976
C) the

placing of the symbols to correspond with the topographical layout of the devices ( see 4.1.3 ).

4.1-l .Number of Conductors - According to the number of conducton, devices or elements represented by a single symbol, the two methods of representation as given in 4.1.1.1 and 4.1.1.2 may be distinguished. 4.1.1.1 Single-line representation - Two or more conductors are represented by a single line. In particular, a single line may represent: a) circuits of a multiphase system, b) circuits which have a similar electrical function, c) circuits or conductors which belong to the same signal path, d) circuits which follow the same physical route, and e) conductor symbols which would follow the same route on the diagram. Several similar items of apparatus may accordingly be represented by a single symbol. 4.1.1.2 Multi-line individual line.
representation -

Each conductor is represented by an

of the 4.1.2 Arrangement of Symbols - According to the arrangement symbols representing the elements or parts of an item of apparatus on the diagram, the methods of representation are given in 4.1.2.1 to 4.1.2.3. symbok for the different parts 4.1.2.1 Assembled representation -The of an item of apparatus or of an installation or equipment are drawn in close proximity on the diagram. 4.1.2.2 Semi-assembled representation - The symbols for the difierent parts of an item of apparatus or of an installation are separated and arranged in such a way that the symbols for mechanical linkages between the parts which work together may be drawn easily. 4.1.2.3 Detached representation - The symbols for the different parts of an item of apparatus or of an installation are separated and arranged in such a way that the circuits may easily be followed. positions of the symbols on the 4.1.3 Topographical Representation -The diagram correspond wholly or gartly to the topographical ( physical ) location of items represented. The following are examples where topographical representation may be used : a) Wiring diagrams, b) Architectural diagrams, and c) Network diagrams.
NOTE- ( Applicable to 4.1.1 to 4.1.3 ) - Several of these methods of reprcsentation may be used on the same diagram. 6

