INRI AAF IS 17128 (Part 1) : 2019 
Indian Standard 


saaa aea — aga adi 
uano ugat 
qr aaa an uR Raat 


Automotive Vehicles — Vehicle 
Dynamics Test Methods 


Part 1 General Test Conditions 


ICS 43.020 


© BIS 2019 


mAT HAKA AI 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR NIA, 9 Teg STH AMT, ay Ret - 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


May 2019 Price Group 7 


Automotive Braking and Steering System, Vehicle Testing and Performance Evaluation Sectional Committee, 
TED 04 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Automotive 
Braking and Steering System, Vehicle Testing and Performance Evaluation Sectional Committee had been 
approved by the Transport Engineering Division Council. 


The dynamic behavior of a road vehicle is a most important part of vehicle safety. Any given vehicle, together 
with its driver and the prevailing environment, forms a unique closed-loop system. The task of evaluating 
dynamic behavior is therefore very difficult since there is a significant interaction between these driver-vehicle- 
environment elements, each of which is complex in itself. A complete and accurate description of the behavior of 
the road vehicle must necessarily involve information obtained from a number of tests of different types. Since 
they quantify only a small part of the complete vehicle handling characteristics, the results of these tests can only 
be considered significant for a correspondingly small part of the overall dynamic behavior. 


Less data is acquired to obtain relationship between overall vehicle dynamic properties vs actual driving patterns. 
The effort is going on to do obtain correlation between accident avoidance and vehicle dynamic properties in 
general. Therefore, it is not possible to use this standard for regulatory purposes. Finally, test conditions and tyres 
have a strong influence on test results. Only vehicle dynamic properties obtained under identical test and tyre 
conditions are comparable. 


This Indian Standard is published in several parts. The other parts in this series are: 


Part 2 Steady state test procedures 

Part 3 Transient response test methods 

Part 4 Ride comfort measurements 

Part 5 Subjective evaluation -vehicle ride, handling, steering and tyre evaluation 


In the preparation of this standard considerable assistance has been derived from the following International 
Standards: 


a) ISO 4138 : 2004 Passenger cars -- Steady state circular driving behaviour --- Open loop test methods 
b) ISO 7401 : 2003 Road vehicles — Lateral transient response test methods — Open loop test methods 
c) ISO 7975 : 2006 Passenger cars — Braking in a turn — Open loop test method 


d) ISO/TR 8725 : 1988 Road vehicles — Transient open loop response test method with one period of 
sinusoidal input 


e 


Nas 


ISO/TR 8726 : 1988 Road vehicles — Transient open loop response test method with pseudo-random 
steering input 
f) ISO 9815 : 2003 Road vehicles — Passenger car and trailer combinations — lateral stability test 
g) ISO 12021-1: 1996 Road vehicles — Sensitivity to lateral wind — Part 1: Open loop test method using 
wind generator input 
h) ISO 15037-1 : 2006 Road vehicles — Vehicle dynamics test methods — Part 1: General conditions for 
passenger cars 
j) ISO 17288-2 : 2004 Passenger cars — Free steer behaviour — Part 2: Steering pulse open-loop test 
method 
For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 


“Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised). The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 17128 (Part 1) : 2019 


Indian Standard 


AUTOMOTIVE VEHICLES -- VEHICLE 
DYNAMICS TEST METHODS 


PART 1 GENERAL TEST CONDITIONS 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard (Part 1) specifies general test 
conditions that apply when vehicle dynamics 
measurements to be carried out for M1 categories of 
vehicles as defined in IS 14272. 


1.2 This standard specifies the general conditions 
for vehicle parameters, measuring equipment, data 
processing, environment (that is, test track, wind 
velocity, climate conditions), vehicle preparation for 
loading conditions, Vehicle readiness and Test report 
preparation (general data and test conditions). 


1.3 This standard provides guidelines for various test 
methods used to evaluate vehicle properties and not for 
any regulatory requirements. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standard indicated below contain provisions, which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication the edition 
indicated was valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 


IS No. 
14272 : 2011 


Title 


Automotive vehicles — Types — 
Terminology (first revision ) 


3 VARIABLES 


3.1 Reference System 


The variables of motion to describe vehicle behavior 
in a test-specific driving situation shall be referred to 
vehicle axis system (X,Y,Z). Vehicle fixed co-ordinate 
system (Xx, Yy, Zz) to be used. CG of the vehicle 
in testing condition shall be taken as the reference 
point. 


In case CG point not taken as reference, other specific 
geometry point on the vehicle near to the CG point 
to be taken for the measurement and co-related with 
respect to CG point. 


3.2 Abbreviation 


Xx — Along longitudinal axis of vehicle, origin at CG 
point (postive towards front). 


Yy — Along lateral axis of vehicle, origin at CG point 
(postive towards driver left). 


Zz — Along vertical axis of vehicle, origin at CG point 
(postive upwards). 


Roll angle ( RXx) — Rotation about X-axis of vehicle 
(anti clockwise positive from front view of vehicle). 


Pitch angle (RYy) — Rotation about Y-axis of vehicle 
(anti clockwise positive from left view of vehicle). 


Yaw angle (RZz) — Rotation about Z-axis of vehicle 
(anti clockwise positive from top view of vehicle). 


3.3 Parameters to be Measured 


3.3.1 Static Parameters 
Following static parameters to be measured (see Fig. 1 
and Fig. 2): 

a) Wheel base (1) — Distance between the front tyre 
center to rear tyre center in the side view of the 
vehicle; 

b) Wheel track — Front (T,) — Distance between 
front left tyre center to front right tyre center in 
the front view of the vehicle; 

c) Wheel track — Rear (T ) — Distance between rear 
left tyre center to rear right tyre center in the rear 
view of the vehicle; 

Center of gravity of vehicle, CG — Point at which 
entire weight of the vehicle acts: 


d 


Nay 


1) Longitudinal — From front axle centerline, 

2) Lateral — From vehicle geometric centerline, 

3) Vertical (h) — Height from ground level. 

Static Stability factor (SSF) — The static stability 

Factor of a vehicle is one half the track width, T, 

divided by h, the height of the center of gravity 

above the road; 

f) Front axle weight (FAW) — A part of the total 
mass of vehicle acting at front axle of the vehicle; 
and 


g) Rear axle weight (RAW) — A part for the total 
mass of vehicle acting at rear axle of the vehicle. 


e 


Nas 


IS 17128 (Part 1) : 2019 


FAW RAW 


Fic. 1 Static PARAMETERS TO BE MEASURED (FRONT VIEW) 


Fic. 2 Static PARAMETERS TO BE MEASURED (Top VIEW) 


3.3.2 Dynamic Parameters 


3.3.2.1 Linear variables 


a) Longitudinal Velocity (v,) — Rate of change of 
linear displacement of vehicle in the direction of 
X-axis at reference point. 


b) Longitudinal acceleration (a,) — Rate of change 
of linear velocity of vehicle in the direction of 
X-axis at reference point. 


c) Lateral Velocity (v ) — Rate of change of linear 
displacement of vehicle in the direction of Y-axis 
at reference point. 


d) Lateral acceleration (a) — Rate of change of 
linear velocity of vehicle in the direction of Y-axis 
at reference point. 


3.3.2.2 Rotational motion 


a) Vehicle Roll angle (ev) — Vehicle rotational angle 
about longitudinal (Xx) axis, origin at reference 
point. 

b) Pitch angle (0) — Vehicle rotational angle about 
lateral (Yy) axis, origin at reference point. 


c) Yaw angle (y) — Vehicle rotational angle about 
verticle (Zz) axis, origin at reference point. 


3.3.2.3 Rotational velocity 


a) Roll velocity (dpv/dt) — Rate of change of vehicle 
roll angle at reference point. 


b) Pitch velocity (d0/dt) — Rate of change of vehicle 
pitch angle at reference point. 


c) Yaw velocity (dy/dt) — Rate of change of vehicle 
yaw angle at reference point. 


3.3.2.4 Other dynamic parameters 


a) Front tyre slip angle (a,) — Front tyre slip angle 
is the angular difference between the direction the 
front tyre contact patch with the road is pointing 
and the direction of the wheel. 

Rear tyre slip angle (a ) — Rear tyre slip angle is 
the angular difference between the direction the 
Rear tyre contact patch with the road is pointing 
and the direction of the wheel. 


Body Side slip angle (B) — Angle from the X-axis 
to the direction of the horizontal velocity about the 
Z-axis . 


b 


Nas 


c 


S 


d 


sæ 


Steering wheel angle (6,,) — Angular displacement 
of steering wheel measured from straight 
ahead position. Counter Clock wise rotation is 
positive. 


e 


Nas 


Steering wheel torque (M,,) — Torque applied 
for rotating steering wheel about its own axis. 
Rotation towards left is positive. 


f) Path radius (R) — Distance between vehicle 
trajectory point & instantaneous center. 


IS 17128 (Part 1) : 2019 


3.3.2.5 Understeer gradient (K) 


It is the difference between the front side slip angle to 
rear side slip angle (a, - a). The steady-state handling 
characteristics may be classified into three categories: 


For understeer : (a, > a), K = positive 
For neutral steer : (a4,= a), K = 0 

For oversteer : (a, <a), K = Negative 
3.3.2.5.1 Understeer 


When the understeer coefficient K > 0, which is 
equivalent to the slip angle of the front tyre af being 
greater than that of the rear tyre ar, (that is, a,” a), the 
steer angle required to negotiate a given curve increases 
with the square of vehicle forward speed. 


For an understeer vehicle, a characteristic speed vchar 
may be identified. It is the speed at which the steer 
angle required to negotiate a turn is equal to 2“1/R, as 
shown in the Fig. 3. 


Characteristic 
speed E 2 
R 


Under steer 


y Neutral steer 


> Oversteer 


“Critical speed 


Fic. 3 UNDER STEER GRADIENT 
3.3.2.5.2 Neutral steer 


When the under steer coefficient K = 0, which is 
equivalent to the slip angles of the front and rear tyres 
bring equal that is, a, = a), the steer angle required 
to negotiate a given curve is independent of forward 
speed. 


3.3.2.5.3 Oversteer 


When the understeer coefficient K which is equivalent 
to the slip angle of the front tyre af being less than 
that of the rear tyre ar (that is, a, < a), the steer angle 
required to negotiate a given curve decreases with the 
increase of vehicle forward speed. 


For all oversteer vehicle, a critical speed vchar, can 
be identified. It is the speed at which the steer angle 
required to negotiate any turn is zero. 


IS 17128 (Part 1) : 2019 


NOTE — For specific parameter to be measured, refer the 
relevant part of this Indian Standard. These variables can be 
measured directly or can be calculated from relevant measured 
parameters. 


4 MEASURING EQUIPMENT 


4.1 Description 


Typical operating range and accuracy level of system 
and transducers is shown in Table 1. Appropriate 
transducers and data recording system to be used for 
the data collection with time histories. All data to be 
collected on multi channel recording system in time 
domain. The below specified accuracies shall be 
achieved whether the variables are measured or are 
calculated. 


4.2 Transducers and Installations 


Transducers shall be installed in line to manufacturers 
recommendations/instructions. So that desired variable 
can be directly measured. If it is not possible to 
measure the desired variable at intended position then 
transformation to be carried out to calculate the desired 
variable. 


4.3 Data Processing 


The frequency range relevant tests on dynamics of 
passenger cars is between 0 to 5Hz. Based on whether 
analogue or digital data processing methods are used, 


4.3.1 Analogue Data Processing 


The bandwidth of the entire, combined transducer/ 
recording system shall be no less than 8 Hz. In order 


Table 1 Variable’s typical Range and Recommended Error 
( Clause 4.1 ) 


SINo. Variable Typical operating Range Recommended Max ‘Overall’ Error 
a) 2) (3) (4) 
i) Steering wheel angle -360° to +360° + 1° for < 90° 
+ 2° for > 90° and < 360° 
+ 4° for > 360° 
ii) Steering wheel torque (M,,) -30 N.m to +30 N.m + 0,1 Nm for M,, < 10 Nm 
+ 0,3 Nm for M,,> 10 Nm 
ili) Sideslip angle -20° to +20° +/-0.3° 
iv) Longitudinal velocity 0 to 180 km/h + 1 km/h for v, < 100 km/h 
+ 2 km/h for v, > 100 km/h 
v) Lateral velocity -10 m/s to +10 m/s +/-0.2m/s 
vi) Longitudinal acceleration -15m/s’to +15m/s? +/-0.15m/s? 
vil) Lateral acceleration -15m/s?to +15m/s? +/-0.15m/s? 
viii) Roll angle -15° to +15° +/-0.15° 
ix) Pitch Angle -15° to +15° +/-0.15° 
x) Yaw Angle -30° g to +30° +/-0.30° 
xi) Yaw velocity -50° /s to +50° /s + 0,3°/s for < 20°/s 
+ 1°/s for > 20°/s 
xii) Pitch Velocity -50° /s to +50° /s + 0,3°/s for < 20°/s 
+ 1°/s for > 20°/s 
xiii) Roll Velocity -50° /s to #50? /s + 0,3°/s for < 20°/s 
+ 1°/s for > 20°/s 
xiv) Vertical displacement +/- 0.1m #/-.001m 
KV) Vertical acceleration -30m/s?to +30m/s? +/-0.15m/s? 


to execute the necessary filtering of signals, low-pass 
filters shall be employed. The width of the passband 
(from 0 Hz to frequency /0 at -3 dB) shall not be less 
than 9 Hz. Amplitude errors shall be less than + 0.5 
percent in the relevant frequency range of 0 Hz to 5 Hz. 
All analog signals shall be processed with filters having 
phase characteristics sufficiently similar to ensure that 
time delay differences due to filtering lie within the 
required accuracy for time measurement. 


4.3.2 Digital Data Processing General Considerations 


Preparation of analog signals includes consideration 
of filter amplitude attenuation and sampling rate to 
avoid aliasing errors, and filter phase lags and time 
delays. Sampling and digitizing considerations include 
presampling amplification of signals to minimize 
digitization errors, number of bits per sample, number 
of samples per cycle, sample and hold amplification, 
and timewise spacing of samples. Considerations for 
additional phase less digital filtering include selection 
of passbands and stopbands, and the attenuation and 
allowable ripple in each, as well as correction of 
antialias filter phase lags. Each of these factors must 
be considered if an overall data acquisition accuracy 
of + 0.5 percent is to be achieved. 


5 TEST CONDITIONS 


5.1 General 


Below is the guidelines for ambient and vehicle test 
conditions to be maintained. Any deviations, needs to 
be recorded in reports. 


5.2 Test Track 


Test to be carried out on smooth, dry, clean and uniform 
paved road surface. The gradient of the paved road 
surface should not exceed more than 2 percent in any 
direction when measured over any distance interval 
between that corresponding to vehicle track and 25 
m. For each test, road surface condition and paving 
material shall be recorded in the test report. 


It is recommended to have road gradient less than 1.5 
percent in any direction. 


5.3 Climate Condition 


The ambient wind velocity shall not exceed 5 m/s during 
test. For each test method, wind velocity, direction and 
climate conditions shall be recorded. 


5.4 Test Vehicle 
5.4.1 General Data 


General data of the test vehicle shall be presented in the 
test report shown in Annex A. For any change of vehicle 
specification (that is, load etc), general data shall be 
recorded again. For new vehicle it is recommended to 
have adequate initial run-in before starting the tests. In 
certain cases ambient temp has a significant influence 


IS 17128 (Part 1) : 2019 


on the test results, this should be taken in to account 
when making comparisons between vehicles. 


5.4.2 Tyres 
5.4.2.1 General 


For a general tyre condition, new tyre shall be fitted 
inline to vehicle manufacturer’s specifications. If not 
specified by the tyre manufacturer, they shall be run in 
for at least 150 kms on the test vehicle or an equivalent 
vehicle without excessively harsh use, for example 
braking, acceleration, cornering, hitting the kerb etc. 
After run in, the tyres shall be maintained at the same 
vehicle positions for the tests. 


5.4.2.2 Tread-depth 


Tyre tread depth shall have at least 90 percent of the 
original value across the whole breadth of the tread 
and around the whole circumference of the tyre. 
Tread depth shall be recorded in the test reports. It 
is preferred to measure tread depth at tread wear 
indicators on the tyre or to be measured at the same 
identified locations. 


5.4.2.3 Date of manufacturing 


Date of manufacturing, other regulatory markings on 
tyre, printed construction details should be recorded in 
test reports. The tyre used for testing should not have 
been manufactured before twelve months. The tyre 
side wall photographs may be attached to the report to 
capture manufacturing details of the tyres. 


5.4.2.4 Tyre pressure 


Tyres shall be inflated to the pressure as specified by the 
vehicle manufacturer for the test vehicle configuration 
at the ambient temperature of the test. Tolerance for 
setting the cold inflation pressure is + 5 kPa (+ 0.7 PSI) 
for the pressure up to 250 kPa (36 PSI) and + 2 percent 
for the pressure above 250 kPa (36 PSI). Inflation 
pressure shall be recorded in test reports. 


(1 kPa = 10? bar = 10° N/m? = 0.145 038 PSI) 


5.4.2.5 Others 


Tests may also be performed under conditions other 
than the general tyre conditions. The details shall be 
noted in the test reports. As the tread depth or uneven 
wear may have a significant influence on test results, it 
is recommended that those parameters to be taken into 
account when making comparisons between vehicles 
or between tyres. 


5.4.3 Operating Components 


If any specific part in the vehicle is replaced or the 
geometry of the vehicle is changed, shall be recorded, 
as this may have significant influence on measured 
data for example, suspenion parts, steering parts, brake 
parts, rubber mounts, etc or any other part which can 
change the vehicle weight distributions. 


IS 17128 (Part 1) : 2019 


5.4.4 Loading Conditions of the Vehicle 


The test mass shall be between the complete vehicle 
kerb mass plus driver, test equipment and the maximum 
total mass as specified by vehicle manufacturer. Care 
shall be taken to generate a minimum deviation in the 
location of the centre of gravity and in the moments 
of inertia as compared to the loading conditions of 
the vehicle in normal use. Resulting wheel loads shall 
be determined and recorded in the test report ( Refer 
Annex A and Annex B). Care shall be taken if dummy 
mass is used for loading. Dummy shall represent the 
equivalent passenger mass. 


6 TEST METHODS 


6.1 Warm Up 


All relevant vehicle components shall be warmed 
up prior to the tests in order to achieve component 
temperature representative of the normal driving 
conditions. Tyres shall be warmed up prior to the tests 
to achieve an equilibrium temperature and pressure 
representative of normal driving conditions. 


A procedure equivalent to driving at the test speed 
for a distance of 10 km or driving 500 m at a lateral 
accelerations of 3 m/sec? both left and right turns, may 
be appropriate for warming up the tyres. 


6.2 Initial Driving Condition 
6.2.1 General 


The initial driving condition is specified in most of the 
vehicle dynamics test methods. It can be either steady 
state straight run or steady state circular run. 


If there is no specific requirement defined in a test 
method standard, the test shall be performed in 
the highest suitable gear for vehicles with manual 
transmission and for vehicles with automatic 
transmission in drive-D. The position of the 
transmission lever and the selected driving programme 
shall be recorded in the test report. 


The position of the steering wheel and the accelerator 
pedal shall be kept as constant as possible during the 
initial driving condition. The moment of observation 
t,, to evaluate steady state conditions is defined as the 
point in time which usually is between 0.5 s to 0.8 s 
before the reference point in time t0 of the specific 
test method. The initial condition is considered to be 
sufficiently constant if for the moment if observation t 
the requirements of 6.2.2 and 6.2.3 are fulfilled. 

NOTE — For the method which is used to determine only 


steady state values the moment of observation t and the 
reference time t, will be identical. 


6.2.2 Steady State Straight Ahead Run 


The longitudinal velocity in the initial driving condition 
shall not deviate by more than + Ikm/h (+ 2 km/h for 
the velocities more than 100 km/h) from the nominal 
value during the time interval from t, to t, and the mean 


value of lateral acceleration shall be within a range 
from + 0.3 m/s? as an alternative to the limits of lateral 
acceleration, the mean value of the yaw velocity shall 
be within a range from + 0.5° /s. 


For the time interval from t, to t,, the standard deviation 
of the lateral acceleration shall not exceed 0.3 m/s”. As 
an alternate to the limits of lateral acceleration, the 
standard deviation of the yaw velocity shall not exceed 
0.5°/s. 


The difference between the mean values of the 
longitudinal velocity during the time intervals t, to t, 
and tt, to t, shall not exceed + 1 km/h (+ 2 km/h for the 
velocities exceed 100 km/h). 


6.2.3 Steady State Circular Run 
The initial radius R, shall be calculated as follows: 
R= V, /(de/dt) 
R,FV, /(dc/dt) 
The radius in the initial driving condition shall not 
deviate by more than 2 percent or + 2 m from the 
nominal value during the time interval form t, to t,. 
As shown in the below Fig. 4, for the time interval t, 
to t,, the standard deviation of the lateral acceleration 
shall not exceed 5 percent of its mean value and the 


standard deviation of the longitudinal velocity shall not 
exceed 3 percent of its mean value. 


nN 
Y 
sa a 
> ss b IN 
ht 
05 05 a-Positive standard deviation 
aa a b- Mean value 
c- Negative standard deviation 
0.8 
0.5 
Aa _— > 
ti tss t, lo X 
Terminologies: 
X= time, s; 
Y= measured variable; 


reference point in time of the specific test 
method; 


time measurement 1; 
time measurement 2; and 


t = moment of observation to evaluate steady state 
conditions. 


Fic. 4 STANDARD DEVIATION OF THE LATERAL 
ACCELERATION 


The difference between the mean values of the lateral 
acceleration during the time intervals t, to t. and t, 
to t, shall not exceed the nominal value of the lateral 
acceleration by more than 5 percent. The difference 
between the mean values of the longitudinal velocity 
during the time intervals t, and t, to t, shall not exceed 
the nominal value of longitudinal velocity by more than 
3 percent. 


For the time interval from t, to t,, the mean value of the 
lateral acceleration shall not deviate from the nominal 
value by more than + 3 percent. 


7 TRANSDUCERS 
INSTALLATIONS 


AND THEIR 


7.1 General 


Transducers of various types, some commercially 
available and some specially fabricated, are used in 
measuring the required and optional variables. If a 
transducer does not directly measure the required 
variable, appropriate adjustments shall be made 
to its signal to obtain the required variable with a 
sufficient level of accuracy. Because of the variety 
of instrumentation possibilities, the type of each 
instrument used shall be recorded; and where 
applicable, its location on the vehicle shall be entered 
on the test data sheets. 


7.2 Steering-Wheel Angle 


Steering-wheel angle is measured relative to the sprung 
mass. Typical transducers are multi-turn potentiometers 
or digital shaft encoders, geared to the back of the 
steering wheel or attached to a ‘second steering wheel’. 


7.3 Longitudinal Velocity 


A longitudinal velocity transducer should be installed 
as close as possible to the reference point position on 
the vehicle. The location of the velocity transducer 
shall be recorded and its signal corrected as necessary 
during data processing to provide longitudinal velocity 
at the reference point. Typical transducers are fifth 
wheels with accuracies to 0.2 km/h, and ‘contactless’ 
velocity transducers based upon optical or doppler 
principles, with optical accuracies to 0.1 km/h and 
doppler accuracies to 0.5 km/h. The steady-state fifth- 
wheel signal is very close to horizontal velocity, while 
optical transducers measure longitudinal velocity (the 
component of horizontal velocity in the X direction, 
equal to horizontal velocity multiplied by the cosine of 
the sideslip angle). An additional way to measure the 
longitudinal velocity is by Global Positioning System 
(GPS) sensor (see 7.11). 


7.4 Lateral Velocity and Sideslip Angle 


Lateral velocity at a given point can be measured 
directly by means of a bipolar velocity transducer 
based upon optical principles, installed according to 
the manufacturer’s specifications. The location of the 


IS 17128 (Part 1) : 2019 


transducer must be recorded. Lateral velocity at any 
other point can be obtained by interpolation between 
two lateral velocity transducers or by extrapolation 
from the lateral velocity at the point of measurement, by 
adding the product of yaw velocity times the distance 
to the desired point. Sideslip angle is computed as 
the angle whose tangent is lateral velocity divided by 
longitudinal velocity. Commercially available bipolar 
velocity transducers have full-scale range of + 10 m/s 
and: 1 percent full-scale steady-state accuracy. Sideslip 
angle can be measured directly by a castered trolley, 
attached to the vehicle through gimbals and loading 
springs to keep the caster axis vertical. The sideslip 
angle measured is that which exists at the caster axis. 
The sideslip angle at any other point on the longitudinal 
axis of the vehicle can be computed from the sideslip 
angle at the point of measurement and the yaw velocity. 
The vehicle sideslip angle is defined as that obtained 
for the location of the origin of the vehicle axis system. 
At steady state, accuracies of 0.25° are possible using 
sideslip trolleys. Lateral velocity can also be computed 
by integration of lateral acceleration (corrected for 
position, roll angle, and surface inclination errors) 
minus the product of longitudinal velocity and yaw 
velocity. Sideslip angle is then computed. This 
method is suitable only for short tests because the net 
acceleration error, including zero offsets, is integrated. 


7.5 Angular Velocity 


Yaw, roll and pitch velocity are measured directly by 
angular-rate transducers, installed as specified by the 
manufacturer. The traditional angular-rate sensors are 
rate gyroscopes. Typically, good performance for rate 
gyroscopes includes: linearity of + 0.2 to + 0.5 percent 
full scale to 1/2 full scale and + 1 to + 2 percent to full 
scale; cross-axis sensitivity of 0.04 percent; thresholds 
of 0.05 percent full scale; and hysteresis 0.15 percent 
full scale. ‘Solid-state’ sensors based on the Coriolis 
acceleration of vibrating elements, fiber optics, lasers or 
other principles are also commercially available. These 
typically have performance properties such as: linearity 
of + 0.1 to 1 percent full scale; sensitivity threshold 
of 0.01 percent and zero hysteresis. Angular-rate 
transducers are typically fixed in the vehicle: therefore, 
in steady-state turning they measure earth-plane yaw 
velocity multiplied by the cosine of the vehicle roll 
angle. The signal must be corrected for vehicle roll and 
pitch angles in order to obtain yaw velocity in the earth 
plane. When sideslip transducers are installed at both 
front and rear, yaw velocity in the earth plane can be 
computed from the difference between front and rear 
lateral velocities, divided by the longitudinal distance 
between the transducers. 


7.6 Lateral Acceleration 


In most manoeuvres, particularly in steady state, 
the quantity of interest is centripetal acceleration. 
In practice, lateral acceleration is the quantity that is 


IS 17128 (Part 1) : 2019 


typically measured. Centripetal acceleration can be 
determined from lateral acceleration if other vehicle 
motion variables are also known. Lateral acceleration 
(aY) can be measured by an accelerometer having 
sufficient accuracy over a sufficient bandwidth, which 
includes steady state, and installed in one of the 
following ways: 


a) Mounted on the sprung mass and aligned with its 
sensitive axis aligned with the vehicle YV axis. If 
it is not located at the origin of the vehicle axis 
system, its output will have an error due to yaw, 
roll and pitch accelerations. Although this error 
should not exist under steady-state conditions, 
the accelerometer location should be recorded. 
The position-corrected signal will measure “side 
acceleration”, which in turn must be corrected for 
the component of gravitational acceleration due 
both to the sine of the vehicle roll angle plus that 
of track surface inclination. 


b) Mounted on a platform stabilized by a gyroscope 
system: Position correction considerations are as 
in a), above. Consideration must be given to gyro 
erection and drift errors, as described below: 


An accelerometer mounted to the vehicle sprung 
mass, as in a) and b) above, will measure the lateral 
acceleration of the sprung mass. In steady state, this 
will be equivalent to the lateral acceleration of the 
total vehicle. High quality “servo” accelerometers have 
linearities of + 0.05 to + 0.1 percent full scale, with 
0.02 percent hysteresis and 0.001 percent resolution. 
Accelerometers based upon measurement of beam 
or spring deflection typically have linearities of 
+ 1 percent of full scale. Measurement errors can be 
dominated by installation conditions: for example, 
a 0.6° error in roll angle compensation will cause a 
0.01 g acceleration measurement error. Steady-state 
centripetal acceleration may be obtained as the product 
of horizontal velocity and yaw velocity. Steady-state 
centripetal acceleration differs from lateral acceleration 
by the cosine of the vehicle sideslip angle. This 
correction factor may be applied in data processing, 
or for sufficiently small sideslip angles (for example; 
cosine 8° is 0.99), the difference may be ignored. When 
travelling in steady state on a known radius, centripetal 
acceleration may be obtained from horizontal velocity 
squared divided by the circle radius or from yaw velocity 
squared multiplied by the radius. For these methods 
of determining acceleration, ‘radius’ should ideally be 
the radius of the circular path of the reference point, 
including corrections for body roll, etc. Practically, 
such errors may have to be tolerated. 


NOTE — The side acceleration is the component of the vector 
acceleration of a point in the Y-direction. 


7.7 Body Angles 


Vehicle roll and pitch angles with respect to the gravity 
vertical can be measured by a two-axis gyroscope, 


either a case-referenced free gyro or a gravity- 
referenced vertical gyro. The free-gyro element is 
caged, or locked to its case when not measuring. When 
uncaged, it remains fixed in inertial space, enabling 
measurement of angular vehicle motion. A free gyro 
may be used to measure roll and yaw, or roll and pitch 
motion. A vertical gyro is ‘erected’ to a gravity vertical 
by pendulous switches, which when activated control 
slow-acting torquer motors. Neither type can maintain 
the required measurement accuracy for long periods 
of steady turning. Free gyros and vertical gyros with 
deactivated erection systems tend to ‘drift’ at a rate 
usually specified by the manufacturer at 0.5° to 1° per 
minute maximum; and vertical gyros with activated 
erection systems seek an ‘apparent vertical’, which is 
the sum of the gravity and lateral acceleration vectors, 
at a rate of 2° to 5° per minute. In the absence of lateral 
acceleration, the accuracy of vertical-gyroerection is 
typically specified at + 0.15° to + 1°. Vehicle roll and 
pitch angles with respect to the road surface can be 
measured by: 


a) An angular measurement transducer installed in 
the roll and pitch gimbals of a sideslip trolley; 


b) Measurement of changes in the vertical distance 
to the ground from reference points on either 
side and/or the front and rear of the vehicle, by 
ultrasonic or optical transducers. The accuracy of 
the ultrasonic or optical transducers of + 0.5 mm 
is sufficient, taking into account that the pavement 
reference surface is far from being flat and its 
roughness is quite noticeable. Fitment of three 
transducers to the vehicle will define a plane that 
can be used to compute both pitch and roll angles 
relative to the road surface. It is recommended 
to fit the ultrasonic or optical transducers as far 
apart as possible in order to improve measurement 
accuracy; and 


c) Measurement of wheel jounce and rebound 
motion with respect to the sprung mass, taking 
into account suspension linkage factors. (This 
method will not account for tyre deflections.) In 
each of these methods, it is practical to attain the 
specified accuracy, with no restriction on test run 
duration. 


To obtain vehicle roll and pitch angles relative to the 
earth plane, the signal must be corrected for the angle 
of the road surface relative to horizontal. 


The change in vehicle roll and pitch angles from an 
initial test condition can be measured by integration 
of the signals from an angular-rate gyros. This method 
is suitable only for short tests since the entire signals, 
including any zero offsets, will be integrated. 


NOTES 


1 In vehicles with suspended cab or separated cab to the chassis 
there could be two body angles. One of the cab relative to the 
road surface and the other of the chassis relative to the road 
surface. 


2 The measurements of changes in the vertical distance to the 
road surface from reference points on either side of the vehicle 
by ultrasonic or optical transducers to measure roll angle may 
give different results than other methods, depending on vehicle 
chassis roll stiffness. This effect could be noticeable in vehicles 
with separated chassis or very long vehicles. Use of roll angle 
data obtained with respect to the test surface or to gravity 
should be corrected for road surface inclination, according to 
the end usage. 


7.8 Steering-Wheel Torque 


Steering-wheel torque is measured by a torque load cell, 
installed as specified by the manufacturer to measure 
the torque applied to the steering wheel about its axis 
of rotation. In some tests, the results are not valid if the 
steering-wheel inertia is not the original one. 


7.9 Steer Angles 


Steer angles of the wheels with respect to the 
sprung mass can be obtained by angle measurement 
transducers, attached between the sprung mass and 
spindle assemblies, mounted in bearings to the wheel 
hubs and attached to the sprung mass through restraints 
which permit unrestricted fore/aft, vertical, and 
camber motions; or by linear or angular displacement 
transducers mounted in the steering linkage. The 
resultant front-wheel steer angle resulting from force 
and moment compliance plus suspension kinematics is 
computed by subtracting steering-wheel angle divided 
by overall steering ratio from total front road-wheel 
steer angle. Resultant rear-wheel steer angle resulting 
from force and moment compliance plus suspension 


IS 17128 (Part 1) : 2019 


kinematics is the same as rear road-wheel steer angle, 
except for vehicles having four-wheel steering. 


7.10 Slip Angles 


Tyre slip angles can be measured directly by available 
optical transducers. Alternatively, they can be computed 
as the difference between sideslip angle referred to the 
front and rear wheel locations and the respective total 
road-wheel angles. 


7.11 Vehicle Trajectory 


The vehicle trajectory can be measured by a Global 
Positioning System (GPS). The GPS provides a simple 
non-contact measurement of speed and both X and Y 
position in the earth-fixed coordinate system. Sampling 
update rate is usually 20 Hz. Resolution of X and Y 
coordinate changes into course angle can be performed 
in post-processing or within some commercially 
available units. Some commercial units provide both 
analogue and digital outputs. Typical speed accuracy 
is 0.1 km/h, with resolution to 0.01 km/h. Typical 
distance resolution is 1 cm. Typical course angle 
accuracy is 0.1°, with resolution of 0.01°. Trajectory 
can be determined by integration of X and Y velocity 
components or directly from X and Y displacements. 
Sideslip angle can be computed from the X and Y 
velocities, or from the difference between course angle 
and the integrated signal from a vehicle-fixed yaw rate 
gyro. The defined accuracy of GPS is valid only for 
steady-state conditions. 


IS 17128 (Part 1) : 2019 


Vehicle 
identification 


Drive train 


Engine 


Transmission 


Gear ratios 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 54.4 ) 


( VEHICLE INFORMATION ) 


Vehicle identification number 


Type of vehicle 


Manufacturer 


Model 


Model Year 


Registration Number 


Type of Drive 
Special Features (TCS) 


Engine Number 


Type of engine 


O Gasoline 0 Diesel O Others ( ) 


Air/Fuel mixture control 


O Carburetor O Injection 0 Others ( ) 


Charging system 


C] Natural aspirated [I turbo charger 


O Super charger O Others ( ) 


Ignition point control 


O Mechanical Electrical 


Fuel cut-off 


O Yes O No 


Displacement in Liters/No of 
cylinders 


Max power in KW/Engine Speed 
in RPM 


Max torque in Nm/engine speed 
in RPM 


Type of gears 


O Manual O Automatic 
O Others ( ) 


O Continuously Variable 


If manual (Number of forward 
gears) 


1st Gear ARA AETA | 
2nd Gear ee eer al | 
3rd Gear Aa I 
4th Gear ee ee eer ral | 
5th Gear Mamaa 
6th Gear kaaa 
Reverse Gear EWW 


10 


Final Drive 
Ratio 


Suspension 


Steering 


Braking system 


Wheel 


Tyres 


IS 17128 (Part 1) : 2019 


Final Drive ratio 


Front Suspension: O Independent O Dependent O Others 
Type of front suspension: Of ummnannuwaanasaawsawwawaausawsunaawan 

Front Stabilizer/Anti-roll bar O Yes O No 

Rear Suspension: O Independent O Dependent O Others 


Type of rear suspension : 


Rear Stabilizer/Anti-roll bar 


Steered axle 


Front O Rear 0 Both 


Type of Steering 


Manual 0 power assisted UO Electric 


Type of Electronic power 
steering (EPS) 


Rack Mounted 0 Column Mounted 
O Others ( ) 


Oo 
O 
O Electronic controlled steering L Others 
Oo 
Oo 


Pinion Mounted 


Overall steering ratio on Front/ 
Rear 


Steering wheel diameter in (mm) 


Max steering wheel angle in 
(deg) 


Turning circle radius in (m) 


Power assisted 


O Yes O No 
Antilock brake system O Yes O No 
Electronic stability system O Yes O No ifYes Don O off 
Mention other features (If amy) | mai. 
Type of front axle brake O Drum O Disc O Others 
Type of rear axle brake O Drum O Disc O Others 
Rim size-Front, in Inch 
Rim Offset (Front), mm 
Type of RIM O Steel O Alloy 
Rim size-rear, in inch OCT. 
Tread depth-Front/Rear (New) | umunawa. MMA wi mm 
(Optional) 
Aspect ratio-Front/Rear Tl sessen ETEEN 
Inflation pressure-front/Rear | sesers kPa / essione kPa 


11 


IS 17128 (Part 1) : 2019 


Mass Kerb weight of the vehicle Total. anan kg / FAW? ................ kg / RAW: 


Gross vehicle weight of the Totala ana kg / FAW: ................ kg / RAW: 
vehicle nkaka kg 


Weight during testing Totål sorunca Ke) FAW? awa kg/ RAW: 
condition(instrumentation/driver) | ............... kg 


Weight during testing condition | FL:............. kg: FR, corci kg, 
(instrumentation/driver)-Split up | pp... kg, RR............. kg, 


Vehicle Overall height;mm [aaa 
Dimensions 


Overall width, mm 0 


Overalllength,mm [Ta 


Wheelbasemm ha aeeeeceececstseteeees 


Track width front, mm a. 


Track width rear, mm a. 


CG height at test mass, MM J. umaasa, 


General comments and/or relevent details: 


12 


Test method 


Proving ground 


Ambient condition 
road surface 


Climate 


Tyres 


Driving conditions 


Staff 


ANNEX B 
( Clause 54.4 ) 


TEST CONDITION 


IS 17128 (Part 1) : 2019 


Vehicle Identification Number 


IS Number / Test Method 


location 


Path radius 


Odometer Reading in kms 


Type 


Condition 


Track temperature, degree celcius 


Co-efficient of friction between 
tyre & road, Mue 


Air temperature, degree celcius 


Relative humidity, percent 
Wind speed, m/s 


Wind direction 


Manufacturer name 


Date of mfg 


Tyres pecification 


Manual transmission 


Automatic transmission 


Test Engineer 


Observer 


Data analyst 


Test method specific data: 


13 


IS 17128 (Part 1) : 2019 


Reference point co-ordinates for measured variables: 


X = mm (Measured from, front left wheel center point along the longitudinal axis of vehicle) 


Y, = mm (Measured from front left wheel center point along the lateral axis of vehicle) 


Z, = mm (Measured from, front left wheel center point along the verticle axis of vehicle) 


Sensor positions (referred to the reference point) 


Variable 


X (mm) 


Y (mm) 


Z (mm) 


Longitudinal velocity 


Lateral velocity 


Sideslip angle 


Longitudinal acceleration 


Lateral acceleration 


Yaw velocity 


Pitch velocity 


Roll velocity 


14 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TED 04 (12575). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


