( Reaffirmed 2005 )

IS : 9576 - 1980

Indian Standard
GUIDE MILL SAWING
Timber
Chairman INSPECTOR GENERAL OF FORESTS

FOR OF TIMBER
BDC 9

Sectional

Committee,

Representing Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation

Mem bcrs Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters SHRI S. S. ABHYAN~AR SHRI S. K. GTJPTA ( Alfernate ) ADDITIONAL DIRECTOR ( TIMBER ) Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) JOINT DIRECTOR ( WORKS ) ( Alternote ) ADDITIONAL INSPECTOR GENERAL Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation ox FORESTS National Test House, Calcutta SHRI S. K. BANERJEE SHRI D. K. KANUN~O ( Alfelnate ) C~xxx CONSERVATOROB FORESTS Forest Department, Government of Himachal Pradesh, Simla CONSERVATORox FORESTS ( Alternate ) Forests and Cooperation Department, CHIEB CONSERVATORox FORESTS, Agriculture, Government of Gujarat, Ahmadabad VADODARA ADDITIONAL Crrxax CONBERFORESTS, VATOR VADODARA Tkernate ) Government of Karnataka, DIRECTOR, FOREST RESEARCH Forest Department, Bangalore AND UTILIZATION Plywood Industries Research Institute, Indian DIRECTOR Bangalore Naval Headquarters CMDE V. P. GARQ SERI R. S. CHAUDHARY ( Alternote ) Forest Department, Government of Uttar Pradesh, SBRI B. H. HIN~ORANI Lucknow Federation of Indian Plywood and Panel Industry, SERI K. S. LAULY New Delhi EXIZCUTIVE DIRECTOR ( Aftrrnare ) Directorate General of Technical Development, SHRI J. S. MATHARU New Delhi SHRI P. V. MEHTA ( Alternate ) personal Inderpuri, capacity In DR A. N. NAYER ( c-59, New Delhi II0012 ) ( Continued on Page 2 )

INDIAN

@I Copyright 1980 STANDARDS INSTITUTION

This publication is protected under the Zndian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS :9576 - 1980
( Continued from pug83 1)
Members SH~I .J. N. PANDEY Representing Bihar State Forests Patna Development Corporation Ltd,

Sam B. M. PRAUD ( AItem& ) Indian Academy PEE~~DENT GENERAL SECRETARY ( Alternatc ) DR S. K. PURKAYA~THA
DR A. PURTJSHOTHAM Da V. RANQANXTHAN

of Wood Science, Dehra Dun

SHRI G. V. RAO SHRI U. B. KANCHAN ( Alternote ) National Buildings Organization, New Delhi DR R. S. RATRA REPRESENTATIVE Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) SHRI J. K. SINHA ( Alternate ) Research Institute & Colleges ( Timber Forest SERI S. N. SANYAL Mechanics Branch ), Dehra Dun In personal capacity ( Srikolpam, Lawsaflr Bay, SHEI A. C. SEKHAR Pedawaltait P. O., Vishakhnpatnam 530017 ! Dirc;;c.t; ,zieneral of Supplies and Disposals, SHRI SHARAN SINGE Soar F. C. SHARMA SHRI D. AJITRA SIMHA, Deputy Director General DircctorateeGcneral of Civil Aviation ( Ministry Tourism and Civil Aviation ). New Delhi Director General, IS1 ( Ex-o&o Member ) Secretary Deputy SERI J. R. MEHTA Director ( Civ Engg ), IS1 of

Forest Research Institute & Colleges ( Wood Anatomy Branch ), Debra Dun Indian Plywood Manufacturing Co Ltd, Bombay In personal capacity ( C-198, Defenco Colony, .New Delhi 1 Ministry of Difence ( R & D )

Timber

Conversion

and Grading

Subcommittee,

BDC

9 : 10

Convent7
SHRI A. C. SEKEA~ c Srikalpam `, Lawsons Bay, Pcdawaltair P. O., Vishakhapatnam 530017 Members
ADDITIONAL DIIZECTOR ( TIMBEB ) Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) JOINT DIRECTOR ( WORKS ) ( Alternate ) CHIEF CONSERVATOR OB FORESTS Forest Department, Government of Pradesh, Simla CONSERVATOR OP FORESTS ( Alternate )

Himachal

Forest Denartment. Government of West Bengal. _ _ Calcu'tta . Forests and Cooperation Department, CHIEB CONSEBVATOR OP FORESTS, Agriculture, Government of Gujarat, Ahmadabad VADODARA ADDITIONAL CHIEB CONSERCHIEF CONSERVATOR OB FORES&
VATOR 01 VADODARA F 0 R EST9 ( Alternate)
,

( Continuedon Pals 15 )

2

IS:9576-1980

Indian Standard
MILL
0. 0.1

GUIDE FOR SAWING OF TIMBER
FOREWORD

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 28 July 1980, after the draft finalized by the Timber Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council.

0.2 With the developments and advancement in the technique of engineering skills, greater achievements have been made in the manufacture For economical mill of mill sawing machines for timber in India. sawing of timber and also for reducing the wastage of timber to the minimum during such sawing, good practices with improved techniques This standard has, suitable for different species of timber are needed. therefore, been prepared to outline these methods of mill sawing of timber. It also takes into account the use of different types of machines for different purposes. 0.3 In the formulation of this standard due weightage has been given to international co-ordination among the standards and practices prevailing in different countries in addition to relating it to the practices in the field in this country. 0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

I. SCOPE 1.1 This standard covers different types of machines used in mill sawing of timber, their maintenance and general principles of mill sawing and saw doctoring.
*Ruler for rounding off numerical values ( rruiscd ).

3

IS : 9576 - 1980 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall apply and for definitions other than those given below, reference may be made to IS : 707-1976* ( see Fig. 1 ).
KERF CLEARANCE WIDTH

SET

HOOK

ANGLE

I
LA

-T---y-7
PITCH -

A
GIUGE OF SAW

FIN. 1

DIAORAM OF SAW TOOTH SHOWING TERMS USED IN DESCRIBING PARTS AND ANGLES

2.1 Conversion sections.

-

The process of sawing

logs and

flitches

into

smaller

2.2 Gauge ( of the Saw Blade ) 2.3 Gullet - Concave space between saw dust during conversion. 2.4 Jointing - Process of accurately is to make the cutters share equally finish. 2.5 Kerf Width of the cut made Loss of timber The distance

Thickness

of a saw blade. saw teeth, for the

two consecutive

setting cutters. Effect of jointing in the work, and for a specified by any type of saw. sawing the in the form of saw dust two consecutive saw

2.6 Kerf Loss due to saw cut. 2.7 Tooth teeth.

during

Pitch -

between

*Glossary of terms applicable to timber technology and utilization ( srcond revision ). 4

IS I 9576 - 1980

2.8 Dogs -

The devices fixed to the saw mill carriages, is to hold the log to keep steady during sawing.

whose

function

2.9 Carriage - A vehicle used to carry the log while it is being fed into the saw or saws for conversion into timber. 2.10 Set - The amount of cut the teeth should be able to give clear of the body of the saw blade, so that there is freedom from friction between This is achieved either by bending over to right saw blade and timber. or left the cutting point of alternate tooth or by increasing the thickness of the cutting point of the teeth from the thickness of the saw blade. In India The former is called spring set while latter is called swage set. generally spring set is used. 2.11 Hook-The angle between the front face and a line from the tooth point to the centre of the circular saw or perFendicuIar to the back of a band saw. 2.12 Sharpness the teeth. Angle l`he angle between the front and the back the tangerlt is cut. of

2.13 Clearance Angle -- The angle between circle and the grinding back of the teeth. 2.14 Cutting Speed The speed at which

to the cutting

timber

3. CROSS

CUTTING

OF LOGS

3.1 Logs, when brought to the saw mill in different lengths, are requirep to be cut across the grain into specified lengths with the use of cross cutting saws which are either chain or reciprocating saws. This operation may be completed in the forest itself. 4. PROCESS OF CONVERSION of conver-

4.1 Stages of Conversion - Normally there are two stages sion, namely, break down of logs and further conversion.

4.1.1 Break Down of Logs - Under this operation the log shall initially be converted into cants by sawing longitudinally in a vertical band mill cants into large timber, preparatory to further and by extension conversion. 4.1.2 Further Conversion - The large size timber obtained from breakdown pl-ocess shall be further converted into scantling, battens, etc, in Some time smaller logs which are vertical band saw or circular saw. not difficult to handle are directly converted into scantling or batten according to the requirement 4.2 Types of Sawing - There are two broad classifications the logs, namely, plain sawing and quarter sawing. 5 of sawing

15:9576-1980 4.2.1 Plain Sawing - Under this process, the logs shall first be sawn into three pieces ( see Portions marked a, b and c in Fig. 2 ) and thereafter pieces a and c shall be converted by giving cuts tangentially to the annual rings in line with the initial cuts but in case of piece b though the cuts shall also be given tangentially to the annual rings but these shall be perpendicular to the initial cuts used for breaking down of the logs.

FIG. 2

PLAIN SAWING OF LOGS

4.2.2 Quart.57 Sawing - Under this process, log shall be sawn into four quarters, for subsequent radial conversion ( JGC Fig. 3 ). Though D gives the best quality of timber it is not frequently practised due to difficulties A judicious combination of quarter in turning the log after each cut. sawing and plain sawing is given in Fig. 4.

A Fro. 3

B

c

1)

QUARTER SAWIXG OF LOGS

FIG. 4

CohrnIN.4-rxoN

OP

QUARTER SAWING AND PLAIN SAWING OF LOGS

6

IS : 9576 - 1980
4.3 Machines for Sawing conversion of timber. Following It shall machines mainly are generally consist used for

4.3.1 Band Mill ( Vertical ) parts ( see Fig. 5 ):

of the following

4 b)

A band of steel blade

with teeth

on one or both sides.

Heavy base or frame, which is generally a heavy casting. Function of this frame is to maintain all the components of the mill in proper position with respect to each other during operation. column, which the upper wheel. Two pu@s is mounted on the heavy base and supports

The c>

4

( lower and upper ) one piece iron casting in weight and

1) Lower pulley - This wheel is generally and is of a heavy fly wheel type.

2) Upper pulley - This wheel is generally lighter usually consists of a rim with steel spokes.

e)

Adjusting mechanism - The function of this mechanism is to raise or lower the upper wheel, in order to change the saw blade and is also to tighten the saw blade on the wheels. device - This device is to help the upper wheel of the mill to move downward when there is too much strain on the saw blade during operation. Guides - These guides provide support for the saw blade when it enters the cut and when it is subjected to sudden shock and also damp excessive vibrations. Carriage - This is a vehicle into the saw. The carriage the log into the saw. to carry the log while it is being fed is moved along the track in feeding

f-1Straining d h)

FREE PULLEY

LCARRIAGE STEEL 1 DRIVING PULLEY BLADE

Fro.

5

BAND MILL ( VERTICAL) 7

IS :9576 -1980
parts ( see Fig. 6 ): A a>
4.3.2 Band Mz'll ( Horizontal ) -

It mainly

consists

of the

following

heavy base or frame, which is generally a heavy casting; the main function of this frame is to maintain the mill in proper position. These are mounted on the heavy base and support the two wheels on which the band of steel blade runs.

b) cl

Columns -

Wheels - These are two in number having same dimensions and are mounted on the columns for the support and running of the blade. These should run in perfect balance and in proper alignment. The faces of wheels should be free from undue or uneven wear, especially at the position where the saw is supported near its toothed edge.

4

Saw blade - It is round band of steel blade with teeth on one side The blade shall be correctly and is mounted on the two wheels. tensioned, so that it retains its position on the wheels and has the necessary tightness at the teeth to resist, without deflection, the load exerted by the log while it is being fed to the saw.

IMBER LOG

CARRIAGE'

[BASE

FIG. 6

BAND MILL ( HORIZONTAL )

4.3.3 Band Saw - This machine is similar to band mills except that it does not have any carriage. The material is fed manually. The principal parts of the band saw are as under: The main function a) Framr - This is generally of heavy casting. of the frame is to maintain all the components of the saw machine in proper position.
8

IS : 9576 - 1980 b) TWO wheels - These wheels are identical in all respects. They are mounted on the frame, one directly above the other, and the steel band saw revolves around them. These wheels are usually made of cast iron. The upper wheel can be adjusted by moving up or down in order to put the saw blade in tension or for the removal of the saw blade for sharpening. c) Saw blade - It is a thin, endless steel band with saw teeth in one edge. The size of the blade depends upon the diameter of the . wheels. d) Table - It is fastened to the frame casting directly above the lower wheel. A slot is provided in the table for the insertion and Some tables are grooved for a movement of the saw blade. mitre gauge. e) Throat slate - This is a plate made of soft metal or wood which is fixed in the centre of the table. f) Saw guide - It consists of two steel jaws between blade passes. which the saw

g) Guards - These consist of metal doors for the upper and lower wheels in order to avoid any accident when the saw blade breaks and also for dampening of excessive vibrations. h) Speed - Band saws are driven by belt by means of direct motor drive or by motor drive connected to the shaft of the lower wheel. 4.3.4 Circular Saw - Themachine is altogether different than band saw. In this a circular saw blade which is mounted on an arbor or shaft The material is revolves through electric motor or diesel engine. fed manually. The principal parts of the circular saw are as under: a) Frame - This is generally of heavy casting. The main function is to maintain all the parts of the circular saw machine in proper position. b) Table - This is generally of cast iron and is mounted on the A slot frame. The upper surface of the table is well machined. is provided in the centre of the table for the free movement of the circular saw blade. Also a rectangular slot is made in the table for the movement of a mitre gauge. c) Arbor shaft - It is generally of mild steel and revolves on two It is driven by a belt bearings, which are bolted to the frame. which passes over a pulley on one end. On the other end of the shaft circular saw blade is mounted. This end of the arbor is threaded. 9

IS : 9576 - 1980
d) Collar - There are generally two~collars of cast iron; one is fixed on the arbor to keep the saw blade in position from one side and other is a loose one. e) Pulleys mounted f) There are generally two cast iron pulleys. on the shaft and other is on the motor shaft. One is

Saze, blade - It is a circular steel plate with teeth cut on its edge and hole drilled in the centre. The blade is slipped over the threaded portion of the arbor and fixed against the fixed collar. The loose collar is then `put on the arbor and finally a hexagonal nut is screwed firmly on the threaded portion of the arbor to keep this blade in position. PRINCIPLES OF MILL SAWING

5. GENERAL

5.1 Before the log is brought from the storing place for sawing, it shall be studied and style of product required shall be considered carefully; as a particular method of conversion may be economical for certain sizes of timber, but not for other. 5.2 The log shall be examined in respect of its length, girth, defects, etc, to ascertain if the log is suitable for conversion to the required sizes. It shall also be examined in respect of end defects and centre heart so that maximum yield is obtained from the log. 5.3 Off-cut shall be cut as thinly as possible and the subsequent cuts made in those thicknesses w-hich may bring out most favourable price. 5.4 Unless the specific sizes are required, the cutting to secure cants of as large a size as possible. shall be done so as

5.5 With crooked logs, the bulge shall be placed into the saw or away from it, but never sideways to it. If not specified otherwise, the crooked logs shall be sawn into planks, 2.5 cm thick, rather than thicker sizes. 5.6 Excessive taper, flutes and shakes cause conversion difficulties conversion shall be judiciously done so as to reduce wastage. 5.7 Bole otherwise 5.8 with extensive specified. shakes shall be converted into scantlings to the crack. and if not

A log with a large check

shall be sawn parallel

5.9 With unfigured timbers or for work like sleepers and scantling where figure isnot a consideration, tangential sawing ( plain sawing ) shall be preferred. Where figure is important in most of the timbers radial sawing ( quarter sawing ) shall be preferred. mother comparative advantages and disadvantages of plain and quarter sawing are given under 5.9.1 and 5.9.2 respectively. 10

IS:9576-1980 5.9.1 The following are the advantages of plain sawn timber: and there is less figure, timber
waste

a) It is easier in cutting.

and cheaper

to cut at the mill,

b) In some woods, it gives a more beautiful and `U's and `V's due to growth rings. c) It dries more conditions. rapidly than quarter-sawn

such as mottle, under the same

d) It does not collapse

so easily in drying.

e) If knots are present, these appear as round knots unlike in quartersawn boards in which these appear as splay knots. 5.9.2 The following are the over plain sawn timber: a) It shrinks b) c) chief advantages of quarter-sawn timber

or swells less across the width. to warp. grain or figure effects, such back, and par&e1 lines due and wear.

It shows less tendency

In many woods, it gives specialised as silver grain, ribbon figure, fiddle to growth rings. resistance to abrasion

d) It offers greater

e) It does not surface check or split open so badly in seasoning and, therefore, can be dried more rapidly in a kiln by giving it a more severe treatment. f) It has a tendency OF to take a finish more uniformly. MACHINES AND SAW BLADES

6. MAINTENANCE

6.1 In order to keep the machines in efficient working order, it shall be necessary to keep different parts of the machine properly maintained. Points mentioned under 6.1.1 to 6.1.4 shall be kept in mind. 6.1.1 Packing - Packing shall be done, when and shall be so fitted that the saw runs steadily the centre than at the rim. the saw is in the bench and slightly warmer at

6.1.2 Adjustment of Saw Fence - Saw fence shall be extended to a suitable distance beyond the teeth at the front so that wood may not seize the saw owing to its not having sufficient room to open out as it leaves the saw. In cutting large logs or springy timber, which close in on the saw blade during conversion, wooden wedges shall be used in the kerf at the take-off end of the bench so as to give extra clearance to the saw to prevent jamming and buckling. 11

IS : 9576 -

1980

6.1.3 Maintenance of Bearing - All bearing shall be kept free from grit and dirt, and properly lubricated. These shall not be screwed up too tight but tight enough to prevent play. End play on spindle shall not be allowed to run hot and shall be trued up when necessary. 6.1.4 Saw Doctoring Method and Machine - The band saw blade to be used for conversion shall depend on the species to be converted. Specification of the teeth of band saw blade for three group of timbers, coniferous wood, non-coniferous wood ( low and medium namely, density ) and non-coniferous ( heavy ) wcod are given in Table 1. The saw shall be kept in perfect condition. Proper setting, levelling, tensioning and sharpening of the saw shall be done to carry out successful conversion. The teeth shall be well sharpened and jointed so that all the teeth share the work equally, while cutting the log and correct amount of strain is applied to the saw. The body of the saw shall be free from lump and properly tensioned and levelled for the speed to be run. The proper set shall be given to provide sufficient clearance for the saw to prevent timber binding on the body of the saw as well as to avoid undue wastage due to greater kerf. The saw doctoring shall consist of the following operations. by an 6.1.4.1 Lap grinding - The ends to be jointed by overlapping amount equal to 14 times the pitch shall be ground to the required taper by a lap grinder, which consists of a vertical spindle with a grinder. 6.1.4.2 iiluxing - Before brazing saw blade borax mixed shall be applied on the tapered ends of the blade to prevent and to obtain clean joint. in water oxidation

6.1.4.3 Brazing - The taper ends of the saw blade shall be placed over the other with brass moulder in between and shall be pressed between the red hot iron blocks in a brazing fixture, which generally a mechanical press and two iron blocks ( see consists of four clamps, Fig.7 ). 6.1.4.4 Cleaning of joint - The joint surplus material removed with a file. shall be properly cleaned and

6.1.4.5 Sharkming - After jointing, the blade shall be properly sharpened. Sharpening shall be generally done by a saw sharpening machine, which consists of the following: A platform on which two wheels are a> date saw blades of different length; mounted so as to accommo-

b)

An adjustable grinder for adjusting to different gulleting ( most of the grinders are provided with angle adjustment also ); and rotating blade bv one teeth at every stroke is carried out by changing the eccentricity rod depending on the pitch of teeth ). 12 ( this of the

for c>Pusher arrangement pushing

TABLE

1

SPECIFICATION

FOR THE TEETH OF BAND SAW BLADE (Clause 6.1.4)
NON-CONIFERS ~--_---__--____~ r-----------Low to Medium Density Medium to Greater Density Sd. Sp.09. < 0.6 Sd. Sp. Gr. > 0.6 15. r_--_-~-__--_ Thickness (mm) 15. Pitch ( cm 1 (6) 4.5 4.5 4.5-5 -j Gullet Depth (cm) (7) o-95-isi2 0.95-1'12 1'12-0'85 #------A---__-~ Thickness (mm) lo0 Pitch (cm) (9) 3.8-4'5 3.8.4'5 4.5 Gullet Depth (cm) (10) 0.95 0'95 1'12 6 .. G ;;: I 5; 0s 0

CONlPIh3

ANQLE or Hoort w CLE~RARCE ANQLE WIDTH OF SAW (cm) -----_ Thickness (mm) (2) 1.18 1.18-l-25 1'25-1.40

25" l5O h-----) Pitch (cm) (3) 4'5 4.5 4.5-5

Gullet Depth (cm) (4) 0'95-1.12 0.95~1'12 1'12-0'85

(`1 10 12.5 15

(5) 1'18-1'25 1'25 1.40

(81 1'25 1*40 1'60

lSr9576-1980

MECHANICAL

SAW

BLADE

FIG. 7

BRAZING FIXTURE

6.1.4.6 Tensioning and levelling - Tensioning and levelling shall be done to prevent slip of blade over the wheels. This is done by making the saw blade convex with the help of a tensioning machine, which consists of tensioning rolls rotated with a power and a face plate fitted on a platform for proper rolling of the saw ( see Fig. 8 ). Levelling is carried out with the help of level plate.

TENSIONING ROLLS WITH ROTATING DEVICE

FIG. 8

TENSIONING MACHINE

6.1.4.7 Setting - After sharpening, setting is done so that width of cut is more than thickness of the blade. Alternate teeth are bent in opposite direction with the help of saw setter in case of spring setting ( See Fig. 1 ).

14

IS : 9576 - 1980
{ Continued from page 2) Members SHRI Y. P. GARB SHRI B. R. GUPTA Him;3& Represcntin~ Pradesh Forests Lessees Assoeiation,

Forest Department, Government of Jammu and Kashmir, Jammu Tawi Forest Department, Government of Uttar Pradesh, SHRI B. H. HINQORANI Lucknow Andhra Pradesh Timber Merchants Federation, SHRI N. LAXMINARAYAN Hyderabad SH~I V. SUDERSE~AN ( Alternate \ Directorate General of Technical Development, SHRI J. S. MATEIARU New Delhi SHRI P. V. MEIITA ( Altcrnatc ) OREIDER-IN-CHAROE SHRI S. S. RAJPUT SHRI 8. S. RAWAT
SHRI F. C. SHARMA

SHRI J. K. SINEA SHRI GULAM ALAM ( Altrrnntr SHRI R. T. SOMAIYA SHRI JIMMY WADIA ( Altrrnata

15

INDIAN ON TIMBER

STANDARDS

CONVERSION

AND

GRADING

IS: 190-1974 1326-1976 l3329-1975 1331-1971 1898-1975 2178-1962 2179-1979 2372-1963 2377-1967 3337-1978 Coniferous Aircraft Timber Timber Timber Tables RALLIES sawn timber ( baulks and scantlings ) ( third recision) (jrst rwisioa) Non-coniferous timber sawn timber ( baulks and scantlings) ) (first rduirion) (first reuision ) rcuision ) (first revision ) evaluation evaluation of defects of defects in timber: in timber:

( baulks and scantling ( second reuision ) construction propeller

Cut sizes of timber

for use in aircmft for use in aircraft timber for cooling towers

construction

Converted

for lorry bodies (jrst

for volume of cut sizes of timber for general purposes and

(Jirst revision )

3364 ( Part I l-1976 Method of measurement Part I Logs (/if5 1 rruision )

3364 ( Part II )-1976 Method of measurement and Part II Converted timber ( first revision ) 3731-1966 4422-1967 4423-l-967 4424-1967 4895-1968 5246-1969 5247-1969 5806-1970 5966-1970 6534-1971 6707-1972 7308-1973 9104-1979 9561-1980 9576-1980 Grading rules for teak squares bats of timber Willow clefts for cricket Guide for handsawing Grading Converted

Use of timber in coal mines rules for teak logs logs timber ( coniferous ) for packing cases, crates, and light furniture boxes timber in converted timber in converted limbs of logs of trees into form for ammunition/explosive form for general purposes of timber Coniferous

Non-coniferous Non-coniferous Guiding

principles logs

of grading and inspection

Willow logs for artificial Non-coniferous

Guide for storage and protection Recommendations Guide for mill sawing of timber

for felling and conversion

logs

