NAT HIAF IS 17233 : 2019 
Indian Standard 


aAa h uaga ch slra À NA ch At 
Tern oh aga sik Aat & fer 
stafi att carers ATS 


Acceptance and Certification 
Criteria for Design and Construction 
of All Types of Ropeways Intended 
for Transportation of Passengers 


ICS 93.110 


© BIS 2019 


anda AM sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Te TH MT, ay fref — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


July 2019 Price Group 3 


Continuous Bulk Conveying, Elevating, Hoisting, Aerial Ropeways and Related Equipment Sectional 
Committee, MED 06 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standardwas adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Continuous 
Bulk Conveying, Elevating, Hoisting, Aerial Ropeways and Related Equipment Sectional Committee, had been 
approved by the Mechanical Engineering Divisional Council. 


An aerial ropeway is a special form of transportation system where passengers/materials are carried on a 
tensioned wire rope supported above the ground. In ropeways handling passengers, safety, reliability, and 
conformance to high-quality and good industry practices are paramount for securing the safety of the users. 
Aerial ropeways are particularly useful in regions where the facility in surmounting natural barriers gives them 
a great advantage over railways or roads, both of which may need the heavy civil engineering work to secure 
easy gradient. They are inexpensive to maintain, pollution free, environment friendly, does not affect aesthetics, 
their power demand is modest and, they are not seriously affected by adverse climatic conditions. 


Nothing in this standard is intended to contravene any provisions of the statutory regulations wherever they are 
in force. 


Composition of the Panel-1 on ‘Aerial Ropeways’ of MED 06 responsible for the formulation of this standard is 
given at Annex D. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 :1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised). The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 17233 : 2019 


Indian Standard 


ACCEPTANCE AND CERTIFICATION CRITERIA 
FOR DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF ALL 
TYPES OF ROPEWAYS INTENDED FOR 
TRANSPORTATION OF PASSENGERS 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard covers the acceptance and 
certification criteria for all types of ropeways intended 
for transportation of passengers. 


1.2 This standard is intended with a view to technical 
acceptance of the ropeway with respect to design, 
construction and safety of passengers before putting 
to regular passenger transportation and subsequently 
monitoring its conformity once in a year mainly for 
safety of passengers to ensure that all safety measures 
are properly and efficiently functioning. 


1.3 This standard is prepared with an acceptance criteria 
for all design of varying components depending upon 
the type of ropeway. 


2 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 


2.1 Ropeway — The system of overhead ropes on 
which carriers are suspended and hauled for the 
purpose of carriage of passengers, animals or goods 
and includes trestles, ropes, carrier, stations, offices, 
machinery and other works used for the purpose of or 
in connection with such aerial ropeway. 


2.2 Inspecting Authority — Any competent authority 
recognized by the statutory regulations to inspect 
the aerial ropeways installation and determine its 
acceptability or otherwise, on the basis of this standard 
and compliance to prevailing statutory rules and 
regulations. If required, Competent Authority may 
hire external agencies like engineering institutions/ 
independent experts for carrying out said inspection. 


2.3 Pre-commissioning Inspection — Basically covers 
all the operations required for confirming the readiness 
of the installation for acceptance and certification. 
Such inspection may be carried out by the purchaser or 
builder or by any third party. 


2.4 Inspection — All of the operations intended for 
ascertaining and assessing the actual condition of an 
installation and its components. 


2.5 Operational Inspection and Checks — Operations 
intended for verifying the good working condition of 
the installation before and during operation. 


2.6 Operating Test — Operation for a specified 
duration, during which the correct working of the 
installation is tested. 


2.7 Readiness for Acceptance — Condition of the 
installation where the functional and technical safety 
conditions for acceptance have been fulfilled. 


2.8 Readiness for Operation — Condition of the 
installation where the functional and technical safety 
conditions to allow passengers to be transported have 
been fulfilled. 


2.9 Applicability — This standard applies to all 
passenger ropeway installation along with the 
requirement of all other applicable Indian standards in 
force. 


2.10 Worst Operating Conditions — Loaded cabins 
operating in the upward direction and empty cabins 
operating in the downward direction. 


3 DESIGN, DOCUMENT CHECKING AND 
VERIFICATION 


Design and document verification shall be carried out 
by the Inspecting Authority or purchaser or by any third 
party appointed by the purchaser. The verification shall 
encompass, but not limited to, the following: 


a) Profile design (with all possible operating 
conditions) with load, power calculation, selection 
of bought out mechanical / electrical components, 
ropes; 

b) Provision of rescue system under worst condition 
and corresponding arrangement in the cabin; 


c) Establishment of ropeway capacity, cycle time; 


d) The civil foundation design and drawing based 
on the load arising out of different operating 
condition; 

e) The structural design and drawing based on the 
load arising out of different operating condition; 


IS 17233 : 2019 


f) Electrically interlocked safety devices provided in 
line and station; 


g) Conformity with all stipulations contained in 
applicable Indian standards; 


h) Operation and maintenance manual; and 


j) Earthing and lightening arrestor systems. 
4 PRE-COMMISSIONING INSPECTION 


4.1 Verification of conformity of the installation with 
the approved design and documents. 


4.1.1 Scope of verification shall include 


a) Verification of the conformity of the completed 
installation with the approved documents; 


b) Checking of all test certificates/reports; 


c) Checking the suitability of individual components 
(depending on type of installation), their operation 
with each other and within their local environment 
(see Annex A); and 


d) Operating test reports as per Annex B; 


4.2 Preparation of a report on the pre-commissioning 
inspection containing the following visual observations: 


a) Physical condition of the station and line 
structures; 


b) Free movement of the carriers or tow-hangers on 
the line and in the stations; 


c) Availability of stipulated (in respective Indian 
standards) clearance of the carriers, tow-hangers 
and ropes in relation to other components and the 
station /line structure and fixed objects; 

d) Attachment of the carriers or tow-hangers to the 
moving ropes and their resistance to slippage 
under all possible operating conditions; 

e) Condition of the ropes, their splice joint(s) and 
end fixings; 

f) Tensioning devices including the tensioning of the 
rope; 


g) Rope guides and their proper operation; 


h) Operation of the drive system under all the 
operating modes, including the operation of the 
control and adjustment devices, taking into account 
the most unfavourable operating conditions; 


j) Performance of all the brakes individually under 
the most unfavourable loading and operating 
condition; 

k) Operation of the safety and monitoring devices; 

m) Generation of any abnormal sound, vibration, 
temperature rise etc; 

n) Electrical installations including power supply 
system and system for dissipation of energy for 
regenerative power, if any; 

p) Telecommunications and signaling installations; 
and 

q) Safety measures and instructions for the passengers 
and operating staff in and around the stations. 


NOTE — All pre-commissioning reports shall be signed and 
dated and made available to all concerned. 


5 CONDUCTANCE OF PERFORMANCE TEST 


5.1 If the installation satisfactorily passes the inspection 
in accordance with 4 then performance test shall be 
carried out as per Annex C. 


5.2 The test should be carried out in presence by an 
authorized person from operator/builder and inspection 
Authority. 


6 READINESS FOR ACCEPTANCE AND 


CERTIFICATION 
Readiness for acceptance shall be achieved after 
adhering to the following: 

a) Submission of documents as per 3; 

b) Pre-commission inspection as per 4; and 


c) Performance test as per 5. 


Item 


ANNEX A 


[ Clause 4.1.1 (c 


Specification/Drawing 


)] 


Test certificate/ 
Inspection Details 


Compliance 


Yes/No 


IS 17233 : 2019 


Acceptance 


Yes/No 


Main motor 


Main gearbox 


Control panel and drive 


Power supply system 


DG set 


Drive sheave assembly with shaft 


Service brake 


Emergency brake 


Earthing systems 


Telecommunication units 


Safety systems 


Cabin haulage drive 


Track rope 


Track rope brake 


Hauling rope 


Tensioning system 


Rope splicing details (certificate) 


Socketing details / certificate 


Cabins 


Carriage 


Grip 


Hanger 


Saddles 


Line sheaves 


Pedestals 


Mount beams 


Return sheave assembly with shafts 


Station sheaves 


Grip locking device 


Grip unlocking device 


Security items 


Air compressor 


Auxiliary drive motors 


Lightening protection system 


ANNEX B 
[ Clause 4.1.1(d) ] 


Step Activity during Trial Minimum Duration Remarks 
(At Design Speed ) 

1. Carry out individual trial run,for example, all brakes, motors, 2h continuous operation Take corrective action, if 
engines, generator, gear box, etc. (whichever is possible in abnormality is observed 
detached condition) 

2. Run ropeway with empty rope and check ropeline alignment 4 h continuous operation a Rectify abnormalities, if any, 
at sheaves of terminals and towers and record parameters with day for 2 days and take further trial 
grid power supply and DG supply.—For example: 

a) Supply voltage, 

b) load current, 

c) Ropeway speed, 

d) Tension system movement; and 

e) Vibration and temperature at major equipments, for 
example,motor, gear box, drive sheave structure, towers 
and return station structure. 

3: Run ropeway with rescue drive at empty rope with grid power 2 h continuous operation Rectify abnormalities, if any, 
supply and DG supply. Record ropeway parameters, for and take further trial 
example: 

a) Supply voltage, 
b) Load current, and 
c) Ropeway speed. 

4. Run ropeway with 1 cabin/gondola/vehicle at grid power 2 h continuous operation Rectify abnormalities, if any, 
supply or DG supply. Record ropeway parameters, for and take further trial 
example: 

a) Supply voltage, 

b) Load current, 

c) Ropeway speed, 

d) Tension system movement, and 

e) Vibration and temperature at major equipments, for 
example,motor, gear box, drive sheave structure, towers 
and return station structure. 

5. Run ropeway with 50 percent cabin/gondola/vehicle at grid 4 h continuousoperation for Rectify abnormalities, if any, 
power supply or DG supply. Record ropeway parameters, for 1 day and take further trial 
example: 

a) Supply voltage, 
b) Load current, 
c) Ropeway speed, 
d) Tension system movement, and 
e) Vibration and temperature at major equipment’s, for 
example,motor, gear box, drive sheave structure, towers 
and return station structure.percent 
6. Run ropeway with 100 cabin/gondola/vehicle at grid power 6 h continuous trouble free Rectify abnormalities, if any, 


supply or DG supply. Record ropeway parameters, for 
example: 


a) Supply voltage, 

b) Load current, 

c) Ropeway speed, 

d) Tension system movement, and 


e) Vibration and temperature at major equipment’s,motor, 
gear box, drive sheave structure, towers and return 
station structure. 


operation for 2 days 


and take further trial 


IS 17233 : 2019 


Step Activity during Trial Minimum Duration Remarks 
(At Design Speed ) 
Run ropeway by rescue drive with 100 percent cabin/gondola/ 2 h continuous operation Rectify abnormalities, if any, 
vehicle at grid power supply or DG supply if it is electric and take further trial 


motor driven. Record ropeway parameters, for example, 
a) Supply voltage, 
b) Load current, 


Cc 


<~ 


Ropeway speed, 
d) Tension system movement, and 


e) Vibration and temperature at major equipments,for 
example,motor, gear box, drive sheave structure, towers 
and return station structure. 


It the rescue drive is diesel engine driven the following 
parameters shall be recorded: 


a) Engine operation; 
b) Operation of gear drive; 
c) Vibration and temperature; and 


d) Exhaust from the engine. 


ANNEX C 
( Clause 5.1 ) 


Step Activity during Trial Minimum Duration Remarks 
(At Design Speed ) 
1. Capacity test with all safety devices: Running the system with 2 h continuous operation 


full load under worst condition of use at designed capacity 


2. Checking of all Rescue systems with full load condition under To be demonstrated once 
the worst condition of use: 


a) Rescue drive system; 
b) Vertical rescue, if applicable; and 


c) Separate rescue system as provided. 


IS 17233 : 2019 


ANNEX D 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Composition of the Panel-1 on ‘Aerial Ropeways’ MED 06 


Organizations Representative(s) 
In Personal Capacity Suri A. BHADRA (Convener) 
In Personal Capacity Suri C. K. KARMAKAR 
In Personal Capacity, Kolkata SHRI DWIJENDRA LAL Das (Invitee) 
CSIR-CIMFR, Dhanbad Dr DeBASISH BASAK 
CRS, Pvt Ltd, Kolkata SHRI K. BOSE 
Damodar Ropeways & Infra Ltd, Kolkata SHRI RANJAN MUKHERJEE 
Usha Breco Limited, Ghaziabad SHRI MANOJ PANWAR 

Member Secretary 


SHRI A. K. MOHINDROO 
Scientist ‘C’ (MED), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 06 (13572). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi f 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


