IS 10386 (Part 2) : 2013 
(Reaffirmed 2018) 


IAA HAF 


qå må armen < fa, waren AR 
aan + fu gran ated 
aM 2 gAn, quere «us Ut Suum 
(Yen FART) 


Indian Standard 


SAFETY CODE FOR CONSTRUCTION, OPERATION 
AND MAINTENANCE OF RIVER VALLEY PROJECTS 
PART 2 AMENITIES, PROTECTIVE CLOTHING AND EQUIPMENT 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 13.340.10; 93.160 


O BIS 2013 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 


September 2013 Price Group 3 


Safety in Construction, Operation and Maintenance of River Valley Projects Sectional Committee, WRD 21 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 2) (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Safety in Construction, Operation and Maintenance of River Valley Projects Sectional Committee 
had been approved by the Water Resources Division Council. 


This standard was first published in 1982; however, the Committee decided to revise this standard on the basis of 
the experience gained since then as well as considering technological development in the field. 


With large scale increase in construction activity, there has also been an increase in the occurrence of accidents 
on construction jobs. It shall be the overall responsibility of the employer to provide for a safe working environment, 
as well as to provide safety and health protection to the persons engaged on any construction jobs. 


It shall be the responsibility of the employer to initiate and maintain programmes and provide amenities and 
safety requirements on each construction job in order to reduce or to eliminate hazards of construction activities 
and also to provide necessary first aid facilities as well as ambulance van for prompt transportation of the injured 
persons to a physician or hospital. The project authorities shall ensure the availability of medical personnel for 
advice and consultation on matters of occupational health and shall make necessary arrangements for prompt 
medical attention in case of serious injury on such account. 


Each employee shall comply with the different safety provisions and regulations in force on the project and shall 
remain alert at all times to eliminate hazards to himself or to others. 


The following standards may be referred in conjunction to this standard: 


IS No. Title 
1989 (Part 1) : 1986 Specification for leather safety boots and shoes: Part 1 For miners (fourth revision) 
2925 : 1984 Specification for industrial safety helmets (second revision) 
3521 : 1999 Industrial safety belts and harnesses — Specification 
4037 : 1967 Specification for stretchers and stretcher carriers 
4756 : 1978 Safety code for tunneling work (first revision) 
4770 : 1991 Rubber gloves for electrical purposes — Specification (first revision) 
5983 : 1980 Specification for eye-protectors (first revision) 
6994 (Part 1): 1973 Specification for safety gloves: Part 1 Leather and cotton gloves 
8519 : 1977 Guide for selection of industrial safety equipment for body protection 
8520 : 1977 Guide for selection for industrial safety equipment for eye, face and ear protection 
8521 (Part 1): 1977 Industrial safety face shields: Part 1 With plastic visor 
8807 : 1978 Guide for selection of industrial safety equipment for protection of arms and hands 
9167 : 1979 Specification for ear protectors 
13115: 1991 Portable first aid kit for general use — Specification 
14166 : 1994 Respiratory protective devices : Full face masks — Specification 
15322 : 2003 Particle filters used in respiratory protective equipment — Specification 
15323 : 2003 Gas filters and combined filters used in respiratory protective equipment — Specification 
15809 : 2008 High visibility warning clothes — Specification 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
“Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 10386 (Part 2) : 2013 


Indian Standard 


SAFETY CODE FOR CONSTRUCTION, OPERATION 
AND MAINTENANCE OF RIVER VALLEY PROJECTS 
PART 2 AMENITIES, PROTECTIVE CLOTHING AND EQUIPMENT 


( First Revision ) 


1SCOPE 


This standard (Part 2) lays down the requirements 
covering first aid and medical facilities, occupational 
health, environmental controls, ventilation, lighting, 
water supply, drainage, sanitation and personal 
protective clothing and equipment. 


2 FIRST AID AND MEDICAL FACILITIES 


2.1 In spite of taking all precautions, accidents may 
occur during the course of construction. The employer 
shall, therefore, ensure the availability of suitable 
arrangements at every work-site for rendering prompt 
and efficient first aid to injured persons. Proper 
equipment such as for prompt shifting transportation 
of injured persons to a physician or a hospital shall 
also be provided. The telephone numbers of the 
physician, hospital and ambulance shall be 
conspicuously pasted at each work-site and first aid 
station. First aid kits shall be provided at accessible 
points in the ratio of at least one kit for 25 employees. 
In the absence of clinic, hospital or physician, 
reasonably accessible, in terms of time and distance, 
to the work-site, at least one person who has a valid 
certificate in first aid training shall be available at each 
work-site to render first aid. For this purpose, standard 
first aid kits approved by the medical officer-in-charge 
of project shall be available at the work-site. To readily 
locate the first aid station, adequate identification and 
directional marks shall be provided. An emergency 
alarm shall also be provided for all first aid stations. 
Under no circumstances shall a rescuer enter the site, 
to remove a victim of over exposure due to the presence 
of dangerous gases/vapours, without proper respiratory 
protection. 


2.2 The safety wing of the project, under the advice of 
the medical officer-in-charge of the projects, shall be 
responsible for issuing instructions/training on the first 
aid practices to be followed. 


Atsite where excavation/tunneling/construction works 
are being carried out, the agency shall arrange to 
conduct annual occupational health check up of their 
employees working in dust prone areas through medical 


practitioner as per proforma given in state rules. 
Occupational health check up record based on check 
up done year-wise shall be maintained at site by agency 
and shall be produced on demand. 


2.3 In case of special jobs such as, working in 
pneumatic lock or other similar conditions where the 
workmen are subjected to higher pressures, either in 
pneumatic sinking of wells or in the working of tunnel 
shields under pneumatic pressures, detailed special 
specifications for de-compression chambers and other 
special devices shall be made in the safety requirements 
under the contract. At least one person trained by the 
medical officer-in-charge shall be available in each shift 
at each working point, having special training with 
respect to medical aid in dangers arising out of working 
in pressurized locations. 


3 OCCUPATIONAL HEALTH 
ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROLS 


AND 


3.1 The employer shall ensure that regulations and 
environmental controls, applicable to any work 
environment, intended for controlling or eliminating 
hazards to a workers' health and safety are followed at 
all times. 


3.2 When hazardous substances such as dust, fumes, 
mists, vapours or gases exist, are produced in the course 
of construction, such as, site clearing or demolition, 
handling of corrosive materials, grinding, spraying, etc, 
their concentration shall not be allowed to exceed the 
limits specified by the concerned authority and all 
reasonably practicable measures shall be taken to 
prevent inhalation, ingestion or skin absorption of these 
hazardous substances. To achieve this, engineering 
controls shall be implemented, whenever feasible and 
appropriate respiratory protective equipments shall be 
provided to the workers and shall be used, wherever 
necessary. Adequate washing facilities for employees 
engaged in the application of paint, coating, herbicide 
or insecticide, or in other operations when 
contaminants may be considered harmful, shall be 
provided at the work-site to enable employees to 
remove such harmful substances from their hands and 
body before leaving the work-site. 


IS 10386 (Part 2) : 2013 


3.3 Dust Elimination 


3.3.1 In case of haul and access roads, the road surfaces 
shall be kept moist. 


3.3.2 In case of concrete batching and mixing plant 
and in places where handling of cement is done 
manually, nose masks shall be provided to the 
workers. 


3.3.3 Exhaust fans shall be provided at the tunnel 
portals, entry and exit of adits and chimneys/shafts and 
other openings. 


3.4 Protection against the effects of excessive noise 
exposure shall be provided when the sound levels 
exceed the prescribed limits. When employees are 
subjected to sound levels exceeding the prescribed 
limits, feasible engineering controls shall be utilized 
and, if necessary, personal protective equipment such 
as ear plug or ear muff shall also be provided to 
employees to minimize the effect of excessive sound 
levels. 


3.5 In construction and related activities, involving the 
use of sources of ionizing radiations, the pertinent 
safety provisions of the Atomic Energy Commission 
shall be strictly followed. 


3.6 Drinking of alcoholic beverages shall be prohibited. 
Employees under the influence of any intoxicating 
beverage, even to the slightest degree, shall not be 
permitted to remain at work. 


3.7 Where workers are employed in a compressed air 
environment in tunneling works, rest shelters with 
required facilities shall be provided at work-site. 


4 VENTILATION AND LIGHTING 


4.1 Workmen shall be provided with simple supply of 
fresh air to maintain their health and safety at all times. 
The ventilation system shall be adequate to maintain 
supply of fresh air and if natural circulation is not 
adequate artificial ventilation shall be provided. The 
fresh air supply to be made available inside tunnel shall 
be adequate. At tunnel locations where works are being 
carried out having forced ventilation system, alternate 
disel generator set also shall be provided to take care 
of forced ventilation during power failure. Adequately 
designed ventilation/ exhaust system shall be provided 
to carry away harmful accumulation of dust and fumes. 
Oxygen content of the atmosphere in the working area/ 
space shall be determined by pre-entry and subsequent 
tests made with approved instruments such as portable 
oxygen detectors. No one shall enter or remain in a 
working area/space when tests indicate the presence 
of oxygen less than 19.5 percent by volume in its 
atmosphere unless he wears approved respiratory 


protective equipment, such as, fresh air hose mask or 
self contained breathing apparatus. In case, presence 
of dangerous gases 1s indicated, the working area shall 
be examined for dangerous gases within 2 h before 
the work is begun and after every 2 h during the 
working shift and record maintained. Whenever, there 
1s a rock fall in the underground works, the special 
safety measures shall be adopted, even if proportions 
of dangerous gases are within permissible limits. Air 
shall be considered unfit for workmen to breathe, if it 
contains any of the following: 


a) Less than 19.5 percent by volume of oxygen; 

b) More than 0.5 percent by volume of carbon 
dioxide; 

c) More than 0.005 percent by volume of carbon 
monoxide; 


d) More than 0.001 percent by volume of 
hydrogen sulphide; 

e) More than 0.002 percent by volume of oxides 
of hydrogen; 

f) More than 0.5 percent by volume of methane; 


g) More than 1.50 percent by volume of 
flammable gases; and 


h) Any other poisonous gas in harmful 
amounts. 


4.2 Construction areas, aisles, stairs, ramps, runways, 
corridors, offices and shops where work is in progress, 
shall be adequately lighted with either natural or 
artificial illumination. Inadequate lighting of working 
areas is by itself a source of danger, particularly, where 
work is undertaken at night. The minimum illumination 
intensities as given in Table 1, shall be provided while 
any work is in progress. 


Table 1 Minimum Illumination Intensities 


SI In Lux Area of Operation 
No. (Ix) 
(0 Qo (3) 
i) 54 General construction areas; concrete placement, 


excavation and waste areas; accessways; active 
storage areas; loading platforms; refueling and field 
maintenance areas 

Indoors; warehouses, corridors, hallways and exit 
ways 

Tunnels, shaft and general underground work areas 
(except that minimum of 108 lux is required at tunnel 
and shaft heading during drilling, mucking and 
scaling) 

General construction plant and shops (for example, 
batch plants, screening plants, mechanical and 
electrical equipment rooms, carpenter shops, rigging 
lofts, active store rooms, barracks or living quarters, 
locker or dressing rooms, mess halls, and indoor 
workrooms) 

First aid station, infirmaries and offices 


i) 54 


H) 54 


iv) 108 


v) 325 


5 WATER SUPPLY, DRAINAGE AND 
SANITATION 


5.1 Adequate supply of potable water shall be provided 
in all places of employment. The potable drinking water 
shall be provided from sources meeting central, state 
or local health requirements. These drinking water 
points shall be identified by writing signs “Drinking 
water” on pipe line and as well as water outlets. Portable 
drinking water cans of suitable capacity may be 
provided at all work locations besides pipelines and 
water outlet taps at selected locations. The samples shall 
be taken from potable drinking water provided at work 
locations to be tested periodically in laboratory once 
in two months to ensure its quality and its fitness. 
Outlets for non-potable water, such as water used for 
construction, industrial or fire fighting purposes, shall 
be identified by signs to indicate clearly that the water 
is unsafe and is not to be used for drinking, washing or 
cooking purposes. There shall be no cross-connection, 
open or potential, between a system furnishing potable 
water and a system furnishing non-potable water. 


5.2 Disposal of waste material or debris shall comply 
with local regulations. All waste material and rubbish 
shall be removed from the work areas as the work 
progresses. Adequate scavenging arrangements shall 
be provided to maintain clean surroundings at all times. 
Refuse containers shall be placed at convenient points. 


5.3 Adequate number of toilets and washing facilities 
shall be provided for employees working at different 
construction sites to comply with local regulations. 
Similarly, adequate number of wash basins and 
drinking water taps with proper drainage arrangements, 
shall be provided for each job-site. For workers 
employed in the construction of tunnels or shafts dry 
closets or water closet cars shall be provided in the 
tunnel at the scale of one unit for each 40 men in the 
shift. Closets shall be effectively and regularly cleaned 
and disinfected. 


5.4 Provision for water supply, drainage and sanitation 
for residential and other type of buildings at a project 
shall follow the standards for temporary structures at 
project sites. 


6 PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT 


6.1 All employees, including equipment operators and 
mechanics, entering hard hat areas; which shall include 
all locations where construction work of any nature is 
in progress, and shall encompass the entire job site 
with exception of interior of shops, offices and parking 
areas, shall wear hard hats or helmets. Hard/steel toed 
boots or shoes shall be used where protection of feet 
is required. The helmets and hard/steel toed shoes shall 
meet the specification laid down in the various Indian 
Standards for such head and feet protection equipment. 


IS 10386 (Part 2) : 2013 


Inside tunnel locations where flammable/toxic gas 
presence is detected no worker shall enter such 
locations without respiratory protection. Minimum of 
two workers together shall be entering the location 
wearing breathing apparatus set. Similarly, the 
employees shall be provided with safety devices for 
protection of eyes, ears, face and neck from physical, 
chemical, radiation and other hazards during welding 
and similar operation. The employer shall be 
responsible for enforcing the wearing of proper 
personal protective equipment in all operations where 
there is exposure to hazardous conditions. Regulations 
governing the use, selection and maintenance of such 
personal protective equipment shall be followed. 
Immediately, before starting the work, the protective 
equipment shall be thoroughly examined to see 
whether the same is in sound condition. Under no 
circumstances shall a person work with unsound 
personal protective equipment. 


6.2 Apart from wearing of hard hats or helmets and 
hard/steel toed shoes in the hazardous areas (see 6.1), 
which is obligatory, it shall be the responsibility of the 
employer to enforce wearing of other personal 
protective equipment like safety belts, safety goggles, 
respirators, gloves, ear protection, etc, during different 
operations needing any of the above personal protective 
equipment for safety of the workers. The use of 
standard personal protective equipment as occasioned 
by the type of work shall be made obligatory. The 
protective equipment required will no doubt vary with 
the size, nature and location of the operation, however, 
its selection shall follow the standards and 
specifications laid down in different Indian Standards 
for different kinds of job. It shall be light for 
convenience in use and strong to withstand rough 
service. Similarly, all tools shall have the required in 
built safety measures needed for use at various jobs. 
All motor vehicles and other construction equipments 
shall be provided with safety measures like seat belts, 
anchorages, guard rails, tee boards, etc. A driver’s seat 
shall be of such design, construction and dimensions 
as shall permit safe operation of the machinery without 
undue fatigue and discomfort to the driver. 


6.3 For workers engaged on cement handling, wearing 
of full length clothes, tight eye goggles and dust mask 
shall be made obligatory. Hand cream or petroleum 
jelly shall also be provided for their use, as protection 
against cement dermatitis. Employees working with 
steel reinforcement shall be provided with a leather or 
heavy denim apron and heavy hand gloves or hand 
pads, in addition to safety belts and suitable head gear. 
During concreting, the workers shall use hard hats and 
rubber boots. Spray gun operators shall be required to 
wear gloves, goggles and dust mask. Workers handling 
paint and creosoted materials shall apply protective 


IS 10386 (Part 2) : 2013 


creams on the exposed skin before exposing themselves 
to paint and creosote. 


6.4 Gloves of a suitable type shall be worn by all 
employees when required to handle wire ropes, steel 
cables or other rough and sharp edged materials. 
Leather or asbestos gloves shall be preferred for 
welding operations. Goggles shall be worn when 
grinding, chipping, scrapping, caulking, cutting and 
heating rivets. Employees, when working in areas in 
which a potential exposure to direct or reflected laser 
light exists, shall be provided with anti laser eye 
protection devices. Areas in which lasers are used, shall 
be posted with standard laser warning placards. 


6.5 Safety shoes shall be worn by workers engaged in 
for structural steel erection work. Safety shoes also be 
worn when working in shops or other places where 
materials are likely to fall on the feet. The tunnel 
workers shall be provided with hard/ steel-toed shoes. 
For very heavy work, fire resistant laggings and high 
boots shall be used. 


6.6 When working near or over an opening where there 
is danger of falling, safety belt shall be worn by 
workers. Safety belts and harness shall also be provided 
when working on scaffolds, in hoppers or on high piles 
of loose material. 


6.7 The sand blast operators shall wear an approved 
sand blaster’s hood as well as goggles and other 
protective clothing. Preferably all workmen should be 
removed to safe distance from the block where sand 
blasting is being done till the operation of sand blasting 
is completed, however workmen working in the vicinity 
of sand blasting, grinding, etc, shall also be provided 
with goggles and respirators/nose masks. 


6.8 Persons before entering a magazine shall put on 
magazine shoes without nails, which shall be kept at 
all times in the magazines. 


6.9 Employees, when working around moving 
machinery, shall not wear loose garments. They shall 
also cover any loose hair that might be caught by 
moving parts. No loose garments or ragged clothing 
shall be worn by the persons engaged in the tunneling 
operations. During welding operations, the sleeves and 
collars shall be kept buttoned up and pockets eliminated 
from the front of overalls and aprons. Trousers or 
overalls shall not be turned up on the outside. The 
clothing shall be free from grease, gasoline, oil and 
other flammable materials. Loose clothing with free 
ends shall not be worn by operators of portable 
electrical drills, reamers, etc. Smooth overalls shall be 
worn by them with ¡jumper tucked in. Employees 
exposed to vehicular traffic shall be provided and shall 
be instructed to wear warning vests marked with or 
made of reflectorized or high visibility material. 


6.10 Employees working over or near water, where 
the danger of falling with risk of drowning exists shall 
wear approved life jackets or buoyant work vests. These 
shall be fully inspected for any defects prior to and 
after each use. The defective units shall not be used. 
Suitable rescue equipment shall also be provided and 
maintained in an efficient state. Walkways and 
structures extending over or immediately adjacent to 
water shall be provided with ring buoys of required 
buoyancy placed at intervals of not more than 50 m. 
At least one life saving skiff shall be available at 
locations where employees are working over or 
adjacent to water. Safety nets shall be provided when 
the work places are more than 10 m height where the 
use of ladders, scaffolds, catch platforms, temporary 
floors of safety lines is impracticable. Such nets shall 
be of 10 cm mesh and shall be made of Manila rope at 
least 1.25 cm diameter, with an outside or border rope 
of 2 cm diameter. The borders shall be provided with 
loops so that the nets can be attached to the structures, 
or to each other. 


IS 10386 (Part 2) : 2013 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Safety in Construction, Operation and Maintenance of River Valley Projects 
Sectional Committee, WRD 21 


Organization 
NTPC Ltd, New Delhi 


Bhakra Beas Management Board, Chandigarh 


Central Board of Irrigation and Power, New Delhi 


Central Electricity Authority, New Delhi 


Central Water Commission, New Delhi 


Geological Survey of India, Kolkata 


Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee 
Irrigation Deptt, Government of Kerala, Thirunvanthapuram 


Irrigation & CAD Department, Government of Andhra Pradesh, 
Hyderabad 

Irrigation Department, Government of Punjab, Chandigarh 

Irrigation Department, Government of Uttarakhand, Dehra Dun 

Jaiprakash Industries Ltd, New Delhi 


Karnataka Power Corporation Ltd, Bangalore 


Larsen & Toubro, Chennai 
NHPC Ltd, Faridabad 


National Projects Construction Corporation Limited, Faridabad 


North Eastern Electric Power Corporation Ltd, Shillong 


Saradar Sarovar Narmada Nigam Ltd, Gandhi Nagar 
Satluj Jal Vidyut Nigam, Shimla 


Tamil Nadu Electricity Board, Chennai 

THDC India Ltd, Rishikesh 

Tungabhadra Steel Products Ltd, Tungabhadra Dam 

Water Resources Department, Government of Madhya Pradesh, 
Bhopal 

In personal capacity [Institution of Fire Engineers (India), 


Genmala High School Road, Venmala 682028, Cochin] 
BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 

Suni V. K. GUPTA, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR 

(Hypro-ENGG), (Chairman) 
MEMBER (IRRIGATION) 

Director (DAM SAFETY) (Alternate) 
SHRI A. C. GUPTA 

Suri N. K. Buara (Alternate) 
SHRI MANOJ SIKDAR 

SHRI Manos TRIPATHI (Alternate) 
Director (DSM) 

Director (DSR) (Alternate) 
Suri N. BHATTACHARYA 

Suri C. PauL (Alternate) 
Dr GoPAL CHAUHAN (WRDM) 
CHIEF ENGINEER (IDRB) 

Director (DesiGNS, IDRB) (Alternate) 
Suri L. S. N. RAJU 

SHRI S. PANDURANGA Rao (Alternate) 
CHIEF ENGINEER (RSDD) 

Director Dams (RSDD) (Alternate) 
CHIEF ENGINEER (GANGA VALLEY) 

SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER (MB Dam) (Alternate) 
Suri D. G. KADKADE 

SHRI NARENDRA SINGH (Alternate) 
CHIEF ENGINEER (CIVIL DESIGNS) 

PROJECT ENGINEER (CiviL DesiGNS) (Alternate) 
Suri N. RAGHAVAN 
Suri A. K. JAN 

SHRI KAJAL Sana (Alternate) 
Suri S. BASAK 

Suni A. K. GUPTA (Alternate) 
Suri A. C. BORAH 

Suri K. G. MrrraL (Alternate) 
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR (D&P) 
Suri R. K. SHARMA 

SHRI V. S. UPADHYAYA (Alternate) 
Suri K. Gora 

SHRI V. GOPALAKRISHNAN (Alternate) 
Suri R. K. VISHNOI 

SHRI MANOJ SARDANA (Alternate) 
Suri Hussain BIN ALI 

SHRI Y. S. CHANDRA SHEKAR (Alternate) 
Suri K. K. TIWARI 

Suri R. K. Jain (Alternate) 
SHRI G. B. MENON 


Suri J. C. Arora, Scientist ‘F’ and Head (WRD) 
[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 


Dr R. R. DasH 


Scientist ‘C’ (WRD), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


“BIS Catalogue” and “Standards : Monthly Additions”. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: WRD 21 (492). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.L T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 
VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


