(Reaffirmed 2001)

1I El
I.
Scope2. Terminology The water surface splashing or by spraying 2.2 Air Flow -

Indian Standard

TESTING

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR OF WATER COOLING TOWERS

Describes a recommended

code of practice for performance the following

testing

of water cooling shall apply.

towers.

For the purpose of this standard,

definitions

It is a steady flow device that uses a combination !.I Cooling Tower:ool water by exposing it as an extended surface to atmosphere. is extended by filling, which which produced droplets. of air flowing through presents the cooling

of mass and energy transfer or creates

to

a film surface tower.

drops due to

Total quantity

2.3 Inlet Air Wet Bulb Temperature :ower. 2.4 Circulating Water Flow 2.5 Hot Water Temperature 2.6 Retooled

Average

wet bulb temperature

of the air at inlet tower,

to the cooling

The quantity Temperature

of hot water flowing of circulating

into the cooling

water entering

the cooling

tower. tower.

Water Temperature Difference

Temperature

of circulating

water leaving

the cooling

2.7 Cooling Range 2.8 Heat Load 2.9 Approach temperature. 2.10 Drift Loss -

between the hot-water

temperature

and the retooled the cooling and entrained the

water temperature. tower. inlet air wet bulb

Rate of heat removal from the circulating Difference between the retooled water

water within temperature

Water lost from the cooling

tower as liquid droplets to control

in the outlet air.

2.11 Purge - Water discharged in the circulating water.

from the system

concentration

of salts or other impurities loss from the system and

2.12 Make Up - Water added to the circulating by evaporation, drift, purge and leakage. 2.13 Cold Water Basin - A device underlying direct its flow to the suction line or sump.

water system to replace water the tower to receive

the cold water from the tower surface within

2.14 Packing or Fill - The material which forms the heat transfer which the water is distributed in its passage down the tower. 2.15 Water Distribution at the top of the tower. 2.16 Casing or C/adding within the tower. The arrangement The facing whereby the water

the tower and over

is conveyed the

to all parts of the packing and retains the water above the

material

which

surrounds

packing

2.17 Tower Pumping Head - The head of water required at the inlet to the tower measured basin kerb to deliver the circulating water through the distribution system. 2.18 Fan Power The power input to t&e fan assembly excluding power losses in the driver.

2.19 Fan Drive Assembly drive shaft and transmission 3, Technical Guarantee

Components for providing power to the fan, normally unit and primary supporting members.

comprising

driver,

3.1 The object of the test procedure is to determine the overall operating characteristics of the cooling tower and to verify the technical guarantee as agreed between the purchaser and the supplier. The guarantee shall cover functional and thermal performance of the cooling tower in terms o' quantity of water, range approach and inlet air conditions within the conditions of validity specified in 5'

Adopted 3 January 1986 INDIAN
MANAK

0 September 1986. ISI STANDARDS
BHAVAN,

Gr 2

INSTITUTION
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

* .
1

IS :11561 -1986
4. Conditions of Validity of Tests and thermal efficiency of cooling towers, agreement the following between conditions of and

4.0 In determining the performance validity shall be fulfilled. These conditions the supplier.

may also form the basis for contractual At the time of test all equipment checks shall be made. shall be clear

the purchaser

4.1 Conditions of Equipment ting condition and the following

and system shall be in proper operamaterials which may clog or

4.1.1 Water distribution system impede normal water flow. 4.1.2 Mechanical equipment shall

and free irom foreign

shall be in good working be clear

order and set for design duty. and other deposits which may impede

4.1.3 Drift eliminators normal air flow. 4.1.4 4.1.5

and free from algae material,

Packing shall be free from foreign

such as oil, scale or algae. elevation Immediately prior to the test. of with

Water level in water basin shall be at normal operating the make-up -

4.1.6 Wherever possible simplicity and accuracy.

and purge should be shut off during be carried out during

the test in the interest conditions

4.2 Conditions of Atmosphere the following restrictions.

The test should shall

stable weather

4.2.1 The average wind velocity above local ground level.

not exceed 7.0 m/s when measured

at a height of 1.5 to 2.0 m

4.2.2 The inlet wet bulb temperature should be within f5"C of the design wet bulb temperature. Readings may fluctuate but the rate of change in average wet bulb temperature shall not exceed l"C/min. 4.3 Variation from Design Conditions conditions shall be permissible. 4.3.1 Circulating The following variations of average test readings from design

water flow not more than 10 percent

above or 10 percent

below the design value.

4.3.2 Cooling 4.3.3

range not more than 20 percent

below or 20 percent above design.

Heat load not more than 20 percent

below or 20 percent above design. of the test conditions, the difference between flow, cooling range and heat load, shall not

During the hour selected as being representative maximum and minimum readings of circulating water exceed 5 percent. 5. Test Requirement

5.1 Functional Test Requirements - In order to establish that the cooling tower is fully operational and that the mechanical equipment is functional in accordance with the design requirements, checks should be made on the equipment described in 5.1.1, 5.1.2 and 5.1.3 as follows. 5.1.1 Fans a) The fan blades are angled for design duty, b) The fan is centralized tolerances, c) The fan rotates d) The direction in the fan housing plane, and to ensure uniform tip clearance within the specified

in the correct

of rotation

of the fan is correct.

5.1.2 Fan drive assembly a) The fan drive is aligned b) The lubrication within the specified tolerances, recommendations, is within the capacity of the driver, and

is in accordance

with the manufacturer's

c) The fan power observed d) There is no excessive

under no heat load conditions mechanical noise or vibrations. 2

IS:11561 -1986
51.3 Water distribution system freely, and free board.

a) All the valves are operating b) The system is regulated

for even distribution, with sufficient

c) The water levels are correct 5.2 Performance Test Requirements 5.2.1 Thermal performance take readings of the following
tests-To

conduct

a full

thermal

performance Unit m/e "C "C "C "C mS/s

test,

it is necessary

to

quantities: Parameter

a) Wind velocity

b) 4

Wet bulb temperature

cl Dry bulb temperature
Hot water temperature

e) Retooled water temperature f) Circulating
water flow

9) Make-up water quantity and temperature

ms/s and "C mS/s and "C

h) Purge
5.2.2 Power consumption 5.2.2.1 conditions. 5.2.2.2 design. Pumping head _ Fan power It'is

water quantity

and temperature

It Is to be checked that total head at the tower inlet is correct to be checked that the fan power is in agreement contractual obligations,

for design

with that quoted for by guarantee,

5.2.3 Amenities - In the event of the test involving observations may be required of the following: a) Tower noise, and b) Drift nuisance. 6. Instruments and Methods of Measurement

covered

6.1 Measurement of Wind VelocityThe instrument velocity is a rotating vane type anemometer.

recommended

for

the

measurement

of wind

Calibration of the instrument before use is necessary. Measurement shall be made in an open and unobstructed location to the windward side of the equipment at a horizontal distance sufficient to eliminate the influence of the upstream effects of the equipment and a vertical distance 1.5 to 2.0 m above local ground level. The frequency of readings taken should arrive at a representative average result. 6.2 Temperature Measurement inlet wet bulb temperature shall be determined as the 6.2.1 Measurement of air temperature -The arithmetical average of measurements taken within 1.5 m of air inlets and between 1.5 and 2-O m above the basin kerb elevation on both sides of the cooling tower, so as to bracket substantially the air flow to the tower. The number of stations at which measurements should cooling tower and the existence of neighbouring influences. be taken depends upon the size of the increase with wind speed and gust effect, in order to

measuring instrument 6.2.2 Measurement of water temperature - The location of the temperature shall be such that the true average temperature of the hot circulating water entering the distribution system of the cooling tower and the retooled circulating water entering the basin is determined. Make up and purge water temperature readings shall be taken in the piping immediately adjacent to the cooling tower. 3

IS : 14561'-1966
6.2.3 Temperature measuring instruments -Temperature more of the following instruments: a) Mercury-in-glass b) Thermocouples, c) Electric thermometers, and thermometers. shall be within f 0.1%. be provided and sufficient measurements shall be made with `one or

resistance

The instrument

accuracy

In all measurement of wet-bulb temperature, sufficient wetting shall time shall be allowed for the state of evaporative equilibrium to be attained. 6.3 Water Flow Measuring lnstrumenfs 6.3.1 Volume measurements shall be made with accuracy of fl percent of the quantity measured: a) Liquid quantity b) Liquid-flow meter, measuring rate meter. employ a tank having The following sufficient either either of the and

following

instruments

having

an

mass or volume;

6.3.2 Liquid quantity meter should rate for at least 2 minutes.

capacity

to accumulate

the flow

6.4 Measurement of Tower Pumping Head the pumping head may be evaluated:

measurements

shall be taken in order that inlet to the tower is measured. power on the type of

a) Static pressure above atmosphere measured at the centre line of the water and immediately adjacent to the connecting flange. b) The height above basin kerb level of the point at which the above static consumption shall

pressure be the

6.5 Measurement of Power Input to the Fan - The power consumption in watts measured during head load test. The power name-plate. Electrical instruments. consumption measurements shall shall not exceed be made

average stated

by more than with either

5 percent indicating

of the value type or

integrating

6.6 Measurement of Drift Loss - The amount of drift loss may be estimated by taking the difference between the quantity of make-up water flow and the sum of the purge flow and evaporation loss. 6.7 Measurement of Tower Noise - The total noise inclusive shall be measured and also the background noise measured of fan and water noise. Noise level shall be measured by an industrial of the tower under full water and fan load immediately before the test and exclusive

grade sound level meter on `A' scale

The microphone of the sound level meter shall be located out of doors, at least l-5 m above local ground level and in position previously agreed between the purchaser and the supplier. 7. Evaluation of Results to fulfil guaranteed

The measure of the thermal performance of a cooling tower is its ability conditions in terms of quantity of water, range, approach and inlet air conditions. This can be achieved performance curves. by a direct comparison between the test results

and the manufacturer's

4
Printed at Britannia Calendar Mfg Co, Calcutta. India

