( Reaffirmed 1999 )

Is:10017-1981

Indian

Standard
OF

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR CONSTRUCTION COCOA BEANS STORAGE STRUCTURES
Stimulant Foods Sectional Committee, AFDC 39
Chairman SHRI C. P.
NATARAJAN

Rcjlrcsenting
Central Food Technological ( CSIR ), Mysore Research Institute

MGmbcrr SHRI D. S. CHADHA Central Committee for Food Standards ( Ministry of Health and Family Welfare), New Delhi

SMT D. MUKHERJEE ( Alternate ) DR N. K. JAIN Tea Research Association, Calcutta SHRI P. C. SHARMA ( Alternate ) Government Analyst Laboratory, Madras SRI s. KASTTJRI Public Analyst, Government of Haryana, Cbandigarh DR S. L. KHOSLA SHRI S. K. ANAND ( Alternate ) Quartermaster General's Branch, Army HeadCOL R. K. KOCHHAR quarters, New Delhi LT-COL P. J. CHERIAN ( Altemat~ ) SHRI S. S. MEENAKSHI~UNDRAM Coffee Board, Bangalore SMT SUNALINI N. MENON ( AltGsnatG ) DR K. K. MITRA Tea Board, Calcutta Calcutta Tea Traders Association, Calcutta Srnu NARENDRA KUMAR SWRI K. M. PATEL ( Alternate ) Central Plantation Crop Research Institute ( ICAR ), SHRI M. N. NAYAR Kasaragod SHRI T. A. SRIRAM( Altcrnatc ) Cadbury India Limited, Bombay SHRI C. Y. PAL SHRI S. J. KEICOBM ( Alternatu ) The Kerala State Co-operative Marketing Federation SHRIK. RAM.~KIUSHNA P~LLAI Limited, Cochin SHRI P. P. BHAS-N ( Alternate ) Brooke Bond India Ltd, Calcutta SHRI C. K. RAMANATH SHRI A. K. GUPTA ( Alternate ) Kair;tisFkp-operative Milk Producers' Union SHRI v. H. SHAH
SHRI KAILASH

VYAS ( Alternate )

,

( Cotztinuedon page 2 ) I
INDIAN This publication reproduction is protected

0

CopVright 1982
INSTITUTION of 1957 ) and

STANDARDS

I

under the Indian Cobyright Act ( XIV

in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the of copyright under the said Act.

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement

IS : 10017- 1981
( Continuedfrom page 1 ) Members
DR S. B. SINGH SHRI K. N. SIRoAR DR C. S. VENKATARAM

Representing
Public Analyst, Government of Uttar Pradesh, Lucknow The Consultative Committee of Plantation Association, Calcutta United Planter's Association of Southern India, Coonoor

SHRI V. RANOANATHAN ( Alt-srnate) Central Coffee Research Institute, Chikmagalur SHRI S. VlSHVESHWARA Food Specialities Ltd, Moga SHRI R. WALTER SWR~ A. K. ROY ( Akrnate ) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-o$icM Member) SHRI T. PURNANANDAM, Director ( Agri & Food ) ( Secretary)

Cocoa and Its Products Subcommittee,
Convener

AF'DC 39 : 3
Milk Producers' Union

SHRIV. H. SHAH Members

Kaira District Co-operative Limited, Anand

SHRI KAILA~HVYAS ( Alternate to Shri V. H. Shah ) Directorate of Cocoa, Arecanut and Spices DevelopDR C. K. GEORGE mcnt, Calicut Government Analyst Laboratory, Madras SHRI S. KA~TURI Quartermaster General's Branch, Army Headquarters COL R. K. KOCHHAR New Delhi Lr-COL P. J. CHElUAt" ( Alternate ) Central Food Technological Research Institute SHRI C. P. NATARAJAN ( CSIR ), Mysore SHRI N. G. GOPALAKRISHANA RAO ( Akrnate ) Central Plantation Crop Research Institute ( ICAR ), DR M. N. NAYAR Kasaragod SHRI T. A. SRIRAM( Alternate ) Cadbury India Limited, Bombay &RI c. Y. PAL SHRI S. J. KEKOBAD( Ahrnate ) Amalgamated Malabar Estates Private Ltd, Calicut SHRI M. C. POTHEN The :&&r Biscuit and Chocolate Company Ltd, SHRI M. G. SATHE SHRIJ. S. SUNDER RAJ Agriculture Department, Nadu, Madras Government of Tamil

SHRI N. SADASNAM ( Alternate )

IS : 10017 - 1981

Indian

Standard
OF

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR CONSTRUCTION COCOA BEANS STORAGE STRUCTURES
0. FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 12 December 1981, after the draft finalized by the Stimulant Foods Sectional Committee, had been approved by the Agricultural and Food Products Division Council. 0.2 The damage to cocoa beans due to fungal, microbial and insect attacks can be minimized to a large extent if cocoa beans are stored in structures which prevent as far as practicable, their entry inside and also if suitable measures are taken during handling, transport and storage. 0.3 The damage and pollution of cocoa beans during storage are due to temperature, moisture and dampness, insects and rodents. It is, therefore, obvious that in order to conserve cocoa beans they should be stored in sound structures of different types, each type being suitable for a particular region in the country and code of practice should be formulated and adopted for handling, transporting and storing; when such standards become available and are implemented, they will go a long way in minimising the loss of cocoa beans. 0.4 This standard has been formulated mainly with a view to guiding processors, dealers and other agencies connected with handling of cocoa beans so that the damage to cocoa beans is, as far as possible, reduced to the minimum. 0.5 This code has been prepared for the construction of structures which would permit effective control of insect and other pests of stored cocoa beans and which entirely exclude rain and ground moisture.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard covers requirements and method for construction cocoa beans bag storage type structures. 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall apply. 3 of

IS : 18817 - 1981 2.1 Bag - A container made either of jute, fabric or laminates having the standard dimensions and containing a net content of60 to 65 kg of dry cocoa beans. 2.2 Bag Storage Structure beans are stored. 3. LOCATION 3.1 The cocoa beans bag storage structure shall be located on a raised and well-drained site, or on suitably made-up soils, if necessary. 3.2 The structure shall not be located on lands subjected to' floods or inundations and shah be safe from damage by surface or seepage water. 3.3 The structure shall be at least 15 m away from residential buildings, factories ( other than cocoa processing factories ), dairies, poultry farms, kilns and other possible sources of fire and 30 m away from garbage, dumping grounds, slaughter houses, hide curing centres, tanneries and such other places, the close vicinity of which is deleterious to safe storage of cocoa beans. 3.4 The structure shall be away from large trees. to lorries and preferably Structure in which bags containing cocoa

3.5 The structure shall be generally accessible situated near a rail head with goods siding.

3.5.1 Where the structure is near waterways, such as ferry heads and docks sufficient berthing, loading and unloading facilities shall be made available. 4. BAG STORAGE STRUCTURES

4.1 The bag storage structure may be of dimensions most economically suited to the land available. The storage capacity shall be calculated taking into account the coefficient factor of 0*8m2 per metric tonne of cured cocoa seeds.
NOTE 1 - The coefficient factor is derived from (a) 14 bags stacked one over the other; (b) each such bag containing 62.5 kg of cocoa beans; (c) 30 percent floor area for passage, in between the stacks; and (d) stacks of 30 bags. NOTE 2 - The minimum height of the wall may be 5.5 m for flat roofed structures and in the case of other structures the minimum wall height may be 425 m inside at the point where the roof crosses the wall.

4

IS : 18817- 1981 5. FOUNDATION 5.1 The foundation shall be carried to a depth of not less than one metre unless rock, sheet-rock or laterite is met with at a higher level and shall have concrete bedding of suitable thickness unless rock, sheet-rock or laterite is met with. 5.2 The foundation masonry shall be of stone burnt bricks, concrete blocks or other suitable materials depending upon the availability of the same at a particular region. It shall be constructed either in lime mortar 1 : 3 ( 1 part lime and 3 parts of sand ) or cement mortar of proportion not less than 1 : 5. 5.3 The foundation trenches on both sides shall be filled with coarse sand or gritty material and shall be flush with ground level. 5.4 Necessary measures shall be taken to make the structure termite-proof. 6. PLINTH 6.1 The plinth level shall be at a minimum height of O-7 m from the surrounding ground level. 6.2 The plinth shall be filled up as given under 7.1. 6.3 The plinth ( or basement ) masonry shall be of stone in cement mortar of proportion not less than l-5 and cement pointed 1 : 4 or plastered on its outer surface with cement plaster not less than 1 : 6. 6.4 75 mm thick stone slab or' 1 : 2 : 4 cement concrete plinth slab over the plinth masonry and below superstructure shall be laid. 7. FLOOR 7.1 Filling of Plinth or Basement - Fill with gritty moorum soil or red earth, sand or coal clinker. The layers should be of 75 mm up to a height of 150 mm in case of cement concrete floor or 225 mm in case of granite or any other good stone slabs floor, below the plinth level. Water profusely and compact each of these layers. Lay over these a layer of coarse sand and stone. Water and compact these layers of coarse sand and rubble stone and again compact these layers thoroughly.

IS : 10017- 1981 7.2 Laying of the Floor - It shall be of either cement concrete, granite stone or any other good quality stone slabs. If the floor is of cement concrete it shall be 75 mm thick ( 25 mm thick 1 : 2 : 4 of 20 mm metal over 50 mm of 1 : 4 : 8 of 40 mm metal ) and shall be laid in alternate panels, not exceeding 2-5 m 2. The joints of panels shall be neatly grouted with cement mortar 1 : 3. If the floor is of stone slabs, a layer of lime concrete or cement concrete 1 : 4 : 8 of 38 mm metalof not less than 75 mm thickness shall be laid over the 150 mm layer of rubble stone, over which the stone slabs shall be set in lime mortar 1 : 3 or cement mortar 1 : 4. The stone slabs shall not be less than 50 mm in thickness and shall be pointed with cement 1 : 3. 8. WALLS 8.1 The walls shall be solid and shall be at least 300 mm thick in the case of brick construction. In the case of laterite or other hard stone construction, the thickness of the wall shall be 450 mm up to a height of 3 m from the plinth and 225 mm thick from this height upwards, In the case of brick construction the walls shall be plastered with lime mortar 1 : 2 or cement mortar 1 : 4 and shall be finished smooth. In case of laterite or stone construction, cement mortar of 1 : 3 to 1 : 4 shall be used for pointing purpose. There shall be no off-sets or projections in the wall. The wall shall be flush with the outer surface of the plinth; in case this is not possible, the plinth projections shall be rounded off. 9. DOOR 9.1 The door opening shall be not less than 2 m wide and 2.5 m high. The door leaves shall be of steel or timber and either rolling type or opening outside. When open, the door leaves shall flush with the outside surface of wall. When closed, they shall be close filling with the frame of the door. The door leaves shall not have cracks or open joints. 10. AlR VFNTS 10.1 Air vents shall be provided at floor level for the ingress of fresh air. Windows shall not be provided. 10.2 The clear opening of the air vents should not be more than 25 cm*, and shall be provided with shutters opening inside. When the godown abuts the road and safety considerations preclude the erection of air vents in the outer wall, they may be provided in the inner wall. 10.3 For every 5 m length of wall, there shall be one air vent. 6

IS : 10017- 1981 11. VENTILATORS 11.1 For every 6 m length of the wall, one ventilator of the size 0.7 m high and 1.2 m wide shall be provided. A centrally rotating shutter shall be provided to the ventilator and the shutter shall be close fitting with the frame of the ventilator. The frame of the ventilator shall be fixed flush with the inside face of the wall. 11.2 The ventilator shall be protected by glazed sun shades and frame work of expanded metal or wire mesh. 12. ROOF 12.1 The roof may be either of reinforced concrete flat, or shell roof, a sloping roof with asbestos cement sheets or Mangalore tiles, if the former is not available. The sloping roof shall be a single-span or two-span structure with a central longitudinal gutter which is a source of leakage. Galvanized steel sheets shall not be used. 12.1.1 The leaves of the roof shall project at least O-7 m from the outer surface of the walls. The purlins and sheets shall be well anchored and secured. 13. DRAINAGE 13.1 Gutter and drain pipes shall be provided with the required dimensions taking into consideration the intensity of rainfall and the projected area of the roofing. 13.2 A stone or concrete slab of suitable dimensions shall be provided on the ground below each drain pipe so that the ground is not secured due to the water falling from the drain pipe. The drain pipe shall be located in such a way that it shall not obstruct the ventilators. 13.3 All round the structure, abutting the plinth a pavement 0.5 m wide and 150 mm thick of lime concrete or cement concrete 1 : 3 : 6 or rubble stone pitching set in cement mortar 1 : 4 shall be constructed with suitable drainage arrangement. The pavement shall slope outside at 1 in 10. 14. UNDERGROUND DRAINAGE BY RUBBLE DRAIN

14.1 Where ground water is likely to rise during the rainy season above the lowest level of the foundation, a trench 0.7 m wide shall be constructed all round the structure. 7

IS : 10017- 1981 14.2 The trench shall be one metre away from the outer periphery of the structure, and shall be at the lowest level of the foundation with a longitudinal bed slope towards the natural fall of the ground. It shall be connected to an outfall drain for ultimate disposal of the water. It shall be filled with rubble or brick bats or graded jelly to a depth of O-7 m and the rest with earth, and then levelled. 14.3 The rubble filling of drain should be so arranged as to have the effect of an inverted filter, that is, bigger rubble should be put at the bottom and the size of rubble, brick bat or jelly to be reduced gradually.
NOTE-The requirements given under 14 above depend upon locality and site conditions may and not be insisted upon in the case of inland region with rainfall of less than 750 mm. In coastal and heavy rainfall regions these are necessary, where the soil conditions require.

