WEC 519-3 ( 1988 ) [ Superseding IS 9080 ( Part 3 ) : 1989 ]

lndian Standard SAFETY IN ELECTROHEAT
PART 3 PARTICULAR

INSTALLATIONS
HEATING AND

REQUIREMENTS FOR INDUCTION AND CONDUCTION INDUCTION MELTING INSTALLATIONS

ICS

25.180.10

Q BIS 1997

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
NEW

INDIAN
DELHI

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR 110002 Price Group 8 MARG

BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR

July 1997

industrial Electroheat

Equipment Sectional Committee,

ET 17

NATIONAL FOREWORD This Indian Standard which is identical to IEC Pub 519-3 ( 1988 ) `Safety in electroheat installations - Part 3 : Particular requirements for induction and conduction heating and induction melting installations' was adopted by Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendations of the Industrial Electroheat Equipment Sectional Committee, ET 17, and approval of the Electrotechnical Division Council. While taking up the revision of IS 9080 ( Part 3 ) : 1979 Safety requirements in electroheat installations : Part 3 Particular requirements for mains and medium frequency induction furnace installations', the Sectional Committee decided to align the standard with the corresponding IEC 519-3 ( 1988).This standard supersedes IS 9080 ( Part 3 ) : 1979. The text of IEC Standard has been approved as suitable for publication as Indian Standard without deviations. In this standard, certain terminology and conventions Attention is specially drawn to the following : a) Wherever the words`lnternational `Indian Standard'. are not identical with those used in Indian Standards.

Standard'appear,

referring to this standard, they should be read as

b)

`Comma ( , ) has been used as a decimal marker while in Indian Standards, use a point ( . ) as the decimal marker.

the current practice is to

Only the English language text in the International Standard.

Standard has been retained while adopting it in this Indian

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960`Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)`.The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. In this standard, reference appears to certain International Standards for which Indian Standards also exist. Thecorresponding Indian Standards which are to be substituted in their place are listed below along with their degree of equivalence : international Standard Corresponding Indian Standard Degree of Equivalence Technically equivalent

IEC 50 (841) : 1983 International electrotechnical vocabulary, Chapter 841 : Industrial electroheating I EC 364-4-41 :1983 Electrical installations of buildings, Chapter 41 : Protection against electric shock IEC 519-9 : 1984 Safety in electroheat installation, Part 1 : General requirements

IS1885(Part17):1979

IS 2309 : 1989

Technically equivalent

IS/IEC 519-1 ( 1984)

Identical

WIEC

519-3(1988)

Indian Standard SAFETY IN ELECTROHEAT
PART 3 PARTICULAR

INSTALLATIONS
HEATING AND

REQUIREMENTS FOR INDUCTION AND CONDUCTION INDUCTION MELTING INSTALLATIONS

1. 1.1

Scope This standard 519-1. of: both induction melting instalshall be read in conjunction with IEC Publica-

tion 1.2

It consists

a general section covering requirements common to and conduction heating installations and induction lations and, two sections, of installation. 1.3 The standard A and B, giving specific requirements

for

each

type

applies

to conduction heating (For conduction of solids, heating, at low, use of

installations for induction and medium and high frequencies. direct current is also included);

installations low, medium

for and

induction melting, high frequencies; the conveying which are

holding

and

superheating

at

those parts of heat installation, section. Examples

or handling within the

equipment influence

of the of the

electroheating

of application

: of slabs, billets, hot forming and

Installations for induction and conduction heating for subsequent rods, strip, wire, tubes, rivets, etc., heat treatment. Installations furnaces. with induction crucible furnaces or

induction

channel

2.

Definitions Note. Terms relating to this publication Publications 519-1 and 50(841). Terms which are not defined considered essential for this follows. are defined in IEC

in IEC Publication 519-1 publication are presented

but as

IS/IEC 2.1

519-3(1988)

induction Method charge,

heating

(I EV

841-05-01,

modified) heat is generated by currents in

the 2.2

of heating in which the induced electromagnetically. resistance

Conduction heating (direct ( I EV 841-02-02 modified) Resistance be heated and

heating)

heating in which current passes is not induced electromagnetically.

through

the

material

to

2.3

Heating That conduction

section part of the takes place. ( I EV 841-05-06 equipment in which heating by induction or

2.4

inductor

modified) of induction neatlng or melting current and designed to create the in the charge (IEV 841-10-13).

.The component carrying equipment, magnetic field which

(e.g., coil(s)) an alternating induces currents

2.5

Contact

system of a conduction heating connected to the heating furnace ( I EV 841-0518) heat it is by work station circuit. by which the

The component charge is electrically 2.6 Induction crucible

An induction melting or holding furnace in which the or in the crucible containing generated directly in the charge, means of one or more inductor coils arranged around the crucible.

2.7

Induction

channel

furnace

(IEV

841-05-19)

An induction melting or holding furnace forming a transformer in a whose secondary circuit comprises the molten metal contained channel made of refractory material and which is connected to a refractory lined chamber also containing molten metal, into which charge pieces to be heated are placed.

3. 3.1

Inductor Where the inductor or parts of it are intended to wear or exchanged to meet a new production manufacturer's instructions shall be followed. to be replaced requirement, due the

3.2

Should the effect of cooling of the inductor become insufficient and cause danger to personnel or damage to essential parts of the equipan alarm signal shall be given and the heating power switched ment, off automatically.

IS/IEC 3.3 Cooling may cause short-circuit. of the inductor below condensation at the coil dew and point should its terminals

519-3 (1988)

be avoided as it leading to possible

3.4

For electroheat equipment with forced cooled inductors having a charge and/or lining of high heat capacity, it is advisable to have an emergency supply for cooling the coil(s) and where applicable the conveying equipment until the hot charge has been removed and until the lining has cooled to a safe temperature level.

3.5 shall

The voltage not exceed

applied to inductors, for the manufacturer's rating.

example,

coils

with

tappings,

4. 4.1

Capacitors All citors off. necessary which may precautions be dangerous shall be taken to rapidly discharge capato touch after they have been switched

that

A warning notice shall be displayed in a prominent the discharge has to be effected before handling the

position stating capacitors.

4.2 work with.

For capacitors permanently coil or a transformer,

the

connected discharge

in

parallel to an inductor device may be dispensed

Where capacitors connected in parallel to an inductor or a transformer are disconnected only in the off-load condition, the discharge device may be dispensed with, providing a sufficient time delay occur for the discharge between switching off,the supply and opening of the capacitor switch.

Note.-

If there is -a indispensable.

risk

of

d.c.

charging,

the

discharge

device

is

4.3 fuses

Capacitors which are shall have discharge

switched facilities.

on

load

or

connected'

via

external

4.4

A discharge capacitor terminals

is rot a substitute device together and to earth before

for short-circuiting handling.

the

Note.-

Although a discharge device has operated, a residual charge sometimes be left at the interconnections of seriesmay connected capacitors due to blown fuses, interrupted internal differences of the capacitance values or dielectric connections, recharging from d.c. components of the previous charge.

3

IS/IEC 4.5

519-3 (1988) Capacitors for low frequencies shall be connected via devices. Where internal fuses are employed, external means Capacitors for medium and tion can be dispensed with. quencies may be connected without protective devices. protective of protechigh fre-

4.6

In the case of liquid-cooled capacitors, the capacitor temperature shail be monitored by a device fitted with an automatic alarm. If the cooling systems of several capacitors are connected in series, it will suffice to monitor the temperature of the capacitor at the outlet end. Where the capacitor units are individually switched, the last unit in the series-connected cooling circuit shall be permanently connected in the electrical circuit, or be the last unit to be disconnected.

4.7

instead of the coolant at the outlet be monitored.

capacitor point or

temperature, rate of flow

of

the temperature of each cooling circuit

the may

5.

Mains

frequency

power

sources

In the case of mains frequency power sources which feed a single phase load from a three-phase supply and which employ capacitors and series reactors to keep the 3 line currents in reasonable balance, resonance causing overvoltages liable to impair safety may occur if the phase connection common to the capacitors and reactors of the balancing circuit becomes open-circuited, for example, by a blown fuse or a defective contactor in the line.

For SUPPlY, breaker.

such for

conditions example,

measures overvoltage

shall be provided tripping of

to the

disconnect
Supply

the circuit

Contactors which control the three-phase supply to capacitor combination shall be designed to ensure that connected to the common point of the reactor and capacitor when switching on and opens late when switching off.

the reactorthe contact closes early

6. 6.1

Motor-alternator

frequency

converters

In the case of rapid power reduction or switching in of capacitors, transient voltages may occur which the heater and frequency converter shall be designed to tolerate.

6.2

The converter has been

excitation current has reached its completed.

shall only be applied when the operating speed and the starting

frequency sequence

IS/IEC 6.3

519-3 (1988)

The alternator shall be provided with over-current and overvoltage protection. Protection devices shall include time dependent elements to match the transient characteristics of the alternator. Thermal protection devices are normally not suitable because of their inertia.

6.4

If there is a risk of voltage peaks which are inadmissible even if of short duration, direct acting protection devices shall be employed, for example surge arresters. Series-compensated frequency alternators for example series capacitor shortshall include suitable protection, circuiting devices.

6.5

In the case of control switching-in operations shall only safe level.

frequency convertors without automatic voltage of capacitors or power reduction by switching be possible when the generated voltage is at a

7. 7.1

Solid

state

frequency

converters be protected at the input which may occur during that safety is ensuring

Solid terminals switching maintained.

state frequency converters shall to prevent transient overvoltages operations on the supply side,

7.2

Solid state frequency converters voltage and overcurrent protection.

shall

have

quick-acting

over-

7.3

Additional measures shall be taken dangerous transient voltages due to rapid

to avoid the changes of load

occurrence power.

of

8. 8.1

Ferromagnetic

frequency

multipliers considered phase type. in this standard are

Ferromagnetic of the conventional

frequency multipliers three-phase/single

The multiplier consists of a special connection tically saturated cores of single-phase reactors, i.e., which shall comply with the standards of formers, control and safety requirements. regard to cooling, 8.2 On reactors currents content

of highly magnechokes or transtransformers with

the three-phase input side of a multiplier, capacitors and shall be connected so as ~to compensate high magnetizing of the multiplier reactors as well as to limit the harmonic in the supply currents.

9. 9.1

Switchgear Design of on-load quency converters shall the converter for sudden operated switchgear take into account the load decreases. of motor alternator voltage characteristics freof

5

IS/IEC 9.2

519-3 (1988) take into account (transformers the and

Design of off-load operated switchgear shall reactances of the converters, time behaviour reactors) and capacitors.

9.3

Design of switchgear shall take into account not only the but also the harmonic content mental component of the current, may be produced by the installation. When switching capacitors others shall be considered when is made: When occur switching . as a on, high on-load, a choice the following points of switching device or

fundawhich

9.4

among method

current

peaks

at

high

frequency

may

critical levels of overvoltage When switching off, restriking of the switching device shall be avoided.

result

of

10. 10.1

Cables,

wires

and

busbars and busbars shall be so dimensioned taking into account the avoided, current loadings. that inadmismagnitude and

Cables, wires sible heating is frequency of their

Note. -

Tables of cable current carrying values relevant frequency (50 Hz/60 Hz) are generally not applicable tallations working at higher frequencies.

for mains for ins-

In the over-heating current. 10.2 given shall 10.3

case of

of parallel individual

connections, conductors

care due

shall be taken to avoid to unequal sharing of

Where cables, wires or in Sub-clauses 6.2.8, apply.

busbars are forced cooled, the provisions 6.5.1 and 6.5.2 of IEC Publication 519-1,

The installation's individual overcurrent protection devices may be dispensed with for internal connections between components such as frequency multipliers, converters, transformers, capacitors, switchinductors and contact systems, provided such connections are gear, short-circuit and earth-leakage proof.

Note. -

This is deemed to be the case with cables or arrangements of solid wires or single cores where contact with one another (also with earthed parts) is prevented by using sufficient clearances, spacers or insulating shims, by laying the conductors in separate conduits of insulating material or by using cables or wires that are considered to be short-circuit proof by their design.

IS/IEC

519.3(1988)

The short-circuit strength mentioned above can be dispensed with for medium and high-frequency installations if sufficient shortcircuit protection is ensured by the design of the frequency converter, for example solid state equipment.

10.4

Cables and wires which are part of the heating section are normally provided with an insulation that shall resist high mechanical and thermal stresses. In the majority of cases this insulation is insufficient for protection against electric shock. For this reason measur,es shall be taken for the prevention of inadvertent contact with these cables and wires during operation, if the permissible touch voltage (Sub-clause 14.1.1) is exceeded.

11.

Liquid

cooling

(see

IEC

Publication

519-1,

Sub-clause

6.5)

11.1

The formation of bubbles in equipment of voltage band 3 shall the bubbles liable to deteriorate the

cooling systems be avoided, as cooling system.

of high-frequency arcing may occur

in

11.2

In textile reinforced hoses moisture may creep along reinforcement thus creating potential differences between forcement and the coolant, possibly exceeding the electrical of the hose wall.

the textile the reinresistance

This disposition 11.3'

shall be taken of hoses.

into

account

in

the

choice

of

material

and

the

Certain liquid-cooled components (e.g., ceramic capacitors, water of electronic valves) are extremely sensitive to pressure. jackets Deviating from the requirements of Sub-clause 6.5.4 of IEC Publication 519-1, they shall only withstand the rated service pressure. Their water connections however shall withstand 1.5 times the rated service pressure.

12.

Rating The instance,

plate

(see

IEC

Publication

519-1,

Clause

8) (for installation rating plates.

principal inductor,

of the electroheat components contact system) shall have individual

13.

Clearance The frequency used for

and

creepage

distances employed for not necessarily high those

clearances and creepage distances and medium frequency installations are mains frequency (50 Hz/60 Hz).

Where reduced quency generators) impairing safety.

values are measures

employed shall be

(for taken

example, in high-freto prevent flashovers

7

IS/IEC 14.

519-3 (1988)

Protection against Clause 12) Protection against Clause 412) Permissible

electric

shock

(see

IEC

Publication

519-1,

14.1

direct

contact

(see

I EC Publication

364-4-41,

14.1.1

touch

voltuge

as a function

of frequency

The limit of permissible touch voltage is a function of frequency; Recommended limit levels are under this limit increases with frequency. consideration and where national standards exist they shall apply.

Note.

-

Care should be taken where a high-frequency modulated by one of a lower frequency.

voltage

is

14.1.2 All parts of the heating installation having electrical equipment, for example capacitors, reactors, transformers, inductors or contact cables and busbar connections, shall be located systems, switchgear, inside enclosures or be otherwise adequately protected against direct It shall not be possible to open the doors or remove the contact. covers giving access to those parts of the equipment with voltages of bands 2 and 3 without the use of a tool, for example, a spanner or a lock, the key of which is available only to an authorized person.

14.1.3 Live conductors at voltage bands 2 except where the following conditions exist:

and

3

shall

be

inaccessible

Voltages in band 2: access only by authorized persons. In addition for voltages in band 3, the design shall be such as to prevent inadvertent contact by authorized persons who are carrying out fault finding, testing and repair. This may be achieved, for example, by one or more of the following methods:

1)

Use

of

bolted-on only

covers: with power switched internal off. screens: shall be fitted of power and specification to

Access 2) Hinged

intended doors

lockable

or hinged

A positively operated, non-resettabie safety switch to ensure that the door is closed before restoration means provided to bring out leads of appropriate externally connected test instrumentation.

3)

Internal

screens

and

insulation: employed covering the screen shall of test probes.

Internally fixed screens or insulation shall be positions where voltage test points are required; have holes or slots of dimensions to allow insertion

IS/IEC

519-3 (1988)

14.1.4 Accessible plugs and sockets etc. for d.c., a.c.. or high-frequency voltages greater than 500 V which must not be interchangeable shall be automatically switched off before or when being disconnected in service this may be achieved by use of to avoid hazard of safety to personnel; mechanical interlocks .

14.2

Protection against Clause 413) Permissible touch

indirect

contuct

(see

IEC

Publication

364-4-41,

14.2.1

voltage

as a function

of duration

and

frequency

As stated in Sub-clause 14.1 .l the permissible touch voltage increases with frequency . This shall be taken into consideration when drawing information from the existing values of limit levels for mains d.c. and voltage band 2 given in Sub-clause 413.1 .1.3, frequency, Table 41A and Figure 41 B of Publication 364-4-41 (see IEC Appendix A). The permissible touch voltage continuous contact is' identical with direct contact (see Sub-clause 14.1.1). Limit mains are levels under for voltage consideration. band as the a function permissible of frequency touch voltage for for

3

and

for

frequencies

other

than

14.2.2 The electrical insulation resistance of parts of the electroheat installation varies throughout the process cycle due to changes of temperature, the electrical insulation, lining and electrical components, for example, capacitors, water-cooled windings and particularly the temperature and quality of water employed.

A value of minimum electrical insulation resistance is normally given and therefore it is necessary to take these variations account when setting the operating levels of protective devices, example earth leakage detection at the time of commissioning the tallation. Induction heating installations currents. This may necessitate installation from the power supply often electrical mains. have considerable isolation of the

not into for ins-

leakage electroheat

14.3

Special

requirements and bracelets shall of medium and high not be worn frequencies near (e.g., strong in the electrovicinity

14.3.1 Metal rings magnetic fields of inductors).

9

IS/IEC 14.4

519-3 (1955) Earthing provisions (see IEC Publication 519-1, Sub-clause 12.4)

14.4.1 If live parts are connected to earth, via resistors, impedances installation which is electrically isolated from arresters in an supply mains, the earth connections shall be dimensioned thermally dynamically for the highest current occurring in case of fault. current flowing in these earth connections shall be monitored. If maximum limit admissible in operation is exceeded, an alarm shall given and the installation switched off automatically.

or the and The the be

Monitoring is not necessary in the case of connections that serve for the discharge of electrostatic charges or the like and in highfrequency applications where the inductor is protected by guards which, when removed, prevent operation of the heater.

14.4.2 When using protective earthing, consideration shall frequency dependence of the loop impedance formed source, the active conductors and the earthing system.

be given to the by the current

14.4.3 It may be necessary to operate, without connection to earth, metal parts which are directly influenced by the electromagnetic field, in order to avoid closed metal loops and thereby maintain electromagnetic and thermal effects within acceptable limits; in which case See Sub-clause 12.3 of IEC other means of protection shall apply. Publication 519-1.

Where these parts are liable to be at a voltage exceeding the permissible touch voltage level (see Sub-clause 14.2.1) access by operating personnel shall not be possible. If this cannot be avoided for reasons of space requirements or due to the mode of operation of the installation, protection of personnel shall be ensured by other means given in the operating instructions.

14.4.4 All sheathed of an enclosure shall be earthed

cables, conduits or pipes passing through those parts containing high-voltage circuits in the voltage band 3 at the point where they pass through the enclosure.

14.4.5 In high-frequency generators, circuits of voltage band 3 may be employed using the earthing provisions for the supply system of voltage band 2, providing the overload monitoring of the supply transformer interrupts the high-voltage circuit immediately.

Note.

-

Individual earthing generally required for distribution systems of voltage band 3 can be dispensed with for the high-frequency circuits of generators because of low values of shortcircuit power which exist within the high-frequency circuits.

10

IWIEC

519-3(1988)

14.5 Protective

conductors conductors for lowfor protective aluminium or galvanized steel strip. equipment copper or aluminium should

material The permissible frequency equipment is copper, For medium or high-frequency be used. On dimensioning be given also to the

the cross-sectional discharge current

areas, due of capacitors.

consideration

shall

The penetration depth of the current decreases with increase of frequency. This shall be taken into consideration when dimensioning the cross-sectional area of the protective conductor.

15.

Radio

interferences

Care should be taken to avoid radio interferences when electroheat by national or internaequipment is operated. Guidance may be given tional standards.

11

IS/IEC

519.3(1988)

SECTION SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS CONDUCTION HEATING

A

s AND

FOR INDUCTION INSTALLATIONS

Al. Al .1

Conveying

equipment

and

charge shall charge. be capable of withstanding the

effect

The conveying of temperature

equipment from the

Design of the conveying equipment shall take into account the effects of the electromagnetic fields. In addition to employing suitable materials and geometries this may necessitate further measures, such as screening, isolation, avoidance of closed metallic loops and forced cooling to keep electromagnetic and thermal effects within acceptable limits. The effect be catered of the electromagnetic for in the design. forces acting on the charge shall

also Al.2

Design of the conveying equipment shall be suitable for the volume and physical strength of the charge which occur heating process.

changes during

in the

Al .3

Charge pieces having dimensions, shape, physical properties, burrs and tolerances as agreed between user and manufacturer shall be employed to ensure the safe working and correct operating sequence of the heating installation.

Al .4

Measurement of surface temperature does not allow reliable assessment of the temperature distribution in the charge due to specific possible overheating of the charge physical phenomena. Therefore, cannot be excluded. Attention should be given to minimize this risk, for example, by compliance with the operating instructions.

Al.5

Presence of metallic residues, i.e., scale, may interfere with progress of the charge and affect the reliability and safe working the heating installation. When necessary, scale and residue shall removed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions.

the of be

Al.6

Where the conveying equipment or part of it is forced example, water-tooled, refer to Sub-clauses 3.4 and A2.7.

cooled,

for

A2. A2.1

Contact

system parts of it are intended to meet a new production shall be followed. to be require-

Where the contact system or replaced due to wear or exchanged ment the manufacturer's instructions

12

IS/IEC A2.2

519-3 (1988)

The value of contact pressure given by the manufacturer shall be heating power is switched on maintained throughout the period when by use of a suitably designed device, for example, a locking system which can only be opened by a power-operated release mechanism and with heating poller switched off.

A2.3

contacts shall close or open only with the During normal operation, switched off to prevent arcing and voltage surges; heating power in the design shall be made to prevent scatter of hot metal provision which may cause danger to personnel and equipment.

A2.4

In the case of a rapidly moving charge (for example, tubes) shall be provided to prevent surface irregularities f:om measures damaging contact systems or their holding mechanism, for example, by allowing these to be moved from the path of such irregularities.

A2.5

In applications where contact systems are used without electrical insulation, the equipment shall be designed, for example, with protecsuch that in normal use inadvertent tive screens or sufficient distance, This applies contact with the bare contact system is not possible. the voltage is exceeded (see Subwhere permissible touch clause 14.1.1). Where possible, compliance use of protective screens or other means of protection a warning notice shall be displayed on the installation made with Sub-clause 12.2 of IEC Publication 519-1. is not and

A2.6

Should the effect of cooling of the contact system become insufficient and thus cause danger to personnel or damage to essential parts of the equipment, an alarm signal shall be given and the heating power shall switch off automatically.

A2.7

For heaters with forced cooled contact systems having a charge of it is advisable to have an emergency supply for high heat capacity, cooling the contact system and where applicable the conveying equipment also, until the hot charge has cooled to a safe temperature level or has been removed.

A3. A3.1

Inductor

(see

Clause

3)

In applications where inductors are used without electrical insulfor example, hardening, brazing or annealing, the equipment ation, shall be designed, for example, with protective screens or sufficient such that in normal use inadvertent contact with the bare distance, conductor is not possible. This applies where the permissible touch voltage is exceeded (see Sub-clause 14.1.1). Where possible, compliance use of protective screens or other means of protection a warning notice shall be displayed on the installation made with Sub-clause 12.2 of IEC Publication 519-1. is not and

13

IS/IEC A4. A4.1

519-3 (1988)

Special

requirements

(see

sub-clause

14.3)

For induction heating equipment used for pipework, container or in application fields where boiler manufacture, treatment or repair, safety regulations normally allow only operating voltages of band 1, voltages of band 2 also may be applied, where necessary, providing the following precautions are taken:

Use of motor-alternators the transformers having high insulation resistance

or

transformers an extra-high to earth;

having separate windings; dielectric strength and

a

Use of contact footwear to earth,

equipotential connections which provide a otherwise insulating to operating personnel, shall be used. The circuit shall at no point except via an insulation monitoring system.

safe area of gloves and be connected

If it is not possible to avoid direct or indirect parts where the insulation is insufficient to prevent is the case with water cooled heating cables, the clothing or tools is necessary.

contact electric use of

with .live shock, as insulating

A5.

Earthing

provisions

(see

Sub-clause

14.4)

The charge and the moving parts of the conveying system usually cannot be solidly earthed or included in a protective system, in which case other means of protection shall apply. See Sub-clause 12.3 of IEC Publication 519-1.

14

IS/IEC SECTION SPECIFIC B

519-3 (1988)

REQUIREMENTS FOR INDUCTION MELTING INSTALLATIONS

Bl.

Tiltins

device with a tilting device, the following require-

In furnaces equipped ments shall be met: Bl

1 In the event of failure of the tilting mechanism, the furnace shall remain in the position reached or slowly tilt back to its normal be possible without position. Tilting-back to its normal position shall danger. there is a danger of the if, during tilting, 2 the well normally covered by the furnace platform, shall be provided to avoid this danger. These create other hazards, e.g., cutting or squeezing. workman protective measures falling into measures shall not

Bl

B1.3

In the case of a hydraulic tilting device, the pump, the hydraulic fluid reservoir and the piping shall be so positioned as to be protected against any eventual damage due to accidental outflow of molten metal.

B1.4 B1.5 shall

The

tilting

movement

shall

be limited

in both

directions. energizing the normal position. furnace

If, during tilting, only be possible

live when

parts are accessible, the furnace is in its

B1.6 cally 81.7

In the return

case of to zero.

hydraulic

tilting,

activating

levers

shall

automati-

With tilting devices of any kind, push-buttons and of the non-maintained type in the switched-on position.

levers

shall

be

82. 82.1

Furnace

foundations

There shall be a receiving well or a ladle pit capable of taking the total amount of molten metal in the case of emergency tilting or a The receiving well or the ladle pit shall be protected by breakthrough. barriers or covers. The area beneath metal to flow into the fast enough to avoid parts of the installation the furnace shall be designed to allow receiving well in front of the furnace consequential damage to the furnace in the event of a breakthrough. the molten at a rate and other

82.2

82.3

The presence of water below the furnace shall be explosion due to contact with

in the avoided molten 15

receiving because metal.

well or the ladle pit of the possible danger

or of

IS/IEC B3. B3.1

519-3 (1988) Lininu

Molten metal breaking through the furnace lining represents a The lining thickness varies hazard to personnel and equipment. Furthermore sudden deteriorations for throughout its operating life. example by thermal and mechanical shocks may be experienced.

83.2

The intervals.

state This

of the furnace may be effected of electrical

lining by: of the

shall

be

checked

at

reasonable

al bl Cl

Evaluation Visual

values

installation.

inspection. of the crucible diameter at different heights (crucible

Measurement furnaces). Temperature furnaces).

control

(inductor

case

and

coolant

of

channel

B3.3

In order to increase safety to operators and to reduce risk of due to the electrical insulation deterioration damage to the furnace, below a critical value together with the possibility of a breakthrough it is recommended that alarm devices and of the refractory lining, means to disconnect the supply to the furnace should be provided.

84. B4.1

Operation Overheating by: aI the the rate of power input; of the molten metal shall be avoided. This is effected

charging

procedure. the enters temperature bath according to within acceptable

84.2

the charge Care shall be taken that keep its progress of the melt to the limits. The charging _ surface or fusion

84.3

shall not lead to freezing procedure of scrap pieces above the bath (bridging).

of

the

metal

84.4

To avoid molten metal manufacturer.

overheating, shall be made

measurement in accordance

of the temperature with the instructions

of of

the the

84.5

Special precautions shall be taken when pieces with cavities which may contain moisture because of the risk of eruptions of molten metal.

charging into the

materials or bath of metal

B4.6

Dangerous, during melting

noxious or toxic shall be evacuated

fumes or by means

gases liable to of an appropriate

be

generated device.

16

WIEC B5. 85.1 Earthing provisions (see Sub-clause 14.4)

519-3

(1988)

The charge usually can be connected to earth by an earthing electrode, the effectiveness of which shall be ensured. Where earthing is See Subnot possible, means of protection shall apply. other clause 12.3 of IEC Publication 519-1. It is also recommended to use an insulation monitoring device in accordance with Sub-clause B3.3.

77

IS/IEC 5193(1988) APPENDIX A

ADMISSIBLE

TOUCH VOLTAGE OF DURATION

AS A FUNCTION

TABLE 41A

Maximum prospective

touch voltagd duration
Prospective touch voltage

Maximum disconnecting time

a.c., r.m.s.

d.c.

5" 1 0.5 0.2 0.1 0.05 0.03

<so 50 15 90 110 150 220 280

<120 120 140 160 175 200 250 310

Notes 1. -The d.c. column of Table 41A is related to ripple-free d.c., for example from batteries. If the source of supply is rectified a.c. the a.c. column figures would apply. Specific values for rectified a.c. are under consideration. 2. - The prospective touch voltage on d.c. equipment can be of different waveform from the system voltage and is dependent on the fault circuit parameters.

18

IS/IEC

5193

(1988)

V

a.c.

r.m.s. -

Fig.

418.

-

Maximum prospective touch voltage duration curves according to Table 41A.

19

