IS 6936 : 1992
( Reaffirmed 2012 )

Ivldian Standard

?

GUIDE FOR LOCATION, SELECTION AND HYDRAULIC DESIGN OF CANAL ESCAPES ( First Revision )

UDC

626'422'45

0 BIS 1992

BUREAU
MANAK

OF

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR DELHI

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR 110002 MARG

BHAVAN,

NEW October 1992

Price Group 2

Canals and Canal Linings Sectional Committee, RVD 13

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Canals and Canal Linings Sectional Committee had been approved by the River Valley Division Council. Escapes are essentially sefety valves for the canal system. They can serve such purposes as protection of the canal against possible damage, emptying of the canal for repairs and maintenance in addition to removing a part of sediment deposited in the canal. Though the admission of water into the canal from the head is under complete control by the provision of a head regulator excess rise in water level, may take place at any point on the canal downstream as a result of admission of storm water into the system or due to sudden reduction in demand. The closure of canal outlets by the farmers due to low demand or fault-y regulation, could increase water level which may make the canal banks vulnerable to breaches or dangerous leaks. Similar situations can also arise in the case of lift canals in the event of breakdown in the water lifting arrangements. Provision of surplus escapes at suitable intervals along the canal would control the water levels and thereby save the canal from being damaged by qutflanking or breaching. At times, the canal may be required to be closed for carrying out repair works, weed clearance, etc. Provision of escapes would enable the canal to be drained quickly thereby facilitating expeditious clearing and repair operations. In some cases the head reach of a main canal may besubjected to heavy siltation. This would necessitate provision of scouring sluice in the form of an escape structure to clear the silt deposit.

IS 6936 : 1992

Indian Standard
GUIDE FOR LOCATION, SELECTION AND HYDRAULIC DESIGN OF CANAL ESCAPES ( First Revision )
1 SCOPE 1.1 This standard covers the requirements of setting of escape structures on an irrigation canal system, selection of the type of structure and hydraulic design considerations. 2 REFERENCES 2.1 The following Indian adjuncts to this standard: IS No. 4997 : 1968 Standards Tilte Criteria for design of hydraulic jump type stilling basins with horizontal and sloping apron Criteria for design of canal head regulators (.first revision ) are necessary 5.3 Escapes may be necessary near important points where branches take off from a main canal or several distributries take off from a branch. In case of lift channels escapes are essential on upstream of the pumping 3tations. Also in case of power channels, escapes may be necessary upstream of balancing reservoirs and forebays. 5.4 Wherever a canal is very close to the edge of the river bank, its bed level near the headworks being considerably lower than the flood plain of the river there is a risk of flood flow entering into the canal by way of breaches. If there is no escape provision the canal system may be seriously damaged by excessive flow. Escapes may be located at a point downstream of the reach where the canal bank is vulnerable to river flood damage, to restrict the damage to the reach upstream of the escape only. 5.5 When the canal runs along a steep side hill or along a steep bank of comparatively soft material, an escape may be located at the upstream end of the canal section where it first approaches the steep bank. In case of a land slide occurring in the hill slope the entire canal may be blocked resulting in abrupt rise in water level on the upstream for a considerable distance. This in turn can cause extensive damage to the canal section. An escape provided at a suitable place on the upstream of such a reach would act as a safety plug to arrest the rise in water level and avoid consequential effects. Where the length of such vulnerable sections are large intermediate escapes may also be necessary. 5.6 Escapes opposite the inlets or at nearest suitable location may be needed whose drainage water is let into the canal without reserve capacity to receive such water over and above the authorized discharge of the canal. .' 5.7 Certain quantity of heavy bed silt may find its way through the head regulator into the head reach of the main canal and thereby reduce the water way. In such cases, sluice escape within 5 km of the caual head reach is a useful adjunct. The sluice escape if properly worked will assist in keeping down the bed level of the head reach of -the canal. Such escapes can also work as silt ejector for diversion schemes. 5.8 Where the canal is confined by bank on one side only and the unbanked side allows surface inflow, escapes need to be provided at appropriate location in the vicinity, to dispose of the water so received. 1

6531 : 1992

3 TERMINOLOGY 3.0 For the-purpose of this standard definition shall apply. 3.1 Canal Escape A structure to escape from the canal. 4 CLASSIFICATION 4.1 Types of Escape The escapes types: may be classified into the~following surplus or excess water the following

OF ESCAPES

a) Weir or Surface Escapes - These are weirs either in or flush escapes constructed masonry or concrete with or without crest shuters which are capable of disposing surplus water from the canal. b) Sluice Escape - Sluices are also used as surplusing escapes. They enable the canal to be emptied quickly for repairs and maintenance and in some cases act as scouring sluices also, to facilitate removal of silt. 5 LOCATION OF ESCAPES intervals

5.1 Escapes should be located at suitable and places as detailed in 5.2 to 5.9.

5.2 Location of canal escapes are often determined on the availability of suitable drains, depressions or rivers with their bed level at or below canal bed level for disposing surplus water through the escapes, directly or through an escape channel.

IS 6936 : 1992 5.9 Provision of an escape on up stream of railway crossing and in the initial reach of canal, upstream of major aqueducts tunnel is desirable at suitable locations.

half the less than discharge maximum

maximum discharge of the canal or not the difference between the maximum of the canal at the site of the work and flow at the next lower escape.

5.10 Provision of an escape at certain distance is desirable. For the main canal escape at 15 to 20 km and for other canals 10 to 15 km may be provided. 6 CHOICE QF THE TYPE OF ESCAPE 6.0 The choice of the type of escape should be of that made considering the requirements particular escape which will be different for different escapes. 6.1 Surface -Escape Such structures may be conveniently used in case of an escape opposite an inlet when the inlet does not bring in considerable quantity of silt. Surface escape also become useful at the tail end of the canal or on, lift irrigation schemes, when there is fluctuation in the withdrawals from the canal excess quantities of flow may be conveniently diverted through the surface escape. 6.2 Sluice Escape These escapes are necessary wherever the canal is required to be ~emptied quickly. Sluice escapes become essential opposite an inlet when the inlet can bring in considerable quantity of silt. Sluice escapes in such cases would serve the following purposes. a) Removal of the surplus water, and b) Exclusion of silt. 6.3 Sometimes surface escapes may be provided in combination with sluice escapes to serve the required purpose. The sluices may be provided in the body walls of the weirs with the top of shutters at full supply level. 6.4 Escapes may sometimes be provided economiaqueducts/ cally in combination with canal syphon. 7 CAPACITY OF ESCAPES

7.3 In case of escapes located in the vicinity of inlets the minimum discharge capacity will be fixed by that of the inlet, but it may occasionally be designed for a greater capacity to enable it to dispose of excess water brought by the canal. 7.4 Capacity of the sluice escape which acts as a scouring sluice at the head reach of the main canal to facilitate scouring of the silt is limited to a percentage of the design discharge and shall be fixed on the basis of model tests and silt charge. 7.5 Where an escape is reqmred mainly to empty the channel for maintenance, the capacity should be fixed taking into consideration the number of days in which the canal is to be emptied. 7.6 If none of the above clauses is applicable for fixing the discharging capacity of an escape, the discharging capacity may be kept as up to l/2 of parent canal. 8 ESCAPE CHANNEL
8.1 When the escape is located

near the natural drain bed into which the water is discharged, no escape channel may be required and the difference in elevation may be negotiated through a fall. If the escape channel has to be specially constructed, its bed level and fall should be fixed with reference to that of the drainage into which it outfalls. Where there is substantial difference in the water levels of the canal and escape channel proper energy dissipation arrangements are necessary. 8.2 In case of sluice escapes it is desirable that the bed of escape channel is below the bed level of the canal. 8.3 Grade and section of the escape channel should be such that it may generate non-silting non-scouring velocities and should also be with a stable side slopes. 8.4 The concrete a series ary to the full level in escape channel will usually be either a lined chute or an earthen channel with of falls along its course, if found necessnegotiate the difference in level between supply level of the canal and the water the natural drainage.

7.1 Flows required to be diverted through the escapes may vary from small quantities to total canal discharges. 7.2 No general rule may be laid for the discharge capacity of each escape. At important locations like canal passing cities or towns where breach of canal can effect costly properties or human iife, the discharging capacity of escape should equal the maximum flows that may occur in the canals. Escape capacity may include flood run-off as well where inlets are provided for entry of flood waters. At locations where the entire flow is to be escaped cross regulators would be necessary. In other cases it should seldom be greater than

8.5 The capacity of escape channel should be large enough to carry maximum escape discharge. 8.6 The carrying capacity of the natural channel should be investigated taking into consideration the possibility that it may be, carrying the natural drainage water at the same time when the escape is opened. If inadequate, the natural channels should be enlarged to carry the required discharge. 2

IS 6936 : 1992 8.7 The escape should discharge in a well defined drainage so that problem of water logging may not arise. 9 DESIGN CONSIDERATlON FOR ESCAPES depth of llow not exceeding provided in the canal. l/2 the freeboard

9.1 The difference between the maximum water level of the canal and minimum water level in the escape channel should form the basis for determining the exit gradient, factor of safety against uplift and sliding for designing the escape structure, if the structure is founded on permeable foundation. 9.2 The water way required should be computed using appropriate discharge coefficient depending vpon the conditions of flow at the proposed structure. 9.3 In case of surface escapes the sill is provided at full supply level. The waterway should normally be fixed taking into consideration a

9.4 In case of sluice escapes, it is desirable to keep the sill as low as possible depending upon the permissible bed level of the escape channel. This would enable quick emptying silt removing in addition to providing an~economical water way. 9.5 Energy dissipation arrangements should be adequate to cater for all conditions of flow and operation. 9.6 Adequate protection works should be provided on the downstrem of the structure as in the case of a regulating structure ( see IS 6531 : 1992 and IS 4997 : 1968 ). 9.7 The structural and hydraulic design would be similar to that of regulators or sluices or weir as givea in relevant Indian Standard.

3

Standard Mark The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau qf Indian Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

Bureau of Indiau

Standards

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Acf, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization. marking and equality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright No part of these publications may be reproduced m BIS has the copyright of all its publications. any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the~free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details. such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. Revision of Indian Standards

when necessary and amendments, if any, are Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revrsed, issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that! they are in possession of Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the the latest amendments or edition. following reference : Doc:No RVD 13( 16) Amendments Amend No. Issued Since Publication Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Telephones: 331 01 31. 331 13 75

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Marg,

New Delhi

110002 Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone

Regional Central

offices:
: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur NEW DELHI 110002 Shah Zafar Marg

331 01 31 ( 331 13 75 37 84 99, i 37 86 26, !' 53 38 43, ( 53 23 84 235 02 16, 1 235 15 19, 632 92 95, t 632 78 91, 37 85 61, 37 86 62 53 16 40, 235 04 42, 235 23 15 632 78 58, 632 78 92

Eastern

: 1/14~C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 : SC0 445-446, : C. I. T. Campus, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH IV Cross Road, Marol, MADRAS 160036 600113

Northern Southern Western

: Manakalaya, E9 MIDC. BOMBAY 400093

Andheri

( East )

Branches

: AHMADABAD, BANGALORE, BHOPAL, BHUBANESHWAR, FARIDABAD, GHAZIABAD, GUWAHATI, HYDERABAD, LUCKNOW, PATNA, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

COIMBATORE, JAlPUR, KANPUR,

Printed at Printrado, New Delhi, India

