IS 13933

: 1995

WT&r m=r*

( Reaffirmed 2000 )

Indian Stundard

METHODOFTESTFORREADY BIODEGRADABILITYOFSURFACE ACTIVEAGENTS(MODIFIEDSTURMTEST)

UDC

661.1X5.1 : 543

RUHEAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR

STANDARDS
SHAH 110002 Price Group 4 ZAFAR MARG

NEW DELHI November 1995

Soaps and Other

Surface

Active

Agents

Sectional

Committee,

CHD 025

FOREWORD This Indian Standard WAS adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft Soaps and Other Surface Active Agents Sectional Committee had been approved Division Council. finalized by the by the Chemical

It was considered to incorporate the method of test for ready biodegradability of surface active agents ( Modified Sturm Test ) in IS 12795 : 1989 `Specification for Linear Alkyl Benzene'. However, the Committee decided to prepare a separate Lndian Standard, prescribing the complete details of the test method which would he of special significance in the context of all soaps and surface active agents. The existing method in IS 12795 : 1989 provides for primary biodegradability. This standard provides a method to estimate the ultimate biodegradability which is more relevant in the context of environment protection. The test method presently prescribed in IS 12795 : 1989 is applicable to soluble and insoluble organic materials. Since presence of organic impurities complicates the interpretation of the CO, production data, it has been provided that the material tested must be of high purity. In addition, it is subject to the following conditions at the concentrations used in test: i) The test material ii) It should iii) Tt should iv) The test chemicals should have negligible to bacteria, get adsorbed for to glass surface, determining and the ready biodegradability of organic vapour pressure,

not be inhibitry not significantly

has been found suitable under aerobic conditions.

In the preparation of this standard considerable assistance has been drawn from the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) Dot ; 3018 &Method for determination of biodegradabrlity of surface active agents' which is thankfully acknowledged. The composition of the Technical Committee responsible for formulation of the standard is given in Annex A. In reporting the results of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )`.

IS 13933 : 1995

Indian Standard

METHOD OF TEST FOR READY BIODEGRADABILITY OF SURFACE ACTIVE AGENTS ( MODIFIED STURM TEST ) ,
1 SCOPE

dioxide. 2.2 Determination of Total Organic Carhon
2.2.1 General

1.1 This standard prescribes the method of test for ready biodegradability of Surface Active Agents. 1.2 Outline
of the Method

In this test, test organisms are inoculated into a chemically defined microbial growth medium containing the test material. Carbon dioxide-free air is bubbled through the contents and the amount of carbon dioxide produced is estimated by its absorption in barium hydroxide solution. The biodegradability is judged by the amount pf carbon dioxide generated by the test material as a percentage of the theoretical amount that would be produced by the material. 1.3 Principle Aerobic micro-organisms utilising an organic substrate as a carbon and energy source convert the molecule into new cells, carbon dioxide and water. Further, when the available substrate is exhausted, some bacteria die and are subsequently metabolised by the surviving cells. By measuring the amount of carbon dioxide produced and comparing the quantity with the theoretical yield, calculated from the substrate carbon content, a measure of the ultimate biodegradability can be made. The test duration is limited to 28 days.
NOTE -~ It has been found by experience that materials
degrading extensively in this cried are readily degraded under practical conditions. 8 ence, a result regarded as positive by this test procedure indicates that the substance tested is readily and ultimately biodegradable.

This method, with suitable adjustment of the method of heating the sample depending on its composition, is useful in determining carbon and hydrogen in many organic compounds. Gas-heated furnaces may be used, but electrically heated ones are more easily manipulated. 2.2.2 Apparatus The furnace of the Heraeus type consists of three independent heaters A, B, and C in Fig. 1. It is substantially the same as all furnaces for determining hydrogen and carbon by combustion. Two of these heaters, A and B connected to rheostat F and Cr are movable along the tube. The third, C which surrounds the lead chromate, is stationary. The form of furnace though not essential is highly convenient. The usual furnaces are not long enough, and the lead chromate has to be heated by a gas flame, withless flexibility and with frequent damage by melting to the tube. As combustion tube, use a hard glass or fused silica with a transparent section the total length is 100 to 110 cm, and the external diameter is about 2 I mm. Insert a robber stopper at one end, and draw out the other sufficiently to make a rubber tubing connection to the abs0rptio.n. train. To allow observation the 12cm transparent section should begin about 35 cm from the large end. The first pai-t of the tube up to the end of the transparent section is empty. Following this space is a roll of copper gauze about 2 cm long; and next 33 cm is filled loosely with copper oxide in short lengths. A second roll of copper gauze wire from IX cm of fused Jcad separates the chromate, which is held in place by a plug of glass wool extending to the constricted end of the tube.

2 TOTAL
MATERIAL

ORGANIC

CARBON

OF TEST

2.1 The total organic carbon ( TOC ) content of the test material should be calculated or, if this is not possible, actually analysed as per details given in 2.2 to compute the theoretical yield of carbon

IS 13933: 1995

Purify the oxygen or air entering the combustion tube by passing through a drying apparatus H, containing the following, arranged in order of the passage of the gas through them; sulphuric acid R for removing traces of ammonia, 30 percent potassium hydroxide solution J, granular soda lime K for removing traces of carbn dioxide, granular calcium chloride L for removing moisture. The absorption tube R is connected to an oxygen tank with a suitable reducing valve. The absorption train consists of a 5-inch tube N filled with granular calcium chloride to absorb moisture. Saturate the calcium chloride, before use with carbon dioxide to prevent possible absorption of the later from the sample by any traces of calcium oxide that may be present. This is conveniently done by passing carbon dioxide through a tower tilled with calcium chloride or by filling a iarge jar containing calcium chloride with carbon dioxide and then allowing it to stand overnight. In either case, finally draw air through to remove any carbon dioxide. Keep the prepared calcium chloride in well-stoppered bottles. Connect the calcium chloride tube to a potash bulb N containing a 30 percent potassium hydroxide solution and some soda lime and granular calcium chloride. Use a little potassium permanganate to oxidize an ferrous iron or nitrates in the potassium hydroxide solution. Normally, six to eight determinations may be made with one charge in the bulb. The Vanier tube shown may be replaced by the more common Geissler tube or, better, two in series. Follow these by a soda lime-calcium chloride tube P. Connect the last tube to an aspirator, using a guard tube Q to keep the pressure constant. The soda lime and granular calcium chloride to absorb any carbon dioxide escaping from the potassium hydroxide solution and any water evaporating from it. 2.2.3 Procedure Assemble the apparatus, and test for tightness by starting the respiration of air at the rate of about three bubbles per second through the potassium hydroxide bulb; then close the inlet for air or oxygen at the opposite end of the train. If there are no more than three bubbles per minute in the potash bulb, the apparatus is considered tight. Before starting the determination, after the train has been out of use some hours or after any changes in chemicals and connections, run a blank by aspirating about a litre of air through the train, which is heated in the same manner as if a determination were beine made. If the Vanier bulb or Geissler tubes and-the tube containing calcium chloride show a change in weight of less than 0.5 mg each, the apparatus is ready for use. Starting from the cold, move the heaters towards the end of the tube where the gases enter, and warm the air enough by cutting in the electric current to dry the tube and its contents thoroughly. Cut Dff the 2

current from the small heater A and move the large heater B over the copper oxide. Keep about 250 mm of that part of the combustion tube between the two heaters exposed where the boat containing the sample is to be placed. Bring the copper oxide to a red heat by turning on the full current on the large heater. When this temperature IS reached, reduce the LUI'rent with the rheostat to avoid overheating the tube. This is important, for a fused tube means much wasted work. Meanwhile, weigh and connect the absor$ion train. It is advisable to use a bone-dry sample in this determination; otherwise, the moisture must be determined on a similar sample aud the weight later subtracted from the increase in weight of the calcium chloride tube before the percentage of hydrogen is calculated. Weight 0.2 g of the fine11 meshed coal sample into a porcelain or platinum boat. Pl;r;e the boat and sample in a weighing tube closed with a stopper to prevent moisture absorption until it is introduced into the combustion tube. When ready, place the boat and sample as rapidly as possible in the exposed and cooler part of the tube between the two heaters. The copper axide should be red-hot and the lead chromate at dull red heat at this stage. As soon as the boat is in place near the asbestos plug at the beginning of the copper oxide, insert the stopper connecting with the purifying train and aspirate pure oxygen gas through the apparatus at the rate of about three bubbles per second. Pass the current through the shorter heater. Control the rate of evolution of volatile matter by manipulation the rheostat and by gradually pushing this heater toward the boat. The heat must be increased gradually until all the volatile matter is driven off. Prevent too rapid and evolution of gas and tar, which would thus escape complete combustion or be driven back into the purifying train. Aftel the sample is ignited, increase the heat more rapidly but take care not to overheat and soften the combustion tube. Continue the aspiratian with oxygen for 2 minutes after the sample cease!: to glow. Then turn off the current, ar.d aspirate about 1 200 ml of air through the apparatus. Disconnect the absorption bulbs, cool to room temperature, wipe with a lintless cloth and weigh. Weigh the ash in the boat, and carefully inspect for any unburnt carbon, which would vitiate the results. The percentage of ash found should be checked with that determined by proximate analysis. 2.2.4 Calculations Increase in weight of potassium hydroxide bulbs x 0.272 100

0 X -Y-------

weight of sample

-

-7 percent carbon

IS 13933 : 1995
3 DETERMINATION BIODEGRADABILITY 3.1 Apparatus OF

4 REAGIBJTS
4.1 Purity of Water

Assembly following:

as shown

in Fig.

2 consisting

of the

Sterilised distilled pounds inhibitory used. 4.2 Mineral

or deionised to microbial

water free of comsurvival must be

3.1.1 Carbon Dioxide Scrubbing Apparatus Four one-litre plastic bottles or glass flasks each containing 700 ml of 10 N sodium hydroxide (NaOH) solution. One one-litre Erlenmeyer flask containing 700 ml of 0.025 N barium hydroxide [ Ba (OH), Isolution. One empty one-litre Erlenmeyer prevent liquid carry-over. flask as a trap to

Salts Medium

The medium shall be prepared stock solutions. 4.2.1 Ferric
Chloride Solution

from the following

Dissolve 0.25 g ferric chloride (FeCl,. 6H,O) in one litre of water. 4.2.2 Magnesium
Sulphate Solution

hexahydrate

All these are connected in series, using suitable plastic tubing, to a pressurized air source, the air is sparged through the scrubbing solutions at a constant rate of flow. 3.1.2 Carbon Dioxide Production Apparatus Four 5-litre flasks for each test material. Bubblers (lOO-ml barium lutions) -18 numbers. hydroxide tubings. absorbing so-

Dissolve 22.5 g of magnesium sulphate heptahydrate ( MgS0,.7Hz0) in one litre of water. 4.2.3 Calcium
Chloride Solutron

Dissolve 2'7.5 g of anhydrous one litre of water. 4.2.4 Phosphate

calcium

chloride

in

Buffer Solution

Stoppers and flexible plastic

Dissolve 8.5 g of potassium dihydrogen orthophosphate (KH,PO,), 2 1.75 g of d&potassium hydrogen orthophosphate (K,HPO,), 33.4 g of disodium

.025N Ba(OHJ2

AIR

TR

O-025 N BaiO

H) 2

20m9il Na ACETATE

INOCIJLUM

0.025N

E?a(OH) 2

FIG. 2 OECD

`MODIFIED STRUM TEST' FORREADY BIODEGRADAECLITY 3

IS 13933 : 1995

orthophosphate heptahydrate hydrogen ( Na HPO,:7H,O ) and 1.7 g of ammonium chloride ( N&Cl ) in one litre of water. 4.2.5 Ammonium Sulphate Solution sulphate (NH,),SO, in

5 PROCEDURE 5.1 Preparation of Sample

Dissolve 40 g of ammonium one litre of distilled water. 4.3 Test Medium

Make up to one litre with water volumes of stock solution ( 4.2 ): 4 ml of ferric chloride 1 ml of magnesium 1 ml of calcium 2 ml of phosphate I ml of ammonium The final solution 4.4 Barium solution,

the following

Prepare a stock solution of sample by dissolving a homogeneous aliquot of the test material in water, the concentration would depend on the active content percentage. To obtain a homogeneous sample, it is necessary to mix well, at the same time avoiding forming which will tend to concentrate the active ingredient disproportionately. This step is extremely important for correct calculation of biodegradation based on the exact amount of carbon in test system. The pP of the stock solution need not be adjusted unless it falls outside the range of 3 to 10, since the phosphate buffer in the test medium will control it. If thepH lies outside this range, adjust an aliquot of the stock solution tcpH 7.0 + 1.0 with lN hydrochloric acid or sodium hydroxide making sure that the solution is vigorously mixed during th.: additon of acid or alkali. 5.2 TOC
of Test Compound

sulphate

solution,

chloride

solution, and

buffer solution, sulphate

solution. the test medium.
0.025 N.

will constitute
Solution -

Hydroxide

Dissolve 4.0 g of barium hydroxide octahydrate Ba(OH),.SH,O in one litre of water. Filter through a filter paper and seal the clear solution to protect from air and carbon dioxide. When running a series, it is preferable to prepare more than 5 litres of solution. 4.5 Hydrochloric
4.6 Test Organisms 4.6.1 Source Acid Solution 0.5 N.

Determine the total organic carbon (TOC) of the test material by analysing the stock solution ( or the neutralised aliquot ). 5.3 Reference
Substances

The source of the test organisms is activated sludge freshly sampled from a well-operated municipal sewage treatment plant receiving no or minimal industrial effluent. 4.6.2 Preparation ofh4icrohial Culture

In order to check the activity of the inoculum, the use of control substances is desirable. Aniline, sodium acetate or sodium benzoate are suggested as reference substances. The reference substance shall yield more than 60 percent dioxide within 28 days, otherwise the test is regarded as invalid and must be repeated an inoculum from a different source. 5.4 Test Conditions The following steps shall be done in scqucnce:

The activated sludge is aerated for 4 hours in the laboratory 500 ml of the mixed liquor is sampled and homogenised for 2 minutes at medium speed in a blender. It is then settled for 30 mrnutes. If the supernatant still contains high levels of sludge solids at the end of 30 minutes, it may be settled for an additional 30 to 60 minutes or adapted to laboratory conditions to obtain better settling. The supernatant is decanted to provide sufficient volume for 1 percent inoculum for each carbon diotide test flask. Carry-over of sludge solids should be avoided, otherwise this would interfere with measurement of carbon dioxide produced. 4.6.3 Measuremtw

To each of the four 5-litre test flasks, add 2 470 ml of water followed by 3 ml of ammonium sulphate, 3 ml of magnesium sulphatc, 3 ml of calcium chloride, 6 ml of phosphate buffer, 12 ml of ferric chloride (all s?ock solutions). and 30 ml of activated sludge inocuhun. These additions now total 2 527 ml in each flask. Aerate the mixtures with carbon dioxide-free air (3.1.1) for 24 hours to uurgc the system of carbon dioxide. After the aeration period, three carbon dioxide absorber bottles are each filled with 100 ml of 0.25 N barium hydroxide solution and connected in series to the exit air line of each test flask. Now, test material is added lo two of the four flasks to begin with testing period. Each material is tested at two concentrations, 10 and 20 mg/l. The amount of test material (stock solu(ion) required in the flask is calculated as given 4

uf Viable Count

It is useful to performviable counts on the supernatant fraction to determine microbial numbers; this is optional. The inoculum should normally contain 1Oa to 20 X lObcolony forming units per millilitre. It should be used the same day it was prepared.

IS 13933 : 1995

below: BxC Stock solution Nhere A = test compound solution, mg/l; B = test compound mg/l; and C = fina! volume flask (ml). concentration concentration of test medium in stock in test flask, in the test per flask, ml = A

the carbon content of the test compound (TOC). Biodegradability is expressed as percentage TCO,. TCO, = mg CO, per mg of test material (number material molecular E.xample:
x

:-

of carbon atoms in test molecular weight of CO,) weight of active test material

Sodium la&y1 sulphate (SLS)contains 12 carbon atoms and therefore, 12 x 44 288.33 = 1.83 1 mg CO,/mg SLS

TCO,of 3LS =

Sufficient stock solution to reach the desired test concentration, as calculated above, plus suff%zient water to make 473 ml (stock solution + water) are added to the appropriate flasks. To the third flask, used as blank control and containing no test material, add 473 ml of water. The final volume in each flask is now 3 000 ml. A control substance (5.3), at a concentration mg/l, is added to the fourth flask. 5.5 Performance
of the Test

In the case of mixtures, TCO, of the total active material is weighed average of the TCO, of the individual compound. 5.7 Precaution Evolution of a significant amount of carbon dioxide from the blank flask during test would indicate contamination or the medium, glassware or air supply. A total carbon dioxide evolution in the blank at the end of the test exceeding 50 mg,carbon dioxide per 3 litres medium should be considered as invalidating the test. 5.8 Calculations The first step in calculating the amount of carbon dioxide produced is to correct the test material flasks for endogenous carbon dioxide production. The control flask serves as a "seed blank" to correct carbon dioxide which may be produced through endogenous respiration of the bacteria. The amount of carbon dioxide produced by a test material is determined by the difference ( in ml of titrant ) between the experimental and blank barium hydroxide traps. Sample Calculation: Blank Experimental Test Material 48.0 ml hydrochloric 45 .Oml hydrochloric 3.0 ml hydrochloric acid titrated acid titrated acid titrated

of 20

To start with, bubble carbon dioxide-free air (3.1.1) through the solutions at a rate of 50-100 ml/ min per flask (approximately 1 to 2 bubbles per second). The carbon dioxide produced id each flask reacts with the barium hydroxide and precipitates as barium carbonate. The amount of carbon dioxide produced is determined by titrating the unreacted barium hydroxide with standard 0.05 N hydrochloric acid. Periodically, every 2 or 3 days, the carbon dioxide absorber nearest to the flask is removed for titration. The remaining two absorbers are moved closer to the flask, and a new absorber filled with 100 ml of fresh barium hydroxide solution is placed at the far end of the series. Titrations are made as needed (before any barium carbanate precipitate is evident in the second trap) approximately every alternate day for the first 10 days, and every fifth day until the 28th da]. On the 26th day, the pH of the flask contents is measured again, and then 1 ml of concentrated hydrochloric acid is added to each of the test flasks to decompose inorganic carbonate. The final titration is made on day 28. Titrations of the 100 ml barium hydroxide solution are made after removing the bottles closest to the flask. The barium hydroxide is titrated with standard hydrochloric acid, using phenolphthalein indicator. The test is run at 25 + 2' C temperature which is recorded throughout the duration of the test. 5.6 Reporting
of the Results

Then convert ml hydrochloric of carbon dioxide produced. Carbon dioxide, mg = =

acid titrated into mg

(0.05) x ml titrated x 44 2 1.1 x ml hydrochloric acid titrated

The final step is calculating the theoretical carbon dioxide produced using the following formula : mg CO, produced TCO,, percent = (mg test material atided ) x (TCO of test material T

The amount of carbon dioxide produced by the test compound during the test is measured and expressed as percent of the theoretical carbon dioxide it should have produced (TCO,) as caicuiated from

x 100

Is 13933 : 1995

Biodegradability, percent 5.9 Interpretation

Amount of CD* pmduced x 100 =llk%&alamlnmtofco, of the Results

5.9.1 Test materials giving a result to greater than 60 percent yield of carbon dioxide ( within 28 days ) are regarded as readily biodegradable. This level must be reched within 10 days of biodegradation exceeding 10 percent.

6

Is 13933

: 1995

ANNEX A ( Foreword )
COMMITTEE CQMPOSITION

Soaps and Other Surface Active Agents Sectional Committee, CHD 025
Chainnm
SHIU P. DAS -A Members SHRI M. S. THAKUR SHRI C. D. ANAND SHRIMA~ &I AGOARWAL ( AItemate SHRI S. K. fWHANA SHIUS. C. SFUVASTAVA (Alternate ) DR. A. N. BHAT

Representing Drugs Controller of India, New Delhi

Godrej Soaps Ltd. Bombay Directorate General of Technical ) Ministry of Defence ( DGQA) Hindustan ) Lever Ltd, Bombay.

Development,

New Delhi

SHRI S. M. SAHNI(Alternate
CHIEF CHEMIST

Central Board of Excise & Customs (Ministry of Finance), ) Kbadi and Village Industries ) Aegis Chemical Industries Ltd, Bombay ) The Nan-Power ) Development ) Central Pollution Contro: Board, Delhi The Tata Oil Mills Co Ltd, Bombay ) Association ) Nand Kishore Khanna ) Directorate ) K. S. Krishnan ) Indian Soaps t Toiletries Makers' Association, Bombay National Test House, Calcutta ) Nit-ma Limited, Bombay ) Gujarat Detergent Manufacturers ) Kamataka ) Mumbai Grahak Panchayat, ) Bombay Soaps & Detergents Ltd, Bangalore Association, Ahmcdabad Associates (P) Itd, New Delhi General of Supplies and Disposals ( Inspection & Sons. Bombay for Consumer Action Commissioner (Small Scale Industries Soap Manufacturers' Association, Bombay Commission, Bombay

New Delhi

DEPUTYCHIEF CHEMIST ( Alternate

SHRI A. A. WARSI SHRI K. D. KAMBLE ( Alternate
SHRI A. C. DEW SHRIT. K. IYER( Alternate SHRl R. C. DOSHl SHR~Y. R. DOSHI (Alternate SHIU S. R. SINGH

), New Delhi

SHRIR. MUKHOPALIHYAY(Alternate SHRI S. K. GHOSH DR K. S. HOLLA SHP.IF. E. DAXOOWALA(Alternate SHR~Y~GESH KAMDAR DR N. G. WAOLE (Alternate SHRI P. P. KHAIWA SHRIN. K. I&ANNA (Alternate Swxr V. B. KHANNA

on Safety and Health ( ACASH ), Bombay

Wing, ), New Delhi

SHRIP. JAYA KUMARAN(Alternate SHRI K. S. KRIWNAN SHIUSRIDHAR KRISHNA (Alternate SHRI V. P. MENON SHR~J. C. NIIHAWAN SHRIP. K. CHAKRABORTV ( Alternate SHIU K. K. PAmI. SHRIM. A. RHATT (Alternate SHfU A. A. PATEL SHRIMAHENDRA VYAS ( Altemnte DR K. 8. PATIL SHR~M. P. NAIK ( Alternate SHRI BHIMIUO RAGALIWTE

SHUMATIVASJDHA CHACHA~( Alternate REPRESENTAnVE REPRESENTAWE SHRI SA~SH KLIMAH

Directorate General of Health Services, New Delhi Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ), New Delhi Federation of Associations of Small Scale Soap and Detergent India, Delhi ) Oil Technologists Association of India, Kanpur Consumer Educatton and Research Centre, Bombay ) Consumer ) Director General, BIS ( ,kk-oflciu Member Mentber Secretary SHRIP. P. MALIK
Additional Director ( Chem ), BIS 7

Manufacturers

of

SHRI R.C DOSHI( Alfemafe

DR B. R. ~~AIKWAD
DR K. C. TRIVEDI SHIUS. V. G~IU~ALE (Alternate SHRI N. cr. WAGlE SIIRIMA.II KRISHNABASRUR ( Alternafe DR R. K. SINOH

Guidance

Society of India ( Regd ), Bombay

)

Director ( Chem )

( ( `ontirrued on page 8

I

I5 13933: 1995
( Continuedfrom page 7 )

Method of Test
Convener SHIU N. G. WAGLE Members SHRIMA~KRISHNABASRUR
DR A. N. BHAT

Subcommittee,

CHD

025 : 04

Consumer

Guidance

Society of India (Regd), Bombay

Consumer Hindustan )

Guidance Society of India (Reed), Bombay Lever I.td, Bombay

DR V.RDHAYNUKA(Alternate SHRI M. A. BHATT
SHIU S. K. CHECKER SHR, C. B. &A'lNDRAM SHRI ,4. J. VAKIL(Alternate SHUMATI VAT~ALA IYEP

Nirma Ltd, Ahmcdabad Sbriram Institute for Industrial Research, The Tata Oil Mills Co Ltd, Bombay

Delhi

) Central Institute for Research Cotton Technology Regional Testing Centre, New Delhi Nand Kisbore Khanna & Sons, Bombay ) Italab Pvt Ltd, Bombay I) National Test House, Calcutta Soaps & Detergents Ltd, BangaIore Manufacturers ( CJROT ), Bombay

DR S. K. KAFtXIR SHRI P. P. KHANNA
SHRI N. K KHANNA (Alternate SHRJ J. J. PATEL SHRIK. S. SANTHANNAM (Alternate SHRIJ. C. DEY (Alternate SHRI P. B. PATEL SHRI B. M. Sooo DR K. B. PAITL DR ( Alternate

II ) ) Karnataka ) Federation of Associations India, Delhi ) Godrej Soaps Ltd, Bombay ) Consumer ) Harcourt Butler Technological Institute, Kanour Education and Research Centre, Ahmedabad of Small Scale Soap and Detergent

B. R. RAMESH(Alternate SHRI SANT~SH KUMAR
SHRIR. C. DOSHI (Alternate SHRI M. S. THAKUR &RI N. G. DYER(Alternate SHRI R. C. TRIVEDI

SHRI J. T PHAKARDA(Alternate DR R. K. TRIVEDI

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Srandurds harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright No part of these publications may be reproduced in any BIS has the copyright of all its publications. form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revrsron. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition. This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot: No. CHD 025 (0630). Acf, 1986 to promote certification of goods

Ameodmeots Amend No.

hoed Date

Since Publication of Issue Text Affected

RIJREAIJ Headquarters:

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, Y Bahadur Shah Z:rfar Marg. Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 7.5 Regional Central Eastern Northern Southern Western Offices : : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur NEW DELHI 110002 : l/14 C. 1. T. Scheme CALCUTTA 700054 : SC0 335-336, Sector

New Delhi

110002

Telegram5 : Manaksarrstha ( Common to all offices ) T`elephonr

Shah Zafar

Marg Maniktola 160022 6001 I3

331 01 31 1 331 13 75 37 84YY, I 37 86 26. 37 85 61 31 86 62

VII M. V. 1. P Koad, 34-A, CHANDIGARH Road, MADRAS Andheri

60 38 43 1 60 20 25 235 02 16, 2.35 04 42 1 235 15 19, 235 23 15 832 02 95, 832 7X 5X 1 832 78 `)I. 832 7X Y2 BHUBANESHWAK.
HYDEIIABAD.

: C. I. T. Campus,

IV Cross

EY MIDC, : Manakalaya, BOMBAY 400093 : AHMrlDABAD. COIMBATORE.
JALPUR.

Marol,

( East 1

Branches

BANGALORE. I--AKIL)ABAl).
LIICKNOW.

BHOPAL. GLJWt\Hi\Tl.
PATNA.

GI1AZIABAI).

KANPUK.

-1'HIK1JVrZNf\NTI_IAPUHr~M. ~r1ute.d at Newlodla I'rllltiuy
PNm!. Kb"r,a* ["J,.

