IS 10061 :1991 ( Reaffirmed 2001 )

(

FFfT

y+vl

)

Indian Standard

PROFORMA FOR ANALYSIS OF UNIT RATE OF EXCAVATION OF TUNNELS BY CYCLIC DRILLING AND BLASTING (First Revision >

UDC

69'003'12 : 624'191'2

@ BIS 1991

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 1 I0002

September 1991

Price Group 2

Cost Analysis and Cost Estimates Sectional Committee, RVD 19

FOREWORD This Indian Standard ( First Revision > was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Cost Analysis and Cost Estimates Sectional Committee had been approved by the River Valley Division Council. Tunnels are provided for various purposes such as for river diversion during construction of dams, pressure conduits to serve as penstocks for power house, pressure or free flow conduits in water carrier system, spillways and for rail and road transporation. Tunnelling may be either in rock or in soft ground or shield driven. The tunnelling costs depend not on14 on labour, machinery and materials of construction but also on the purpose of construction, types of rocks and soils bored through including physical defects of the geological formations, the number of entrances provided for excavating the tunnel, etc. The cost of excavation of tunnels may vary therefore from place to place. To have a proper comparison of the unit rates of excavation of various tunnels, it is necessary to have uniformity in the analysis of the costs of different parameters which make up the unit rate, which has been brought out in this standard in the form of proforma. This standard was first published in 1981. The revision of this standard has been taken up in the light of the experience gained during the last nine years in the use of this standard. This standard has been revised and additional items, required to be covered have been added.

IS 10061 : 1991

Indian Standard

PROFORMA FOR ANALYSISOF UNIT RATE OF EXCAVATION OF TUNNELS BY CYCLIC DRILLING AND BLASTING (First Revision j
1 SCOPE 5. Construction

Agency

This standard lays down proforma for analysis of unit rate of tunnel excavation. It does not include provisions for tunnel lining. 2 CLASSIFICATION For ease of comparison of unit rates of excavation of various tunnels, the following classification for tunnels should be adopted: a) Geological i) Tunnels in competent rock ii) Tunnels in incompetent rock b) Cross-Sections i) ii) iii) iv)
C)

a) Departmental or contractor b) Name of department/contractor
6. Shape

of~the tunnel ( circular, horse shoe, elliptical, vertical walled with arch roof ) size of the tunnel dimensions to the pay-line ) ( excavated

7. Excavated

8. Type of final lining

plan and L-section of adits and shafts 10. a) Main tunnel - heading length ( shorter limb ) b) Secondary tunnel - heading length ( shorter limb ) 11. Description of alignment including mention of bends, transitions, approach channel, exit channel 12. Types of rock bored ( igneous, sedimentary or metamorphic ) and physical properties such as compressive strength, abrasive value and modulus of elasticity 13. Physical defects of rock formations ( joints, faults, etc ) 14. Ground water conditions, locations and quantity of seepage water at various periods of the year 15. Description of rock cover, depressions and khuds crossing over the tunnel along its alignment 16. Inflammable and abnoxious gases, if encountered ( brief description ) 17. Methods adopted for tackling tunnel excavation ( full face; heading and benching; multiple drifting; pilot tunnel; forepoling; providing double steel ribs and invert struts; etc ) a) Reaches of competent rock strata b) Reaches of incompetent rock strata ( sheared and fractured ) 1

9. Location

Up to 20 m2 From 20 m2 to 40 m2 From 40 ma to 70 m2 Exceeding 70 ma

Method of Excavation

i) Full face ii) Heading and benching iii) Multi-drift Unit cost for tunnel excavation for tunnels excavated by heading and benching method may be the average of unit cost of heading and unit cost of benching. The average will be weighted average depending upon the area of heading and benching. 2.1 Technical Information
The following pertinent

technical information will also be helpful for a full appreciation of the circumstances under which the tunnel is excavated:
I. Name of the project 2. Layout plan of the project 3. Location with plan and L-section of the tunnel 4. Purpose of the tunnel

Is 10061:1991 c) Reaches with inadequate rock cover and adverse ground water conditions d) Reaches showing rock distress e) Reaches of bad rock strata causing break through conditions f) Any other adverse geological conditions. 18. Equipment at each tunnel heading a) Drill Jumbo Type Overall dimensions Number of decks Motive power machines ( hydro-booms; b) Drilling ladder drilling system with fast rock drills; other drills ) Number and Type c) Drill steel and drill bits ( a brief description ) d) Mucking machine Make and model Capacity Motive power Number of mucking machine ~ Number, make, e) Haulage equipment. Locos-Diesel/Electr]c ~model and Rubber tyred carriers j capacity ~ f) Muck trucks I Number, make, Mine cars/diesel/ electric ) model and Rubber tyred carriers J capacity g) Ventilation i) Diameter
p)

Location and lead of dump portal

yard from

19. Air supply -- Installed capacity of compressors pipe size Water supply -- Capacity of tank, pipe size, length, etc. 20. Electrification Main supply voltage Transformer details Spacing Lighting voltage Trolley line rectification (in case of electrictraction ) Firing voltage 21. Excavation data ( in reaches of competent rock strata ) a) Type of strata Average number of drill holes and size of holes per round Type of cut-holes pattern Number and size of cut-holes Average depth of drill-holes Average actual advance Type of explosive and detonators used Quantity of explosive used per round Explosive factor ( kg~m' )
b)

Time Cycle Moving drill jumbo up to . .. the face and drilling the round Average drilling rate . . . ( cms Loading the round; . .. removing drill jumbo from the face firing the circuits Smoke clearance time .. . Advancing mucking machine to the muck pile, scaling down loose rocks and mucking out Time for installation of steel supports sets Time for secondary blast- .. . ing and muck removal Number of sets installed Spacing of sets Time for installation . .. Time for lagging and blocking OR .. . ( h Min)

of ventilation duct Make, model, type and capacity main blowers Spacing of main blowers

of

per Afin ) (hkfin)

ii) Same as above in case of exhaust blowers -- at the face inside the tunnel and spacing h) Pumping arrangements inside the tunnel Number of pumps -- main/feeder Type of pumps Capacity of pumps Spacing of pumps Length, size and nature of pipelinesrnain/feeder j) Tunnel supporting arrangement k) Communication and outside n) Instruments inrock for arrangement inside

( &fin) ( h &fin )

( h Min )

(h Min) ( Min )

m) Instruments for monitoring determining stresses

2

IS 10061:1991 Time for shotcreting/ guniting/installing weld `"" mesh and rock bolts ( in case steel supports are not considered necessary )
( Min )

a) Length of reach ( R. D. .. to ... ...) Geological condition through

...metres

description of tunneling time taken to tunnel . ..( days)

Average time lost due to ... (hlfin) hold ups/derailments in case rail mounted equipment is used (h) Average cycle time for ... advance A Overall advance in a month (metres) Maximum overbreak . .. Average overbreak ... Percentage overbreak of the excavation of pay line . .. 22. Data of steel supports used in the tunnel Type and spacing of steel ribs a) b) i) Segmental type ribs ii) Portal type ribs i) Rib spacing 300 to 600 mm ii) Rib spacing more than 600 and up to 900 mm (cm) (cm) %

b) . .. ... ...and so on 25. Date of commencement and completion of tunnel excavation 26. Monthly progress from the date of start of excavation to completion of excavation. Year Month Progress in metres (R. D . . ..to... ) Tunneling condition

. .. a brief description 27. Incentive payment and results obtained schemes for tunnel crews ( if introduced ) 28. Industrial disputes ( if any) 29. Safety arrangements including firstaid, medical and rescue operations
30. Accidents during tunneling

Percentage in the total length of Iunnel ... ...?0 . .. .. . `J/ /0
. . . ...70

. .. a brief description and their effect on progress

. . ...%

c) iii) Rib spacing more than 900 and up to 1200 mm iv) Rib spacing more than 1200 and up to 1500 mm 23. a) Percent of tunnel unsupported Percent of tunnel supported ( steel ribs ) Percent of tunnel supported ( rock bolts) Percent of tunnel supported ( Pre-cast or pre-stressed segmental lining ) 24. Tunneling reaches in very

Fatal accidents Major accidents Reasons of accidents of strata and that actually obtained during tunneling
32. Lessons learnt

. . . ...%

. . . ...% . . ...%

. . . No of persons dead ... No of persons disabled . . . A broad split up be given A brief description outlining the major variations be given.

31. Geological forecast . . Current forecast . ..%

., . . ...4

. . . ...%

3 PROFOMA
. . . ...%

FOR ANALYSIS OF UNIT RATE OF COST FOR TUNNEL EXCAVATION

poor/distress/cavity

3.1 The proforma recommended for use in analysis of unit rate of tunnel excavation is as given in Table 1.

IS 10061 : 1991 Table 1 Proforma for Analysis of Unit Rate of Excavation of Tunnel ( Clause 3.1 )
Sl No. (1) Item (2) Unit (3) Quantity (4) Rate (5) Amount (6) Remarks (7)

i)

ii)

iii)

iv)

Drilling a) Machinery and equipment excluding air operating cost b) Compressed air CJ Other material d) Labour Blasting a) Machinery and equipment b) Material c) Labour Scaling, Mucking and Disposal a) Scaling b) Machinery and equipment c) Labour Shotcreting/GunitingjRock bolting and Consolidation grouting a) Shotcreting b) Guniting c) Rock bolting d) Consolidation grouting e) Labour Supports and Lagging a) Machinery and equipment b) Material c) Ldbour Facilities a) Ventilation b) Surveying c) Lighting d) Dewatering e) Communication f) Instrumentation g) Tracks h) Miscellaneous items Ancillaries and Incidentals a) Construction of the following: 1) Labour and staff quarters 2) Service roads 3) Electric power supply 4) Water supply system 5) Sanitation system 6) Drainage system 7) Other amenties including first-aid, medical facilities and safety arrangements and rescue operatians b) avl:Fetenance/operation of' items mentioned c) Supervisory works establishment

v)

vi)

vii)

viii) ix)
X)

Quality Overload

control ( excluding profit )

Contingencies

This would include establishment, office stationery, general tools and plant, staff cars, their running and maintenance, insurance, workman's compensation,statutory benefits, telephone and telecommunication facilities interest liabilities on borrowings from the owner and bank guarantee charges etc. operation, repairs and maintenabove shall include depreciation, erection, NOTE - All items mentioned All items of labour mentioned above shall include indirect ance and dismantling of machinery where used. statuatory and other benefits payable to the labour.

4

Standard Mark

by the provisions cf the Bureau of Indian made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.
Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations

The use of the Standard

Mark is governed

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the ~country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. Revision of Indian Standards Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in on this Indian Standard may be possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments sent to BIS giving the following reference: Dot : No. RVI) 19 ( 34 )

Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters
:

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75

New Delhi 110002 Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone

RegionaI Central Eastern Northern Southern Western Branches

Offices :
: Manak Bhavan,

NEW DELHI CALCUTTA

9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 110002 Maniktola 160036 600113

: l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road,

311 01 31 I 331 13 75 37 86 62 53 38 43 235 02 16 6 32 92 95 COIM BATORE, JAIPUR, KANPUR,

700054

: SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH
: C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS : Manakalaya,

E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri BOMBAY 400093
: AHMADABAD,

( East )

4-: BANGALORE, BHOPk&&HUBANESHWAR, FARIDABAD, GHAZIABAD, GUWAHATI, HYPERABAD, PATNA, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

Printed at Printwell Printers, Aligarh, India

