IS 17281 : 2019 
ARRAI ATAF 
Indian Standard 


san ARAU sagen AAN AT 
Ya — Staat iuar fra dett 
va mese wd 


Requirements for Good Aquaculture 
Practices — India GAqP Shrimp 
Hatchery and Grow Out Farms 


ICS 67.120.30 


© BIS 2019 


anda HIS Sm 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 serere TH HM, ay freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2019 Price Group 4 


Fish, Fisheries and Aquaculture Sectional Committee, FAD 12 


FOREWORD 
This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Fish, Fisheries 
and Aquaculture Sectional Committee had been approved by the Food and Agriculture Division Council. 


Considerable milestones have been reached in productivity of aquaculture products in the country. Concerns 
about food safety and quality, sustainability, environmental protection, worker safety and welfare have also 
gained importance. Thus, it is desirable to set up control and compliance systems for various kinds of aquaculture 
produce. In this context, it is necessary to pay attention to the quality of production practices requiring minute 
attention at different aspects of production, storage, handling and distribution. 


In India, aquacultural practices are highly localized occupations and display a lot of variability in cultural practices 
and varietal preferences across regions. Further, with the opening up of the world market, there is a flow of trade 
in the aquacultural products. It is, therefore, necessary to define and assign certain common minimum standards 
to facilitate trade in these products and to win the confidence of the consumers within the country and outside. 


Such standards envisaging focused approach for implementing good aquaculture practices, traceability etc. 
through appropriate infrastructure, record keeping and monitoring would reap following broad benefits: 


a) Development of basic infrastructure at the field level, 
b) Build up culture for good aquaculture practices by the farmers, 
c) Uniform approach across farms regardless of their sizes 


d) Increased awareness among the producers as well as the consumers about the need for consumption of 
good quality and safe food, 


e) Traceability through complete integration of food chain, 

f) Improvement in the environment, 

g) Worker safety and welfare, and 

h) Reputation in the international market as a producer of good quality and safe produce, and 

j) Overcoming the Technical Barriers to Trade (TBTs). 
This standard is part of a series of Indian Standards on Good Aquaculture Practices under development. 
The composition of the Committee, responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex A. 


In formulation of this standard, considerable assistance has been provided by Indian Council of Agricultural 
Research - Central Institute of Brackishwater Aquaculture, Chennai (ICAR-CIBA). Contribution of Dr. K. K. 
Vijayan, Director, (ICAR-CIBA) is also duly acknowledged. 


IS 17281 : 2019 


Indian Standard 


REQUIREMENTS FOR GOOD AQUACULTURE 
PRACTICES — INDIA GAqP SHRIMP HATCHERY 
AND GROW OUT FARMS 


1SCOPE 


This Indian Standard covers the control points and 
compliance criteria necessary to be followed by the 
producers (individual producers and/or members of 
a producer group) of shrimp hatchery and grow out 
farms. 


2 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
terminologies shall apply: 


2.1 Good Aquaculture Practices (GAqP) — 
Practices that address environmental, economic and 
social sustainability for on-farm processes, and result 
in safe and quality food and non-food aquaculture 
products. 


2.2 Applicant Producer/Producer Group — 
Individual/organization that has applied for certification 
to India GAqP certification body. 


2.3 Hazard — A biological, chemical, physical agent 
in, or condition of, with the potential to cause an 
adverse health effect. 


2.4 Individual Producer — A person/organization 
legally responsible for on farm production, who retains 
ownership of all the produce covered in the India GAqP 
licence. 


2.5 Inspection — An examination of all aquaculture 
practices in order to verify compliance to requirements 
specified in this standard. 


2.6 Record — Document showing objective evidence 
of the tasks performed and results achieved. 


2.7 Self-Inspection — Internal inspection of the 
registered product carried out by the grower on his/her 
farm using control points and compliance criteria. 


2.8 Traceability — The ability to trace the history, use 
or location of a product (that is, the origin of materials 
and parts, processes applied to the product, or its 
distribution and placement after delivery) by means of 
a record. 


2.9 Worker — Any person on the farm who has been 
contracted to carry out a task. This includes farm 
owners and managers. 


2.10 Producer Group — A recognized group of 
producers applying for certification with an internal 
procedure and internal control of all the members 
registered to the India GAqP requirements, and 
complying the requirements as specified in this 
standard. 


2.11 Field — Separate unit of land within a farm. 


2.12 Farm — A farm is an agricultural production unit 
or group of agricultural production units, covered by 
same operational procedures, farm management. 


2.43 Environment — Surroundings in which 
an activity takes place including air, water, land, 
natural resources, flora, fauna, humans, and their 
interrelation. 


2.14 Certification — All actions leading to the issuance 
of an India GAqP licence. 


2.15 Standard Operating Procedure — A written 
document which details an operation, analysis, or 
action whose mechanisms are prescribed thoroughly 
and which is commonly accepted as the method for 
performing certain routine or repetitive tasks. 


2.16 Major Requirement — The mandatory 
requirement that shall be fully complied with. In 
case of non-compliance, it will seriously affect 
the quality of freshwater aquatic animal as well as 
safety for consumers. It means that the requirement 
shall be complied with relevant laws and regulations 
as well. 


2.17 Minor Requirement — The requirement that shall 
be mostly complied with. In case of non-compliance, it 
will affect the health of freshwater aquatic animal or 
product quality. 


2.18 Veterinary Drug — Any substance applied or 
administered to any food-producing animal, whether 
used for therapeutic, prophylactic, or diagnostic 
purposes or for modification of physiological functions 
or behaviour. 


3 CONTROL POINTS AND COMPLIANCE 
CRITERIA 


3.1 Control points and compliance criteria required 
to be followed by the applicant producer (individual 


IS 17281 : 2019 


producer and/or member of a producer group) for 
independent verification of the aquaculture practices 
that have gone into the production of the produce are 
given in Table 1. In addition, the applicant producer 
(individual producer and/or member of a producer 
group) shall demonstrate compliance with all applicable 
statutory and regulatory requirements. 


3.2 These criteria are marked as ‘Major’ or ‘Minor’ or 
‘Reco’. The criteria marked as ‘Major’ have a definite 
effect on the safety and quality of the produce and shall, 
therefore, be complied with, or shall give adequate 
assurance about the safety and quality of the produce. 
The criteria marked as *Minor', though have a bearing 
on quality, and are those which, if implemented, would 
provide an advantage to the assessment for India GAqP 
certification. The criteria marked as ‘Reco’, are those, 
which though may not have direct bearing on safety 
and quality of produce but may have other benefits to 
the producer and are recommended for implementation 
and are advisory in nature. 


3.3 For the purpose of verification, a grading pattern 
given below shall be followed for grant of India GAqP 
licence: 


Category of Licence Compliance Compliance 
of Major of Minor 
Requirements | Requirements 
(in, Percent) (in, Percent) 
India GAqP — A 100 90 
India GAqP — B 100 80 
India GAqP — C 100 75 


4 BIS INDIA GAQP CERTIFICATION 


BIS India GAqP certification shall be as prescribed 
under the provisions of Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 
2016 and Rules and Regulations framed thereunder. 
The details of the conditions under which the licence 
may be granted to producer (individual producer and/ 
or member of a producer group) may be obtained from 
the Bureau of Indian Standards. 


Table 1 Control Points and Compliance Criteria 
( Clause 3.1 ) 


Requirements Inspection method 


Hatchery shall be registered with coastal 
aquaculture authority of India 


constructed at an 
environmentally suitably area, legally permitted 
coastal regulation zone (CRZ) 


Various sections of the hatchery, such as brood 
stock maturation, larval rearing, live feed, 
laboratory, water intake, water treatments, 
effluent treatment, biological waste disposal, etc. 
should be identified from the lay out map 


Different production systems in the hatchery 
shall be physically isolated to prevent cross 


Entrance to the hatchery should be restricted to 
the personnel assigned to work exclusively in this 
area and a record of personnel entering the facility 
should be maintained by the security personnel. 


SI No. Item Compliance 
Level 
A-1 HATCHERY AND SEED PRODUCTION 
A-1.1 Hatchery registration Major 
A-1.2 Hatchery site and location Major Hatchery shall be 
A-1.3 Hatchery lay out Minor 
A-1.4 Hatchery infrastructure Major 
contamination. 

A-1.5 Biosecurity Minor 
A-1.6 Water treatment Minor 


Standard intake water treatment protocol should 
be used. 


Source water for the hatchery should be filtered 
and treated to prevent entry of disease vectors and 
any pathogens. Initial treatment should through 
filtration, by slow sand filter or rapid sand filters, 
and store in reservoir tanks. Following settlement, 
it should be chlorinated and de chlorinated. 


The water is then filtered through 1-5 um 
cartridge filter, followed by UV sterilization and 
ozone treatment. Each functional unit should 
have separate water treatment system. 


Verification of registration 
certificate and allied 
documents 


Verify that land has been 
selected based CRZ rules 


Verification of layout map 
and visual inspection 


Examine the layout of farm. 
Visual inspection. 


Visual inspection. 


Verify visitor policy. 


Verify the water quality 
records, and check the 
samples. 


Visual inspection of water 
treatment facilities. 


SI No. 


Item 


Compliance 
Level 


Table 1 ( Continued ) 


Requirements 


IS 17281 : 2019 


Inspection method 


A-1.7 


A-2 
A-2.1 


A-2.2 


A-2.3 


A-2.4 


A-2.5 


A-2.6 


A-3 
A-3.1 


Discharge treatment system 


Major 


BROODSTOCK MANAGEMENT 


Broodstock procurement 


Broodstock transportation 


Broodstock Quarantine 


Broodstock feed 
management 


Procedure for induced 
maturation 


Procedure for spawning and 
Larviculture 


Major 


Minor 


Major 


Minor 


Minor 


Minor 


No waste water shall be released out of the 
hatchery without chlorination and dechlorination, 
especially to prevent the escape of the larvae into 
the natural waters. 


Wastewater from each facility shall be released 
into special concrete or lined sedimentation 
tanks. From there it overflows into treatment 
tanks where the water shall be chlorinated and 
dechlorinated through aeration. 


In the case of Penaeus vannamei hatchery, only 
SPF brood stock cleared through the quarantine 
shall be used in the hatchery for seed production. 


In P. vannamei hatchery, no other species shall be 
used for hatchery production. 


Use of pond reared broodstock strictly prohibited. 


In the case of wild broodstock, healthy inter-molt 
animals without any external fouling, transport in 
individual brooder bag filled with clean chilled 
seawater and sufficient oxygenation. Activated 
charcoal and 10 ppm EDTA shall be added to 
prevent build-up of ammonia and chelating the 
heavy metals. 


Well maintained quarantine facility with separate 
water and aeration facility shall be provided. 
Animals are individually maintained after 
adequate prophylactic treatment. Individual 
animals shall be screened for WSSV and MBV 
and shall be transferred to maturation facilities. 


High quality fresh feed, possibly SPF feed shall 
be used. Feed shall be kept in a secure place that 
is able to prevent contamination and keep the 
quality of the feed. 


Farmers shall follow the standard operating 
procedure for induced maturation and spawning 


Measures shall be in place to disinfect eggs 
according to standard operating procedures. 
Nauplii should collect through 60 to 100 um net 
and wash under clean steady seawater, gather the 
nauplii and treat with 200 to 300 ppm formalin 
for 30 s and again treat with povione iodine 
(50 ppm) for one minute. Wash again with slow 
and current of sea water for 5 to 10 min. Stock 
in the larvicultutre tank at a stocking density of 
100 no/L. 


In case abnormal mortality is found and target 
diseases are suspected, disease transmission shall 
be controlled and relevant competent authority 
shall be immediately informed. 


HATCHERY INPUTS : PROBIOTICS, PREBIOTICS, IMMUNESTIMULANTS 


Appropriateness of 
biological and chemical 
inputs 


Minor 


Biological and chemical inputs applied shall be 
appropriate for the targeted disease or health 
condition. The current list of approved inputs 
from Competent Authority shall be available with 
hatchery personnel. 


Verify the analyse report of 
the discharge water. 


Visual inspection 


Visual inspection and 


verification of records. 


Visual inspection, and 
interview with hatchery 
operators. 


Inspection and interview 
with hatchery operators. 


Visual inspection, and 
interview with hatchery 
workers. 


Verification of feed 
management plan, if any. 


Verification of records and 
existing SOP’s. 


Verification of records and 
existing SOP’s. 


Verification of records. 


IS 17281 : 2019 


SI No. 


Item Compliance 
Level 


Table 1 ( Continued ) 


Requirements 


Inspection method 


A-32 


A-4 
A-4.1 


A-4.2 


A-5 
A-5.1 


A-6 
A-6.1 


A-6.2 


A-7 
A-7.1 


A-7.2 


Awareness of banned 
chemicals/anti-biotic 


Major 


Hatchery personnel shall be aware of the banned 
chemicals and antibiotic. 


Periodic residue analysis by accredited labs. 


STORAGE OF FRESH FEED, EQUIPMENT, AND OTHER MATERIAL 


Storage of fresh and dry feed Minor 


Hatchery equipment Minor 


TRAINING 


Training to hatchery workers Minor 


TRANSPORT 


Broodstock transportation Major 


Seed packing and Minor 


transportation 


HATCHERY SANITATION 


Personnel hygiene Major 


Effluents/ discharges Minor 


Fresh feed should be kept at isolated and secured 
place. Only authorized personnel shall have 
access to the place. 


Different form of frozen feed should have 
separate freezers. 


All the equipment such as nets, sieves shall be 
sterilized and kept in specific locations facilitating 
easy operation. 


Back up air compressors, pumps, motors, should 
be kept in a specific storage rooms. 


Hatchery technicians shall attend period 
training conducted by State Department of 
Fisheries, Research organizations and University 
Department to update the new knowledge, 
analytical techniques, latest operational protocols, 
good management practices etc. 


Transport time from landing centre/quarantine 
facility must be minimum. Preferably on cooler 
nights. Individual shrimp should be in separate 
brooder bag. The brooder bag contains one third 
clean sea water and two third of oxygen. Reduce 
the temperature of water in order to lower the 
metabolic activity. 


Follow the standard operating procedure for 
transportation, add 1 g of charcol/L of water to 
prevent the building up of ammonia and nitrate. 
Add 10 ppm EDTA to chelate heavy metals, and 
inhibit the bacterial growth. 


A designated place in the hatchery for seed 
packing must be there. Standard operating 
procedures for packing of seeds need to be in 
place. Seed shall be sold to licenced farmer in the 
case of exotic species. 


Hatchery workers should enter through dressing 
room, where they remove their street clothes and 
take a shower before entering another dressing room 
to put on working clothes and boots. At the end of 
the working shift, the sequence should be reversed. 


Workers shall be vaccinated for endemic 
communicable diseases and other immunization 
as required by regulatory authorities. 


There should be means provided for disinfection 
of vehicle tyres (tyre baths at the gate), feet 
(footbaths containing hypochlorite solution at 
>50 ppm active ingredient), and hands to be used 
upon entry and exit. 


Effluents should be discharged to Effluent 
treatment system and properly disinfected before 
discharging out to the receiving ecosystem. 


Infected stocks should be incinerated properly. 


Verification of records and 
interview with workers. 


Visual inspection and 
interview with hatchery 
workers. 


Visual inspection and 
interview with workers 


Verification of records and 
interview with workers. 


Visual inspection and 
interview with workers. 


Verification of records and 
visual inspection. 


Visual inspection and 
interview with workers. 


Verification of records, 
visual inspection and 
interview with hatchery 
workers. 


Table 1 ( Continued ) 


IS 17281 : 2019 


SI No. Item Compliance Requirements Inspection method 
Level 
A-8 TRACEABILITY 
Traceability Major Record shall be maintained for hatchery stock for Verification of records 
traceability purpose. 

B BRACKISHWATER SHRIMP FARMING — GROW OUT 

B-1 Farm registration Major Farm shall be registered with Coastal Aquaculture Verification of the farm 
Authority, India registration document 

B-2 Biosecurity measures Major Farms must establish adequate bio-security Visual inspection. 
measures including fencing, reservoirs, bird- 
scare, separate implements for each of the ponds 
etc. 

B-3 Pond preparation Minor The recommended pond management practice Visual inspection and 
shall be followed for preparation of pond before verification of SOP's. 
stocking. 

B-4 Seed quality Major The seeds shall be procured from the licenced Verification of record 
hatchery. 

B-4.1 Seed stocking and initial Minor Stocking seeds as per the stocking density Verification of record and 

management approved by Coastal Aquaculture Authority. assess from pond sampling 

B-5 Soil and water management Major The recommended management practices shallbe Visual inspection and 
followed. Minimize the water exchange or follow Verification of record. 
zero water exchange system. Avoid the use of 
ground water. 

B-6 Feed management Major Good quality feed shall be used. Usage of feeds Verification of record. 
containing antibiotics, pesticides, hormones, Verify shrimp samples for 
other harmful additives, microbial toxins and  adequateness of feeding. 
aflatoxins must be avoided. Feeds should have 
adequate water stability. 

Feeding shall be adjusted according to crop 
biomass, survival and feeding trays used for 
monitoring feed consumption. 
B-7 Health management Major If the disease is found to be mild and non- Visual inspection and 


infectious — carry out the corrective measures; 
disease treatment or improving general pond 
condition. 


If a mild infectious disease is detected in a pond 
with potential to spread within a farm, quarantine 
that pond and resort to the best possible option for 
disease treatment. 


Ifany serious infectious disease is detected which 
has the potential to spread widely, isolate the 
pond, harvest all the shrimp by adopting good 
sanitary practices. But, ensure that the water 
is not discharged into the environment before 
proper disinfections 


Take necessary precaution to avoid transfer of 
shrimp or equipments or anything used in the 
disease-affected pond to other ponds. 


Cooperating and communicating with 
neighbouring shrimp farmers regarding disease 
problem should be practiced so as to minimize 
the spread of disease. 


Information on disease outbreak shall be 
communicated to local regulatory authority. 


verification of records. 


IS 17281 : 2019 


Table 1 ( Concluded ) 


SI No. Item Compliance Requirements Inspection method 
Level 
B-8 Use of antibiotic and other Major Application of antibiotic/ chemical/drug shall be Verification of records. 
chemicals done according to the recommended practices. 


When necessary, use only those chemicals and 
drugs that are approved for use in aquaculture. 


Banned antibiotics and pharmacologically active 
substances shall be prohibited. 


Whenever permitted antibiotics/drugs/chemicals 
are used for disease treatment, make sure that 
withdrawal period are observed before harvesting 


the shrimp. 

B-9 Effluent management Major Minimize water exchange with surroundings. Verification of records 
Switch over to the closed system or semi open and interview with farm 
system of aquaculture. workers. 


While draining, there should be minimal re- 
suspension of sediments. 


If necessary, discharge of effluents must be done 
through a sedimentation pond, which will prevent 
re-suspension of sediment. 


It is also advisable to allow the effluents pass 
through a mangrove plantation. If there are no 
mangroves, efforts may be made for planting 
mangroves which is also an eco-friendly exercise. 


All aquaculture farms should have the effluent 
treatment systems of appropriate designs, 
stipulated in the regulations imposed by the 
Government. 


B-10 Harvest Minor Shrimp harvest and transportation must be Verification of records 
planned in advance. 


Carryout necessary monitoring to ensure that the 
produce is residue free prior to harvest. 


Harvest and transportation should be carried out 
quickly and by following scientific methods to 
ensure freshness of the produce when it reaches 
the processing plants. 


Keep proper records of sale of shrimp from the 


farm. 
B-11 Traceability and recall/ Major Identification of harvested stock shall be Verification of records and 
withdrawal maintained for traceability and recall/withdrawal, SOP’s. 
if needed. 


IS 17281 : 2019 


ANNEX A 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Fish, Fisheries and Aquaculture Sectional Committee, FAD 12 


Organization 
Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi 


Central Inland Fisheries Research Institute, 
Barrackpore 


Central Institute of Brackish Water Aquaculture, 
Chennai 


Central Institute of Fisheries Education, Mumbai 


Central Institute of Fisheries Technology (CIFT), 
Cochin 


Central Institute of Fresh Water Aquaculture, 
Bhubaneswar 


Central Marine Fisheries Research Institute, Kochi 


Coastal Aquaculture Authority, Chennai 


Defence Food Research Laboratory, Mysore 
Export Inspection Council of India, New Delhi 


Fisheries Division, DAHD&F, Min. of Agriculture, 
Gol, New Delhi 


Food Safety and Standards Authority of India, 
New Delhi 


National Fisheries Development Board, Hyderabad 


National Institute of Fisheries Post Harvest Technology 


and Training (NIFPHATT), Cochin 
Sea Food Exporters Association of India, Alleppy 
Society of Aquaculture Professionals, Chennai 


The Marine Products Export Development Authority 
(MPEDA), Kochi 


Kerala University of Fisheries and Ocean Studies, 
Kochi 


All India Shrimp Hatchery Association 


Director General, BIS (Ex-officio Member) 


Representative(s) 
DR JoYKRUSHNA JENA, (Chairperson) 


Dr Bay KUMAR BEHERA 
SHRI DHARMENDRA KUMAR MEENA (Alternate) 


Dr K. AMBASANKAR 
Dr SuBHENDU KUMAR OTTA (Alternate) 


Dr GoPAL KRISHNA 
Dr B. B. Nayak (Alternate) 


Dr K. AsHoK KUMAR 
Dr MADHUSUDANA Rao (Alternate) 


Dr KEDAR NATH MOHANTA 
Dr P. C. Das (Alternate) 


Dn A. K. ABDUL NAZAR 


ProF R. JAYARAMAN 
Suri S. Mani (Alternate) 


Dr N. GOPALAN 
Suri R. M. MANDALIK 


SHRI PAUL PANDIAN 
Suri I. A. SIDDIQUI (Alternate) 


Ms VINITA VERMA 
Dr RasesH Kumar (Alternate) 


EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR (TECHNICAL) 


SHRI VARGHESE JOHN 
Mn Kamat Ras (Alternate) 


SHRI NORBERT KARIKKASSERY 
PRESIDENT 


JOINT DIRECTOR 
Deputy DIRECTOR (QC) (Alternate) 


Dn T. V. SANKAR 


SHRI D. RAMRAJ 
Suri K. MADHUSUDAN Reppy (Alternate) 


SHRI P. RAJESH, 
HEAD (FOOD AND AGRICULTURE DEPARTMENT) 


Member Secretary 


Ms Navita YADAV 


SCIENTIST ‘C’ (FOOD AND AGRICULTURE DEPARTMENT), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: FAD 12 (14330). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


