**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 8378 (1987) : Vocabulary for basic and general terms in 
dimensional metrology [PGD 25: Engineering Metrology] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



?TR TJ^ ^TT teMHI | ^t ^Wt ^m\ ^f ^TT ^T^?TT \' 

Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



REAFFIRMED 



. & &Q5 IS ; 8378 - 1 987 

UDC 001-4 : 389-1 +631-7 ( First Rep rint MARCH 200 1 ) ( Reaffirmed 1998 ) 



Indian Standard 

VOCABULARY FOR 
BASIC AND GENERAL TERMS IN DIMENSIONAL METROLOGY 

( First Revision ) 



t 



1. Scope — Covers the basic and general terms relating to dimensional measurements and instru- 
ments in metrology. 

2. Quantities and Units 

2.1 Quantity — An attribute of a phenomenon, body or substance which may be distinguished 
qualitatively and determined quantitatively. 

Note 1 — The term 'quantity' may refer to a quantity In a general sense [ see example (a) ] or to a specific quantity 
[see example (b) ]. 

Note 2 — Quantities which are mutually comparable may be grouped together into categories of quantities, for 
example, thickness, circumference, wavelength. 

Examples: 

a) Quantities in general sense, that is, length, angle; and 

b) Specific quantities, that is, length of a particular rod, half-angle of a taper. 

2.2 Derived Quantity— A quantity defined as function of base quantity. 

2.3 Dimension/ess Quantity — A quantity in the expression of which the exponents of the base 
quantities, in a given system, are zero. * * 

Example : Linear strain. 

2.4 Unit ( of Measurement ) — A specific quantity, adopted by convention, used to express quanti- 
tatively, quantities which have the same dimension. 

2.5 Symbol of a Unit ( of Measurement ) — A conventional sign designating a unit of measure- 
ment. 

Example : m is the symbol for metre. 

2.6 System of Units (of Measurement )— A set of units established for a given system of 
quantities. 

Note) — A system of units comprises a set of chosen base units, together with dervied units determined by their defining 
equations and proportionality factors. 

Example: 

a) international system of units — SI, and 

b) CGS system of units. 

2.7 Coherent System of Units ( of Measurement ) — A system of units composed of a set of base 
units and coherent derived units. 

Example: Metre. 

2.8 International System of Units, SI — The coherent system of units adopted and recommended by 
the General Conference on Weights and Measures. 

Note — For the length measurement, SI is based at present on the base unit as, the metre, unit of length. 



Adopted 14 September 1987 



@ April 1988, BIS 



Gr 7 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN. 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 



IS: 8378 -1987 

2.9 Base Unit ( of Measurement ) — A unit of measurement of a base quantity in a given system of 
quantities. 

2.10 Multiple of a Unit (of Measurement) — A large unit of measurement which is formed from a 
given unit according to scaling conventions. 

Example: One of the decimal multiples of the metre is the kilometre. 

2.11 Sub-Multiple of a Unit ( of Measurement ) — A smaller unit of measurement which is formed 
from a given unit according to scaling conventions. 

Example: One of the decimal sub-multiples of the metre is the millimetre. 

2.12 Value ( of a Quantity ) —The expression of a quantity in terms of a number and an appropriate 
unit of measurement. 

Example: 5*3 m. 

2.13 True Value ( of a Quantity ) —The value which characterizes a quantity perfectly defined in the 
conditions which exist when that quantity is considered. 

Note — The true velue of a quantity is an ideal concept and, in general, cannot be known exactly. Indeed, quantum 
effects may preclude the existence of a unique true value. 

2.14 Conventional True Value (of a Quantity ) — A value of a quantity which, for a given purpose, 
may be substituted.for the true value. 

Note — A conventional true value is, in general, regarded as sufficiently close to the true value for the difference to be 
insignificant for the given purpose. 

Example: Within an organization, the value assigned to a reference standard maybe taken as 
the conventional true value of the quantity realized by the standard. 

2.1 5 Numerical Value (of a Quantity ) —The number in the value of a quantity. 
Example: 53. 

2.16 Reference-Value Scale ( of a Quantity or Property ) — For a given quantity or property, a series 
of values determined in a defined manner and adopted by conversion. 

Example: The Mohs hardness scale based on hardness of a series of specified minerals. 
3. Measurements 

3.1 Measurement— The set of operations having the object of determining the value of a quantity. 

3.2 Metrology —The field of knowledge concerned with measurement. 

Note — Metrology includes all dimensional aspects both theoretical and practical with reference to measurements, 
irrespective of their level of accuracy. 

3.3 Static Measurement — The measurement of a quantity whose value can be considered constant 
for the duration of the measurement. 

Note — The qualifier 'static* applies to the measurand and not to the method of measurement. 

3.4 Principle of Measurement — The specific basis of a method of measurement. 

Examples: 

a) The Abbi's effect of alignment applied to the measurement of length/ and 

b) Taylor's principle of gauging. 

3.5 Method of Measurement — The set of theoretical and practical operations, in general terms, 
involved in the performance of measurements according to a given principle. 

3.6 Measurement Procedure — The set of theoretical and practical operations, in detailed terms, 
involved in the performance of measurements according to a given method. 



IS : 8378 - 1987 

3.7 Measurement Process — All the information, equipment and operations relevant to a given 
measurement. 

Note — This concept embraces all aspects relating to the performance and quality of the measurement; it includes for 
example, the principle, method, procedure, values of the influence quantities and the measurement standards. 

3.8 Measurand — A quantity subjected to measurement. 

Not a — As appropriate, this may be the measured quantity or the quantity to be measured. 

3.9 Influence Quantity — A quantity which is not the subject of the measurement but which 
influences the value of the measurand or the indication of the measuring instrument. 

Example: Ambient temperature; frequency of an alternating measured voltage. 

3.10 Transformed Value ( of a Measurand ) — A value of a quantity which represents the measurand 
and which is functionally related to it. 

Note — The transformed value may be internal to a measuring system or may be provided as output from the system. 

Examples: 

a) The value represented by a binary train within a digital electronic system or computer, 
and 

b) Value of pressure transformed in terms of dimensional value on air gauge. 

3.11 Measurement Signal — A representation of a measurand within a measuring system. 

Note — The input signal to a measuring system may be called the stimulus; the output signal may be called the 
response. 

3.12 Direct Method of Measurement — A method of measurement in which the value of a measurand 
is attained directly, rather than by measurement of other quantities functionally related to the 
measurand. 

Note — The method of measurement remains direct even if it is necessary to make supplementary measurements to 
determine the values of influence quantities in order to make corresponding corrections. 

Example: Measurement of a length using a graduated rule. 

3.13 Indirect Method of Measurement — A method of measurement in which the value of a measur- 
and is obtained by measurement of other quantities functionally related to the measurand. 

Examples: 

a) Measurement of pitch diameter of thread by three wire method, and 

b) Measurement of tooth thickness of gear by span measurement method. 

3.14 Fundamental Method of Measurement — A method of measurement in which the value of a 
measurand is determined by measurement of the appropriate base quantities. 

3.15 Definitive Method of Measurement — A method of measurement of a quantity in accordance 
with a definition of the unit of that quantity. 

3.16 Direct Comparison Method of Measurement — A method of measurement in which the measur- 
and is compared directly with a quantity of the same kind having a known value. 

Examples: 

a) Measurement of a length using gauge block and comparator, and 

b) Measurement of a length using graduated rule. 

3.17 Substitution Method of Measurement — A method of measurement in which the measurand is 
replaced by a quantity of the same kind, of known value, and chosen so that the effects on the 
indicating devicehare the same. 

Example: Determination of length by using setting master. 

3 



ISt8378-1987 

3.18 Differential Method of Measurement —A method of measurement in which the measurand is 
compared with a quantity of the same kind, of known value only slightly different from the value of 
the measurand, and in which the difference between the two values is measured. 

Examples: 

a) Measurement of a bore diameter by using dial bore gauge and setting ring, and 

b) Measurement of diameter of a piston by means of slip gauge and a comparator. 

3.19 Null Method of Measurement — k method of measurement in which the value of the measurand 
is determined by balancing, adjusting one or more quantities, of known values, to which the measur- 
and has a known relationship at balance. 

Not* — The measurand and tha adjuatad quantities may ba of diffarant kinds. 
Example: Measurement of a dimension by means of an air gauge. 

4. Measurement Results 

4.1 Result of a Measurement — The value of a measurand obtained by measurement. 
Note 1 — Whan tha tarm 'raault of a measurement' is ussd, it should ba made clear whether it refera to: 

a) tha Indication, 

b) tha uncorrected result, or 

c) the corrected raault, 

and whether averaging over several observations is involved. 

Nota 2 — A complete statement of tha result of a measurement includes information about the uncertainty of measure- 
ment and about tha values of appropriate influence quantities. 

4.2: Indication (of a Meesurfng Instrument) — The value of a measurand provided by a measuring 
instrument. 

Note 1 —Tha indication Is expressed In unite of the measurand, regardless of the units marked on the scale. What 
appeere on the scale ( sometimes called direct indication, direct reading or scale value ) has to be multiplied by tha 
instrument constant to provide tha indication. 

Nota 2 — For a material measure, tha Indication la Ita nominal or marked value. 

Nota 3 — The measuring of tha tarm 'indication' is sometimea extended to cover what is recorded by a recording 
instrument, or the measurement signed within a measuring system. 

4.3 Uncorrected Result — The result of a measurement before correction for assumed systematic 
errors. 

Nota 1 — If only a single Indication ia involved, the uncorrected result is identical to the indication. 
Nota 2 — In English, uncorrected result was formerly referred to as indicated value. 

4.4 Corrected Result — The result of a measurement obtained after having made corrections to the 
uncorrected result in order to take account of assumed systematic errors. 

4.5 Accuracy of Measurement — The exactness of the indicated readings with the actual values of 
the measured dimension or property. 

Note — The use of tha tarm precision for accuracy ahould ba avoided. 

4.6 Repeatability of Measurements— The closeness of agreement between the results of successive 
measurements of the same measurand carried out subject to all of the following conditions: 

a) the same method of measurement, 

b) the same observer, 

c) the same measuring instrument 

d) the same location, 

e) the same condition of use, and 

f) repetition over a short period of time. 

Nota — Repeatability may ba expressed quantitatively In terms of dispersion of the results. 



IS : 8378 - 1987 

i 

4.7 Reproducibility of Measurements — The closeness of agreement between the results of measure- 
ments of the same measurand where the individual measurements are carried out changing condi- 
tions such as: 

a) method of measurement, 

b) observer, 

c) measuring instruments, 

d) location, 

e) condition of use, and 

f) time. 

Note 1 — A valid statement off reproducibility requires specification off the conditions changed. 
Note 2 — Reproducibility may be expressed quantitatively in terms off dispersion off the results. 

4.8 Experimental Standard Deviation — For a series of n measurements of the same measurand, the 
parameter s characterizing the dispersion of the results is given by the formula: 



-v 



Z (Xi-x) % 
/-1 



/?-1 



xi being the result of the /th measurement and x being the arithmetic mean of the n results 
considered. 

Note 1 — The experimental atandard deviation ahould not be confused with the population atandard deviation a off a 
population of aize N and off mean m, given by the formula: 



V 



in 

E (jr f — at)« 

— n 



Note 2 — Conaldering the aeries of n meaaurementa as a sample of s population. * la an estimate of the population 
atandard deviation. 

Note 3 — The expression *\<sfff provides sn estimate of the atandard deviation of the arithmetic mean x with respect to 
the mean m of the overall population. The expression s/^/N Is called the experimental standard deviation of the 



4.9 Uncertainty of Measurement— An estimate characterizing the range of values within which the 
true value of a measurand lies. 

Note — Uncertainty of meaaurement comprises, in general, many components, some of the components may be esti- 
mated on the basis of statiatical distribution of results of series of messurements and can be characterized by experimental 
atandard deviationa. Estimatea of other componenta can only be based on experience or other information. 

4.10 Error of Measurement — The result of a measurement minus the true ( conventional ) value of 
the measurand. 

Note 1 — The term relatea equally to: 

a) the indication. 

b) the uncorrected result, and 

c) the corrected result. 

Note 2 — The known parte off error off measurement may be compensated by applying appropriate corrections, the 
error of the corrected result can only be characterized by an uncertainty. 

Note 3 — 'Absolute error' which has a sign should not be confused with absolute value of an error which is the 
modulus of an error. 

4.11 Relative Error — The absolute error of measurement divided by true ( conventional ) value of 
the measurand. 

4.12 Random Error — A component of the error of measurement which, in the course of a number 
of measurements of the same measurand, varies in an unpredictable way. 

Note — It is not possible to correct the random error. 



IS: 8378 -1987 

4/|3 Systematic Error— A component of the error of measurement which, in the course of a number 
of [measurements of the same measurand, remains constant or varies in predictable way. 

Note — Systematic errors end their causes mey be known or unknown. 

4.14 Correction— The value which, added algebraically to the uncorrected result of a measurement 
compensates for an assumed systematic error. 

Note 1 — The correction is equal to the assumed systematic error, but is of opposite sign. 

Note 2 — Since the systematic error cannot be known exactly, the correction is subject to uncertainty. 

4.16 Correction Factor — The numerical factor by which the uncorrected result of a measurement is 
multiplied to compensate for an assumed systematic error. 

Note — Since the systematic error cannot be known exectly, the correction factor is subject to uncertainty. 

~6. Measuring Instruments 

6.1 Measuring Instrument — A device intended to make a measurement alone or in conjunction 
with other equipment. 

6.2 Material Measure — A device intended to reproduce or supply, in a permanent manner during its 
use, one or more known values of a given quantity. 

Note — The quantity concerned may be called the supplied quantity. 

Example: Length standard, of one or more values with or without scale. 

6.3 Measuring Transducer— A measuring device which provides an output quantity having a given 
relationship to the input quantity. 

Example: Probe used in electronic dimensional measurement. 

6.4 Measuring Chain — A series of elements of a measuring instrument or system which constitutes 
the path of measurement signal from the input to the output. 

Example: Surface finish measuring instrument comprising a stylus, meter, printer, etc. 

6.6 Measuring System — A complete set of measuring instruments and other equipment assembled 
to carry out a specified measurement task. 

Note — The term 'measuring installation' is reserved for measuring apparatus, usually of the larger kind, which is perma- 
nently Installed. 

Examples: 

a) Apparatus for calibration of slip gauge blocks, 

b) Measuring system for thread gauge-calibration, and 

c) Surface plate calibration by spirit level/or auto-collimeter. 

6.6 Indicated Instrument — A measuring instrument which displays the values of a measurand or a 
related va ue. 

Examples: 

a) Micrometer, and 

b) Vernier. 

6.7 Recording Instrument— A measuring instrument which provides a record ( permanent or semi- 
permanent ) of the value of a measurand or a related value. 

Note 1 — The record mey be analogue ( continuous or discontinuous line ) or digital. 
Note 2 — Values of more than one quantity may be recorded simultaneously. 
Note 3 — A recording measuring instrument may also incorporate an indicating device. 
Example: Surface texture/roundness recorded on graph paper or on digital display. 

6.8 Totalizing Instrument— A measuring instrument which determines the value of a measurand by 
summation of partial values of the measurand obtained simultaneously or consecutively from one or 
more sources. 

6 



IS: 8378 -1987 

6.9 Integrating Instrument — A measuring instrument which determines the value of a measurand by 
integrating a quantity with respect to another quantity. 

Example: Surface finish measuring instrument. 

5.10 Analogue Measuring Instrument — A measuring instrument In which the output or display is a 
continuous function of the value of the measurand. 

Note — This term relates to the form of presentation of output or display, not to the principle of operation of the 
instrument. 

Example: Dial indicator. 

6.11 Digital Measuring Instrument — A measuring instrument which provides a digitalized output 
and/or display. 

Note — This term relates to the form of presentation of output or display, not to the principle of operation of the 
instrument. 

Example: Digital micrometer. 

6.12 Indicating Device— For a measuring instrument, the set of components which displays the 
value of a measurand or a related value. 

Note 1 — The term may include the indicating meana or setting device of a materiel measure. 

Note 2 — An analogue indicating device provides an analogue indication; a digital indicating device provides a digital 
indication. 

Note 3 — A form of presentation of the indicationa either by means of a digital indication in which the least aignificant 
digit moves continuously thus permitting interpolation, or by means of a digital indication aupplemented by a acale end 
index, is called a semi-digital indication. 

Note 4 — The term 'read out device' is used as a general descriptor of the means whereby the response of a measuring 
instrument is made available. 

6.13 Recording Device— For a recording instrument the set of components which record the value 
of a measurand or a related value. 

6.14 Recording Medium— A strip, disc, sheet or other structure on which is recorded the value of a 
measurand or a related value. 

Note 1 — A recording medium bearing pre-printed co-ordinate lines is generally called a recording chert. 
Note 2 — An electronic or magnetic recording medium may be called a memory. 

6.15 Sensor— The element of a measuring instrument or measuring chain to which a measurand is 
directly applied. 

Examples: 

a) Stylus of a lever type dial indicator, and 

b) Float of a level measuring instrument. 

6.16 Detector— A device or substance which indicates the presence of a particular quantity without 
necessarily providing its value. 

Note— In eome casee, an indication may be produced only when the value of the quentity reaches e given threshold. 
Example: LED display indicator. 

6.17 Scale Mark — A line or other mark on an indicating device corresponding to one or more 
defined values of a measurand. 

Note 1 — For digital and aemi-digitel indications, the numbers themselves ere equivalent to scale marka. 
Note 2 — The term 'gauge mark' is often used in cases where only one or a few marks are involved. 

6.18 Index — The fixed or movable part of an indicating device whose position with reference 
to the scale marks enables an indicated value to be determined. 

Examples: 

a) Pointer, 

b) Luminous spot 

c) Liquid surface, and 

d) Recording pen. 



IS: 8378 -1987 

5.19 Scale — An ordered set of scale marks, together with any associated numbering, forming a part 
of an indicating device. 

6.20 Scale Length — For a given scale, the length of the line between the first and the last scale 
marks and passing through the centres of all the shortest scale marks. 

Note 1 — The lint may be real or Imaginary, curved or straight. 

Note 2 — Scale length is expressed in units of length regardless of the units of the measurand or the units marked on 
the scale. 

5.21 Scale Range — For a given scale, the range of scale values between the extreme scale marks. 

Nolo — The scale range is expressed in the units marked on the scale, regardless of the units of the measurand, and Is 
normally stated in terma of its lower and upper limits, for example, Vernier 0-300 mm. 

5.22 Scale Division — The part of a scale between any two successive scale marks. 

6.23 Scale Spacing — The distance between any two successive scale marks, measured along the 
"same line as the scale length. 

Note — Scale spacing is expressed in units of length, regardless of the units, of the measurand or the units marked on 
the scale. 

5.24 Scale Interval — The difference between the scale values corresponding to two successive 
scale marks. 

Note — Scele interval is expressed In the units marked on the scele, regardless of the units of the measurand. 

6.26 Linear Scale -* A scale in which each scale spacing is related to the corresponding scale 
interval by a coefficient of proportionality which is constant throughout the scale. 

Note — A linear acale having constant scale intervals is called a regular scale. 

5.26 Non-Linear Scale — A scale in which each scale spacing is related to the corresponding scale 
interval by a coefficient of proportionality which is not constant throughout the scale. 

Note — Some non-linear acales are given special names, such as logarithmic scele square-law scale. 

6.27 Suppressed-Zero Scale — A scale whose scale range does not include the scale value corres- 
ponding to zero value of the measurand. 

Example: Micrometer 50-75 mm. 

6.28 Expanded Scale — A scale in which part of the scale range occupies a disproportionately large 
part of the scale length. 

5.29 Dial — That part of an indicating device, fixed or moving, which carries the scale or scales. 

Note — In some indicating devices, the dial takes the form of drums or discs bearing numbers and moving relative to a 
fixed index or window. 

5.30 Scale Numbering —The set of numbers, marked on the scale which either corresponds to the 
values of the measurand defined by the scale marks or merely indicate the numerical order of the 
scale marks. 

5.31 Zero of a Measuring Instrument — The direct indication of a measuring instrument when the 
instrument is in use with zero value of the measurand, any auxiliary power supply required to 
operate the instrument being switched on. 

Note 1 —This term is commonly celled electrical zero in the case of a measuring instrument having en electrical 
auxiliary power aupply. 

Note 2 — The term 'mechanical zero' ia often used when the instrument is not in use snd any auxiliary power supply la 
switched off. rr J 

Note 3 — The mechenicel zero msy possibly not coincide with the electrical zero; in some types of instruments, the 
mechanical zero may be indeterminate. 

6.32 Setting ( of a Measuring Instrument ) — The operation of fixing the positions of the gauge marks 
or scale marks of a measuring instrument ( in some cases of certain principal marks only ), in relation 
to the corresponding values of the measurand. 

5.33 Adjustment — The operation intended to bring a measuring instrument into a state of perfor- 
mance and freedom from pfas suitable for its use. 

8 



IS : 8378-1987 

6.34 User Adjustment — The operation intended to bring a measuring instrument into a state of 
performance and freedom from bias suitable for its use, employing only the means at the disposal of 
the user. 

6. Characteristics of Measuring Instrument 

6.1 Nominal Range — For each scale range, the set of values of the measurand for which a measur- 
ing instrument gives values within that scale range at a particular setting of its controls. 

Note — The nominal range is expressed in units of the measurand, regardless of the units marked on the scale, and 
is normally stated in terms of its lowar and upper limits, for example micrometer 25-60 mm. Where the lower limit 
is zsro, the nominal ranga is commonly stated solely in terms of its upper limit, for example a nominal range of micro- 
meter 0-25 mm la expressed as 26 mm. 

6.2 Span — The modulus of difference between the two limits of a nominal range of a measuring 
instrument. 

Example: Dial indicator with — 50jt to + 50ji span 100fi. 

6.3 Nominal Value — A value used to designate a characteristic of a device or to give a guide to its 
intended use. 

Note — The nominal value may be rounded value of the characteristic concerned and is often an approximate value of 
the quality realized by a standard. 

Examples: 

a) Size of a limit gauge 20 mm, and 

b) Size of a ring gauge 25 mm. 

6.4 Specif ied Measuring Range) Specified Working Range — The set of values of a measurand for 
which the error of a measuring instrument is intended to lie within specified limits. 

Note — The upper and lower limits of the specified measuring range are sometimes called the maximum capacity and 
minimum capacity respectively. 

6.5 Rated Operating Conditions — Conditions of use giving the ranges of the measurand and of the 
influence quantities, and other important requirements, for which the metrological characteristics of a 
measuring instrument are intended to lie within specified limits. 

Note*. The rated operating conditions generally specify rated values of the measurand and of the Influence 
quantities. 

6.6 Limiting Conditions — The extreme conditions which a measuring instrument can withstand 
without damage and without degradation of its metrological characteristics when it is subsequently 
operated under its rated operating conditions. 

Note 1 — The limiting conditions for storage* transport and operation may be different. 

Note 2 — The limiting conditions generally specify limiting values of the measurand and of the influence quantities. 

6.7 Reference Conditions — Conditions of use for a measuring instrument prescribed for perfor- 
mance testing, or to ensure valid intercomparison of results of measurements. 

Note — The reference conditions generally specify reference values or reference ranges for the influence quantities 
effecting the measuring Instrument. 

6-8 Instrument Constant — The coefficient by which a direct indication must be multiplied to obtain 
the indication of a measuring instrument. 

Note 1 — A measuring instrument, in which the direct indication is equal to the value of the measurand, has an instru- 
ment constant of 1 . 

Note 2 — Multi-range measuring instruments with a single scale have aeveral instrument constants which correspond, 
for example, to different positions of e selector mechanism. 

Note 3 — For some measuring instruments, the transformation from direct indication to indication may be more complex 
than a simple multiplication by an instrument constant. 

6-9 Response Characteristic — For defined conditions, the relationship between a stimulus and 
corresponding response. 

Note 1 — The relationship may be based on theoretical or experimental considerations; it may be expressed in the form 
of en algebraic equation,* numerical table or a graph. 

Note 2 — When th* stimulus varies as a function of time, one form of response characteristic is the transfer function 
( the Laplace transform of the response divided by that of the stimulus ). 

9 



18:8318-1987 

6.10 Sensitivity — The change in response of a measuring instrument divided by the corresponding 
change in the stimulus for a particular magnification. 

mats — Senafthrity may depend on the value of the stimulus. 

6.11 Discriminotion — The ability of a measuring instrument to respond to small changes in the 
value of the stimulus. 

6.12 Discrimination Threshold — The smallest change in a stimulus which produces a perceptible 
change In the response of a measuring instrument 



Nata — Thedfiecrfimkiotionthrcchold may depend on, for example, noiee (internal or external ), friction damping, 
mortis. 



6.13 Resolution { ofsn Indicating Device ) — A quantitative expression of the ability of an indicating 
device to distinguish meaningfully between closely adjacent valuea of the quantity indicated. 

6 L14 Deed Bend— The range through which a stimulus can be varied without producing a change 
in the response of a measuring instrument 

Moto — The inherent dead band ia tometimee deliberately increased to reduce unwanted change in response for small 
changes in the stimulus. 

6.16 Hysteresis — The property of a measuring instrument whereby its response to a given stimulus 
depends on the sequence of preceding stimuli. 

Nolo — Although hysteresis is normally considered in reletion to the measurand, it msy slso bs considered in relation to 
influence quantities. 

6.16 Stebility — The ability of a meesuring instrument to maintain constant its metrological 
characteristics. 



Nats — It is uauel to consider stability with respect to time. Where atability with reapect to another quantity is 



6.17 Trenspsrency — The ability of a meesuring instrument not to affect the value of the measurand. 

6.18 Drift — The slow variation with time of metrological characteristics of a measuring instrument. 

6.18 Response Time — The time interval between the instant when a stimulus is subjected to a 
specified abrupt change and the instant when the response reaches and remains within specified 
limits of its final steady value. 

6.20 Tracking Error (of a Meesuring Instrument) —The error arising from a lag in response of a 
measuring instrument to a changing stimulus. 

6.21 Accuracy of a measuring Instrument— The ability of a measuring instrument to give indications 
approaching the true value of a measurand. 

6.22 Accurecy Close — A class of measuring instruments which meet certain metrological require- 
ments that are intended to keep errors within specified limits. 

— An accuracy class is usually denoted by a number or symbol sdoptsd by convsntion snd celled the class 

6.23 Limits of Error {of e M eesu ring Instrument), Meximum Permissible Errors f ofe Meesuring 
Instrument)— The extreme valuea of an error permitted by specifications, regulations, etc, for a 
given measuring instrument 

6»24 Error { of Indication) ofe Meesuring Instrument— The indication of a measuring instrument 
minus the true (conventional ) value of the measurand. 



^ For a material measure, the indication ia ita nominal or marjted value. 

6.26 Datum Error {ofe M e e su ring Instrument ) — The error of a measuring instrument at a specified 
scale value or a specified value of the measurand, chosen for checking the instrument. 

6.26 Zero Error {ofe Measuring Instrument ) — The datum error tor zero value of the measurand. 
6J7 Intrinsic Error— The error of a meesuring instrument used under reference conditions. 

10 



18:8378-1987 

6.28 Bias Error — The systematic component of the error of a measuring instrument. 

6.29 Freedom from Bias Error — The ability of a measuring instrument to give indications free from 
bias error. 

6.30 Repeatability Error — The random component of error of a measuring instrument. 

6.31 Repeatability — The ability of a measuring instrument to give, under defined conditions of use, 
closely similar responses for repeated applications of the same stimulus. 

Note — The defined conditions of use are usually as follows: 

a) Repetition over a short period of time, 

b) Use at the same location under constant ambient conditions, and 

c) Reduction to a minimum of the variations due to the observer. 

6.32 Fiducial Error — The error of a measuring instrument divided by a value specified for the 
instrument. 

Note — Specified value is generally called the fiducial value, and may be, for example, the span or the upper limit oj 
the nominal range of the measuring instrument. 

7. Measurement Standards 

7.1 Measurement Standard — A material measure, measuring instrument or system intended to define, 
realize, conserve or reproduce a unit or one or more known values of a quantity in order to transmit 
them to other measuring instruments by comparison. 

Example: Standard gauge block. 

7.2 Collective Standard— A set of similar material measures or measuring instruments fulfilling, by 
their combined use, the role of a standard. 

Note 1 — A collective standard is usually intended to provide a single value of a quantity. 

Note 2 — The value provided by a collective standard is an appropriate mean or the values provided by the individual 
instruments. 

7.3 Group Standard ( Series of Standards ) — A set of standards of specially chosen values which 
individually or in suitable combination reproduce a series of values of a quantity over a given range. 

Example: Set of slip gauges. 

7.4 Primary Standard — A standard which has the highest metrological qualities in a specific field. 

Note — The concept of primary standard is equally valid for base units and for derived units. 

7.5 Secondary Standard— A standard whose value is fixed by comparison with a primary standard. 

7.6 International Standard — A standard recognized by an international agreement to serve inter- 
nationally as the basis for fixing the value of all other standards of the quantity concerned. 

7.7 National Standard — A standard recognized by an official national decision as the basis for 
fixing the value, in a country, of all other standards of the quantity concerned. 

Note — The national standard in a country is often a primary standard. 

7.8 Reference Standard — A standard, generally of the highest m etiological quality available at a 
given location from which measurements made at that location are derived. 

7.9 Working Standard — A standard, which usually calibrated against a reference standard, is used 
to calibrate or check material measures of measuring instruments. 

7.10 Transfer Standard— A standard used as an intermediary to compare standards, material 
measures or measuring instruments. 

Note — When the comparison device is not strictly a standard, the term 'transfer device' should be used. 

Example: Adjustable calipers used to intercompare end standards. 

11 



IS:8378-1987 

7.11 Tracea bilhy — The property of a resu It of a measurement whereby it can be related to appro- 
priate standards, generally international or national standards, through an unbroken chain of 
comparisons. 

7.12 Calibration — The set of operations which establish, under specified conditions, the relation- 
ship between values indicated by a measuring instrument or measuring system, or values represented 
by a material measure, and the corresponding known value of a measurand. 

Note 1 — The result of t calibration permits the estimation of errors of indication of the measuring instrument, measur- 
ing system or material measure, or the assignment of velues to marks on arbitary scales. 

Note 2 — A calibration may also determine other metrologicel properties. 

Note 3 — The result of a calibration may be recorded in a document, sometimes called a calibration certificate or a 
calibraticn report. 

Note 4 — The result of a calibration is sometimes expressed as a calibration factor, or as a seriefof calibration factors 
in the form of a calibration curve. 

7.13 Conservation of a Measurement Standard — All the operations necessary to preserve the 
metrological characteristics of measurement standards within appropriate limits. 

Note — The operations commonly include regular calibration, storage under good conditions and care in use. 

7.14 Reference Material — A material or substance, one or more properties of which are sufficiently 
well established to be used for the calibration of an apparatus, the assessment of a measurement 
method or for assigning values to materials. 

7.15 Certified Reference Material— A reference material, one or more of whose property values are 
certified by a technically valid procedure, accompanied by or traceable to a certificate or other docu- 
mentation which is issued by a certifying body. 



EXPLANATORY NOTE 

This standard was first published in the year 1977 as 'Glossary of terms used in metrology' 
based on BS 5233: 1975 'Glossary of terms used in metrology' issued by the British Standards 
Institution. 

The first revision is based on ISO document 'International vocabulary of basic and general 
terms in metrology* published by the International Organization for Standardization ( ISO). 

It has been revised in relation to dimensional metrology and a few clauses have been added 
with the deletion of some of the clauses. A few suitable examples have also been Included. 

12 



IS: 8378 -1987 



INDEX 



A 






Deviation, standard, experimental, of the 


mean ( Note 3 ) 4.8 








Deviation, standard, population 


( Note 1 ) 


4.8 


Absolute value of an error 


( Note 3 ) 


4.10 


Device, indicating 




6.12 


Accuracy 


( Note ) 


4.5 


Device, indicating, resolution of an 




6.13 


Accuracy class 




6.22 


Device, readout 


( Note 4 ) 


6.12 


Accuracy of measurement 




4.6 


Device, recording 




6.13 


Accuracy of a measuring instrument 




6.21 


Device, transfer 


( Note ) 


7.10 


Adjustment 




6.33 


Dial 




6.29 


Adjustment, user 




6.34 


Differential method of measurement 




3.18 


Analogue indication 


( Note 2 ) 


6.12 


Digital indication 


( Note 2 ) 


6.12 


Analogue measuring instrument 




6.10 


Digital measuring instrument 
Dimensiontess quantity 




6.11 
2.3 








Direct comparison method of measurement 


3.16 


B 






Direct indication 


( Note 1 ) 


4.2 






Direct method of measurement 




3.12 


Band, dead 




6.14 


Direct reading 
Discrimination 


( Note 1 ) 


4.2 

6.11 


Base unit ( of measurement ) 




2.9 


Discrimination threshold 




6.12 


Bias ( error ), freedom from 




6.29 


Division, scale 




6.22 


Bias error 




6.28 


Drift 




6.18 



( Note 3 ) 
( Note 4 ) 
( Note 4 ) 
(Note 3) 
( Note ) 
( Note ) 
( Note 2 ) 
( Note 3 ) 



( Note 1 ) 
( Note ) 



Calibration 

Calibration certificate 

Calibration curve 

Calibration factor 

Calibration report 

Capacity, maximum 

Capacity, minimum 

Categories of quantities 

Certificate, calibration 

Certified reference material 

Characteristic, response 

Chart, recording 

Class, accuracy 

Class index 

Coherent system of units ( of measurement ) 

Collective standard 

Conditions, limiting 

Conditions, operating, rated 

Conditions, reference 

Conservation of a measurement standard 

Constant, instrument 

Conventional true value ( of a quantity ) 

Corrected result 

Correction 

Correction factor 

Curve, calibration ( Note 4 ) 



Datum error ( of a measuring instrument ) 

Dead band 

Definitive method of measurement 

Derived quantity 

Detector 

Deviation, standard, experimental 



7.12 

7.12 

7.12 

7.12 

7.12 

6.4 

6.4 

2.1 

7.12 

7.16 

6.9 

6.14 

6.22 

6.22 

2.7 

7.2 

6.6 

6.6 

6*7 

7.13 

6.8 

2.14 

4.4 

4.14 

4.16 

7.12 



6.26 

6.14 

3.15 

2.2 

6.16 

4.8 



Electrical zero ( Note 1 ) 

Error, absolute value of an ( Nole 3 ) 

Error, bias 

Error, bias, freedom from 
Error, datum ( of a measuring instrument ) 
Error, fiducial 

Error ( of indication ) of a measuring instrument 
Error, Intrinsic 

Error, limits of ( of a measuring instrument ) 
Error of measurement 
Error, random 
Error, relative 
Error, repeatability 
Error, systematic 

Error, tracking ( of a measuring instrument ) 
Error, zero ( of a measuring Instrument ) 
Errors, maximum permissible ( of a measuring 
instrument) 
Expanded scale 

Experimentel standard deviation 
Experimental standard deviation of the mean ( Note 3 } 



Factor, calibration 

Factor, correction 

Fiducial error 

Fiducial value 

Freedom from bias error 

Function, transfer 

Fundamental method of measurement 



Qeuge mark 



( Note 4 ) 

( Note ) 
( Note 2 ) 



6.31 
4.10 
6.28 
6.29 
6.25 
6.32 
6.24 
6.27 
6.23 
4.10 
4.12 
4.11 
6.30 
4.13 
6.20 
6.26 
6.23 

6.28 

4.8 

4.8 



7.12 

4.16 

6.32 

6.82 

6.28 

6.9 

3.14 



( Note 2 ) 6.17 



13 



18:8378-1987 



Group standard ( series of standards ) 



Hysteresis 



I 



Index 

Index, class ( Note ) 

Indicated value ( Note 2 ) 

Indicating device 

Indicating device, resolution of an 
Indicating instrument 

"Indication, analogue ( Note 2 ) 

Indication, digital ( Note 2 ) 

Indication, direct ( Note 1 ) 

Indication, error of ( of a measuring instrument ) 
Indication ( of a measuring instrument ) 
Indication, semi-digital ( Note 3 ) 

Indirect method of measurement 
Influence quantity 
Instrument constant 
Instrument, measuring 
Instrument, measuring, accuracy of a 
Instrument, measuring, analogue 
Instrument, measuring, datum error of a 
Instrument, measuring, digital 
Instrument, measuring, error of indication of a 
Instrument, measuring setting of a 
Instrument, indicating 
Instrument, measuring* indication of a 
Instrument, measuring, limits of error of a 
Instrument, measuring, maximum permiasible errors of 
Instrument, recording 
Instrument, totalizing 
Instrument, measuring tracking error of a 
Instrument, measuring, zero of a 
Instrument, meesuring, zero error of a 
International standard 
International system of units, SI 
Interval, scale 
Intrinsic error 
Integrating instrument 



Length, scale 

Limiting conditions 

Limiting values ( Note 2 ) 

Limits of error ( of a measuring instrument ) 

Linear scale 

Logarithmic scale ( Note ) 



M 



Mark, gauge 
Mark, scale 
Marked value 
Material measure 
Material, reference 



( Note 2 ) 
( Note 2 ) 



7.3 



6.15 



5.18 

6.22 

4.3 

6.12 

6.13 

6.6 

5.12 

6.12 

4.2 

6.24 

4.2 

6«12 

3.13 

3.9 

6.8 

6.1 

6.21 

5.10 

6.25 

6.11 

6.24 

5.32 

6.6 

4.2 

6.23 

6.23 

5.7 

5.8 

6.20 

6.31 

6.26 

7.6 

2.8 

6.24 

6.27 

6.9 



6.20 

6.6 

6.6 

6.23 

5.25 

6.26 



5.17 
6.17 
4.2 
5-2 

7.14 



Material, reference, certified 7.16 
Maximum capacity ( Note ) 6.4 

Maximum permissible errors ( of a measuring 6.23 
instrument ) 

Mean, experimental standard deviation of the ( Note 3 ) 4.8 

Meesurand 3.8 

Measurand, transformed value of a 3.10 

Measure, material 6.2 
Measured quantity ( Note ) 3.8 
Measured, quantity to be ( Note ) 3.8 

Measurement 3.1 

Measurement, accuracy of 4.5 

Measurement, base unit of 2.9 

Measurement signal 3.11 

Measurement, error of 4.10 

Measurement, method of 3.5 

Measurement, method of, definitive 3.15 

Measurement, method of. differential 3.18 

Measurement, method of, direct 3.12 

Measurement, method of, direct comparison 3.16 

Measurement, method of, fundamental 3.14 

Measurement, method of, indirect 3.13 

Measurement, method of, substitution 3.17 

Measurement, multiple of a unit of 2.10 

Measurement, principle of 3.4 

Measurement procedure 3.6 

Measurement process 3.7 

Measurement, result of a 4.1 

Measurement standard 7.1 

Measurement standard, conservation of a 7.13 

Measurement, static 3.3 

Measurement, sub-multiple of a unit of 2.11 

Measurement, symbol of a unit of 2.5 

Measurement, system of units of 2.6 

Measurement uncertainty of 4.9 

Measurement, unit of 2.4 

Measurement, repeatability of 4.6 

Measurements, reproducibility of 4.7 

Measuring chain 6.4 
Measuring installation ( Note ) 6.6 

Measuring instrument 6.1 

Meesuring instrument, accuracy of a 6.21 

Measuring instrument, analogue 5.10 

Measuring instrument, datum error of a 6.25 

Measuring instrument, digital 6.11 

Meesuring instrument, error of indication of a 6.24 

Measuring instrument setting of a 6.32 

Measuring instrument, indication of a 4.2 

Measuring instrument, limits of error of a 6.23 
Measuring instrument, maximum permissible errors of a 6.23 

Measuring instrument, tracking error of a 6.20 

Measuring instrument, zero of a 6.31 

Measuring instrument, zero error of a 6.26 

Measuring range, specified 6.4 

Measuring system 5.6 

Measuring transducer 5*3 
Mechanical zero ( Note 2 ) 5.31 

Medium, recording 6*14 
Memory ( Note 2 ) 5.14 

Method of measurement 3.6 

Method of meesurement, definitive 3.16 

Method of measurement, differential 3.18 

Method of measurement, direct 3.12 

Method of meesurement, direct comparison 3.16 

Method of measurement, fundamental 3.14 

Method of measurement, indirect 3.13 



14 



18:8378-1987 



Method of measurement, substitution 

Metrology 

Minimum capacity 

Multiple of a unit ( of measurement ) 



N 

National Standard 

Nominal range 

Nominal value 

Non-linear scale 

Numbering, scale 

Numerical value ( of a quantity ) 

Null method of measurement 



Operating conditions, rated 



( Note ) 



( Note ) 



3.17 Reference material, certified 

3.2 Reference ranges 
6.4 Reference standard 
2.10 Reference values (Note) 

Reference value scale ( of a quantity or property ) 

Regular scale ( Note ) 

Relative error 

Repeatability error 
7,7 Repeatability of measurements 
e.1 Repeatability 

6.3 Report, calibration ( Note 3 ) 
5.26 Reproducibility of measurements 

6.30 Resolution ( of an indicating device ) 
2.15 Response characteristic 
3.19 Response time 

Result, corrected 

Result of e measurement 

Result, uncorrected 

6.5 



s 



7.16 

6.7 

7.8 

6.7 

2.16 

5.26 

4.11 

6.30 

4.6 

6.31 

7.12 

4.7 

6.13 

6.9 

6.19 

4.4 

4.1 

4.3 









Scale, expanded 




6.28 


Population standard deviation 


( Note 2 ) 


4.8 


Scale interval 




5.24 


Precision 


( Note ) 


4.6 


Scale length 




6.20 


Primary standard 




7.4 


Scale, linear 




6.25 


Principle of measurement 




3.4 


Scale, logarithmic 


( Note ) 


5.26 


Procedure, measurement 




3.6 


Scale mark 




6.17 


Process, measurement 




3.7 


Scale, non-linear 
Scale numbering 
Scele renge 




6.26 
6.30 
5.21 


Q 






Scele, regular 


( Note ) 


5.26 






Scale spacing 




6.23 








Scale, square-law 


( Note ) 


6.26 


Quantity, conventional true value of a 




2.14 


Scale, suppressed -zero 




5.27 


Quantity, derived 




2.2 


Scale value 


( Note 1 ) 


4.2 


Quantity, dimensionless 




2.3 


Secondary standard 




7.5 


Quantity, influence 




3.9 


Semi-digital indication 


( Note 3 ) 


6.12 


Quantity 




2.1 


Sensitivity 




6.10 


Quantity, measured 


( Note ) 


3.8 


Sensor 




5.15 


Quantity to be measured 


( Note ) 


3.8 


Setting of a measuring instrument 




5.32 


Quantity, numerical value of a 




2.15 


SI, international system of units 




2.8 


Quantity, supplied 


( Note ) 


5.2 


Spacing, acale 




6.23 


Quantity, true value of a 




2.13 


Span 




6.2 


Quantity, value of a 




2.12 


Specified measuring range 




6.4 


Quantities, categories of 


( Note 2 ) 


2.1 


Specified working range 




6.4 








Square-law acale 


( Note ) 


6.26 








Stability 




6.16 


R 






Standard deviation, experimental 




4.8 








Standard deviation of the mean, experimental ( Note 3 ) 4.8 


Random error 




4.12 


Standard deviation, population 


( Note 2 ) 


4.8 


Range, measuring, specified 




6.4 


Standard, international 




7.6 


Range, nominal 




6.1 


Standard, measurement 




7.1 


Range, scale 




6.21 


Standard, measurement, conservation of a 




7.13 


Range, working, specified 




6.4 


Standard, national 




7.7 


Ranges, reference 


( Note > 


6.7 


Standard, primary 




7.4 


Rated operating conditions 




6.5 


Standard, reference 




7.8 


Rated values 


( Note ) 


6.6 


Standard, secondary 




7.6 


Reading, direct 


( Note 1 ) 


4.2 


Standard, transfer 




7.10 


Readout device 


( Note 4 ) 


6.12 


Stendard, working 




7.9 


Recording chart 


( Note 1 ) 


6.14 


Static measurement 




3.3 


Recording device 




6.13 


Sub-multiple of a unit ( of measurement ) 




2.11 


Recording instrument 


* 


6.7 


Substitution method of measurement 




3.17 


Recording medium 




5.14 


Supplied quantity 


( Note ) 


52 


Reference conditions , 




6.7 


Suppressed-zero scale 




6.27 


Reference material 




7.14 


Symbol of a unit of measurement 




2.6 



16 



18:8378-1987 



Syatematlo error 

System, meesurlng 

Sytttm of units* International, SI 

Systam of unlta ( of meaaurement ) 



Threshold, discrimination 

Time, response 

Totalizing Instrument 

Traceability 

Tracking error ( of a measuring Instrument ) 

Tranafer device ( Note ) 

Transfer function ( Note 2 ) 

Transfer atandard 

Transformed value ( of a measurand ) 

Transparency 

True value ( of a quantity ) 

True value ( of a quantity ), conventional 



4.13 


Uaar adjustment 




6.34 


6.6 








2.8 








2.6 


V 








Value of an error, abaolute 


( Note 3 ) 


4.10 




Value, fiducial 


( Note ) 


6.32 




Value, indicated 


( Note 2 ) 


4.3 


6.12 


Value, marked 


(Note 2) 


4.2 


6.18 


Value ( of a measurand ), transformed 




3.10 


6.8 


Value, nominal 




6.3 


7.11 


Velue ( of a quantity ) 




2.12 


6.20 


Value ( of a quantity ), conventional true 




2.14 


7.10 


Value ( of a quantity ), numerical 




2.16 


6.8 


Value ( of a quantity ), true 




2.13 


7.10 


Value, scale 


( Note 1 ) 


4.2 


3.10 


Values, limiting 


( Note 2 ) 


6.6 


6.17 


Values, rated 


( Note ) 


6.6 


2.13 


Values, reference 


( Note ) 


6,7 


2.14 









w 



u 



Uncertainty of measurement 
Uncorrected result 
Unit ( of measurement ) 
.Unit ( of measurement ), baae 
Unit ( of meaaurement ), multiple of a 
Unit ( of measurement ), sub-multiple of a 
Unit ( of measurement ), symbol of a 
Units, international aystem of, SI 
Unlta ( of meaaurement ), aystem of 



4.8 

4.3 

2.4 

2.8 

2.10 

2.11 

2 6 

2.8 

2.6 



Working range, specified 
Working atandard 



Zero, electrical 

Zero error ( of a measuring instrument ) 
Zero of a measuring instrument 
Zero, mechanical 



( Note 1 ) 



( Note 2 ) 



6.4 
7.8 



6.31 
6.26 
6.31 
6.31 



16 



Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 



