**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 13029 (1991) : Internal Combustion Engines - Setting 
Ignition Timing in Spark Ignition Engines - Code of 
Practice [TED 2: Automotive Primemovers] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



1313029:1991 
WR^t^ "RFfWi (Reaffirmed 2006) 

/rt<^/^w Standard 

INTERNAL COMBUSTION ENGINES — SETTING 

IGNITION TIMING IN SPARK IGNITION 

ENGINES — CODE OF PRACTICE 



UDC 621-43-04: 006-76 



© BIS 1991 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 

May 1991 PrtlKCf oup 2 



Automotive Primemovers Sectional Committee, TED 2 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Automotive Primemovers Sectional Committee had been approved by the Transport Engineering 
Division Council. 

This Indian Standard aims to standardize the procedure for aligning timing marks with ignition of 
fuel in the case of spark ignited automotive engines. The procedure may be extended to new and 
under-service engines. 

While preparing this standard considerable assistance has been derived from SAE J 327 *Ignition 
timing* issued by the Society of Automotive Engineers, USA. 



IS 13029 : 199t 



Indian Standard 



INTERNAL COMBUSTION ENGINES — SETTING 

IGNITION TIMING IN SPARK IGNITION 

ENGINES — CODE OF PRACTICE 



1 SCOPE 

!•! This standard recommends practices applicable 
for ignition of fuel with respect to positioning of 
timing marks, increments of measurements in the 
case of two and four stroke spark ignited auto- 
motive engines. The method to identify the 
timing cylinder in a multi-cylinder engine has also 
been specified. 

1.2 The recommended practices specify both 
'contact-breaker' and 'contact breakerless' ignition 
systems. It aims to help in setting correct timing 
of engines. 

2 REFERENCES 

2.1 The following Indian Standards are necessary 
adjuncts to this standard: 



IS No. 



Title 



IS 7451 (Part 4 ) : 1974 Reciprocating internal 

combustion engines: 
Part 4 Designation of 
direction of rotation 

IS 7451 ( Part 5 ) : 1974 Reciprocating internal 

combustion engines : 
Part 5 Designation of 
cylinders 

3 POSITIONING OF TIMING MARKS 

3.1 Two Stroke Engines 

A reference mark is to be engraved or embossed 
or cut into an exposed stationary part of the 
engine ( example, crank case ) to coincide with 
the rotating flywheel mark for ignition timing. 

3.1.1 'C mark is to be cut into the flywheel to 
correspond with the reference mark on the 
stationary engine part when the piston is at top 
dead centre ( TDC ). Also, the recommended 
ignition timing mark is to be cut into the flywheel 
to correspond to reference mark on the stationary 
part of the engine when the piston is at the posi- 
tion wTiere ignition is to commence. 

3.2 Four Stroke Engines 
3.2.1 

a) Timing marks can be placed either on the 
vibration damper pulley ( non-principal out- 
put end ) or flywheel ( principal output 
end). 



b) Each mark shall be minimum with T incre- 
ment. 

c) Numerals shall be placed after every 4' or 
5"" interval. 

d) Top dead centre will be indicated by the 
letter 'O'. 

e) If both 'advance' and 'retard' segments are 
to be used, then larger number of increments 
shall be shown on the 'advance' segment. 

f ) Block lettering of a sans-serif style be pre- 
ferably used. 

g) The marks, numbers and lettering shall be 
legible and durable. 

h) It is preferable to have the pointer fixed and 
the quadrant movable. 

NOTE — A moving pointer on a fixed-quadrant is 
also permitted. 

]) Recommended dimensions for marking are 
given in Fig. 1 and Fig. 2. 

k) The designation of direction of rotation shall 
be as per IS 7451 ( Part 4 ) : 1974. 

4 METHOD OF MEASUREMENT AND 
SETTING OF IGNITION TIMING 

4.1 Static Method 

Not Applicable to 'Contact Breakerless' Systems, 
4,1.1 Two Stroke Engines 

4.1.1.1 With the low tension lead connected to 
the distributor, turn on the ignition switch and 
connect a 6/12 volt lamp in parallel with the con- 
tact breaker, that is, one lead to the lamp from 
the low tension terminal and the other to earth. 

4.1.1.2 Turn the engine crankshaft so that the 
contact breaker points are fully closed. Continue 
to slowly turn the engine crankshaft in the same 
direction until the contact breaker points just 
commence to open. This is indicated be the 
lighting up of the lamp. At this position of the 
engine crankshaft, check if the reference mark on 
the stationary part of the engine corresponds to 
the ignition timing mark on the flywheel. If they 
do not match then adjust the contact breaker 
points by relative rotation of the same after un- 
screwing and following the method recommended 
by the manufacturer till the reference mark on the 
stationary part corresponds to the ignition timing 



I 



IS 13029 : 1991 



DIE CASTING 



STAMPING 





DAMPER OR 
PULLEY 



STAMPING 




3^ MIN 
■J-OMIN 



MO\ABLE 
POINTER 



Ml dimensions in millimetres. 

Fig. 1 TIMING Marks For Vibration Damper 



IS 13029 : 1991 



I -^ 



5 min 



7 min 




22 min 



Fig. 



AIJ dimensions in millimetres, 

2 Timing Marks For Flywheel 



mark on the flywheel. 

4.1*2 Four Stroke Engines 

4.1*2.1 With the low tension lead connected to 
the distributor turn on the ignition switch and 
connect a 12 volt lamp in parallel with the con- 
tact breaker, that is, one lead to the lamp will be 
from the low tension terminal on the distributor 
and the other to earth. 

4.1.2.2 Repeat the procedure as per 4.1.2 till the 
ignition timing pointer corresponds to the igni- 
tion timing specified by the manufacturer. 



4.2 Dynamic Method ( Applicable to Both 
and without Contact Breaker Systems ) 

4.2.1 Two Stroke Engines 

4.2.1.1 The procedure shall be as follows: 

a) Connect the ignition timing measuring 
instrument to the engine as required. 

b) Start the engine. 



c) Set the engine to the required speed as 
recommended by the manufacturer. 

d) Measure the ignition timing using the timing 
marks on the engine as described in 2 above 
or by reading the value by manufacturer, 

e) If it does not match with the recommended 
value by manufacturer, adjust with the pro- 
visions made by the manufacturer. 



4.2.2 Four Stroke Engine 

4.2.2.1. The procedure shall 
in 4.2.1.1. 



be the same as 



with 5 TIMING CYLINDER IDENTIFICATION 

5.1 The numbering of cylinders in single or multi- 
bank engines shall be in accordance with IS 7451 
(Part 5): 1974. 

5.2 Timing Cylinder 

5.2.1 It is preferable to use the first cylinder as 
the timing cylinder. For identification a number 
'V shall be embossed on the engine intake mani- 
fold. 



standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards 
Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products 
covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with 
the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality 
control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked 
products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safe- 
guard. Details of conditions under which a' licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to 
manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



Boreau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a sifttutopy institution established under the ^wreaw o//nrf/a/j Standards Act^ 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of 
goods and attending to connected matters in the country. . ,. ^ 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in 
any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in 
the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or 
grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), 
BIS. 

Revision of Indian Standards 

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, 

are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in 

possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent 
to BIS giving the following reference: 

Doc : No. TED 2 ( 4888 ) 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 

Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 11 0002 

Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 

( Common to all Offices ) 

Regional Offices: 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Mare . ( 331 01 31 

NEW DELHI 110002 Z 331 13 75 

Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M. V.I.P. Road, Maniktola 37 86 62 

CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C CHANDIGARH 160036 53 38 43 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 6001 13 235 02 16 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol. Andheri ( East ) 

BOMBAY 400093 6 32 92 95 

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. 

COIMBATORE, FARIDABAD, GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 

HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at Progressire Printers, Shahdra^ Delhi, India 



