Indian Standard 


au aaa arith cat arate 
STAR oh akor oh faa 
(set Feier fafa) 


( TEM FTIO ) 


Method for Determination of 
Thermal Conductivity of Thermal 
Insulation Materials 
(Water Calorimeter Method) 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 91.100.60 


© BIS 2018 


ARA AH A 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAF HAT, 9 ERRE WAL Hm, ae fereit-110002 
Y MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


August 2018 Price Group 2 


Thermal Insulation Sectional Committee, CHD 27 


FOREWORD 


This standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the 
Thermal Insulation Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division Council. 


This standard was originally published in 1980. During this revision, attempt is being made to incorporate changes 
according to the latest developments in the field. 


The determination of thermal conductivity of a material is not simple since it may involve the measurement of a 
very small heat flow and the maintenance of steady temperatures and electrical energy inputs over considerably 
long periods. In addition, temperatures or temperature differences have to be measured accurately with suitable 
devices and care has to be taken to minimize heat losses. 


Thermal conductivity determinations are usually made on slabs or sheets of the material, the apparatus being such 
that the heat flow is normal to the faces, and lateral heat losses from the test area are generally prevented by a 
guard ring or the like. The need for normal flow militates against the use of thick specimens unless they are also 
of considerable area. On the other hand, many insulating materials have a granular structure, and the sample 
cannot be representative unless it is thick enough to include several diameters of the average grain. A compromise, 
therefore, has to be made in such situations for appropriate dimensions of the test specimen. 


This is a secondary routine method for measuring the thermal conductivity of homogeneous insulating materials, 
and its reproducibility is 5 percent. Wherever applicable, the method given in IS 3346 shall be used as a referee 
method for determination of thermal conductivity. 


In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or 
calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical 
values (revised)’. 


IS 9490 : 2018 


Indian Standard 


METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF 
THERMAL CONDUCTIVITY OF 
THERMAL INSULATION MATERIALS 
(WATER CALORIMETER METHOD) 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard prescribes the general procedures and 
design of equipment for determining the thermal 
conductivity of dry samples of thermal insulating 
materials, provided that: 


a) the materials are sufficiently uniform with 
regard to their aggregates and pores; and 

b) the thermal conductivity of the material does 
not exceed 1.5 W/mK. 


1.2 The equipment described in this standard is suitable 
for hot face temperature between 675 K and | 275 K. 


1.3 The thermal conductivity coefficients obtained 
apply only to the particular sample tested. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to revision 
and parties to agreements based on this standard are 
encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the 
most recent edition of the standard indicated below. 


IS No. Title 


3069 : 1994 Glossary of terms, symbols and 
units relating to thermal insulation 
materials (first revision) 

Method for the determination of 
thermal conductivity of thermal 
insulation materials (two slab, 
guarded hot plate method) (first 


revision) 


3346 : 1980 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions of terms, 
symbols and units given in IS 3069 shall apply. 


4 PRINCIPLE OF MEASUREMENT 


A specimen of the material to be tested is placed on a 
horizontal heater assembly. On the specimen a water flow 


calorimeter is placed alongwith a guard ring. The 
assembly is suitably insulated to minimize heat losses. 
The amount of heat flowing through the specimen is 
determined by the flow rate of water through the 
calorimeter and its temperature rise. Thermal 
conductivity is measured using temperature drop and heat 
flow through the specimen, and its area and thickness. 


5 EQUIPMENT 
5.1 Heater Assembly 


The heater assembly shall consist of a heater resistance 
wire coil laid in a suitable refractory material with 
grooves, meant for the purpose, deep enough so that 
the coil does not touch the sample (or plate) placed on 
it, and produces uniform heating. The material shall be 
strong enough to withstand the load of specimen, 
calorimeter, etc placed on it. Its dimensions shall be 
about 450 mm x 450 mm. 


5.1.1 The heater shall be fed from stabilized lead acid 
batteries of sufficient ampere-hour capacity or through 
a stabilized and regulated power supply from the mains, 
so that its temperature does not fluctuate in one hour 
of a test period by more than 0.5 percent of the 
temperature difference between the hot and cold plates. 


5.2 Calorimeter and Guard Ring 


The water flow calorimeter plate shall be about 
230 mm x 230 mm. The guard ring shall be co-planar, 
about 110 mm wide, fitted around the calorimeter plate, 
with a gap not more than 3 mm wide maintained 
between the guard plate and the calorimeter plate in 
order to minimize thermal contact between the two. In 
order to ensure that lower surfaces of the calorimeter 
and guard ring are co-planar and that the calorimeter 
remains centred in the guard ring, the two shall be 
placed on a levelling plate and the gap between them 
filled with strips of blotting paper or any other suitable 
material. The two shall then be linked suitably so as to 
lock them together. The calorimeter and the guard ring 
shall consist of a manifold of high conducting metallic 
tube of not less than 7 mm bore packed as tightly as 
possible and brazed or clamped continuously to a thick 


IS 9490 : 2018 


high conducting metallic plate on one side and a strong 
iron plate on the other. The high conducting metallic 
surface plate shall be flat to within 0.25 mm/m and 
shall be not less than 5 mm in thickness. A twin-tube 
manifold is preferable in so far as every portion of the 
plate will then have the same temperature. The 
calorimeter and guard ring may also be made of high 
conducting metallic plates, with suitably designed cut- 
in counter flow channels, which on assembly would 
form continuous tube space inside the plate assembly 
so that uniform temperature could be maintained in the 
entire plate surface by circulation of water. 


5.2.1 The calorimeter and the guard ring shall be supplied 
with water at a steady flow rate from a constant-head 
tank. The accuracy of measurement of flow rate of water 
shall be within + 0.2 percent. The rate of flow shall not 
vary by more than 1 percent during the test period. 


5.3 Thermocouples 


Calibrated, similar thermocouples shall be used to 
measure temperatures to 0.02 K or better in conjunction 
with a calibrated potentiometer having an accuracy of + 
0.1 percent or better. Cold junctions of the thermocouples 
shall be maintained at 273 K, for example, in an ice cell 
containing mixture of ice and water. At least four 
thermocouples shall be placed on the heating side, and 
two under the calorimeter. Preferably, for precise 
detection of temperature imbalance between the guard 
surface and the calorimeter surface, additional 
thermocouples may be fitted across the gap at each face 
along the periphery of the gap. These thermocouples 
across the gap may be fitted at a distance of about 10 
mm from the edge of the calorimeter and guard surface. 
Thermocouples shall be made of wire not larger than 
0.46 mm in diameter (No. 26 SWG). 


5.4 Assembly 


General arrangement of the equipment is shown in 


Fig. 1. A flat plate of a heat resistance alloy 
measuring 450 mm x 450 mm and about 3 mm thick 
and flat to within 0.25 mm/m shall be placed on the 
heater assembly. This plate shall have one cut, about 
100 mm long, in each corner and edge to reduce 
warping. The sample shall be placed on this plate, 
sandwiched between two sheets of asbestos paper about 
0.3 mm thick. The thermocouples shall be placed 
between the sample and the asbestos sheets. Calorimeter 
and guard ring shall be placed on the top asbestos sheet. 
The edges of the test specimen shall be covered with 
thermal insulating material at least 70 mm thick to 
minimize heat losses. The exposed surfaces of the 
calorimeter and guard ring shall also be covered with 
at least 70 mm of insulating material. 


6 PROCEDURE FOR THERMAL 
CONDUCTIVITY MEASUREMENT 


6.1 Samples 


A test specimen, 450 mm x 450 mm and of uniform 
thickness 50 mm to 80 mm shall be used. The materials 
to be tested in the apparatus may be of various types 
and shall be suitably supported horizontally in the 
apparatus as given in 6.1.1 to 6.1.3. 


6.1.1 Rigid Slabs 


Rigid slabs such as those of cellular concrete or calcium 
silicate insulation or slabs built up of bricks bonded 
with cement may be held in a frame of angle iron about 
600 mm square, ifnecessary, which is fitted with screws 
which support the edges of the slab. Shallow grooves 
shall be made on the surface to place the thermocouples. 
Care shall be taken to ensure that the faces of the slab 
are flat to within 0.25 mm/m. 


6.1.2 Semi-rigid Slabs 
Semi-rigid slabs and similar materials such as fibrous 


mats or plastic compositions shall be placed in the 
apparatus on the flat plate. Where the compressibility 


A — Guard ring 
B — Water calorimeter 
C — Asbestos paper 


D — Thermocouples for detecting temperature imbalance 


E — Thermocouples 


F — Specimen 
G — Plate 
H — Heater assembly 


Fic. 1 ARRANGEMENT OF WATER CALORIMETER APPARATUS 


of the material makes it necessary the thickness of the 
test specimen shall be maintained by supporting the 
calorimeter and guard ring on small distance pieces 
inserted in holes in the test specimen. A correction shall 
be applied for the heat flow through the distance pieces. 


6.1.3 Loose Fill Materials 


Loose fill materials, such as powders or granules, shall 
be packed as uniformly as practicable into a frame about 
450 mm x 450 mm resting on the plate. Where 
necessary, the thickness of test specimen shall be 
maintained as in 6.1.2 or by means of a grid of thin 
mica sheets. A correction shall be applied for the heat 
flow through the distance pieces. 


6.2 Observations 


After assembling the apparatus, operate it, and when 
conditions are steady, make a series of observations of 
temperatures, the water-flow rate and water temperature 
rise through the calorimeter. The heat flow shall be 
calculated from these observations. For each hot face 
temperature condition, make observations using at least 
two different water flow rates. The thermal conductivity 
of the central section of the specimen shall be calculated 
from the heat flow through the central section, regarded 
as flowing through a square of area half way between 
that of the calorimeter and that of the central hole in 
the guard plate, together with the observed hot and cold 
face temperatures and thickness of the central section. 
The test observations shall be made at intervals of not 
less than 30 min until four successive sets of 
observations give thermal conductivity values differing 
by not more than | percent. 


Thermal conductivities at high cold face temperatures 
shall be determined by measuring the temperature by 
means of thermocouples fixed parallel to the faces at 
known positions inside the test specimen. 


7 CALCULATION 


Thermal conductivity shall be calculated as follows: 


.I- sit. -t. 
LE wrk 
A(t, -t,) 
where 
A = thermal conductivity of the material, W/mK; 


IS 9490 : 2018 


f = flow rate of water, g/s; 

l = thickness of sample (or distance between hot 
face and cold face), m; 

s = specific heat capacity of water in J/gK; 

t, = outlet temperature of water, K; 

t, = inlet temperature of water, K; 

A = Area of heat flow (central section), m?; 

t, = hot face temperature, K; and 

t, = cold face temperature, K. 

8 REPORT 


The report of the results of each test shall include the 
following: 


a) Name and other identifications of the 
materials; 


b) Thickness of the specimen tested (or distance 
between hot face and cold face); 

c) Mass of the specimen, after drying, used for 
the test; 


d) Density before test just after placing the 
specimen in the apparatus of the specimen 
used for the test; 


e) Moisture, as received, in the specimen used 
for the test; 


f) Moisture regain, during test, of the specimen; 
g) Hot face temperature; 

h) Gold face temperature; 

j) Mean temperature of the test; 

k) Heat input per unit area; 

m) Thermal conductivity; 

n) Flow rate of water; and 

p) Special remarks, if any. 


Here, mention should also be made of the following: 


a) Whether some metallic portions, or coatings 
of insulation were removed during test; 

b) Whether thermocouples were fixed inside the 
specimen for determining thermal 
conductivity at higher cold face temperature; 
and 

c) Any other special point that may be relevant 
from the scientific or application point of view. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CHD 27 (10074). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.1.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 26 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


