NAT HIAF IS 16864 : 2018 
Indian Standard 


ueta ma corer — Γεπ{ϑτ{8 


Polycarbonate Protective 
Shield — Specification 


ICS 83.140.99 


© BIS 2018 


anda AM η] 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 SERE TH AMT, ay freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2018 Price Group 8 


Plastics Sectional Committee, PCD 12 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Plastics 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Petroleum, Coal and Related Products Division Council. 


Polycarbonate protective shields are protective equipment which are generally carried by public safety officials 
whilst engaged in operational duties, and during training. These are also used by civilians engaged in activities 
where the risks of attack and assault are similar, for example, private security personnel, bullion handlers, escorts 
and couriers. 


The purpose of this standard is to provide confidence to the user that the polycarbonate protective shields when 
used, will protect from the attack and assault in the course of their duties. 


The polycarbonate shields are generally used in conjunction with other items of protective clothing and equipment 
such as helmets, body and limb protectors, gloves and protective footwear. 


These shields are typically used for riot control in public areas and correctional facilities. Other uses of these 
shields are for securing the scene, for example, clearing a building, crowd control and for protection or herding 
in an incident involving animals etc. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 16864 : 2018 


Indian Standard 


POLYCARBONATE PROTECTIVE 
SHIELD — SPECIFICATION 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard specifies the requirements, methods 
of sampling and tests for polycarbonate protective 
shield. 


1.2 Polycarbonate protective shield is intended for use 
by the public safety organizations or others who might 
be exposed to attack and assault in the course of their 
duties, for use as personal protection equipment in 
operational situations and in training etc. 


1.3 This standard is not applicable for bullet and 
explosion proof protective shields. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards given below contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to revision, 
and parties to agreements based on this standard are 
encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the 
most recent editions of the standards indicated: 


IS No./Other Title 
publication 
4905 : 1968 Methods for random sampling 
13360 Plastics — Methods of testing 
(Part 3/Sec 1) Physical and dimensional 
: 1995 properties, Section 1 


Determination of density and 
relative density of non-cellular 
plastics 


(Part 4/Sec 1) Rheological properties, Section 1 


: 2000 Determination of the melt mass- 
flow rate (MFR) and the melt 
volume-flow rate (MVR) of 
thermoplastics ( first revision) 

(Part 5/Sec 4) Mechanical properties, Section 4 

: 2013 Determination of izod impact 
strength ( first revision) 

(Part 5/Sec 7) Mechanical properties, Section 7 

: 1996 Determination of flexural 


properties 


IS No./Other Title 
publication 

(Part 6/Sec 17) Thermal properties, Section 17 
: 2013 Determination of temperature of 


defection under Load — Plastics 
and ebonite ( first revision) 


(Part 8/Sec 9) Permanence/chemical properties, 


: 1997 Section 9 Determination of 
resistance to environmental stress 
cracking (ESC) — Bent strip 
method 

(Part 9/Sec 5) Optical properties, Section 5 

: 2010 Determination of haze and 
luminous transmittance of 
transparent plastic 

14443 : 1997 Polycarbonate sheets — 
Specification 
ISO 4892-2 Plastics — Methods of exposure 

: 2013 to laboratory light sources — 

Part 2: Xenon-arc lamps 
ISO 11357-2 Plastics — Differential scanning 
: 2013 calorimetry (DSC) — Part 2: 


Determination of glass transition 
temperature and glass transition 
step height 


Standard test method for 
resistance of transparent plastics 
to surface abrasion 


ASTM D1044-13 


3 REQUIREMENTS 


3.1 Material Requirements 


3.1.1 The polycarbonate material for manufacture 
of body of the protective shield shall be natural. 
NOTE — The polycarbonate material may contain 


additives, processing aids and stabilizers (for example UV 
stabilizers), etc. 


3.1.2 The polycarbonate material shall also comply 
with the requirements given in Table 1 when tested as 
prescribed in col 4 of the Table 1. 


IS 16864 : 2018 


Table 1 Requirement for Polycarbonate Material 


( Clause 3.1.2 ) 


51 Νο. 
a) (2) 
i) Melt Flow Index, g/10 min 


(at 300°C under 1.2 kg load when measured 
after pre-drying of the material at 120 + 5°C 
upto 4 h) 


Characteristic 


Requirement 


1.5 to 8 (for extrusion/thermoforming) 


Method of Test, Ref to IS 
(3) (4) 
IS 13360 (Part 4/Sec 1) 


8 to 15 (for injection moulding) 


11) Specific gravity 1.19 to 1.22 IS 13360 (Part 3/Sec 1) 
ili) Flexural modulus, Min, MPa 2 200 IS 13360 (Part 5/Sec 7) 
(with crosshead speed of 1.2 mm/min and a span 
to depth ratio of 16 to 1 (test specimen size, 
4 mm x 10 mm) 
iv) Izod impact strength, notched, Min, kJ/m2 (test 60 IS 13360 (Part 5/Sec 4) 
specimen thickness of 3 mm and notch radius 
of 0.25 mm) 
v) Deflection temperature under load at 1.82 MPa, 120 IS 13360 (Part 6/Sec 17) 
Min, °C 
Table 2 Requirements for Polycarbonate 
Body of the Shield 
( Clause 3.2.5 ) 
51 Νο. Characteristic Requirement Method of Test, Ref to IS/Annex 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Dart drop impact, Min, J (at 27°C) 150 Annex B 
ii) Light transmission, percent, Min 83 IS 13360 (Part 9/Sec 5) 
iii) Flammability (test specimen 94 HB class Annex C 


thickness 3.18 + 0.13 mm) 


3.2 Physical Requirements 
3.2.1 Description 


3.2.1.1 The polycarbonate protective shield shall be 
of suitable design, shape and curvature as agreed to 
between the purchaser and the supplier. Ribs shall be 
provided all along the edges of the polycarbonate body 
of the shield. 


NOTES 

1 The shape of the shield should be such that it gives maximum 
coverage to the user. 

2 The design of the shield should be such that during handling, 
the vision area should not foul with the resting surface. 


3.2.1.2 The total weight of the polycarbonate 
protective shield shall be 3.4 kg (max). The 
weight of polycarbonate body of the shield shall be 
2.6 kg (min). 

NOTE — Total weight, weight distribution and design of the 


shield must not negatively impact the user’s ability to perform 
tasks required during tactical operations. 


3.2.2 Dimensional Requirements of Polycarbonate 
Body of the Shield 


Length 955 mm + 45 mm 
—25 mm 
Breadth 580 mm + 20 mm 
Breadth concave 620 mm + 10 mm or any other 


proven better shape 


Thickness (Min) 3.0 mm 


3.2.3 Manufacturing Process 


The polycarbonate protective shield shall be 
manufactured by thermoforming or injection moulding 
process adhering to code of good fabricating practices 
as given at Annex A. 


3.2.4 The polycarbonate body of the shield shall have 
abrasion resistance surface coating on both the surfaces. 


NOTE — The composition of the coating and the application 
techniques are not specified in this standard. 


3.2.5 The polycarbonate body of the shield shall also 
comply with the requirements given in Table 2 when 
tested as prescribed in col 4 of the Table 2. 


3.2.6 Polycarbonate Material Identification 


The polycarbonate body of the shield shall meet all the 
test requirements detailed below. The test specimen for 
the following tests shall be taken from flattened area of 
the polycarbonate body of the shield. 


3.2.6.1 Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy 


The results are to be recorded as a plot of the percent 
transmittance of the infrared radiation through the 
specimen versus the reciprocal wavelength (cm) or 
wavenumber of the radiation. The infrared spectra 
obtained by this method shall consist of a minimum 
wavenumber range of 4000 — 400 reciprocal 
centimetres. Signature peaks for polycarbonate are 
1770 cm" assigned to C=O and a set of three peaks in 
the range of 1000-1300 cm" assigned to C-O. Library 
matching shell confirm to at least 95 percent. 


3.2.6.2 Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) 


The mid-point of glass transition temperature of the test 
specimen measured in the second heating cycle shall be 
above 140 °C when tested in accordance with the test 
method prescribed in ISO 11357-2. 


3.3 Performance Requirements 


3.3.1 Resistance to Vandalism 


The polycarbonate body of the shield shall have 
impact resistance of level ‘A3’ when tested for vandal 


resistance as per the test method prescribed in Annex C 
of IS 14443. 


3.3.2 Resistance to Forced Entry 


The polycarbonate body of the shield shall have 
resistance of level ‘B3’ against penetration when tested 
for resistance to forced entry as per the test method 
prescribed in Annex D of IS 14443. 


3.3.3 Resistance to Surface Abrasion 


The test specimen of polycarbonate body of the shield 
when tested for resistance to surface abrasion in 
accordance with ASTM D1044 for 100 cycles under 500 
g load, shall have haze percent not more than 20 percent. 


IS 16864 : 2018 


3.3.4 Handle Requirements 


3.3.4.1Grips and supports must allow the user to 
comfortably hold and position the polycarbonate 
protective shield. 


3.3.4.2 General requirements of handle and other 
accessories of polycarbonate protective shields 


a) Manufacturing process for handle should be 
gas-assisted injection moulding (GAIM); 


b) Material for handle should be polymeric, 
preferably polycarbonate; 


c) Integration of handle to polycarbonate sheet 
should be done using structural adhesive; 


d) Elastomeric bushes and washer system should be 
used for nut and bolt system; 


e) Metallic bolts, if used, shall be SS304 hex-headed 
M6 bolts; and 


f) Nut and bolts system should preferably be 
self-locking. 
NOTES 
1 The assembly of the various components (handle, flat 
polycarbonate sheet, arm rest, etc.) with polycarbonate shield 
body should be such that polycarbonate shield is not stressed 
and there is handle cushioning provided through elastomeric 
bushes and washer system. 


2 In cases, where protective shield constructed 
with the inner flat polycarbonate sheet from inner side and 
handle is assembled through nut and bolts through a hole, 
the shield body should have a horizontal groove after the 
deformation for the displacement under the loading condition. 
This will help in avoiding stress on polycarbonate shield at 
the assembled point. 


3 Following adhesives are recommended for integrating 
the handle on polycarbonate sheet: 


a) Cyanoacrylate based adhesives like permabond UV glue. 
b) Weld-on plastic adhesives. 


3.3.5 A list of accessories conventionally used in 
polycarbonate protective shield is given in Informative 
Annex D. 


Fig. 1 and 2 illustrate typical examples of polycarbonate 
protective shields, their components and design features. 
Fig. 1 and 2 are illustrative and for information only. 


CONTOUR TO 
FLOW SHEET 
CURVETURE Πο 


BATON | 
HANDLE Sl i 
135 X με 85 
ctyo ο —| s 
SMOOTH BLEND/ 
m TRANSITION 
AT THIS REGION 
(BOTH SIDES) 


-- 6 
De on 


SECTION AT X-X 


Fic. 1 EXAMPLE OF POLYCARBONATE PROTECTIVE SHIELDS, THEIR COMPONENTS AND DESIGN FEATURES 


IS 16864 : 2018 


=h 


CLIP FOR HANDLE 
CROSS BELL 
CLIP FOR PAD 
HAND BELL 
CLIP FOR 
CROSS BELL 
A 
x 88 
583 
A 
M8 HEX. BOLT 
RUBBER WASHER 
1.5 mm THICK PP SHEILD 
585 
88 M8 NUT 
DETAIL B 
SECTION A-A 


SCALE 1:1 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


Fic. 2 EXAMPLE ΟΕ POLYCARBONATE PROTECTIVE SHIELDS, 
THEIR COMPONENTS AND DESIGN FEATURES 


3.4 Maintainability Requirements 


3.4.1 Resistance to Environmental Stress Cracking 


Environment Stress Cracking Resistance (ESCR) test 
shall be performed on polycarbonate body of the shield 
(with protective coating) by constant strain method as 
per IS 13360 (Part 8/Sec 9). 


The test specimen shall be taken from the 
polycarbonate body (coated) of the shield as flat strip 
of size 125 mm x 15 mm cut from centre. The test 
specimen shall be conditioned at 27 + 2°C for at least 
24 h to relieve internal stresses. 


Test shall be carried out on a set of three test specimens 
under a constant strain of 0.5 percent at 27 + 2°C. 
Chemicals, namely, 10 percent hydrochloric acid 
solution, 10 percent sulphuric acid solution, kerosene, 
petrol, diesel and Molotov cocktail, shall be applied 
on the test specimen. The exposed surface of the test 
specimen shall be examined after 10 min for signs of 
cracks, crazes, surface changes or pealing of coating, 
if any. 

NOTES 

1 Chemical should be applied or wiped gently on/from the 

surface using cotton. Care should be taken not to touch 


cut edge of the test specimen; this can adversely affect test 
results. 


2 Another set of test specimen exposed to the same 
environmental conditions without the chemical acts as 
control. These test specimens should be used as reference for 
comparing with exposed strips. 


3.4.2 Weathering Resistance 


The test specimen when tested for weathering resistance 
in accordance with ISO 4892-2, shall be evaluated for 
retention of light transmission before and after exposure 
time of 3 000 h (Min). The light transmission of the test 
specimen after exposure for 3000 h shall not be less 
than 70 percent. 

NOTE — Measurements should be carried on pre and post 

exposure test specimen at an interval of 1 000 h or as agreed to 

between the purchaser and the supplier. 


4 PACKING AND MARKING 


4.1 The polycarbonate protective shield shall be 
suitably packed as agreed to between the purchaser and 
the supplier. 


IS 16864 : 2018 


4.2 Each polycarbonate protective shield shall be 
permanently marked with the following: 


a) Indication of the source of manufacture and trade- 
mark, or the company responsible for placing the 
product in the market, if any; 


b) Batch Νο. 
c) Month and year of manufacture; 


d) Best use before........ (month and year to be 
declared by the manufacturer); and 


e) Any other information required by the statuary 
authority. 


In addition to the above, the following information 
shall also be given in English/Hindi/regional language 
and may be included in a separate leaflet placed on the 
product: 


a) Types of threats that the shield is designed to 
protect against; 


b) Instructions for proper use as intended by the 
supplier; 

c) List of components and required accessories 
provided with the shield; 


d) Instructions for assembly and precautions 
regarding installation of attachments or 
modifications to the shield (if required); 


e) Care and maintenance instructions; 


f) Recommended storage conditions and life 


expectancy under those conditions; and 
g) Availability of replacement parts (optional). 


4.3 BIS Certification Marking 


The polycarbonate protective shield may also be 
marked with the Standard Mark. 


4.3.1 The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the 
provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 
and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The 
details of the conditions under which the licence for use 
of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers 
or producers, may be obtained from the Bureau of 
Indian Standards. 


5 SAMPLING 


The samples of the polycarbonate protective shields 
shall be drawn and the criteria for conformity 
determined as prescribed in Annex E. 


IS 16864 : 2018 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 3.2.3 ) 
CODE OF GOOD FABRICATING PRACTICES 


A-1 Polycarbonate can be processed into useful end 
products by any of the usual processing techniques 
like extrusion, blow moulding, injection moulding 
etc. Selection of processing equipment, processing 
conditions and tool designing plays extremely 
important part in achieving best possible performance 
in end products made out of polycarbonate. 


Polycarbonate sheets are amenable to practically 
all sorts of forming and fabricating techniques in 
comparison to other thermoplastic sheets. Adoption of 
improper practices, however, can lead to unacceptable 
performance level at the end use. This code of good 
fabricating practices highlights the areas of critical 
importance in forming and fabrication of polycarbonate 
sheets. It cannot, however, be treated as a complete 
guide to fabricating or forming. Experts in this field 
should invariably be consulted on various aspects 
especially when the end use is of critical importance. 


A-2 FORMING 


For production of limited number of large simple parts 
with uniform wall thickness, forming of plastic sheets 
has been found most economical route of production. 
Polycarbonate sheets are readily adoptable to standard 
forming techniques. Polycarbonate sheets, however, 
cool very rapidly and to achieve good results the forming 
machines should invariably be equipped with its own 
heating devices. To avoid blistering and consequent 
brittleness in the end product, polycarbonate sheets 
must be pre-dried especially if the forming operation 
is carried out at temperature over 160°C. The clamping 
frame should preferably be heated to prevent heat loss 
of heated sheets through the frame. Since polycarbonate 
sheets cool very fast, the forming should be done 
rapidly as soon as the sheets reach desired temperature. 
Demoulding should also be carried out quickly as soon 
as the material is rigid but still hot to touch. 


A-2.1 Moulds 


Wood, filled or unfilled polyesters, epoxies and metal 
can be used as mould material. To avoid thermal shock 
to polycarbonate sheet, materials which are not good 
conductor of heat are preferred tooling materials. If 
use of metal is must, the mould should be heated to 
120-125°C. Generous radii of at least equal to wall 
thickness of the product should be provided in the 
tool. Draft angles of 5-7° for male moulds and 2-3° for 
female moulds are recommended. A shrinkage factor of 
0.5 to 1 percent should be considered while designing 
the tool. To avoid air entrapment and consequent marks 
on the product surface, too smooth a mould surface 
should be avoided. Minute air channel can be provided 
on the mould surface by use of medium sand paper or 


fine steel wool. Adequate number of vacuum holes of 
0.5 to 0.75 mm diameter should be provided in the mould 
to facilitate removal of air from between mould surface 
and polycarbonate sheet. To speed up air evacuation, 
back drilling of the holes with larger diameter drill 
can be adopted. Normally, release of product from a 
properly designed mould should not pose a problem. 
If difficulty is encountered, release agents like silicone 
spray, polytetrafluoroethylene spray, zinc stearate, 
talcum powder, etc, can be used. However, when the 
part has to undergo finishing operations like painting, 
printing or bonding, silicone or teflon spray should not 
be used. 


A-2.2 Pre-drying 


Polycarbonate sheets are to be pre-dried before forming 
in hot air circulating oven maintained at 125 + 3°C. The 
air volume in the oven should be exchanged six times in 
an hour to remove water vapour. Polycarbonate sheets, 
after removal of masking, should be hung vertically or 
be placed in horizontal racks with a separation of about 
25 mm. After pre-drying the sheets should be used 
within few hour depending on sheet thickness and local 
atmospheric condition. Drying time varies with sheet 
thickness as given in Table 3. 


Table 3 Drying Time 
( Clause A-2.2 ) 
51 Νο. Sheet Thickness Drying Time 
mm h 
() (2) (3) 
i) 0.75 0.50 
ii) 1.00 1.00 
iii) 1.50 1.50 
iv) 2.00 3.00 
v) 3.00 4.00 
vi) 4.00 10.00 
vii) 5.00 16.00 
viii) 6.00 24.00 
ix) 8.00 36.00 
x) 9.50 40.00 
xi) 12.00 48.00 


A-2.3 Heating 


Production of good parts depends on controlled and 
uniform heating of polycarbonate sheets. Sandwich type 
heaters are recommended. Normal forming temperature 
is between 185-210°C range. Best result is achieved at 


around 200°C. Heating rate is usually affected by power 
fluctuation and air draught and should be controlled. To 
avoid hot spots and to achieve forming temperature at 
the edges, slower heating is recommended. Clamping 
frame should be pre-heated to 120-130°C. 


A-2.4 Cooling 


Dueto high heat distortion temperature of polycarbonate, 
products formed from polycarbonate sheets retain 
sufficient rigidity even at 125°C and can be demoulded 
at this temperature. This enables to achieve lower cycle 
time in the forming process. 


A-2.5 Techniques 


All thermo-forming techniques like plug assisted and 
unassisted vacuum forming, free blowing, pressure 
forming or snap back forming can be used to give desired 
shapes to polycarbonate sheets. Polycarbonate sheets can 
also be cold formed at relatively lower temperature of 
about 160°C by techniques like drape forming, matched 
mould forming, hot line bending, etc. In such cases 
pre- drying of sheets can be avoided. Polycarbonate 
sheets are heated in an oven on felt covered supports. 
Tools are to be pre-heated to 80°C. Since embossing 
of polycarbonate thin sheets is widely employed in 
fabrication of membrane switches this technique is 
discussed in slightly more detail in the next section. 


A-2.5.1 Embossing 


Embossing is used to form raised areas in thin 
polycarbonate sheets. Thickness of up to 0.25 mm is 
readily amenable to embossing while thickness up to 
0.50 mm can be embossed only in certain configuration. 
Due to high stress build up during embossing operation, 
life of membrane switch could be affected significantly 
and life testing is always recommended. Embossing 
dies can be made from metals like zinc, magnesium, 
aluminium and steel and-non-metals like polyesters, 
silicone rubbers, etc. The clearance between male and 
female portions of the die should be approximately 
equal to sheet thickness. Draft angle of minimum 3° on 
both male and female tools is recommended. To reduce 
fatigue and impact failure possibilities all corners should 
have radii of equal or greater than the sheet thickness. 
The embossing width should be equal or greater than 
5 times the sheet thickness. The embossing height should 
not exceed 2.5 times the sheet thickness (excluding 
adhesive and liner) with sheet thickness included in the 
measurement. Spacing between embossed areas should 
be 1.5 mm minimum to limit distortion after embossing. 


A-2.6 Annealing 


Stress relaxation through annealing in formed products 
should preferably be avoided. Frozen in stress can 
be reduced by adopting better processing parameters 
and good machines. In certain cold formed products, 
the stress can be relieved by heating at 130-135°C for 


IS 16864 : 2018 


1 h per 25 mm of sheet thickness. The impact strength 
of the products, however, might be reduced after this 
operation. Since the products tend to deform while 
releasing stress, they should be kept in forms during 
the process. 


A-3 INJECTION MOULDING 


To injection mould polycarbonate, plunger type 
machines are positively to be avoided. Screw pre- 
plasticising type injection moulding machines 
preferably with medium to high injection pressure 
capability usually give satisfactory result. Machines 
equipped with precise temperature pressure and speed 
control give optimum productivity and quality parts. 


Hourly plasticising capacity of the machine should 
be adequate to take care of total part weight produced 
during the hour. Too high a capacity may lead to poor 
strength in the part due to thermal degradation resulted 
from high residual time of the melt in the barrel. 
Lower capacity will extend the cycle time, thereby 
reducing the productivity. Shot capacity of the injection 
moulding machine should be at least 20 to 30 percent 
more than the part weight including sprue and runners 
to avoid incomplete parts. Part weight should also not 
be lower than 20 percent of the shot capacity to avoid 
thermal degradation of the melt remaining in the heated 
machine barrel for longer period of time. The clamping 
force of the machine is usually decided on the basis of 
projected area of the part and injection pressure which 
in turn depends on part intricacies, flow length and 
thickness of the part. To take an example, a part with 
400 cm? projected area being moulded at an injection 
pressure of 1 000 kg/cm? will need a machine with 
minimum clamping force of 200 tonne (it is assumed 
that only 50 percent of injection pressure is actually 
transmitted into the mould cavity due to pressure drop 
in flow path). 


L/D ratio of the plasticising screw of an injection 
moulding machine processing polycarbonate should be 
20:1 and the compression ratio should be in the range of 
1:2 to 1:2.5. Shut-off-valves cause material hang over 
and consequent thermal degradation resulting in poor 
quality parts. Short free flow nozzles with a minimum 
opening of 3mm are recommended for processing 
of polycarbonate. Good nozzle temperature control 
improves part quality and eliminates melt drooling. 


Since polycarbonate is used in components of precision 
engineering applications, dimensional accuracy and 
high-performance levels have to be assured during 
production of the parts. Parameters like temperature, 
pressure and speed, influence part quality immensely 
and they are to be precisely controlled to ensure 
quality parts. The machine should be able to control 
the temperature within + 2°C of the settings. Modern 
injection moulding machines are equipped with 
microprocessor control and various control options like 
variable pressure and speed. 


IS 16864 : 2018 


A-3.1 Injection Moulds 


Sprue bushing in an injection mould should have a 
generous taper, should be well polished and hardened. 
The sprue diameter should be larger than the nozzle 
orifice by 1 mm. The sprue bushing radius should be 
1 mm larger than that of the nozzle. The small end 
of the sprue should be at least 4 mm in diameter. In 
case of direct sprue gating, cooling opposite the sprue 
avoids sink marks and cooling in the sprue area reduces 
cycle time. Short full round primary runners with at 
least 5 mm diameter are preferred. For long flow path 
hot runners are recommended. Cold slug wells at the 
end of both primary and secondary runners must be 
provided. Trapezoidal runners can be used if necessary, 
but half round runners should be avoided. Gate type, 
dimension and location depend on the product design 
and on polycarbonate grade and its viscosity. All types 
of gates, namely pin point, diaphragm, film, tunnel, 
fan, tab, spider, ring, etc, could be successfully used 
for polycarbonate. For natural polycarbonate the pin 
point gate diameter should be between 0.8-2 mm. A 
maximum land length of 0.5 to 1 mm is recommended 
in case of diaphragm gating. In case of tunnel gate, the 
minimum diameter for natural polycarbonate should be 
0.8 mm. In deciding the location of the gate following 
points should be kept in mind: 


a) Gate should be placed preferable in the thickest 
section of the part, 


b) Gate location should minimize weld lines, 
c) Gate should-direct air towards the vents, and 
d) Location should facilitate degating. 


Like the sprue, runner and gating the location and 
design of venting is also important. Improper venting 
could cause air entrapment in the mould leading to 
localized burning, sinks, short shots, high moulded 
in stress, etc. For shallow articles, 0.02 to 0.05 mm 
thick vents should be placed at intervals of 2 to 4 cm 
around to cavity periphery, which allows venting of 
air on the split lines opposite the gate. Too much of 
venting, however, can cause reduction of air speed and 
can cause blockage and it can also act as potential area 
for flash. For more complicated and large products, 
venting should be decided on the basis of product and 
mould design. 


A-3.2 Injection Moulding Conditions 


The product, mould design and the MFR of the material 
used decide the temperature condition in injection 
moulding of polycarbonate. Depending on melt flow 
temperature between 280-320°C has to be achieved 
to ensure easy moulding and quality product. Mould 
temperature between 80-120°C not only helps in easy 
flow of melt in the mould and shorter cycle time, it also 
ensures stress free moulding with excellent surface finish. 


Polycarbonate melt is usually highly viscous and 
injection pressure requirement is higher as compared to 
other thermoplastics. Depending on product size, gate 
dimension and grade used quite often injection pressure 
higher than 1 000 kg/ cm?is encountered. After or hold 
on pressure in case of polycarbonate moulding is about 
50 percent of injection pressure. Backpressure should 
not exceed 10 kg/cm’. Like other parameters, injection 
speed also depends on part intricacies, the mould 
quality and the gating system. Fast injection speed 
is, however, desirable to avoid premature freezing of 
the melt and knitting around corners. Slow injection 
speed should be used during start up. To facilitate 
release of part from mould, sometimes use of mould 
release agent like silicones spray or zinc stearate spray 
might be required. If, however, the parts need painting 
or decorating use of release agent should be avoided. 
These release agents should never be mixed with the 
polycarbonate granules. 


A-4 MACHINING 


Polycarbonate sheets can be machined using ordinary 
workshop equipments. Cooling is not necessary under 
normal conditions, but at higher cutting speeds, cooling 
with air or water is recommended. Oil emulsions should 
not be used for cooling purposes. No sharp corners or 
notches should be left on the sheet after machining as 
they may lead to part failure. 


A-4.1 Sawing 


Ordinary band saws and circular saws can be used 
to cut polycarbonate sheets. Due to heat resistance 
characteristics of polycarbonate, blade speed and cutting 
rate are not very critical. Tungsten carbide tipped saw 
blades should be used. To achieve clean cut following 
recommendations should be observed (see Fig. 3). 


Circular Saw Band Saw 
Clearance angle 20-30° 20-30° For single sheet less than 3mm, thick, band 
saws routers or shears are preferred to 
circular saws 
Rake angle 1-5° 0-55 
Shaft speed 2500-4000 rev/min 
Blade or band speed 1800-2400 m/min 600-1000 m/min 


Tooth spacing 9-15 mm 


1.5-2.5 mm 


NOTE — Polycarbonate sheets should be clamped to the support table to avoid vibration and rough cutting. 


IS 16864 : 2018 


Table 4 Conditions for Drilling 
( Clause A-4.2 ) 


SI Hole Diameter Speed Feed Recommended 
No. mm rev/min rev/min Drill Angles 

() (2) (3) (4) (5) 

i) 3 1750 0.035-0.075 Clearance angle 15° 

ii) 6 1000-1500 0.035-0.075 Rake angle 0-5° 

iii) 9 600-100 0.012-0.074 Included tip angle 160-180° 
iv) 12 325-650 0.075 

v) 18 350 0.075 


A-4.2 Drilling 


Carbon steel twist drills have been found suitable for 
drilling polycarbonate sheets. To achieve best results, 
however, high speed carbide tipped twist drills should 
be used under conditions given in Table 4. 


To drill larger holes, special drill bits with rake angle 
of at least 5° should be used (see Fig. 4). Sheets should 
be-clamped to the drilling table to avoid vibration and 
to minimize friction in the drill hole. Swarf should 
regularly be removed. 


A-4.3 Shearing and Punching 


Shearing or punching of polycarbonate sheets up to 
3 mm thickness is quite easy. To obtain smooth cuts 
shear blades with rake angle of 45° or more and a 
clearance between the bed and the blade of 0.015 to 
0.030 mm should be used (see Fig. 5). Shrinkage 
allowance of up to 5 percent should be made while 
punching holes. 


A-4.4 Turning 


For turning of polycarbonate sheet following tool 
parameters (see Fig. 6) are critical: 


Clearance angle 20° 

Rake angle 0-5° 

Tip radius 0.5 mm 
Speed 500-1000 m/min 


Cutting speed 0.1-0.5 mm/rev 
Tough swarf is produced during turning of 
polycarbonate sheet and this should not build up on 
machine or the tool. At higher cutting speed, turning 
should be stopped periodically to cool the work piece 
with air or water 


A-4.5 Milling 


Universal milling machine can beused for polycarbonate 
sheets. Apart from ordinary metal working tools high 


speed knife cutters can be used also. To achieve good 
results following parameters are important: 


Clearance angle 20-25° 
Rake angle 0-55 
Speed of milling cutter 100-500 rev/min 
Cutting speed 0.1-0.5 mm/rev 


A-4.6 Tapping 


Standard metal working taps are recommended for 
polycarbonate sheets. Taps that produce threads with 
root diameters slightly rounded arc preferred. To avoid 
excessive heat build-up tapping should be done gently. 
Cutting oils or emulsions should preferably not be used 


A-5 BENDING 


A-5.1 Cold Bending 


Practically all polycarbonate sheets excepting those with 
abrasion resistance special hard surface coating can be 
installed with a curve under stress. The minimum radius 
of curvature recommended for compact polycarbonate 
sheets is 150 times the sheet thickness while the same 
for multi-walled hollow structured sheets is 175 times 
the sheet thickness. With this minimum recommended 
radius, impact resistance, transparency or weather 
ability of polycarbonate sheets remain unaffected. 


A-5.2 Cold Line Bending 


Sheet thickness, tool edge and angle of bending 
determine the mechanical cold bending results. 
Blunt tool edges should be avoided. Sufficient time 
(about 2-3 s) for immediate sheet relaxation after 
bending should be allowed. Assembling should be 
undertaken only after relaxation for 5 to 10 days. 
During installation any forced reduction of bending 
angle must be avoided. Since cold bent sheets are 
under internal stress, the impact resistance of sheets 
is reduced. This limit use of cold bent sheets in less 
demanding applications. 


IS 16864 : 2018 


CLEARANCE i 
ANGLE a OTH S 
PACIN 
G 


s 


FiG. 3 DETAILS ΟΕ ΦΑΝ BLADES 


INCLUDING 
RAKE 
ANGLE CUTTING 
TIP ANGLE 
CLEARANCE CLEARANCE 


ANGLE ANGLE 
FiG. 4 DETAILS OF SPECIAL DRILL 


RAKE ANGLE 


RAKE ANGLE Υ 


1 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 


. usus 


FiG. 5 DETAILS OF SHEAR BLADES 


TIP RADIUS 


RAKE ANGLE 


FiG. 6 DETAILS OF PARAMETERS USED FOR TURNING 


10 


A-5.3 Hot Line Bending 


Polycarbonate sheet is locally heated to 155-160°C in 
this method by an electrical resistance wire with single 
heating the sheet must be turned over several times. 
After desired heating level is achieved, the sheet is bent 
to the required angle. For better tolerance and higher 
productivity, bending machines with temperature 
controlled heaters on both sides should be used. 


A-6 ASSEMBLY 


In the process of fabricating parts from polycarbonate 
sheet, it might be required to bond it with another piece 
of plastics including polycarbonate or glass or metal. 
The bonding technique that can be adopted depends on 
the part configuration, strength requirement, flexibility, 
heat resistance etc. Ease of bonding and appearance 
also have major role to play. Adhesive bonding, 
mechanical fastening or welding can be successfully 
used to bond polycarbonate sheet. 


A-6.1 Adhesive Bonding 


Inherent stress level, temperatures, time of exposure 
and nature and concentration of chemicals determine 
the chemical resistance behaviour of polycarbonate 
sheets. Many of the usual solvents used in manufacture 
of adhesives are known to cause stress cracking of 
polycarbonate. Selection of adhesive, should therefore, 
be made on the basis of practical data pertaining to 
the actual stress conditions and end-use requirements. 
Many of the epoxy and polyurethane based adhesives 
and polycarbonate solutions in methylene dichloride 
have widely been found useful in polycarbonate sheets 
fabrication. 


A-6.2 Mechanical Fastening 


Pop rivets are widely used in fastening polycarbonate 
sheets mechanically. Only aluminium rivets are 
recommended. The rivet head should be 2.5-3 times the 
diameter. Drilling of oversized holes is recommended to 
~accommodate thermal expansion of rivets. Aluminium 
and neoprene washers should be used to spread out 
the load Application of small amount of silicone fluid 
in the hole reduces chance of stress cracking and 
environment attack. Even spreading of rivets helps to 
minimize possibility of localized overstressing. The 
above recommendations are also true if nut and bolts 
are used. Non-rusting type nuts and bolts should be 
used and nuts should not be tightened too firmly. 


A-6.3 Welding 


Traditional welding is not a recommended technique 
as a large scale production method for jointing of 
polycarbonate sheet based parts. For small volume or 
proto-type part production, however, it can be used 
successfully. The parts and the welding rod (a strip 
cut from polycarbonate sheet) must be pre-dried as 


11 


IS 16864 : 2018 


per standard practice. The parts are put next to each 
other with minimal separation. The hot air temperature 
should be set around 475-500°C. 


Ultrasonic spot welding technique when used to 
join polycarbonate sheets results in high mechanical 
performance and low residual stress. More than 
70 percent of tensile strength of polycarbonate sheet 
can be attained in the bonded areas using this fast and 
effective technique. Use of high ultrasonic amplitude is 
recommended. A fillet radius should be included at the 
root of the stud to reduce stress concentration and to 
prevent possible breakage in this area caused by high 
vibrational energy. 


A-7 FINISHING 


Most common finishing operations that are 
conducted on polycarbonate sheet parts are painting 
and printing. Since both paints and printing inks 
are largely based on organic solvents which are 
known to have adverse effects on polycarbonate, 
selection of these should be based on stress level in 
the parts and practical experience of efficiency of a 
particular paint or ink system in similar conditions 
of use. 


A-7.1 Painting 


Standard spray painting technique can be adopted; 
cleaning of the surface is a must prior to painting. Both 
single and two component epoxy and polyurethane 
paint systems have been developed for painting on 
polycarbonate surface. Single coat and multi-coat 
systems are available within the available range of 
paints. If cut and spray technique is employed, care 
should be taken to avoid deep cuts in the sheet surface 
while cutting through the masking layer. Notches 
created by deep cuts may cause impact failure in the 
parts. 


A-7.2 Screen Printing 


Screen printing of polycarbonate sheets is similar to the 
technique adopted for other materials. Vinyl and acrylic 
based inks are found suitable. However, selection of ink 
should be based on similar judgement as recommended 
in case of paints. Thinner, if used, should be as per 
manufacturer’s recommendations. 


A-7.3 Anti-Static Treatment 


Polycarbonate sheets are good electrical insulator. 
Machining or handling of polycarbonate sheets 
usually result in accumulation of static charge 
on the surface. Surface treatment with proper 
antistatic agents reduces the possibility of static 
charge build up in polycarbonate sheets. Proprietary 
antistatic formulations are available from chemical 
manufacturers like American Cyanamide Co. AKZO 
and BEE Chemical Co. 


IS 16864 : 2018 


A-7.4 Cleaning 


Surface cleaning of polycarbonate sheets is required 
before and/or after various finishing operations. 
Sometimes this might be required even before forming. 
Recommended clearing agents are mild detergent 
dissolved in water, isopropyl or isobutyl alcohol 
and clean water. Use of soft cloth or sponge helps 
in cleaning. Paint splashes, greases, dirt, etc can be 
removed easily before drying by rubbing lightly with 
cotton moistened with methylated spirit or petroleum 
ether. A wash with mild soap solution and clean water 
should follow. To avoid water spots the surface should 
be dried thoroughly with a chamois or moist cellulose 
sponge. Abrasive or highly alkaline cleaners should 
never be used on polycarbonate sheets. Surface should 
also not be scrapped with razor or any other sharp 
tool. In case of heavy dust build up, an ionising air 
gun should be used to remove the dust. It should be 
followed by wiping with soft cloth dipped in water or 
4.5percent isopropyl alcohol. 


A-8 INSTALLATION 


Polycarbonate sheets of both compact and multi- 
walled hollow varieties are extensively used in 
building and construction industry. Architectural 
and engineering design for any installation should 
be guided by factors like wind load and snow load 
(wherever applicable) on the installation. Data 
related to span width, radius of curvature and sheet 
thickness, etc in relation to loading are available 
from sheet suppliers and should be used judiciously. 
Depending on sheet thickness and possible loading 
the edge engagement of sheet is determined. Since 
thermal expansion of polycarbonate sheet is relatively 
higher, the rebate depth (depth of fixing profile) 
should be calculated and maintained accurately 
to avoid deformation of sheet after installation. 
Rain water drainage should be ensured in case of 
horizontal installation by maintaining a slope of 


12 


9 cm/m length of sheet. Wood or metal profiles can be 
used as structural support. General recommendations 
given below should be followed during installation 
of sheets: 


a) Edge engagement and expansion allowance 
should be calculated. 


b) Sheets are to be cut to exact size and edges should 
be free from cuts and notches. 


c) 50 mm of masking should be removed from all 
edges. 


d) Suitable gaskets or sealants should be used at the 
edges. 


e) Masking should be completely removed soon 
after completion of installation. 


f) Sheets should be cleaned with mild soap solution 
and soft cloth after installation is over. 


g) Incase of UV coated sheets, the coated side should 
always face the outside. No solvent should be used 
to clean this coated surface. 


Sealant should be used not only to secure the sheets 
properly with the supporting frame but also to eliminate 
possibility of leakage. Keeping the expansion and 
contraction the sheet undergoes due to temperature 
fluctuations, the sealant should accommodate certain 
amount of movement without loss of adhesion with 
frame or sheet. Silicone and polysulphide sealants 
and polybutene tapes have been found suitable in this 
respect and are used quite often. However, chemical 
compatibility of the sealing system with polycarbonate 
sheet has to be established before use during installation 
Where expansion and contraction of sheet exceeds the 
limitation of such sealants, neoprene or EPDM rubber 
gaskets of about 65 shore hardness can be used, the 
gasket is snap fitted into the glazing bars to allow free 
movement of the sheet during thermal expansion or 
contraction. Moreover, use of such gasket has aesthetic 
value as well. 


IS 16864 : 2018 


ANNEX B 


( Clause 3.2.5 ) 
DART DROP IMPACT STRENGTH 


Β-Ι A Gardner Impact Tester (see Fig. 7) is used for 
testing dart drop impact strength of polycarbonate 
Shields. The specimen is placed over a hole of 25.4 mm 
diameter in a die mounted on the anvil. A round nosed 
dart, 12.7 mm diameter is placed upon the specimen. A 
dart with a variable mass of up to 15.0 kg is raised to the 
desired height in a 1.25 m calibrated tube and dropped. 
The maximum applied impact energy is given as: 


Mx n= 15.0 kg x 1.25 m= 18.75 kg.m (187.5 J) 


FALLING DART WEIGHT 
MAX. 15 kg. 


CALLIBRATED 
GUIDE TUBE 


A slight reduction in the maximum energy may occur 
due to the zero adjustment necessary for the various 
thicknesses of the specimen. The test specimen 
considered to have passed the test, if the sample shows 
no visible signs of surface cracking around the impact 
area. 


ElI 
Elx 
ΩΣ 
S > 8 
ΕΙ ο 
SZ" 
O 
ui z 
r 
alo = 
O < 
x= 
a = 2 
== ° 
5/5 9 
=> |I 
>x >< 
< < 
= >= 


@12.7 METAL ROUND 
POSED PUNCH 


POLYCARBONATE SHEET 
SPECIMEN 


@25.4 


All dimensions in millimetres 


Fic. 7 GARDNER IMPACT TESTING MACHINE 


IS 16864 : 2018 


ANNEX C 
( Clause 3.2.5 ) 
DETERMINATION OF FLAMMABILITY 
HORIZONTAL BURNING TEST FOR CLASSIFYING MATERIALS 94HB 


C-1 TEST CRITERIA 


A material shall be classified 94HB on the basis of test 
results obtained on small bar specimens when tested as 
described in C-4 to C-12. 


C-2 A material classed 94HB shall (see also C-3): 


a) Not have a burning rate exceeding 38.1 mm per 
min over a 76.2 mm span for specimens having 
thickness of 3.05 to 12.7 mm, or 


b) Not have a burning rate exceeding 76.2 mm per 
min over a 76.2 mm span for specimens having a 
thickness less than 3.05 mm, or 


c) Cease to burn before the flame reaches the 102 mm 
reference mark (see C-10). 


C-3 If only one specimen from a set of three specimens 
does not comply with the requirements, another set of 
three specimens is to be tested. All specimens from this 
second set shall comply with the requirements in order 
for material in that thickness to be classified 94 HB. 


C-4 APPARATUS 


The apparatus employed is to consist of the following: 


a) Test chamber, enclosure or laboratory hood — 
Free of induced or forced draft during tests. 


b) Laboratory burner — A Bunsen of Tirrill burner 
having a tube with a length of 80 to 100 mm and 
an inside diameter of 94 +1.6 - 0.0 mm. The tube 
is not to be equipped with an end attachment, such 
as a stabilizer. 

c) Wire gauze — A 20 mesh (20 openings per 

25.4 mm), 0.43 mm diameter iron wire gauze, 

127 mm square. 


d 


wm 


Gas supply — A supply of technical grade 
methane gas with regulator and meter for uniform 
gas flow. Natural gas having a heat content of 
approximately 37 MJ/m° has been found to provide 
similar results. Other fuel gases, such as butane, 
propane and acetylene (which have a higher heat 
value) may also be used. However, technical grade 
methane gas shall be used in case of dispute. 


6 


wm 


Ring stand — A ring stand with clamps, or the 
equivalent for horizontal positioning of the 
specimen and the wire gauze. 

Stopwatch or other timing device. 

Conditioning room or chamber — Capable 
of being maintained at 27 + 2° C and a relative 
humidity of 65 + 5 percent. 

h) A Metal support fixture — As illustrated in 
Fig. 8 for testing specimens that sag or bend at 
their free end. 


σα 
aS 


All dimensions in millimetres 


Fic. 8 FLEXIBLE SPECIMEN SUPPORT FIXTURE 


14 


C-5 TEST SPECIMENS 


Test specimens are to be limited to a maximum 
thickness of 12.7 mm. Test specimens of a 127 mm 
length by 12.7 mm width are to be provided in the 
minimum thickness and in a 3.18 + 0.13 mm thickness. 
The 3.18 + 0.13 mm thick specimens are not necessary 
if the minimum thickness is greater than 3.18 + 
0.13 mm or the maximum thickness is less than 3.18 + 
0.13 mm. 


Exception: A material classified 94HB in the 3.18 
+ 0.13 mm thickness shall automatically be classed 
94HB down to a 1.57 mm minimum thickness without 
additional testing. 


C-5.1 The specimens are to comply with the following: 


a) The maximum width is to be 13.2 mm; and 


b) The edges are to be smooth, and the radius on the 
comers is not to exceed 1.3 mm. 


C-5.2 If a material is to be considered in a range of 
colours, melt flows, or reinforcements, specimens 
representing these ranges are also to be provided. 
Specimens in the natural (if used in this colour) and 
in the most heavily pigmented light and dark colours 
are to be provided and considered representative of the 
colour range, if the test results are essentially the same. 
An additional set of specimens is to be provided in 
the heaviest organic pigment loading, unless the most 
heavily pigmented light and dark colours include the 
highest organic pigment level. When certain colour 
pigments (for example, red, yellow, or the like) are 
known to have particularly critical effects, they are 


WIRE GAUGE 


IS 16864 : 2018 


also to be provided. Specimens in the extremes of 
the melt flows and reinforcement contents are to be 
provided and considered representative of the range, 
if the test results are essentially the same. If the 
burning characteristics are not essentially the same 
for all specimens representing the range, evaluation is 
to be limited only to the material in the colours, melt 
flows, and reinforcement contents tested, or additional 
specimens in intermediate colours, melt flows, and 
reinforcement contents are to be provided for tests. 


C-6 SPECIMEN CONDITIONING 


The specimens are to be conditioned for at least 48 h 
at 27 + 2°C and a relative humidity of 65 + 5 percent, 
prior to testing. 


C-7 TEST METHOD 


The burning test is to be conducted in a chamber, 
enclosure, or laboratory hood free of induced or forced 
draft. An enclosed laboratory hood with a heat-resistant- 
glass window and an exhaust fan for removing the 
products of combustion after the test is recommended. 


C-8 Each specimen is to be marked across its width 
with two lines, 25.4 and 102 mm from one end of the 
specimen. The specimen is to be clamped at the end 
farthest from the 25.4 mm mark, with its longitudinal 
axis horizontal and its transverse axis inclined 45°. 
The wire gauze is to be clamped horizontally beneath 
the specimen, with a distance of 9.5 mm between the 
lowest edge of the specimen and the gauze, and with 
the free end of the specimen even with the edge of the 
gauze. (see Fig. 9). 


25.4 


SPECIMEN 


Fig 


τ᾽ 


WIRE GAUGE 


Fic. 9 HORIZONTAL BURNING TEST FOR 94HB CLASSIFICATION 


15 


IS 16864 : 2018 


C-8.1 If the specimen sags at its free end during the 
initial set up, the support fixture illustrated in Fig. 8 
is to be positioned under the specimen with the small 
extending portion of the support fixture 19 mm from 
the free end of the specimen. Enough clearance is to be 
provided at the clamped end of the specimen so that the 
support fixture can be freely moved sideward. As the 
flame front progresses along the specimen, the support 
fixture is to be withdrawn at the same rate. 


C-9 The burner is then to be placed remote from 
the specimen, ignited, and adjusted to produce a 
blue flame 25 mm high. The flame is to be obtained 
by adjusting the gas supply and the air ports of the 
burner until a 25 mm yellow tipped blue flame is 
produced and then the air supply is to be increased 
until the yellow tip disappears. The height of the 
flame is to be measured again and corrected if 
necessary. The flame is to be applied to the free end 


at the lower edge of the specimen. The centre axis 
of the burner tube is to be in the same vertical plane 
as the longitudinal bottom edge of the specimen 
(and inclined toward the end of the specimen) at 
an angle of approximately 45° to the horizontal 
(see Fig. 9). The flame is to be applied so that the front 
edge of the specimen, to a depth of approximately 6.4 
mm, is subjected to the test flame for 30 s without 
changing the position of the burner and is then 
removed from the specimen. If the specimen burns to 
the 25.4 mm mark before the flame has been applied 
for 30 s, the flame application is to be discontinued 
when the flame reaches the 25.4 mm mark. 


C-10 If the specimen continues to bum after removal 
of the test flame, the time for the flame front to travel 
from the mark 25.4 mm from the free end to the mark 
102 mm from the free end, is to be determined and the 
rate of burning is to be calculated. 


ANNEX D 
( Clause 3.3.5 ) 


( Informative ) 


LIST OF ACCESSORIES CONVENTIONALLY USED IN 
POLYCARBONATE PROTECTIVE SHIELD 


D-1 ARM PAD 


a) Fabric — Polyester 100 gsm, 
b) Thread — Polyester, 

c) Velcro (12 mm), and 

d) Foam (12 mm). 


D-2 SHOULDER BELT 
a) Belt Fabric — Polypropylene (PP) (30 mm), 


b) Push Lock -- Acrylonitrile Butadiene 
Styrene (ABS), 
c) Adjuster — Acrylonitrile Butadiene 


Styrene (ABS), and 
d) MS Buckle. 


D-3 HARNESS SHIELD ARM BELT 
Fabric — Velcro (12 mm). 


D-4 STICKER (IF ANY) 
Material — High Impact Polystyrene (HIPS) Sheet. 


D-5 OTHER ACCESSORIES 


a) Nylon lock nut, 
b) SS304 hex-headed M6 bolts on handle, and 


c) EPDM [Ethylene Propylene Diene Monomer 
(M-class)] washers and inserts for handle. 


IS 16864 : 2018 


ANNEX E 
( Clause 5 ) 
SAMPLING OF POLYCARBONATE SHIELDS 


E-1 SCALE OF SAMPLING 


E-1.1 Lot 


In a single consignment all the shields of identical 
dimensions belonging to the same batch of manufacture 
shall be grouped together to constitute a lot. 


Ε-Ι.2 For judging conformity to the specified 
requirements each lot shall be considered separately. 


E-1.3 The number of sample shields from a lot for 
determining the conformity shall be in accordance with 
col 2 and col 3 of Table 5. 


E-1.4 The sample shield shall be taken at random from 
the lot. In order to ensure randomness of selection, 
random number tables may be used (see also IS 4905). 


E-2 NUMBER OF TESTS AND CRITERIA FOR 
CONFORMITY 


E-2.1 Each of the sample shield selected according 
to E-1.3 shall be tested for all the requirements of 
this specification. The lot shall be declared to be in 
conformity if each sample sheet individually meets the 
specified requirements. 


Table 5 Number of Sample Sheets 
( Clause E-1.3 ) 


SI Νο. Number of Shields in a Lot Number of Sample Shields 

N n 

a) (2) (3) 

i) Up to 25 1 

ii) 26 to150 2 

iii) 151 to300 3 

iv) 301 to 500 4 

v) 501 and above 5 


17 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: PCD 12 (11138). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


