NAT HIAF IS 1201 : 2021 
Indian Standard 


ER AR Aena anA er fore attaror 
uaa — feta arms chr Tat TeR OT 


(FAT TRT) 


Methods for Testing Tar and 
Bituminous Materials — Sampling of 
Bituminous Materials 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 75.140 


© BIS 2021 


anda AM Sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Te TH art, ay freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2021 Price Group 5 


Bitumen, Tar and Related Products Sectional Committee, PCD 06 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft finalized 
by the Bitumen, Tar and Related Products Sectional Committee, had been approved by the Petroleum, Coal and 
Related Product Division Council. 


This standard was originally published in 1958 as ‘Methods for testing tar and bituminous materials — Sampling’ 
and first revised in 1978. ‘Methods for testing tar and bituminous materials’ was originally published as series of 
22 standards in the form of a booklet, as listed below: 


SI No. IS Designation Title 
1. IS 1201 : 2004 Sampling 
2. IS 1202 : 1978 Determination of specific gravity 
3. IS 1203 : 1978 Determination of penetration 
4. IS 1204 : 1978 Determination of residue of specified penetration 
5. IS 1205 : 1978 Determination of softening point 
6. IS 1206 (Part 1) : 1978 Determination of viscosity: Part 1 Industrial viscosity 
I: IS 1206 (Part 2) : 1978 Determination of viscosity: Part 2 Absolute viscosity 
8. IS 1206 (Part 3) : 1978 Determination of viscosity: Part 3 Kinematic viscosity 
9. IS 1207 : 1978 Determination of equiviscous temperature (EVT) 
10. IS 1208 : 1978 Determination of ductility 
11. IS 1209 : 1978 Determination of flash point and fire point 
12. IS 1210 : 1978 Float test 
13. IS 1211 : 1978 Determination of water content dean and stark method 
14. IS 1212 : 1978 Determination of loss on heating 
15. IS 1213 : 1978 Distillation test 
16. IS 1214: 1978 Determination of matter insoluble in benzene (WITHDRAWN 
due to toxic nature of benzene) 
17. IS 1215 : 1978 Determination of matter insoluble in toluene 
18. IS 1216 : 1978 Determination of solubility in carbon disulphide trichloroethylene 
19. IS 1217 : 1978 Determination of mineral matter ash 
20. IS 1218 : 1978 Determination of phenols 
21. IS 1219 : 1978 Determination of naphthalene 
22. IS 1220 : 1978 Determination of volatile matter content 


(Continued on third cover) 


IS 1201 : 2021 


Indian Standard 


METHODS FOR TESTING TAR AND 
BITUMINOUS MATERIALS — SAMPLING OF 
BITUMINOUS MATERIALS 


(Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard covers methods of sampling bitumen and 
bituminous materials, binders, emulsions, reclaimed 
asphalt material in their liquid, semi-solid or solid 
states supplied in any of the following forms: 


a) Cans or small containers, drums, barrels and bags 
of different sizes depending on the state of the 
material; 


b) Solid materials in loose form; 
c) Rail tank wagon and tanker trucks or lorries; and 
d) Bulk storage tanks and other types of bulk storage. 


2 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard the following 
definitions shall apply. 


2.1 Lot — The quantity of material of the same 
composition offered for inspection at one time. A lot 
may consist of the whole or a part of the indented 
quantity. 


2.1.1 Formation of Lots 


a) The lot shall be in place before sampling is 
undertaken. 


b) The basic principle in declaring a lot is that the 
material in the lot should be as homogeneous as 
possible with regard to the quality characteristics 
specified. 


c) Care shall be taken so that the material in a single 
lot comes from the same source or batch of 
manufacturer/supplier and to the extent possible 
from raw material of identical origin. 


2.2 Upper Level Sample — A sample of upper level 
is the one taken at a level of one-sixth of the depth of 
the material below the top surface and in the centre of 
the container. 


2.3 Middle Level Sample — A middle level sample 
is the one taken at a level of one half of the depth of 
the material below the top surface in the centre of the 
container. 


2.4 Lower Level Sample — A sample of lower level 
is the one taken at a level of five-sixths of the depth 
of material below the top surface in the centre of the 
container. 


NOTES 

1 In the case of horizontal cylindrical tanks and tanks of 
irregular shape, ‘upper’, ‘middle’ and ‘lower’ samples taken at 
levels corresponding to one-sixth, one-half and five-sixths of 
the depth of product in the tank are not representative. In such 
circumstances, samples shall be taken at levels corresponding 
to one-sixth, one-half, and five-sixths of that volume. 


2 In the case of cone-roof tanks, the sample may be drawn from 
the centre as near as possible. 


2.5 Average Sample — A true average or representative 
sample is such that its composition would be the same 
as that of any part of the quantity sampled if the whole 
were mixed to ensure homogeneity. When the contents 
of the vessel are substantially homogeneous as shown 
by preliminary examination of upper, lower and middle 
samples and the cross section of the vessel is uniform, 
an average sample is usually made up by combining 
equal parts of samples drawn from levels at one-sixth, 
one-half and five-sixths of the depth of the liquid below 
the top surface. 


2.6 Composite Sample — A composite sample is one 
taken by combining representative samples of a product 
from a number of containers that is, from packages in 
proportion to the contents of each of the containers 
sampled. 


3 SAMPLING APPARATUS 


3.1 Bitumen Sampler — A strong metal vessel of 
sufficient capacity, the handle of which shall be attached 
by means not adversely affected by hot bitumen 
(see Fig.1). 


3.2 Sampling Thief or Tube Method — The sampling 
thief or tube shall be either of glass or metal, to reach 
to within 3 mm of the bottom of the vessel and having 
a capacity of approximately half or one litre. A metal 
tube suitable for sampling 250 litre drums is illustrated 
in Fig. 2. The rings shall be soldered to opposite sides of 
the tube at the upper end for convenience in holding it. 


IS 1201 : 2021 


FIG. 1 BITUMEN SAMPLER 


FIG. 2 SAMPLING TUBE 


3.3 Sampling Scoop — of such dimensions as to 
enable a core of convenient size to be taken throughout 
the depth of the package (see Fig. 3). 


HAMMER HEAD FOR 
ORIVING NTO BARRELS 


Fic. 3 SAMPLING SCOOP 


3.4 Knife or Spatula — Provided with a strong, broad 
steel blade for use with materials which are soft. 


3.5 Hammer and Chisel — Of any convenient size for 
use with samples which are hard enough to shatter. 


3.6 Bottle Sampler — Made of metal with a handle and 
stopper (see Fig. 4). 


3.7 Sample Containers 


3.7.1 Containers for the samples of liquid bituminous 
materials (see Fig. 5) shall be small-mouth cans with 
cork-lined screw caps, except for emulsions. In which case 
they shall be wide-mouth glass jars or bottles. Containers 
for the samples of semi-solid and solid materials shall be 
friction-top cans. 


3.7.2 The size of the sample container used shall be such 
that it is nearly filled by the sample taken just enough 
free space such as 5 to 10 percent of the capacity of the 
container being left to allow for expansion and to enable 
the contents to be mixed by shaking and not allowing 
ageing. 

NOTE — Sample container should be clean, dry and oil free to 

prevent sample contamination. 


4 SAMPLE SIZE 


4.1 The sizes of samples to be taken for testing shall be 
as follows: 


6-5 


O-6 THICK Gi 


NOTE — A tolerance of 10 percent is allowable on dimensions in millimetres. 


Fic. 4 BOTTLE SAMPLER FoR TANK CARS 


Wise 


aS I ' -i -i 
7 MM TIR 


Fic. 5 (A) SAMPLE CONTAINERS FOR BITUMEN BINDERS 


3 


IS 1201 : 2021 


IS 1201 : 2021 


FIG. 5 (B) SAMPLE CONTAINERS FOR BITUMEN 


4.1.1 Liquid Materials 


a) From small containers, cans, drums and barrels — 
One litre for each sample. 


b) From bulk storage tanks and drums — 5 litres. 
4.1.2 Semi-solid or Solid Materials 


a) From barrels; drums; cakes and powdered 
materials in bags — | to 2 kg for each sample. 


b) From bulk — A minimum of 4.5 kg composite or 
average sample. 


5 PROCEDURE AND SCALE OF SAMPLING 


5.1 From Cans or Small Containers, Barrels, Drums 
and Bags 


5.1.1 Liquid Materials — The number of packages 
to be selected for sampling from the lot shall be in 
accordance with col 1 and 2 of Table 1. The sample 
packages shall be selected at random. 


Table 1 Scale of Sampling 
( Clauses 5.1.1 and 5.1.2 ) 


Number of Containers in Number of Containers to be 


the Lot Selected for Sampling 
(1) (2) 
1 1 
2to15 2 
16 to 50 3 
51 to 150 5 
151 to 500 8 
501 and above 13 


5.1.1.1 Composite sample — From each ofthe packages 
selected for sampling a small quantity of material shall 
be withdrawn with the help of a sampling apparatus in 
accordance with the procedure given in 5.1.1.2. The 
quantity so withdrawn from each of the packages shall 
be fully representative and proportional to its contents. 
The material withdrawn from all the packages shall 
be thoroughly mixed together and then the requisite 
quantity for testing shall be withdrawn. This shall be 
the composite sample. An identical composite sample 
if required may also be made keeping as reference 
sample under the joint seals of the purchaser and the 
seller. If the composite sample passes in respect of all 
the requirements of the specification the lot may be 
considered to be in conformity to the requirements of 
the specification. 


5.1.1.2 A sampling apparatus of convenient size shall be 
lowered into the package so that it touches the bottom, 
and if the container contains free water its contents 
shall be rejected and the apparatus is again lowered 
into the package to such a depth as to avoid the water. 
The apparatus shall then be withdrawn as before and 
its contents are used to rinse the sample container and 
then discarded. The apparatus shall next be lowered 
slowly as far as possible into the contents of the drum 
or can, without touching the water layer, if present. The 
apparatus shall then be closed and withdrawn and the 
sample allowed to flow gently and without splashing 
into a sample container. 


5.1.2 Semisolid or Solid Materials — The number 
of packages to be selected for sampling from the lot 
shall be in accordance with col 1 and 2 of Table 1. The 
sample packages shall be selected at random. 


5.1.2.1 From each of the sample packages from the lot 
appropriate quantity shall be taken. For this purpose an 
appropriate sampling apparatus, aid or device may be 
used which may involve use of hammer, chisel, knife 
or spatula. If the material is held in small containers 
with a bung-hole too small to introduce the thief, the 
contents of the container shall be mixed thoroughly 
by shaking and the requisite quantity of sample shall 
be poured out. Care shall be taken to ensure that from 
each container the material taken is fully representative 
and proportional to its contents. The material so taken 
from each of the sample containers shall be thoroughly 
mixed together or melted together if necessary to form 
a combined mass of material from which a suitable 
sample for testing shall be taken. This shall be called 
the composite sample. If required a similar composite 
sample may be taken for purpose of preservation for 
reference under the joint seals of purchaser and the 
seller. The composite sample shall be required to 
pass all the specified requirements in order to declare 
a lot to be in conformity to the requirements of this 
specification. 


5.2 From Rail Tank Wagon and Road Tank Trucks 
or Lorries 


5.2.1 A careful observation of the condition of the 
material in regard to the presence of foam, sediment, 
or free water on top or at the bottom of the material 
in the wagon/truck shall be made immediately before 
sampling, and, if such extraneous materials are 
present in measurable quantities, their volume shall 
be estimated and samples of each shall be taken and 
properly labelled. If possible, the foreign materials 
shall be removed and discarded before sampling. 


5.2.2 Liquid bituminous materials shall, if practicable, 
be sampled before heating, but if heating is necessary, 
at no time shall the temperature exceed that required for 
satisfactory sampling. Semisolid or solid bituminous 
materials shall be rendered fluid by heating. 


5.2.3 When possible, thoroughly mix the material to be 
sampled by circulating for several hours before samples 
are taken. Collect the sample from the draw-off cock at 
the bottom of the tank in the bitumen sampler. When it 
is not possible to mix the contents of the tank, or when 
it is desired to ascertain if the contents of the tank are 
uniform, take samples by means of a bottle sampler 
by the method described in 5.3.1. Close the sample 
container immediately. 


5.2.4 From each tank wagon/truck the requisite 
quantity of material (1 lit from a 20 MT tanker) shall be 
taken to constitute the composite sample for testing, for 
example, 5 numbers of samples from 25 MT bulk tank. 
If the composite sample is found to pass all the tests, the 
material in the tank wagon/truck shall be considered to 
be in conformity to the requirement of the specification. 


IS 1201 : 2021 


If required an identical composite sample may be taken 
for reference. 


5.3 From Bulk Storage 


5.3.1 Liquid Materials and Materials Made Liquid by 
Heating — The inlet and outlet to the storage tank shall 
be closed and a 5-litre sample drawn from the upper, 
middle and bottom contents. The sample may be taken 
from drain cocks on the side of the tank if such are 
available, with the help of a sampler illustrated in Fig. 1 
and when so taken, enough material shall be allowed to 
flow through the drain cocks and discarded to ensure 
a representative sample from the contents of the tank. 
Otherwise samples may be taken by lowering into the 
material a suitable bottle sampler, a satisfactory type 
of which is illustrated in Fig.5. The bottle or can shall 
be fitted with a stopper which shall be removed by a 
string or wire attached to it after it has been lowered to 
the proper depth. The 1 to 5 000 kg lot samples from 
bulk storage may be tested separately for consistency 
in order to detect stratification. They may then be 
combined, thoroughly, mixed, and a 5-litre sample 
taken therefrom for other tests that may be required for 
determining average characteristics of the material. 


5.3.2 Solid Materials in Loose Form — Mix the piece 
representing the total quantity on a clean hard surface 
and proceed as follows: 


Place the broken down samples on a clean impervious 
surface, mix by shoveling and heap into a cone by 
depositing separate small quantities one on top of the 
other, the cone being formed symmetrically throughout, 
with its apex always in the same vertical line. 


Alternatively, shovel the material into a funnel having a 
sort cylindrical stem about 51 mm in diameter. Support 
the funnel in a vertical position above the top of the 
cone, and raise it (without lateral displacement) as the 
cone grows higher to allow the material to flow, out 
gently and not fall from a height. Form a new cone 
twice Ina similar way, flatten the third cone by pressing 
it with a metal sheet or any other suitable appliance, 
the flattening being carried out symmetrically, thus 
giving a mass of approximately uniform thickness and 
diameter. Divide the sample at this stage in quarters by 
pressing through it a metal cross constructed from four 
arms or blades which meet at a common centre, held 
at right angles to each other by stays. Remove a pair 
of opposite quarters completely and reject them. Mix 
the two remaining quarters together thoroughly, reduce 
in bulk by further quartering, and repeat the procedure 
until a final sample of suitable quantity is left. The gross 
sample shall not be less than 25 kg from which shall be 
selected | to 1.5 kg of the composite sample for tests. If 
the composite sample satisfies all the specified tests, the 
material in the lot shall be declared to be in conformity 
to the specified requirements. 


IS 1201 : 2021 


6 PRECAUTIONS 


6.1 In addition to the general precautions given in 6.2, 
in sampling for certain tests, some special precautions 
need to be observed. Such precautions are prescribed in 
the relevant standards for method of tests. 


6.2 A sample shall not include material other than 
that to be sampled and shall not become altered, for 
example by evaporation of volatile constituents or by 
oxidation, in the process of sampling. The following 
precautions shall be observed in sampling: 


a) Official samples shall be taken by, or under the 


immediate supervision of a person of judgment, 
skill and experience in sampling. 


b 


wm 


Sampling of bituminous material is normally 
associated with the risk of heat burns due to 
spilling and splashing of the hot bitumen. It is 
necessary to wear appropriate personal protective 
equipment while collecting the hot samples. 

c) The surrounding area should be adequately 
illuminated, should have safe and easy access for 
collection of the samples. 

d) Presence of hydrogen sulphide in sampling area 

should be tested before starting the sampling 

process. 


e 


wm 


The sampling apparatus, including cords or 
other ancillary gear and sample containers shall 
be dry and free from any substance which may 
contaminate the sample. 


f) The sampling apparatus shall be filled and allowed 
to drain at least twice before drawing the sample 
and the sample container shall be rinsed at least 
twice with the material obtained during the third 
or any subsequent filling of the sampling apparatus 
and shall be allowed to drain before being used to 
contain the actual sample. 


a 


During sampling operations, the material being 
sampled shall be protected, as far as possible, 
from the effects of wind and weather. The sample 
containers shall be closed immediately after the 
sample has been taken. 


8 


h 


wm 


Sampling should be done through a platform 
and the person carrying out the sampling should 
be harnessed securely to the platform and not on 
the truck. Personal Protective Equipment shall be 
worn during sampling. Full body overall with fire 
resistant material, face shield, eye goggles, safety 
helmet, heat resistant gloves, H,S detector, Safety 
Shoes (heat and splash resistant) shall be worn by 
the person carrying out sampling. 

Facilities for safety shower and eye wash are to 
be made available in the immediate vicinity of the 
sampling area. 


wa 


Liquid materials in tanks and other bulk containers 
shall be sampled by the appropriate method 


j 


prescribed in this standard. The sample shall be 
drawn through dip hatches, manholes or other 
opening giving direct and unconfined access to the 
bulk of liquid. Samples shall not be drawn from 
dip-pipes or other fittings. Gauge glasses or drain 
fittings shall not to be used for sampling unless 
specified. 


k 


ha 


Care shall be taken to prevent contamination of 
sample by water or any other foreign material. 
This may also cause unsafe environment of work. 


m 


har] 


If there is any reason to suspect that a sample or 
a set of samples may not be fully representative, 
a further sample or set of samples shall be taken. 
The necessity for taking a second or ‘check’ 
sample, or set of samples, generally arises due to 
failure or faulty labelling. 


n) All metal sampling gear should be made of 
non-spark generating materials. 

p) Rubber stoppers or corks shall not be used for 
closing vessels containing samples. 

q) Care shall be taken to prevent contamination of 
the stock, for example, by dirt or other extraneous 
matter. 


ig 


wa 


It is advisable to take more than one set of samples 
for check purposes in case of dispute, leakage or 
breakage in transit or for any other reasons. 


S 


nN 


Every possible precaution against fire hazard shall 
be taken when sampling flammable materials like 
cutback bitumen, etc. 


NOTE — The person involved in sampling should use 
adequate Personal Protective Equipment as per the Material 
Safety Data Sheets (MSDSs) of the material to be sampled. 


7 LABELLING, PACKING AND STORAGE OF 
SAMPLES AND SAMPLE CONTAINERS 


7.1 Labelling 


Sample containers shall be labelled. Gummed labels 
may be used on glass surfaces but in general wired-on 
labels shall be preferred. Labels shall be permanently 
marked. The following information shall be recorded on 
the label: 


a) Sample reference number; 
b) Place at which sample was drawn; 
c) Date of sampling; 


d) Initials or other identification mark of sampling 
officer; 


e) Grade of material; 
f) Quantity represented by sample; 


g) Tank number, package number and type, name of 
the point of dispatch; 


h) Type of container from which sample was drawn 
and type of sample (upper/middle/average etc); and 


j) The name of the manufacturer/supplier. 


7.2 Packing 


Sample containers shall be sealed properly to prevent 
tampering. The type of packing used for samples which 
are to be transported depends largely on the means of 
conveyance. Wooden cases or strong cardboard cartons 
are recommended for cans containing samples. The 
space round the sample container shall be filled with 
material, such as saw dust; when such materials are 


IS 1201 : 2021 


used, the cork or stopper shall be covered with a paper 
or viscose cap in order to prevent contamination of the 
sample on opening. 


7.3 Storage 


Samples of materials which may be affected by light 
or heat shall be stored in a cool, dark place, periodical 
examination shall be made for leakage. 


IS 1201 : 2021 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Bitumen, Tar and Related Products Sectional Committee, PCD 06 


Organization 


CSIR-Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 
Airports Authority of India, New Delhi 


Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited, R & D 
Centre,Noida 


Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited, Kochi 
Refinery 


Birla Institute of Technology and Science, Pilani 
CSIR-Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 
CSIR-Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 


CSIR-North East Institute of Science and Technology, 
Jorhat 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Chennai Petroleum Corporation Limited, Chennai 
Dilip Buildcon Limited, Bhopal 
Directorate General Border Roads, New Delhi 


Directorate General of Quality Assurance, Ministry of 
Defence, New Delhi 


Engineer in Chief Branch, New Delhi 


G R Infra-Projects Limited, Gurugram 
GP Global Asphalt Private Limited, New Delhi 
Highways Research Station, Chennai 


Hindalco Industries Limited, Mumbai 


Hindustan Colas Private Limited, Mumbai 


Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited 
(HP Green R & D Center), Bengaluru 


Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


Indian Institute of Petroleum, Dehradun 


Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai 
Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 


Representative(s) 


PROF SATISH CHANDRA (Chairman) 


SHRI SUPRIO GOSH 
SHRI VINOD KUMAR SHARMA (Alternate) 


Ms SONAL MAHESHWARI 


SHRI C. SHANMUGANATHAN 


SHRI ADALAZHAGAN K. 


SHRI SRIDHAR RAJU 
Ms RAJANI LAKHANI 
DR AMBICA BEHL 


DR SHASHI D. BARUAH 
DR B. P. BARUAH (Alternate) 


SHRI DIVAKAR AGRAWAL 


SHRI H. RAMAKRISHNAN 
DR V. SELVAVATHI (Alternate) 


SHRI B. B. KAMESWARA RAO 
SHRI ANUSH K. C. (Alternate) 


SHRI UMAKANT KUMAR 
SHRI ASHOK KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI VIVEKANAND 
SHRI ANIL KUMBHARE (Alternate I) 
SHRI SACHIN VINAYAK ZOPE (Alternate II) 


SHRI O. P. SRIVATAVA 
SHRI R. JAYAPRASAD (Alternate) 


SHRI U. C. GUPTA 
SHRI RAJESH KUMAR JAIN 


SHRI T. S. SUNDAR 
SHRI R. GEETHA (Alternate) 


SHRI HARSHAD KUMAR PANDIT 


SHRI K. G. RANGANATHA 
Suri T. K. SUBHAASH (Alternate) 


Suri B. Ravi 
SHRI K. R. KRISHNA (Alternate ) 


SHRI SANTOSH DHAKU BHOGALE 


SHRI MANOJ SRIVASTAVA 
DR KAMAL Kumar (Alternate) 


Dr DHARAMVEER SINGH 


Dr ARAVIND SWAMY 


Organization 
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 


Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 
Indian Oil Corporation (R & D Centre), Faridabad 


Indian Oil Corporation Limited-Refineries and 
Pipelines Division, New Delhi 


Indian Oil Corporation Limited, New Delhi 
Indian Road Congress, New Delhi 


Indian Oil Total Private Limited, Mumbai 


Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, 
New Delhi 


National Rural Roads Development Agency, 
New Delhi 


National Test House, Kolkata 


Nayara Energy Limited, Mumbai 


Om Infracon Private Limited, Guwahati 


Ooms Polymer Modified Bitumen Private Limited, 
Gurugram 


Shell Bitumen India Private Limited, Gurugram 
Zydex Industries Limited 


In Personal Capacity 
BIS Directorate General 


IS 1201 : 2021 


Representative(s) 


Dr J. MURALI KRISHNAN 
Dr A. VEERARAGHAVAN (Alternate) 


SHRI SHAM SUNDAR RAVINDRANATH 


SHRI DHANESH KUMAR 
DR I. Devorta (Alternate) 


SHRI S. B. LAHKAR 
Suri K. MEDHI (Alternate I) 
Ms K. GEETHASHREE (Alternate II) 


SHRI N. S. RAMAN 


SHRI S. K. NIRMAL 
SHRI R. V. PATIL (Alternate) 


SHRI GAURAV GOGNE 
DR PANKAJ KUMAR JAIN (Alternate) 


SHRI VARUN AGGARWAL 
SHRI SANJEEV KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI B. C. PRADHAN 


SHRI VINAY KUMAR 


SHRI DHIRAJ GONDALIA 
SHRI MRIGANKA TARAFDAR (Alternate) 


SHRI A. N. Das 
Suri MANISH Basa (Alternate I) 
SHRI DIGAMBAR DEKA (Alternate II) 


Suri B. R. TYAGI 
SHRI PALASH KATHAL (Alternate) 


SHRI NILANJAN SARKER 


SHRI VISHAL SALUJA 
SHRI HIMANSHU AGARWAL (Alternate I) 
SHRI AJAY RANKA (Alternate II) 


DR P. S. KANDHAL 


SHRIMATI NAGAMANI T., SCIENTIST ‘E’ AND HEAD (PCD) 


[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio )] 


Member Secretary 


SHRIMATI D. UMA 
SCIENTIST ‘D’ (PCD), BIS 


(Continued from second cover) 


However, the Committee responsible for the formulation of standards in the field of bitumen, tar and related products 
decided to publish these Indian standards separately for each test so as to make it user friendly. Accordingly, 
second revision of the standard, IS 1201 ‘Methods for testing tar and bituminous materials — Sampling’ has been 
taken up to formulate individual standard. 


In this revision, the following major modifications have been made: 

a) Scope has been extended for Bituminous binders and emulsions; 

b) The term ‘Top Sample’ has been renamed as ‘Upper Level Sample (2.2)’; 

c) Terms ‘Pipe line sample’ and ‘All level sample’ have been removed; and 

d) Precautions (6) has been modified; 
Sampling involves the act, process and technique of selecting a representative part or portion of a bulk or lot or 
mass for the purpose of determining parameters or characteristics of the whole. Samples are taken for the purpose 
of visual assertion and laboratory examination or for preservation for record. The examination may be made to 
determine 

a) the characteristic quality of the material in the lot, 

b) the extent of variation in quality in the different portions of the material, and 

c) conformity to the specifications/specified requirements. 
The Composition of the Committee responsible for formulation of this standard is given at Annex A. 


In reporting the results of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or 
calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical 
values ( revised )’. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: PCD 06 (15429). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T, Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


