May 1999 


IS 5182 ( Part 4) : 1999 
IRAT HITE (Reaffirmed 2014) 
ay WENO HTT Prat (Reaffirmed 2019) 
we 4 Tela avait 
( Tea gaer ) 
Indian Standard 


METHODS FOR MEASUREMENT OF 
AIR POLLUTION 


PART 4 SUSPENDED PARTICULATE MATTER 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 13.040.01 


© BIS 1999 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 


Price Group 3 


Air Environmental Protection Sectional Committee, CHD 32 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 4) (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 


finalized by the Air Environmental Protection Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division 
Council. 


Serious damage may be caused by polluting substances discharged into the atmosphere from various sources. 
Such emissions can adversely affect agricultural land and crops, can soil clothing and building, can corrode 
metal installations and can have a harmful effect on-the health of the community. 


The pollutants emitted into the air may be arbitrarily classifed as follows: 


a) Solid material, such as grit, coarse enough to settle out fairly rapidly. The quantity of such material 
may be assessed by the method described in IS 5182 (Part 1) : 1969 ‘Methods for measurement of air 
pollution:Part 1 Dustfall’. 


b) Finer material which tends to remain suspended in the air, but can be collected by filtration. Heavy 
concentration of such materials can limit visibility or cause blackening of buildings and clothing. A 
method of quantitative assessment is given in this standard. 


c) Gaseous impurities, which can be separated from the air by chemical means. An example of such 
impurities is sulphur dioxide, which causes corrosion and presents a health hazard. A method for the 
determination of this pollutant is given in IS : 5182 (Part 2) : 1969 ‘Methods for measurement of air 
pollution: Part 2 Sulphur dioxide (under revision)’. 


Suspended matter.means all particulate material which is too small in size to have an appreciable falling velocity 
and which, therefore, persists in the atmosphere for lengthy periods. 


Suspended particulate matter consists of smoke, dust, fumes and droplets of viscous liquids. Suspended 
particulate matter varies in size from well below 1 micron to approximately 100 microns. These arise from 
many sources, such as incomplete combustion of solid, liquid or gaseous fuels; wastes from metallurgical, 
chemical and refining operations; incineration and numerous other processes. Besides, natural sources also 
contribute suspended materials like spores, salt water spray, pollens, etc. 


Among the effects of particulate pollutants are reduction of visibility, soiling and deterioration of materials, 
plant damage, irritation of tissues, and possible damage to health. 


The determination of composition of suspended particulate matter in the atmosphere sheds light on the nature 
of particulate pollution. A detailed chemical analysis of particulate samples from urban and rural areas provides 
basic data that is valuable in the overall assessment of air pollution. Such data may be useful in pin-pointing 
sources of pollution in predicting potential health effects. 


This Indian Standard was published in 1973; however, in view of experience gained so far, the technical 


committee decided to revise this standard. In the revised version, correction factors for pressure and temperature, 
have been introduced. 


In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or 


calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical 
values (revised). 


IS 5182 ( Part 4) : 1999 


Indian Standard 


METHODS FOR MEASUREMENT OF 
AIR POLLUTION 


PART 4 SUSPENDED PARTICULATE MATTER 


(First Revision) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard (Part 4) prescribes a method for the 
determination of concentration of suspended 
particulate matter in air. 


1.1.1 This method gives a direct measure of the mass 
of the materials filtered out from the sample of air. 


1.1.2 This method does not cover particle counting or 
sizing. 


2 REFERENCE 


The following Indian Standard contains provisions 
which through reference in this text, constitutes 
provision of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the edition indicated was valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based on 
this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent edition of the 
standard indicated below: 


IS No. 
4167: 1980 


Title 


Glossary of terms relating to air 
pollution (first revision) 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard the definitions given 
in IS 4167 shall apply. 


4 FIELD OF APPLICATION 


4.1 Sampling flow rate shall not be less than 0.8 m?/ 
min. Average flow rates within 1.1 -1.4 m /min over 
24 h sampling, shall give satisfactory results. If 
particulate levels are unusually high, a satisfactory 
sample may be obtained in 6-8 hours. For 
determination of average concentrations of suspended 
particulates in ambient air, a standard sampling period 
of 24 hours is recommended. 


4.2 Mass is determined to the nearest 0.1 mg, air flow 
rates to the nearest 0.03 m°/min. and time to the nearest 
2 min and mass concentration reported to the nearest 
microgram per cubic metre. 


5 INTERFERENCES 


5.1 Particulate matter which is oily, such as 
photochemical smog or wood smoke, may block the 
filter and cause a rapid drop in air flow to a 
non-uniform rate. Dense fog or high humidity can 
cause the filter to become too wet and severely reduce 
the air flow through the filter. 


5.2. Glass-fibre filters are comparatively insensitive to 
change in relative humidity, but collected pariculates 
can be hygroscopic. 


5.3 Whenever the concentration of particulates is 
abnormally high, there may be loss of particulates 
because of the weak adhesion of the particles to the 
filter. 


6 APPARATUS 
6.1 Sampler 


The sampler shall be composed of three main parts, 
namely: 

a) the face plate gasket and retaining ring, 

b) the filter adapter assembly, and 

c) the motor fan unit. 


The sampler shall be capable of drawing ambient air 
through a portion of a clean glass fibre filter of 
8" x 10" size with an effective area of not less 
than 400 cm? ata flow rate of 1 m*/min with a 
permissible variation of 0.3 m/min, over 24 hours. 
The motor shall be able to operate continuously for 
24-hour period with input voltage unit through 
automatic voltage stabilizer giving an output voltage 
ranging from 190-230 V at 50 - 60 Hz and shall be 
properly earthed. The housing for the motor unit may 
be of any convenient construction as long as the 
assembly remains air-tight and leak-free. 

NOTES 

<1 Replace brushes before they are worn out to the point where 

damage to the motor can occur. 

2 Replace when the margins of samples are no jonger sharp. 

The gasket may be sealed to the retaining plate with rubber 

cement or double-sided adhesive tape. 


IS 5182 ( Part 4 ) : 1999 


6.2 Sampler Shelters 


It is important that the sampler shall be properly 
installed in a suitable shelter. The shelter is subjected 
to extremes of temperature, humidity, and all types of 
air pollutants. For these reasons, the materials of the 
shelter shal] be chosen carefully. The sampler shall be 
mounted vertically in the shelter so that the glass-fibre 
filter is parallel with the ground. The shelter shall be 
provided with a roof so that the filter is protected from 
precipitation and debris. The internal arrangement 
and configuration of a suitable shelter with a gable roof 
are shown in Fig. 1. 


The clearance area between the main housing and the 
roof at its closest point shall be 580 + 195 cm’. 
The main housing shall be rectangular, with 
dimensions of about 29 cm x 36 cm. 

6.3 Flow Metering Device 


This device is usually a rotameter or U-tube 
manometer or orifice meter and shall have an accuracy 


of 0.03 m*/min in the flow range of 0.8-1.7 m/min 
when calibrated against a standard orifice meter. The 
calibration of the device shall be checked at least once 
in 3 months. 


6.4 Orifice Calibration Unit 


This consists of a metal tube of 7.6 cm internal 
diameter and 15.9 cm in length, provided with a static 
pressure tap 5.1 cm from one end. The tube end 
nearest to the pressure tap is flanged to about 10.8 cm 
in external diameter with a male thread of same size 
as the inlet end of the high volume sampler. A single 
metal plate, 9.2 cm in diameter and 0.24 cm thick, 
having a central orifice of 2.9 cm in diameter, is held 
in place at the air inlet end with a female threaded ring. 
The other end of the tube is flanged to hold a loose 
female threaded coupling which screws on the inlet of 
the sampler. A gasket and five multi-hole resistance 
plates (5, 7, 10, 13 and 18 holes) are positioned 
between the orifice and sampler. The 18 hole metal 


FIG. | SAMPLER AND SHELTER 


plate simulates the resistance of a clean glass-fibre 
filter while other plates represent a filter with 
increasingly heavy dust loading. An orifice 
calibration unit is shown in Fig. 2. 


6.5 Positive Displacement Meter 


Calibrated in cubic meters to be used as a primary 
standard. 


6.6 Barometer 


Capable of measuring atmospheric pressure to the 
nearest millimetre of mercury. 


6.7 Filter Conditioning Equipment 


Balance room or desiccator maintained within 
20-30°C with less than 50 percent relative humidity. 


7 REAGENTS 
7.1 Filter Media 


Glass-fibre filters or equivalent having a coilection 
efficiency of at least 99 percent for particles of 0.3 um 
diameter shall be used for the quantitative 
measurement of concentrations of suspended 
particulates. If a more detailed analysis is 
contemplated, care shall be exercised to use filters that 
contain low background concentrations of the 
pollutant being measured. Careful quality control is 
required to determine background levels of these 
pollutants. 


8 SAMPLING 
8.1 Filter Preparation 


Expose each filter to the ight source and inspect for 
pinholes. particles or other imperfections. Filters 


ORIFICE 


IS 5182 ( Part 4): 1999 


having visible defects shall not be used. A small brush 
is useful for removing loose particles. Equilibrate the 
filters in the filter conditioning environment for 
24 hours. Weigh the filters to the nearest one-tenth 
milligram and record the tare weight and filter 
identification number. Folding the filter before 
collection of the samples, as far as possible. shall be 
avoided. 


8.2 Sample Collection 


Open the shelter, loosen the wing nuts and remove the 
retaining ring from the filter holder. Install a weighed 
and numbered glass-fibre filter in position with the 
rough side up, replace the retaining ring without 
disturbing the filter and fasten secures. 
Undertightening will allow air leakage, overtightening 
will damage the sponge rubber gasket. During 
inclement weather, the sampler may be removed to a 
protected area for filter change. 


8.2.1 Close the roof of the shelter, run the sampler for 
about 5 minutes, connect the flaw-metering device ta 
the nipple on the back of the sampler. and take the 
reading of the float fixed with the flow-metering 
device kept in a vertical position. Estimate the 
reading to the nearest whole number. If the ball is 
fluctuating too rapidly, tlt the flow-metering device 
and slowly straighten it until the float gives a constant 
reading. Disconnect the flow-metering device from 
the nipple and record the initial flow-metering device 
reading and the starting time and date. on the filter 
folder. 


RESISTANCE PLATES 


Fic. 2 ORIFICE CALIBRATION UNIT 


IS 5182 ( Part 4 ) : 1999 


8.2.2 Sample for 24 hours, and take a final flow-meter 
reading at the end of the sampling period. Record the 
final flow-meter reading, ending time and date on type 
filter holder. Remove the filter retainer as described 
above and carefully remove the filter from the holder, 
touching only the outer edges. Fold the filter 
length-wise so that only surfaces with collected 
particulates are in contact and place in an envelope. 
Record on the envelop, the filter number, location and 
any other factors such as meteorological conditions 
etc, that might affect the final results. 


8.3 Analysis 


Equiltbrate the exposed filters for 24 hours in the filter 
conditioning environment and then weigh again. 
The weighed filters can be used later for detailed 
chemical analyses. 


9 PROCEDURE 
9.1 Calibration 


Since only a small portion of the total air sampled 
passes through the flow-meter during measurement, the 
flow-meter must be calibrated against actual air flow 
with the orifice calibration unit. Before the orifice 
calibration unit can be used to calibrate the flowmeter, 
the orifice calibration unit itself must be calibrated 
against the positive displacement primary standard. 


9.1.1 Orifice Calibration Unit 


Attach the orifice calibration unit to the intake end of 
the positive displacement primary standard and attach 
a high volume biower unit to the exhaust end of the 
primary standard. Connect one end of a differential 
manometer to the differential pressure tap of the 
orifice calibration unit and leave the other end open to 
the atmosphere. Operate the high volume 
motor-blower unit so that a series of different, but 
constant airflows, usually six, are obtained for definite 
time periods. Record the reading of the different 
constant airflows, which are obtained by placing a 
series of loads, one at a time, between the calibration 
unit and the primary standard. Place the orifice, before 
the inlet reduces the pressure, at the inlet of the primary 
standard below atmosphere. A correction must be 
made, therefore, for the increase in volume caused by 
this decreased inlet pressure. Attach one end of a 
second differential manometer to the inlet pressure tap 
of the primary standard and leave the other end of the 
manometer open to the atmosphere. During each 
of the constant airflow measurements made above, 
measure the true inlet pressure of the primary standard 
with this second differential manometer. Measure the 
atmospheric pressure and temperature. Correct the 
measured air volume to true air volume as given 
in 10.1, then obtain the true air flow rate, Q, as given 
in 10.1.2 Plot the graph for the differential manometer 
readings (of the orifice unit) against Q. 


9.1.2 High Volume Sampler 


Assemble a high volume sampler with a clean filter in 
place and run for at least 5 minutes. Attach a 
flow-metering device , read the float, adjust so that the 
float gives a reading of 65 and seal the adjusting 
mechanism so that it cannot be changed easily. Shut 
off the motor, remove the filter and attach the orifice 
calibration unit in its place. Operate the high volume 
sampler at a series of different but constant rate of air 
flows, usually six. Take the readings of the differential 
manometer from the orifice calibration unit and record 
the readings of the flowmeter for each flow-rate. 
Measure the pressure and temperature of the ambient 
atmosphere. Convert the differential manometer 
readings into m/min, that is Q; then plot a graph for 
flowmeter reading against Q. 


A modification of the high volume sampler 
incorporating a method for recording the actual 
airflow over the entire sampling period is also 
acceptable for measuring the concentration of 
suspended particulates. This modification consists of 
an exhaust orifice meter assembly connected through 
a transducer to a system for continuously recording 
airflow on a circular chart. The volume of air sampled 
is calculated by the following equation: 


V=Q.T 
where 
; 3n; 
Q = average sampling rate, m`/min; and 
T = sampling time, in min. 


The average sampling rate, Q, is determined from the 
recorder chart by estimation, if the flow-rate does not 
vary more than 0.11 m/min during sampling period. 
If the flow-rate does vary more than 0.11 m/min 
during the sampling period, read the flow rate from the 
chart at 2 hour intervals and take the average. 


10 CALCULATIONS 
10.1 True Air Volume 
True volume of air at atmos- 


x š 3 
pheric temperature, in m Va = 


Pa-P 
Lae x Vm 
a 


Pa = barometric pressure, in mm of mercury; 

Pm = drop in pressure at inlet to reference 
orifice, in mm, of mercury; and 

Vm = volume measured using the standard 


a ; 3 
orifice, in m`. 
10.1.1 Convertion Factors 


Inches of mercury x 25.4 = millimetres of mercury; 
Inches of water x 73.48 x 107 = inches of mercury; 
Cubic feet of air x 0.028 4 = cubic metres of air. 


10.1.2 True Air Flow Rate 


1 z R 
True air flow rate,Q, in m /min = 


where 
T = duration of sampling, in min. 
10.2 Sample Volume Conversion 


Convert the initial and final flow-meter readings to 
true air flow-rate, Q, using the calibration curve 
established in accordance with 9.1.1. 


10.3 Calculation of Volume of Air Sampled 
3 itO) | y 


Volume of air sampled, V, in m" = 


2 
where 
Qi = initial air flow rate in m/min, 
Q2 = final air flow rate in m°/min, and 
T = sampling time, in min. 


10.4 Corrections for Pressure or Temperature 


If the pressure or temperature during calibration of 
high volume sampler is substantially different from the 
pressure or temperature during orifice calibration, a 
correction of the flow rate, Q may be required. If the 
pressures differ by not more than 15 percent and the 
temperatures, in °C, differ by not more than 100 
percent, the error in the uncorrected flow-rate will be 
not more than 15 percent. If necessary, obtain the 
corrected flow- rate as given below. This correction 
applies only to orifice meters having a constant 
overflow coefficient. This coefficient for the 
calibrating orifice described in 6.4, has been shown 
experimentally to be constant over the normal 
operating range of the high volume sampler, of 0.6 to 
2.2 m /min. 


Calculate corrected flow rate according to the formula: 


Tax Py 
Ti x P2 


Q2=Q1 


IS 5182 ( Part 4) : 1999 


where 

Q2 = corrected flow rate, m/min; 

Qı = flow-rate during high volume calibration, 
m/min; 

Tı = absolute temperature during orifice unit 
calibration, K; 

Pi = barometric pressure during orifice unit 
calibration, in mm Hg; 

T, = absolute temperature during high volume 
calibration, °K; and 

P+ = barometric pressure during high volume 


calibration, in mm Hg. 


10.5 Calculation of Mass Concentration of 
Suspended Particulate Matter 


M. = 6 
sp = Š 2— Mi) x 10 
V 
where 
SP = mass concentration of suspended 
: š 3 
particulates in g/m”. 
M, = initial mass of filter, in g; 
Mı = final mass of filter, in g; 
V = air volume sample, in m°; and 
10° = conversion factor from grams to 


micrograms. 
Masses are determined to the nearest 0.1 mg; airflow 
rates are determined to the nearest 0.03 m/min; times 
are recorded to the nearest 2 min; and mass 
concentrations are reported to the nearest ug/m’. 


11 PRECISION, ACCURACY AND STABILITY 


Based upon collaborative testing, the relative standard 
deviation for single analyst variation, or repeatability 
of the method, is 3.0 percent. The corresponding 
value for multilaboratory variation, or reproducibility 
of the method is 3.7 percent. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to 
promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality 
certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in 
any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in 
the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, 


type or grade designations. Enquiries realting to copyright be addressed to the Director 
(Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards 
are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such 
review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed. 
itis taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession 


of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 'BIS Handbook’ and 
‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. CHD 32 ( 144). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters : 

. Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110 002 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 
Telephones : 323 01 31, 323 33 75, 323 94 02 (Common to ali offices) 
Regional Offices : Telephone 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg { 323 76 17 

NEW DELHI 110 002 323 38 41 

Eastern : 1/14 C. L T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi { 337 84 99, 337 85 61 
CALCUTTA 700 054 337 86 26, 337 91 20 

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160 022 { 60 38 43 
60 20 25 

Southern : C.I T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600 113 £235 02 16, 235 04 42 
235 15 19, 235 23 15 


Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) { 832 92 95, 832 78 58 
MUMBAI 400 093 832 78 91, 832 78 92 


Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. 
LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 


Printed at : Prabhat Offset Press. New Delhi-2 


