( Reaffirmed 2003 )

IS : 11956- 1987

Indian Standard
GUIDELINES FOR THE PREPARATION OF TRADE CATALOGUES
Publications
SHRI

and Graphic

Technology

Sectional

Committee,

EC
of

10 Urban

Chairman
M. J. SINUH Members
SRRI

Representing

Directorate of Printing ( Ministry Development ), New Delhi
Directorate of Government Stationery, Government of Born bay Publications & Information New Delhi

R. B. ALVA

Printing & Maharashtra, ( CSIR ),

SERI G. D. DHOND ( AIternatc) SHRI S. P. A~WAFJTA SHRI D. N. RAI BHATNACU~ SHRI M. B. R0BAnE SHRI V. N. CHHABRA

Directorate

SHHI P. S. SHANKAR ( Alternatr)

Punjab National Bank, New Delhi GoverIxbyt Institute of Printing

Technology,

The Statesman Ltd, New Delhi Institute Indian of Mass Communication, New Delhi Department of Education (Ministry of Human SRRI TALEWAR GIRI Resources Development )$ New Delhi Directorate of Advertising & Visual Publicity SHRI C. L. GUPTA ( Ministry of Information & Broadcasting ), New Delhi Institution of Engineers ( India), Calcutta COL KRISHAN LAL SHRI VISHVANATH MALHOTRA All India Hindi Publishers Association, Varanasi SHRI KRISHNACHANDER HERI ( Alternate ) Vakil & Sons Limited, Bombay SHRI A~UN MEHTA Bennett, Coleman & Co Ltd, New Delhi SHRI SU~HIK MEHTA SHRI S. S. MURT~~Y Defence Scientific Information and Documentation Centre ( Ministry of Defence ), Delhi SRRI G. S. SnAsMA f Alternate) Srrw V. V. Nnxon A. P. Government Text Book Press, Hyderabad SHRI G. R. RAO ( Altcmate ) National Council of Educational Research and SHRIJAIPAL NANQIA Training, New Delhi SHRI C. N. RAO ( AItcrnatc ) Office of the Director of Printing, Stationery & SHIU D. NARASIMHAIAII Publications, Bangalore Plto~ M. R. DUA ( Contintred 0~ Page 2 ) Q Copyright 1987 BUREAU This publication is protected OF INDIAN STANDARDS of 1957) and under the Indian Copyright Act (XIV

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS:11956-1987
McmbCrS
SHRI T. SATISH U. PAI SHRI P. BHASKER Rno

Representing

Manipal Power Press, Manipal ( Alternate ) College of Vocational Studies, University of DR R. D. PAIWAR Delhi, Delhi Indian National Scientific Documentation Centre SHRI V. RAMACHANDRAN ( CSIR ), New Delhi SHRI PRADEEP BANERJEE ( Alternate ) Institute of Printing Technology, Madras SHRI K. MOHAN RAO SHRI M. N. SUBRAMANIAN ( Alternats ) National Book Trust, India, New Delhi SHRI U. PHABHA~AR RAO Directorate of Printing & Stationery, GovernREPRESENTATIVE ment of Uttar Pradesh, Allahabad Thomson Press ( India ) Ltd, New Delhi Sa~r A. K. ROY Federation of Indian Publishers, New Delhi SHRI S. K. SACKDEVA SERI MOHAN PRIMLANI ( Alternate ) Paper and Its Products (Excluding Packaging SHRIK.L.SAHOAL Materials ) Sectional Committee, CDC 15, BIS SHRI 0. L. DUWAL ( Altemafe j Regional Institute of Printing Technology, SHRI D. SEN Calcutta SHRI P. SEN ( Alternate ) Associated Artists, New Delhi SHRI N. N. SETW~ All India Federation of Master Printers, New SERI V. SETHURAM Delhi Pusa Polytechnic (Delhi Administration), New SHRI V. K. SINHA GARDE Delhi SHRI B. D. MENDIKATTA (Alternate ) Air-India, Bombay SHRI A. N. SRIDHAB Publications Division ( Ministry of Information SERI H. H. N. TANDON & Broadcasting ), New Delhi Northern Regional Institute Printing of SERI TARKESHWAR PRASAD Technology, Allahabad SHRI SHABXIM AXMAD ( Alternate ) Macn$ll,n Company of India Limited, New SHRI RAVI VYAS e * Director General, BIS ( Ex-oficio Member) SHRI K.C. SRARMA, Director ( Pub ) Secretav SHRI J. C. GERA Joint Director (Pub), BIS Panel for

Presentation of Information Manuals, EC 10 : P 3
Office

in Technical

Conv6na
SHRI D. NARASIBlHlIAH Members
SHRI V. S. PRABHAKAR RAO SHRI P. PRATAPLINQ AM

of the Director of Printing, Publications, Bangalore

Stationery and

SHRI M. RANGA~EAI SHRI K. L. RAYADAU ( Alternate ) SHRI N. SRIRIVASAMURTHY (Altrrnatd)

Central Machine Tool Institute, Bangalore Madura Coats, Limited, Bangalore HMT Limited, Bangalore

2

IS : 11956- 1987

Indian Standard
GUIDELINES FOR THE PREPARATION OF TRADE CATALOGUES
0. FOREWORD
Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 25 March 1987, after the draft finalized by the Publications and Graphic Technology Sectional Committee had been approved by the Executive Committee. 0.2 Trade catalogue contain information on selection and use of which includes materials, processes, etc. products, As such a trade catalogue should communicate to the potential purchasers and users, in a concise and precise manner, all the required information about the product to enable them to take a decision in selecting and using the appropriate product without loosing sight of other competitors/ A uniform presentation of information enables users manufacturers. as design, purchase, inspection, erection, assembly and ( such maintenance staff) to compare similar products and decide the suitability of one for a particular requirement. 0.3 It is difficult to demarcate useful technical information from advertising or sales information, because technical information also forms part of advertisement or sales information. However, in the interest of the manufacturer, it is suggested that advertising, information and technical information should not be mixed up on the same sheet. 0.4 This guide will help the product manufacturer/producer of the catalogue to communicate the required information in a clearly This guide in no way understood, logical and consistent manner. restricts the freedom of the product manufacturer/producer of the catalogue. 0.5 A blend of presentation techniques, writing, illustrating and production should be used so as to make the communication process The basic objective of making effective and appropriate to the user. essential facts accessible in the shortest possible time may not be achieved unless all aspects of presentation are considered and the best solution to the users' needs identified. 3

0.1 This

IS : 11956- 1987
0.6 Catalogues for different markets ( for example home and overseas, or developed and under developed countries ) and for different products ( for example consumer products and industrial/engineering Hence the manufacturer may adopt only products ) may be required. such of the clauses of this standard to suit this specific requirements.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard provides guidelines presentation of information in trade guidelines relating to publication of trade
2. TERMINOLOGY for the catalogues. catalogues. preparation and It also includes

2.1 For
apply-

the

purpose

of

this

standard

the

following

definitions

shall

2.2 Trade Catalogue - Any publication which conveys to the buyer/user for the selection of a suitable product. 2.3 Book - Book includes every volume, part or division and pamphlet, in any language and every sheet of music, plan separately printed ( see also IS : 796- 1966* ). 2.4

information

of a volume, map, chart or

Booklet -

A document

which or

has covers without

but no spine. covers or spine ( see also

2.5 Pamphlet IS : 796-1966*).

-

A sheet

sheets

2.6 Product -

Any material or item of any complexity ranging from raw material to a finished product or to a complete engineering system, which is offered for sale. The term also includes services having no material content. 3. CONTENTS
trade catalogue may contain any or all of the following The purpose of each category of categories of information as indicated. information is given below: Category a) Identification and purpose To Purjose identify the product define the purpose and

3.1 A

*Glossary of cataloguing terms (Jirrl revision ). 4

IS :11956-1987
Category Purfose To describe its function and use to facilitate comparison of performance describe applications the technical order details data of

b) cl

Functional

data

Applications

To

4 Specifications e) Ordering information and/or aftersales f) Technical
services

To enumerate To facilitate To

placement of after-

inform availability sales service

d h) 3 k)

Handling ( installation Operation Parts lists

data

instructions )

To detail the handling of product such as transit, stages at installation To instruct on all aspects operation and maintenance To facilitate parts and location identification of

and maintenance

Modification

details

To

record changes and provide modification procedures

4. PRESENTATION

AND

STYLE

4.1 The matter

should be presented in an organized and consistent way to provide information which is technically accurate and easy-to-use. Information about related products should be properly grouped and frequently consulted data should be similarly located on the pages for A clear statement of limitations and warnings/ each product. precautions should be given in appropriate sections or grouped under one heading to prevent any possible misuse of the product. 4.1.1 Wherever necessary, the relevant data should by figures, sketches, drawings, photographs, etc. 4.1.2 The imperative form shoultl voice should be used for descriptive be used matter. bc supplemented

for instructions

and active

4.1.3 The extent of information provided will depend on the nature will not require any of the product and users' needs; some products while others may require only some of the supporting information, Accordingly, the producer should select categories mentioned in 3.1. 5

IS : 11956- 1987
the type of the documents ( book or booklet, appropriate to the product being described. or pamphlet ) whichever is

4.1.4 Ultimately, the information provided should aim at stimulating the desire of the user/purchaser for more information and should act as prelude to further enquiries/discussions paving way for liaison. 4.2 General Information - The following applicable, may be given in the catalogue: a) Reference number of the catalogue; information, wherever

b) Date of publication; c) Title d) Brand e) Name f) of the catalogue name, if any; including designation/model;

of the organization; for obtaining copies of the catalogue; catalogue;

Instructions

g) Any limitations h) Record j)

on use of the

of amendments; cataloguc (for example, updating

Notes on the use of the procedure ), if any; and

k) List of supplementary or associated publications ( for example, standards and specifications of other nations/bodies adopted for the manufacture of the product ). 4.2.1 Brand Name -The brand name of the product should be given in full. Where several products share a brand name, brand name of of each individual product should be separately identified, wherever Care should be taken in designing and printing the brand applicable. name, product name and the manufacturer's name in such a way that they are easily, clearly and quickly distinguished by the users. 4.2.2 If the catalogue is in the form of a book, given on the spine of the book. 4.2.3 If the catalogue name of the organization is in the form should appear the title should also be

of a booklet or pamphlet, the on the edge of the back cover.

4.2.4 Reference Number of Trade Catalogue - A trade catalogue should be reference number for ease of identification. given a simple The reference number shall be given on the top right hand corner of the back cover. 6

IS : 11956 - 1987 items given 4.3 Cover - Where a cover is provided, on the cover. to 4.2(c) should be indicated The cover manner. presented in a simple and visually attractive page should be given for catalogue 4.4 Title Page -Title It shall include the following: more than 20 pages. a) Reference b) Model c) Title, d) Date e) Name of publication, and address and of manufacturer/supplier. number, of product, in 4.2(a) should be

containing

or designation

4.5 Contents Page - The contents page should give a list of the main section headings in the order of presentation and indicating the page on which they are found. 5. PRODUCTION OF THE CATALOGUE

5.1 Size -The size of the document should be one of the sizes in a series, preferably A4 (210 X 297 mm), specified in IS : 1064-1980*. Any drawing bigger than A4 size may also be included after suitably folding to A4 size. Kinematic schemes, electrical or hydraulic circuits may be accommodated in A3 or A4 sheets. 5.2 Quality the quality

of paper

of Paper - The factors shall include:

to be considered

in the choice in reading;

of

a) not so reflective/glossy b) sufficiently opaque

as to cause discomfort show-through;

to prevent

c) the stability of the dimensions drawing from which measurements d) the need to reproduce e) sufficient 5.3 Layout strength fine details;

of monographs, are to be taken; and

graphs

or

to withstand

rough

use at the shop floor.

of a Page

back margin in the case of .44 size shall not be 5.3.1 Margin -The less than 16 mm for punching and binding for documents. *Specification for paper sizes ( second rcvihn 7
).

IS : 11956 - 1987 5.3.1.1 Wherever a document is in the form of multi-folder ( consisting of two or more larger sheets with many folds ), care should be taken to leave sufficient margin while printing the matter on each fold, so that when the whole document is folded the required space should be left along with the margin for punching holes. 5.3.2 Columns columns. 5.4 Reproduction The text should usually be presented in double

5.4.1 The requirement of legibility should be considered in the choice of the reproduction process and the type face, interword spacing, line Type size of less than 2'75 mm ( 8 point ) spacing and line length. However, 3'5 mm ( 10 point) and above shall not normally be used. are preferred for the text. 5.4.2 Variation i71 Type Face - Varied type sizes and colours ( if required ) may be used to emphasize the structure of the document ( first, second and third level headings ) or to distinguish terms or units. Variation in type face should be kept to a minimum. 5.5 Divider Leaves-The divider leaves, when provided, may be in colour to focus attention. The utility cards and/or printed of the divider leaves will be enhanced if they are shown by projecting tabs or thumbs or key board printing ( mark on the edges of leaves which indicate where different sections are when the document is closed ). The sequence of divider leaves should correspond with major headings in the main contents list. 5.6 Pagination - Pages should be numbered consecutively in Catalogues divided into parts may international form of numerals. have the pages numbered separately for each part indicating both part and page number. 5.7 Binding

of binding giving substantial or permanent 5.7.1 Any system anchorage down the left hand side of the document is acceptable, provided it allows the text to lie flat without damage to the spine. The USC of loose leaf binders gives additional advantages. 5.7.2 pages. Covers of loose leaf binders should be larger to accommodate

5.8 If the catalogue is in the form of a book having a spine, details the spine should not be given up to 100 mm from the lower edge. 8

on

