**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 10195 (1982) : General requirements for insulated air 
cargo containers [TED 14: Aircraft and Space Vehicles] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



Indian Standard 



IS: 10195- 1932 

( Reaffirmed 2003 ) 



GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR 

JNSULATED AIR CARGO CONTAINERS 



UDC fi2l*tn9W758 36 : 6567073 




© Copyright 1982 

rXDTAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR. .SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI L 10002 

G* 2 November 1082 



IS : 10195 - 1982 

Indian Standard 

GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR 
INSULATED AIR CARGO CONTAINERS 

Air Cargo Handling Sectional Committee, MCPD 8 

Chairman Representing 

Shri K. N. S. Krishnan* Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi 

Members 
Shri P. R. Ghandrashekher ( Alternate to 
Shri K. N. S. Krishnan ) 
Shri P. G. Deshmukh Indian Institute of Packaging, Bombay 

Shri G. S. Ptjrushothaman ( Alternate ) 
Shrt M. S. Ekbote Indian Airlines, New Delhi 

Shri S. C. Bhatnagar ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. V. Kfmbre Air India, Bombay 

Shri C. Mohandas ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. M. Menon Indian Aluminium Company Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri P. Chakraverty ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. G. K. Murthy Directorate of Technical Development and Produ- 

ction ( Air ) ( Ministry of Defence ), New 
Delhi 
Shri B. Sampath ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. P. Nagaraja Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri B. S. Sandhu ( Alternate ) 
Shri L. S. Verma Ministry of Defence ( Aerial Delivery Research and 

Development Establishment ), Agra 
Sqn Ldr M. L. Chaitrasia ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. K. Vithlani Associated Commercial and Manufacturing Enter- 

prises Pvt Ltd, Bombay 
Shri P. S. Das, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director ( MCPD ) 

Secretary 

Shri D. K. Choitdhury 
Assistant Director ( MCPD ), ISI 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



♦Shri K. N. S. Krishnan was the Chairman for the meeting in which this standard 
was finalized. 



© Copyright 1982 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 10195 - 1982 

( Continued from page I ) 

Aii Transport Containers and Pallets Subcommittee, MGPD 8 : 1 

Convener Representing 

Shbi Yashvib Kumae Indian Airlines, New Delhi 

Members 
Shbi M. S. Ekbote ( Alternate to 
Shri Yashvir Kumar ) 
Shbi V. K. Agabwal Hindustan Aluminium Corporation Ltd, Mirzapur 

Shbi M. P. Nagabaja Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd, Bangalore 

Shbi B. S. Sandhtj ( Alternate ) 
Shbi A. Purixshotham International Airports Authority of India, New 

Delhi 
Shbi P. R. P. Rao { Alternate ) 
Repbesentative Air India, New Delhi 

ShbiG. G. Shah National Aeronautical Laboratory ( CSIR ), 

Bangalore 
Shbi F. G. Shabma The Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New 

Delhi 
Shbi L. S. Vebma Ministry of Defence ( ADR & E ) 

Sqk Ldb M. L. Chaubasia ( Alternate ) 



IS : 10195 - 1982 

Indian Standard 

GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR 
INSULATED AIR CARGO CONTAINERS 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 30 June 1982, after the draft finalized by the Air Cargo 
Handling Sectional Committee had been approved by the Marine, Cargo 
Movement and Packaging Division Council. 

0.2 Perishable cargoes, for example dairy produce, fruit, vegetables, 
flowers, frozen foods, meat, fish, etc, require specific temperature ranges 
during door-to-door transportation. During this period of door-to-door 
transportation the container may be subjected to extreme external 
ambient temperatures from 50° to — 50°C and relative humidity up to 
100 percent. This standard has been prepared to ensure that these 
cargoes are kept in prime condition during handling and air 
transportation. 

0.3 In preparation of this standard considerable assistance has been 
drawn from draft standard ISO/TC 20/N.113 'Insulated air cargo 
containers' issued by the International Organization for Standardization. 



1. SCOPE 

1*1 This standard establishes minimum operational requirements to 
ensure that perishable cargoes in insulated standard airborne containers 
are kept in prime condition during ground handling and air transporta- 
tion cycle with a maximum time span of 36 hours. 

1.2 This standard refers to the thermal efficiency of all insulated air 
car g containers irrespective of their size and designation. 

1.3 This standard does not give the detail regarding refrigerated or 
heated containers and the methods and equipment to achieve these 
objectives. 

2. DESIGN REQUIREMENTS 

2.1 The minimum temperature variation for which the container shall be 
designed shall be 35°C. 



IS : 10195 - 1982 

2.2 The containers shall be free of sharp corners and/or crevices which 
may collect dirt and spillage. No pockets shall exist in the cargo load- 
ing space that cannot be reached by conventional cleaning methods. 

2.3 Container may collect spillage during transport cycle but shall allow 
water run-off during flushing and/or washing. Adequate provision shall 
be made to ensure that cleaning shall be satisfactorily drained from 
inside of the container. 

2A Materials used on container structure, interior surfaces, and insulation 
shall not absorb moisture or odour and shall not be functionally affected 
by daily washing. 

2.4.1 Methods of washing shall include flushing using a pressure hose 
at 70°C and strong detergents. 

2.4.2 Container when washed shall not require the use of odour neutra- 
lizing chemicals. 

2.4.3 Container shall withstand freezing temperature while wet imme- 
diately following washing. All valves, seals, doors, and controls shall 
remain operative. 

3. PRESSURIZATION 

3.1 General — Containers will be closed at differing terminal altitudes, 
and the critical condition will be at sea level. Operationally the container 
may be subjected to either internal positive or negative pressure. Careful 
attention to the design of equalization devices, if any and, all seals is 
important in control of air leakage or heat transfer. 

3.2 Pressure Equalization 

3.2.1 Pressure relief device(s) which meets the airworthiness require- 
ments for sudden decompression of aircraft cabin shall be provided. 

3.2.2 A valve or similar device shall operate at a positive internal 
pressure differential not exceeding 3*5 kPa gauge. 

3.2.3 If door seals do not provide sufficient leakage to enable negative 
internal pressures to be equalized in reasonable time, two way device 
shall be provided. 

4. AIRTIGHTNESS TESTS 



4.1 Airtightness tests shall be carried out independently of any structural 
tests as structural testing of a container may distort the structure in the 
seal areas of a container. 

4.2 The temperature inside and outside the container shall be stabilized 
within 3°C of each other and shall both be within the range of 15° to 



IS : 10195 - 1982 

4.3 The container shall be empty and in its normal operational condi- 
tion with the access doors closed in normal manner. Any drain openings 
shall be closed. 

4.4 Air shall be introduced through an accurate metering device and a 
suitable manometer shall be connected to the container by a leakproof 
connection. The manometer shall not be a part of air-supply system. 
The flow measuring device shall be accurate to ±3 percent of the 
measured flow rate and the manometer shall be accurate to ±5 percent. 

4.5 Air shall be admitted to the container to raise internal pressure to 
20 i 1 mm water gauge and supply regulated to maintain this pressure. 

4.6 The air leakage rate shall not be more than 50 percent of the air 
volume per hour. 

Note — Higher leak rates up to 3 timas the above value may be acceptable provi- 
ded that allowance is made for this excess leakage rate in thermal tests ( see 5.4 ). 

4.7 The air pressure shall be increased to 3*5 kPa gauge internal pressure. 
The pressure relief device .or door seal expulsion shall operate. 

4.8 On completion of the above tests there shall be no permanent defor- 
mation and the container shall be fully operational. Closure, seals and 
pressure equalization device shall be intact and functional. 

5. THERMAL TEST 

5.1 General — This test is performed to establish the overall heat 
transfer rate or C K' factor of the container. The container shall be tested 
in the exact configuration intended for use. Any options or component 
configuration alternatives shall be tested in a separate list and appro- 
priately specified when applicable, in the container performance data. 

5.2 Tests shall be carried out with an ambient temperature of 15°G and 
a temperature differential between the interior of container and ambient 
of 15° to 20°C. Temperatures shall be stabilized by soaking the unit at 
constant temperature for 2 hours before commencement of tests. 

5.3 The C K* factor shall be expressed in watts. 

5.4 Allowance shall be made for the heat transfer due to leakage as 
measured in 4.6. 



INTERNATIONAL SYSTEM OF UNITS ( SI UNITS ) 
Base Units 



QpANTlTSf 


Ukxt 


Symbol 




Length 


metre 


m 




Mais 


kilogram 


kg 




Time 


second 


S 




Electric current 


ampere 


A 




Ther mody nam ic 


kelvin 


K 




temperature 








Luminous intensity 


candela 


cd 




Amount of substance 


mole 


mol 




Supplementary Units 








Quantity 


Unit 


Symbol 




Plane angle 


radian 


rad 




Solid angle 


steradian 


sr 




Derived Units 








Quantity 


Unit 


Symbol 


Definition 


Force 


newton 


N 


1 N = 1 kg.ra/s* 


Energy 


joule 


J 


1 J - 1 N.m 


Power 


watt 


W 


1 W= lj/s 


Flux 


weber 


Wb 


lWb=l V.s 


Flux density 


tesla 


T 


1 T = 1 Wb/m 


Frequency 


hertz 


Hz 


I Hz = 1 c/s (s~ l ) 


Electric conductance 


Siemens 


S 


1 S = 1 A/V 


Electromotive force 


volt 


V 


1 V = 1 W/A 


Pressure, stress 


pascal 


Pa 


1 Pa=l N/m 2 



