**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 11315-11 (1985) : Method for the quantitative description 
of discontinuities in rock masses. Part 11: Core recovery 
and rock quality [CED 48: Rock Mechanics] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS : 1T315 ( Part 11 )- 190D 

(Reaffirmed 2001) 

Indian Standard "T^^ ^^^%" 

METHOD FOR ^ 

THE QUANTfTATlVE DESCRIPTIONS OF 
DISCONTINUITIES IN ROCK MASSES 

PART IT CORE RECOVERY AND ROCK DUALITY 

DESIGNATION 



UDC fi24'12l-32 : 622'243n72 : 006*76 




© Copyright iDfiG 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
UANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAlrlADLfR SHAH ZAFAR MAftO 

NEW D£LH1 llOOdS 

Gt 2 January 1 986 



IS : 11315 ( Part 11 ) - 1985 

Indian Standard 

METHOD FOR 

THE QUANTITATIVE DESCRIPTIONS OF 

DISCONTINUITIES IN ROCK MASSES 

PART 11 CORE RECOVERY AND ROCK QUALITY 
DESIGNATION 

Rock Mechanics Sectional Committee, BDC 73 

Chairman Representing 

Dr Bhawani Sinoh University of Roorkee, Roorkee 

Members 

Assistant Research Officer Irrigation Department, Government of Uttar 

( IRI ) Pradesh, Roorkee 

Director Central Water and Power Research Station, Pune 

Shri S. L. Mokhashi ( Alternate ) 
Director Central Soil and Materials Research Station, New 

Delhi 
Dr a. K. Dube Central Mining Research Station ( CSIR ), 

Dhanbad 
Shri P. S. Gosal Irrigation and Power Department, Government of 

Punjab, Amritsar 
Dr G. S. Mehrotra Central Building Research Institute ( CSIR ), 

Koorkee 
Shki a. Ghosh ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. D. Naib Associated Instrument Manufacturers ( India ) 

Private Limited, New Delhi 
Proi' T. S. NaoarAJ ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. L. Nabula Geological Survey of India, Calcutta 

Shri T. K. Natbajan Central Road Research Institute ( CSIR ), New 

Delhi 
Shri P. J. Rao ( Alternate ) 
Prof T. Ramamurthi Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi 

Dr G. V. Rao ( Alternate ) 
DrY.V.Ramana National Geophysical Research Institute (CSIR), 

Hyderabad 
Research Officer ( MERI ) Irrigation Department, Government of Maharashtra, 

Nasik 
Shri G. Raman, Director General, ISI ( Bx-officio Member ) 



Director ( Civ Engg ) 



Secretary 

Shri K, M. Mathur 

Joint Director ( Civ Engg ), ISI 



© Copyright 1986 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 11315 ( Part 11 ) - 1985 

Indian Standard 

METHOD FOR 

THE QUANTITATIVE DESCRIPTIONS OF 

DISCONTINUITIES IN ROCK MASSES 

PART 11 COftE RECOVERY AND ROGK QUALITY 
DESIGNATION 



0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part 11 ) was adopted by the Indian 
Standards Institution on 29 June 1985, after the draft finalized by the 
Rock Mechanics Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil 
Engineering Division Council. 

0,2 It is essential that both the structures of a rock mass and the nature 
of its discontinuities are carefully described for determining the 
mechanical behaviour. This Indian Standard covering various para- 
meters to describe discontinuities in rock masses is being formulated in 
various parts each part covering one parameter. This part covers core 
recovery and rock quality designation. The other parts covering other 
parameters are also being formulated. 

0.3 The rock quality designation ( RQD ), is a simple and practical 
method of describing the quality of core from borings. The geomechanics 
classification for rock mass rating is more comprehensive. Geomechanics 
classification although initially developed for tunnels, has been apphied 
to rock slopes and foundations, ground rippability assessment, as well 
as to mining problems. 

0.4 This code will be helpful in collection of field data for applying the 
geomechanics classification for use in civil engineering. 

0.5 In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with 
this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded 
off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. 



♦Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ) . 



K: 11315 ( Part 11 )* 1985 

1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard ( Part 1 1 ) covers the method for the determination of 
core recovery, and RQD. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.1 For the purpose of this standard, the definitions of terms given in 
IS ; 11358.1986* shall apply. 

3. SYMBOLS 

3.1 For the purpose of this code, unless otherwise defined in the test, the 
following symbols shall apply: 

RQ^D Rock quality designation, 

V P-wave velocity obtained by seismic refraction survey, 

Vr Wave velocity of rock material obtained from ultrasonic tests 
on cores, and 

Jx ( Number of joints per cubic metre ), volumetric joint count. 

4. CORE RECOVERY 

4.1 General — Core recovery defined as the summed length of all pieces 
of recovered core expressed as a percentage of length drilled, should 
be measured and recorded to the nearest 2 percent if possible. When 
the core is highly fragmented the length of such portions is estimated by 
assembling the fragments and estimating the length of core that the 
fragments appear to represent. Fig. I shows the calculation of core 
recovery. Core recovery is normally used to describe individual core 
runs or whole bore-holes, and not specific structurally defined rock units. 
The results obtained in a rock mass of poor quality will be strongly 
dependent on the drilling equipment and on the skill of the drilling 
crew, 

4.2 Sound rock usually furnishes high recoveries, often about 100 percent, 
seamy and or jointed rock may furnish low recovery and badly broken 
cores. 

4.3 Precautions 

a) Core grinding may result in excessive loss of core. Core that is 
damaged in this way should always be recorded. 

b) Diamond core boring gives smooth and regular cores. 

c) The depth drilled at the start and end of zones of core loss should 
be carefully recorded. The relevant length lost can then be 
replaced by wooden blocks with marking on both ends. 



♦Glossary of terms and symbols relating to rock mechanics. 

3 



IS 11315 ( Part 11 )- 1985 

d) In lime stones with solution cavities, the thickness of cavity 
should be estimated while drilling is going on by noting sudden 
increase in rate of drilling. 

5. ROCK QTLJALITY DESIGNATION ( RftD ) 

5.1 General — RQD is a modified core recovery percentage in which 
all the pieces of sound core over 10 cm long arc counted as recovery, 
and are expressed as a percentage of the length, drilled. The smaller 
pieces resulting from closer jointing, faulting or weathering are 
discounted. Fig. 1 illustrates calculation of rock quality designation. 

5.1.1 The RQD has been found to be a more sensitive and consistent 
indicator of general rock quality compared to the gross recovery percent- 
age as obtained in Fig. 1. 

5.2 Precautions 

a) If core is broken during drilling process or handling, the fresh 
broken pieces should be fitted together and counted as one piece, 
if the length exceeds the requisite value of 10 cm. 

b) Material that is obviously weaker than the surrounding rock such 
as over consolidated gauge is discounted, even if it appears as 
intact pieces that are 10 cm or more in length. ( This type of 
material will normally be recovered when using the most 
advanced drilling equipment and experienced or carefully 
supervised drilling crews, ) 

c) To avoid poor recovery due to drilling equipment or human 
factor involved, double tube core barrel of NX size ( 54 mm 
dia, inside ) are specified and proper supervision is required. 

d) The length of individual core pieces should be assessed along the 
centre line of the core, so that discontinuities that occur parallel 
to the drill hole should not adversely effect, RQ,D values of an 
otherwise massive rock mass. 

5.3 Indirect Methods ( Correlated Values ) — In cases where 
drilling has not been possible indirect method should be used. Of the 
two indirect methods, one is based on dynamic testing ( see 5.3.1 ) and 
the other is based on degree of jointing ( see 5.3.2 ). 

5.3.1 RQD is approximately equal to square of velocity ratio 
multiplied by 100. Velocity ratio is defined as ratio between P-wave 
velocity ( V ) obtained from seismic refraction survey in field and wave 
velocity {Vt) of rock material obtained from ultrasonic tests on rock 
cores. 



R(ID:=^{-~~~Y X 100 



4 



IS : 11313 ( Part 11 )* 19tS 



CORE RECOVERY 













v^;1 




25 




^ ;'..■; 




5 


1 


m 


5 


623 


7.5 




10 


m 


12.5 





7-5 


m 


10 




m 




15 




'. >. ' 




10 


V9V 


5 




m 




12-5 




r-)l 





MODIFIED COR^ 
RECOVERY 

25 



10 



12-5 



m 



15 



12-5 



125-0 



85.0 

CORE RECOVERY RC)D 

125/150 = 83Vo 85/150=:57Vo 

Fig. 1 Modified Core Recovery as an Index of Rock Quality. 



IS t 11315 ( Part 11 ) - 1985 

5.3»2 The RQ,D is approximately correlated to number of joints in a 
cube of 1 metre as follows: 

RdD = 115 --3-3 Jv 

( RQP ^- 100 for Jv < 4'5 ) 
Note — Experience shows that actual RQP is sometimes less than above value. 
5.3.3 The core quality shall be classified as under according to i R(ID 



RQP> Percent 


Core Quality 


90-100 


Excellent 


75-90 


Good 


50-75 


Fair 


25-50 


Poor 


25 


Very poor 



6. REPORTING OF RESULTS 

6.1 The result of geological investigations will be reported as follows: 

a) Geological description of site, 

b) Core recovery, and 

c) RdD. 



