**************** 



*■ fe^K 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 10819 (1999): Chromite for Refractory Industry [MTD 13: 
Ores and Raw Materials] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 10819:1999 

Indian Standard 

CHROMITE FOR REFRACTORY INDUSTRY — 

SPECIFICATION 

( First Revision ) 



ICS 73.060.30;81.080 



©BIS 1999 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

June 1999 Price Group 1 



Ores and Raw Materials Sectional Committee, MTD 13 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Ores and Raw Materials Sectional Committee had been approved by the Metallurgical Engineering 
Division Council, 

This standard was first published in 1984. While reviewing the standard in the light of experience gained during 
these years, the committee decided to revise it to bring it in line with the present practices being followed by the 
Indian Industry. 

In the present revision the following changes have been made: 

a) One more grade of the chromite has been added. 

b) Chemical composition of the chromite has been modified. 

Chromite ores containing low silica (one percent Max Si02) are also required by the industry, but as such these 
ores are not available in the country. So this grade is not being included in the standard. 

Chromite finds the second largest use in the production of refractories. Specification for chromite for refractories 
industry is more exacting compared to the needs of metallurgical industry and as such ideal material for refractory 
making is very scare. In view of this and to make the best use of available resources, this standard has been 
prepared to meet the needs of the manufacturers based on the current practice and available experience. 

No marking clause has been included in this standard as chromite is supplied loose. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 l I960 'Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)'. The number of significant places retained in 
the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



IS 10819 : 1999 



Indian Standard 

CHROMITE FOR REFRACTORY INDUSTRY 

SPECIFICATION 



( First Revision ) 



1 SCOPE 

This standard prescribes the requirements for chromite 
(chrome ore) for refractory industry. 

2 REFERENCES 

The following standards contain provisions which 
through reference in this text, constitute provision of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision and parties to agreement based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 



IS No. 


Title 


1387 : 1993 


General requirements for the supply 




of metallurgical materials (second 




revision) 


4737: 1982 


Chromite for chemical industries 




{first revision) 


8562 : 1977 


Method of sampling chrome ore 



IS 4737 or by any other established instrumental/ 
chemical method. In case of dispute the procedure 
given in IS 4737 shall be the refree method. However, 
when the method is not given in IS 4737 the referee 
method shall be as agreed to between the purchaser 
and the manufacturer. 

Table 1 Chemical Composition of Chromite for 
Refractory Industry 

(Clause 5) 



3 SUPPLY OF MATERIALS 

General requirements relating to the supply of 
chromite shall as laid down in IS 1387. 

4 GRADES 

Chromite has been classified into three grades namely, 
Grade 1, Grade 2 and Grade 3. 

5 CHEMICAL COMPOSITION 

The material shall comply with the requirements of 
Table 1 , when analyzed either in accordance with 



SI 


Characteristics 


Grade 1 


Grade 2 


Grade 3 


No. 


(on Dry Basis) 


Percent 


Percent 


Percent 






by Mass 


by Mass 


by mass 


(1) 


(2) 


(3) 


(4) 


(5) 


i) 


Loss on ignition 


1.5 Afe: 


1.5 Max 


1.5 Max 


") 


CnCb 


52 Min 


50Min 


48 Mm 


iii) 


Total iron (as FeO) 


16 Max 


18 Max 


18 Max 


iv) 


Si0 2 


3 Max 


7 Max 


9 Max 


v) 


MgO 


15 Max 


15 Max 


15 Max 



6 PHYSICAL REQUIREMENTS 

The chromite shall be hard, massive, fine grained, 
serpentine free and lumpy ore. 

7 SIZE 

Chromite shall be of the size range - 1 50 mm to + 50 mm. 

8 SAMPLING 

Representative samples of chromite for testing shall 
be drawn according to the scheme of sampling given 
in IS 8562. 



