атт Ah IS 4651 (Part 4) : 2023 
Indian Standard 


чччї эїїх Чїчтәгаї Т AAT BAe 
=ч — tifa afar 
ттт 4 STATA 9 чат Ф Гето {геп 
(йеп чатда ) 


Planning апа Design of Ports and 
Harbours — Code of Practice 
Part 4 General Design Considerations 
( Fourth Revision ) 


ICS 93.140 


© BIS 2023 


т нч э] 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


ee тч чач, 9 FRIST Me ATH AMT, AE Ree - 110002 


MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


September 2023 Price Group 8 


Ports, Harbours and Offshore Installations Sectional Committee, CED 47 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 4) (Fourth Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Ports, Harbours and Offshore Installations Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil 
Engineering Division Council. 


Based on the need felt towards formulating Indian Standard, recommendations relating to various aspects 
of waterfront structures, the IS 4651 series of standards were established. This standard is one of this 
series formulated on this subject and deals with general design considerations. The other parts in the series are 
given below: 


Part 1 Site investigation 

Part 2 Earth pressures 

Part 3 Loadings 

Part 5 Layout and functional requirements 


This standard (Part 4) was first published in 1969 and subsequently revised in 1979, 1989 and 2014. The fourth 
revision of this standard has been taken up to incorporate further modifications necessary in the light of comments 
received from the users of this Standard. The following significant changes have been made in this revision: 


a) Water level raised due to tsunami and the method of calculation of hydrostatic force due to tsunami 
of vertical face structure have been included in Annex B. 

b) Partial load factor for quick release mooring hook (QRMH) capacity has been included. 

c) Transient load combination and sustained load combination for crack width check loading has been 
included 

d) Deflection limit for long term effect along with load combination has been included. 

e) The load factors for foundation design has been included. 

f) Сгапе/тасһіпе operating and extreme loads has been elaborated. 

g) Operating and extreme mooring force while using QRMH has been included. 

h) Existing clause of exposure zone and nominal thickness of cover has been elaborated for better 
understanding. 

j) Clause on reaction force of the fender has been modified. 

k) Clause on Reinforcement detailing of pile has been elaborated as regards to provision of ductility 
requirement. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex C. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision). The number of significant places 
retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 4651 (Part 4) : 2023 


Indian Standard 


PLANNING AND DESIGN OF PORTS AND HARBOURS — 


CODE OF PRACTICE 
PART 4 GENERAL DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS 


( Fourth Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard (Part 4) deals with general design 
considerations for port and harbour structures. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A contain provisions, 
which through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of 
publication editions indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revision and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most 
recent editions of the standards of listed Annex A. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions of 
terms given in IS 7314 and the following shall apply. 


3.1 Added Mass — The surge, sway, heave, roll, 
pitch and yaw motion of the body in the fluid will 
generate resistance of fluid against these motions 
and introduce a pressure field on the submerged 
surface. The component of force due to this 
pressure distribution in phase with body 
acceleration is added mass and the component of 
force in phase with body velocity is damping. 


3.2 Erection Stresses — The stresses produced 
due to pile gantry during construction, EOT crane, 
container crane and skid beams etc. 


NOTE — Erection stresses for container crane is 
generally not required to be considered as the time when 
container crane is off-loaded from the ship to the berth, 
the deck of the berth is completed in all respect in that 
particular stretch. Thus, that part of the deck is already 
designed to carry even the moving and traction load of 
the container cranes. 


3.3 Extreme Load — The wave load to be 


considered during storm with 100 year return 
period. 


3.4 Marine Growth — The marine growth is 
growth of marine organisms around the 
substructure like the pile surface and deck bottom 
surface if sufficient air gap is not provided. 


3.5 Normal Load — The normal load is the load 
to be considered during operation of the structure 
with one year return period. 


3.6 Temporary Load — The loads during 
construction stage including construction live load. 


3.7 Splash Zone — The splash zone is defined as 
the zone between the chart datum and the design 
wave height above the mean high water springs. 


4 LOADS, FORCES AND STRESSES 


4.1 The loads, forces and stresses to be considered 
in designing the structures are the following: 


a) Dead load (DL) (Including the weight of 
marine growth); 

b) Vertical live load; 

c) Impact or dynamic effect of live load; 

d) Forces caused by the tractive effort or 
braking of vehicles, cranes, ship loader/ 
unloader, material handling equipment etc; 

e) Centrifugal forces of vehicles moving on 
curve; 

f) Earth pressure; 

g) Hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces; 

h) Berthing forces from vessels; 

j) Mooring forces; 

k) Forces due to wind; 

m) Secondary stresses (stresses due to 
shrinkage, creep, temperature, etc as 
applicable); 


IS 4651 (Part 4) : 2023 


n) Erection stage stresses; 

p) Live load (LL); 

q) Seismic forces or earthquake loads; and 
r) Tsunami force. 


4.2 The above mentioned loads, forces and stresses 
should be worked out on the basis of provisions in 
IS 4651 (Part 3) and other relevant Indian Standards. 


4.3 The hydrostatic force due to tsunami of vertical 


face structure shall be calculated as per Annex B. 


5 COMBINATIONS OF LOADS, FORCES 
AND STRESSES 


5.1 All members shall be designed to sustain safely 
the effect of the combination of various loads, forces 
and stresses (see 4.1) that can possibly co-exist. All 
calculations shall distinctly tabulate the various 
combinations of above loads and stresses covered by 
the design. The load combinations given in Tables 1 
and 2 should be considered in limit state and 
working stress designs respectively. 


Table 1 Partial Load Factors for Loads in Limit State Design 
(Clauses 5.1, 6.2.2 and 7.1.2) 


Sl Loading Partial Load Factor 
No. р 
Limit State of Limit State of Collapse 
Serviceability 
——~ „== == ==... 
Short Long Normal Extreme/ Temporary Reversal 
Term Term Survival 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) 
i) Dead load (DL) 1.0 1.0 1.5 1.2 1.2 0.9 
ii) Vertical live load 
a) Impact or Dynamic 1.1 0.5 1.5 1:2 1.2 0.9 
load (DyL) 
оа 1.0 0.5 1.5 12 12 0.9 
iii) Earth pressure (EP) 1.0 1.0 1.2 1.0 1.0 1.0 
iv) Hydrostatic force (HyF) 1.0 - 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 
v) Wave and current force 1.0 - 1.2 1.0 1.0 1.0 
(WL and CL) 
vi) Berthing force (BF) 1.0 - 1.5 1.0 - 1.5 
vii) Mooring force (MF) 1.0 - 1.5 - - 1.5 
viii) Working wind force И _ 
(WWiF) 1.0 - 1.0 - 
ix) Extreme wind force А А А 12 _ 15 


(EWiF) 


IS 4651 (Part 4) : 2023 


Table 1 (Continued) 


Sl Loading Partial Load Factor 
No. 
Limit State of Limit State of Collapse 
Serviceability 
„== ek a eee 
Short Long Normal Extreme/ Temporary Reversal 
Term Term Survival 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) 
xiii) Seismic force (EL) 1.0 - - 1.2 - 1.5 
xiv) | Tsunami force (TL) - - - 1.2 - - 


xv) Secondary stresses (SS) 1.0 - Е = 


xvi) ОКМН capacity (ОС) - - - 1.0 - - 
NOTES 


1 If dead load alone is only combined with wind/seismic force, the partial load factor of +1.5, -1.5 shall be considered for wind/seismic 
forces under normal operating conditions similar to IS 456 and IS 1893 (Part 1). 


2 Minimum wind speed for normal loading shall be 60 km/h. 

3 DL + 50 percent of live load shall be considered for seismic force estimation. 

4 Importance factor of 1.5 shall be taken for water front structures for seismic design. 

5 Tsunami load shall be considered in design of structures with additional scour due to tsunami. 


6 Additional weight due to marine growth shall be considered in dead load case. Weight of marine growth shall be calculated from its 
density and thickness of the marine growth around the structure. As a general guideline it is to be taken as 100 mm, if the location is 
known to have higher marine growth. 


7 Limit state of serviceability load combinations shall be given as below: 


a) Transient load combination for crack width check only 


1) 1.0 (DL) + 1.1 (DyL) + 1.0 (LL + EP + HyF + WL + CL + BF + WWiF + SS); and 


2) 1.0 (DL) + 1.1 (DyL) + 1.0 (LL + EP + HyF + WL + CL + MF + WWiF + SS). 
b) Sustained load combination for crack width check 
1) 1.0 (DL) + 0.5 (LL) + 1.0 (EP) 


c) Short term deflection estimate for design of expansion joint 


1) 1.0 (DL) + 1.1 (DyL) + 1.0 (LL +EP + HyF + WL + CL + EL + SS) 


8 Horizontal deflection check for long term effect shall be limited to L/250, where L shall be from point of zero deflection below dredge 
level till top idealized level. 


a)1.0 (DL) + 0.5 (DyL + LL) + 1.0 (EP + Temp) + 1.0 OWL; 


b)With crane operation load; and 
c)Exclude CL with temp. 
For shrinkage, creep and temperature loads, IS 456 and IS 875 (Part 5) may be referred. 


9 For normal loading berthing energy shall be considered for BF calculation. For extreme loading, ultimate berthing energy shall be 
considered for BF calculation. 


10 Limit State of collapse load combinations 


a) Normal load condition 


1) 1.5 (DL + ру + LL) + 1.2 (EP) +1.0 (HyF) + 1.2 (WL + CL) + 1.5 (BF) + 1.0 (WWiF); and 
2) 1.5 (DL + ру + LL) + 1.2 (EP)+ 1.0 (HyF) + 1.2 (WL + CL) + 1.5 (MF) + 1.0 (WWiF). 


b) The seismic load combination in limit state design of RCC and Prestressed concrete structures, are: 
1) 1.5 (DL + IL); 
2) 1.2 (DL+ IL + EL); and 
3) 1.5 (DL+ EL). 


IS 4651 (Part 4) : 2023 
Table 1 (Concluded) 


where JL is Imposed load such as weight of stairways, handrails, equipment reactions and super structures etc. 
c) Extreme/Survival load condition 

1) 1.2 (DL + DyL + LL) +1.0 (ЕР) +1.0 (HyF + WL + CL) +1.0 (BF/QC); 

2) 1.2 (DL + DyL + LL) +1.0 (EP) +1.0 (HyF + WL + CL) +1.2 (EL); 

3) 1.2 (DL + DyL + LL) +1.0 (EP) +1.0 (НуЕ + WL+ CL) +1.2 (TL); and 

4) 1.2 (DL + DyL + LL) +1.0 (EP) +1.0 (HyF + WL + CL) + 1.2 (ЕМІР). 


d) Temporary load condition 
1) 1.2 (DL + DyL + LL) +1.0 (EP) +1.0 (HyF + WL + CL) 


e) Reversal load condition 


1) 0.9 (DL + DyL + LL) + 1.0 (EP) + 1.0 (HyF + WL + CL) +1.5 (BF or MF); 


2) 0.9 (DL + DyL + LL) + 1.0 (EP) + 1.0 (HyF + WL + CL) +1.5 (ЕМІР); and 


3) 0.9 (DL + DyL + LL) + 1.0 (EP) + 1.0 (HyF + WL + CL) + 1.5 (EL). 


11 For Foundation design of piles adequate factor of safety for skin friction and end bearing should be considered as recommended in 
IS 2911 (Parts 1 and 2) along with load factor of 1 for load combination of limit state of collapse. 


Table 2 Increase in Permissible Stresses 
(Clauses 5.1 and 7.1.2) 


Sl Combination of Loads Increase in Permissible Stresses Increase in 
No. — oo Allowable 
Reinforced other Materials Such Foundation 
Concrete as Steel and Timber Capacity 
а) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) DL + LL + impact of braking or traction or Nil Nil Nil 
vehicles + centrifugal forces of vehicles 
ii) DL+LL with impact, braking or tractive 15 15 15 
and centrifugal forces + earth pressure, 
percent 
iii) DL with/without LL including impact, 25 33 1 25 
3 


braking or tractive and centrifugal forces + 
earth pressure + hydrodynamic and 
hydrostatic forces + berthing or mooring 
forces, percent 


iv) Wind forces on structures + load See IS 875 (Part 3) 
combination of (1), (ii) or (ш) 


v) Seismic forces + load combination (1), (1) See IS 1893 (Part 1) 
or (iii) - Berthing or Mooring forces 


vi) Secondary stresses + load combination of 15 15 15 
(i), percent 


vii) Erection stage stresses with DL and 15 33.2 25 
appropriate LL + earth pressure + 3 
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces + 
wind forces, percent 


5.2 Crane/machine operating loads [4.1 (b), 4.1 (d) 5.3 Crane/Machine Extreme Loads 
and 4.1 (e)] along with dead load [4.1 (a)], combined 
with wind load specified by the manufacturer for 
operation should be taken for design purposes. 


Load specified by manufacturer for storm condition 
shall be considered appropriately. Also the limiting 
deflection shall be as рег manufacturer’s 


specification or based on crane load capacity. 


5.4 As berthing of vessel is deemed to be done in 
relatively calm conditions, the berthing forces may 
not be considered to occur simultaneously with 
crane/machine operating load [4.1 (b), 4.1 (d)] and 
[4.1 (е)], wind loads [4.1 (k)] or seismic forces 


[4.1 (q)]. 


5.5 Wind load [4.1 (k)] and seismic forces [4.1 (q)] 
need not be deemed to act simultaneously. 


5.6 Seismic forces [4.1 (q)] need not be combined 
with erection stage stresses [4.1 (n)], berthing forces 
[4.1 (h)] and mooring forces [4.1 (j)]. 


5.7 Tsunami forces [4.1 (r)] need not be combined 
with erection stage stresses [4.1 (n)], berthing forces 
[4.1 (h)] or mooring forces [4.1 (j)] and secondary 
stresses [4.1 (m)]. 


5.8 For QRMH (quick release mooring hook), 
Operating mooring force MF 
= 0.55 x n x SWL 
Extreme mooring force MFE 
= SWL+ (n – 1) х 0.8 х SWL 
where 
n = Number of hooks; and 
SWL = Safe working load of hook. 


6 METHOD OF DESIGN 


6.1 Structures and structural elements may be 
designed by limit state method. 


6.1.1 RCC and pre-stressed concrete members can 
be designed by limit state method whereas for 
designing structures with other material, working 
stress method should be adhered to. 


6.2 Limit State Method 


In the limit state method of design, a structure is 
considered unfit for use when it reaches a particular 
state called limit state at which it ceases to fulfill the 
function or satisfy the conditions for which it is 
designed. The structure shall be designed to 
withstand safely all loads liable to act throughout its 
life and it shall also satisfy the serviceability 
requirements, such as, limitations on deflection and 
cracking, etc. 


6.2.1 All relevant limit states shall be considered in 
design to ensure an adequate degree of safety and 
serviceability. In general, the structure shall be 
designed on the basis of the most critical limit state 
and shall be checked for other limit states. 


6.2.2 Partial Safety Factors for Loads 


The values for the partial safety factor given in 
Table 1 shall normally be used. 


IS 4651 (Part 4) : 2023 


6.2.3 Partial Safety Factor for Material Strength 


When assessing the strength of a structure or 
structural member for the limit state of collapse, the 
values of partial safety factors shall be taken as 1.5 
for concrete and 1.15 for steel. 


6.3 Working Stress Method 


Working stress method or permissible stress method 
may also be adopted in the designs till such time the 
complete changeover to the limit state method is 
made in other relevant Indian Standards on the 
subject. However, as the limit state method is more 
rational and adoptable, the designs may be carried 
out by limit state method. 


7 PERMISSIBLE STRESSES 


7.1 The following permissible stresses shall be 
adopted for the working load method of design: 


7.1.1 When the load items mentioned in 4.1 (a) to 
4.1 (r) are considered for possible appropriate 
combination, the following shall be applicable, 
subject to the stipulations contained in 7.1.2: 


a) For reinforced concrete structural 
members, the permissible stresses shall be 
as specified in IS 456; 


b) For prestressed concrete structural 
members, the permissible stresses shall 
conform to those specified in IS 1343; 


c) For structural steel members, the 
permissible stresses shall be as specified in 
IS 800; 


d) For timber structural members, the 
permissible stresses shall be as specified in 
IS 883; and 


e) For timber or concrete piles, the safe 
bearing capacity, and/or factor of safety 
shall be in accordance with 
IS 2911 (Part 2), IS 2911 (Part 1/Sec 1 to 4). 


7.1.2 Increase in Permissible Stresses 


Under various combinations of loading, for use in 
working stress design, the partial load factor of 1.0 
shall be used for loads given in Table 1. The 
permissible stresses in normal loading may be 
exceeded up to the limit as indicated in Table 2 
provided in no case does the stress exceed the yield 
stress or 0.2 percent of the proof stress of the 
material concerned. 


8 CHOICE OF CONSTRUCTION MATERIAL 


8.1 The basic criteria adopted in the general choice 
of construction material, such as, easy availability, 
easy working, mechanical properties suited to the 


IS 4651 (Part 4) : 2023 


purpose for which it is to be used and economic 
considerations, hold equally good for dock and 
harbour structures. The durability under the 
environmental condition, however, is of particular 
importance in these marine structures. The 


aggressive action of sea water and/or the marine 
environment on the principal construction materials, 
such as, steel, concrete and timber require special 
attention. 


8.2 Structural Steel 


8.2.1 Unless otherwise specified, the steel shall 
conform to IS 2062. 


8.2.2 The corrosion of steel varies in different 
conditions of sea air or sea water exposure. Severe 
corrosion, however, occurs in saline water and under 
marine growth, specially in the splash zone and in 
the reaches of the tidal range with alternate wetting 
and drying. Steel buried in ground is also subjected 
to corrosion under certain conditions. 


8.2.3 Апу опе or a combination of the following 
remedial measures may be taken against the 
corrosion: 


a) Cathodic protection 


Corrosion of steel completely immersed 
under water or buried in ground (where 
possibility of electrolytic corrosion exists) 
can Бе substantially eliminated, апа 
corrosion of steel alternatively exposed to 
wet and dry condition can be significantly 
protected by cathodic protection using an 
impressed current system or sacrificial 
anode system. 


b) Increased section/reduced stresses 


Where the cathodic protection is not 
practical or the maintenance doubtful, extra 
thickness of metal or section may be 
considered for providing an economic 
solution. The actual recommendations as to 
the minimum metal thickness depend upon 
the nature of the structure and its projected 
life. As a general rule, it may be considered 
that any mild steel used in marine structure, 
should have a minimum thickness of 6 mm 
when cathodic protection is provided, and 
a minimum thickness of 10 mm when 
cathodic protection is not provided. In any 
case, no structural steel should be used in 
marine conditions without protective 
coatings. 


c) Use of special steel 


Special alloy steels, such as, like those with 
2 percent copper content can significantly 
arrest corrosion. 


а) Jacketting with under water micro 
concrete in splash zone 


Special care has to be taken in the splash 
zone where the protection could be given 
by a underwater micro concrete by 
jacketting with suitable anti washout 
polymer based cementitious grout. 


NOTE — Any other suitable method with proper 
justification to the satisfaction of user may also be 
used 


8.3 Concrete 


8.3.1 Concrete has extensive use in harbour 
structures, such as, dock walls and floors, piles, 
sheet piles, caissons and monoliths, deck structures 
for jetties and wharves and breakwater armour 
blocks, apart from the use in dock buildings and in 
other structures above ground. 


8.3.2 The concrete structures built in aggressive 
environment are subject to attack by sea water 
penetrating into the mass. Concrete shall be made 
impermeable to such a degree that it is not 
penetrated by the constituents of sea water. The most 
dense concrete will give the best result. Concrete 
grade not less than M 35 for RCC, M 20 for PCC 
and M 40 for prestressed concrete construction shall 
be used. Concrete grade not less than M 15 shall be 
used in mass concrete construction. 


8.3.3 The use of special type of cement and the total 
cement content in concrete also require careful 
consideration. Slag cement (see IS 455) should 
preferably be used for marine structures. As an 
alternative, ordinary Portland cement/Portland 
pozzolona cement [see IS 1489 (Part 1 and 2)] may 
be used. The minimum cement content and 
maximum water cement ratio for all grades of 
concrete for RCC and prestressed concrete 
construction shall be in conformity to Table 5 of 
IS 456. 


8.3.4 As cracking in concrete members is to be 
minimized, reduced stresses are recommended for 
concrete and steel to be used in the design of RCC 
members subject to marine environments unless the 
structure is checked against the formation of cracks. 
The stresses in steel may be reduced to 
165 N/mm? in working stress design. As a guide, 


assessed surface width of cracks at points nearest to 
the main reinforcement should not exceed 0.004 
times the cover of the main reinforcement or 
maximum crack width in different zones given in 
Table 3, whichever is minimum. Limit state of 
serviceability load combinations shall be considered 
for crack width calculation. 


8.3.5 Nominal thickness of cover (cover is concrete 
cover to all the reinforcement) is to be provided for 
the structures in marine atmosphere. It is 
recommended for structures immersed in sea water, 
in splash zone nominal cover shall be 75 mm and for 
all other exposure conditions (the zones above deck 
level, immersed and below mud line), the nominal 


IS 4651 (Part 4) : 2023 


cover shall be 50 mm as specified in Table 4. 


8.3.6 The use of precast concrete elements is 
preferred for marine structures as they are cast 
under strict quality control and, therefore, are 
able to withstand the destructive influence of 
marine environments better. 


8.3.7 All the limit state of serviceability load 
combinations excepting the one under seismic 
combination and long term deflection 
combination shall be used for maximum crack 
width check of structural members and not for 
checking the deflection. The permissible 
deflection of berthing structure need not be 


Table 3 Maximum Crack Width in Different Zones 
(Clause 8.3.4) 


SI No. Exposure Zone Maximum Crack Width (mm) 
Sustained Load Transient Load 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Atmospheric zone — Above splash zone and where direct wave 0.2 0.3 
or spray impingement is infrequent 
ii) Splash zone — Zone between the chart datum and the design 0.1 0.2 
wave height (1.6 times significant wave height) above the mean 
high water springs 
iii) Continuous seawater immersion zone — Below splash zone up 0.2 0.3 
to seabed level 
iv) Below seabed level 0.3 0.3 
NOTES 


1 Sustained Load — Dead load plus 50 percent of full uniformly distributed live load + earth pressure. 


2 Transient Load — Dead load plus berthing load and full crane load or full live load uniformly distributed + earth pressure. 


Table 4 Nominal Thickness of Cover in Different Zones 
(Clause 8.3.5) 


SI Exposure Zone Adequate Thickness of 
No. Cover (mm) 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Atmospheric zone — above splash zone and where direct wave or 50 
spray impingement is infrequent 
ii) Splash zone — zone between the chart datum and the design wave 75 
height above the mean high water springs 
iii) Continuous seawater immersion zone — below splash zone upto seabed 75 
level 
50 


iv) Below seabed level 


IS 4651 (Part 4) : 2023 


checked for berthing or mooring load 
combinations. The seismic load combination for 
limit state of serviceability shall be used for 
checking the deflection of the berthing structures 
near the expansion joints at the deck level. The 
deflection for the berthing structure need not be 
controlled by limiting the deflection of pile at the 
soil/dredge level. 


8.4 Timber 


8.4.1 Timber has wide use in dock and harbour 
structures. It can be used for sheet piles, bearing 
piles, structural members in jetties, fenders, rubbing 
strips transit sheds and warehouses, as structural 
members and/or for door and window frames. 


8.4.2 The hazards which face timber are the attack 
by fungi and insecticides; and in sea water the attack 
by the marine borers. When used in dockside 
buildings the design shall be primarily guided by 
provisions of the relevant standards and protection 
against the attack of fungi and insecticides. The 
timber used in marine structure, particularly if 
subjected to fluctuating tides, is prone to attacks by 
marine borers and require preservative treatment. 


8.4.3 An effective preservative treatment of timber 
is creosoting which is normally applied by pressure 
impregnation (see IS 401). 


9 FENDERS 
9.1 Purpose 


The fenders shall absorb the impact of berthing 
vessel and also the chatter of the moored vessel in 
order to avoid damages to the vessel and to the 
structure. Functionally, fenders shall accomplish the 
following purposes: 


a) Absorb the berthing energy or impact of 
vessels and transmit a designed or 
calculated force to the structure, which 
shall not exceed the allowable hull 
pressure; 


b) The pressure exerted from the fenders 
system does not exceed the ship’s hull 
pressure capacity. Hold the vessel off the 
face of the structure and avoid rubbing 
against the structure and consequent 
damages to the vessel and the structure; and 


с) Impart the thrust from berthing loads to the 
structure at predetermined or design points. 


9.2 Type of Fenders 


The fenders may be made of rubber, steel, timber, 
brushwood, rope, concrete and similar material. 


Rubber has come into extensive use for fender 
system. Amongst various types, there may be 
hollow-cylindrical or rectangular rubber fenders, 
sandwich type known as Raykin fender buffer, steel 
spring fenders, wood-springing type fenders, 
horizontal and vertical timber fenders, fender piles, 
brushwood fenders, gravity-type fenders, torsion 
fenders, floating fenders, rolling fenders, 
obstruction types, etc. The choice of material and 
the type of fender shall be judiciously made to 
serve the specific purpose in the particular case. 


9.2.1 Fixed fenders are fixed or mounted to the 
berthing structures. The fixed fenders are again sub 
divided into the following: 


a) Buckling fenders 
b) Non buckling fenders 


9.3 Design 


The design of the fenders shall be dependent on the 
following parameters and they should be designed 
for berth loads from ships as specified in IS 4651 
(Part 3): 


a) Size of ship 
The fender capacity shall depend upon the 
ship size. 

b) Berthing velocity 


The berthing velocity under various 
conditions and type of vessel shall be 
adopted as specified in IS 4651 (Part 3). 


c) Importance of structure 


The design of the fenders shall take into 
account the importance of consequences 
suffered by the ship and the berthing 
structure in case of an eventual accident 
due to insufficient energy absorption 
capacity. 


d) Energy absorption 


Various types of fenders absorb energy in 
various ways but in most of them, the 
kinetic energy of the ship is stored in 
energy of strain. Shear permits the 
absorption of larger amount of energy than 
tension and compression. Flexure does not 
permit an efficient use of material as only a 
small percentage of the material of the 
fender may reach the allowable stresses. 
Torsion permits a good use of all the 
materials of a fender, particularly if tubes 
with thin walls are used. The flexibility of 
the berthing structure together with that of 
the fendering system may be taken into 
consideration in computing the total energy 


absorption capacity of the whole system. 
Any accepted method of analysis (such as 
beams on elastic foundation) may be 
adopted for such computation. 


e) Reaction force and deflection of the 
fender 


The maximum amount of reaction force of 
a fender system on ship shall be chosen 
taking into account: 


i) The strength of hull; and 
ii) The strength of the berthing structure. 


The manufacturers of proprietary fenders 
usually supply the energy absorption, 
deflection and reaction force 
characteristics of the specific fenders. 
These should be adopted in design. It is, 
however, recommended that a factor of 
safety of 2.0 should be applied over the 
calculated berthing energy. 


f) Disposition of fenders 


The disposition of the fenders shall depend 
upon the location of the berths, the type of 
berthing structure, conditions of berthing, 
etc. The longitudinal spacing Юг 
continuous quay should not normally 
exceed 0.15 L where L is the length of the 
smallest ship. For Island berths spacing of 
primary fenders should be in the range of 
0.25 L to 0.4 L where L is the length of the 
smallest ship. If the range of design vessels 
is large liner, an outer set of primary fender 
would become necessary. The vertical as 
well as horizontal disposition of fenders 
shall be so designed as to prevent the ship’s 
hull and/or berthing structure being 
damaged under all tidal conditions. Ship’s 
bow radius and approach and flair angle 
and in specific cases, may extend from the 
cope level to the low water level. 


10 EXPANSION JOINTS 


10.1 A sufficient number of expansion joints shall 
be provided depending upon the type of the 
structure, the sub-soil and the atmosphere conditions 
in order to accommodate movements arising from 
shrinkage, temperature changes and some yielding 
of the foundation. The steel reinforcement shall be 
so designed that it also acts to provide the shrinkage 
and temperature cracks. 


10.2 As a general rule, a length of 60 m to 300 m 
between the expansion joints is recommended for 
structures, such as solid quay walls or pile supported 
deck structures. Expansion gap shall be provided 


IS 4651 (Part 4) : 2023 


however in general depending on type of structure, 
type of soil and deflection during earthquake. The 
expansion gap shall be calculated considering limit 
state of serviceability load combinations and 
provide suitably. The crane track shall be designed 
suitably at expansion joints. For suspended deck 
resting on flexible long piles, length of the 
expansion joint shall be based on the detailed 
analysis of the whole structure. 


10.3 The expansion joints in the sections shall be 
keyed where horizontal forces are required to be 
transferred to the adjoining section and shall be so 
designed that changes in the length of the sections 
are not hindered. The arrangement of keys for 
vertical support shall depend on the soil conditions, 
the construction of the structure and the type of its 
loading. The expansion joints shall be covered to 
prevent the backfill from being washed out. 


11 BERTHING STRUCTURE SPECIFICATIONS 


11.1 Deck Elevation 


Deck elevation to be given based on extreme 
loading. 


11.2 Bracing of the Piles and Temporary Bracings 


A pile driven at an inclination to the vertical to 
provide resistance to horizontal forces is known as 
brace pile. Design of bracing must consider the 
lateral forces due to currents, waves, earthquake, 
berthing and mooring etc. Sometimes bracing of the 
piles shall be done to strengthen the structure. In the 
case of temporary bracing, structure shall be 
checked before and after the removal of temporary 
bracings. 


11.3 Reinforcement Detailing of Piles 


The shear reinforcement need not be provided when 
maximum shear stress calculated is less than half 
the permissible stress in accordance with 26.5.1.6 
of IS 456. For ductility requirement in piles, 12 mm 
diameter stirrups shall be provided at a spacing of 
150 mm c/c for distance of L/6 from the top for 
piles in zone 4 and zone 5. Effective length of the 
pile, h shall be taken based on sway and non sway 
frame condition as per Annex E of IS 456. 


12 INTEGRITY TEST/FREE VIBRATION 
TEST OF BERTHING STRUCTURES 


The free vibration test shall be carried out to know 
the natural frequency of the structure by pushing 
the structure using a tug boat. The Free vibration 
response of the structure can be recorded using three 
acceleration pick-ups mounted orthogonally. This 
test can be repeated after any natural calamity to 
assess the damage of the structure. 


IS 4651 (Part 4) : 2023 


IS No. 


IS 401 
2001 


IS 455 
2015 


IS 456 
2000 


IS 800 
2007 


IS 875 


(Part 3) 
2015 


(Part 5) : 1987 


IS 883 
2016 


IS 1343 
2012 


ІЅ 1489 


(Part 1) 
2015 


(Part 2) 
2015 


ANNEX A 


(Clause 2) 
LIST OF REFERRED STANDARDS 


Title 


Code of practice for preservation 
of timber (fourth revision) 


Specification for Portland slag 
cement (fifth revision) 


Code for practice for plain and 
reinforced concrete (fourth 
revision) 


Code of practice for use of 
structural steel in general building 
construction (third revision) 


Code of practice for design loads 
(other than earthquake) for 
buildings and structures: 


Wind loads (third revision) 


Special loads and load 


combination 


Code of practice for design of 
structural timer in buildings (fifth 
revision) 


Code of practice for prestressed 


concrete (second revision) 


Specification for Portland 


pozzolana cement: 


Flyash based (fourth revision) 


Calcined 


revision) 


clay based (fourth 


IS No. 
IS 1893 
(Part 1) 
2016 
IS 2062 
2011 
IS 2911 
(Part 1) 
(Sec 1) 
2010 
(Sec 2) 
2010 
(Sec 3) 
2010 
(Sec 4) 
2010 
(Part 2) 
2021 
IS 4651 
(Part 3) : 
2021 
IS 7314 
2023 


Title 


Criteria for earthquake resistant 
design of structures: Part 1 
General provisions and buildings 
(sixth revision) 


Hot rolled low, medium and high 
tensile structural steel — 
Specification (seventh revision) 


Code of practice for design and 
construction of pile foundation: 


Concrete piles, 


Driven cast in-situ concrete piles 
(second revision) 


Bored cast in-situ concrete piles 
(second revision) 


Driven precast concrete piles 
(second revision) 


Precast concrete piles in prebored 
holes (first revision) 


Timber piles (second revision) 


Code of practice for planning and 
design of ports апа harbours: 
Part 3 Loading (second revision) 


Glossary of terms relating to port 
and harbour engineering (first 
revision) 


IS 4651 (Part 4) : 2023 


ANNEX B 
(Clause 4.3) 


FORCE DUE TO TSUNAMI 


B-1 TSUNAMI FORCE 


The hydrostatic force due to hydrostatic head and 
tsunami flow velocity can be estimated from, 


1 


_1 2, чё 
№ = 5 pg [(h + Зп) + Zg (h + 3n)] 


р = density of seawater 

g =acceleration due to earth gravity 

h = depth of water at the toe of the structure 
n 


= 1/3 of the Tsunami run-up given in Table 5 
and is equal to the tsunami height at 10 m 


water depth 
и, = velocity of water particle 


ш = Vg(h +n) 


where, ut is in m/s, g is in m/s? and 7 is in m. 
If the wave height is less than (A+ 3n), suitable 


correction to be made in the equation. 


B-2 The tsunami wave height at 10 m water depth 
can be calculated as 1/3 times tsunami runup at the 


coast as given Table 5. The above equation 
calculates if the height of the wall is more than the 
tsunami run-up above the design water level. 


However, if the wall height is less than (A + 30), 
then suitably, the total hydrostatic force can be 
estimated. The static pressure force due to flow 
velocity head is adopted to be uniform throughout 
the water depth. However, for transparent structures 
such as open pile type structures, the hydrostatic 
force can be neglected. 


B-3 The water level rise due to Tsunami shall be as 
per Table 5. The hydrostatic force due to Tsunami 
of vertical face structure shall be calculated as per 
B-1 and for offshore berthing structures air gap 
of 0.5 m shall be given above tsunami water level. 


Table 5 Water Level Raise Due to Tsunami 
(Clauses B-2 and B-3) 


SI No. Location Run up (m) 

а) (2) (3) 

а) Tamilnadu 
i) Kattupalli - 
п) Ennore creek = 
iii) Light house chennai 2.2 
iv) Kottivakam 3.9 
v) Muttukadu 3.1 
vi) Thalanguda, Cuddalore 2.7 
уп) Silver beach, Thevanampattinam, Cuddalore 4.6 
viii) Parankipettai, Centre for Biological sciences 2.3 
ix) Poompuhar 4.7 
x) Tharangambadi Village 3.6 
x1) Karaikal Beach 3.5 
хп) Nagore 48 
xiii) Nagapattinam Port 3.6 

b) Kerala 

i) Thiruvananthapuram 1.5 
п) Kollam 3 


11 


IS 4651 (Part 4) : 2023 


Table 5 (Concluded) 
SI No. Location Run up (m) 
(1) (2) (3) 
ш) Kayamkulam 4.5 
iv) Azhikkal 5 
v) Alappuzha to Kozhikode 1.0-3.5 
c) South Andaman 
i) JNRM college, Aberdeen 2.9 
ii) Bamboo Flat 3.5 
ш) Wandoor 3.9 
iv) Chidiya Topu 4.5 
d) North Andaman 
i) Diglipur 1.5 
п) Rangat 1.5 
е) Little Andaman 
i) Hut Bay 5.0 
f) Car Nicobar 
i) Malacca 7.0 
g) Great Nicobar 
i) Campbell Bay (Central) 3.0 
п) Campbell Bay (North) 6.0 


NOTE — The run up shown in table is with respect to local mean sea level. In case of alternate location, the nearest location as per the 
table can be considered or site specific data can be collected for the run off and the same can be considered. 


IS 4651 (Part 4) : 2023 


ANNEX C 


(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSTION 


Ports, Harbours and Offshore Installations Sectional Committee, CED 47 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity (3353, Sector D, Pocket 3 
Vasant Kunj, New Delhi, 110070) 


AECOM India Private Limited, Noida 
Afcons Infrastructure Limited, Mumbai 
Aurobindo Reality Infrastructure Private Limited, 


Hyderabad 

Central Institute of Coastal Engineering for Fishery, 
Bengaluru 

Central Water & Power Research Station, Pune 


Chennai Port Trust, Chennai 


Consulting Engineering Services, New Delhi 


CSIR - National Institute of Oceanography, Panaji 


CSIR - Structural Engineering Research Centre, 
Chennai 


Directorate General Naval Projects, Mumbai 
Directorate General Naval Projects, Vishakhapatnam 


Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


Gujarat Maritime Board, Gandhinagar 


Howe Engineering Projects Limited, Mumbai 


India Meteorological Department, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 


ITD Cementation India Limited, Kolkata 


Representative(s) 


DR M. HARIHARAN (Chairperson) 
SHRI SANJEEV GUPTA 
SHRIJ. K. AHLUWALIA (Alternate) 


SHRI V. RAMAMURTY 
MS VASUSMITHA JOSHI (Alternate) 


SHRIN. SUNIL KUMAR 
SHRIN. VENKATESH PRASAD 
SHRI M. В. BELLIAPPA (Alternate) 


DR PRABHAT CHANDRA 
DR J. D. AGRAWAL (Alternate) 


SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER (CIVIL) 
EXECUTIVE ENGINEER (CIVIL) (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


DR SUKOMAL MANDAL 
SHRI D. ILANGOVAN (Alternate) 


Dr. P. HARIKRISHNA 
DR. S. VISHNUVARDHAN (Alternate Т) 
Dr. A. SUBBULAKSHMI (Alternate П) 
REPRESENTATIVE 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI BHASKAR PAL 
SHRI CHARANJIT SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI B. В. TALAVIA 
SHRI HARISH SOLANKI (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Dr S. K. PESHIN 
Dr S. D. ATTRI (Alternate) 


DR R. SUNDARA VADIVELU 
DR S. A. SANNASIRAJ (Alternate) 


SHRI PRODYOT KUMAR 
SHRI PINAKI ADAK (Alternate) 


IS 4651 (Part 4) : 2023 


Organization 


Institute of Engineering & Ocean Technology, Panvel 
(Part of ONGC) 


Jawahar Lal Nehru Port Trust, Navi Mumbai 

Kolkata Port Trust, Kolkata 

Larsen & Toubro Infrastructure Engineering Limited, 
Chennai 

Military Engineer Services, Engineer-in-Chief's 
Branch, Integrated HQ of MoD (Army), 


New Delhi 


Ministry of Ports, 
New Delhi 


Shipping and Waterways, 


Mumbai Port Trust, Mumbai 


National Centre for Coastal Research, Chennai 


National Institute of Ocean Technology, Chennai 


Nuclear Power Corporation of India Limited, Mumbai 


RITES Limited, Gurugram 


Royal Haskoning DHV India, Noida 


Stup Consultants Private Limited, Mumbai 


Visakhapatnam Port Trust, Visakhapatnam 


In Personal Capacity (A 307, Casa Ansal Apartments, 
18 Bannerghatta Road, Banglore, 560076) 


In Personal Capacity (Plot 8, PSR Avenue, Allipuram, 
Nellore, 524002) 


In Personal Capacity [C-401, Greenfield Tower CHS, 
Kadamwadi, Vakola, Santcruz (east), Mumbai - 
400055] 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


SHRI DINESH GUPTA 
MANAGER (PPD) 
DEPUTY MANAGER (PPD) (Alternate) 


SHRI A. К. MEHERA 
SHRI AMITABHA CHATTOPADHYAY (Alternate) 


SHRI T. SRINIVASAN 
SHRIP. R. RAJESH (Alternate) 


BRIG S. K. SHARMA 


SHRIH. N. ASWATH 
SHRI ANIL PRUTHI (Alternate) 


DEPUTY CHIEF ENGINEER (D) 
SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER (D) (Alternate) 


DR M. V. RAMANAMURTHY 
DR R. S. KANKARA (Alternate) 


DR BASANTA KUMAR JENA 
DR VIJAYA RAVICHANDRAN (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRIR. SARAVANAN 
SHRI KRISHAN KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI MOHD. ASLAM BIJAPUR 
SHRI SATYANAND KUNTA (Alternate) 


SHRI MUNISH KOTWAL 
SHRI RAJARAMA RAO (Alternate) 


SHRIG.V. SATYANARAYANA 


SHRI VEDAGIRI K. 


SHRIJ. VENKATESWARA RAO 


SHRI V. N. HEGGADE 


SHRI ARUNKUMAR S., SCIENTIST ‘E’/DIRECTOR 
AND HEAD (CIVIL ENGINEERING) (REPRESENTING 
DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI ABHISHEK PAL 
SCIENTIST ‘D’/ JOINT DIRECTOR 
(CIVIL ENGINEERING), BIS 


IS 4651 (Part 4) : 2023 


Planning and Design of Ports and Harbours, CED 47/WG1 


Organization 


Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 
AECOM India Private Limited, Noida 
Afcons Infrastructure Limited, Mumbai 


Aurobindo Reality Infrastructure Private Limited, 
Hyderabad 


Howe Engineering Projects (India) Limited, Mumbai 
ITD Cementation India Limited, Kolkata 

Kolkata Port Trust, Kolkata 

L&T infrastructure, Chennai 

Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways, New Delhi 
National Centre for Coastal Research, Chennai 


National Centre for Sustainable Coastal Management, 
Chennai 


National Institute of Ocean Technology, Chennai 


Ocean Engineering & Consultancy Private Limited, 
Chennai 


15 


Representative(s) 


DR R. SUNDARA VADIVELU (Convener) 
SHRI SANJEEV GUPTA 
MS VASUSMITHA JOSHI 


SHRIN. SUNIL KUMAR 


SHRI ABHISHEK BASU 
SHRI PINAKI ADAK 
REPRESENTATIVE 
SHRI T. SRINIVASAN 
SHRI H. N. ASHWATH 
DR M.V. RAMANAMURTHY 
DR RAMESH 
DR B. K. JENA 
DR K.M. SIVAKOLUNDU 


SHRI S. SAKTHIVEL 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 47 (18848). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8% Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector У, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : СІ.Т. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot Мо. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


