( Reaffirmed 2001 )

Indian Standard

MECHANICALSURFACE AERATORSGUIDELINES FOR EVALUATION ANDTESTIN-G
UDC 628~353.3 : 620.1

@ BIS -1992

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

IN~DIAN
9 BAHADUR

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR MARG

NEW DELHI 110002

January 1992

Price Group 6

Public Health Engineering Sectional Committee,

CED 40

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Public Health Engineering Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. Gas transfer operations, in particular, aeration, serve a multitude of purposes in water and waste treatment. The principal objectives of aeration, however, are either to add or remove gases or volatile substances from water. In biological processes, surface aerators help to transfer the required oxygen through mixing in the basin and also help to keep the biomass in suspension. The processes that are primarily characterized by the turbulence generated by the mixing devices are as follows: a) Mixing of raw wastes, return sludge and oxygenated fluid ( macro-scale turbulence ), b) Mixing to keep solids in suspension ( macro-scale turbulence ), c) Mixing and the resultant turbulence influencing the transfer of oxygen from air bubbles or other inter-facial surfaces into the liquid ( micro-macro-turbulence ). d) Transfer of substrate, waste product, oxygen etc, into and from the liquid mass and floes ( micro-turbulence ). This is important and is often the rate controlling step in the purification process of activated sludge. If a large number of micro-scale turbulence is generated, then the supply of oxygen is the most decisive step for removal of organics from the treatment plant. For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised)`. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

IS 13166 : 1992

Indian Standard

MECHANICALSURFACEAERATORSGUIDELINES FOREVALUATION ANDTESTING
1 SCOPE 1.1 This standard gives guidelines regarding evaluation and testing of single surface aerators. It covers basic equations of mass transfer, characteristics of aeration equipments, oxygenation capacity determination, effects of variables on oxygenation, brief idea about reaeration of deoxygenation, estimation of dissolved oxygen and mass transfer coefficient & and overall test procedure for finding KLa oxygenation capacity and oxygenation efficiency. 1.2 This standard face aerators. 2 REFERENCES 2.1 Indian Standard IS 3025 ( `Methods of sampling and test chemical ) for water and waste Dissolved oxygen', is a necessary standard. Part 38 ) : 1990 (physical and water : Part 38 adjunct to this AERATION does not cover multiple sur4 -BASIC EQUATIONS OF MASS TRANSFER

4.1 A number of mechanisms have been suggested to represent conditions in the region of phase boundary ( Table 2, Fig. 1 ). The expressions of mass transfer for various modes are different due to variations inbasic assumptions. Parameters like `s' and `to' are difficult to evaluate for surface aerators and therefore, film theory is often employed to give an overall mass transfer coefficient ( KLa ) since solubility of oxygen is low in ~water. It has been observed that the transfer of oxygen from a gaseous into liquid phase takes place in three distinct stages, namely:

a) The oxygen

molecules are transferred from air to the liquid interface establishing a saturated oxygen layer at the interface in milliseconds. pass through by liquid of about three molecules thick by a process of molecular diffusion which is a relatively slow process.

W The oxygen molecules

3 DESCRIPTION OF VARIOUS DEVICES

3.1 On the basis of mechanical design, facilities for oxygenation by aeration may be divided into following general classes, namely:

The oxygen is diffused into the body of c>liquid by further diffusion and convection.
4.2 All devices utilize the first stage.

a>D@users
b!

small orifice diffusers, hydraulic shear diffusers, static aeration devices ( includes both porous and non-porous ). Surface Aerators - rotors ( formerly referred as brushes, combs and paddles ), cone aeration, updraft aerators, and cavitation type and downdraft types wherein oxygen is supplied by self-induction from a negative head produced by the rotating element.
Static Mixer.

-

c)

Table 1 summarizes the characteristics ble aerat.ion equipment.

of availa-

Diffusion control of oxygen transfer in the second stage and surface renewal have different relative importances depending on the type of aeration device. In diffused aeration systems, oxygen transfer from the interface to the body of liquid is governed principally by the process of molecular diffusion and hence is very much affected by surface impurities in the liquid. In surface aeration, the shearing action of the impeller creates new interfaces coupled with a high degree of induced turbulence, mass transfer of oxygen is governed by surface renewal.
4.2.1 Shorter the time of exposure, the greater is the rate of mass transfer. Maximizing oxygen flux would be expensive in both the oases. Decreasing the time of contact for diffused aeration requires increasing mixing at the gas liquid interface. Shallow tanks and high volumetric rates of air are needed in diffused aeration systems. In surface aerators, decreased time means more turbulence and hence more power input. Optimal conditions with respect to power consumption puts a practical limit on transfer rate in both cases.

Bubble aeration with porous and other facilities is basically an aeration device which produces mixing in the ~activated sludge basin whereas surface aerators of any description are mixers which oxygenate the contents of the aeration basin. From turbulence viewpoint, mechanical surface aerators are more efficient because they produce a lagre number of micro-scale eddies with high intensity. However, the mechanical surface aerators will be effective only for certain depth of the aeration tank.

IS 13166 : 1992 4.2.2 The effect of some of the operating variables on oxygen transfer rate are given in Table 3. 5 DETERMINATION OF OXYGENATION CAPACITY 5.1 The three most commonly accepted techniques to determine oxygenation capacityjefficiency for standardization of aeration equipment are: of re-aeration of a) Non-steady state Table 1 Characteristics deoxygenated pure water in a test tank, in an activated in an activa-

b) Steady state evaluation sludge basin, and

c) Non-steady state evaluation ted sludge basin.

Table 4 compares the various methods for determining mass transfer coefficient for the evaluat ion of oxygenation capacity and efficiency.

of Available Aeration Equipment ( Clause 3.1 ) Advantages Disadvantages
Effidency -kg Of Oa,hr,kw

Processe'ben

Transfer (6)

(1) Diffused Aeration

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

i) Porous diffuser

convenProduce fine or small Large bubbles made up of tional activated c-_ramic plates or sludge process tubes. plastic wrapped cloth tube or bag

ii) Nonporous diffuser

iii)

Static

Made in nozzle, valve orifice or shear types, they produce large coarse or large bubbles. Some made up of plastic with check valve design Produces high shear and entrainment as water in mixture is forced through vertical cylinder containing static mixing elements, construccylinder tion is metal. plastic or polyethylene Aeration Low output speed, large diameter turbine High output speed, small diameter propeller Low output speed

All sizes of conventional activated sludge

initial and High oxygen High transfer efiicienmaintenance costs prone to clog, not cy, good mixing, maintain high suitable for compliquid temperalete mixing ture varying air flow provides good operational flexibility High initial cost, Less-clogging. Maintains low oxygen transhigh liquid temperafer efficiency, high ture, low maintepower cost nance cost

0'53-0'91

075

Primary lagoon tion

aerated applica-

Low maintenance, high liquid temperature

Ability to adequately mix aeration basin contents is questionable

1'22-1'33

Mechanical i) Radial flow slow speed ii) Axial high speed iii) Brush aeration iv) Turbine aeration

All sizes of conventional acti vated sludge and aerated lagoons do

Oxidation

ditch

Units contain a low speed turbine and provide compressed air in sparge ring type of equipments NOTE --Other if available, may also be added.

Conventional activated sludge

High oxygen transfer efficiency, high pumping capacity ygrd oxygen tranefficiency, high pumping capacity Moderate oxygen transfer efficiency Good mixing, moderate oxygen transfer efficiency submerged

Some icing in cold climates

2'43

d0

1'59-2'13

do Require both reducer and compressor aerators, -air/oxygen

1*68/m 1.035-l `59

such as pump aerators,

turbine

injectors,

2

IS 13166:1992
Table 2 Comparison of Mass Transfer Models ( Cluuse 4.1 )
Theory (1) i) Film ii) Penetration Stagnant Propert$sas;Liquid (2) Type of Diffusion (3) Steady KL (4) DIL 21/ Dn tc Remarks (51 Easy to determine transfer coefficient mass

Renewal of surface, cons- Unsteady tant time of exposure of fluid elements to surface Renewal of surface, frequency distributions for time of exposures to gas phase Stagnant and continuously renewed surface depending on degree of turbulence Same as film and penetration Unsteady

Only average value of tc can ,b,elucnown. Its IS not exact known S difficult to determine

iii) Surface renewal iv) Film/ surface renewal v) Filmlpenetration

d-m-

Steady and/or unsteady Steady and/or unsteady

2/ Kcoth

1/SL'lD n=cc 1 + 2 c exp n=l nan2Dt) L.2

Both S and L are difficult to determine Diffiac$t L to determine

DIL

(KL = Liquid film coefficient. S = Surface renewal rate.

D = Diffusivity.

L = Liquid film thickness.

ta = Contact time.

rLlOUlD

SPRAY=02

= Q(Cz-Cl)

TOTAL
FIG.

Oz= KLa(CS-C)V

1

SCHEMATIC OF GAS TRANSFER INVOLVEDIN A SURFACEABRATOR

5.2 Non-steady state aeration of deoxygenated tap water by an aeration device is the most common method employed for determining oxygen transfer rates. In this case there are five different methods to evaluate the value of the overall mass transfer coefficient and these are summarized in Table 5. The absolute value of the overall mass transfer coefficient cannot be determined by any of the above methods. Exponential curve fitting is a slight improvement in the analysis of overall mass transfer coefficients over the log-deficit technique because the value of Cs need not be taken into consideration. However, for standardization and comparison purposes of aeration performance, the log-deficit technique can. be used. It is 3

simpler and can be easily reproduced. In this case actual experimental values of Cs should be used instead of assumed values from literature for calculating overall mass transfer coefficient ( KLU ). However, the value of CS has to be determined in any case for determining the oxygen transfer rate in the field scale _Cs waste water Therefore, this method B = Cs tan water )' dan be used in all experimental analysis. Moreover, the values of mass transfer coefficient determined by this method are slightly lower than determined by other methods from this category. This may result in slight over design of an aeration system which is a built-in risk factor.

(

IS 13166 : 1992 Table 3 Effect of Some Operating Variables on Oxygenation ( Clause 4.2.2)

Increase in Operating Variable (1) i) Temperature

Resulting Physical Change (2) Diffusivity, D increases but film thickness and Cs decreases

Effect on Equation Variable (3) KLa increases Cs-C decreases KLa increases

New Effect on Oxygenation (4) Negligible decreases Increases if C C 3 mgjl if C > 3 mg/l

ii) Circulating

velocity

L decreases, bubble size decreases hence interfacial area increases A increases, L decreases Cs increases

iii)

Aeration Partial

rate OS

pressure

KLa increases increases

Cs-C

Increases

iv) On Demand

OS is removed from solution faster than C decreases Bubble size path is longer and Cs increases but there less is proportionally surface removal and surface formation D and Cs both Film thickness A increases decrease decreases

Cs-C increases

Increases

.'

v) Height

of water

&a decreases but ( Cs-C 1 increases

Decreases

vi) Soluble inorganic

Kna and Cs-C both decreases KLa increases

Decreases Increases up to a level of lo15 cm from the top level of surface aerator and beyond that it decreases

vii)

Submergence

Table 4 Summary of Mass Transfer Calculation Methods ( Clause 5.1 )

Method (1) i) Non-steady state aeration of tap water

Assumption (2) Complete mixing, constant temperature

Advantages (3) Simple and rapid method, good control of variables

Disadvantages (4) Independent alpha determiall conditions nation, must be reproducible Evaluation of small aerators only, because high flow rates are required to obtain good accuracy. Impracticable for evaluation at large scale units

ii) Steady state aeration of tap water

Complete mixing, temperature

constant

Same as above except smaller volume of water can be used, as KLa evaluation accuracy is dependent on volume. No transient methods are required I 1 KLa is made under actual field conditions

iii) Activated sludge field conditions

state

Complete mixing, no significant microbial change during test period composition Substrate load and tank conditions do not change during test period

iv) Activated sludge-nonfield steady state conditions

i

i

I
b

i

Difficult to control variable during test period. Respiration factor sometimes difficult to correctly evaluate

4

IS 13166 : 1992 Table 5 Comparison of Non-Steady
Method (1) i) Direct analysis

State Methods for Reaeration of Deoxygenated Water ( Clause 5.2 )
Equation Remarks (3) Plot dc/dt versus C, slope = KLa Y-axis intercept = max rate of

(2) a += dc/dt = rate of oxygenation, for , dcldt = KLa Cs - KLaC a+KLa(Ce -C) where KL = liquid film coefficient

oxygen transfer Exact values of dc/dt difficult to evaluate except using a computer

a = interfacial Volume ii) Exponential ing curve fitt-

area per unit

So KLa = overall mass transfer coefficient C = Cs [ 1 - exp ( - Kmt 1 I where t = contact time

K&a is independent

iii) Rapid estimate ( time constant method )
iv> Log-deficit method

C

E

CS [

1 - exp ( - KLat 1 I

KLa-_

zd"",");
*
L

- In ( cs - KLah +Cs(l

c

)P

v) Linearized transformation method

C(t+h)=Cte

-emKLah)

of DO concentra: tion time and space KLa is independent of DO concentration A least square non-linear analysis to be used for calculating KLa and Cs. Illustrative example is given at Annex A Same as in (ii) but the value of CS should be known to get 63'86% and 95% saturation level of DO Value of Cs should be known, Nonlinearity of plotted data means incorrect use of CS The simplest and accurate method CS need not be known

5.3 A review of testing procedures employed by manufacturers and professional organisations given at Table 6 indicates that data ( concentraare normally truncated tion versus time) above 70-90x and under 1O-2Oo/o of saturation value. The truncation below 10-20% is mainly done to avoid errors resulting from improper mixing of the deoxygenating chemical ( sodium sulphite ) with the aeration tank tap water. Initial mixing of the deoxygenating chemical can cause erratic and unreliable data generation at the beginning of the test unless extreme care is taken to optimise the testing condition. At the upper end ( above 70% saturation DO concentration ) as the value of dissolved oxygen concentration approaches its saturation, the value of overall transfer coefficient cannot be determined exactly ( &u --too ). From this analysis the log deficit method is still by far the simplest and can be used without hesitation. Moreover, in an actual activated sludge system dissolved oxygen in the aeration tank is desired to be kept in the range of 1 to 2 m-g/l which is certainly less than 70% of the saturation value. Therefore, using the entire data including at the upper end is of no use and that is why one is certain of getting higher values of oxygen transfi"; r$.. if other method described in Table 6
.

6 IMPORTANT EVALUATIONS

CONSIDERATION -IN OF OXYGENATION RATES

6.1 Sodium Sulphite Addition Before the experimental run begins, the dissolved oxygen ( D.O. ) level in the test basin is reduced to zero, or below zero level, by the addition of sodium sulphite and a cobalt salt acting as a catalyst. The sulphite reacts with dissolved oxygen and the resulting sulphate remains as inert dissolved material which does not take any part in She further reaction. The method of sodium sulphite addition cam effect the measured dissolved oxygen uptake. The aerator to be tested is usually used to distribute the sodium sulphite throughout the aeration basin. This means that it is operating when the chemical is added and therefore dissolving the sodium sulphite instantaneously and uniformly at all points in the basin, but since it is impossible, one has to attempt to approach this condition within the limits of practicality. The conditions to be observed are:
i> Completely

pre-dissolve the chemical in water and do not add any solid. residue. If solids are added, they may be dissolved slowly and possibly, locally only. The test
result sistent as ~a consequence and inaccurate. will be incon-

Table 6 DO Cut Off Organization

% Cs
% Cs

DO Cut Off r-----------7

ii) Add the chemical

Yeomans Emico
Welles Rexord Mix-equipment ASME PEMA WPCF

Lower 10 10
20 ;:

ugger 80
75 ;: 90 ;:

l"o"

in significantly excess quantity so that there is sufficient time for its distribution throughout the basin before it is used up by the proceeding aeration. Sodium sulphite requirements are based on the mean system saturation and normally, 1.25 times the astoichiometric requirement is used. Tests have been conducted using 95 to 200% of the

5

IS13166:1992
stoichiometric quantity without affecting the oxygen transfer rate results. iii) Add the chemical in such a manner that its distribution throughout the tank by the surface aerator is facilitated. This can be achieved by adding the solution at several, perhaps four points ( one feed line for each quadrant ) at location of high velocities. iv) Strong evidence has indicated sodium sulphite values above 2,000 mgll increases oxygenation capacity, probably due to reduction in surface tension with an increasing interfacial area thus increasing mass transfer coefficients. Moreover, an increase in oxygenation capacity also results from increasing cobalt concentrations beyond l-5 mgll. Fresh tap water should be used after every v) six test runs because there is a possibility of sodium sulphate build up in the aeration -tank. 6.2 Dissolved Oxygen Concentration The Winkler titration method and its modification gives results which will depend on water for the determination of dissolved oxygen [ see IS 3025 ( Part 38 ) 1. Dissolved oxygen can also be measured by a dissolved oxygen probe-meter. The calibration of an oxygen meter using membrane type sensors can be undertaken in mg/l or percent saturation level. However, percentage saturation requires only compensation of membrane permeability for temperature changes whereas if read out is in required mgll compensation must also be made for solubility changes in temperatures, dissolved solids and atmospheric pressure. Percent saturation is more clearly related to the ideal state of biological process than concentration of dissolved oxygen. During an aeration/agitation process, size distribution or bubbles of oxygen is produced from large macromolecule to the molecular dimension of oxygen in the aeration basin. The Winkler titration method can entrap oxygen molecules from all sizes of bubbles whereas the oxygen meter can read out what has passed through its membrane. Therefore, there is a possibility of discrepancy between these two systems of measurements. A lot of judgement is required before calibrating an oxygen meter. Excess cobalt chloride in test water may also interfere in ( DO ) determination by Winklers method. For surface aerators, it is often assumed that water affect (DO ) saturation. depth does not .Cs value which may, or may not be the case as there are very fine bubbles entrained in the aeration basin which travel large distance downwards and finally are released upwards near the top of the water surface. Moreover, it is di.%cult to estimate the exact value of ( DO ) saturation. Similar difficulties also arise while 6 measuring the actual ( DO ) concentration the turbulent field in the aeration basin. 6.3 Methods of Estimating Mass Transfer Coefficient The methods listed in the previous sections have some drawback or the other. The simplest and accurate method is the Linearised Transformation Method which can be used provided the system conditions can be reproduced easily. It would be an ideal situation if the exponential curve fitting method is used. However, the difference in values calculated from various methods is not more than 15 percent. During the nonsteady aeration of tap water, the dissolved oxygen concentration continues to increase with time, it is suggested that atleast three station points in one quadrant of the aeration basin should be chosen, namely, the first near the aerator, the second midway on the diagonal and the third one near the extreme end of the diagonal. At each station point, at least three depth water samples should be taken at different depths, simultaneously ( Fig. 2 ).
AERATION BASIN

in

f

LEGEND
Sampling Stations Depths

T-l T-2
T-3 S-l s-2 s-3 *15 cm

1* f It + 1$
1+1+1 1+1+1 1+1+1 1+1+1 1+1+1

from top WL. tMid-depth of aeration basin. $15 cm from bottom of aeration

basin.

FIG. 2 SAMPLING LOCATIONSIN ABRATION BASIN FOR SURFACEAERATOREVALUATION

It is important that the average of all the (DO) concentration from nine samples is not to be made. Rather, calculate the mass transfer

IS 13166 : 1992 ,coefficient at each station and depth point separately. The average of the individual mass transfer coefficients obtained from several stations and depth points is then taken. The DO concentration by itself is not important. It is the mass transfer coefficient which is a parameter in the oxygen transfer calculations. For actual wastewater systems, two factors, namely, alpha cc ( KLa wastewater/KLa tap water ) and Beta l3 ( DO saturation in wastewater/DO saturation in tap water ) should be determined separately for evaluating the performance of the aeration device in the field. A declared oxygenation efficiency ( OE ) of l-5 kg O,/kW/h and an alpha factor of 1-O leads .to exactly same power consumption as an effici,ency of 2.0 kgO,/kW/h modified by an alpha factor of 0.75, although at first sight, the latter might appear to be more efficient aerator. .6,4 Time Period As the test proceeds a response curve is generated by each ( DO ) probe. Measurements should be recorded atleast every 10 seconds cycling from the first to the last probe consecutively. At the completion of the test, the response asymtotic concentration should be compared with initial DO saturation value of each probe to verify the final DO saturation value and probe calibration. If DO probes are not available, a simple sampler rod with BOD bottles fixed at three heights could be used having inlet and outlet arrangements for water and air at a differential head of about 0.10 m respectively. The water inlet tube should nearly touch the bottom of BOD bottle. Air outlet tube is projected outside the BOD bottle, thereby minimizing any kind of mixing of water with air bubbles. It can be used at 30 seconds or longer time intervals. For quicker and faster measurement oxygen DO probe is a must, provided its response period is fairly good. Moreover, the DO probe of an oxygen meter registers only molecular oxygen that has gone into the solution. But with a BOD bottle sampler rod, oxygen from even minute air bulbbes can be fixed. ,6.5 Temperature Coefficient It has been observed that the value of the Arrehenius constant (~9)for mass transfer of oxygen has three distinct values in the range of 5-45X using a surface aerator. The exact value of the temperature coefficient should be used. 0 = 1.024, 20 > T > 5 e = 1.028, 35 > T > 20 B = 1.031, 45 > T > 35 .where T is temperature in "C. 6.6 Basin Configuration For a given diameter of surface aerator, D, the dimensions of an ideal test basin should be between 4 to 5 D ( length/width), the water depth should be 1.5 to 2.0 D. It would be advisable to have either a square tank or a circular tank of equivalent dimensions with baffles. If it is desired to operate the unit as a facultative activated sludge process, the circle of influence can be increased from 5 D to 10 D units depending on the thickness of the aerobic zone required in the treatment plant. 6.7 It is also found that oxygenation efficiency ( OE ) decreases with increase in basin volume. However, oxygenation capacity ( OC) tends to increase with increase in area of influence for a given water depth. 6.8 No simple type of aerator is ideal for all conditions. The efficiency ( OE ) of the aerator in transferring oxygen is obviously important but a high oxygenation capacity ( OC ) is of no value if obtained at the expense of inadequate stirring and mixing. The load on aeration device is rarely constant at the value the designer originally evisaged and, therefore, the efficiency over a range of input process conditions is likely to be more important than efficiency at a particular designed point. 6.9 The efficiency of an aeration device tends to reduce with reduced loads or with increasing load beyond optimum value. This reduction in efficiency shall be taken into account whenever water levels vary considerably. However, increase in submergence or rotational speed may result in more -oxygen transfer than is required, therefore, resulting in wastage of power. For high loading rates, power requirements may be determined by oxygen requirements rather than mixing conditions. However, reverse may be true for other mixing system of activated sludge process. It has been observed that 1 to 7.7 W/ms of specific power is required to disperse the oxygen molecules throughout the aeration basin. However, additional expenditure of power is required to disperse biological suspended solids in aeration basin, that is, 5-20 W/ms at 10.5 m ( keeping same flow velocity of lo-15 cm/s). Power input is generally regarded as a poor criterion since a number of combinations of impeller diameter, rotational speed and submergence can result in the same power consumption with markedly different mixing characteristics. However, in systems with similar geometries, this parameter can still be very useful. 6.10 Sometimes the water in the tank may have a greenish tinge. It is suggested that the extent of production of oxygen due to photo-synthetic micro-organisms may also be calculated using the light and dark bottle technique.

IS 13166: 1992

system performance is a function of oxygen transfer efficiency and mixing and both must be ~considered when evaluating aeration equipment. Oxygen transfer is influenced by the testing procedures employed and methods of analysis used to interpret the raw data. Mixing is influenced by the aeration system geometry of the test facility. A comparison of mass transfer coefficient values for various sample points throughout the test tank will reveal whether or not the volume of fluid is being mixed uniformly. If the mass transfer coefficient value is nearly constant throughout the tank, uniform mixing is occurring. 7 TEST PROCEDURE
7.1 To start the test,

6.11 The overall aeration

the net power consumption Equation 4: p, = p, x ?s x
qb

(P,)
x

as indicated
`Im

in.

..s4),

the aeration basin is filled with tap water and its temperature and DO determined under the test conditions. Cobalt chloride is added to achieve a cobalt ion concentration of about 0.5 mgll. Technical grade sodium chloride is used to completely deoxygenate the test water. Normally, 1.25 times the stoichiometric requirement ( 7.9 mg/l of Na, SOS for each mg of DO present ) is used. As the test proceeds, a response curve ( concentration versus time ) is generated at each sample point. There should be at least three station points with DO measurement at three depths. A tank of 13 m x 13 m x 10 m should have minimum of three sampling stations. A plot of oxygen deficit ( Cs - C ) versus time (t) on a semilogarithmatic graph paper is drawn. The value of overall mass transfer coefficient is calculated by using the expressions:
Kra IT\ \J

Therefore oxygenation efficiency ( OE, ) can be found by the following expression: OE, = OC,/Pn .*. (5) It is necessary to know both gross and net powerconsumption of the surface aerator assembly. For wastewater other than water, Alpha/Beta determinations are pre-requisite for evaluation of oxygenation capacity. A test model ofO-020 rns capacity with similar configuration to proto-type fitted with 0.10 diameter surface aerator is used. If the wastewater is of biode-gradable nature, oxygen uptake rate (y) is to be calculated. In this connection, a one-litre wide mouth bottle filled with bio-degradable waste-water and fitted with a DO probe is used. The wastewater is saturated with DO to begin up. After that a plot of DO concentration with time. is plotted. The slope of this curve determines the oxygen uptake rate (y)r. Using the expression as. given below, rate of change of DO with DO concentration is plotted. The slope of the curve will determine the overall mass transfer co-efficient (KLa). From the intercept ( KLa Csw y ), the value of DO saturation ( Csw ) can be found out if the value of .r determined above is used as defined under the actual field conditions:.
dc __ dt ( KLaCs y) KLa C

-

2.303 1% (G

-

C), - IOk? (ct.3 ( Is - 11 1

C)z __*(l)

To determine alpha (a), it is necessary to deter-mine LLa of wastewater and tap water separately under identical conditions and rates of KLa wastewater to KLa tap water defines alpha(a). After knowing Csw and alpha as -per the field conditions, oxygenation capacity under field conditions ( OCf ) can be determined provided oxygenation capacity ( OCs ) using tap water has also been done as explained previously. The oxygenation efficiency divided by power gives. oxygenation efficiency OEl: OCf 5
oc,

KLa (T) is converted to standard condition 20" C by using Equation 2.
KLa (T) = K,a (20) W20

of

...(2)

The value of `0' to be usedunder different conditions of water temperature is given earlier. KLa values obtained from various sampling points are averaged out to determine the effective mass transfer coefficient for the earlier systems. Oxygenation capacity ( OC) surface aerator under standard condition can be calculated by Equation 3: OCs = KLa C,V . . (3) To determine the oxygenation efficiency ( OE ), the efficiencies of gear/belt and motor are necessary. Manufacturers of gears/belt and motor provide the efficiency of their products at various loading conditions. Gross power consumption (PB) by the entire aerator assembly can be recorded by a watt/watthour meter and necessary corrections for efficiency can be incorporated into the gross power consumption to determine
8

(Am 9.12

c 1 _af)T-*o

OEi = OCij Pnr

For toxic wastewater or wastewater which does not contain microbial biomass, test procedure remains the same as defined for tap water. where c, C*, ca = DO concentration in theaeration basin at any. time, at time-t, and at time-t, respectively, mgll 5 Saturation DO concenCS tration at 1 atm and 20" C ( 9.12 mg/l )

IS 13166 : 1992

c *w

Saturation DO concentration under actual field conditions, mgll KLa (T), KLa (20) = Overall mass transfer coefficient, at any temperature - T and at 20�C respectively, h-1 V - Liquid volume of the aeration basin, rn3 = Efficiency of gear, belt Q, ?a, and qrn and motor respectively = Respiration rate, mg/l/h Y

-

Pn, P nf

= New power consumption under standard and field conditions respectively, kW = Oxygenation capacity under standard and field conditions respectively, kgOt/h = Oxygenation efficiency under standard and field conditions respectively, kgO@W/h

CC,, CCt

C&, CEr

ANNEX A ( Clause 5.2 and Table 5 )
ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLE

The assessment of KLa by the simple method of incremental increase in time from the non-steady state reaeration experiment is presented in Fig. 3. Since the DO values are availableat an interval of two minutes, the value of h is also considered as two minutes. The basic experimenta 1 data is presented in Table 7. The line of best fit has been obtained both by

graphical as well as least square method. The line of best fit by eye judgement drawn on this figure shows the values of KLa and CB to be 0.111 min ( base e ) and ~8.0 mg/l respectively. The line of best fit obtained by least square method show these values to be O-118 min ( base e ) and 7.795 mg/I respecttvely. The nonsteady state reaeration of tap water is. shown in Fig. 4 based on the data indicated in Table 7.

HERE m= O-6 0.111 lmin

KLo=

A = 1*6 Cs = 6.0 mgll

I, 0

I

1

1

I

I

I

I

1
DISSOLVED

2

3
OXYGEN

L
IN mglt

5
AT TIME

6
t-rCt

7

8

FIG. 3

METHOD OF DETERMINATION OF KLU 9

IS 13166 : 1992

0
I

0"
I-

IDEAL

CASE

Cs = 9-02 mgll

O
Ia.

LAG= ZERO
l

EFEECT Cs= 8.8 LAG=ZERO

OF Cs mgll

z d d

0.1

-

1

COMBlNEO CS= 8.8 LAG=2 mgll min I 20 t

EFFECT

OF Cs AND LAG
la

0.05 0

I 10

I 20

I 30 TIME

I 50

I 60

I 70

I 80

I 90

IN MINUTES

FIG.

4

EFFECT OF LAG TIME AND CS

ON DETERMINATION OF KLa

Table 7 Non-Steady Timein
Minutes

State Reaeration Data
DO Concentration

1'S 3'S 5'8 7'8 9'8 11'S 13'S 15'8 17'8 19'8 21'8 23'8 25'8 27'8 29'8

in mgtl 1'39 2'73 3'80 4'62 5'32 5'87 6'24 6'58 6'91 7'13 7'20 7'23 7'41 7'48 7'56

The above table shows that for all practical purposes there is hardly any difference in the values of KLa obtained by different methods. The simplicity of the method and the elimination of the use of computer renders this method far more useful than any other techniques presently adopted for the assessment of &,a value.

Conclusions

1) 2)

The importance of assessment of KLa for a water or waterwaste water system from laboratory or plant studies is emphasized. Simple method of assessment of &a has been suggested. The method eliminates the use of computer and also does not need the assessment of saturation D.O. concentration of the wastewater under any temperature condition of the experiment. by this method are practically the same as obtained by methods using non-linear programming techniques.

3) The results obtained

Comparison of Results
Table 8 shows the values of KLa and C, obtained by the incremental increase method, nonsteady state re-aeration of tap water and nonlinear programming techniques.

4) The elimination

of computer work and simplicity of method renders the method far more useful than any other techniques presently adopted.

10

IS 13166: 1992

Table 8
Parameter By ;;;$cal

Comparison of Results
By Numerical Least Square Curve Fitting 0'118 7'795 Non-Linear Programming Techniques 0'118 7'8

KLa/min Cs in mg/l

( base e )

0'111 8'0

Standard Mark The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, tosting and quality control which is~devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use oft he Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

Bureau of Indian Standards BLS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goodo and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright No part of these publications may be reproduced in any BIS has the copyright of all its publications. form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. Revision of Indian Standards Indian Standards are reviewed peri&<ally and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the latest amendments or sedition. Comments following reference: Dot : No. CED 40 ( 4470 )

Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters
:

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahudur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Regional Offices : Central : Manan Bhavan, 9 Bhadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern Southern Western : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS
: Manakalaya,

Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone 331 01 31 ( 331 13 75 87 86 62

160036 600113 )

53 38 43 235 02
16

E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri BOMBAY 400093

(East

632 92 95

Branches : AHMADABAD; BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

