( Reaffirmed 2003 )

ts I 10485 - 1983

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR INSTALLATION OF SINGLE AND COMMUNITY ANTENNA SYSTEMS FOR RECEPTION OF SOUND AND TELEWSION BROADCASTING
Radio
Chairman SERI H.S. JOLLY Members SIUU 0. P. KHUSHU ( Alternate to Shri H. S. Jolly ) ADDITIONAL DIEECTOI~ STANDARDS Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) ( S&T ), RDSO JOINT DIRECTOR STANDARDS ( S&T)-IV, RDSO ( Altarnatt ) Ministry of Defence ( DPI ) ( N ) CDR S. S. BAIDWAN LT A. BEOWMIUK ( Alternate ) Small Scale Industries Development CommisSHRI A. K. BASAK sioner, New Delhi SHRI P. P. MALHOTRA ( Alternate ) Indian Television Manufacturers Association, SHRI H. M. BHATNAQAR New Delhi Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore SHRI H. S. CHANDRAMOULI SHRI K. RAMASESHU ( Alternatt ) Planning Wireless and Coordination Wing SHRI R. G. DEODHAR ( Ministry of Communication ), New Delhi Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi SHRI M. L. DHAR SERI P. K. DHIN~RA ( Alternate ) Indian Telephone Industrirs Ltd, Bangalore SHRI A. K. GHOSE SHRI N. KRISHNAN KUTTY ( Alternate ) National Test House, Calcutta SARI B. P. GHOSH SHRI B.C.MUKHERJEE (Alternate) The Radio Electronic &Television Manufacturers SHRI J. GUPTA Association (RETMA ), Bombay SHRI T. s. BUXI ( AIternatt ) Peico Electronics & Electricals Ltd, Bombay SHRI J. GUP~A SHRI P. S. SAOEDEV ( Alternate ) Institution of Electronics and Telecommunication DR S. K. HAJELA Engineers, New Delhi ( C0tiinucd on pug8 2 )

Communications

Sectional

Committee,
Rtfrtsenting

LTDC

20

All India Radio,

New Delhi

@ Copyright 1983
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the Indiun Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

( Continuedfrom fiuge 1 )
Members Representing

SERI JAQJIT

SINQH

SHRI R. S. KALE

Federation of Association of Small Industries of India, New Delhi Police Wireiess ( Directorate of Coordination ) ( Ministry of Home Affairs ), New Delhi

SHRI S. JANAEIRAMAN ( Alternate) Ministry of Defence ( DPIL ) COL K. V. KUDVA LT-COL KRISHAN LAL ( Alternate ) Electronics Corporation of India Ltd, Hyderahad Da S. P. LUTHRA Ministry of Defence ( DTD&P ) ( AIR ) SHBI R. C. PANDEY SHRI T. V. VARADRAJAN ( Alternate ) Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd, Bangalore SHRX A. K. N. PRASAD SHRI M. G. SRIDHARAN ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Doordarshan, New Delhi SHRI K. P. RAMASWAMY SHRI K. B. BORKER ( Alternate ) Research Engineering Electronics Central SHRI P. K. RAN~OLE Institute ( CSIR ), Pilani SHRI H. K. JAIN ( Alternate) Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals, SHRI M. SANKARALIN~AM New Delhi SHRI R. S. ARORA ( Alternate ) Posts & Telegraphs Board, New Delhi SHRI V. P. SAXENA SERI N. K. MANQLA ( Alternate ) Department of Electronics, New Delhi SHRI S. SHARMA DR K. S. K. SAI ( Alternate ) Electronics Trade and Technology Development SHRI C. G. SUBRAMANYAN Corporation Ltd, New Delhi SHRI ISRWAR DUTT ( Alternate ) National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi SHRI SURESII CHANDRA Directorate General of Technical Development, SHRI K. K. TANEJA New Delhi SHRI H. S. DUBEY ( Alternate ) Gujarat Communications and Electronics Ltd, SHRI C. M. THIRUMURT~Y Vadodara Director General, IS1 ( Ex-ojicio Member ) SHRI R. C. JAIN, Head ( Electronics )
Seuetary

SI~RI D. K. NAYYAR Assistant Director ( Electronics

), ISI

Panel for Receiving
Convener SHRI

Aerials,

LTDC

2O/P4

P. K. RANOOLE
Members

Central Electronics Engineering tute ( CEERI ), Pilani to Directorate Delhi
)

Research

Insti-

DR M. D. SI~~QH ( Alternate Shri P. K. Rangole ) SHRI A. K. BANSAL SHRI B. K. KOCHAR

General

of

Civil

Aviation,

New

( dlternccte

( Continued on #age 33 )

2

IS:10485 - 1983

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR INSTALLATION OF SINGLE AND COMMUNITY ANTENNA SYSTEMS FOR RECEPTION OF SOUND AND TELEVISION BROADCASTING
0. FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 18 February 1983, after the draft finalized by the Radio Communications Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. 0.2 This code of practice
is intended for the guidance of manufacturers and customers of single and community antenna systems for the reception of sound and television broadcasting. 0.3 This code of practice is based on British Standard CP `The reception of sound and television broadcasting', issued Standards Institution. 1020-1953 by British

1. SCOPE
recommends erection and cabling of single and community antenna systems (that is, antennae and associated equipment) for good reception of sound and television broadcasts. It includes the protection of such systems against atmospheric electricity and recommendations for the certification of the systems.
NOTE 1 - Compliance with the recommendations given confer immunity from relevant legal requirements, if any. in this code does not

1.1 This code of practice

NOTE 2 - The single or community antenna system is supposed to feed to the proper receiving apparatus covered by relevant Indian Standards such as IS : 6151966*, IS : 4547-1978t and IS : 6759-1972$. *Minimum requirements of domestic radio receivers ( mid). j3pecification for receivers for monochrome television broadcast (jirst revision ). $Requirements for radio receivers for frequency modulation broadcast

transmissions transmissions.

3

IS : 10485 - 1983 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.1 For the purpose of this standard the following terms and definitions in addition to those already specified in IS : 1885 ( Parts XVIII to XXII)1967* shall apply.

2.2 Antenna - A single element or an assembly of elements and connected as to have the necessary receiving properties. 2.3 Antenna Cable terminal equipment. A cable connecting

so spaced

an antenna to its associated

2.4 Antenna Mast -- The supporting structure for an antenna, including any brackets, struts and stays. 2.5 Antenna System - A system comprising one or more antennae on a single mast, the appropriate single-cable distribution system, and other appropriate components, which will enable the intended reception of sound or television broadcasts. 2.6 Bondi ng - The connection of a circuit or a component ( that is required to be bonded ) to the metallic cold water mains or electricity supply earth point ( where permitted ), by means of a conductor or conductors in such a manner that a resistance of 0.2 ohm is not exceeded and a current of 30 A may be carried for a period of 5 s. 2.7 Channel Converter - A device for changing the carrier frequencies of all the signals in a particular channel before the signals are transmitted on a cable distribution system. 2.8 Community Antenna System - A common antenna system serving a group of independent users ( for example, households, business concerns, etc. ) and in which signals received by the antenna system are distributed, by a cable distribution system, to a number of television or sound receivers or both. 2.9 Cross Modulation - The modulation, arising from the interaction of. the radio frequency signals in nonlinear circuits, of a wanted signal by the modulation of an unwanted signal on a different carrier frequency. 2.10 Head End - Any equipment that is connected between one or more antennae or other signal sources and the distribution network in order to process the signals that are to be distributed.
*Electrotechnical vocabulary : Part XVIII General terms on radio communications. Part XIX Radio communication circuits. Part XX Radiowave propagation. Part XXI Aerials. Parr XXII Equipments for radio communications,

c

transmitting

and receiving.

4

b: 10483- i983
2.11 Mutual Attenuation between any two outlet sockets The attenuation at specified within a distribution system. frequencies, a

provided for the connection of 2.12 Outlet Socket - A socket standard receiver ( sound or television or both ) to the antenna system. 3. EX.CHANGE OF INFORMATION

' 3.1 Installation Requirements - The initial and ultimate requirements should be ascertaine'd by the contract or from the client, On the basis of drawings and schedule of requirements this information a specification, should be prepared and should include as appropriate:
a) broadcast b) number, c) location d) location services location of central of aerials; of future requiremets; and to be received; and finish ~of distribution equipment; points;

e) signal levels at the outlets; f) anticipation g) operating and safety instructions.

NOTE - The above practice is essential for cable distribution system and desimable for systems with single outlet to a receiver. In case of contracts for buildings under construction the architect and the consultant as appropriate should also be made parties to the contract.

4. TIME 4.1 Initial b)

SCHEDULE Planning -' Time of tenders, and before contract is let. the equipbe ordered of proposals should be allowed for: and when appropriate of installation requirements,

a) preparation submission

c) ~appraisal of tenders, d) approval

4.2 Ordering Central Equipment - For large installations ment may have to be specially manufactured and should early to ensure its availability at the right time for installation.

4.3 Installation of Equipment - Work may commence on the installation of the equipment at any stage of the building work provided that all building work in the actual room, including decoration, is finished: and that the room is dry. Electric light and POMPI' should be available at the Work of other contractors likely 10 commencement of the installation. give rise to dust should not be carried out in the vicinity after installation of the central equipment has begun.

IS:10485-1983 4.4 Antennae
- Antennae stage of the building work. fittings may be installed at any convenient should be

4.5 Wiring - Wiring in ducts, conduits, chases carried out at a late stage of building construction. 5. MATERIALS, APPLIANCES

and the like

AND COMPONENTS types of cables be used. and wires known to

5.1 Cables and Wires -Standard give a reliable performance should

5.2 Socket Outlets and Plugs - Socket outlets and plugs used for telecommunication services should not be interchangeable with those used for electric light or power circuits. 5.3 Quality of Materials - The quality of materials, finish and the performance of the components, apparatus and equipment should be adequate to meet the test requirements specified in 8 and to ensure satisfactory operation for the designated period, 5.4 Fire and Explosion Risk - The provision of telecommunication equipment in any situation where there may be an explosive or flammable atmosphere should be avoided. Where no alternative exists -and it - becomes essential to install telecommunication equipment then the equipment certified to be intrinsically safe and flameproof should be used. 6. PLANNING AND DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS

6.1 Antenna and Earth System - It is customary for long and medium wave receivers for domestic use to be fitted with internal antenna and in majority of cases these provide reception of a quality that the Receivers for short wave and for listener considers to be satisfactory. very high frequency ( VHF ) are commonly provided with a telescopic antenna intended to be stretched when the receiver is in use. Where reception with such an inbuilt~antenna is not satisfactory and the design of the receiver permits, reception is usually improved by using an antenna external to the receiver and ~preferably outside the building. Where an external aerial is used, an earth connection should also be used. Where because of screening, interference or planning restrictions it is either undesirable or impractical to use individual antennae, it is strongly recommended that a community antenna and wired distribution system be used ( 6.4 ). This may be combined with a system for the distribution of television signals when appropriate. 6.2 Sound Reception

6.2.1 Services to he Received - Sound broadcasting in the following frequency sounds is dealt with in 6.2.2 and 6.2.3. Receivers may receive 6

transmissions these bands:

in any one of these bands, band band

combination 525.5 2.3 87 -

of these bands kHz

or all

Medium-wave Short-wave VHF 6.2.2 band

1 606.5

26.1 MHz 109 MHz Bands

Antenna Systems for the Medium-and

Short-wave

6.2.2.1 Outdoor antenna systems - Basically both vertical and horizontal antennae are capable of giving satisfactory results, and practical conditions at the receiving site may indicate the type to be used in individual cases. For reception in weak signal areas a high horizontal antenna is to be preferred. Antenna should preferably be mounted above roof level. Care should be taken to keep the antenna and the lead-in as far as possible, away from any source of interference and from metallic objects that may Care may be taken of the pipes and conduct and radiate interference. electrical wiring often concealed in the walls of modern buildings. 6.25.2 Vertical antenna - A vertical antenna usually takes the form of a metal rod, properly insulated from its support. The insulated wire connecting the antenna to the receiver should also be vertical as far -as possible and a permanent and weather-resistant electrical connection should be made between the antenna and the wire. For private houses it is usually fitted as illustrated in Fig. 1. satisfactory for the antenna to be

Where this arrangement is impracticable, the antenna may be fixed in various positions, for example to a point on a window sill with some loss of effectiveness. consists 6.2.2.3 Horizontal antennae - The most usual arrangement of a horizontal wire with a lead-in from the near and direct to the receiver, the whole forming roughly an inverted letter `L' as in Fig. 2.
c

The support for the house end of the antenna should be taken to a high point and a support at the far end should be approximately of the The lead-in should be taken from a point situated at some same height. distance from the house so that it hangs clear of the wall and away from As far as possible the wire should not run parallel to pipes and gutters. other nearby conductors. Insulated copper wire should be used, suspended by low capacitan-ce The horizontal wire and lead-in should preferainsulators at each end. bly be a continuous length of wire.

7

IS:10485

-

1983

1 2 3 4 5 6

Metal rod aerial mounted on insulating support. Down-lead. Insulator supportiag down-lead clear of gutter. Lead-in tube through wall. Earth terminal. Earthing lead ( see 6.7 ). Precautions against the effects of atmospheric electricity are dealt with

NOTE:in 6.6.

Frc 1. EXAMPLEOF OUTDOOR AERIAL AND E~RTI! SYSTW
8

IS : l9485 = 1983

1 2 3 4 5

Aerial wire and lead-in in one continuous insulated Lead-in tube through wall or window frame. Insulators. Wire suspensions. Steadying stay for down-lead.
NOTE -

J
1

4

1

_I

length.

Precautions

against

the effects

of atmospheric

electricity

and dealt

with

in 6.6.

FIG. 2

EXAMPLE

OF AN 'INVERTED L' AERIAL MHz)

6.2.3

Antenna System for VHF Band ( 87-109

6.2.3.1 General - Antennae for the reception of very high frequency sound broadcasting take the same general form as television antenna systems in that they consist basically of elements that resonate at frequencies to be received. As with television the type of antenna needed depends upon local reception conditions and it should not be assumed that an effective outdoor antenna is unnecessary because the listener lives within a few kilometres of the transmitting station. The placement and positioning of the antenna is most important and has to take into consideration : ( a ) the polarisation of the transmitters and ( b ) the fact that there may by large differences in signal strength at points only about one metre apart, particularly in built up areas, and this effect may not be the same at all frequencies on which a station transmits. VHF antennae with appropriate directivity, depending upon the Using high directivity antennae conditions of reception, should be used. in areas of low field strength or where interference is' experienced is recommended. A few conventional types are shown inEig. 3, 4, 5, 6

9

IS:10485 - 1983
and 7. A characteristic form of distortion ( buzzing sound ) may be heard in areas where signals reflected from hills or large structures are received in addition to the main signal. Highly directional antenna carefully placed should be used under the situation.

The overall dimrnqion a is approximately one-half of the wavelength of the service concerned; for Band I a will be between 2.3 m and 3.4 m depending upon the channel to be received, and for Uand II it will be I.5 m. The dimension b-should be at least 0.76 m for Band I and may be proportionately less for Band II. NOTE - Precautions against the effects of atmospheric electricity are dealt with in 6.6. Fao. 3 EXAMPLEOF SIMPLEHALF-WAVE DIPOLF

18

fS : 10485 . 1983

DlRECllON OF TRANSMITTER

The dimension a is the same as for a simple dipole ( see Fig. 3 ) and the reflector is slightly longer. The dimension 6 is between one-quarter to one-eight wavelength depending on the design of the aerial.
NOTE in 6.6. Precautions against the effects of atmospheric electricity are dealt with

FIG. 4

EXAMPLE OF HALF-WAVE DIPOLE AERIAL WITH REFLECTOR

6.2.3.2 Indoor antenna - When a VHF receiver is used with an antenna fitted inside the cabinet or with a telescopic rod antenna it will be usually necessary to try alternate positions in the room and as the inbuilt antenna is directional the receiver may need to be facing in a certain direction. When antennae of these types are found to be inadequate, a simple antenna erected preferably in the roof space may be satisfactory.

The use of any form of antenna inside framed buildings is likely to give unsatisfactory recommended. 6.3 TELEVISION RECEPTION

ferro-concrete reception

and

or steel is not

6.3.1 The television programmes transmitted in India are so far in Band I ( VHF ) channels 2-4 ( 47-68 MHz ) and Band III (-VHF ) channels 5-12 ( 174-223 MHz ). Television antennae may be required to receive one or more channels in one or both bands. Antennae will be required to receive channels also in the `Ultra High Frequency' -band as and when the transmission in this ~band is adopted. 11

IS:10485-1983
DIRECTOR

The dimension a is approximately one-half the wavelength concerned, as follows: Band I - between 2'3 m and 3.4 m depending on the channel used; Band II - 1.5 m; and Band III - 0.69 m to 0.84 m. The spacing between the elements depends upon the design of the aerial and the dipole is sometimes of the folded type, as indicated in Fig. 6. NOTE - Precautions against the effects of atmospheric electricity are dealt with in 6.6.

FIG. 5
REFLECTOR

EXAMPLE OF THREE-ELEMENT

AERIAL

For Band Dimension a is approximately one-half the wavelength concerned. III the dimension is 0.69 m to 0.84 m. The spacing between the elements depends upon the design of the aerial. NOTE- Precautions against the effects of atmospheric electricity are dealt with in 6.6.

FIG.

6

EXAMPLE OF HIGHLY-DIRECTIONAL AERIALS 1,2

IS t 10485 - 1983

NOTE in 6.6.

Precautions

against

the effects

of atmospheric

electricity

are dealt

with

FIG. 7

EXAMPLE OF AERIALS USED FORVHF RECEPTION

6.3.2 Basic Requirements for Good Reception - The strength of the signal received decreases rapidly with increasing distance from the transmitting Apart The use of an effective antenna is of utmost importance. station. from providing the receiver with adequate input voltage, the antenna has other functions like minimizing multiple images, discriminating against unwanted signals, etc. In situations where -it is undesirable to use individuals antennae (for example, in blocks of flats ) a community antenna system should be provided or connection made to the existing wired distribution system ( 6.4 ). Where feasible, this could also be combined with a system for the distribution of sound signals ( see also 6.1).

13

fS : 10485 - 1983
6.3.3 Antenna System for Television Rec@tion

type of antennae used for 6.3.3.1 General - The conventional television reception are shown in Fig. 3 to 7. The antenna could be mounted vertically or horizontally depending upon the polarization of the transmitting station. The directional properties of the antenna are used multiple images, and to take advantage of directive gain, minimizing rejecting unwanted signals. The three most important electrical parameters to be forward gain, directional properties and band width. properties of the antenna to be considered are of greatest areas where the signal is weak or where reflected signals from other stations using the same channel may occur. considered are The directive importance in or interference

of the antenna or the 6.3.3.2 Antenna for band I - The design antenna system shall be such that it is suitable for use with standard television receivers that comply with the relevant recommendations of IS : 4547-1978* at the location at which it is intended to operate. ,Usually antennae for band I are designed for a particular channel and may take a suitable form as in Fig. 3 to 7. The actual size of the antenna will be guided by the prevailing field strength and the problems of interference or multiple images at the site under consideration. 6.3.3.3 Antenna for b-and ILI - The characteristics of radio propogation and reception in band III require higher sensitivity for the antenna system thant hat required for band I system. The problem of multiple Use of antennae with multiple elements images is also more troublesome. as in Fig. 5 and 6 is recommended. Band III antennae may be so designed as to cover more than one channel for the whole of band III. This is particularly convenient when an area is served by two or more transmissions originating from approximately the same direction. The system of the performance shall be such that when a television receiver that complies with the requirements of IS : 4547-1978* is connected to the outlet socket and tuned to the respective transmission the reproduction of both sourld and vision is acceptable. 6.3.3.4 Combosite band I and band II1 antenna - Antenna can be designed to receive one or possibly two channels in band I as well as one or more channels in band III. The performance of this antenna shall be acceptable on all channels it is intended to receive. If the band I and band III transmitters do not lie in the same direction it will be necessary *Specification 1 Jirst prevision ). for receivers for monochrome television broadcast transmissions

'

14

IS : 10485 `a 1983
to select a type in which the antenna for the two bands and channels can be separately oriented. In fringe areas or where local conditions make reception difficult use of separate antennae for band I and band III is recommended. 6.3.3.5 Indoor antenna - The use of any form of antenna feroconcrete or steel framed buildings islikely to give inadequate tion and is not recommended. inside recep-

It is some times possible to obtain satisfactory reception with an Greater care is required in antenna installed in the loft or roof space. siting such antennae. The use of room antenna is generally deprecated because these tend to give variable reception and inferior pictures. 6.4.

COMtiUNITY ANTENNA AND WIRED DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM ( see Fig. 8 and 9 )

systems provide a means of distributing 6.4.1 General - Distribution sound or television programmes, or both, over a wire network to a number of receivers that may be within individual dwellings, in dwelling in a block of flats or in rooms in a hotel, etc. The programmes may be derived from a wired input to the building or from an antenna system or from both. The wired system will comprise of any necessary equipment to process or amplify the incoming programmes. for the antennae are the same as 6.4.2 Antennae - The requirements those for feeding individual receivers, although it is normally possible and desirable to use a better and more advantageously sited antenna system. 6.4.3 Distribution will include most, ( see Fig. 10 ). of Television and Sound frogrammes - A typical system but not necessarily all of the following components to the located combining

a) the antenna system for which it will generalIy be necessary best position for a given dwelling pattern or a building; b) in weak field strength areas, low-noise close to the antenna system elements; preamplifier(s)

"
and

c) amplifiers
units; d) trunk,

and

channel and

translators,

converters,

branch

spur feeders; incorporated units; in amplifiers and ); and tap-off

e) equalizers f) subscriber g) subscriber

( normally feeders outlet units.

It is generally impractical to feed a ,number of receivers from one antenna system without additional amplification. It may become 15

IS I 10485 1983
l

to translate the signals or signals to a channel that is necessary, otherwise unused in the area in order to avoid interference problems that can arise, Splitting or distribution units are used to divide the signal between different cable routes and should be designed to ensure a correct match to the cable. Subscribers are connected to the spur feeder. The tap-off units also limit signals being fed back from receiver into the spur feeder,

FROM

1 Metal-rod aerial mounted on insulated support. 2 Transformer. 3 Screened feeder connected to transformer in each-flat; the screening of the cable to be earthed. 4 Transformer Mith output leads connected to aerial and earth terminals of receiver.
NCITE -

Precautions

against the effects of atmospheric

electricity

are dealt with

in 6.6.

FIG. 8 EXAMPLE OF LONG-, MEDIUM- AND SHORT-WAVE COMMUNITY AERIAL SYSTEMIN SMALL BLOCK OF FLATS OR TERRACE HOUSING

IS : 10485 - 1983

FRAME

OF EQUIPMENT EARTHED

NATE in 6.6.

Precautions

against

the effects

of atmospheric

electricity

are dealt

with

FIG. 9 EXAMPLE OF LONG-, MEDIUM- AND SHORT-WAVE BAND Cow MUNITY AERIAL SYSTEM IN LARGE BLOCK OF FLATS USING WIDE-BAND AMPLIFIER

17

ISr10485-1983

AERIAL AMPLIFIERS

CHANNEL

HEAD END ' EQUIPMENT

COMBINING

UNIT

AUTDMATIC

LEVEL

---m

NOTE

1

-NOTE

2

---a

NOTE

3

~NOTEk

f
TERMINATING _p

SlGblAL ADAPTORS

NOTE 1 NOTE 2 -

Wired receiver connected
Aerial receiver connected

to HF system. to HF system via an adaptor. ) receiver connected to VHF system. the to VHF system via adaptor,

NOTE3 NOTE 4 NOTE 5items required

Dual-standard VHF-only

( or VHF-only

receiver connected

Not all the items shown are required in any one installation, being dependent on the size, type and layout of the system. PRINCIPAL ITEMS OF EQUIPMENT EMPLOYED IN WIRED DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM

FIG.

10

18

IS : 10485 - 1983

The subscriber feeder should Abe terminated in an outlet unit that is fitted with sockets to provide for the connection of a television or a Very High Frequency/Frequency Medulated sound receiver or both. Where both services are provided, filters~should be embodied to provide isolation between VHF/FM sound and television receivers. Due care should be taken to isolate the outer and inner conductors of the cable from the outlet sockets by use of proper capacitors. Use of proper screened cables is necessary to ensure minimum radiation from the system and adequate protection from outside interference. 6.4.5 System Performance - The performance of the system should be such that when a television or sound receiver complying with the relevent Indian Standards is connected to the appropriate outlet socket on the system and tuned to the appropriate transmission the reproduction of vision and sound or sound should be acceptable. The picture should be appreciably free from noise, reflected images and other interference. Sound reproduction should be essentially free from noise and distortion. 6.4.5.1. Antennae - The antenna( e) erected shall comply with the relevent requirements of balanced or unbalanced impedance, range of input and output voltage, radiation of electromagnetic energy, frequency coverage, voltage standing wave ratio, temperature range and safety considerations. 6.4.5.2 Polarization - The antenna( e ) shall be mounted in accordance with the instructions of the manufacturer and correctly oriented to ensure optimum performance. 6.4.5.3 Frequency coverage - The antenna( e ) shall be suitable-& covering the total band of frequencies for all the channels which are broadcast to or planned for the area in which it is erected. 6.4.5.4 Impedance - The system shall generally be suitable for matching into a characteristic impedance of 75 ohms ( unbalanced ) and a voltage standing wave ratio of less than 2.5 : 1 for input circuits shall be maintained over the entire frequency range for which the system is designed. Exceptionally a system may be designed for a balanced impedance of 300 ohms or suitable value. The input circuits then shall match with the appropriate impedance, All plugs, sockets, connectors with the above requirements. and other components shall comply

6.5 Auxiliary Equipment - All auxiliary equipment ( for example amplifiers, translators, frequency changers, etc) necessary to ensure the good performance of the system shall be provided. I9

1$:10485- 1983
6.5.1 Translators and Channel Cotlverters A XII high signal strength areas, where direct signal pick up of television transmissions and distribution over the community antenna system -may lead to unwanted interference effects, or situations where distribution in other than the received bands is deemed necessary, translators or channel converters shall be used before

the signals

are distributed

in the system.

6.5.2 Channel Conversion Frequincies - No channel other than an unused channel that is within the recognised range of bands used by Doordarshan for VHF and UHF television broadcasting in the country shall bi: used
for frequency
NOTE

conversion.

-

. the planners for this purpose. When available, _ followed for the selection of proper frequencies.

Possible plan for channel conversion

frequencies'may be available from such a plan should necessarily be

frequency stability of channel converters 6.5.3 Frequency Stability -The shall be maintained to an accuracy of 1 part in 104 over the entire temperature and humidity range specified for the equipment. The temperature range for equipment intended for indoor mounting shall be at least + 5OC to + 50�C and the temperature range intended for outdoor mounting shall be at least -10 to 65`C. Amplifiers used stability considerations. in the system shall also be subject to the same

6.5.4 Input and Output Connections - Amplifiers, channel converters, and other components shall be so designed and constructed so that they may be connected in the cable distribution system while the appropriate impedance level is maintained. Design recommended. of systems around unbalanced impedance of 75 ohms is

cross-modulation and 6.5.5 Intut and Output Voltages - As overloading, other non-linear performance effects must be prevented the range of the input and output voltages of amplifiers, channel converters for which specifications can be normal operation w~ithin the manufacturers maintained must be ascertained. 6.5.6 Radiation of Electromagnetic Energy - Amplifiers, channel converters and other active components shall be so designed that, when installed in a distribution system, the limits for the radiation of electromagnetic energy as specified in relevent Indian Standards are not exceeded. coverage of amplifiers and 6.5.7 Frequency Coverage - The frequency other associated equipment shall be clearly specified. A voltage standing wave ratio of less than 2.5 : 1 shall be maintained for input circuits over the entire frequency range specified for the equipment.

IS : 10485- 1983 radio-frequency cables should be used for 6.5.8 Cables - Standard distribution of television and/or VHF FM sound broadcast receptions to a The following general characteristics number of receivers in the system. are ~amongst those that determine the most suitable type of cable for use in a given situation : a) Characteristic impedance; b) Impedance irregularities; c) Attenuation per unit length ; d) Type of outer conductor in coaxial cables; e) The balance of individual f) Flexibility, pairs of multi-pair cables; and bending radius, etc.

To secure the maximum transfer of energy and to avoid reflections that could cause distortion, the impedance of the cable used for television or VHF/FM reception should be well matched to the antenna system. The receiver input impedance shall match the feeder impedance. As far as possible long runs of feeder to individual receivers should be avoided. It is necessary that impedance irregularities are small, otherwise standing waves and multiple images can be produced. The permissible attenuation in the cable is a matter for the designer of the system. Particular care~should, however, be taken of the matching of consecutive lengths of cable both in the methods of joining and in the cable impedance tolerance limits. The screening and balance of cables is important in avoiding interference to other services and from other transmissions. 6.5.9
Outlet Sockets

6.5.9.1 General - At every outlet point an outlet socket shall be provided. Double outlet socket shall be provided where the system is equipped for both television and VHF/FM broadcast distribution. 6.5.9.2 Outlet socket voltages - In the case of community antenna systems the outlet socket voltage at every outlet socket point measured as given below shall be within the appropriate range of the values given in Table 1. In each band for the same input voltage the outlet socket voltages shall not vary between the charm-els by more than 6dB in the television and the VHF/FM bands. Using a selective voltmeter with an input impedance of 75 ohms measure the rms value of the radio frequency voltage at the peak of the synchronising pulses on all television broadcasting services for the relevant 21

fSr10485-1983
area, and the rms value of the radio frequency broadcast channels for the relevant area.
TABLE

voltage

on the FM

sound

FOR COMMUNITY I, OUT PUT SOCKET VOLTAGES AND DOMESTIC SYSTEMS ( Clause 6.5.9.2 )

SYSTEMS

SL No.

SYSTEMS

COMMUNITY SYBTEM r_--h___Y Min Max (3) mV (4) mV 1.5

DOMESTIC SYSTEM _--*`---_y Min Max (5) mV 55 (6) mV 1

(1)

(2)

i) Television

Band I and III 300 ohm. system

55

ii) Band I and III 75 ohm system iii) Television Band I and III Fringe area 300 ohm system iv) v)

27 15

0.75 0.30

27 15

0.5 0.25

75 ohm system
VHF (FM) 75 ohm system

7.5 5 2.5

0.15 0.1 0.1

7.5 5 25

0.1 0.1 O-1

vi) VHF (FM) Fringe area 75 ohm system

6.5.9.3 Mutual attenuation - When measured as given below, the mutual attenuation between any two television outlet sockets shall exceed 33 dB and the mutual attenuation between any TV socket and FM socket that are not mounted~in the same outlet box shall exceed 46 dB. While injecting a appropriate frequency selective voltmeter with outlet socket chosen at
TABLE 2

radio frequency signal into any outlet socket at an level given in Table 2, measure ( by means of an input impedance of 75 ohms ) the output of any random to give the mutual attenuation.
FORMUTUAL LEVEL (2) mV 2 2 2 ATTENUATION SOCKET (3) TV FM TV

TEST VOLTAGE

FREQUENCY (1) MHz 65 100 200

22

IS : 10485 - 1983 6.6 Precautions Against Damage And Interference From Atmospheric Electricity - Metal masts, cross-arms and booms of television and VHF/FM antenna systems should be connected to earth. In most cases, it is sufficient to ensure that the mast is earthed, relying on the clamp that secured the antenna to the mast for adequate earthing of the antenna In the case of some antenna designs the elements may not metal work. be in electrical contact with the boom to which they are secured, and no attempt should be made tp earth such elements. The antenna system should be bonded to any earthed metal work situated near the top of the structure ( for example, water tanks, pipes, etc ) If no earthed metal work is available the using ~a proper earthing lamp. earth connection should be made by the most direct route to the nearest earthing point. The minimum size of the conductor for this connection should be 1.5 mms. In cases where an earth terminal is not provided, the earth connection should be secured to one of the clamping bolts. It may be possible, with some antennae, that the outer conductor of the antenna feeder cable is not connected to the metal work of the antenna. In this case the outer conductor should be separately earthed. For protection IS : 2309-1969*. 6.7 Earth Connection for : a) safety, b) protection c) better against atmospheric electricity, and signal reception. may Abe made to IS : 616-1981?, against lightning reference Earth should be made to

for Receivers

connections

are provided

For safety considerations reference IS : 3043-1966$ and IS : 8240-1976s.

Sound receivers for medium and short wave bands sometimes have an earth terminal provided for the improvement of reception. .When an antenna external to the receiver is used an earth is required. Provided that the earth continuity conductor of the electric supply is connected to a solid earth and interference is not introduced, the earth connection of mains operated receiver may be made by means of the earth pin of the three-pin mains plug.
*Code of practice for the protection of buildings and allied structures against lighting (first revision ) . @afety requirements for main? operated electronic and related apparatus for household and similar general use (jksf m&ion ). $Code of practice for earthing. $Guide for electrical equipment for atmospheres.

23

IS : 10485 - 1982 If the earth continuity conductor does introduce interference, a separate `quiet' earth should be provided. Where practicable the earth connection should be distinct from other earth connections, and should be connected by the shortest available route either to a rising metal water pipe near its point of emergence from the ground or to a buried electrode. Structural steel work of a building should not be used for obtaining an earth connection. The earth conductor should not be used for obtaining an earth connection. The earth conductor should be run as a stranded conductor of law resistance. It is essential that any metal water pipe used provides a low resistance connection with the general mass of earth and any connection to a water pipe should be made by means of a suitable clamp. 6.8 Equipment and Accommodation

6.8.1 General - The installation initially required in a building would rarely suffice throughout the life of the building without additions or modifications, or ~both. Careful consideration should therefore -be given at an early stage to the installation requirements particularly for community wires distributions. Provision should be made for foreseeable additions and modifications. Ease of maintenance and adequate protection against mechanical damage are of importance. Ideally it should be possible to run cables from any position in a building to any other position through concealed ducts, chases and conducts. The actual provision made will depend upon the general standard of amenities desired and the expenditure permissible. References to relevant standards shall be made while designing of ducts, chases, etc, for the accommodation of pipes and cables. 6.8.2

Cable Holes

6.8.2.1 Outside walls - A sleeve of non-hygroscopic material should be connected into the wall. It should slope downwards towards the outside and should be plugged with a suitable non-hardening waterproof compound to prevent the entry of rain, dust, etc. wiring should be taken through 6.8.2.2 Internal walls - Surface walls in sleeves of adequate size. Sharp edges at the cab~le entry and exit should be avoided-either by bushing or by fitting the sleeve with its ends short of the surface and rounding the plaster or other surface material. If the number of cables is so large as to render the use of a sleeve impracticable, a rectangular hole should be made and lined with wood. 6.8.2.3 Floors - Similar considerations apply to floors as to internal The sleeve or wooden lining should extend at least 300 mm, walls. -above floor level. 24.

16 : 10485 - 1983
6.8.3 Central Equipment - Central equipment should preferably be accommodated in a seperate room to which only authorized persons have access. The room should be dry, well ventilated and not subject to extremes of temperature. Good artificial lighting and a mains socket outlet separate from the power supply for the equipment should be provided for maintenance purposes. The Aoor should be constructed of or covered with non-conducting material.

6.8.4 Vertical Ducts - In every multiple-floor building, vertical ducts with fire breaks, provided as necessary, are required. These should be continuous through the height of the building and their number and position should be such as to allow convenient lateral distribution on each floor. In general vertical ducts should not be more than 30 m apart as measured along the corridors. Provision for the support of cables at frequent intervals is necessary. Where floor distribution be located within or adjacent or junction boxes are required to the vertical ducts. they should

6.8.5 Horizontal Ducts - Horizontal ducts are required between the main distribution points to the various rooms and within individual rooms. If a basement is included in the building, the main horizontal duct lining the main distribution point with vertical ducts would probably be most conveniently located therein Floor distribution may be provided by underfloor ducts or conduits, floor chases, hollow detectable skirting, wall grooves with detachable covers or in hollow ceilings along corridors. Where access to positions remote from the wall may be required, full flexibility can be given by the use of under-floor duct systems. 7. INSTALLATION 7.1 Antenna considerations (e) : ' CONSIDERATIONS The antenna( e ) shall be installed with following

7.1.1 Construction - Each antenna and associated clamps shall be constructed in a manner consistent .with good electrical and mechanical practice, and adequate steps shall be~taken to prevent adverse electrolytic action. All elements of an antenna, with the possible exception of parasatic elements, shall be directly and galvanically connected to the metal structure of the antenna. The construction of the antenna shall be such that mounting, loading, and weather conditions to which the antenna is reasonably expected to be exposed, cannot cause any part to become dislodged or permanently distorted. Steps should be taken to prevent the entrapment of water and the generation of adverse noise.

IS:10485 -1983
The antenna structure shall be so designed that, when it is mounted on the mast the mast will have no significant influence-on the characteristics of the antenna, It should be possible to rotate the antenna horizontally or vertically, as appropriate, to find an optimum receiving orientation. This is particularly true for VHF and TV antenna( e ). 7.1.2 Mutetials .- The installer of an antenna system should ensure that the materials used will give a reasonable operating life to the installation. Special care should be taken to avoid adverse electrolytic action between dissimilar materials. For example, copper or copper alloys should never be used in direct contact with aluminium. Protective coating of the materials should be carefully preserved. Damaged parts should be protected by a suitable coating-after installaion. 7.1.3 Cable Connection - The cable shall be so connected to the antenna that proper impedance matching is maintained, with due regard to balanced-to-unbalanced transformation, throughout the entire frequency range of the antenna. The connection facilities shall be such that the outer conductor of the coaxial cable will be directly and galvanically connected to the earthing structure of the antenna by means of a conductor of cross-section at least 10 mms. The connection of the cable shall be made in a suitable connection box to protect the connection from the weather and to prevent The enclosure shall be made of a fire retarding the ingress of moisture. ( The effects of heat and sunlight on plastic materials should material. be considered if such materials are chosen for the enclosure ). 7.1.4 Wind Loading - The wind loading of an antenna must be obtained for the worst mounting conditions at maximum wind velocities recorded in the area ( see IS : 616-1981* ), 7.1.5 Antenna Site - The actual position of the antenna is of consiAs far as possible all local obstructions between the derable importance. antenna and transmitter should be avoided. Where reception conditions are difficult it may be advantageous to find the best position by experiment. Where practicable, antenna should be mounted clear of conductors, including structural metal work. When siting indoor antenna in the loft or attic care should be taken to position it as far as possible clear of pipes, cisterns and other metal work. The plane of polarisation inside the building may not be the same as that of the transmitted signal and the antenna may need to be tilted accordingly.
*Safety requirements for mains operated household and similar use (Jirsf revision ). electronic and related apparatus for

26

At sites where corrosion of the antenna structure is likely to occur as a result of salt-laden atmosphere, fumes and smoke, the antenna and its supporting structure should be provided with a suitable coating. When an antenna strength of the installation should be checked. The should also be checked. is sited at an existing installation, both the and its suitability to carry the additional stress effectiveness of the existing antennae, if any,

7.2 Location and Installation of Equipment and Apparatus - Subject to any earlier specific recommendation in 6, locations should be chosen with regard to optimum operation and where they are easily accessible for maintenance without requiring access to private premises. In all cases reference should be made to the manufacturer's instructions and standard wiring regulations. and wiring of the 7.3 Assembly and Wiring - As much assembly equipment and apparatus as possible should be carried out in the factory to reduce installation work to a minimum. 7.4 Inspection and Tests - Arrangements may be made when desired for general inspection, including operational tests, to be carried out in the presence of the purchaser's representative. 7.5 Delivery and Storage -To avoid damage and deterioration, equipment and apparatus should not be delivered until installation can proceed, provided that suitable storage accommodation has been made. 7.6

Work on Site -

The

work to be done on the site may consist operation,

of :

4 meeting structural requirements during building b) siting and installation of antennae and feeders, C>internal and external cabling and wiring, and amplifiers, converters 4 fitting and connecting
units, etc.

and

combining

7.7 Antenna Feeder Cables - A feeder routed externally to the antenna mast should be held by suitable clips or weather proof tape at a sufficient number of points to minimize strain on connections. A feeder taken over tilted roof should be secured by suitable clips. A loop of cable should be provided to form a water-trap together with sufficient slack for possible installation of combining units at a later date. The feeder should be taken behind the guttering and on the gutter board, or else stand-off brackets should be used. Where antenna transformers, amplifiers, etc, are used out-of doors, they should be of the weatherproof type or enclosed in fully weatherproof cover and mounted in a position that

27

1s.:

iO485 - 1983

will provide as much protection as possible. Down leads should be protected against mechanical damage. Where such downleads are exposed to high winds, they should be kept under slight tension. Unscreened cables, if any, should be mounted so that distance from walls and metallic objects is not less than ten times the spacing between the conductors. Any down leads that are carried through the building structure by means of circuits or ducts, or are embedded in plaster should be of a screened type. The feeder should be looped slightly away from any wood work. It should be fastened to the walls at intervals of 1 m for vertical runs and 300 mm for horizontal runs, using fixings designed to avoid damage to the cables. At the point where the feeder enters the building a water drip loop should be formed in the feeder. If it is not possible to use an air vent for the down leads in the building then entry holes should be drilled at an angle of about 45" downwards from inside the building. Internal runs of feeder runs should be as unobtrusive as possible. Both the inner and outer conductors of the coaxial cable should be securely connected both mechanically and electrically to the plug or outlet socket. Before inserting the feeder plug to the receiver it should be ensured that no dangerous voltages exist on the aerial. Wires and cables run on external walls of buildings should preferably be not less than 3 m above ground level. In case this is not possible then adequate protection should be provided. Rubber and PVC sheathed cables are likely to be damaged by exposure to various preservatives (for example, certain wood preservatives ). 7.8 Internal Cabling and Wiring

7.8.1 General- Telecommunication cables should not be placed in the same ducts or conduits as power cables. Wiring should be carried out according to the standard practice. Joints in cables should be avoided as a general rule. tion boxes should be used for connecting cables. Ends cables should be sealed to prevent ingress of moisture. All pipes, identification. conduits and ducts and cables should be Suitable juncof the feeder marked for

Some plasters and cements have a corrosive effect on metals, and precautions against this may be necessary when cables or conduits are installed in damp situations. Cables insulated with rubber, PVC or polyethylene used where the cable temperature is likely to exceed reference to the manufacturer's specifications. should not be 45" C without

28

IS:10485-1983
7.8.2 mended Cables in 6.5.8. The cables should be of the standard type as recom-

7.8.3 Vertical Ducts - Cables in vertical ducts, chases, casings, etc, should be adequately supported, the provisions of wood battens, etc, will facilitate this work, Cables should be protected where they emerge. 7.8.4 Conduit and Metallic Ducts - Standard practices should be followed for installing conduits. They should preferably be concealed, They should effectively be bonded and earthed. The number and size of wires or cables drawn into any conduit or duct should be such as to permit easy drawing in the out of the cables concerned. Future expansions should be taken into consideration. 7.8.5 Surface Wiring - Cables run on wall surface should be neatly laid and secured at points sufficiently close together to prevent sag. Battens should be fixed to walls where many cables are to be run or where fixing is difficult. Where cable changes direction it should not be bent to a radius less than that recommended by the cable manufacturer ( usually it is four to six times the cable diameter ). Capping can be used to advantage. Protection by conduit or capping should be provided is a risk or damage to or interference with wiring. wherever there

Cables run on girders should be secured by metal clips. Whenever it is necessary to run the cables on tops of girders they should be run in conduit. Cable holes as described in 6.8.2 to pass through walls on floors. 7.8.6 Distribution and Joint Boxes gain such both should be used when cables have

it is necessary to be able to 7.8.6.1 Provision - Normally access to cable junctions and splitting points for testing. Therefore, connections should be contained within a box designed to provide protection and ready access.

installed outdoors should be weather7.8.6.2 Location - Boxes proof. Boxes likely to be vulnerable to flooding should be of a submersible type. All types of boxes should be located so as to provide reasonable access. 7.8.6.3 Wiring - It is essential that pairs of wires are not divided. Where the pairs of wires are twisted within the cable the twist should be maintained up to the point of connection. Minimum amount of slack wire should be left in the bos consistent with the need to avoid fracturing the wire.

IS : 10485 - 1983 7.9 Marking and Numbering - All elements of the system including the antenna, conduits, ducts, etc, cables and boxes and equipment should be suitably marked for identification and extent of use. 8. INSPECTION AND TBSTING

8.1 Inspection of Installation - The complete .installation should be inspected by the client or an engineer authorised by him to ensure that the work of installation has been carried out satisfactorily and that the methods, materials and components used conform with the recommendations of this code. The record plans and operating instructions should be checked for accuracy and to ensure that the signal levels measured conform to those mentioned in 6.569 or those mention-ed in this section ( 8.2 ). of an installation or of 8.2 Testing of Installations - On completion extensions or alterations to an installation, tests should be made to ensure that as far as possible the system meets all functional requirements and will give satisfactory service under the extreme points. In case of a community antenna system outlet socket voltages for conformity to Tables 1 and 2 as in 6.5.9 should be tested. Typical signal levels required for satisfactory reception by receivers using external antennae shall be in accordance with relevant standards of performance ( For example IS : 4547-1978*, IS : 615-1968t, etc ) 8.2.1 Recommended Design Details - Notwithstanding anything contained in 6.5.9 and 8.2 it is recommended that design details given in Table 1 should as far as possible be aimed at for the antenna systems for domestic and community set-ups. Signal levels for subscriber outlet sockets for community antenna systems for VHF, FM and TV systems should be as given in Table 1 and 2 under 6.5.9. The community antenna systems for band I and band III should aim at following specifications.

a)

Attenuation Attenuation

for adjacent for in band out of band

channels channels channels than than

-

6 dB, 12 dB, 16 dB, signal as

b) Cl Attenuation 4 Signal/noise
per

ratio IS : 4547-1978*, modulation -

better better

30 dB for minimum 40 dB,

e) Cross

*Specification for receivers for monochrome television broadcast ( jrst mision ). iMinimum requirements of domestic radio receivers ( revised ).

transmissions

30

f)

Intermodulation

-

better

than 55 dB, and less than 0.5 dB.
TV distribution Recommenda-

g) Slope over a single channel

NOTE-It is theoretically possible to design community systems at HF or VHF distribution systems at audio frequencies. tions for these will be incorporated at appropriate time.

Recommendations consideration.

for

UHF

and These are

colour

TV

systems

are

under

8.2.2 Protective Earth Connections with standard practice. 8.2.3 Secondary Cells be checked for satisfactory When they condition.

should be tested in accordance used in the system they should

9. MAINTENANCE These recommendation relate particularly to large installation to these in which it is important to minimize the risk of failure. and

9.1 Commissioning - Telecommunication systems generally function The completion date should, therefore, be best when in constant use. timed so that the installation can be commissioned at the earliest possible date afterwards. If this is not possible adequate arrangements should be made for maintenance. 9.2 Regular Maintenance - In the absence of personnel with necessary specialized knowledge an agreement should be made with the makers, suppliers or contractors for regular maintenance. 9.3 Routine Inspection - Routine inspection be carried out at regular intervals particularly and safety of the antenna( e ). of the installations should in regard to the security

and 9.4 Log Book - A log book giving details of all routine attention faults should carefully be recorded so that if makers, suppliers or contractors are called in for special service they may know what services have been carried out, etc. 9.5 Keeping of Plans - The record of plans, diagrams etc, should be carefully preserved and kept up-to-date. 9.6 Masthead Equipment - Masthead equipment attention due to vulnerability to corrosion and atmospheric is usually the possible cause of unsatisfactory reception. 31 and instructions, needs special electricity and

fS:iO485- i983 lo. SEGREGATION 10.1 General
be placed

OF CIRCUITS Requirements - Cables cables.
for RF signals shall not

Safety

in the same ducts as power

10.2 Interference - In many cases it may be permissible for cables of different telecommunication facilities to share ducts. Individual authorities concerned should be consulted for this type of sharing. 10.3 Particular Safety Requirements - Apparatus connected to telecommunication circuits associated with or energized from a low voltage or medium voltage should be isolated in such a way as to protect the telecommunication circuit from low- and medium-voltage supplies.

11. ABATEMENT 11.1 For reception

OF ELECTRICAL

INTERFERENCE

to be satisfactory, the level of electrical interference has to be low compared with that of the signal. A wide variety of domestic electrical appliance and industrial equipment may cause objectional interference, and this is best suppressed at source. When suppression at source is not possible, some improvement may be obtained by fitting a suitable interference suppress or in the house wiring as possible with due regard to the source, Alternatively some improvement may be obtained by fitting an interference suppressor in the mains lead to the receiver. Other possible sources include intermittent open circuit or earth faults in the electrical installation. Such defects are best guarded against by inspection and maintenance at regular intervals. Normal operation of some devices like fluorescent lamps, thyristors, etc, may give rise to salient interference. If interference is radiated from electrical wiring associated with a source of radio noise, the severity of the interference can be reduced considerably 5f the wiring is enclosed in a continuous earthed metal screen. Attention should therefore be given to the bonding and earthing of existing conduit or metal sheaths of cables.

32

fS : 10485 - 1983
( Continuedfrom page 2 ) Members SHRI D. P. BOBDE Da K. S. K. SAI ( Alternate) SHRI M. BUTOHI RAJU ENCXNEER-IN-CHARQE Department Representing of Electronics, New Delhi

Electronics Corporation of India Ltd, Hyderabad Wireless Planning & Co-ordination Wing I Ministrv of Communications 1. II New Delhi SHRI S. BALAERIBHAN (Alternate j ' ' Directorate of Co-ordination ( Police Wireless ), SHRI S. JANAKIRAMAN Ministry of Home Affairs, New Delhi RailEeThiBoard ( Ministry of Railways ), New SHRI K. S. KALIDAS SHRI S. JAIN (Alternate) Bharat Electronics Ltd, Ghaziabad DR V. K. KOSHY SHRI A. K. MAJFJ~DAR ( Alternate ) DR S.P. KOSTA ISRO Satellite Centre, Bangalore Shyam Antenna Electronics Pvt Ltd, New Delhi S~IRI RA JIV MEHIZOTRA Ministry of Defence ( DTD & P ) ( AIR ) SHRI R. C. PANDEY SHRI C. M. KRISHNAMURTHY ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Doordarshan, New Delhi SHRI K. P. RAMASWAMY SHRI K. B. BORKER ( Alternate ) All India Radio, New Delhi DR C. S. R. RAO SHRI A. S. GUIN ( Alternate ) Federation of Associations of Small Industries of SERI 0. N. SHAR~A India, New Delhi DR K. K. SRIVASTAVA Defence Electronics Research Laboratory, ( Ministry of Defence ), Hyderabad

INTERNATIONAL
Base Units Quantity Length Mass Time Electric current Thermodynamic temperature Luminous Amount intensity of substance Units Unil radian steradian Symbol rad sr Unit metre kilogram second ampere kelvin candela mole A K cd mot Symbol m kg

Supplementary Quantify Plane angle Solid angle Units Derived

Quantify Force Energy Power Flux Flux density Frequency Electric Pressure, conductance force stress Electromotive

Unit newton joule watt weber tesla hertz siemen s volt Pascal

Symbol N 1 1 1 1 1 1

Definition N = 1 kg.m/ss J=lN.m W = 1 J/s T = 1 Wb/ms (s-1) S = 1 A/V V=l W/A

w
Wb T HZ s V Pa

1 Wb = 1 V.s 1 Hz = 1 c/s

1 Pa = 1 N/m%

