HAAA HAF IS 16557 : 2016 
: (Reaffirmed 2021) 
Indian Standard 


Sle aae wi — NAAA 
F wm UW yago, HE six 


saa — IT 


Solid Waste Management — 
Segregation, Collection and 
Utilization at Household/Community 
Level — Guidelines 


ICS 13.030.10 


© BIS 2016 


ada AM SRT 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
WM WS, 9 ua WHC AMT, we feeei-110002 
Vella” MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


May 2016 Price Group 5 


Solid Waste Management Sectional Committee, CHD 33 


FOREWARD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Solid Waste 
Management Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division Council. 


Solid waste management is an obligatory function of civic local bodies/municipalities in India. In rural India it is 
the responsibility of gram panchayats/similar bodies as recognized and approved by the Government (Union/ 
State/UT). However, performance of this task is far from satisfactory in most of the parts of the country. This 
results in problems of health, sanitation and environmental degradation. With rapid growth in population, the 
situation is becoming more and more critical with the passage of time. 


It is essential that each individual of common public and all functionaries in the civic bodies engaged in handling 
of solid waste, must have a clear understanding of their duties in their respective domains. This will help achieve 
the goal of reuse and recycle with the ultimate objective of zero disposal to landfill. 


This standard describes methodologies for handling of different types of waste generated at house hold/community 
level. 


This standard is intended to be used as one of the tools for management of solid waste operations for implementing 
relevant solid waste rules. 


IS 16557 : 2016 


Indian Standard 


SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT — SEGREGATION, 
COLLECTION AND UTILIZATION AT HOUSEHOLD/ 
COMMUNITY LEVELS — GUIDELINES 


1 SCOPE 


This standard prescribes guidelines for segregation, 
collection and utilization of solid waste (SW) generated 
at household and/or community levels. 


Elements namely, ‘Transportation from primary 
vehicles to processing and recycling facilities’ and 
‘Final disposal of reject material’ are excluded from 
this standard. 


NOTE — General guidelines are also provided for collection 
and handling of E-waste, Bio-medical waste, domestic 
hazardous waste, garden waste, construction and demolition 
waste generated from household/community levels. 


2 REFERENCE 


The standard listed below contains provisions, which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the edition 
indicated was valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent edition of the standard 
indicated below: 


IS No. Title 
9569 : 1980 Glossary of terms relating to solid 
wastes 
3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard the definitions of the 
terms, symbols and units given in IS 9569 and the 
following shall apply. 

NOTE — Efforts have been made to align the following terms 


with the definitions given in solid waste rules notified by 
Government of India as amended from time to time. 


3.1 Aerobic Composting — A controlled process 
involving microbial decomposition of organic matter 
in the presence of oxygen. 


3.2 Bio-degradable Waste — It means any organic 
material that can be degraded by micro-organisms into 
simpler stable compounds. 


3.3 Community — Group of apartments or houses 
including their private spaces. 


3.4 Disposal — The final and safe disposal of post 


processed residual solid waste and inert street 
sweepings and silt from surface drains on land to 
prevent contamination of ground water, surface water, 
ambient air and attraction of animals or birds. 


3.5 Door to Door Collection — Collection of solid 
waste from the door step of households, shops, 
commercial establishments, offices, institutional or any 
other non residential premises and includes collection 
of such waste from entry gate or a designated location 
on the ground floor in a housing society, multi-storied 
buildings or apartments, large residential, commercial 
or institutional complex or premises. 


3.6 Dry Waste — Waste other than bio-degradable 
waste and inert street sweepings and includes recyclable 
and non-recyclable waste, combustible waste and 
sanitary napkin and diapers etc. 


3.7 Domestic E-Waste — A part of dry waste 
comprising of electrical and electronic equipment 
whole or in parts or rejects which are intended to be 
discarded by household after their intended use. 


3.8 Household Bio-Medical Waste (Including 
Domestic Sanitary Waste) — A part of dry waste 
generated during the medication/treatment at home 
including sanitary napkins, diapers, etc. 


NOTE — For reference to indicative list of bio-medical waste 
(see Annex A). 


3.9 Domestic Hazardous Waste — Discarded paint 
drums, pesticide cans, CFL bulbs, tube lights, expired 
medicines, broken mercury thermometers, used 
batteries, used needles and syringes and contaminated 
gauge, etc, generated at the household level. 


NOTE — For reference to indicative list of hazardous waste 
(see Annex A). 


3.10 Processing — Any scientific process by which 
segregated solid waste is handled for the purpose of 
reuse, recycling or transformation into new products. 


3.11 Transportation — Conveyance of solid waste, 
either treated, partly treated or untreated from a location 
to another location in an environmentally sound manner 
through specially designed and covered transport 
system so as to prevent the foul odour, littering and 
unsightly conditions. 


IS 16557 : 2016 


3.12 Segregation — Sorting and separate storage of 
various components of solid waste namely 
biodegradable wastes including agriculture and dairy 
waste, non-biodegradable wastes including recyclable 
waste, non-recyclable combustible waste, sanitary 
waste and non- recyclable inert waste, domestic 
hazardous wastes, and construction and demolition 
wastes. 


3.13 Storage — Means to store segregated waste at 
household/community level separately. 


3.14 Solid Waste — Means and includes solid or semi- 
solid domestic waste including sanitary waste, 
commercial waste, institutional waste, catering and 
market waste and other non- residential wastes, street 
sweepings, silt removed or collected from the surface 
drains, horticulture waste, agriculture and dairy waste, 
treated bio-medical waste excluding industrial waste, 
bio-medical waste and E-waste, battery waste, radio- 
active waste generated in the area under the local 
authorities and other entities mentioned in Solid Waste 
Rules. 


3.15 Waste Picker/Waste Collector — A person or 
groups of persons informally engaged in collection and 
recovery of reusable and recyclable solid waste from 
the source of waste generation, the streets, bins, material 
recovery facilities (MRF), processing and waste 
disposal facilities for sale to recyclers directly or 
through intermediaries to earn their livelihood. 


4 ELEMENTS OF 
MANAGEMENT 


SOLID WASTE 


4.1 Waste Generation 


The quantity and quality of solid waste generated from 
houses or communities vary from place to place. 
However, different types of solid waste (SW) have 
commonality in that these sources generate dry waste, 
bio-degradable waste, domestic E-waste, domestic 
hazardous waste, domestic bio-medical waste, 
construction and demolition waste. 


4.2 Waste Segregation at Source 


Re-usable or saleable material from dry waste such as 
paper, glass materials, metallic waste, plastic waste 
(News papers, bottles, cans, milk pouches, etc), clothes, 
etc, are generally retrieved at the household level. 
However, a lot of recyclable dry waste such as waste 
paper, plastic bags, broken glass, metal, packaging 
material, etc, is not segregated and is disposed of along 
with domestic/trade/institutional waste. At times, such 
waste is transferred from household to common 
dustbins where the contents are spread around for 
sorting and collection. By throwing such recyclable 
material on the streets or into a common dustbin, the 
quality and value of recyclable material deteriorates 


due to soiling by bio-degradable waste or domestic 
hazardous waste, etc. 


4.3 Storage of Segregated Solid Waste at Source 
4.3.1 General 


Separate storage of segregated solid waste at the source 
of waste generation is the first essential step towards 
solid waste management. Solid wastes namely dry 
waste, bio-degradable waste, domestic E-waste, 
domestic hazardous waste, domestic bio-medical waste, 
construction and demolition waste should be stored as 
described in 4.3.2 to 4.3.6. 


4.3.2 Storage of Dry Waste 


All dry waste shall be stored in the designated bins/ 
bags. Care shall be taken to keep/make the dry waste 
materials free from contamination/soiling with bio- 
degradable waste or domestic hazardous waste. 
NOTE — It is recommended that plastic based packaging 
materials for milk, food, etc, should be rinsed thoroughly to 


remove extraneous material and dried before storing it in the 
dry waste bin. 


4.3.3 Storage of Bio-Degradable Waste 


All bio-degradable waste shall be stored in separate 
bins and shall be transferred to the society or community 
waste collection bin or van, as the case may be, on 
daily basis. Bio-degradable waste shall never be 
disposed of in plastic bags. In case a plastic inner liner 
is used for keeping the waste bin clean, the plastic liner 
shall not be thrown along with bio-degradable waste. 
The plastic liner can be re-used after cleaning or 
washing. When discarded, the plastic liner shall be 
stored in the dry waste bin after cleaning. For keeping 
the bio-degradable waste bin clean, paper (Example 
old newspaper) may be used as inner liner, which can 
be transferred along with biodegradable waste. In any 
eventuality, biodegradable waste shall never be put 
inside a plastic bag and disposed of. 


4.3.4 Storage of Domestic Bio-Medical Waste 
(Including Sanitary Waste) 


Sanitary waste like diapers, sanitary pads, etc, shall be 
wrapped in the pouches provided by the manufacturers 
or brand owners of these products or in a suitable 
wrapping material as instructed by the local authorities 
and shall be placed in the bin meant for dry waste. 


4.3.5 Storage of Domestic Hazardous Waste 


Domestic hazardous waste shall be stored separately 
for periodic collection ensuring that ‘Broken glass 
articles’ ‘needles’, ‘razors’, ‘used shaving cartridges’ 
and other sharp objects are kept in a puncture-proof 
container so that no person is injured or suffers any 
kind of injury at the time of periodic collection of such 
wastes. Residents are encouraged to store their old 


battery cells and domestic hazardous waste separately 
in a bag to be handed over to waste pickers on monthly 
or quarterly basis. A separate bin shall be provided at 
the community premises to facilitate transfer of 
domestic hazardous waste from the source. An 
indicative list of domestic hazardous waste is given at 
Annex A. 


4.3.6 Storage of Domestic E-Waste 


Domestic E-waste shall be stored separately to hand 
over periodically to the waste picker or shall be 
transferred directly to the designated bin at community 
level for further disposal. 


4.4 Collection and Transportation of Segregated 
Waste from Source 


4.4.1 General 


Bio-degradable waste shall be collected from houses 
every day because of its putrescible nature. Dry waste 
may be collected at longer regular intervals at the 
convenience of the waste generator and the waste 
picker, as this waste does not normally decay and need 
not be collected daily. Domestic hazardous waste and 
domestic E-waste are produced occasionally and 
therefore such waste need not be collected from the 
doorstep. Domestic bio-medical waste shall be handed 
over separately to the daily waste picker for further 
disposal as designated by the regulatory authorities. 
Household shall be advised or directed to put such 
waste in special bins kept at the community level for 
further treatment and disposal as designated by the 
regulatory authorities. For behavioral aspects and 
awareness of public for effective management of solid 
waste, (see Annex B). 


Bio-degradable waste, dry waste, domestic hazardous 
waste, domestic E-waste, domestic bio-medical waste, 
construction and demolition waste shall be collected 
separately in such a way that these waste do not get 
mixed together during the collection and the subsequent 
transportation and unloading operation. 


4.4.2 Bio-Degradable Waste 


Bio-degradable waste shall be collected from door to 
door by staffs of civic authorities or authorized persons 
appointed by contractors engaged by civic authorities 
on daily basis under the supervision of civic bodies. 
Such collection shall be at pre-informed timings from 
all residential premises including slums and informal 
settlements. 


Handcarts, containerized tricycles, motorized vehicles 
or any other vehicle suitable for collection of segregated 
waste without necessitating deposition of waste on the 
ground and multiple handling of waste should be used 
by the waste pickers. Bio-degradable waste collected 


IS 16557 : 2016 


from the doorstep shall be directly transported to the 
processing or disposal facility. 


Vehicles used for transportation of wastes shall be 
covered and shall have a facility to prevent waste 
spillage and leachate dropping from the vehicles on 
the ground en-route to the processing or disposal 
facility. Waste shall not be visible to public, nor exposed 
to open environment for preventing their scattering. 
Bio-degradable waste stored at the secondary waste 
storage depots in covered bins or containers shall be 
attended daily and it shall be picked up before the 
container start overflowing. 


Households shall be motivated to process bio- 
degradable waste within their premises or communities 
to the extent it is feasible to do so. 


4.4.3 Dry Waste 


Dry waste collected from household or community shall 
be first transferred from dry waste bins/bags to bags of 
appropriate size to carry the dry waste to the designated 
segregation areas. 


4.4.4 Domestic Hazardous Waste 


Hazardous waste shall be handed over to waste picker. 
An indicative list of domestic hazardous waste is given 
at Annex A. 


4.4.5 Domestic Bio-Medical Waste (Including Sanitary 
Waste) 


Bio-medical waste should be handed over to waste 
picker. An indicative list of domestic Bio-medical waste 
is given at Annex A. 


4.5 Treatment of Segregated Waste 
4.5.1 Utilization of Bio-Degradable Waste at Source 


Households shall be motivated to practice various 
methods such as home composting/bio-methanation, 
etc, listed in Annex C for treatment of bio-degradable 
waste. In case of treatment of bio-degradable waste at 
community level, conventional facilities/ modern 
technologies such as composting, biogas plants, bio- 
methanation facilities, etc, as provided by Urban Local 
Bodies/Regulatory Authorities shall be used. 


The treatment facilities shall produce consumable 
products which are environment friendly. The products 
emerging out of treatment facilities such as compost/ 
gas, etc, shall be either utilized at the source of waste 
generation or shall be handed over/sold as per the 
procedures prescribed by the regulatory authorities. 


4.5.2 Recovery and Recycling of Dry Waste 


Dry waste shall be segregated in to different categories 
and sub-categories such as paper, card board, plastics, 


IS 16557 : 2016 


glass, metals, etc, for further recovery and recycling. 
Dry waste sale proceeds shall preferably belong to the 
waste pickers to motivate and reward them for 
collecting and transporting it unmized with bio- 
degradable waste. 


4.5.3 Safe Disposal of Domestic Hazardous Waste 


The waste picker shall further dispose domestic 
hazardous waste as per the instructions/rules of Urban 
local bodies /Regulatory authorities. 
NOTE — For reference to indicative list of domestic hazardous 
waste (see Annex A). 
4.5.4 Safe Disposal of Domestic Bio-Medical Waste 
(Including Sanitary Waste) 


The waste picker shall further dispose the domestic bio- 
medical waste as per the instructions/rules of Urban 
local bodies/Regulatory authorities. 


NOTE — For reference to indicative list of bio-medical waste 
(see Annex A). 


5 PROCESS CONTROL REQUIREMENTS 


5.1 Segregation of Solid Waste at Household/ 
Community Level 


5.1.1 General Requirements 


Solid waste generated at household/community level 
shall be segregated and stored in the bins/ bags specified 
at 5.1.2. No solid waste shall be thrown on the streets, 
footpaths, open spaces, drains or water bodies. 


5.1.2 Requirements for Waste Bins/Bags at Household/ 
Community Level 


5.1.2.1 Dry waste and bio-degradable waste shall be 
kept separately at the source of waste generation. 
Colour code for bins/bags shall be as follows: 


a) Green — for bio-degradable waste 


b) White or Blue — for dry waste (excluding bio- 
medical waste/hazardous waste) 


c) Red — for bio-medical waste and rejects. 
All bins shall be covered with lid. 
5.1.3 Segregation of Waste 


Dry waste, bio-degradable waste, domestic hazardous 
waste, domestic bio-medical waste, etc, shall be 
separated and stored in the designated bins or bags. 


Domestic hazardous waste and domestic bio-medical 
waste such as used batteries, containers for chemicals 
and pesticides, discarded medicines, etc, if and when 
generated, shall be kept separate. Sharp edged objects 
like broken glass, sharp metal parts, etc, shall be kept 
separate. 


5.2 Handling and Primary Collection of Solid Waste 
5.2.1 Dry Waste 


Dry waste shall be collected from the household or 
community at the frequency and in the manner, notified 
by the local regulating body from time to time. 


5.2.2 Bio-Degradable Waste 


Bio-degradable Waste shall be collected from the 
household on a daily basis. Bio-degradable waste shall 
be transferred directly from the designated bins at 
household/community level to the larger size collection 
drums. Plastic liner, if used in bins, shall not be 
transferred with bio-degradable waste. 


5.2.3 Domestic Hazardous Waste 


Domestic hazardous waste shall be deposited by the 
household in special bins as provided at the community 
level and shall be collected by the waste picker at 
specified intervals for further disposal. Care should be 
taken to ensure that domestic hazardous waste is not 
mixed with other wastes. 


5.2.4 Domestic Bio-Medical Waste (Including Sanitary 
Waste) 


5.2.4.1 Domestic bio-medical waste including sanitary 
waste shall be handed over to the waste picker for 
further disposal. The collection of domestic bio-medical 
waste shall be done in accordance with the instructions/ 
tules of the regulatory authorities. 


5.2.4.2 Domestic bio-medical waste shall be collected 
and stored in separate bins at community level. This 
shall then be transported to the disposal facilities as 
notified by urban local bodies or designated authorities. 
Care should be taken to ensure that domestic bio- 
medical waste is not mixed with other wastes. An 
indicative list of domestic bio-medical waste is given 
in Annex A. 


5.2.4.3 Domestic sanitary waste such as used sanitary 
napkins and disposable diapers shall be wrapped in 
newspaper, marked with a red ‘X?’ and placed in the 
red bin for collection preferably on a daily basis. Waste 
picker shall accept and transport it separately to a 
pickup point at a waste segregation centre or a hospital 
and should keep it in a covered yellow drum or bag for 
pickup by bio-medical waste service providers for 
disposal as per rules. 


5.2.5 Collection and Handling of Garden Waste 


Waste from gardens, lawn trimming, tree pruning, etc, 
shall be collected at least once in a week for transfer to 
the nearest park or compost point. Collection days can 
be staggered for different areas, on different pre- 
informed days to enable citizens to trim the trees and 
lawns accordingly and keep the waste ready. 


5.2.6 Handling of Construction and Demolition Waste 


Waste from minor civil repairs or alterations in 
constructions such as buildings, roads, drainages, etc, 
shall invariably be filled into used cement sacks which 
shall be neatly stacked for ease of weekly pickup on 
pre-informed days. It shall not be kept in loose heaps 
outside private premises. Group housing societies may 
stockpile up to a truckload within the premises and 
transport to a site specified by the local authorities. 


Wherever, major demolitions or reconstruction is 
undertaken, different types of wastes shall be separately 
stacked within the premises only, not on public spaces. 
Keeping waste separately makes it in turn as a resource, 
saves construction and transportation costs. Sand, 
bricks, aggregate shall be stored in unmixed heaps so 
that each can be reused. Concrete blocks, waste plaster 
and ready-mix concrete can be stored together for 
crushing into ‘manufactured sand’ for reuse in concrete 
block-making. 


6 EQUIPMENT 


6.1 Recommended Size/Design/Type of Collection/ 
Storage Bins and Primary Vehicles 


IS 16557 : 2016 


6.1.1 Primary storage bins at household level should 
be of appropriate size, easy to handle, preferably of 
10-15 litre capacity. 


6.1.2 Collection bins or push-carts should preferably 
be of 40-60 litre capacity to permit safe handling and 
emptying. Bio-degradable waste should be first 
received at the doorstep in a 20 litre basin to enable 
pick-out of any plastic sachets, etc, before emptying it 
into the 60 litre bins for transport. 


6.1.3 Compost bins and biogas units may be of any 
type and size at users convenience 


6.1.4 Equipment for transport of segregated waste 
should as far as possible be non-motorized to minimize 
breakdowns and guarantees punctual and regular 
service as per the requirements laid down by the local 
authorities. Pushcarts should have a double-bar for 
pushing to enable bags to be hung between them. This 
arrangement facilitates segregation and collection of 
waste at household . See Annex D for a recommended 
design. 


ANNEX A 
(Clauses 3.8, 3.9, 4.3.5, 4.4.4, 4.4.5, 4.5.3, 4.5.4 and 5.2.4.2) 


INDICATIVE LIST OF DOMESTIC BIO-MEDICAL WASTE 
(INCLUDING SANITARY WASTE)/DOMESTIC HAZARDOUS WASTE 


A-1 INDICATIVE LIST OF HOUSEHOLD BIO- 
MEDICAL WASTE 


a) Feminine hygiene products like disposable 
sanitary napkins or tampons; 


b) Disposable diapers for infants, senior citizens 
or invalids; 


c) Used sponges, cottons, bandages, tissue 
papers face masks, gloves, condoms, 
disposable syringes, urine or blood bags or 
items soiled with bodily fluids or similar 
potentially infectious waste; 


d) Expired solid or liquid medicines, drugs and 
cosmetics including chemotherapy agents; and 


e) Sharp items like used needles or shaving 
blades or surgical instruments such as scalpels 
and lancets, culture dishes and other glassware 


should be separately stored in puncture-proof 
jars. 


A-2 INDICATIVE LIST OF DOMESTIC 
HAZARDOUS WASTES 


A-2.1 The following list shows common household 
items containing potentially hazardous ingredients that 
might render waste as hazardous. 


A-2.1.1 Cleaning Products 
a) Oven cleaners, 
b) Drain cleaners, 
c) Wood and metal cleaners and polishes, 
d) Toilet cleaners, 
e) Tub, tile, shower cleaners, 


f) Bleach (laundry), and 


IS 16557 : 2016 


g) Poolchemicals. 
A-2.1.2 Indoor Pesticides 
a) Antsprays and baits, 
b) Cockroach sprays and baits, 
c) Flea repellents and shampoos, 
d) Bug sprays, 
e) Houseplant insecticides, 
f) Moth repellents, and 
g) Mouse and rat poisons and baits. 
A-2.1.3 Automotive Products 
a) Motor oil, 
b) Fuel additives, 


c) Carburetor and fuel injection cleaners and 
filters, 


d) Air conditioning refrigerants , 
e) Starter fluids, 
f) Automotive batteries, 
g) Transmission and brake fluid, and 
h) Antifreeze. 
A-2.1.4 Workshop/Painting Supplies 
a) Adhesives and glues, 
b) Furniture strippers, 


c) Oil or enamel based paint, 


d) Stains and finishes, 

e) Paint thinners and turpentine, 

f) Paint strippers and removers, 

g) Photographic chemicals, and 

h) Fixatives and other solvents. 
A-2.1.5 Lawn and Garden Products 

a) Herbicides, 

b) Insecticides, and 

c) Fungicides/wood preservatives. 
A-2.1.6 Miscellaneous 

a) Batteries, 

b) Mercury thermostats or thermometers, 

c) Fluorescent light bulbs/tube lights, and 


d) Driveway sealer. 


A-2.2 Other Flammable Products 


a) Propane tanks and other compressed gas 
cylinders, 


b) Kerosene, 

c) Home heating oil, 
d) Diesel fuel, 

e) Gas/oil mix, and 


f) Lighter fluid. 


ANNEX B 
(Clause 4.4.1) 


BEHAVIORAL ASPECTS AND AWARENESS OF PUBLIC FOR EFFECTIVE 
MANAGEMENT OF SOLID WASTE 


B-1 Training, awareness-raising campaigns, extension 
activities, school and college educational programs and 
environmental education are key elements of effective 
segregation. The programs may also cover topics on 
methods of disposal of wet garbage, cleanliness, 
sanitation, disposal of garbage, segregation at source 
and management of waste through the principles of 
reuse, reduce and recycle. The primary purpose of these 
instruments is to make people aware of the importance 


of SWM as they rely on voluntary compliance by 
polluters motivated either by the threat of adverse 
publicity or the prospective favorable publicity. Broad 
community participation is needed. Waste separation 
at the source (household) is the main solution to 
environmentally sustainable SWM, and it can 
significantly reduce both the cost of collection and the 
overall cost. If waste separation is successfully 
implemented, there are many opportunities to collect 


and utilize the segregated materials. Furthermore, the 
following activities will yield long-term, positive 
environmental and socioeconomic impacts: 


a) Regular sharing of information with and 
raising the awareness of local people; 


b) Training volunteers to educate households in 
separating wastes; 


c) Expanding community and school-operated 
recycling banks to all communities and 
schools; 


IS 16557 : 2016 


d) Continuing and expanding mass media 
mobilization; and 


e) Establishing community working groups to 
monitor illegal dumping. 


B-2 Voluntary participation of people should be 
adopted for dropping the waste into collection vehicle. 
To make sure that everyone knew that the waste 
collection vehicle was coming, melodic come-on music 
may be added indicating arrival of the collection 
vehicles. This shall motivate more participation of 
people to bring their waste up to collection vehicle. 


ANNEX C 
(Clause 4.5.1) 


INDICATIVE LIST OF VARIOUS TREATMENT METHODS OF BIO-DEGRADABLE 
WASTE AT HOUSEHOLD/COMMUNITY LEVEL 


C-1 HOME COMPOSTING 


Homes and apartments can use the domestic bio- 
degradable waste for producing compost. Many designs 
of home composters are now available for single or 
multiple homes. Composting needs aeration to control 
odours. This can be done by addition of dry leaves or 
coco peat to make the waste porous, or by manual or 
mechanical turning arrangements. Addition of moisture 
is rarely needed unless the fresh biodegradable waste 
is very dry. 


C-1.1 Community composting can be done collectively 
by residents of group housing. The most cost-effective 
method is stack composting, where a pipe or wood 
frame of 1-2 m x 2-3 mis raised off the ground by 200- 
300 mm and covered with old baskets or matting to 
support a base layer of dry leaves. Then bio-degradable 
waste is spread in one thin layer a day of maximum 
150 mm and covered with a layer of dry leaves or older 
stabilized compost or coco-peat to control odour and 
flies. Stacks can be built up to a manageable height 
with 10-12 such alternating layers and left to mature 
for a month or two. Normally no additional watering is 
needed but sprinkling with a very dilute solution of 


fresh cow dung helps to speed up decomposition. 
Composting bio-cultures in liquid or powder form or 
mixed with coco-peat are also very useful. Check with 
repeat users of different types to select the most 
effective ones. 


C-1.2 Vermi-composting is also an option for 
decentralized conversion of bio-degradable waste to 
useful manure, as per the instructions of the supplier 
of earthworms. 


C-2 BIO-METHANATION 


Individual houses can use very basic biogas units of 
one plastic tank inverted within another for bio- 
degradable waste quantities as small as 2-4 kg a day, 
producing an hour or two worth of cooking gas. Kitchen 
wash-water can be used in the process in place of fresh 
water. For more details on bio-methanation, literature 
available in books, internet, etc, may be referred. 


At community level, the facilities can go up to a ton or 
more of bio-degradable waste a day. Plastic shall not 
be entered into the units. Also, over-feeding or 
underfeeding for longtime should be avoidable. 


IS 16557 : 2016 


ANNEX D 
(Clause 6.1.4) 
RECOMMENDED PUSH-CART DESIGN 


124" M.S. PIPE 


TXF M.S. 
ANGLE FRAME 


INCHES 


Dry Resource Bags z 5 i 
atthe back of cart A mah S hai AA Aa À 
The handle is designed as a frame to suit -= “e = -_ a "iso -~ 
both navigation purpose and tie bags. F T = 4 | - ï 
mai i 


Gap in handle frames: 15” to tie dry 
resource bags 


The size of bags can vary as per the types 
of waste streams workers separate at Push- 
Cart level. 


Minium 4 recommended: 
1: Paper Recyclable 
2. Plastic Recyclable 
3. Mixed low valye recyclable 
/non-recyclable 
4. Household bio hazards 
like sanitary napkins and diapers 


HDPE Bags are recommendedto last 1 year 


IS 16557 : 2016 


Model Primary Collection 
Push Cart 


* MS is Economical/ SS is rust-proof but costly 


Capable of holding 4 bins with lids 


2/4/6/8 Dry resource bags (HDPE) 
* Workers need to be supplied full personnel 


protective gear; Caps, Masks, Aprons, Gloves 


The 2 front wheels and 1 at the back of the Push-Cart are called SRT (Steel Rim Tyres) with double ball bearings 
and nylon rubber tyres. The bracket at the back should be heavy duty with bearing movable bracket as shown, for 
easy guiding. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CHD 33 (2259). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


