IS : 9692 ( Part 8/Set 4) - 1988 ( Reaffirmed 2002 )

Indian Standard

GUIDE ON MAINTAINABILITY OF EQUIPMENT
PART 8 MAINTENANCE Section AND MAINTENANCE Support SUPPORT PLANNING 4 Maintenance Resources Requirement

UDC 621.31-7 ( 026 )

0 Copyright

1989

BUREAU
MANAK

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

BHAVAN,

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

Gr 4

May

1989

IS : 9692 ( Part S/Set 4 ) - 1988

Indian Standard

GUIDE ON MAINTAINABILITY OF EQUIPMENT
PART 8 MAINTENANCE Section AND MAINTENANCE Support SUPPORT PLANNING 4 Maintenance Resources Requirement

0.

FORE

WORD
Part 3 Maintainability programme

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part 8/Set 4) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 14 September 1988, after the draft finalized by the Reliability of Electronics and Electrical Components and Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. 0.2 This guide is intended to make recommendations for the standardization of maintainability practices and to stimulate ideas in the maintainability field. Organizations acquiring items will find the guide useful in assisting them in defining maintainability requirements associated and programmes. Item suppliers will benefit from use of guide, gaining an understanding of the requirements for achieving and verifying maintainability objectives. 0.3 This standard ( Part S/Set 4 ) one of the Indian Standards in the series on `Guide on maintainability of equipment'. Other standards in this series are: Part 1 Introduction to maintainability Part 2 Maintainability requirements in specifications and contracts

Part 4 Test and diagnostic procedures Part 5 Maintainability studies~during the design phase Part 6 Maintainability verification Part 7 Collection, analysis and presentation of data related to maintainability 0.4 This part of the series consists of the following 4 sections: Section 1 General Section 2 Maintenance support analysis

Section 3 Maintenance planning analysis Section 4 Maintenance quirements support resources re-

0.5 In the preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from the IEC Dot 56 (Central Office ) 132 Draft IEC Publication 706 : Guide on maintainability of equipment: Part 8 Maintenance and maintenance support planning, issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard ( Part S/Set 4 ) provides guidance in respect of maintenance support resources requirement. 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.1 The terms and definitions, as given in IS : 1885 (Part 39 ) - 1979* and IS : 7690 - 19757 shall be applicable for the purpose of this standard. 3. MAINTENANCE SUPPORT RESOURCES DETERMINATION 3.0 The maintenance support resources to allow
+Electrotechnical vocabulary: Part 39 Reliability of electronic and electrical items ( first revision ). tMathematica1 guide to the terms and definitions for reliability of electronic equipment and components ( or parts ) used therein.

achievements of operational requirements in a safe and cost effective manner must he identified, ~defined, specified, acquired and verified. This standard outlines activities needed to obtain the following maintenance resources : a) Personnel and training; b) Technical manuals and software ;
c) Test and support

equipment; and

d) Spare parts provisioning; e) Facilities. 3.1 Personnel and Training

3.1.1 General - To achieve operational objectives at the lowest overall life-cycle cost, it is required that properly qualified and trained personnel be available.
1

IS : 9692 ( Part 8/Set 4 ) - 1988 For the majority of systems, the very expensive element of maintenance support is maintenance personnel. Careful selection of these personnel and their effective training minimizes this cost. For complex systems that employ advanced state-of-the-art designs, the number of personnel, their skill levels and their training must start from an analysis of the maintenance requirements. Training must be developed so that it is consistent with the system's design, the maintenance concept and the support equipment. Personnel must be selected and trained to provide knowledgeable and capable technicians on site when the deliveree hardware becomes operations, and to keep it operational after production equipment is delivered in quantity. Personnel training must include both initial training and sustained training to cover attrition and replacement personnel. 3.1.2 Personnel Skill Requirements - Personnel specialities and skill levels ( that is, basic, intermediate and high ) and quantities must be identified by evaluation the complexity, and frequency of tasks in the maintenance support analysis. Specialities and skill levels must be established for each location, where prime equipment is operated and where maintenance activities are performed. These- requirements must be compared against the personnel skill requirements initially specified for the system. ~Areas of difference should be corrected through an update of the maintenance support analysis. 3.1.3 Training Requirements
3.1.3.1 Given the requirements for personnel as dictated by the system design, one must determine the personnel resources that actually will be assigned to operate and maintain the system in the field. The difference in skills between the specified requirements and the personnel that will be assigned is the basis for a formalized training programme ( that is, that effort required to upgrade personnel to the desired proficiency level ). Training needs must be defined in terms of programme content, duration of training and equipment data requirements. 3.1.3.2 Human factors engineers are interested in the personnel and training requirements to ensure that these requirements are realistic for the system. If skill levels requirements are high and a large amount of training is anticipated, then the equipment design should be re-evaluated to see if changes can be made to simplify the situation. In addition, the need for high personnel skills significantly limits the market in terms for finding qualified people.

b)

entry requirements and a brief course outline ; Maintenance training at all lines of maintenance - type of training, basic entry requirements and brief course of outline;

equipment, devices, aids and data required to support operators and maintenance training activity; d) Proposed schedule for initial operator and maintenance training; and training e) Proposed approach for further throughout the system life-cycle. 3.1.4.2 A training programme should consist of the following major components : a)

Training c>

A means of analyzing the job to identify

the training requirements; b) The development of specific training objectives ; of evaluation criteria; d) Selection of instructional delivery methods: e) Implementation of the training; and f) A means for providing feedback to quantify the results of the training. 3.2 Technical Manuals and Software 3.2.1 General
3.2.1.1 Technical manuals (TM)/Technical information (TI) for hardware as well as software should contain information and procedures that operators and maintainers will nLed to do their job correctly, efficiently and cost elrectively. They are also used as training aids. TM/T1 should be designed to suit the user's need and organized for easy access and reference. Suppliers of equipment shall provide TM/T1 written in a language specified by the customer. 3.2.1.2 A TM for systems/equipment may contain the following: a) Description; b) Theory; c) Procedures : c) The development

1) Operation, 2) Test, 3) 4) 5) 6) Troubleshooting, Repair, Service, and Preventive maintenance;

3.1.4 Planning
3.1.4.1 A personnel and training should cover the following:

planning basic 2

a) Operator

training -

type of training,

d) Reference data: 1) Schematics, 2) Wire lists, and 3) Programming listings.

IS : 9692 ( Part S/Set 4) - 1988
3.2.1.3 The TM designer must be useroriented and familiar with personnel considerations. He should consider the following factors:

3.2.3 Organization of Technical Manual
3.2.3.1 The best technical manual layout is that which is most obvious to the user, however, it varies from case to case. As a rule of thumb, an effective technical manual is organized by the following :

a) User characteristics, b) Equipment characteristics, c) Environmental conditions, d) Job design, and e) Training design. 3.2.1.4 -There are many types of TM and they can be presented in various media. The types of TM and media that they can be used for manuals are listed below: a) Types: 1) Illustrations only, 2) Step-by-step procedures, and 3) Checklists of. important instructions ; b) Media: 1) 2) 3) 4) Printed, Slide, Audio/video, Computer.

a) b) c) d)

Natural order (performance/occurrence), Most critical to least critical, Most needed to least needed, and Location/distance/availability.

3.2.4 Technical Information (TI)
3.2.4.1 Maximum use should be made of existing technical information. This is achieved by the following:

a) Evaluating existing technical information for -adequacy in meeting specification requirements ; and b) Determining the most proach such as: 1) use `AS-IS', 2) upgrade, and 3) prepare new technical cost effective ap-

and

information.

3.2.2 Development of Technical Manual (TM)
3.2.2.1 Emphasis in the development to a technical manual should be on those tasks which:

3.2.4.2 All technical information requirements should be included in the system/equipment contract. They may include the following: a) Source data; b) Proprietary data; c) Reproduction d) Changes: rights; and and

a) are difficult to perform, b) occur frequently, and c) influence mission success. 3.2.2.2 The phases of development technical manual are shown in Fig. 1.
CUSTOMER REQUIREMENTS

of the

1) Modifications, 2) Alterations.

T +
SOURCE DATA INTEGRATION

ANALYSIS TO ESTABLISH DETAILED OBJECTIVES

SlGN AND 4 RMATTING 4

PRODLICTION

. 0 0 0 0

PERSONNEL SELECTION REQUIREMEtjlS TRAlNlNG REQUIREMENTS JOG DESIGN PREREQUISITE TRAINING REQUIREMENTS TRAINING EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS

_

EVALUATION 4 ;$L;DAllDN VERIFICATION1

TRAINING AND TRAINING EQUIPMENT DEVELOPMENT

FIG. 1 DEVELOPMENT PHASESOF A TECHNICALMANUAL
3

IS : 9692 ( Part S/Set 4 ) - 1988 3.2.5 Formats 3.3.2 Types of Support Equipment Support

Technical information should be prepared in optimum formats to make them easy to read and understand. The following principles should be followed: Use of simple familiar words, Integrated text and illustration modules, Good style and usage, and Technical information should be matched to medium. 3.2.6 Training 3.2.6.1 The best of technical manual is of no value, unless it is used. The technical manual &signer must ensure that provisions exist for teaching the user how to use the technical manual. If this training is not given, the technical manual may never be used. 3.2.6.2 Training, training data and technical manual are inter-dependent. It is necessary to establish training requirements based on available skills, job requirements and technical manual. training manual, Tradeoffs among technical and training material/equipment/aid should be made on the basis of overall programme costeffectiveness. 3.2.7 Evaluation 3.2.7.1 A technical manual's effectiveness can be best evaluated during actual use to see if the user can do his job efficiently. The general criteria are as follows: a) Can the representative users do the job to the required standard, and b) Can the overall system performance be improved (Assumption : Improving maintenance performance improves system/performance). In addition, feedback and suggestions for improvements from users are a must for an effective technical manual. 3.3 Test and Support Equipment 3.3.1 Equipment required for maintenance, servicing and inspection of a system but not essential for its operation is called support equipment. The types and quantities depend on the type of support work needed. Thus it may be necessary to monitor the condition or operation of the system/equipment, or to perform specified tests to find out if _the operating perameters are within specified limits, or to diagnose and locate a failed part or component. The equipment needed for this may be built into the system/equipment to be acquired. It may be operated automatically or manually or there may be special test sets necessary as well as an assortment of common or standard tools. The overall requirements system from the system/equipment specifications, in particular, the requirement for availability. a) b) c) d)

3.251

equipment classified by its use, availability the source into the foilowing categories:

and

a) Hand tools - Basic tools to facilitate maintenance, such as wrenches, hammers, screwdrivers, soldering guns and pliers ; b) Special hand tools (special type) - Any hand tools which are modified to fill a special requirement such as wrench whose shank is bend so that it can reach a specific nut or bolt in an assembly; c) Common support equipment - Any common plant equipment for removal, assembly, disassembly or start up of equipment, such as cranes, slings and fork lift trucks;
General and standard support equipment -

Any mechanical and electronic measuring and monitoring equipment, such as pressure gauges, voltohmmeters and oscilloscopes;
Specific support equipment Any equipment required for performing a specific task for a specific system such as special fixtures to allow measurement of mechanical parameters or special electronic analyzer/ tester, etc; and Shop tooling - Industrial fixtures and equipment which are required for overhaul, inspection, and repair of major systems and equipment such as welding, machining and testing facilities.

3.3.3 Selection of Support Equipment - Before the support equipment can be selected, major, system an.d equipment design characteristics must be known. The majority of the common support equipment, and general and standard support equipment can be selected after completion of the conceptual design for system equipment and after a maintenance concept for a system and the facility is known. Each maintenance task for a system equipment should be reviewed to identify required support equipment. In the earlier stages of design, these requirements might be quite general and will become more specific as more detailed design specifications for system/ equipment are known. To minimize proliferation of items of support equipment, and to assure that as many off the shelf items as possible are being specified, coordination and standardization is required in the selection process. It should be clearly indicated into which of the following categories selected support equipment belongs :
Off a> the shelf commercial equipment - Most of the common and general and standard support equipment will be in this category;

b>Industry

common equipment Equipment used commonly by a specific industry segment, recognizing that it may have to be suitably modified to suit; and

4

IS : 9692 ( Part 8/Set 4 ) - 1988

cl Special new equipment - Equipment

which is designed and custom-built to suit a specific maintenance, servicing system/equipment or inspection.

are based on studies of measurement, requirements for inspection, isolation and alignment of equipment. The calibration facilities should be specified and acquired. 3.4 Spare Parts Provisioning 3.4.0 All spare parts, consumables, special supplies and related inventories need to support corrective and preventive maintenance actions associated with the prime equipment. Test and support equipment, facilities and training equipment are elements of maintenance support. At each line of maintenance where corrective maintenance is performed, the type and quantity of spare parts provisioned and stocked must be determined. Also, it is necessary to know how often provisioning should be accomplished. The estimation and ordering of spares required can be divided into three distinct phases: a) Initial or pre-operational phase, b) Stabilized operational phase, and c) Extended or extensive modification use phase. These are predicated on the basis of failure rates or expected damage. Initially these are estimated but with the stabilization of operation, a better correlation is established. This relates also to the items or parts with limits on operational life, which may be found to be better or worse than initially given. 3.4.1 Development of Spare Parts Lists 3.4.1.1 The types of spare parts are based on the maintenance plan and maintenance task analysis which indicate items that are removed and replaced at each maintenance line and location. Spare parts quantities are based on the following: a) Spares required due to system/equipment failures ; b) Spares required for preventive maintenance (items which are replaced periodically); c) Spares required to fill the logistics pipeline to compensate for repair lines and supplier lead times; and d) Spares required to replace repairable items which are condemned for one reason or another and condemned items are removed from the inventory. 3.4.1.2 Figure 2 covers the spare parts development process. As shown in Fig. 2, first maintenance support analysis data is used for calculation of spares and inventory optimization, and is based on maintenance plan and maintenance task analysis. Proposed inventory is then evaluated on the basis of risks, fill rates and cost, and for selected inventory, a supply support plan is generated to cover both pre-operational maintenance support and full operational maintenance support. It is often possible to obtain 5

3.3.4 Support Equipment Data 3.3.4.1 Support equipment data provides information needed to justify procurement of support equipment and to make preliminary estimate of required quantities. It is essentially a proposal for an item of support equipment which includes the following: a) Requirement - A description of maintenance task and the reasons for recommending proposed item of equipment, and logistics requirements, if applicable; of b) Description - A narrative description the item, sketch of the item and, if possible, a sketch ~of its application; Cost - Cost estimate of the item of support equipment ; 4 Reference - A listing of system and equipment documentation describing maintenance task for which the support equipment is required; and Usage - Determined by the expected frequency and duration of maintenance tasks for which the item of support equipment is required.

c>

e>

3.3.4.2 As the system design progresses, support equipment data is updated to include additional items aild details with regard to the existing item. Support equipment requirements and data should be reviewed whenever changes to the system, and equipment design are being made and revised accordingly, if reqmred. 3.3.5 Automatic Test Equipment - Automatic test equipment is usually a computer driven equipment providing simulated, stimulated, power and environmental characteristics of the itEm's actual operation. Equipment is usually designed from the initial concept to provide for automatic test equipment fault diagnosis and/or localize ion. Automatic test equipment is usually very complex and expensive and is normally justified only in cases when a large number of expensive equipment items need to be tested. A consideration should be given to `Built-in test' features of equipment to facilitate fault diagnosis when system turnaround is vital and complexity is such that manual testing is not practical. 3.3.6 Calibration Much . of the support equipment is used to measure values of specified parameters such as pressure, frequency, voltage, etc. In order for these measurements to be useful, they must be accurate. To assure this, measuring devices are checked against standard or calibrated on a scheduled basis or after major maintenance on the device. Calibration requirements

IS : 9692 ( Part S/SW 4 ) - 1988

SPARES CALCULATION COMPUTATION OF SPARES BASED ON REPLACEMENTFREOUENCY, REPAIR FREQUENCY ,REPAIR AND RECYCLE TIMES

I

I
BASED ON OVERALL SUPPLY SUPPORT FOR EFFECTIVENESS CONSIDERING RISKS OF SHORTAGES, FILL RATES AND COST

SELECTED INVENTORY FIRM INVENTORY LIST BY TYPE AND QUANTITY OF SPARE

MAINTENANCE SUPPORT ANALYSIS OATA

0
CONCEPT INVENTORY OPTIMIZATION -D
_-I__-

SYSTEM OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS AND MAINTENANCE

ACQUISITION DELIVERY

AND OF SPARE

INITIAL INVENTORY LIST BASED ON MAINTENANCE TASK ANALYSIS

-

I-

J&ORRECTlVE
--_--

ACTION

LOOP

1

--

FIG. 2 SPARE PARTS DEVELOPMENT PROCESS

cost advantages by ordering spare repair parts when ordering prime equipment. These cost advantages should be carefully examined when the proposed spare repair parts inventory is being evaluated. 3.4.2 Spare Parts Identification - All spare' parts ordered must have a unique identification and clearly indicate equipment, assembly or subassembly they belong to. They should be adequately packaged to allow for their transportation and storage without damage caused by either handling or environmental exposure. 3.4.3 Sources, Maintenance and Recoverability During the provisioning process, source, maintenance and recoverability (SMR) codes should be developed and assigned to each part. The SMR code is the link between the maintenance support analysis and the user, and defines to him the approved maintenance plan. For example, a five character SMR code may indicate the following:
Codes Example
of

1st and 2nd characters -

Identify source and means of acquiring the support item such as stocked procured item, off the shelf item, from local supplier, etc.
-

3rd and 4th characters

5th character

-

Identify maintenance and indicate the lowest maintenance authority to remove, replace and use the item, and who should repair the item, that is, limited repair at central maintenance facility, etc. Identifies item's recoverability such as dispose of, may be used in less critical application, is repairable, etc.

SMR

Code
1 N 1

P S

PROCURE0 ITEM --!

1

1

1

t

DISPOSE OF AT SITE

6

IS 3.5 Facilities 3;S.l These are all supporting

: 9692 ( Part 8/Set 4 ) - 1988

facilities needed

for

the

following:

should be developed which must contain sufficient qualitative and quantitative information to allow the following: a) assess and allocate requirements, b) analyze existing facilities to determine their adequacy, and c) determine need for new facilities or modifications of the existing facilities. 3.5.4 The following factors should be considered when developing plans for facilities: a) turnaround b) facility time, and

a) Performance of maintenance and repair functions at each line of maintenance (for example, clean rooms); b) Warehousing for spare parts; and c) Housing of related administrative and training functions. 3.5.2 Facilities include utility needs, such as electrical power, cotipressed air, water, ~environmental controls (ventilation, heating, air-conditioning), lighting, communications, fire protection and lifting equipment. 3.5.3 A facility plan for new system/equipment

utilization,

c) total facility costs.

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS
Headquarters : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI Telephones: 3310131, 3311375 110002 Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Regional Off ices: Central: *Eastern: Northern: Southern: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI l/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola, 160036 600113 110002 700054 Telephone 3310131, ~3311375 362499 21843, 31641 412442, 412519, 412916 6329295

CALCUTTA

SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH C.I.T. Campus, MADRAS

TWestern: Manakalaya, Branch Offices: `Pushpak' Nurmohamed Peenya Industrial Gangotri

E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East), BOMBAY 400093

Shaikh Marg, Khanpur,

AHMADABAD

380001 560058

26348,26349 384955, 384956 66716 53627
-

Area, 1st Stage, Bangalore-Tumkur

Road, BANGALORE 751002 781003 5oooo1

Complex, 5th Floor, Bhadbhada

Road, T.T. Nagar, BHOPAL 462003

Plot No. 82/83, Lewis Road, BHUBANESHWAR 5-8-56C L.N. Gupta Marg (Nampally RI4 Yudhister 117/418 B Sarvodaya

53/5 Ward No.29, R.G. Barua Road, 5th By-lane, GUWAHATI Marg, C Scheme, JAIPUR Nagar, KANPUR 302005

Station Road), HYDERABAD 208005 695035

221083 63471, 69832 216876, 218292 62305 62104, 62117

Patliputra Industrial Estate, PATNA 800013 T.C. No. 14/1421, University P.O., Palayam, TRIVANDRUM Inspection Off ices @`ith Sale Point) : Pushpanjali, First Floor, 250A West High Court Road, Shankar Nagar Square, NAGPUR 440010 Institution of Engineers (India) Building, 1332 Shivaji Nagar, PUNE 411005

25171 52435

*Sales Office in Calcutta is at 5 Chowringhee

Approach,

P.O. Princep Street, Calcutta 700072

276800 896528

tSales Office in Bombay is at Novelty Chambers, Grant Road, Bombay 400097

The Central Electric Press. Delhi-7

