( Reaffirmed 2005 )

IS:5503(PartI)-1969

Indian Standard
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR SILOS FOR GRAIN STORAGE
PART I CONSTRUCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS Commodities

Storage and Marketing Structures for Agricultural Sectional Committee, AFDC 28
Chairman SHRI SHRI KRIsHNA Members Representing

Central Public Works Department

Indian Produce Associafion, Calcutta SHRI.V. S. AGGARWAL RAI BAHADURG. S. SWAIKA ( Alternate ) - Directorate of Agriculture, Government of Punjab AG;;~U;~ ENGXNEER ( I~XPLE The Builders' Association of India, Bombay SWR~B. V. APTE SHRI K. K. MADHOK ( Alternate ) Directorate of Marketing & Inspection ( Ministry of SHRI S. K. BEDEKER Food, Agriculture, Community Development & Co-operation ), Faridabad SHRI R. N. CHATURVEDI ( Alternate ) Quartermaster General's Branch, Army Headquarters COL B. M. CHENGAPA COL R. R. RAO ( Alternate ) DIRECTOR ( STORAGEAND INSPEC- Directorate of Storage & Inspection ( Ministry of Food, Agriculture, Community Development & TION) Co-operation ) Farmaids Corporation, New Delhi SHRI V. K. GUPTA Directorate of Plant Protection, Quarantine and DR D. S . KATHURIA Storage ( Ministry of Food, Agriculture, Community Development & Co-operation ), Faridabad National Cooperative Development Corporation, SHRI S. T. KHUSHALANI New Delhi SHRI J. P. MITAL (Alternate) Agriculture Department, Government of West Bengal SHRI J. N. MAHALANOBIS SHRI T. K. MAZUMDER ( Alternate ) Central Food Technological Research Institute SHRI S. K. MAJUMDER ( CSIR ), Mysore Planning Commission SHRI K. V. NATARAJAN Indian Agricultural Research Institute ( ICAR )+ DR~S.PRADHAN New Delhi DR RATTAN LAL ( Alternate ) Food Corporation of India, New Delhi SHRI I. C.PURI SHRI 0. N. BAJPAI ( Alternate ) ( Continued on page 2 $

INDIAN
MANAK

STANDARDS
BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR DELHI NEW

INSTITUTION
SHAH 1 ZAFAR MAR0

IS : 5503 ( Part I ) - 1969
( Continued from page Members SIIRI P. RAMDAS SHR~ RAMESHWARDAYAL

I)
Representing

(:mtraI Warehousing Corporation, New Delhi Chamber of Commerce, Hapur SHRI RHAGWATI PRASAD JAIN ( .dfu;I~;~) SHRI ADUSUMILLI SUB~A RAO Pradesh klillers Rice Association, Vijayawada SHRI SHUUSHER SINGH Directorate of Standardization ( Ministry of Defence ) DR H. G. KHAISA ( Alternate) STATE MARKETINGOFFICER Agriculture Department, Government of Tamil Nadu ASSISTANT hlrZRKE.rINC OFFICER ! Alternate) SUPERINTENDING SURVEYOR OF Central Public Works Department WORKS ( Foon ) Ministry of Food, Agriculhure, Community DevelopSHRI M. L. TANEJA ment & Co-operation ( Department of Aericuhure ) National Seeds dorporation, New Delhi &SRI S.S.vIRDX SHRI S. L. RAINA ( Alternate ) Roller Flour Millers' Federation of India, New Delhi SHRI S. P. VIR~~ANI DR 1). V. KARMARKAR( Alternate ) Director General, ISI ( Ex-ofi& Member) DR HARI BHAGWAN, De,mty Director ( Agri & Food )

Secrttnry
SHRI MAITOE<AKT. SANTWANI

Assistant Director ( Agri & Food ), ISI Associate Sew tafy SH~UI.. RAMACI~ANDRA RAO Drprtty Director Mechanically Operated

( Ci5, Eng ), IS1
Subcommittee,
AFDC 28

Storage

Structures

:4

Convener SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER( ELEC- Central Public Works Department TRICAL ) ( FOOD STORAGE ELECTRICAL CIRCLE ) Members SHRXR. K. ADYA SHRI M. S. ASTHANA
SHRI S. V. BHAT SHRI D. GANGULY ( Alternate

Martin Burn Ltd, Calcutta Ministry of Food, Agriculture, Community ment & Co-operation (Department operation ) Larsen & ?`oubro Ltd, Bombay

Developof Co-

DIRECTOR OF ENGINEERING

Ministry of Food, Agriculture. Community Development gi Co-operation ( Department of Food ) DIRECTOR ( STORAGE & INSPEC- Ministry of Food, Agriculture, Community Development & Co-operation TXON ) Dynacraft Machine Company Private I.imited, Z&RI NAZAR R. N. FUTEHALLY Bombay Associated Cement Companies Limited, Bombay MAJ-GEN HARKIRAT SINGH SIIRI A. S. ASTALA ( Alternate ) ( Contirrtred onfiugc 12 )

)

2

IS : 5503 ( Part I ) - 1969

Indian Standard
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR SILOS FOR GRAIN STORAGE
PART I CONSTRUCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS

0.
0.1 This Indian

FOREWORD

Standard ( Part I ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 22 December 1969, after the draft finalized by the Storage and Marketing Structures for Agricultural Commodities Sectional Committee had been approved by the Agricultural and Food Products Division Council. 0.2 In India, agriculture contributes nearly 50 percent of total national income and of which food grains are the most important. There is a huge loss of food grains in storage. The loss can be minimized by scientific storage and by employing proper storage structures which can protect the grain from rodents, insect pests and outside humidity and temperature. 0.3 For the purpose of handling, transporting quantities of food grains in bulk, special storage Such structures are needed where: a) grains from producers are collected stored b) grains are brought and manufacturing plants, and storage of large structures are required. shipping point, or

at a central

to be used by the processing from one vessel to another ports.

c) grains are stored for transferring railway wagons, and d) grain exporting and importing

or to

Accordingly, these are named as interior transfer silos and sea-board silos respectively. applies to the storage and sea-board silos.

storage silos, mill silos, This standard primarily ( Part Grain II )-1969 handling of

0.4 This standard is a necessary adjunct to IS: 5503 ` General requirements for silos for grain storage : Part II equipment and accessories `. 0.5 This code is not intended .to restrict diseng and construction engineers. the initiative

and ingenuity

0.6 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this the final value, observed or calculated, standard is complied with, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance 3

IS : 5583 ( Part I ) - 1969 with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard ( Part I ) prescribes the basic constructional ments for steel and reinforced cement concrete silos. 1.2 This standard primarily applies to the storage and sea-board requiresilos.

2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose of this standard, 2.1 Grains -All the grain intended the following milled definitions products, shall apply. oilseeds and

cereals, pulses, millets, to be used as seed.

2.2 Silo - A unit consisting of several tall bins having height greater than their diameter used for storage and handling of grains in bulk and fitted with necessary equipment and accessories. 2.3 Storage Block A portion of the silo used for the storage of grain. and other

2.4 Headhouse - A portion of the silo which houses elevator accessories, such as weighing and c!eaning machines for grains. 2.5 Distribution GalleryThe structure conveyor system for distribution of grain into

on top of bins for housing bins. side for either This may be ground level at

2.6 Marine Tower -A structure located on the quay loading or unloading of food grains into and from ships. stationary or portable. 2.7 Collection Gallery - A portion for housing collection equipment. of the silo at or below

2.8 Angle of Repose-An angle formed with the horizontal which the loose grain, when piled, will retain its position. 2.8 Garner -An intermediate desired flow for further handling 3. LOCATION hopper for of grains. storage of grains

plane,

to ensure

3.1 The structure shall be located on a site having proper drainage and not liable to flooding or inundations, and which has adequate load bearing capacity.
*Rules for rounding

off numerical values ( revised).

4

IS:5503( 3.2 The

PartI)-

structure, as far as possible, shall be well away from source of contamination, such as slaughter-house and tanneries, and possible sources of fire-hazard, such as timber stores and petrol pumping stations. 3.3 The construction of structure in residential areas shall be avoided.

3.4 Silos, as far as possible, shall be located near railheads. There shall be loading and unloading facilities and sufficient space for manoeuvring vehicles and railway line. Where silo is near water-ways, such as docks and ferry heads, sufficient berthing, loading and unloading facilities shall be made available. 3.5 Silos expansion shall be facilities. located with due regard to the maximum permission possible shall be

3.6 In case the location is near air-port, obtained from the aviation authorities. 4. SILO

necessary

AND ANCILLARY

STRUCTURES

4.1 A silo shall generally

consist of truck and wagon dump or both, headhouse, storage block, and distribution and collection galleries ( see Fig. 1 ). Besides, it may have a number of ancillary structures at each site, such as a small block consisting of office and store rooms, a laboratory, a noncombustible store-building for storing fuels, a bagging shed, a track shed where the wagons or lorries may be handled under cover, repair shop, weigh bridges for lorries and wagons, an electrical substation, and a control room. 5. TRUCK

OR WAGON

DUMP
where by the

5.1 Truck

dump shall consist of a single hopper or series of hoppers the grain is dumped by trucks, wagons or carts. shall shall be generally located near the headhouse

5.2 Truck dump side of a road. 5.3 Wagon dump railway track.

be located

near the headhouse by the side of a

5.4 Truck dump and wagon dump shall be adequately protected against rain and shall be provided with suitable metal sieves with sufficient strength for separation of foreign matter, such as hay or other bigger sized grains, 5.5 The hopper may be made of steel with the grains. 5.6 The dump shall have adequate accumulation. provision suitable slope for easy flow of in case of water

for drainage

5

-

- -

- -

-

,-HEAD

HOUSE

I

RAfiWAY

LINES

II\

CROS$

CONVEYOR CONVEYOR

LQNGITUDINAL f

\ FIG. 1

L PNEUMATIC DISCHARGE \ PLANT (MARINE TOWER)

GENERAL LAYOUT PLAN FOR A GRAIN SILO

IS : 5503 ( Part I ) - 1969 6. HEADHOUSE 6.1 A headhouse shall consist of basement and a number of floors. It shall accommodate chiefly the bucket elevators for vertical elevation of grains, automatic weighing and cleaning machines, garners and other handling equipment. 6.2 The height of the headhouse elevators. The top floor shall bucket elevators. shall be determined by the height accommodate driving equipment of the of the

6.3 The various floors of headhouse shall be designed for actual loads due to various types of machines installed plus 400 kg/m2. For preliminary design purposes, in the absence of details of actual loads of the equipment, the loads given in Table 1 may be adopted.
TABLE 1 LOADS FOR PRELIMINARY DESIGN FLOORS OF HEADHOUSE ( Clauses 6.3 and 8.3 )
SL No. FLOORS OF HEADHOUSE LOADS IN kg/m2 FOR RATED CAPACITY OF HANDLING EQUIPMENT ~_--~~~h__~~~~__~ up to 100 t/h (1) i) (2) (3) 101-500 t/h (4) 500-1000 t/h (5) Above 1000 t/h (6)

OF DIFFERENT

Top floor ( accommodating the driving ~equipment of bucket elevator ) Despatch conveyor floor Scale floor Distribution floor Cleaner floor

500

750

1000

1200

ii) iii) iv) v)

500 500 500 500

650 750 750 650

750 1000 1000 750

1000 1200 1200 1000

6.4 The structural provisions, such as necessary openings and supports various equipment [ see IS : 5503 ( Part II )-1969" ] shall be provided in the design of the headhouse.

for for

6.5 In case the silo is situated near airways, suitable obstruction markings shall be provided on the headhouse in accordance with the existing Civil Aviation Standards. 6.6 The headhouse construction. may be of reinforced cement concrete or steel

*General requirements for silos for grain storage and accessories.

: Part II Grain handling equipment

7

IS : 5503 ( Part I ) - 1969

6.7 The basement

shall be of sufficient depth to receive the grains from the collection conveyors and of adequate dimensions to accommodate the truck or wagon dump, the boot of the elevator, and conveyor equipment. The basement shall be waterproof,

6.8

7. STORAGE

BLOCK

7.0 The
receive

storage block shall consist of a number of storage bins which the grain from the headhouse through the distribution gallery.

7.1 Storage Bins - The silo bins may be circular, rectangular or of any other shape. The dimensions of the bins shall be decided by considerations, such as load bearing capacity of the soil, quantity and variety of food grains to be handled, workable height of a bucket elevator, and stresses induced by grains, wind and seismic loads. The bins may be constructed of reinforced cement concrete or of steel. 7.1.1 The dimensions: circular bins shall be constructed Mb1 Diameter Height in metres in metres 8 40 with Max 10 50 the following

NOTE- Silo bins with smaller dimensions than those specified above and silos with lesser overall capacity than 50 01)O tonnes have been proved to be uneconomical and hence are not recommended.

7.1.2 Arrangement - The silo bins may preferably be arranged in rows (not exceeding four rows ) with the headhouse located in a convenient position. The interspaces between the bins may also be used for storage The general plans of a typical silo structure are given in Fig. 1 purposes. for guidance only.
7.1.2.1 the system identification The rows of bins shall be uniformally numbered according to described below and shown in Fig. 1, to facilitate easy and management:

4

Facing headhouse from track line, storage block on the left shall be numbered as Block 1 and on the right side as Block 2. rows of bins, including rows of star bins or interspace shall be serially numbered as 1, 2, 3, 4, . . . . . . . etc, starting Even if the interspace bins are not utilized, the track side. shall be assigned numbers according to the plan. bins, from these

b) The

The c> from

bins shall be numbered as No. 01, 02, . . . . . . . etc, starting the headhouse. Thus, bin No. 1104 will indicate the fourth bin in the first row in the left block. 8

IS:5503(PartI)-1969 7.1.3 Criteria for Design of RCC Bins -- The bins shall be as given in IS : 4995-1968*.
criteria for design of RCC

7.1.4 Criteria for Design of Steel Bim - The criteria for design of steel bins shall be as given in ` Indian Standard code of practice for design, fabrication and erection of steel silos and bunkers `. ( under preparation, see Note ).
NOTIC- Until this standard is published, this criteria shall be as agreed to between the concerned parties. 7.2

Foundation-The silo structure shall rest on reinforced cement concrete raft foundation supported on piles or laid directly on soil, In any case, site investigations for depending on the soil condition. foundation shall be carried out ( see IS : 1892-1962t ).

7.2.1 While laying down the foundation, due consideration shall be given to the wind forces (see IS : 875-1964$ ) and seismic conditions of the zone (see IS : 1893-19665 ). 7.2.2 In case the reinforced cement concrete raft is to be laid over the piles, the top of the mat shall be at the plinth level. 7.2.3 The type of foundation into account the layout, nature for the storage bins shall be decided taking of soil and the loads transferred.

7.3 Plinth -The concrete mat on which the silo bins stand shall be deemed as the plinth, unless the mat is laid directly on hard soil or rock. In the latter case, suitable plinth walls shall be provided outside with masonry work and the space between the reinforced cement concrete mat and the hopper of the silos shall be used for housing the collection conveyors. 7.3.1 The plinth rain water level. level shall be at least 0.5 m higher than the maximum

7.4 Other Requirements - The requirements for floors, walls, roofs and bin bottoms of the reinforced cement concrete bins shall be as given In case of the steel bins, the requirements shall be as in IS : 4995-1968*. code of practice for given in 7.4.1 to 7.4.4 [see also ` Indian Standard design, fabrication and erection of steel silos and bunkers ' ( under preparation ) 1.
*Criteria for design of reinforced concrete bins ( silos ) for bulk food grain storage.

tCode of practice for site investigations for foundations. SCode of practice for structural safety of buildings

: Loading standards.

SCriteria for earthquake resistant design of structures (first reuision).

9

IS : 5503 ( Part I ) - 1969 7.4.1

Floor
floors shall be of reinforced cement concrete and

7.4.1.1 Basement properly waterproofed. 7.4.1.2 7.4.2

The side walls shall also be waterproofed. surface of the walls shall be given suitable be painted with aluminium waterpaint

Walls

7.4.2.1 The exterior proofing treatment. 7.4.2.2 The from outside. 7.4.3

walls shall

preferably

Roof
It shall be laid fumigation,

7.4.3.1 The roof over the silos shall be waterproofed. giving a suitable slope for proper drainage of rain water. 7.4.3.2 Suitable air-tight openings for spouting, etc, shall be provided for in the design of the roof, 7.4.4

aeration,

Bin Bottom

The bins shall be provided with flat or hopper bottom. In case of hopper bottom, the slope adopted shall be suitable for material to be handled and the material of the hopper to ensure easy gravity flow. It shall be at least 10 deg more than the angle of repose.

7.4.4.1

7.4.4.2 fumigation,

Suitable air-tight openings for discharge of grains, etc, shall be provided for in the design of bin bottom.

aeration,

8. GALLERIES 8.1 Distribution Gallery - Distribution gallery shall accommodate the conveying equipment for receipt of grains from the distribution elevators of the head house for spouting to the various bins. 8.1.1 Dimensions-The type and number of galleries and their dimensions shall depend upon the number of conveyors to be housed and the rows of bins. While designin g the gallery, care shall be taken to provide sufficient space for distribution arrangement, dust control equipment, and for inspection and maintenance. 8.2 Collection Gallery - It shall house the conveying equipment for receipt of grains from the bins and shall be located below the bins. The type and number of galleries and their dimensions shall depend upon the number of conveyors to be housed and the rows of bins. While designing the gallery, care should be taken to provide sufficient space for distribution arrangement, dust control equipment, and for inspection and maintenance. 8.3 The loads for preliminary design of galleries shall be adopted as given in Table 1. The actual load of mechanical equipment plus 400 kg/m" shall be adopted for design of galleries. 10

IS:5503(PartI)-1969 9. ANClLLARY 9J Track Shed by a fire-proof 9.1.1 9.1.2 9.2

STRUCTURES
be separated from the headhouse

The track shed shall and dust-proof partition.

Fixed glass windows shall be provided The doors in the partition

in the partition.

shall be self-closing.

Ragging Shed 9.2.1 The bagging shed shall be so located as to facilitate
from the headhouse and despatch receipt of bulk of bags by trucks or rail cars.

grains 9.2.2 10.

It shall also be rodent-proof

and fire-proof.

GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 10.1.1 Doors and windows shall be of non-combustible
material.

10.1 Doors and Windows
10.1.2 Adequate doorways shall be provided in the basement and in the gallery floor for easy access to fire-escape exits in case of emergency. 10.2 Stairways

and Exits
an easy slope and shall be provided and passenger self-closing with

10.2.1 Stairways shall have suitable landings at intervals.

10.2.2 Stairways, required for exit purpose in shafts formed of non-combustible material. 10.2.3 Openings in the stairways to open in the direction of exit. shall have

lifts, shall be hinged

shutters

10.2.4 At least two exit doors, as remote from one another as practicable, shall be provided in the basement and preferably in each floor. 10.2.5 A separate fire escape ladder shall floor and from the headhouse. 10.2.5.1 The protection caging. 10.2.5.2 fire escape ladder shall be provided be from the gallery suitable

provided

with

The fire escape ladder

shall be easily accessible.

10.3 Ventilation - Ventilation for the buildings, operating rooms and for the areas, where protection for explosion is necessary, shall be as permitted by the factory regulations in force. 10.3.1 In the case of basements, the venting that is practicable consistent with stability. area shall be the maximum,

10.3.2 Wired glass may be used only as protection against explosions and, where it is included in explosion-venting areas, explosion-type hardware shall be used. 11

IS:5503(PartI)-1969
( Continuedfrom page 2 ) Members SHRI JAYANT V. KANJI SHRI V. P. S. KASHYAP SHRI SANMUKHLAL G. MEHTA SHRI B. I. PATEL SHRI P. RAMDAS MR S. R. ROESSLER SHRI T. J. JEORCE ( Alternate) SHRI ADUSUMILLI SUBBARAO*
SUPERINTENDING

Representing The Roller Flour Millers' Federation of India, New Delhi Government Engineering Workshop, Nilokheri Federation of ,A11 India Foodgrain Dealers' Association,, Bombay Elton Engineermg Works, Vallabhanagar, Anand Central Warehousing Corporation, New Delhi Howe ( India ) Private Limited, New Delhi

WORKS ( FOOD ) SHRI R. SWARUP

SURVEYOR

OF Central Public

Andhra Pradesh Rice Millers' Association, Vijayawada Works Department Triveni Structurals Limited, Naini, U.P. The Commissioner for the Port of Calcutta Port Trust, Bombay

SHRI J. B. TALATI SHRI M. R. SAHA ( Alternate )
SHRI FERNANDO VIEGAS

SHRI V. SUBRAMANYAM ( Alternate 1

L

*He is also alternate to Shri Sanmukhlal Foodgrain Dealers' Association, Bombay.

G. Mehta representing Federation of All India

12

