IAAI AAF IS 2370 : 2014 
Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2019) 


atb 2 «ies BH — faf 
( geet FRAT ) 


Walk-in Cold 
Rooms — Specification 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 97.130.20 


© BIS 2014 


ada AM em 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAF Tt, 9 egee pi mm. ae fereit-110002 
Lidia MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


March 2014 Price Group 6 


Refrigeration and Air Conditioning Sectional Committee, MED 03 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Refrigeration and Air Conditioning Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering 
Division Council. 


This standard was first published in 1963. The refrigeration and air conditioning industry, both in India and 
abroad, has made tremendous strides since then. Walk-in type cold rooms have undergone a quantum improvement 
with the introduction of rooms assembled with pre-fabricated rigid polyurethane foam insulated panels, installed 
with factory made cooling systems. These are now manufactured within the country. Hence it was decided to 
revise this standard for walk-in cold rooms. 


The Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard has taken into consideration the views of 
manufacturers, consumers and technologists and has related the standard to the current manufacturing trade 
practices followed in the country and abroad in this field. Due weightage has also been given to the need for 
international co-ordination among standards prevailing in different countries of the world. Assistance has been 
derived from the following standards: 


B.S. 2502 : 1979 Specification for manufacture of sectional cold rooms (walk-in type), issued 
by the British Standards Institution 

ARI Standard 420 - 2000 Unit Coolers for Refrigeration, issued by Air-conditioning & Refrigeration 
Institute, USA 

ASHRAE Standard 25-2001 Methods of testing forced convection and natural convection air coolers for 
refrigeration. 


This standard is intended chiefly to cover the technical provisions relating to walk-in cold rooms, and it does not 
include all necessary provisions of a contract. 


The major changes in this revision are: 


a) Internal cabinet and maximum ambient shade temperature have been modified. 
b) The term unit cooler has been incorporated. 

c) Type of refrigerants used have been modified. 

d) Capacity rating test and standard rating conditions have been modified. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard 


IS 2370 : 2014 


Indian Standard 
WALK-IN COLD ROOMS — SPECIFICATION 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard covers the general constructional 
and performance requirements of walk-in cold rooms 
within the range of 5 kilolitre to 200 kilolitre gross 
volume capacity and operated by an electrically driven 
refrigerating machine of the vapor compression type. 
The methods of carrying out tests on walk-in cold 
rooms are also specified. 


1.2 The limits of internal and ambient temperature 
covered by the standard are: 


a) Internal cabinet temperature : — 40°C to 
+15°C 
b) Maximum ambient shade : + 46°C 


temperature 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions, which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 


IS No. Title 
302 (Part 1) : Safety of household and similar 
2008 electrical appliances: Part 1 General 

requirements 

325 : 1996 Three-phase induction motors 

661 : 2000 Thermal insulation of cold storage — 
Code of practice 

996 : 2009 Single-phase small ac and universal 
electric motors 

1068 : 1993 Electroplated coatings of nickel plus 
chromium and copper plus nickel 
plus chromium 

1401 : 1970 Accessibility test probes 


9968 (Part 1) : 


Elastomer insulated cables: Part 1 For 


1988 working voltages up to and including 
1100 V 
12360 : 1988 Voltage bands for electrical 


installations including preferred 
voltages and frequency 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 


3.1 Walk-in Cold Room — A complete self-contained 
unit, into which a person can enter and reach any part 
inside, comprising, 


a) the insulated cold room, made in transportable 
sections; 


b) the unit cooler; and 


c) all auxiliaries, such as fans, lights, etc, the 
complete unit being capable of removal from 
One site and re-erection on another without 
interference with the main structure of a 
building. 


3.2 Insulation (Thermal) — A material of low thermal 
conductivity employed for the purpose of resisting heat 
flow. 


3.3 Transmittance (Thermal) — The quantity of heat 
flowing per unit time through unit area of wall or 
partition, divided by temperature difference between 
the air or other fluid on either face. 


3.4 Unit Cooler — Factory-made assembly, including 
means for forced air circulation and elements by which 
heat is transferred from air to refrigerant without any 
element external to the cooler imposing air resistance. 


3.4.1 Unitary Unit Cooler — It comprises the 
condensing unit, the evaporator and fans for forced air 
circulation, valves and piping in a single cabinet. 


3.4.2 Split Unit Cooler — It comprises the condensing 
and evaporating units in separate cabinets. 


3.5 Vapour Compression Cycle — A refrigeration 
cycle in which a refrigerant absorbs heat by evaporation 
and after being mechanically compressed, surrenders 
heat during liquefaction at higher temperature level. 


3.6 Refrigerant — The volatile fluid used in vapour 
compression cycle. 


3.7 High Pressure Side — The part of refrigerating 
system subject to higher or condenser pressure. 


3.8 Low Pressure Side — The part of refrigerating 
system subject to the lower or evaporator side. 


IS 2370 : 2014 


3.9 Evaporator — The part of refrigerating system, 
which performs the function of absorbing heat. 


3.10 Condensing Unit — The part of refrigerating 
system, which is responsible for condensing the low 
pressure evaporated vapour to high pressure liquid 
refrigerant. It mainly comprises a power-driven 
compressor; a condenser and receiver, if any. 


3.11 Unit Coolers — A factory made assembly, 
including means for forced air circulation and elements 
by which heat is transferred from air to refrigerant 
without any element external to the cooler imposing 
air resistance. Unit cooler shall be unitary or split. The 
split unit cooler may be air-cooled or water cooled type. 


3.11.1 Unitary Refrigerant Unit — A unitary 
refrigerant unit consists of both evaporating unit and 
condensing unit in a single fabricated unit. These units 
may be window mounted or roof mounted. 


3.11.2. Split Refrigerant Unit — In split refrigerant 
unit the evaporating unit and condensing units are two 
separate units, which are connected together by 
refrigeration piping 


3.12 Net Total Cooling Effect — The refrigeration 
capacity available for space and product cooling 
expressed, in W. 


3.13 Total Cooling Effect — The heat absorbed by 
the refrigerant. This is the sum of the net total cooling 
effect and the heat equivalent of the energy required to 
operate the cooler. 


3.14 Temperature Difference (TD) — The difference 
between the dry-bulb temperature of the air entering 
the unit cooler and the saturation temperature 
corresponding to the refrigerant pressure at the suction 
connection of the unit cooler. 


4 COLD ROOM 


4.1 Inside Dimensions 
4.1.1 Inside Depth (Length) 


The inside depth (length) shall be mean horizontal 
distance between the inside surfaces of the front and 
back inner walls of the lining. 


4.1.2 Inside Width 


The inside width shall be the mean horizontal distance 
between the inner surfaces of the walls on the left and 
right hand side. 


4.1.3 Inside Height 


The inside height shall be the mean vertical distance 
between inside surface of the floor and ceiling of the 
lining. 


4.1.4 Gross Volume 


Gross volume shall be the product of inside depth 
(length), inside width and inside height. It shall be 
expressed to the nearest 50 litre up to 10 kilolitre and 
nearest 100 litres for sizes beyond 10 kilolitre. 


4.2 Materials 


4.2.1 Materials used in the construction of the cold 
room shall comply with Indian Standards where 
applicable, except where such requirements are 
otherwise modified by this standard. They shall be free 
from defects, which are liable to cause undue 
deterioration or failure. 


4.2.2 Under normal conditions of use, the materials 
used shall not shrink, warp or cause mould or odours, 
and shall be resistant to attack by vermin and 
destructive pests; where liable to be exposed to 
moisture, food products, they shall be suitably resistant 
and shall not contaminate stored products placed in 
contact with them. However, the client may like to take 
care of pest for example rodents, termites, bats, etc, 
and use suitable pest controlled method as per the site 
conditions. Ceiling materials (under its life span) used 
shall not loss any of their essential properties such as 
adhesion, plasticity and moisture resistance. 


4.2.3 Interior and exterior finishes shall be durable 
and capable of being cleaned effectively and 
hygienically without undue deterioration. All metal 
parts used inside the cold room or on the outside, where 
they are liable to be exposed to moisture shall be 
corrosion resistant or adequately protected against 
corrosion. Finishes shall not crack, chip, flake, rub of 
or soften under conditions of normal service and 
cleaning. 


4.2.4 Electroplated metal parts used in construction 
of sectional cold rooms shall conform to Grade B of 
IS 1068. For parts used internally, the standard shall 
be that for severe outdoor conditions or extra hard wear. 


4.2.5 Cadmium plating shall not be used on any part 
of the storage space or its fittings. 


4.2.6 Where vitreous enamelled parts are fitted, 
suitable means shall be provided to prevent chafing or 
mechanical stress likely to cause chipping. Where liable 
to contact with food products or their derivatives or 
other chemically active substances, the enamel shall 
be suitably resistant. 


4.3 Construction 


4.3.1 The cold room and its parts shall be constructed 
with strength and rigidity adequate to normal 
conditions of handling, transport and usage. 


4.3.2 All joints between sections shall be so formed 
as to become rigid and air tight after erection, and yet 
allow of the sections being dismantled and properly 
re-erected, if required. 


4.3.3 Doors of the cold room shall be arranged for 
access from both inside and outside. Where so desired, 
an electrical alarm signal may be provided in a 
convenient position. 


4.3.3.1 Door heaters 


The doors in walk-in cold room shall be equipped with 
suitable concealed heater wire circuit inside the door 
frame prevents condensation and frost formation at the 
edge of door and frame. The door heater of appropriate 
rating particularly for freezer application (below 0°C) 
is to be provided to prevent ice formation between door 
frame and the door. 


4.3.4 The type and quality of gaskets and hardware 
used on access doors, hatches, plugs, etc, shall be such 
that efficient insulation is reasonably maintained. 


4.3.5 Suitable provision shall be made to ensure that 
all external surfaces of the cabinet shall be reasonably 
free from condensation under normal conditions of 
service. 


4.3.6 Internal Linings and External Fittings 


Linings and facings shall have sufficient mechanical 
strength to resist distortion and give reasonable 
protection to the insulation. 


4.3.7 Ingress of Air 


When the doors of the refrigerated space are closed 
there shall be no appreciable leakage of ambient air 
into the interior, either past the door gasket or by any 
other means. 


4.3.8 Hardware 


Door fasteners and hinges shall be smooth and positive 
in action and designed to maintain their proper 
functioning without undue wear under normal 
conditions of service. 


4.3.9 Drains 


Where drains are fitted they shall have ample capacity 
to cope with the requirements of normal service and 
shall be suitably sealed against ingress of air; they shall 
also be accessible for cleaning. 


4.3.9.1 Tray heater 


Evaporator drain tray shall be provided with suitable 
heater of appropriate rating to prevent ice formation 
over the tray and ensure proper flow of water to drain. 


4.3.10 Interior Fittings 


Hanging rails and shelves shall be of robust 


IS 2370 : 2014 


construction, rust-proof and shall be adequately 
supported. 


4.3.11 Minimum Internal Height 
The minimum height of cold room shall be 2 m. 
4.3.12 Minimum Door Opening Sizes 


Unless otherwise specified the minimum clear opening 
size of door ways, shall be 1.8 m high x 0.75 m wide. 


4.4 Thermal Insulation 


4.4.1 The quality, thickness and application of the 
insulating materials shall be such that efficient 
insulation of cold room is reasonably maintained. The 
whole of the external surface shall be sealed against 
moisture penetration by diffusion. Where the insulation 
space is vented to the inside, steps shall be taken to 
ensure that particles of the insulating material cannot 
escape into the storage compartment. Insulation 
materials confirming to IS 661 may be used. 


4.4.2. Where the moisture barrier is broken by door 
locks, pipes, hinges, etc, the points of entry shall be 
suitably sealed. Detachable plates and covers on the 
external surfaces shall also be provided with suitable 
seals against ingress of moisture into the insulation. 


4.4.3 Where the external/internal surfaces are of high 
heat conducting materials, they shall be separated by 
insulating breaker strips or their equivalent, to ensure 
that all external surfaces shall be reasonably free from 
condensation under normal conditions of service. 


4.4.4 Frame members within the insulation shall be 
kept to a minimum consistent with adequate 
constructional rigidity and loading applied in use. 
Where possible frame members shall not penetrate the 
full thickness of the insulation. 


5 UNIT COOLER 


5.1 Construction 


5.1.1 Pipes and connections to moving or resiliently- 
mounted parts shall be so arranged as not to foul or to 
transmit vibration to other parts. All other pipes and 
connections shall be secured and sufficiently free 
length shall be provided to minimize the risk of failure 
due to fatigue. 


5.1.2 Where necessary under normal operating 
conditions, pipes and valves shall be thermally 
insulated. 


5.2 Noise 


The refrigerating system shall be free from undue noise 
or vibration. However the noise level shall not be 
exceeding 85 db. 


IS 2370 : 2014 


5.2.1 Noise Level 


The noise level of unit cooler, unitary unit cooler, split 
unit cooler shall not exceed 85db noise level while 
measuring at 1.5 m radius away from each unit. 


5.3 Water Condensation 


Suitable means shall be provided to prevent water 
condensed on cold parts of the refrigerating system 
from effecting the operation of the unit or its controls. 
Suitable means shall be provided to prevent moisture 
dripping or splashing from baffles, drip trays or other 
cold parts on to the food or other products placed in 
the cold room. 


5.4 Safety Features in Design (Operation of Safety 
Device) 


Refrigerating piping, valves, fittings, their related parts 
and all material used in the construction and installation 
of refrigerating system shall be suitable for the 
refrigerant used. No material which would deteriorate 
due to chemical action of the refrigerant or the oil or 
the combination of both and moisture shall be used. 
Aluminum, zinc or magnesium shall not be used in 
contact with methyl chloride. Magnesium alloys shall 
not be used in contact with chloro-fluoro derivatives 
of methane and ethane. Copper and copper alloys shall 
not be used in contact with ammonia. 


5.4.1 All joints shall be readily accessible. 


5.4.2. Joints from refrigerant copper pipe and fittings 
made with solder or other alloys shall have melting 
point of, 


a) not less than 260°C for pipe sizes up to 
32 mm; and 


b) 540°C for pipe sizes above 32 mm and for all 
the sizes on hot gas lines. 


5.4.3 Stop valves shall be installed on all systems other 
than those using centrifugal compressors, containing 
more than 10 kg of refrigerant. The location of the 
stop valves shall be as given in 5.4.4. 


5.4.4 Stop valve shall be provided at the inlet and outlet 
ends of each of compressor, receiver and evaporator. 


5.4.5 When the door or hatch is left open under normal 
operating conditions, the automatic overload protective 
device shall come into operation. 


5.5 Control of Operation 


Refrigerant flow and compressor driving motor 
operation shall be automatically controlled to 
reduce the cabinet temperature to the temperature 
specified and to maintain it within the limits of the 
application. 


5.6 Location of Components 


The evaporator and any associated screens, baffles, drip 
tray, etc, shall not obstruct access to stored products. 
All control devices and service valves shall be readily 
accessible. 


5.7 Defrosting System 


Unit coolers which maintain room temperature below 
0°C shall be provided with a suitable defrosting system 
to remove excess frost on the evaporator coil, which 
may affect the cooling capacity. This defrosting system 
shall operate automatically by means of a suitable 
controller. 


5.7.1 Pressure Relief System 


A pressure relief valve system of suitable capacity and 
number shall be provided for all the cold rooms 
operating below 0°C. 


5.8 Optional Items 


The manufacturer/supplier shall make available the 
following items at extra cost and as agreed to between 
the purchaser and the manufacturer. 


Air curtain and air shield PVC strip curtain, Exterior 
ramps, door kick plates, Bumper rail, Protecting guard 
for sliding doors, corner protectors, partition walls and 
doors from same materials, roof mounted refrigeration 
unit, extra lighting, vision panel in doors be supplied, 
where necessary. 


6 ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT 


6.1 Rating of Motors 


All motors shall be continuously rated and shall be 
suitable for the particular application. Motors, other 
than that of hermetically sealed compressor units, shall 
comply with IS 325 or IS 996, as applicable. Motors 
of hermetically sealed compressor units shall be of 
adequate rating to comply with the test for adequate 
rating of compressor motors (see 6.9). For compressor 
motors an external over load relay shall be provided in 
addition to the inherent protection provided by the 
compressor manufacturer. 


6.1.1 Micro Processor Based Controller 


All walk-in cold room refrigeration system operation 
shall be controlled through microprocessor based 
controller. 


6.2 Motor Overload Protection 


Motor shall be adequately protected against dangerous 
over heating arising from excessive current. Small FHP 
single phase motors shall be provided with a fuse 
protection. 


6.3 All Control Gear shall Comply with Relevant 
Indian Standards, Where Applicable 


6.4 Cables and Flexible Cords 


Flexible supply cords and all cables used shall comply 
with IS 9968 (Part 1) as regards thickness of insulation, 
insulation resistance, voltage test and, in the case of 
flexible supply cords only, colour. The current carrying 
capacity of each cable and flexible cord shall be 
adequate for its full load current. Where a flexible 
supply cord passes through holes in metal parts such 
holes shall be shaped or bushed to protect the flexible 
cord from damage. 


6.5 Wiring 


6.5.1 The wiring methods, together with the design, 
arrangement and workmanship employed, shall give 
full protection to the electrical insulation against 
mechanical damage from oil, heat, refrigerant, moisture 
or corrosive materials where these could be 
encountered. Conduit for internal wiring shall be 
adequately sealed against ingress of moisture. 


6.5.2. Soldering fluxes shall not cause corrosion. 


6.6 Accidental Contact 


Live parts shall be protected by suitable guards, shields 
or screens of adequate strength and durability so that 
there is no possibility of making inadvertent contact 
under normal service conditions. It shall not be possible 
to touch live parts with the accessibility test probes 
following the procedure described in IS 1401 even after 
the removal of covers or casings which can be removed 
without the use of tools, or during replacement of the 
lamp. 


6.7 Internal Electrical Components 


Internal lamps shall be mounted in suitable fittings and 
provided with guards for protection against mechanical 
damage. Internal fans shall be suitable for operation at 
the lowest air temperature likely to occur. 


IS 2370 : 2014 


6.8 Earthing 


Metal casings of the electrical components, metal frame 
and all exposed metallic parts likely to become alive 
shall be provided with earthing facilities in accordance 
with the requirements given in IS 302 (Part 1). 


6.9 Standard Rating Conditions for Unit Coolers 
for Refrigeration 


The evaporators shall be designed keeping the 
temperature difference between the cold room (return 
air), temperature and the saturated section temperature 
of the refrigerant as 5°C. Refer Table 1 given below. 
Moreover, the end user shall have freedom to specify 
the RH percent while sending inquiry. 


7 CLASSIFICATION OF TESTS 
Tests shall be classified into three groups, namely, 


a) production routine tests; 
b) type tests; and 
C) acceptance tests. 


7.1 Production Routine Tests 


These shall consist of routine tests that would be 
conducted on each and every unit after completion at 
the manufacturer's works. 


7.1.1 General Running Test 


Each unit shall be given a run to ensure vibration free 
and satisfactory operation of mechanical parts. 


7.1.2 Pressure Tests 


The manufacturer shall test all parts of the refrigerating 
system to pressures at least 1.2 to 1.5 times of the design 
operating condition (depends on air cooled or water 
cooled/evaporative type condenser used) of the 
refrigeration system (low side and high side of the 
system) but not less than those given in Table 2. The 
system shall be kept under pressure for a minimum 
period of 24 h and no reduction in pressure is 
acceptable, after holding 24 h 


Table 1 Standard Rating Conditions for Unit Coolers for Refrigeration 


(Clause 6.9) 

SI Group Number Inlet Air Temperature Nominal Relative Saturated Suction 

No. Humidity Temperature 
Dry-Bulb Wet-Bulb 
SC Së 

(UI (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 

i) High +10 3:2 70 +5.0 

ii) Medium above freezing +2.0 — — -3 
iii) Medium below freezing -18 — — -23 

iv) Low -23 — — -28 

v) Very low -25 — — -40 


IS 2370 : 2014 


Table 2 Minimum Test Pressures 
(Clause 7.1.2) 


SI Refrigerant Chemical Formula High Pressure Side Low Pressure Side 
No. kg/cm? kg/cm? 
(UI (2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) System with air cooled condenser operation: 
a) Ammonia R 717 NH, 33 22 
b) Chlorodifluoromethane R 22 CHCIF, 32 20 
c) 1,1,1,2-Tetrafluoroethane R 134a CH, FC E 20 20 
d) R 404A — 36 20 
ii) System with water cooled/evaporative condenser 
operation: 
a) Ammonia R 717 NH, 22 22 
b) Chlorodifluoromethane R22 CHCIF, 22 20 
c) 1,1,1,2-Tetrafluoroethane R 134a CH, FC E 20 20 
d) R 404A — 25 20 


7.1.2.1 Vacuum test 


The manufacturer shall carry out vacuum test of entire 
system at vacuum as per altitude and hold it for 
minimum period of 8 h. No raise in pressure shall be 
noticed after holding for 8 h period. 


7.1.3 Electrical Tests of Unit Cooler 


a) Insulation resistance — The insulation 
resistance between all electrical circuits and 
the earthed metal parts when measured at 
normal room temperature with a voltage of 
not less than 500 V dc shall be not less than 
one mega ohm; and 


b) High potential test — The normal insulation 
of all electrical circuits at room temperature 
shall be such as to withstand a high-potential 
test of 2 000 V rms applied for not less than 
five seconds between all circuits and 
accessible metal parts. 


For refrigerating machinery to be connected to circuits 
of 50 V and below the high-voltage test shall be 500 V 
rms. The test voltage shall be alternating, of 
approximately sine wave form and of any convenient 
frequency between 25 and 100 cycles/s. 


7.2 Type Tests 


The type tests shall consist of the tests that would be 
necessary to check the performance and characteristics 
of the units and components and shall be carried out 
by a recognized testing authority, who may be the 
manufacturer, if approved by the purchaser. Once a 
walk-in cold room has undergone type tests, any major 
or essential alterations, which the manufacturer intends 
to make, shall be reported to the testing authority and 
further type tests shall be carried out in accordance 
with the procedure laid down in this standard Besides 
all the production routine tests specified in 7.1, the type 
tests comprise the following. 


7.2.1 Cold Room 
7.2.1.1 Door seal test 


Visual light ingress test from ambient into the dark 
cold room (finished cold room without lights) shall 
indicate gaps in the door to frame sealing. 


7.2.1.2 Thermal insulation 


The insulated structure of the cold room after assembly 
shall be tested by the heat-input method to determine 
its thermal transmittance. For this purpose the interior 
of the cold room shall be heated by an electrical heater 
(or heaters) suitably shielded to prevent radiation to 
the walls and so located as to ensure a uniform 
temperature of 14 + 1°C above the ambient temperature 
outside the test room and maintained at that temperature 
for 30 h. 


The record of electrical energy input and inside and 
outside temperatures shall be taken hourly during the 
last 6 h. From this record, compute the heat dissipation 
from the cold room to the outside ambient, from which 
calculate the thermal transmittance. The thermal 
transmittance shall not exceed the value specified. 


Thermal transmittance = Q x 1 000/6 A (t, — t) 


where 
Q = kWh recorded for 6 h; 
A = mean area of cold room walls and ceiling; 
and 
t,t; = average outside and inside temperatures 


respectively. 
7.2.2 Unit Cooler 


The tests as per 7.2.2.1, 7.2.2.2, 7.2.2.3 and 7.2.2.4 
shall be carried out on the fully assembled unit cooler 
with all its panels, fittings and standard accessories (if 
any) in place. 


7.2.2.1 Measurement of air-flow 


The evaporator air flow shall be measured at rated 
voltage and frequency with a calibrated anemometer/ 
any other suitable velocity probe and s given by: 


Air flow 2 A x v m?/h. 


where 
A = area over which at least 16 anemometer 
readings are taken at equispaced locations, 
in m?; and 
v = mean velocity of air, in m/h. 


7.2.2.2 Capacity rating test 


a) Method 1 — The cooling capacity may be 
determined by using the enthalpy change of 
the refrigerant across the evaporator and the 
refrigerant mass flow rate. Any enclosure in 
which the specified test conditions can be 
maintained within a tolerance of +1°C may 
be used to determine cooling capacity. 
Refrigerant side gross cooling capacity can 
be computed by the product of mass flow rate 
of refrigerant and the enthalpy difference at 
the inlet and outlet of the cooler. 


Enthalpies at the inlet and outlet of the cooler 
can be read off the standard P-H chart or tables 
based on the refrigerant inlet and outlet 
conditions. 

Refrigerant flow shall be measured by a 
refrigerant flow meter with an accuracy of 
2 percent of the quantity measured. 

Net cooling capacity shall be found by gross 
cooling capacity minus (E, + E). 

b) Method 2 — This method determines the 
cooling capacity of a unit cooler by measuring 
the electrical input to a calibrated box (see 
Fig. 1) soas to maintain specified temperature 
and humidity conditions inside the calibrated 
box ata specified outside ambient temperature. 
The size of the calibrated box shall be such 
that it shall not restrict the normal flow of air 
around the equipment to be tested. In no case 
shall the heat leakage of the calibrated box 
exceed 30 percent of the gross total cooling 
effect of the air cooler under test. 


For forced circulation unit coolers, Air side gross 
cooling capacity can be found by: 


Qa = K,(t4—1) + E, + EW 


air side gross cooling capacity, in W; 


SE 
E) 
UH 


heat leakage coefficient of calibrated box, 
in WPC; 


IS 2370 : 2014 


E. = total electrical input to heaters and auxiliary 
equipment of calibrated box, in W; 


E = total electrical input to fan motor(s) of unit 
cooler, in W; 


t, = average dry-bulb temperature of air 
surrounding the calibrated box, in °C; and 


t, = average dry-bulb temperature of air within 
the calibrated box, in °C. 


Net cooling capacity shall be found by gross cooling 
capacity minus (E, + E). 


Calibration of the Calibrated box — The heater input 
shall be adjusted to maintain an average box 
temperature of 14 + 1°C above the outside surrounding 
temperature. The box temperature shall be taken as the 
average of all readings. 


A calibration test shall be the average of eleven 
consecutive hourly readings that fall within the limits 
specified by this standard. 


A calibration test shall be made for the maximum and 
the minimum forced air movements expected in the 
use of the test box. The calibration heat leakage shall 
be plotted as a straight line function of these two air 
quantities and this curve shall be used as calibration 
for the box. 


The calibration heat leakage of the calibrated box shall 
be computed as described in 7.2.1.2. 


7.2.2.3 Power consumption test 


The power consumption of the unit cooler shall be 
measured during the capacity rating test at the standard 
rating conditions given in 6.9. 
NOTE — Attention is drawn to IS 12360 where it is 
recommended adoption of 240 V single phase in place of 230 


V single phase. In the interim period, however, 230 V single 
phase will be permissible voltage. 


7.2.2.4 Maximum operating condition test is conducted 
at an outdoor ambient temperature of 46°C and at 
specified indoor temperature (see 6.9). The unit cooler 
shall operate for at least 2 h without tripping of the 
compressor or any of the safety controls. 


7.3 Acceptance Tests 


If the purchaser desires any of the production routine 
tests to be repeated at the time of purchase, where 
agreed to between the purchaser and the manufacturer, 
the tests may be carried out at the manufacturer's 
works. Alternatively, the tests may be repeated at the 
place specified by the purchaser. 


7.4 Preparation of Units for Tests 
7.4.1 Preparation of Selected Units 


a) The cold room and unit cooler shall be 


IS 2370 : 2014 


b) 


TEMPERATURE CONTROLLED 


ENCLOSURE 


CALIBRATED BOX 


Vf LLLLLLLLLLLILILL LLL LLL), 


L_.._AIR COOLER 


TENES 


D.B. AND W.B. TEMPERATURE MEASURING 
INSTRUMENTS (NAT. CONV. TEST) 


FORCED 
CIRCULATION 
AIR COOLER 


HUMIDIFIER 


D.B. AND W.B. TEMPERATURE 
MEASURING DEVICES 


D.B. TEMPERATURE 


MEASURING DEVICES 


HEATERS 


II LA 
Ce esce] 


Fic. 1 CALLIBRATED Box METHOD 


installed as in normal service. All permanently 
located accessories shall be in their proper 
places but the storage space shall otherwise 
be empty during all tests except as limited by 
the test conditions herein stated; and 

Before the unit cooler is put on test, it shall 
be given a minimum run-in period of 12 h. 


7.5 General Requirements for Tests 


7.5.1 Test Conditions 


a) 


The sectional cold room shall be so placed or 
shielded as to prevent direct radiation from 
the heating equipment. Air circulation in the 
test room shall be such that the specified 
uniformity of temperature distribution is 
obtained without a direct draught upon the 
room under test. Windows in the test room 

shall be provided with suitable radiation 


b) 


c) 


shields. The cold room shall be shielded from 
extraneous air currents which exceed 15 m/ 
min. 

The interior of the cold room shall be dried 
immediately before the stabilization period 
preceding the tests. 

The cabinet door (or doors) shall be kept 
closed during each test. 


7.5.2 Temperatures 


7.5.2.1 Ambient temperatures 


a) 


Outside ambient temperature shall be 
maintained to within + 1.5 °C of the specified 
value, and shall be measured at points located 
at 1 m from the floor and 0.25 m from the 
sides and front of the cold room. This 
condition shall be maintained during both 
stabilizing and test periods. 


b) The ambient temperature shall be recorded at 
one of the above positions, preferably with a 
recording instrument. If an indicating 
instrument is used, readings shall be taken at 
intervals of 30 min. 

c) The vertical temperature gradient from the 
floor to a height of 2 m shall not exceed 
1.5 °C for each meter of vertical distance. 


7.5.2.2. Internal cold room temperature 


a) Temperature of the cold room air shall be 
measured in at least six representative 
positions and the mean shall be taken as the 
cold room temperature; 

b) Allthe temperature measuring elements shall 
be supported in the cold room in such a manner 
that there shall be at least 13 mm of air space 
separating the thermal element from contact 
with heat conducting surfaces in the cold 
room. Connections from the temperature 
measuring elements shall be brought to the 
outside of the room in such a manner as to 
interfere as little as possible with air seals; and 


c) The inside temperature shall be maintained 
to within +2°C or lower as agreed to between 
the parties. 


7.5.3 Electrical Supply 


The condition specified for tests shall be average values 
within the following variations: 


a) +2 percent of standard voltage; and 
b) +1 percent of supply frequency. 


7.5.4 Instruments and Measurements 


a) Allinstruments used for measuring shall be 
calibrated against a secondary standard before 
making each test or series of tests; 

b) Temperature measuring instruments shall be 
accurate to 0.3?C; and 

c) The operating time of the unit shall be 
obtained by means of a recording meter or a 
self-starting synchronous electric clock. 


8 MANUFACTURER'S GUARANTEE 


The manufacturer shall give a guarantee for the 


IS 2370 : 2014 


soundness of construction and performance of the cold 
room, and shall be responsible for putting right any 
manufacturing defects free of charge for a period of 
twelve months from the date of sale to the original 
purchaser or date of inspection or approval in the case 
of government or semi-government institutions, it 
being understood that such repairs or replacements of 
defective parts to be carried out at the manufacturer's 
works. 


9 MARKING 


9.1 The sectional cold room shall have the following 
information marked on a nameplate in permanent and 
legible manner in location where it is accessible and 
visible: 


a) Name of the manufacturer or sponsor of the 
complete assembled unit; 

b) Voltage rating and normal running current of 
the unit cooler; 

c) Name and the maximum weight of the 
refrigerant used; and 

d) Type, model, catalogue and serial number of 
the cold room compressor, motor, etc, or 
sufficient information to provide adequate 
identification for replacement of parts or 
necessary servicing; 


9.2 The following information shall be provided by 
the manufacturer or the sponsor of each complete unit, 
not necessarily in a permanent marking: 


a) Operation instructions; 
b) Internal volume; and 


c) Net storage surface. 


9.3 BIS Certification Marking 


Each walk-in cold room may also be marked with the 
Standard Mark. 


9.3.1 The use of the Standard Mark is governed by 
the provisions of Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 
and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The 
details of conditions under which a license for the use 
of Standard Mark may be granted to the manufacturers 
or the producers may be obtained from the Bureau of 
Indian Standards. 


IS 2370 : 2014 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Refrigeration and Air Conditioning Sectional Committee, MED 03 


Organization 


Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi 


ACR Project Consultants, Pune 


All India Air Conditioning and Refrigeration Association, New Delhi 


Annapurna Electronics and Services Limited, Hyderabad 


Applicomp (India) Limited, Bangalore 
Bureau of Energy Efficiency, New Delhi 


Carrier Aircon Ltd, Gurgaon 


Central Power Research Institute, Bangalore 


Consumer Education and Research Centre, Ahmedabad 


Directorate of Quality Assurance (Engineering Division), Pune 


Directorate General of Supply and Disposals, Ahmedabad 


EKL Appliances Limited, Aurangabad 


Electrical Research and Development Association, Vadodara 


Electronic Regional Test Laboratory (North), New Delhi 


Emerson Climate Technologies (India) Limited, Karad 


Godrej Appliances Limited, Mumbai 


Indian Institute of Chemical Engineering, Kolkata 


Intertek Testing Services (I) Private Limited, New Delhi 


Krishak Bharati Co-operative Limited, Surat 


Lawkim Limited, Satara 


LG Eectronics India Private Limited, New Delhi 


National Dairy Development Board, Anand 


National Horticulture Board, Gurgaon 


National Thermal Power Corporation, Noida 


Nirma University of Science and technology, Ahmedabad 


Refrigeration and Airconditioning Manufacturer Association, New Delhi 


10 


Representative(s) 


Pnor SANJEEV JAIN (Chairman) 
Suri P. M. V. Supparao (Alternate) 


SHRI ARVIND G. SURANGE 
SHRI M. SARAVANAN (Alternate) 


Suri S. K. SHARMA 


Suri G. K. PRASAD 
SHRI PREM CHANDER (Alternate) 


Suri B. P. HARISH 


Suri S. P. GARNAIK 
SHRIMATI VINEETA KANWAL (Alternate) 


Suri J. P. GOPAL 
Suri Ajay Pratap SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI A. R. RAVIKUMAR 
Suri GussaLa B. BALARAJA (Alternate) 


Ms Sweta MAHAJAN 


Suri J. P. TIWARI 
Lr Cot MAHENDRA PRASAD (Alternate) 


Suri R. K. AGRAWAL 
SHRI SANJEET Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI SETHURAMAN 
Suri V. SRINIVASAN (Alternate) 


Dr G. S. GREWAL 
Suri C. B. Menta (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHOK KUMAR 
Suri D. K. Gurari (Alternate) 


SHRI CHETHAN THOLPADY 
Suri D. P. Desranne (Alternate) 


Suri B. J. WADIA 
SHRI A. ACHAREKAR (Alternate) 


Dr D. SATHIYAMOORTHY 
Dr Sup K. Das (Alternate) 


SHRI MANMOHAN KULASHRI 
SHRI PUNEET RANDEO (Alternate) 


Suri K. SRIHARI 
SHRI JATINDER SONDHI (Alternate) 


Suri KisHor M. Josui 
Suni RASIK P. KHAVNEKAR (Alternate) 


Suri SUNIL C. PANCHBH 
SHRI BRIJESH KUMAR SHARMA (Alternate) 


Suri P. K. PUNDIR 
SHRI VEE SUNDER (Alternate) 


Dr R. K. SHARMA 
SHRI BRAJENDRA SINGH (Alternate) 


Suri D. K. SURYANARAYAN 
Suri S. K. JHA (Alternate) 


DR VikasH J LAKHERA 


Suri A. K. JOSHI 
Suri R. K. Menta (Alternate) 


Organization 


Rinac India Ltd, Bangalore 


Samsung India Elex Limited, Noida 


Tecumseh Products India Limited, Hyderabad 


The Energy and Resources Institute, New Delhi 


Vadilal Enterprises Limited, (Rsd) Ahmedabad 


Volga Airtechnics Limited, Ahmedabad 
Voltas Limited, Mumbai 


Voluntary Organization in Interest of Consumer Education, 


New Delhi 


Western Refrigeration Private Limited, Mumbai 


Whirlpool of India Limited, Distt Pune 


BIS Director General 


IS 2370 : 2014 


Representative(s) 


Suri P. K. RANJITH 
Suni RANISH SIMHA (Alternate) 


Supt MANISH GULATI 
Suni PusHPESH Gupta (Alternate) 


Suni KorEswanA Rao 
SHRIMATI CHITRA VERMAAN (Alternate) 


Suri P. S. CHIDAMBARAM 
Suni GIRISH SETHI (Alternate) 


Suri S. R. KELLA 
Suri I. CurRaG Rava (Alternate) 


Suri A. K. MEHTA 


Suni DEEPAK BAID 
Suri A. D. KumBuar (Alternate) 


Suri T. C. Kapoor 
Suri I. H. Wapuwa (Alternate) 


SHRI PARESH PATIL 
SHRI HARMEET SINGH (Alternate) 


Suri V. SuGosH 
SHRI SATISH SHIGGAON (Alternate) 


Suri T. V. Sincu, Scientist ‘F’ and Head (MED) 
[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
Shri M. K. Paramanik 
Scientist ‘C? (MED), BIS 


11 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 03 (1049). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern. : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.L T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. KOCHI. 
LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


