**************** 



* tOT£ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 



Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



IS 8187 (1976): D-type fuses [ETD 39: Fuses] 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 




5fR TT^ ^TT <sMHI | ^TT ^fft ^TRT ^ff ^TT ^T^fT )f 

Bhartrhari — Nltisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 





BLANK PAGE 




<*i *3f», 




*?W!& 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



^5:8187- 1976 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
D-TYPE FUSES 



UDG 621-316-923 




© Copyright 1977 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NIAV DELHI 11D002 



March \9T] 



AMENDMENT NO. 1 OCTOBER 1980 

TO 
IS : 8187-1976 SPECIFICATION FOR D-TYPE FUSES 

Alterations 

( Page 3, clause 0.3, line 3 ) — Substitute ( Table 31 ' for ' Table I '. 

( Page 40, Table 9, figure of fuse-links of ' Types D II and D III ' ) — 
Substitute the following for the existing figure: 



T*S nwi. 



, 0A rnin 



H 



71 



7 W^ -' 



A-l-w 




Types D II and D III 



( Page 42, Table 10, figure of gauge piece of ' Types D II and Dili*) — 
Substitute the following for the existing figure: 




dj0min. |a_ 
Types D II and D III 



( Page 45, Table U,col 8, last entry ) — Substitute ' 30 95 * y or < 30 05 '. 
( Page 60, Table 27, coi 2, jf/M entry ) — Substitute ' 650 ' for ' 450 '. 



( ETDC 57 ) 



Printed ■( Piiotosrtpb, Ntw Delhi. India 



IS : 8187-1976 



Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
D-TYPE FUSES 



Switchgear and Gontrolgear Sectional Committee, ETDG 17 

Chairman Representing 

Shri V. S. Bhatia Siemens India Ltd, Bombay 

Members 

Shri S. K. Datta (Alternate to 
Shri V. S. Bhatia) 
Shri N. S. S. Arokiaswamy Tamil Nadu Electrici ty Board, Madias 

Shri N Thyagarajan (Alternate) 
Shri C. R. Balasubramanian English Electric Co of India Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri B. M. Rajsekhran {Alternate) 
Shri S. K. Bhatia Research & Development Organization for El**: 

trical Industry, Bhopal 
Shri J. H. Bhojwani Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Bhopal 

Shri R. C Bansal [Alternate) 
Shri B N. Biswas Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Hyderabad 

Shri R Subba Rao (Alternate) 
Shri K K. Bose Calcutta Electric Supply Corporation Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri T. K. Ghose (Alternate) 
Chief Engineer Delhi Electric Supply Undertaking, New Delhi 

Shri P. S SawHNey (Alternate) 
Director Central Power Research Institute, Bangalore 

Senior Deputy Director (Alternate) 
Director (Transmission) Central Electricity Authority, New Delhi 

Deputy Director 

(Transmission) (Alternate) 
Shri V. C Doshi Associated Cement Companies Ltd, Bombay 

Shri R. H. Kulkarni (Alternate) 
ShriD. T. Gursahani Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals, New 

Delhi 

Shri G. R. Bhatia (Alternate) 
Shri H. V. J. Iyengar DGEF Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri C. S. N. Raju (Alternate) 
Shri R. D.Jain Rural Electrification Corporation Ltd, New Etelhi 

Shri P. Rao (Alternate) 
Shri N. G. Jayaram Mysore Electrical Industries Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri B. S. Narasimhan (Alternate) 

(Continued en page 2) 



© Copyright 1977 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act (XtV of 1957) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 8187-1976 

(Continued from page 1) 

Members Representing 

Shri A. R. Jhaveri The Ahmedabad Millowners" Association, Ahmada- 

bad 
Shri Raman M. Thaxkar (Alternate) 
Joint Director Standards Railway Board (Ministry of Railways) 

(Electrical-1) 
Deputy Director Standards 
(SS/TI) (Alternate) 
Shri V. A. Kjhshnamurthy Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 

Shhj K. S. Anantanarayanan (Alternate) 
Shhi Ved Parkash Mahekdru Northern India Switchgear Manufacturers 

Association, Jullundur 
Shri K K. Bhaoat (Alternate) 
Shri V. S. Mant The Hindustan Brown Boven Ltd, Bombay 

Shri K. S. Madhavacj (Alternate) 
Shri V. N. Manohar The Tata Hydro-Electric Power Supply Co Ltd, 

Bombay 
Shri D. B. Mehta (Alternate) 
Shri S. K Mukherjbe National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri J. S. Negi Jyoti Ltd, Vadodara 

Shri R. M. Nanavati (Alternate) 
Shri H M. Pai The Ahmedabad Electricity Co Ltd, Bombay 

Shri K. G. Parikh The Millowners Association, Bombay 

Dr G. M. Phadke Indian Electrical Manufacturers Association, 

Bombay 
Shri M A. Joshi (Alternate) 
Shri K. N. Ramaswamy Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 
Shri R. K. Gupta (Alternate) 
Shri S. P. Ranade Crompton Greaves Ltd, Bombay 

Shri S. R. PotKis (Alternate) 
Shri A. P. Shenoy Bombay Electric Supply and Transport Under- 

taking, Bombay 
Shri Y. K. Palvanxar (Alternate) 
Shm M. P. Wagh Larsen & Toubro Ltd, Bombay 

Shri I. C. Joseph (Alternate) 
Shri S. P. Sachdev, Director General, ISI (Ex-ojjirio Member) 

Director (Elec tech) 

Secretary 

Shri A. K. Gogia 
Assistant Director (Elec tech), ISI 

Panel for D-Type Fuses, ETDG 17 : Pll 

Convener 
Shri I. C. Joseph Larsen and Toubro Ltd, Bombay 

Members 

Shri V. A. Kjushnakurthy Central Pubbc Works Department, New Delhi 

Shri J. S. Negi Jyoti Ltd, Vadodara 

Shri A. P. Shenoy Bombay Electric Supply and Transport Under- 

taking, Bombay 



IS : 8187 • 1976 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
D-TYPE FUSES 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 23 July 1976, after the draft finalized by the Switchgear and Controlgear 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division 
Council. 

0.2 This standard covers the requirements for D-type fuse-links as well 
as fuse-holders. These fuses are used in both domestic and industrial 
installations. 

The fuse-links, fuse-bases, fuse-carriers and gauge-pieces may be made by 
different manufacturers. However, this standard will ensure the inter- 
changeability between the different parts of D-type fuses manufactured by 
different manufacturers. 

0.3 Fuses covered by this standard are primarily intended for the protection 
of wiring in installations where the maximum prospective current does not 
exceed the values specified in Table 1 . For applications involving higher 
breaking capacities, manufacturers may be consulted, 

0.4 This standard, shall be read in conjunction with IS : 2208-1962* and 
IS : 3106-1964f, which gives information on the general aspects, application 
and installation of fuse-hnks. 

0.5 In preparing this standard, assistance has been derived from the 
following: 

CEE Publication 16 (1970) 'Fuses for domestic and similar purposes'. 
International Commission on Rules for the Approval of Electrical 
Equipment. 

IEC Publication 241(1968) 'Fuses for domestic and similar purposes'. 
International Electrotechnical Commission. 

IEC Publication 269-1(1968) 'Low voltage fuses, Part 1 General re- 
quirements'. International Electrotechnical Commission. 

IEC Publication 269-2 (1973) 'Low voltage fuses, Part 2 Supplementary 
requirements for fuses for industrial applications'. International 
Electrotechnical Commission. 



♦Specification for HRG cartridge fuse-linlss up to 650 V. 

"fCode of practice for selection, installation and maintenance of fuses (voltage not exceed- 

a fiVl united 



ing 650 volts) 



IS : 8187-1976 

IEG Publication 269-3 (1973) 'Low voltage fuses, Part 3 Supplementary 
requirements for fuses for domestic and similar applications'. 
International Electro technical Commission. 

0.6 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing 
the result of a test shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. 
The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be 
the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 

1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard covers D-type fuses for domestic and similar general 
purposes, with a rated voltage up to and including 500 V and a rated current 
not exceeding 100 A. 

1.2 This standard does not cover fuses intended for the protection of semi- 
conductor devices . 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given in IS : 1885 
(Part XVII)-1969f and the following, shall apply. 

2.1 D-Type Fuse — ■ A non-interchangeable fuse comprising a fuse-base, a 
screw-type fuse-carrier, a gauge-piece and a fuse-link. 

2.2 Fuse-Base for Panel Mounting — A fuse-base having live parts which 
are accessible, even when mounted and wired as in normal use, complete 
with a gauge-piece, a fuse-link and a fuse-carrier in position, the protection 
against electric shock being given by shielding the live parts after installation 
by means of a separate cover. 

Note — A fuse-base for back connection need not be a fuse-base for panel mounting. 

2.3 Gauge-Piece — The part of the fuse, which is designed to prevent the 
use of a fuse-link having a rated current higher than that corresponding to 
the gauge-piece. 

2.4 Fuse-Indicator — A device intended to show whether or not the fuse- 
element has operated. 

2.5 Rated Current of a Fuse-Link 

2.5.1 The current assigned to the fuse-link by the manufacturers. 

2.5.2 The rated current of a fuse-link is the current that the fuse-link 
may carry continuously without deterioration under the conditions specified, 
when it is placed in the fuse-carrier for which it is designed and when the 
latter is screwed home into the fuse-base. 

•Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised). 

tElectrotechmcal vocabulary: Part XVII Switchgear and controlgear 



IS : 8187 - 1976 

2.6 Rated Current of a Fuse-Base, a Fuse-Carrier, or a Gauge- 
Piece 

2.6.1 The current assigned to the relevant part by the manufacturer. 

2.6.2 The rated current of the relevant part is the highest rated current 
in the range of fuse-links with which that part is intended to be used. 

3. STANDARD RATINGS 

3.1 The standard rated voltages shall be 415 and 500 volts. 

3.2 The standard rated currents shall be as follows: 

a) For fuse-bases and fuse-carriers — 25, 63 and 100 A 

b) For fuse-links and gauge-pieces — 0-5, 1, 2, 4, 6, 10, 16, 20, 25, 
35, 50,63, 80 and 100 A. 

Note — 5 and I A are not preferred ratings. 

3.3 Fuse-links having a rated current not exceeding 63 A shall be suitable 
for both ac and dc. 

3.3.1 Fuse-links having a rated current exceeding 63 A, may be suitable 
for both ac and dc, for ac only or for dc only. 

3.3.2 Fuse-bases, fuse-carriers and gauge-pieces are deemed to be suitable 
for both ac and dc. 

4. CONSTRUCTION 

4.1 Fuses shall be so designed and constructed that in normal use their 
performance is reliable and without danger to the user or surroundings. 
They shall pass the tests specified in 7. 

4.1.1 The main insulating parts of fuse-bases, fuse-carriers and gauge- 
pieces and the container of the fuse-links shall be made of ceramic material. 
Compliance shall be checked by inspection and, if necessary, by the relevant 
tests specified in 7. 

4.2 Construction of Fuse-Bases 

4.2.1 Fuse-bases shall be so designed that they shall be securely fixed in 
such a way that their removal requires the use of a tool. 

4.2.2 Fuse-bases other than those designed for mounting directly on bus- 
bars or the like, shall be suitable for mounting on a flat surface. 

4.2.3 Fuse-bases shall be so constructed as to permit the conductors to be 
introduced into the terminals and to be secured therein after having fixed 
the fuse-base to a support, in addition, the terminals shall be so located that, 
after the conductors have been correctly fitted, there is no risk of their 
bridging the fuse-link. 

4.2.4 The cover shall be firmly fixed in such a way that it may not be 
rotated and may only be removed with the aid of a tool. 



IS : 8187.1976 

The cover shall withstand the mechanical stresses imposed during fixing. 

Note — This requirement does not exclude fuse-bases for panel mounting provided 
with parts which may be removed without the aid of a tool if when installed, they are 
covered by a. shield which requires the use of a. tool for its removal, 

-4.2.5 Fuse-bases for front connection shall be designed according to 
Tables 2 and 3 and shall be so constructed that the screwed shell is in one 
piece with its contact strip unless the design is such that movement of this 
strip with respect to the shell is not possible and that the screwed shell and 
both contact strips are securely fixed to the fuse-base. 

Fuse-bases for back connection shall be designed according to Table 4 
and shall be so constructed that the screwed shell and both contact strips 
are securely fixed to the fuse-base. 

4.2.6 Terminal studs of fuse-bases according to Table 4 shall be brazed 
or welded to the fuse-base contacts and shall be secured against lateral dis- 
placement, unless the connection is not subject to torsion while fitting the 
conductors. 

4.2.7 The part of the bottom contact strip inside a circle concentric with 
the hole for fixing the gauge-piece, as indicated by hatching in the plan 
views of Tables 2 and 3 shall have a plain and unbroken upper surface at 
the required level, the edge of the hole for fixing the gauge-piece having no 
burrs and no projections of any kind above this level within the hatched 
area. 

Note — This requirement does not preclude the presence of holes through the material 
■within the hatched area. 

4.2.8 If the required length of thread in the hole for fixing the gauge- 
piece is obtained by plunging, the edge of the extrusion shall be reasonably 
smooth. 

4.2.9 Terminals of Fuse-Bases 

4.2.9.1 Fuse-bases shall be provided with terminals in which connection 
is made by means of screws or nuts. The means for clamping the conductors 
shall not serve to fix any other component. Screws and nuts for clamping 
the conductors, including studs for back connection, shall have ISO metric 
screw threads (see IS : 4218*). 

Note — The requirement with regard to the means for clamping the conductors does 
not exclude fuse-bases designed for mounting directly on bus-bars and in which the same 
means serve for fixing and for connection. 

4.2.9.2 Terminals intended for the connection of external conductors 
shall allow the connection'of conductors having nominal cross-sectional areas 
as shown in Table 5. 

4.2.9.3 For fuse-bases for panel mounting, terminals not intended for 
the connection of external conductors shall allow the connection of conductors 
having nominal cross-sectional areas as shown in Table 6. 

*ISO metric screw threads. 



IS : 8187 - 1976 

4.2.9.4 Terminals shall comply with Table 7. 

If the required length of thread in a terminal screw hole is obtained by 
plunging, the edge of the extrusion shall be reasonably smooth and the 
length of thread shall exceed the specified minimum value by at least 
5 mm. The length of the extrusion shall be not more than 80 percent of 
the original thickness of the metal, unless the mechanical strength is adequate 
with a greater length. 

Note — Terminals other than shown in Table 7 can also be used. 

4.2.9.5 Terminals shall be so fixed that when the clamping means is 
tightened or loosened, the terminal does not work loose. 

Covering with seabng compound without other means of locking is not 
deemed to be sufficient. 

Note — Terminals may be prevented from working loose by fixing with two screws 
or by fixing with one screw, provided that any appreciable movement is prevented by a 
recess or other suitable means. 

4.2.9.6 Terminal studs for back connection shall be provided with 
means for securing the nut for clamping the conductors, and they shall be 
securely fixed to the fuse-base contacts. ,*. 

4.2.9.7 Terminal shall be so designed that they clamp the conductor 
between metal surfaces with sufficient contact pressure and without damage 
to the conductor. 

4.2.9.8 Terminals other than those intended for the connection of 
conductors by means of cable lugs or bars only, shall not require special 
preparation of the conductor in order to effect correct connection, and 
they shall be so designed or placed that the conductor may not slip out when 
the clamping screws are tightened. 

Note 1 — The term 'special preparation of the conductor' covers soldering of the 
strands, use of cable lugs, formation of eyelets, etc, but not the reshaping of the conductor 
before its introduction into the terminal or the twisting of a stranded conductor to consoli- 
date the end. 

Note 2 — The conductors are considered to be damaged if they show sharp in- 
dentations. 

4.3 Construction of Fuse-Carriers 

4.3.1 The screwed shell shall be provided with means for retaining the 
fuse-link in position and free from burrs on the contact surface, and also 
securely fastened to the insulating cap. 

4.3.2 Fuse-carriers shall be provided with a suitable aperture for observ- 
ing the fuse indicator of the fuse-link. This aperture shall be closed by a 
securely fixed window of glass, mica or similar transparent material. 

4.4 Construction of Gauge-Pieces 

4.4.1 Gauge-pieces having a rated current not exceeding 63 A shall be 
so constructed that the current-carrying parts are in one piece and that 
they withstand the mechanical stresses occurring in normal use. 



IS s 8187 - 1976 

4.4.2 The metal part of gauge-pieces having a rated current not exceeding 
63 A shall have on both sides smooth contact surfaces without burrs within 
the prescribed area, and both the surfaces shall protrude from the adjacent 
ceramic material. 

4.4.3 The part forming the calibration ring shall be of ceramic material, 

4.5 Construction of Fuse-Links 

4.5.1 Fuse-links shall contain only one fuse-element, which shall be 

directly connected to both contacts. 

Note — This requirement does not preclude fuse-1 inks containing fuse-elements 
consisting of more than one wire or strip connected in parallel 

4.5.2 Fuse-links shall be of the enclosed type and shall be so constructed 
that it is not possible to remove the contacts by hand or to replace parts 
ensuring the non-interchangeability without damaging the fuse-link beyond 
repair. 

4.5.3 Fuse-links shall be provided with a fuse indicator visible when the 
fuse-link is placed in a fuse-carrier. The fuse indicator shall operate satis- 
factorily down to a voltage of 100 V. 

Compliance shall be checked by the tests specified in 7.12.6 and 7.12.7 

• 4.5.4 Contacts shall be so designed that they provide and maintain 
electrical contact. They shall be nickel-plated or be otherwise equally 
protected. 

5. REQUIREMENTS 

5.1 Non-interchangeability and Dimensions 

5.1.1 Fuses shall be so designed that a fuse-link shall not be replaced 
by a fuse-link having a higher rated current without changing the gauge 
piece. 

Note 1 — This requirement does not apply when the higher rated current does not 
exceed 6 A. 

Note 2 — For Juses not complying with the dimensions given in appropriate tables 
of this standard, compliance shall be checked by inspection of drawings, taking into 
account the effect of tolerances and by checking the samples against these drawings. 

Note 3 — Conformity to the dimensions specified in 5.1.2 ensures compliance with 
this requirement. 

5.1.2 The dimensions of fuses shall be in accordance with the appropriate 
Cables specified below: 

a) Fuse-base for front connection 

b) Fuse-base for front connection 

c) Fuse-base for back connection 

d) Fuse-carrier 
c) Gauge-piece 

f) Fuse-link 

g) Edison thread E 27 and E 33 

8 



25 A and 63 A 


Table 2 


100 A 


Table 3 




Table 4 




Table 8 




Table 9 




Table 10 




Table II 



IS : 8187 • 197* 

h) Whitworth thread Tabic 12 

j) Fastening thread Table 13 

Note 1 — -Deviation from the dimensions specified in Tables 2 to 13 may be made, 
but only if they provide a technical advantage and do not adversely affect the purpose 
and safety of fuses complying with the tables at the end of this standard especially with 
regard to jnterchangeability and non-interchangeability. 

Note 2 — Fuses with such deviations shall, however, comply with all other require* 
meiUs of this specification as far as they reasonably apply. 

5.2 Protection Against Electric Shock 

5.2.1 Fuses shall be so designed that live parts are not accessible when 
the fuse base is mounted and wired as in normal use 5 complete with a gauge' 
piece, a fuse-link and a fuse-carrier in position. 

With the exception of the fuse-carrier, parts providing protection against 
accidental contact with live parts shall not be removable without the aid 
of a tool. 

Note. 1 — Compliance with the tables specified in 5.1.2 ensures that the live parts in 
the gap between the fuse-carrier and the fuse-base are inaccessible when the fuse-earner 
has been screwed home. 

Note 2 — For fuse-bases for panel mounting, the requirement with regard to inacces- 
sibility does not apply to parts intended to be shielded when the fuse is installed. 

Note 3 — Fuses which are evidently intended for surface mounting shall comply with 
the requirements with regard to the protection against electric shock. Fuses not complying 
with these requirements are deemed to be intended for panel mounting. 

5.2.2 Fuses shall be so designed that fuse-links may be replaced without 
touching live parts. 

5.2.3 Cover fixing screws other than those shielded when the fuse is 
complete with a gauge-piece, a fuse-link and a fuse-carrier in position, shall 
not be live. 

5 .3 Moisture Resistance — Fuses shall be proof against humid con- 
ditions which may occur in normal use. They shall pass the test specified 
under 7.9. 

5.4 Insulation Resistance and Electric Strength — The insulation 

resistance and the electric strength of fuses shall be adequate. They shall 
pass the test specified under 7.10. 

Note — Fuse-links and gauge-pieces are not subjected to these tests. 

5.5 Heating — Fuses shall be so constructed that the contacts are not 
subjected to excessive heating in normal use. Compliance shall be checked 
by the test specified under 7.11. 

5*6 Fusing Characteristics — The fusing current of fuse-links shall be 
appropriate both for large and short operating times. Compliance shall be 
checked by the tests specified under 7.12. 

5.7 Breaking Capacity — Fuse-links shall operate satisfactorily when load- 
ed with any current between their minimum fusing current and their rated 



IS : 8187 - 1976 

breaking capacity, without damaging the fuse or causing danger to the 
surroundings. Compliance shall be checked by the tests specified under 7.13. 

5.8 Resistance to Heat and Fire 

5.8.1 Fuse-bases, fuse-carriers, fuse-links and gauge-pieces shall be suffi- 
ciently resistant to heat. They shall pass the tests as specified under 7.14. 

5.8.2 External parts of insulating material shall be resistant to abnormal 
heat and to fire. They shall pass the test as specified under 7.14. 

5.9 Mechanical Strength of Fuse-Links — Fuse-links shall have adequate 
mechanical strength and their contacts shall be securely fixed. Compliance 
shall be checked by the test specified under 7.15. 

5.1ft Greepage Distances, Clearances and distances Through Sealing 
Compound 

5.10.1 Greepage distances, clearances and distances through scaling 
compound shall not be Jess than the values specified in Table 14-. 

5.10.2 Sealing compound shall not protrude above the edge of the cavity 
in which it is contained 

5.11 Screws, Current-Carrying Parts and Connections 

5.11.1 Connections, electrical or otherwise, shall withstand the mechanical 
stresses occurring in normal service. Screws transmitting contact pressure 
and screws which are operated during the installation of the fuse, shall 
screw into a metal nut or metal insert. 

Compliance shall be checked by inspection and by the test specified 
in 7.17. 

Note — Screws or nuts whjch are operated during the installation of the fuse include 
terminal screws or nuts, screws for fixing covers, etcj but noi screws for fixing the fuse- 
base lo the supporting surface. 

5.11.2 Screws and rivets which serve as electrical as well as mechanical 
connections, shall be locked against loosening. 

Compliance shall be checked by inspection and by manual test. 

Note 1 — Spring washers may provide satisfactory locking. For rivets, a non-circular 
shank or an appropriate notch may be sufficient. 

Note 2 — Sealing compound provides satisfactory locking only for screw connections 
not subject to torsion in normal use. 

5.11.3 Current-carrying parts, other than fuse-elements and protective 
coatings, shall be of copper or an alloy containing at least SOpercent copper 
for cast parts or parts made from brass bar, and at least 58 percent copper 
for parts made from rolled sheet, except that contacts of fuse-links and screw- 
ed shells of fuse-carriers and fuse-bases shall contain at least 62 percent 
copper. 

10 



1& .8187-1976 

Compliance shall be checked by inspection and by chemical analysis. 
Nora — This requirement does not apply to screws, nuts, washers, clamping plates 

and similar parts of terminals. 

5.11.4 Contacts shall be so designed that they provide and maintain 
adequate electrical contact. They shall be nickel-plated or be otherwise 
at least equally protected. 

5.12 Resistance to Rusting — Ferrous parts shall be adequately protected 
against rusting. 

Compliance shall be checked by the test specified under 7.18. 

6. MARKING 

6.1 Fuse-Bases — Every fuse-base shall be clearly and indelibly marked 
with the following particulars: 

a) Rated current in amperes, 

b) Rated voltage in volts, 

c) Manufacturer's name and/or trade-mark, and 

d) Type reference. 

6.1.1 Marking shall be on the main part and the marking for rated 
current, rated voltage and manufacturer's name or trade-mark shall be 
discernible from the front when the fuse -base is mounted and wired as in 
normal use, but not fitted with a fuse-carrier, a fuse-link or a gauge-piece, 
if necessary after removal of the cover. 

6.2 Fuse-Carriers — Every fuse-carrier shall be clearly and indelibly 
marked with the following particulars: 

a) Rated current in amperes, 

b) Rated voltage in volts, and 

c) Manufacturer's name and/or trade-mark. 

6.2.1 The marking shall be on the main pan and shall be discernible 
from the front when the fuse-carrier is screwed home into a fuse-base. 

6.3 Gauge-Pieces — Every gauge-piece shall be clearly and indelibly 
marked with the following particulars: 

a) Rated current in amperes, and 

b) Manufacturer's name and/or trade-mark, 

6.3.1 The marking for rated current shall be discernible from the front 
when the gauge-piece is fitted in a fuse-base, except that this marking may 
be at the back of gauge-pieces having a rated current exceeding 63 A. 

6.3.2 In addition, the front surface of the gauge-piece shall be coloured 
as shown in Table 15. 

Note — For gauge-pieces having a rated cunent not exceeding 6 A, the marking for 
rated current may be 5-6 A The marking shall be done in green colour. 

II 



IS t 8187 - 1976 

6.4 Fuse-Links — Every fuse-link shall be clearly and indelibly marked 
with the following particulars: 

a) Rated current in amperes; 

b) Rated voltage in volts; 

c) Manufacturer's name and/or trade-mark; 

d) Type reference, if more than one type of time-lag or quick-acting 
fuse-link is included in the manufacturer's range, nature of supply, 
if the fuse-link is suitable for ac only or for dc only; and 

e) Symbol for time-lag, if applicable. 

6.4.1 In addition, the fuse-indicator of fuse-links shall be coloured as 
shown in Table 15. 

6.5 Symbols — When symbols are used, they shall be as follows: 

Amperes A 

Volts V 

Alternating current «*» 

Direct current 



Time-lag fuse-links (r \ ^\ 



6.5.1 For the marking of rated current and rated voltage, figures may be 
used alone. The figure for the rated current shall then be placed before or 
above the figure for the rated voltage, and separated from the latter by a 
line. 

The recommended shape of the symbol for time-lag fuse-links is shown in 
Fig. 1. 

Note — The marking for current and voltage may acLoiduigly be as follows: 
10 A 500 V or 10/500 or ^~ 

6.6 Compliance with the requirements* of 6.1 to 6.5 shall be checked by 
inspection and by the test specified under 7.19. 

6.7 The fuse-bases, fuse-carriers, gauge-pieces and fuse-links may also be 
marked with the ISI Certification Mark. 

Note — The use of the ISI Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of the 
Indian Standards Institution (Certification Marks) Act and the Rules and Regulations 
made thereunder. The ISI Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys 
the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that 
standard under a weM-defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which 
is devised and supervised by ISl and operated by the producer. ISI marked products 
are also continuously checked by ISI for conformity to that standard as a further 
safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the ISI Certification 
Mark may be granted to manufacturers or processors, may be obtained from the Indian 
Standards Institution. 

12 



IS : 8187-1976 




Fio. 1 Recommended Shape of the Symbol for Time-Lag Fuse-Links 



7. TESTS 

7.0 General Conditions of Tests 

7.0.1 Unless otherwise specified, Che samples are tested as delivered and 
under norma) conditions of use, at an ambient temperature of 27^5°C 

7.0.2 Fuse-bases, fuse-carriers and gauge-pieces shall be tested separately. 

7.0.3 Unless otherwise specified., fuse-links shall be tested in appropriate 
fuse-bases complying with the relevant table of this standard. 

7.1 Type Tests 

7.1.1 All tests of fuses specified in the following clauses shall be type 
tests. The purchaser shall accept certified copies of type tests as evidence 
of compliance of fuse-links with the requirements of the relevant clauses 
of this specification, and the manufacturer shall hold available originals 
of such certificates, detailed drawings of the fuses and a record of any 
alternations that may have been made in fuses subsequent to the type tests. 
The manufacturer shall, if required by the purchaser, certify that the fuses 
are identical in material and performance with those covered by a certificate 
of stated date. 

7.1.2 The fuse-links to be used for the type tests shall he identical with 
those to be used in service in all of the following details: 

a) Container, in all dimensions, material and process of manufacture; 

b) Gaps or other end-closure of container in dimensions and methods 
of attachment and sealing; 

13 



IS i 8187-1976 

c) Granular filler of cartridge^ in material, grain size and completeness 
of filling; 

d) Any device provided for indication purposes; 

e) Any high resistance or indicating component, fuse-element; and 

f) Fuse-element in every respect. 

7.1.3 The test of a fuse-link of any given rated current shall be deemed to 
prove fuse-links of the same standard size but of intermediate or lower rated 
current provided that points (a) to (e) of 7.1.2 are observed and the fee- 
elements are identical in respect of length, form and materials, although 
theii number or cross-sectional dimensions or both may be reduced. 

7.1.4 For fuse-bases, fuse-carriers and gauge-pieces, the number of samples 
shall be three, all samples being subjected to all the tests. For fuse-link*, 
the number of samples required for each of the tests is shown in Table 16. 

7.1.5 The following shall comprise the type tests. 

a) Tests for construction requirements of fuse-bases (see 7.3), 

b) Tests for terminals for fuse-bases (see 7.4), 

c) Tests for constructional requirements of fuse- carriers (see 7.5), 

d) Tests for checking constructional requirements of gauge-pieces 
(see 7.6), 

e) Test for non-interchangeability and dimensions (see 7.7), 

f) Test for protection against electric shock (see 7.8), 

g) Test for moisture resistance (see 7.9), 

h) Tests for insulation resistance and electric strength (see 7.10), 
j) Test for heating (see 7.11), 
k) Test for fusing characteristics (see 7.12), 
m) Test for breaking capacity (see 7.13), 
n) Test for resistance to heat and fire (see 7.14), 
p) Test for mechanical strength of fuse-links (see 7.15), 
q) Test for creepage distances, clearances and distances through 

sealing compound (see 7.16), 
r) Test for screws, current carrying parts and connections (see 7.17), 
s^ Test for resistance to rusting (see 7.18), and 
t) Test for checking indelibility and legibility of marking (see 7.19) 

7.1.6 Criteria of Acceptance — Fuse-bases, fuse-earners and gauge- pieces are 
deemed not to comply with this specification if there are more failures than 
that of one sample in one of the tests. If for fuse-bases, fuse-carriers and 
gauge-pieces, one sample fails in a test, that test and diose preceding which 
may have influenced die result of that test, are repeated on another set of 
samples of the number specified in 7.1.4j all of which shall then comply with 
the repeated tests. 

14 



IS : 8187 - 1976 

Fuse-links are deemed not to comply with this specification if there are 
more failures than that of one sample in one of the tests. If for fuse-links 
one sample fails in a test, that test and those preceding which may have 
influenced the result of that test are repeated on another set of samples of 
twice the number specified in 7.1.4, all of which shall then comply with the 
repeated tests. 

Note — The applicant may submit together with the first set of samples, the additional 
set which may be needed should one fail. The testing station will then, without further 
request, test the additional samples and -will only reject if a further failure occurs. If the 
additional set of samples is not submitted at the same time, a failure of one sample will 
entail rejection. 

7.2 Acceptance Tests — The following shall comprise the acceptance tests: 

a) Test for checking non-interchangeability by gauges only {see 7.7.1), 

b) Test for protection against electric shock {see 7.8), 

c) Test for moisture resistance {we 7.9"), 

d} Tests for insulation resistance and electric strength {see 7.10), and 
e) Test for heating {see 7.11). 
7.2.1 The sampling plan and place of testing shall be subject to agreement 
between the manufacturer and the purchaser However, a recommended^* 
sampling plan is given in Appendix A. 

7.3 Tests for Constructional Requirements of Fuse-Bases 

7.3.1 Compliance with 4.2.2 shall be checked by placing the fuse-base 
on a flat surface, when the fuse-base shall not rock about on axis perpendi- 
cular to the axis through the points of support, and by verifying that the 
part near the fixing holes and in contact with the supporting surface is 
sufficiently even 

7.3.2 Compliance with 4.2.3 shall be checked by inspection during the 
test specified under 7.4.1. 

7.3.3 Compliance with 4.2.4 ^hall be checked by tightening the cover 
fixing screws with a torque equal to two-thirds of that specified in Table 17. 
After this test the cover shall show no cracks. 

7.3.4 Compliance with 4.2.5 shall be checked by the following test. 

A fuse-carrier complving with Table 8 and with a fuse-link in position 
is screwed home into the fuse with a gauge-piece in position, the torque 
applied being as shown in Table 18. 

The fuse-carrier is screwed home and withdrawn 25 times. 

After this test, the samples shall show no change, impairing their further 
use, the fixing screws of the screwed shell and the bottom contact strip 
shall not have worked loose and the contact strips shall not have moved 
appreciably. 

The fixing of the bottom contact strip is verified by attempting to move 
it without undue effort. 

15 



IS i 8187-1976 



DBF 




Fig. 2 Apparatus for Torque Test 

Note 1 — For this test, the apparatus shown in Fig. 2 shall be used. 
Note 2 — For verifying the lateral displacement of the bottom contact strip, the gauge 
shown, in Table 19 may be used. 

7.3.5 Compliance with 4.2.6 shall be checked by manual test. 

Note — For verifying the lateral displacement of the contact strip, the gauge shown in 
Table 19 may be used, 

7.3.6 Compliance with 4.2.7 shall be checked by inspection and measure- 
ment. 

7.3.7 Fuse-bases having parts which are cemented or glued together, are 
immersed for 24 hours in water at a temperature of 27±5 D C. 

After this test the samples shall show no change impairing their further 
use; in particular the ceramic parts shall remain firmly fixed to each other. 

7.4 Tests for Terminals for Fuse-Bases 

7.4.1 Compliance with the requirements of 4.2.9.1 to 4.2.9,4 is checked 
by measurement and, by fitting conductors of the smallest and largest 

16 



IS : 8187 . 1976 

cross-sectional areas specified in Table 5 or 6. If the length of the extrusion is 
more than 80 percent of the original thickness of the metal, the mechanical 
strength of the terminal is checked by the following tests. 

Screws and nuts are subjected to the test specified an 7.17 but with the 
torque increased to 1 2 times the torque specified. 

After this test the terminal shall show no damage impairing its further use. 

A conductor of the largest cross-sectional area specified in Table 5 or 6 
shall be fitted the torque applied being equal to two-thirds of the torque 
specified in Table 17 and while clamped it is subjected for 1 minute to an 
axial pull of 50 N applied without jerk. 

During this test, the conductor shall not move noticeably in the terminal. 

7.4.2 Compliance with 4.2.9.5 shall be checked by the test specified 
in 7.17. 

7.4.3 Compliance with 4.2.9.6 shall be checked by the following test. 
Two nuts are locked together on the stud and through these a torque as 

shown in Table 20 shall be applied Lo the stud for 1 minute, five times in 
each direction. The stud shall not become loose. 

7.4.4 Compliance with 4.2.9.7 and 4.2.9.8 shall be checked by inspection ' 
of the terminals and of the conductors, after the test specified in 7.4.2. 

7.5 Tests for Constructional Requirements of Fuse-Carriers 

7.5.1 Compliance with the requirements of 4.5.1 shall be checked by 
manual test and by the following test. 

The fuse-carrier with a fuse-link in position, is screwed home into a fuse- 
base with a gauge-piece in position, the torque applied being equal to that 
specified in Table 18 and then withdrawn. 

The test is made five times on the fuse-carrier as delivered. 

For fuse-carrier^ having parts which are cemented or glued together, the 
test shall be repeated five times after the samples have been immersed for 
24 hours in water at a temperature of 27^5^0 and again five times after 
the samples have been conditioned for 1 hour at a temperature of 2004j5 a C. 

For fuse-earners having parts of non-ceramic insulating material, the 
test is repeated five times after test specified under 7.9 and again five times 
after the samples have been conditioned for 1 hour at a temperature of 
200±5°C. 

After these tests> the samples shall show no change impairing their further 
use, in particular, the insulating material shall show no cracks and no undue 
shrinkage. 

Note 1 — The test after immersion is made after the test specified under 7.10.3 and 
the test at 200°C may be combined with that specified under 7.14. 

Note 2 — Means for retaining the fuse-link in position other than that shown in 
Table 8 may he provtded. 

7.5.2 Compliance with 4.3.2 shall be checked by the following tests. 

17 



IS : 8187 - 1976 

A force of the value shown in the Table 21 is gently applied to the window 
from both the outside and inside, by means of a steel rod 7 mm in diameter. 

During this test, the window shall not break or be displaced. 

7.6 Tests for Checking Constructional Requirements of Gauge- 
Pieces — Compliance with the requirements of 4.4.1 shall be checked by 
the following tests. 

The gauge-piece is screwed home in a fuse-base by applying for i minute 
a torque of 1 Nm It is then withdrawn with the aid of the appropriate 
hand-key shown in Fig 3. 



a ma 




Types D II & D III 



D II 

d in 



20 5 
2b j 




dP- 



Type D IV H 



Fig. 3 Hand-Key for. Gauge-Piece 

In addition, an axial force of 10 K is applied in both directions between 
the metal part and the ceramic part of the gauge-piece. 

The test is made on the gauge-piece as delivered. For gauge-piece 1 ; 
having parts which are cemented or glued together the test is repeated after 
the samples have been immersed for 24 hours in water at a temperature of 
27 = i = 5°C and again after the samples have been conditioned for 1 hour at 
a temperature of 200 ±5°C 

After these tests, the samples shall show no change impairing their further 
use, in particular the thread shall not be damaged and the ceramic part? 
shall still be securely fixed to each other and shall not be detached from the 
metal part. 



♦Approximate dimensions. 
fResilient between 5 and 9 mm. 



18 



IS : 8187 - 1976 

Note — The test after immersion is made after the test specified under 7.10.3 and the 
test at 200°C may be combined with that given in 7.14. 

7.7 Test for Checking Non-interchangeability and Dimensions 

7.7.1 Compliance with the requirement specified under 5.1 shall be 
checked by means of the gauges detailed in Tables 19, 22, 23, 24, and 25 
and by measurement. 

7.7.2 The thickness of the screwed shell shall be measured by means of a 
micrometer with pointed anvils. The mean value of two sets of three 
measurements, each set being made on two different generating lines sepa- 
rated by at least 30°, shall not be less than the value specified in the relevant 
tables. 

In general, the three measurements along each generating line shall be 
made at places evenly distributed along the generating line, if possible, at 
the most unfavourable spots 

For rolled threads, one of the measurements shall be made at the top of 
the thread, one at the root of the thread and one at random between these 
measurements . 

7.7.3 For fuse -carriers, the measurements shall be made on the part of the ' 
screwed shell protruding from the insulating cap 

7.7.4 For fuse-bases, the measurements shall not he made within the 
first turn of the thread 

7.7.4.1 For fuse-bases for panel mounting without cover or ring pro- 
tecting the shell against accidental contact, the diameter C and dimension 
40^2 5 shown in Table 2, and diameter C and dimension jO'j^. shown 
in Tabic 3 need not be verified 



7.8 Test For Protection Against Electric Shock — The following test 
shall be conducted 

A test finger, as shown in Fig. 4j shall be applied in every possible position, 
if necessary, with a force of 20 N, an electrical indication with a voltage not 
less than 40 V being used to show contact with live parts. 

7.9 Test for Moisture Resistance 

7.9.1 Compliance shall be checked by the humidity treatment described 
in 7.9.3 followed immediately by the measurement of insulation resistance 
and by the electric strength test specified in 7.10. 

7.9.2 Cable entries, if any, shall be left open, if knock-outs are provided, 
one of them shall be opened. Covers and other parts which may be re- 
moved without the aid of a tool, shall be removed and subjected, if necessary, 
to the humidity treatment with the main part. 

7.9.3 The humidity treatment shall be carried out in a humidity cabinet 

19 



IS : 8187-1976 




CYLINDRICAL 




SECTION 
A-A B-B 

SPHERICAL 



^-EH 




SECTION 

c-c 



Tolerances, on angles ±5 r ; on linear dimensions less than 25 mm Jj ^ , and 
on lineai dimensions °ver 25 mm. J-0 2 

Fig 4 Standard Test Finger 

containing air with a relative humidity maintained between 91 and 95 
percent. The temperature of the air, at all places where samples may- 
be located shall be maintained at a value t which is 35 ±5°G 

7.9.4 Before being located in the humidity cabinet the samples shall be 
brought to a temperature between / and /+4°C 

The samples shall be kept in the cabinet for 2 days (48 hours). 

Note 1 ■ — In most cases the samples may be brought to the specified temperature 
by keeping them at this temperature for At least 4 hours before the humidity treatment. 

Note 2 — A relative humidity between 91 and 95 percent may be obtained by placing 
in the humidity cabinet a saturated solution of sodium sulphate {NajS0 4 ) or potassium 
nitrate (KNOj) in water having a sufficiently large contact surface with air. 

Note 3 — In order to achieve the specified conditions within the cabinet it is neces- 
sary to ensure constant circulation of the air within and in general, to use a cabinet which 
is thermally insulated. 

7.9.5 After this treatment, the samples shall show no damage within the 
meaning of this specification. 

20 



IS : 8187 - 1976 

7.10 Tests for Insolation Resistance and Electric Strength 

7.10.1 These tests shall be conducted immediately after the moisture 
resistance test (see 7.9). The tests shall be conducted in the humidity 
cabinet or in the room in which the samples were brought to the prescribed 
temperature, after reassembly of these parts which may have been removed- 

7.10.2 Insulation Resistance Test — The insulation resistance shall be 
measured with a dc voltage of approximately 500 volts applied, the measure- 
ment being made 1 minute after application of the voltage. 

The insulation resistance is measured consecutively. 

a) between current-carrying parts and the exterior, and 

b) between the terminals. 

When testing fuse-carriers, a distance of 3 mm is left between the metal 
foil and the lower edge of the insulating cap, the metal foil is not pressed 
against the inspection window. 

The insulation resistance shall not be less than 5 MJ2. 

Note — The term exterior includes all external meal parts, accessible cover fixing 
screws, fuse-base fixing screws and metal foil in contact with the outer surface, terminate 
of fuse-bases for panel mounting are not included. 

7.10.3 Electric Strength Test 

7.10.3.1 The fuse shall be mounted in the same position as will be used 
in service. For mounting, unpainted metal shall be used. For single pole 
unite, at least three units shall be mounted. If there is more than one 
mounting position then the position which will stress the fuses to the 
maximum extent, shall be used. 

7.10.3.2 The test voltage shall have a practically sinusoidal waveform 
and the supply frequency shall be between 40 and 60 Hz. The value of the 
test voltage shall be selected from Table 26. 

7.10.3.3 Initially, not more than half the prescribed voltage shall be 
applied. It shall then be raised rapidly to the full value. The voltage 
shall be applied for one minute as follows: 

a) With the fuse-link in position, between each of the poles and all 
other poles connected to each other and unpainted metal plate; and 

b) With the fuse-link removed, between the incoming terminals con- 
nected together and the outgoing terminals connected together. 

7.10.3.4 No flashover or breakdown shall occur during the test. 
Note — Glow discharges without drop in \-oltage shall be neglected. 

7.11 Test for Heating 

7.11.1 The test shall be carried out with the fuse-links placed in the 
appropriate fuse-carrier which shall be screwed home into a fuse-base, the 
metal part of a gauge-piece being in position, the fuse-carrier, fuse-base and 
gauge-piece shall comply with the relevant tables of this specification. 

21 



IS : 8187 - 1976 

7.11.2 The fuse-base shall be mounted as in normal use on a vertical 
non-metallic and heat-resistant board, 15 mm thick. The fuse-link shall be 
loaded with ac or dc at its rated current. 

7.11.3 The voltage drop across the fuse-link contacts is measured with dc 
when the current has been flowing for 1 hour for rate d currents up to 63 A, 
and 2 hours for rated currents up to 100 A. 

7.11.4 The value measured shall not exceed the appropriate value speci- 
fied in Table 27. 

Note — To facilitate the test procedure for fuse-links having a high rated current, the 
heating of the fuse-link may be achieved by applying ac, the actual measurement of the 
voltage drop being made with dc, immediately after the period with ac load. 

7.12 Test for Fusing Characteristics 

7.12.1 The test shall be carried out with the fuse-link placed in the 
appropriate fuse-carrier which is screwed home into a fuse-base, the metal 
part 1 ; of the gauge-piece being in position. The fuse-carrier, the fuse- 
base and the gauge-piece shall comply with the relevant tables of this 
specification. 

7.12.2 The fuse-base shall be mounted as in norma] use on a vertical 
non-metallic and heat-resistant board, 15 mm thick, and shall be fitted with 

""single-core PVC insulated aluminium conductors havmg a nominal cross- 
sectional area and a minimum length as given in Table 28. 

7.12.3 The tests shall be made with ac unless the fuse-links are for dc only. 
For fuse-links having a rated current less than 10 A, the test specified 
under 7.12.6 and 7.12.7 shall be made at a voltage of 240 V± 10 percent, for 
other fuse-links- a voltage of 100 V is, in general, sufficient 

Note — Care shall be taken that during the tests specified under 7.12.6, 7.12.7 
and 7.12.8, the current does not vary appreciably before the fuse-element melts. 

7.12.4 The fuse-links shall be subjected to the smaller test current given 
in Table 29 for the period indicated. 

The fuse-links shall not operate 

7.12.5 The fuse shall then be allowed to cool to room temperature and 
subjected to the larger test current given in Table 20 

The fuse-links thall operate within the period indicated in Table 29. 

7.12.6 A current equal to 7 times the rated current shall be passed and 
the pre-arcing time shall be determined. 

The pre-arcing time of fuse-links having a rated current not exceeding 
4 A and that of quick-acting fuse-links having a rated current exceeding 4 A 
shall not exceed the value shown in Table 30 by more than 01 second. 

The pre-arcing time of time-lag fuse-links having a rated current exceeding 
4 A shall exceed the value given in Table 30. 

22 



IS : 8187 - 1976 

During this test, the fuse-indicator of at least one of the two of the samples 
shall operate. 

7.12.7 For time-lag fuse-links, a current equal to 5 times the rated current 
shall be passed and the pre-arcing time shall be determined. 

The pre-arcing time of fuse-links having a rated current not exceeding 
63 A shall not exceed 6 seconds and that of the fuse-links having a rated 
current exceeding 63 A shall not exceed 10 seconds. 

During this test the fuse-indicator of at least one of the two samples shall 
operate. 

7.12.8 For quick-acting fuse-lints, a current equal to 1 75 times the rated 
current shall be passed and the pre-arcing time shall be determined. 

The pre-arcing time for any of the fuse-links shall not be less than 
10 seconds. 

7.12.9 Fuse-links shall be subjected to 100 cycles of operation, each cycle 
comprising a period of I hour during which the current shown in Table 1 
shall be passed and a period of 15 minutes without the current flowing. 

During these cycles, the fuse-links shall not operate. 

7.12.9.1 After these cycles, the fuse shall be allowed to cool down to 
approximately room temperature, and the fuse-links shall then be loaded 
with a current equal to 9 times the smaller test current shown in 
Table 29 for the period indicated m that table. 

The fuse-links shall not operate. 

7.12.9.2 The fuse shall be allowed to cool down to approximately room 
temperature. Time-lag fuse-links shall, in addition, be loaded with the 
larger test current shown in Table 29. 

The fuse-links shall operate within the period indicated in that table. 

Note- — Care shall be taken that during the test, the current remains stable within 
^2 5 percent of the specified value. 

7.13 Test for Breaking Capacity 

7.13.1 For breaking capacity test, fuse-links shall be mounted according 
to 7.12. 

7.13.2 Fuse-links for ac only shall be tested with ac, fuse-links for dc only 
shall be tested with dc and fuse-links for both ac and dc shall be tested with 
both ac and dc. 

7.13.3 For ac tests, the frequency shall be 30 Hz with a tolerance of 
^25 percent, and the circuit shall be closed by a synchronous switch, 
30 ±10° after voltage zero. 

7.13.4 The voltage applied shall be 110 percent of rated voltage with a 
tolerance of 3 percent and the supply circuit shall be such that the recovery 
voltage is between 1 10 percent and 115 percent of rated voltage and shall be 

23 



IS : 8187 - 1976 

maintained for at least 30 seconds after the closing of the circuit, which may 
be suitably earthed. 

7.13.5 The fuse shall be connected in a circuit as shown in. Fig. 5 having 
the characteristics shown in Table 31. 



r 

s 

t 




■oVo 



rw>_ 



[]■ 



A = Circmt-breaker, single-pole or double-pole; 

B = Synchronous switch for ac tests only; 

C— Fuse-link under test, 

L= Adjustable ironless inductor, iT reqmred. 

if= Adjustable resistor; and 

£= Supply source, ac or dc 

Fig. 5 Circuit Diagram for Breaking — Capacity Test 

7.13.6 The fuse-links shall be tested under the conditions specified 
in 7.13.1 to 7.13.5 but with the prospective current shown in Table 32. 

7.13.7 Fuse-links shall be tested under the conditions specified under 
7.13.1 to 7.13,5 except that: 

a) fuse-links for both ac and do shall be tested with dc only; 

b) fuse-links for ac only shall b e tested with unity power factor; 

c) dc tests shall be made in a substantially non-inductive circuit; and 

d) three samples shall be tested at 2'5 times, one at 4 times and one at 
8 times the rated current 

7.13.8 Criteria for Passing the Test -- In each of the tests specified in 7.13.5 
to 7.13.7, the fuse-links shall operate satisfactorily and the fuse shall show 

a] no permanent arcing; 

h) no ignition; 

c) no violent bursting of the fuse-link, 

d) no welding of the contacts, 

e) no damage such as would render unserviceable the fuse -base, the 
fuse-earner or the gauge-piece; and 

f) no displacement of, or damage to, the inspection window. 
7.13.8.1 In addition, the protecting fuse or circuit -breaker incor- 
porated in the test circuit shall not operate. 



24 



IS : 8187 - 1976 

7.13.8.2 The following phenomena are, however, ignored: 

a) Disintegration of the fuse indicator; 

b) Cracks in the insulating container of the fuse-link provided it remains 
in one piece; 

c) Blackening of the inspection window; and 

d) Small holes, blister spots and localized bulging of the contacts of the 
fuse-link, provided that the gauge-piece and the fuse-carrier are not 
damaged 

7.14 Test for Resistance to Heat and Fire 

7.14.1 Fuse-links, gauge-pieces and fuse-bases containing sealing com- 
pound shall be kept for ] hour in a heating cabinet at a temperature of 
150±5°C. 

After samples have been allowed to cool down to approximately room 
temperature, inspection shall show no damage impairing their further rise., 
no appreciable change in the identification colours of fuse-links and gauge- 
pieces, and no movement of sealing compound to such an extent that live 
parts are exposed. 

Note — A slight displacement of the sealing compound may be neglected Sealing 
compound may flow, provided the movement does not reduce creepage distances and 
clearances below the values specified in 5.10. 

7.14.2 Fuse-bases, fuse-carriers, fuse-links and gauge-pieces shall be 
placed in a heating cabinet which is maintained at a temperature of 
200±5°C. 

After this test, the samples shall show no damage impairing their further 
use except that the fuse-element may have melted, the identification colours 
of fuse-links and gauge-pieces may have changed and the sealing compound 
may have flown. Insulating parts which are cemented or glued together, 
shall not have become detached. 

The condition of the samples shall be verified by inspection and, if neces- 
sary, by the tests specified in 7.7, 7.8 and 7.19. 

Note — For fuse-carriers and gauge-pieces, this test may be combined with the tests 
specified m 7.5 and 7.6 respectively. 

7.14.3 This test shall be made with an electrically heated conical mandrel 
in an apparatus as shown in Fig. 6. 

The mandrel shall be inserted into a conical hole reamed in the part to 
be tested in such a way that portions of the conical part of the mandrel of 
equal length protrude from both sides. The sample shall be pressed against 
the mandrel with a force of 12 N. 

The mandrel shall be heated to a temperature of 300°C in approximately 
3 minutes and shall be maintained within 10°G of this value for 2 minutes. 
The temperature shall be measured by means of a thermocouple inside the 
mandrel where it is in contact with the sample. 

25 



IS : 8187 - 1976 



THERMOCOUPLE - 



TERMINALS FOR 
THERMOCOUPLE - 




TERMINALS FOR THERMOCOUPLE 




AH dimensions in. millimetres. 

Fig. 6 Hot Mandrel Apparatus 
26 



IS : 8187 - 1976 

During the test, sparks of about 6 mm in length shall be produced at the 
upper surface of the sample where the mandrel protrudes by means of a 
high frequency spark generator. 

Gases produced during the heating shall not be ignited by the sparks. 

7.14.3.1 During the test, the samples .shall not move on the mandrel 

by more than 3 mm. 

Notts ] — The test is not made on parts of ceramic material, but only on fuse-base 
covers and other external parts of non-ceramic insulating material. 
Note 2 — Revision of this test is under consideration 

7.15 Test for Mechanical Strength of Fuse-Links 

7.15.1 Fuse-links having a rated current not exceeding 63 A shall be tested 
in a tumbling barrel with hardwood ends, 2 cm thick, as shown in Fig. 7. 

Only one sample shall be in the barrel at a time and the barrel shall be 
turned at a rate of 5 rev/min, the fuse-link thus being subjected to 10 falls 
per minute. 

The samples shall be subjected to 50 falls from a height of 35 cm. 

7.15.1.1 After this test, inspection and manual test shall show that the 
contacts are still securely fixed and that none of the filling has come out. 



SAMPLE 




Dimension in millimetres. 

Fig. 7 Tumbling Barrel 
27 



IS : 8187-1976 

7.15.1.2 Fuse- links having a rated current not exceeding 1 10 A shall 
then be subjected to a further 450 falls during which the container shall not 
break. 

Note — Fuse-links having a rated current exceeding 63 A shall not be subjected to 
these tests. 

7.15.2 The fuse-link shall be placed in the appropriate fuse-carrier which 
is screwed home into a fuse-base, a gauge-piece being in position. The 
fuse-carrier, fuse-base and the gauge-piece shall comply with the relevant 
tables of this specification. The gauge-piece shall have a diameter d] equal 
to the minimum value specified for the relevant rated current. 

The torque applied to the fuse-carrier shall be equal to that specified in 
Table 18. 

The fuse-carrier shall be screwed home and withdrawn five times. 

7.15.2.1 After this test, the fuse-links shall show no damage within the 
meaning of this specification, in particular the surfaces of the contacts shall 
not have become concave. 

7.16 Test for Creepage Distances, Clearances and Distances 
Through Sealing Compound — The measurements to check compliance 
with 5.10.1 shall be made on fuses fitted first with conductors of the smallest 
and then with conductors of the largest cross-sectional areas as specified in 
Table 5 or 6. 

Note 1 — Conformity to the relevant standard tables ensures (hat the internal creep, 
age distances and clearances are adequate ; they need not otherwise he checked. 

Note 2 — The contribution to the creepage distance of any groove Jess than 1 mm. vide 
shall be limited to its width 

Note 3 — Any air gap less than 1 mm vide shall be ignored in compiling the total 
clearance. 

7.17 Test for Screws, Current Carrying Parts and Connections 

7.17.1 Compliance for screws and nuts which are operated during the 
installation of the fuse shall be checked by the following test. 

The screws and nuts shall be tightened and loosened twice by means of a 
suitable screw driver or spanner, applying a torque as shown in Table 17. 

Note 1 — Column ] of Table 17 applies to screws without heads, if the screw when 
tightened does not protrude from the holes. 

Note 2 — Column 2 of Table 17 applies to other screws and nuts. 

7.17.2 While testing terminal screws and nuts, a rigid (solid or stranded) 
conductor having the largest cross -sectional areas specified in Table 5 or 6 
shall be placed in the terminal. 

7.17.3 The conductor shall be moved every time the screw or nut is 
loosened . 

7.17.4 During the test the terminals shall not work loose and no damage 

28 



IS J 8187-1976 

impairing the further use of the screwed connections, or terminals shall 
occur. 

Note 1 — Screws or nuts v,hich are operated during the installation of the fuse include 
terminal screws or nuts, screws Tor fixing covers, etc, but not screws for fixing the fuse-base 
to the supporting surface. 

Note 2 — The shape of the blade of the screw dnvier should suit (he head of the screw 
to be tested The screws and nuts should not be tightened in jerks. 

Not* 3 — Damage to covers shall be neglected. 

]\ t oti 4 — The values given in col 1 of Table 1 7 are provisional 

7.18 Test for Resistance to Rusting 

7.18.1 All grease shall be removed from the parts to be tested by dipping 
in carbon tetrachloride for 10 minutes. The parts shall then be immersed 
for 10 minutes in a 10-percent sotution of ammonium chloride in water at 
a temperature of 27 ±:5°Q. 

7.18.2 Without drying, but after shaking off any drops, the parts shall 
be placed for 10 minutes in a box containing air saturated with moisture at 
a temperature of 27 : t5 C. 

7.18.3 After the parts have been dried for 10 minutes in a heating cabinet 
at a temperature of 100 I t:5 o G > their surfaces shall show no signs of rust. 

Note — Traces of rust on sharp edges and any yellowish film removable by rubbing 
shall be ignored, 

7.19 Test for Checking Indelibility and Legibility of Marking— Com- 

phance with 6.6 shall be checked by inspection and by rubbing the marking 
with a piece of cloth soaked with water and again with a piece of cloth 
soaked with petroleum spirit. 

Not*. — Revision of this test is under consideration. 



TABLE 1 TEST CURRENTS 

(Clauses 3 and 7.12.9) 

Rated Current of Fuse-Link., /„ Test Cursetti 

(1) (2) 

A A 

Up to and including 10 1 2 / a 

Over 10 up to and including 25 1 12 I a 

„ 25 „ „ „ 100 1 08 I a 



29 



IS : 8187 - 1976 



TABLE 2 FUSE-BASE FOR FRONT CONNECTION — TYPE D II, 25 A 500 Vj 
AND TYPE D m, 63 A 500 V 



(Clauses 4.2 5, 4.2.7, 5 1.2 and 7.7.4.1) 
AH dimensions in millimetres. 





{Continued) 



30 



IS : 8187-1976 



TABLE 2 FUSE-BASE FOR FRONT CONNECTION — TYPE D H, 25 A 500 V; 
AND TYPE D HI, 63 A 500 V— CbnJrf 



Type 



B 



(1) 


m 


(3) 


w 


D II 


E 27 


5f 


3-,:S 


r> in 


E 33 


63t 


*5t?r 



Dimensions 








mm' 


D 


E 


F 


G 


H* 


(">) 


(6) 


(7) 


(8) 


(9) 


(10) 


25 5 


10 


5 


20 


24-5 


15 


31 5 


12 


<S 


25 


30 5 


30 



l = This edge of the cover shall be slightly rounded 

2= The effective thread length of the screwed shell shall be at least 7 mm from the top. 

3=The lower part of the screwed shell and the upper part ofit? support shall be so designed 
that the 'GO' gauges C 13 can be fully inserted, 

4 — The 3/16 m Whitworth thread in the hole for filing rhe gauge-piece shall he concentric 
with the screwed shell and shall have an effective thread length of at least. 

2 2 mm Tor Type D II, and 

3 2 mm for Type D II C 

5=Thc cross-sectional area of the contact strips shall be at least Q.mrn s . 

€= Slotted holes, closed or open, may be used for fixing the fuse-base to its support. 

If slotted holes are used, they shall have the dimensions shown. 

Note — The sketches are not intended to govern design except as regards the dimensions 
shown . 

"Set 4.2.7. 

| Within the first turn of the thread (that is, 3 6 mm for Type D II and 4 2 mm for 
Type D lit from the top)j a lolerance of — 1 and — 15 mm respectively is allowed. 



31 



15 : 8187 • 1976 



TABLE 3 FUSE-BASE FOR FRONT CONNECTION — TYPE DIVH, 

100 A 500 V 



(Clauses 4 2.5, 4 2.7, 5.1 2 and 7.7 4 1) 
All dimensions in millimetres 



"^ i^ 



R-3±i 




5Q.S -i-5 



Gmin. 



(Continued) 



32 



IS t 8187 - 1976 



TABLE 


1 3 FUSE-BASE FOR FRONT CONNECTION - 

100 A 500 V—Conli 


TYPE DIVH, 


Type 




Dimensions 






£, 




A B 


C D 


o 1 * 


E 


F 


G H\ 


(1) 


(2) (3) 


(4) ('->) 


(6) 


(?) 


(8) 


(9) (10) (11) 


DIVH 


Rljin 2 5* 


57I„ 40 


44 


24 


24 


25 32 60 



l=Resihent grip for gauge-piece 

2 = Thc cross-sectional area of the contact strips shall be at least Q mm 2 

3= Slotted holes, closed or open, may be used For fixing the fuse-base to its support. 

If slotted holes are used, thev shall have the dimensions shown. 

Note — The sketches are not intended to govern design except as legards the dimensions 
shown. 

♦Within the first turn of the thread (that is, 2 3 mm from the top), a tolerance of —0 5 
mm is allowed. 
f.&* 4.2.7. 



33 



IS : 8187 - 1976 



TABLE 4 FUSE-BASE FOR BACK CONNECTION — TYPE D U, 25 A 
500 V; TYPE D m, 63 A 500 V; AND TYPE D IV H, 100 A 500 V 



(Cioum 4 2.3, 4 2,6 and 5.1 2) 
All dimensions ia millimetres 




Bmax. 



C min. 



[Coniumed) 



34 



IS : 8187 - 1976 



TABLE 4 FUSE-BASE FOR BACK CONNECTION — TYPE D II, 25 A 
500 V} TYPE D m, 63 A 500 V; AND TYPE D IV H, 100 A 500 V—ConUi 



Type 






Dimensions 








A 


B 


a 


D 


E 


</ 


(1) 


(2) 


(3) 


(41 


P) 


(S) 


(7) 


DII 


55 


58 


30 


13^05 


14+05 


Mj 


D HI 


65 


58 


35 


16±0 5 


18^05 


M6 


D IV H 


86 


78 


45 


2M-I 


22 J-I 


M8 



]= Terminal studs securely fixed to die contact strips. 

2= Connection secured by means of lock nuts or spring washers. 

For the other dimensions, see Tables 2 and 3 

Note — The sketches are not intended to govern design except as regards the dimensions 
shown. 



TABLE 5 SIZES OF CONDUCTORS 

(Clauses 4 2 9.2, 7 4.1, 7.16 and 7 17 2) 



Rated Current of 
Fuse- Base 


Nominal Cross- 
Sectional Are* 


CD 


m 


\ 


mm 2 


25 


1 J to 10 


63 


2 3 „ 23 


100 


10 „ 50 



TABLE 6 SIZES OF CONDUCTORS (PANEL MOUNTING) 

(Clauses 4 2.9.3, 7 4 I, 7 IS and 7 17 2) 



Rated Current of 
Fuse-Base 


Nominal Cross- 
Sectional Area 


(1) 


(2) 


A 


mm 8 


25 


! 5 to 6 


63 


4 „ 16 


100 


10 „ 35 



35 



IS : 8187-1976 



TABLE 7 TERMINALS FOR FUSE-BASES 

{Clause 4 2.9.4) 
All dimcnsjoJis in mjJhmetres 




-^("-IrncK. 




For Fuse-Bases of Type D II Only 



(1 6d) 0miri - 




For Stranded Conductors For Cable Lugs and Bars 



! = Washer 

2= Clamp 

3 = Spring washer 

4= Cable lug or bar 

[Continued) 



36 



IS : 8187 - 1976 







TABLE 7 


TERMINALS FOR FUSE-BASES 


— Contd 






Type 


Single- 
Screw 
Terminal 


Double- 
Screw 
Termtnal* 


c i 


*t 


J 




gt 


A 




r 

C) 

4292 


CI 
4 2.9 3 






a% 


d 


«J 


d 




(1) 


(2) 


(3) 


(+) 


(5) 


(&) 


(7) 


(8) 


(9) 


(10) 


(11) 


DII 


25 


M 5 


20 


M 4 


7 


6 


43 


36 


15§ 


30 


Dili 


35 


M 6 


25 


M 3 


JO 


8 


7 


55 


19§ 


35 


DIVH 


45 


M 8 


35 


M 6 


14 


10 


110 


95 


23 


50 



Note — The sketches are not intended lo govern design except as regards the dimensions 
shown. 

•If more than two screws are used, they shalL be so designed that the sum of their cross- 
sectional areas at the root of the thread is at least equal to the cross-sectional area of the 
smallest screw for a single-screw terminal, as shown, in the table 

"1"A clamping area with a smooth contact surface shall be provided around the screw 
within the circle with diameter g, for clamping the lugs or bars 

^Effective thread length {see also 4.2,9,4). 

!;These values are only valid for the bottom contact-strip; for the other contact-strip, 
the values arc 13 and 16 mm respectively. 



37 



S : 8187 - 1976 



TABLE 8 FUSE-CARRIER — TYPE D II, 25 A 500 V; TYPE D m, 
63 A 500 V; AND TYPE D IV H, 100 A 500 V 

(Clauses 5 1 2, 7 3 4 and 7 5 1) 

All dimensions in millimetres 

-0*ma„. 1 1 _ D*ma» 




Ci ^>ma«- 



-B mm. 



Types D II and D JH Type O IV H 

l = This edge of the insulating cap shall be slightly rounded 

2= Resilient part of the means for retaining the fube-liuk in position. 

•Resilient between 5 and 1 mm 



(Continued) 



38 



IS : 8187-1976 



TABLE 8 FUSE-CARRIER — TYPE D II, 25 A 500 V; TYPE DID, 
63 A 500 V; AND TYPE D IV H, 100 A 500 V — Contd 



Type 








Dimensions 










f 

A 


a 


<r. 


Q 


;j 


i^ 


F 


G 


(1) 


CO 


0) 


(4, 


('» 


(<"'» 


(7) 


(8) 


(9) 


D II 


E 27 


32* 


32 


34 


38t 


22 j 


— 


— 


E> in 


E 33 


37 


40 


43 


48f 


28 


— 


— 


D IV H 


R 1J in. 


2-'i + 


^ 


r j > 


70 


— 


3j + 1 


— 



Note — The sketches are not intended to go\ em design except as regards the dimensions 
shown. 

•Provisionally, a thickness of 27 mm is allowed, when measured as specified m 5.1.2. 
tFor fuse-carrier* designed to be sealed, a tolerance of -^ 1 mm is allowed. 
J Within the first mm of the thread (that is, 2 3 mm from the edge of the shell), a 
tolerance of —0 5 mm ii allowed. 



39 



IS : 8187 - 1976 



TABLE 9 FUSE-LINK — TYPE D n, 0-5 TO 25 A 500 V j TYPE D m, 
35 TO 63 A 500 V; AND TYPE D IV H, 80 TO 100 A 500 V 



(Ctaust 5 1.2) 
All dimensions in millimetres, 



A 4>min- 



1-5 min 





Types D II and D IH 



Type D JV H 



(Continued) 



40 



IS t 8187 - 1976 



TABLE 9 FUSE-IINK — TYPE D H, 5 TO 25 A 500 V; TYPE D m, 
35 TO 63 A 500 V; AND TYPE D IV H, 80 TO 100 A 500 V — Contd 



Type 

(1) 
D II 



D III 



D IV H 



Rated 

Current 
A 

(2) 



05 

] 

2 

4 

6 
10 
16 
20 
25 

35 
50 
63 



} 



100 



B 



A 

(3^ 



u ] 



13J 



13 



32 tl <>±0 3 



Dimensions 



D 






34 



+o 



(61 



38 5 J:" 



d 

(71 



61 
6 
6 
6 
6 
8 
10 

n 

I4J 



oa 

-0 4 



!tko°5 

20J u * 
f}±0 2 



(8) 



14 2 



20 2 



1 = Normal shape of insulating container. 

2 5^ Alternative shape. 

3— Alternative designs of contacts 

4 = Metal contact pieces 

5= Fuse-link without metal cover. 

6 ss Optional metal cover. 

Note — The sketches are not intended to govern design except as regards the dimensions 
shown, 

♦Diameter of fuse-indicator 

tThe maximum value indicated in the table shall not he exceeded within a distance 
of 10 mm from the end of the contact. 



41 



IS t 8187 - 1976 



TABLE 10 GAUGE-PIECE — TYPE D II, 0-5 TO 25 A 500 V; TYPE D HI, 
35 TO 63 A 500 V; AND TYPE D IV H, 80 TO 100 A 500 V 



{Clams 5 1 2) 
All dimensions m millimetres. 



— 3 





— j-i d, <prr>h, i»_i 



9. os 



F 7 ? 



^r^ 
e^a 






+ 5 
4 



3*8 s 

- — M (Jj«imin _ 
Types D II and D 



6 0-o e 




Type D IV H 



(Continued) 



42 



IS : 8187 - 1976 



TABLE 10 GAUGE-PIECE — TYPE D II, 0-5 TO 25 A3NVj TYPE D III, 
35 TO 63 A 500 V; AND TYPE D IV H. 80 TO 100 A 500 V — Could 



Type 



(1) 



run 



BIVH 



Rated 






Dimensions 






COLOUR OP THE 


C'TjBWeNT 

A 








A 








Frovt Sl-rf\ce 


A 


B 


C 


rf 




<k 


Jt 


(2) 


(3) 


<V\ 


0) 


(61 




(71 


'Hi 


(9 J 


".''1 








6=i 


' 


4 "i 

4 "i 


fi "> 
6 1 


Light blue 
Red 


2 1 








f> 5 




4 3 


fi j 


Pink 


4 ( 








6 5 


,+08 
-0 


4 "j 


fi 5 


Brown 


« J- 
10 1 


24-?-l 


jo LI -, 


— 


b 5 

85 


4 "> 
65 


b 3 


Green 
Red 


16 | 








10 5 




8'j 


8 "i 


Grey 


20 | 








12 5 




9 i 


9 5 


Blue 


r»j 








14 5 j 




9 5 


9 ". 


Yellow 


3"'l 

if) j. 

63 J 


30-?-, 


2fil? 3 


— 


16 =n 

18 5 
20 5^ 


, '-OB 
-0 


ISO 

no 
no 


1") 

no 
n n 


Black 
White 
Copper 


80 1 

100 / 


— 


— 


r -0-6 


8/ 


-i z T 


— 


— 


Silver 
Red 



1 = Calibration ring of ceramic material 

2 = The3/I6i« Whitworth thread shall have an elective length of at (east 2 3 mm. 

3 = Coloured surface. 



Note ■ 
shown 



- The sketches are not intended to govern deiign except as regards the dimensions 



43 



IS i 8187.1976 



CJ .5 



§ 



U 



E 

d 



o 

2 



c 
E 

a 

E 




to 



44 



IS : 8187 - 1976 



a! 

w 

X 
O 



o 



en 
3 






•3 ™ 



= ■< 
2 - 



5 

u 
en 



I 



■i 

2 § 

as 



o 
o 
en 



;— T" ^ 



10 — 



(6 



■* 

o 







U5 


CO 



a 



45 



S : 8187 - 1976 



9 



o = 
S fr 'i 



^ a O 

-5 £ £ 
» 6 

a 

A 
■< 
H 








L^ 0u ^ I 








X 




~ i ■ 


~|<o 




i ^ 






X 




^ 


r <>4| m 






_V-« 









46 



IS : 8187 - 1976 






=5 1 



-5 



S5 

CO" ^ 






■5 p: 






C71 

en 






z 

o 



o 
"J- 



a 
P 



2 S- 



47 



IS t 8187-1976 



H 
O 



j 



•3 



5 




48 



IS t 8187 ■ 1976 



S 












I 



« I 



I 



"*> "S 



■*- 4 



I 



I 



I 



■* S 



I 



X 

g 



O 
o 



*~, 


M 


eo 


ul 




Ol 








eb 




W) 




CM 




o> 


*— * 


m 


OJ 


d> 


' — ' 


W 




mm 




m 


*-■» 


•* 



=. 5 



2 S 



04 ~ 



5. CO 



C «3 



£ 5 



■" o 

o 

in 

--^ m 

S- — i 



o 
en 



s 



13 



rt 






49 



IS i 8187 - 1976 



TABLE 14 CREEP AGE DISTANCES AND CLEARANCES 

(Clause 5 10 1) 

Distance 
mm 
Creepage 

Between metal parts, including contacts, which are of different polarity when the 5 

fuse-link has operated 

Between live parts and accessible metal parts, including fuse-base fixing screws, 5 

with a fuse-earner, a fuse-Iiak and a gauge-piece in position 
Between live parts and cover fixing screws which are not earthed and not accessible 3 

to the standard test finger 

Clearance 

Between metal parts, including contacts, which are of different polarity when, the 5 

fuse-link has operated 

Between live parts and accessible metal parts, including fuse-base fixing screws, 5 

with a fuse-carrier, a fuse-link and a gauge-piece in position 

Between live parts and the cover fixing screws which are not earthed and not 3 

accessible to the standard test finger 

Between live parts and the surface on. which a fuse-base for front connection is 10 

mounted 

Distance thiough sealing compound between live parts covered with at least 5 

2 5 mm of sealing compound and the surface on which a fuse-base for front 
connection is mounted 



TABLE 15 COLOUR OF GAUGE-PIECE/FUSE INDICATOR 

(Clauses 632 and 6 4 1) 

Rated Current Colotr of Gauge- 

Piece/Fuse Indicator 

(P (2) 

A 

fl 5 Under consideration* 

1 Under consideration* 

2 Pink* 

4 Brown* 

6 Green* 

10 Red 

J 6 Grev 

20 Blue 

25 Yellow 

3^ Black 

63 Copper 

SO Silver 



100 Red 

•Refer to Note under 63.2 (for gauge-pieces). 



50 



IS : 8187 - 1976 



TABLE 16 SAMPLING FOR TYPE TESTS 

Tests of Clauses 



(11 

7.9, 7.10 and 7 14 

7 II, 7.12 4 and 7 12 5 

7.12.6 

7 12.7 and 7 12 B 

7 12 9 

7.13 5 

7 !3 6 

7 !3.7 

7 15.1 

7152 

•For fuse-links rated up to 10 A onlv. 



(Clause 7 1 41 










Numbep or ! 


Samples 












/ ■ 








AC only 


DC onlv 


Both 


ac and dc 


<2) 


(31 




(41 


.3 


3 




3 


3 


1 




3 


3 


3 




3 


3 


3 




\ 


6 


6 




r> 


3 


3 




6 


3 


■3* 




} 


•s 


1 




) 


3 


3 




1 


3 


3 




3 



TABLE 17 TORQUE VALUES FOR SCREWS AND NUTS 

(Clauses 7 3 3, 7 4 1. 7 17 1 and 7 1 7 4 



Nominal Diameter 


T 


'oRqlF 




of Thread 


. 


_> 


™ 




I 




ir 


(n 


(21 




f3. 


mm 


Nm 




Nm 


2 b 


2 




04 


30 


2i 




t 


3 5 


n 4 




08 


40 


7 




1 n 


50 


fift 




'iO 


(id 


_ 




J => 


80 


__ 




"> 1 


10 


— 




7 =1 



TABLE 1» TORQUE VALUES (FUSE-CARRIER) 

(Clauses 7 3 4, 75 1 and 7.15 21 
Thread Torqte 

(1) (2) 

Nm 
E 27 4 

E 33 ft 5 

R IJ in 10 



51 



IS j 8187-1976 



TABLE 19 GAUGES C 17 FOR VERIFYING THE POSITION OF THE HOLE 
FOR FIXING THE GAUGE-PIECE 



(Clauses 7.3.4, 7.3.5 tmd 7.7.1) 
All dimensions in millimetres. 




- 






f— D — ► 














Type 








Dimensions 










Gauge 




r 


A E 






C 


n 


D 




d 






Max 


Min Max 


Mm 


Max 


Afi 


Max 


Mm 


Max 


Min 




(1) 


(2) 


(3) (4) 


(5) 


(6) 


(7) 


(8) 


(9) 


(10) 


(11) 


(12) 


D II 


31 


30-5 11-5 


11-0 


5 


45 


24-3 


24 2 


30 


2-9 


C17A 


D III 


31 


30-5 11-5 


110 


5 


45 


30 5 


30-4 


30 


29 


C 17 Ij 


D IV H 


38 


37-5 17 


16-5 


14 


13 5 


38-9 


38 8 


14 4 


143 


GI7G 


1= Surface E. 
2=Slightly rounded edge. 





















The gauges are intended for verifying that the hole for fixing the gauge-piece in 
the bottom contact-strip is concentric with the screwed shell. 

It shall be possible to introduce the gauge without undue force into the fuse-base So 
that the surface E is approximately level with the upper edge of the screwed shell. 

Material: Steel. 



52 



15:8187.1976 



TABLE 20 TORQUE VALUES (TERMINAL STUDS) 


(Clause 


7.4.3) 




Thread 




TOBfiUE 


(J) 




(2) 
Nm 


M 5 




25 


M 6 




50 


M 8 




7-5 


M 10 




10-0 



TABLE 21 


FORGE VALUES 


[Clauss 


7.5 


■2) 




Thread 








Forge 


(1) 








(2) 

N 


E 27 and E 23 








5 


R I^in 








10 



53 



IS : 8187-1976 




o 









A 4 


1 

t 


* 1 

\m — o 
•4 Q- 


J 


H 










54 



IS: 8187-1976 



u 
o 

< 



< 

CO 



Q 



en 



—.go o 



*r 




O CM 



S S2 

as CO ;£ 

HI — ■ W 



H 

J 







r 








o 


a 


^j 








l 


1 


u 




CO 




ir 






h 






■a 




CO 


i.n 


en 









1 






!-*■ 




o 

CO 


CO 






o 
o 




c 
















*3 




?1 




















^ 




o 


O 


■* 










3 




■£> 


L.-5 


t-» 










3] 


CO 


o 
en 


en 

CO 

en 










v» 














ti h 




















- 










O 


o 


to 


o 




Kh 




1 






en 


CO 


en 





z 


o 
o 


5 






o" 


en 

C-J 




en 

CO 

en 





















■«* 







W 


Ph 


o 














lO 


eo 


CO 


en 
















CJ 


o 


O 






eo 


CO 


© 


f 1 


M^ 


<5i 

CM 




CM 








CN 


o 


tl 


*8 




^■1 
in 


00 

cc 


~-" 








(§ 


T-l 


CO 


CO 
~1 


CD 

J5 


J "" 


7 ^ 












o 


O 


O 


~ 


3 


CO 


r^ 



u 



H 



»3 — ■*■ 



LI 



c 





-O 


30 


cn 


01 


^C 


« 






r=3 en 



3 







Si 

S3 



u 



*\ 



^ s. 









1_1 "1 

^ «> * 

* a 



■-M 



3 

CO 



us 

CO 



CO 
C7> 

in 



z 
g 

< 



- jJ W »5 






w P« 



55 



tS t 8187-1976 



8 
2 



g 



S s 



5 

3 



O 
'3 

I 

-5 



o 

o 



i 



s 




56 



IS : 8187-1976 



O 

o 



M 

a 

O 






H 
O 
O 

Pi 

*E 

a o 
a 



Id 

B 

ft 

o 



u q 
£ 9 

1ST 



z 
o 

z 

o 









S 



3 

cm 

cm 









u a o 



o 
CM 



ID io 
u-) r- 



IT) 

CJ1 


CT) 


IT, 

CJl 


cm 


CM 


CM 


o 

CM 


o 

3 


cm 


CM 


© 
CO 


CO 
CO 



§ 


O 
IT) 


o 

CO 


o 


cm 


■* 


<J> 


a 


■* 


o 


CD 




cm 


CO 


CO 


o 
z 


o 


o 


■* 




CO 


CM 






CM 


^ 


C7> 




■* 


o 


30 




CM 


CO 


CO 




o 


o 


O 




3 


o 


en 




US 


en 


^ 




<N 


CO 


^f 




O 


o 


CO 




"1 


m 


co 




**• 


o 


CO 




US 


CO 


, — I 




CM 


co 


* 




© 


O 


O 




CM 


CM 


us 




■* 


O 


CO 




io 


CO 


I-^» 




CM 


CO 


■* 





CM CO 



<5 



^ 



P3 






O 



O 
■* 



J *°2 



u"> CO CO 
tO O CM 

—> cn tn 



V)cn m S-; 

~-« CM 



3 -— ° o *? 
45 co di io in 

^ "-' CM CO * 






I 5? 



5 



"a ■( 



H 
3 



O o 



es 



o 

o 



o 

o 



us o 

" CM 



2 3 



a5 " 



W tf 



o 
o 



Ci Ql Ol 
iO OT CJ? 



^D 


CM 


_ 


(S 


CM 


CO 


Tf 


"eft 

u 

a 
•a 


in 


in 


so 
to 


to 


CM 


_^ 


C-4 


CO 


■* 


1 

■a 





















.s 




t~- 


CO 


-+• 


■< 



57 



IS : 8187 - 1976 



TABLE 24 GAUGES G 15 FOR 3/16 1a WHITWORTH THREAD 

[Clam 7 7.1) 
All dimensions in millimetres 

NO GO 




— B+d-5- 

L-4- 084*o-oo? 



r 3-1U±o °os 
2 



NO GO 



— 5-01 - m\ 



& 



C I5A 



Mass. 70±7g 

C 15B 



T3 iO-5 




«.5 -002- 



C I5C 

1 = Slightly rounded edge. 

2 = Sharp edge. 



Mass: 15g 
C I5D 



It shall be possible to screw the 'GO' gauges home with a maximum torque of 2 Nm. 
The 'NO GO* gauges shall not engage or slip on under their own weight. 
Material: Steel, parts exposed to wear shall be hardened. 

•Approximate dimension. 



58 



IS j 8187 - 1976 



TABLE 25 GAUGES C 16 FOR FUSE-BASES FOR BACK CONNECTION 

(Clause 7.7.1) 

All dimensions in millimetres. 




Type 




Dimensions 




Gauge 




A 


D 


E 


d 




0) 


(2) 


(3) 


(4) 


(5) 


(6) 


d n 


56J;0 1 


I3±0 01 


14±0 01 


6±0 01 


C 16 A 


D III 


66±0 1 


l&iOUl 


18_L00I 


7 £0 01 


C 16 B 


D IV H 


87 ±0 1 


21±00I 


22J.0 0L 


L0£0 01 


C 16 C 



The gauge shall slide; down to the fuse-base under its own weight, the underside of the 
fuse-hase being parallel to tbe gauge. 

Material : Steel, parts exposed to wear shall be hardened 



59 



IS : 8187-1976 



TABLE 26 DIELECTRIC TEST VOLTAGES 

(Clause 7.10 3.2) 



Rated Voltage of 
Fuse 


Dielectric Test 
Voltage AC (rras) 


(1) 


(2) 


V 


V 


Up to and including 60 


1000 


61 „ 300 


2 000 


301 „ 500 


2 500 



TABLE 27 VALUES OF VOLTAGE DROP ACROSS FUSE-LINK 

(Clause 7.11.4) 



Rated Current of 
Fuse-Link 


Voltage Drop 




f 

Quick-Acting 
Fuse-Links 




i 
Time Lag Fuse- 
Links 


(1) 


(2) 






(3) 


A 


mV 






mV 


0-5 


• 






* 


I 


• 






* 


2 


2000 






2 000 


4 


1 000 






1 000 


6 


450 






325 


10 


450 






225 


16 


370 






185 


20 


330 






165 


25 


300 






155 


35 


270 






145 


50 


240 






140 


63 


220 






130 


80 


200 






130 


100 


190 






130 


•Under consideration. 











60 



IS : 8187 - 1976 



TABLE 28 NOMINAL CONDUCTOR SIZES FOR FUSING TEST 

[Clause 7 12 2) 



Rated Current or Fuse-Base 

(1) 

A 

Up to and including 25 

Over 25 up to aad including 63 

Over 63 up to and including 100 



Nominal Cross- Minimum Length of 
Sectional Area of Conductor per 

Conductors Terminal 

(2) (3) 

mm 8 m 



6 
25 
50 



2 
I 

1 25 



TABLE 29 TEST CURRENTS FOR FUSING TEST 

(Clause* 7 12 4, 7 12 5, 7 12 9 1 and 1 12 9 2) 
Rated Current, /„, of Fuse-Link 

(1) 
A 

Up to and including 4 

Over 4 up to and including 10 

>t *^ S3 t> ty >> ^ 

„ 63 „ „ „ „ 100 



Smaller Test 


Larger Test 


Tes ting 


Current 


Current 


Period 


(2) 


(3) 


(-1) 


A 


A 


hour. 


15 I a 


I 1 In 


1 


1-5 I n 


19 I n 


1 


14 l a 


! 75 I a 


1 


13 I n 


1 6 I n 


1 


13 I n 


16 I„ 


2 



61 



IS > 8187 - 1976 



TABLE 30 PRE-ARCXNG TIME 



Rated Current of Fuse-Link 

(1) 
A 



Up to and including 4 
Over 4 up to and including 10 
„ 10 „ 



{Clause 7.12 


.6) 






Link 




Pre- 


■arctno Time, 
Mm 

(2) 
second 

0-05 


ling 10 






10 


25 






15 


, 63 






20 


100 






35 



TABLE 31 CHARACTERISTICS OF TEST CIRCUIT 

(Clause 7.13 5) 



Rated Current of 


AC 






DC 






Prospective 
Current 


Power 

Factor 

(lag) 


t 

Prospective 
Current 




Time 
Constant 


a) 


(2) 


(3) 


(4) 




(5) 


A 


A 




A 




second 


Up to and including 25 


4000 


3+0 


1600 




003 
+ 20% 


Over 25 up to and including 
63 


8 000 


3 ±S-i 


4000 




0007 
+ 20% 


Over 63 up to and including 
100 


16 000 


°- 3 ^, 


8 000 




0015 

+ 20% 



62 



IS : 8187 - 1976 



TABLE 32 PROSPECTIVE CURRENT VALUES 

(Clause 7.13.6) 



Rated Current of Fuse -Link 



Prospective Cukrent 







AG 


DC 




0) 


(2) 


(3) 




A 


A 


A 


Up to and including 4 


250 


375 


Over 4 


up to and including 10 


500 


750 


„ 10 


>, 20 


1 000 


— 


„ 20 


„ „ „ „ 25 


2 000 


— 


>. 25 


35 


2 500 


— 


» 35 


50 


3 500 


— 


„ 50 


63 


4 500 


— 


„ 63 


so 


6 500 


— 


„ 80 


„ 300 


9 000 


— 


Note — A dash means that no test is made because the prospective current is compar- 
able to, or greater than the valve shown in Table 3 1 . 



APPENDIX A 

(Clause 7.2.1) 
SAMPLING PLAN OF D-TYPE FUSES 

A-l. SCALE OF SAMPLING 

A-l.l Lot — In any consignment, all the D-type fuses manufactured by 
the same factory and during the same period shall be grouped together to 
constitute a lot. 



63 



IS : 8187 - 1976 

A-1.2 From each lot a certain number of fuses as specified in Table 33 shall 
be selected at random and subjected to acceptance tests (see 7.2). For this 
purpose, IS : 4905-1968* shall be used. 



TABLE 33 SAMPLING SCHEME 

(Clauses A-1.2 and A-2.1) 



Lot Size 


Sample Size 


JVi+AT. 


c t 


c, 


c t 


AT 


First 
Stage 




Second 
Stage 




(1) 


(2) 




(3) 


(4) 


(5) 


(6) 


(7) 


1 001 to 3 000 


32 




32 


64 


2 


5 


6 


3 001 to 10 000 


50 




50 


100 


3 


7 


8 


10 001 and above 


80 




80 


160 


5 


9 


12 



A-2. NUMBER OF SAMPLES AND CRITERIA FOR CONFORMITY 

A-2.1 In Table 33 'N^ is the size of the first stage sample. A sample shall 
be declared defective if it fails in one or more of the acceptance tests. If 
the number of defectives found in this sample is less than or equal to C 1} the 
lot shall be considered as conforming to this standard and accepted. If the 
number of defectives is greater than or equal to C 2> the lot shall be rejected. 
If the number of defectives is between C 1 and C 2 , further sample of JV a size 
shall be selected at random and subjected to acceptance tests. If the 
number of defectives in the two samples combined is less than or equal to 
C 3 , the lot shall be accepted, otherwise rejected. 



•Methods for random sampling. 

64 



INTERNATIONAL SYSTEM OF UNITS (SI UNITS) 



Base Units 




Quantity 


Unrt 


Length 

Mass 

Time 


metre 

kilogram 

second 


Electric current 
Thermodynamic 

temperature 
Lurnmous intensity 
Amount of substance 


ampere 
kelvin 

candela 
mole 


Supplementary Units 




Quantity 


Unit 


Plane angle 
Solid angle 


radian 
steradian 



Derived Units 

Quantity 

Force 

Energy 

Power 

Flu* 

Flux density 

Frequency 

Electric conductance 

Pressure, stress 



Unit 

newton 

joule 

vvatt 

weber 

tesla 

hertz: 

Siemens 

pascal 



Symbol 



s 
A 
K 

cd 
mcl 



Symbol 

rad 
sr 



Symbol 

N 

J 

W 

Wb 

T 

Hi 

S 

Pa 



Conversion 

I N -= I 

I J = ! 

f W -= I 

I Wb - I 

I T -= I 

I Hz- I 

I S - I 

J Pa --- J 



kg I m/s s 
N.m 

ih 
Vs 

Wbfm= 
c/5(s ') 
A/V 
N/m' 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

Manak Bhsvan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zahr Marg, NEW DELHI H00Q2 
Telephone 27 01 3] (20 lines) Telegrams. Manaksanstha 



Regional Offices. 

Western . Novelty Chambers, Grant Road 
Eastern ■ 5 Chowrmghee Approach 
Southern C I T. Campus, Adyar 

Branch Offices 

"Pushpak", Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur 

'F' Block, Unity Bldg, Narasimharaja Square 

Ahimsa Bldg, SCO 82-83, Sector I7C 

5-8-56/57 L N. Gupta Marg 

117/418 B Sarvodaya Nagar 

B.C I. Bldg (3rd Floor), Gandhi Maidan East 

Hantex Bldg (2nd Floor), My Station Road 



BOMBAY 400007 
CALCUTTA 700072 
MADRAS 600020 



Telephone 
37 97 29 
23-08 02 

41 24 42 



AHMADABAD 380001 2 03 9) 

BANGALORE 560002 2 76 49 

CHANDIGARH 160017 2 83 20 

HYDERABAD 5O000I 4 57 I I 

KAN PUR 208005 82 72 

PATNA 800004 5 36 55 

TWVANDP-UM 695001 32 27 

Printed at biee Saraswsly Pr«s Ltd Calcutta ItitJu 



