Indian Standard 


am- eth wet fasrt — 
Att wi 
( yaa ) 


Laying in-Situ Terrazzo Floor 
Finish — Code of Practice 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 91.100.30 


© BIS 2018 


KARIA AA ART 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
AM WH, 9 uu AHL AM, Ae fercit-110002 
Lm MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


July 2018 Price Group 4 


Flooring, Wall Finishing and Roofing Sectional Committee, CED 05 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Flooring, Wall Finishing and Roofing Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering 
Division Council. 


This standard was first published in 1962 and subsequently revised in 1984. This revision incorporates the experience 
gained with the use of this standard and brings the standard in line with the latest developments in this field. 


In-situ terrazzo finish is still being adopted in residential and public buildings, for its cost effectiveness and 
decorative finish. However, certain essential precautions are called for in laying the terrazzo floor finish to avoid 
crack development and consequent trouble in maintenance. This revised standard provides guidance in the selection 
of materials, and laying and finishing of terrazzo floor so that a satisfactory performance of the finished flooring 
is obtained. 


In this revision, the following major changes have been incorporated: 


a) Grinding with synthetic series of grinding stones has been introduced; 

b) Curing periods have been modified; 

c) Reference to various building materials has been given based on latest types of same now available; and 
d) Reference to various Indian Standards has been updated. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for formulation of the standard is given in Annex B. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is compiled with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding of numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 2114 : 2018 


Indian Standard 


LAYING IN-SITU TERRAZZO FLOOR FINISH — CODE 
OF PRACTICE 


(Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard covers the laying and finishing of in-situ 
terrazzo floors, skirtings and dadoes. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A contain provisions 
which through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision and parties to agreements based on 
this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards indicated in Annex A. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions of terms 
given in IS 10403 shall apply. 


4 NECESSARY INFORMATION 


4.1 For the efficient planning and execution of the work 
detailed information with regard to the following is 
necessary: 


a) Floor area to be covered; 


b) Location and size of openings, if any, to be 
left out; 

c) Details of the base of sub-floor; 

d) Type and grades of aggregates to be used and 
specific, requirements, if any, regarding the 
pattern, colour and appearance of the finished 
surface; and 

e) Treatment at all corners and adjacent floor or 
walls. 


4.2 All the information stated in 4.1 shall be made 
available by the appropriate authority responsible for 
the construction of the whole building to those who 
are entrusted with the work of laying the terrazzo floor 
before the work is started. Necessary drawings and 
instructions for preparatory work shall also be given, 
where required. 


4.3 Arrangements shall also be made for the proper 
exchange of information between those engaged in 
laying the floor finish and all others whose work will 
effect or will be affected. 


5 MATERIALS 


5.1 Aggregates 


The aggregates used in terrazzo topping shall be marble 
aggregates size varying from 1 mm to 25 mm. Marble 
powder used in terrazzo topping shall pass through 
sieve 300 conforming to IS 460 (Part 1). Aggregates 
for terrazzo underlayer as well as the base concrete 
shall conform to the requirements of IS 383. 


5.2 Cement 


Cement used for the floor work shall conform to IS 269 
or IS 455 or IS 1489 (Part 1) or IS 1489 (Part 2). 


5.3 White Cement 
It shall conform to IS 8042. 


5.4 Pigments 


The pigments to be used in terrazzo shall be of 
permanent colour and shall conform to the requirements 
mentioned in Table 1. 


5.5 Water 


Water used for mixing and curing shall conform to the 
requirements given in IS 456. 


5.6 Dividing Strips 


The material for dividing strips shall be such that it has 
similar resistance to wear as the flooring. The dividing 
strips may be aluminium, brass, copper, glass, plastic 
or similar materials. Aluminium dividing strips when 
used should have a protective coating of bitumen. The 
thickness of strip shall not be less than 1.5 mm and 
width not less than 25 mm for flooring. 


6 DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS 


6.1 The terrazzo finish normally consists of the topping 
and an underlayer and is laid over a layer of base 
concrete or cushioning layer. The arrangement of the 
various layers for terrazzo finish laid directly over 
ground shall be as shown in Fig. 1 and when laid on a 
structural slab, the arrangement shall be as shown in 
Fig. 2. The sub-base shall be a well consolidated layer 
of earth or preferably sand. The cushioning layer shall 
preferably be lime concrete, The base concrete shall 
be lean cement concrete of mix 1:5:10 or lime concrete. 


IS 2114 : 2018 


TERRAZZO TOPPING 
UNDER LAYER 


BASE 
SUB-BASE CONCRETE 


Fic. 1 TERRAZZO FINISH OVER GROUND 


6.2 Thickness 


The thickness of base concrete shall be not less than 
100 mm and of cushioning layer not less than 75 mm. 
The combined thickness of the under layer and topping 
for flooring and dado/skirting shall be not less than 30 
and 20 mm, respectively. The thickness of terrazzo 
topping shall be not less than the following depending 
upon the size of chips used : 


Size of Chips Minimum Thickness 
mm mm 
1 to2 6 
2to4 6 
4 to 7 9 
7 to 10 12 


6.2.1 Where chips of size larger than 10 mm are used, 
the minimum thickness of topping shall be not less than 
one and one-third times the maximum size of the chips. 


6.3 Ingredients and Mix Proportions 


6.3.1 The under layer shall be cement concrete of mix 
1:2:4 by volume. The maximum size of aggregate 
used shall not exceed 10 mm. 


6.3.2 The mix for terrazzo topping shall consist of 
cement with or without pigments, marble powder, 
marble aggregates, and water. The proportions of 
cement and marble powder shall be 3 parts of cement 
and one part of powder by mass. For every part of 
cement marble powder mix, the proportion of 
aggregates by volume shall be as follows depending 
upon the size of aggregates: 


Size of Proportion of Aggregate of 
Aggregates Binder Mix 
mm Parts 
1to7 One and three-fourth 
7 to 15 One and one-half 
15 to 25 One and one-half 


6.3.3 The aggregates may be of the required colour or 
may be a mix of aggregates of different colours in the 
required proportions. The proportions of cement shall 
inclusive of any pigments added to cement. 


TERRAZZO TOPPING 
UNDER LAYER 


CUSHIONING 


STRUCTURAL LAYER 


SLAB 
Fic. 2 TERRAZZO FINISH ON STRUCTURAL SLAB 


6.3.4 The proportions in which pigments are mixed with 
cement or white cement to obtain different colours for 
the binder shall be as specified in Table 1. 


6.4 Prevention of Cracks in-situ Terrazzo Floor 


While laying the floor the joints in flooring shall always 
coincide with the expansion joints, if any, in the 
structural slab so that any movement of the base will 
be in the joints in the flooring instead of forming 
uncontrolled cracks. 


6.4.1 Size of Terrazzo Panel 


Differential shrinkage or expansion between terrazzo 
and the sub-floor may cause cracks in the flooring and 
floor joints shall be formed so that the positions of such 
cracks are controlled. The floor, both while laying the 
under layer and later on the toping, shall be divided 
into panels not exceeding 2 m? so as to reduce the risk 
of cracking. The joints shall be so located that the longer 
dimension of any panel does not exceed 2 m. The panel 
shall preferably be separated by means of dividing 
strips. However, where butt joints are provided, the bays 
shall be laid alternately allowing for an interval of at 
least 24 h between the laying of adjacent bays. 


7 PROGRAMMING OF THE WORK IN 
RELATION TO FLOOR FINISH. 


7.1 In preparing the time schedule, due attention shall 
be given to provide sufficient time for, 


a) the completion of all preliminary operation 
such as laying of services, affecting the 
schedule of commencement and completion 
of the flooring work; and 

b) the hardening of any concrete in the base 
before laying of the floor finish. 


7.2 All the inside walls, ceiling and outside walls shall 
be plastered and door frames and windows fixed in 
place. All heavy work in the room shall be completed. 


7.3 The base concrete shall be finished to a reasonably 
true plane surface and to a level which in lower than 
the level of the finished floor by the depth specified 
for the thickness of the terrazzo flooring. 


IS 2114 : 2018 


Table 1 Cement Pigment Proportions for Various Colours of Matrix in Terrazzo Work 
(Clauses 5.4 and 6.3.4) 
(All proportions shall be by mass.) 


SI Colours Pigment to be Used Proportion of Proportion of Proportion of Ref to IS 
No. Pigment Cement White Cement 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 
i) Red Red oxide of iron 1 15-20 Nil IS 44 
ii) Black Carbon black 1 25-40 Nil IS 40 
iii) Bottle Green Green chromium oxide 1 15-30 Nil IS 54 
iv) Pink Red oxide 1 Nil 100-300 IS 44 
v) Cream Yellow oxide of iron 1 Nil 100-400 IS 44 
vi) Yellow Yellow oxide of iron 1 Nil 25-75 IS 44 
vii) Light Green Green chromium oxide 1 Nil 50-150 IS 54 
viii) French Grey = Nil 1-2 1 — 
Fawn Yellow oxide of iron 1 6 4 IS 44 


7.4 Before the floor finish work is started, all points of 
lever for the finished surface shall be marked out. 
Whenever slope in finished floors is desired points of 
level and outlets shall be correctly marked and outlet 
openings made before hand. 


7.5 Wherever it is suspected that dampness or water 
may find way to be top of the base concrete in the course 
of usage of floor the base concrete shall be laid in two 
layers, each not less than 75 mm thick with a layer of 
water proof membrane inserted between them. The 
waterproofing shall be continued to a height of at least 
150 mm along the side walls. 


8 PREPARATORY WORK 


8.1 Handling and Storage Materials 


Clean, dry storage shall be provided at the site for all 
the materials in accordance with the provisions of the 
relevant Indian Standards. Cement shall not be stored 
in the open. 


8.2 Mixing of Materials 


8.2.1 The mixing of materials is of the greatest 
importance, for if this is not done thoroughly the work 
will not have a uniform appearance. If done manually 
the mixing shall preferably be done in a trough or tub. 
With a view to avoid variation in colour the complete 
quantities of cement and pigment required for one 
operation shall be mixed at the beginning of work and 
stored properly. 


8.2.2 Where different coloured chips are used they shall 
be first well mixed in required proportion of various 
colours and sizes. 


8.2.2.1 Coloured cement may be procured as ready 
mixed material or mixed in site; in the latter case the 
pigment and cement in the required proportions shall 


be mixed thoroughly sieved before further mixing. With 
marble powder and aggregates. 


8.2.2.2 The coloured cement shall be mixed thoroughly 
in dry state with marble powder. The binder so obtained 
and the mix of chips shall then be mixed dry together 
(Proportions given in 6.3.2). 


8.2.2.3 While mixing the aggregates, care shall be taken 
not to get the materials in to a heap, as this would result 
in the coarsest chips falling to the edge of the heap and 
the cement working to the centre at the bottom. The 
material shall be kept, as far as possible, in an even 
layer during mixing. 


8.2.3 After the materials have been thoroughly mixed 
in the dry state water shall be added in small quantities, 
preferably in a fine spray, while the materials were being 
mixed until proper consistency is obtained. The mixture 
shall be plastic but not so wet that it will flow; a rough 
indication for the addition of proper quantity of water 
in the mix is that it shall be capable of being moulded 
when squeezed in hand without water flowing out. A 
high water cement ratio will produce, a mixture with a 
high dry shrinkage. 


8.2.4 Machine mixing should preferably be used. The 
common concrete mixer is not as suitable for 
segregation prevention. The use of special machines is 
recommended. 


8.2.5 The mix shall be used in the work within 30 min 
of the addition of water during preparation. 


9 SPREADING THE UNDER LAYER 


9.1 Dividing strips including the strips required for 
decorative design shall be fixed on the base to the exact 
surface level of floor so as to divide the surface of the 
base in to the required arrangement panel. Anchorage 
arrangements shall be provided either by fixing 40 mm 


IS 2114 : 2018 


long cross nails through the strips or by cutting the edges 
as mentioned in 5.6. 


9.2 Where dividing strips are not used, the screed strips 
shall be fixed on the base, properly leveled to the correct 
height to suit the thickness of floor. 


9.3 Before spreading the under layer, the base shall 
be cleaned of all dirt, laitance, or loose material and 
then well wetted with water without forming any 
water pools on the surface. It shall then be smeared 
with cement slurry just before the spreading of under 
layer. 


9.4 After application of cement slurry, the under layer 
shall be spread and leveled with a spreading board will 
form a satisfactory key for the terrazzo. 


10 LAYING TERRAZZO TOPPING 


10.1 Terrazzo topping shall be laid while the under layer 
is still plastic but it has hardened sufficiently to prevent 
cement from rising to the surface; this is normally 
achieved between 18h and 24h after the under layer 
has been laid. A cement slurry, preferably of the same 
colour as the topping as the topping shall be brushed 
on the surface immediately before laying is 
commended. If possible, the entire work of laying the 
topping shall be completed at one stretch (see 8.2.1). 


10.2 The terrazzo mix shall be placed on the screed 
bed compacted thoroughly by tamping or rolling and 
trowelled smooth. The time interval allowed between 
each successive trowelling is important as only that 
much trowelling which is just sufficient to give as level 
surface is needed immediately after layer. Further 
compacting shall be carried out at intervals, the amount 
depending upon the temperature and rate of set of the 
cement. Excessive trowelling or rolling in early stages 
shall be avoided as this tends to work up cement to the 
surface producing a finish liable to cracking and also 
necessitates more grinding of surface to exposé the 
marble chips. 


10.3 The surface shall then be rammed in order to 
consolidate the terrazzo; it is not sufficient just to ‘float’ 
lightly, as this would cause depressions which have to 
be filled with mortar. A piece of smooth marble/granite 
stone of size 150 mm x 150 mm x 25 mm may be used. 
When using the trowel may be used. When using the 
trowel the object should be to make the surface level 
and smooth with as little use of the float as possible 
relying upon pressure rather than upon a trowelling 
action to achieve till the cement slurry is come on top 
surface. Rolling will be easier than tamping and patting 
but a rolled terrazzo is more likely to crack since the 
roller would draw the cement to the surface unless the 
mixture is very dry. The best results are obtained by 
temping combined with a minimum of trowelling. The 


compaction shall ensure that air bubbles are cleared 
from the mix. 


10.4 Work on Borders and Decorative Designs 


Borders and decorative designs shall be laid before the 
main body of the floorings. They shall be laid and 
finished in the same manner as flooring, preferably 
using dividing strips. Where, however stencils or 
formwork of wood or metal are used instead of dividing 
strips they shall be removed before the lopping mix 
commences to harden. The removal shall be effected 
with as little disturbance to the materials as possible 
and any ragged edged left after removal of the stencils 
or formwork shall be rectified with a trowel, care being 
taken to consolidate the terrazzo to avoid damage to 
the edges of the design 


11 CURING 


The surface shall left dry for air-curing for a duration 
of 12 h to 18 h depending upon atmospheric 
temperature conditions. Allowing water to stand in 
pools over it for a period of not less than 4 days shall 
then cure it. Precautions shall also be taken to prevent 
the floor from being subjected to extreme temperature. 


12 GRINDING 


12.1 The grinding and processing of terrazzo may be 
commenced not less than 4 days from the time of 
completion of laying for with hand grinding and not 
less than 7 days for machine grinding. The period that 
should be allowed before the floor is fit for grinding 
depends upon the materials, their proportions and the 
weather. The sooner the grinding is done the easier it 
is; if it is done too soon the grinding may tear out the 
chips from the matrix. 


12.2 The filling shall be done with a grout using the 
same coloured cement (without marble powder) as in 
the original mix for terrazzo topping and a portion of 
the coloured cement shall be kept for this purpose when 
the floor is laid; this ensures that patches do not differ 
in appearance from the remainder of the floor. 


12.2.1 The first grinding shall be done with synthetic 
series of zero (0) grit size. 


12.2.2 The surface shall then be washed clean and 
grouted with neat cement of the same colour as matrix 
grout of creamlike consistency and make sure the pin 
holes are filled. It shall then be allowed to dry for 24h 
and wet-cured for 6 days in the same manner as 
specified in 10 and grouting process will continue till 
the pin holes are fully filled. 


12.2.3 The second grinding shall be done with 
synthetic series of one (1) grit size. 


12.2.4 The surface shall then be prepared once more 
as in 12.2.2. 


12.2.5 The third grinding shall be done with synthetic 
series of two (2) grit size. 


12.2.6 The surface shall again be washed clean and 
allowed to dry for 12 h and wet-cured for 4 days in the 
same manner as specified in 10. 


12.2.7 The fourth grinding shall be done with synthetic 
series of three (3) to seven (7) grit size. For getting 
smooth shining floors diamond pad should be used after 
the second grinding and grouting is over. 


12.2.8 The surface shall again be washed clean and 
rubbed hard with felt and slightly moistened. Tin oxide 
powder with sprinkling of water and cleaned the 
surface. Two coats of floor sealer can be applied to 
avoid penetration of oil/grease, etc. 


12.3 When all constructional and finishing works, 
namely, painting, distempering, electrical work, 
plumbing joinery work, etc, are completed and just 
before the area is occupied the floor shall be washed 
clean with dilute oxalic acid solution and dried. Floor 
polishing machine fitted with left or hessian bobs shall 
then be run over it until the floor shines. 


13 LAYING TERRAZZO SKIRTINGS AND 
DADOES 


13.1 Under Layer 


For terrazzo finish on vertical surface like skirting’s 
and dadoes, the under layer shall consist of a layer stiff 
cement mortar 1 : 3 (1 cement : 3 sand) by volume 
finished rough so as to provide adequate key for 


topping. 
13.2 Thickness 


The combined thickness of under layer and terrazzo 
topping shall not be less than 20 mm. 


IS 2114 : 2018 


13.2.1 The minimum thickness for terrazzo topping 
shall not be less than 6 mm. 


13.3 Other details regarding laying, curing grinding, 
polishing and maintenance shall be similar to those 
described for in-situ terrazzo flooring except that the 
grinding will be done manually. 


14 INSPECTION AND TESTING 


The work should be inspected while in progress and 
after completion, special attention being paid to the 
following points: 
a) General condition of the base; 
b) Correct level of base in relation to flooring; 
c) Suitability of aggregate; 
d) Correct proportioning of materials; 
e) Proper mixing; 
f) Adequate bond between wearing surface, 
under layer and the base; 
g) Suitable size of bay; 
h) Correct level of dividing strips and the 
gradient of floor; 
j) Sufficient and correct consolidation; and 
k) Correct curing. 


15 MAINTENANCE 


15.1 Under normal conditions the flooring may be kept 
clean by washing periodically with water and 
occasionally with a dilute solution of oxalic acid after 
which it shall be mopped down with cold water and 
dried. If desired, the floor may be polished using a hard 
wax polish or an emulsion polish. 


15.1.1 Soap in any form shall not be used as it tends 
to make the terrazzo dangerously slippery; excessive 
polishing have similar effect. The surface may also be 
kept free from oil and grease to any and slipperiness. 


IS 2114 : 2018 


IS No. 


40 : 1971 


44 : 1991 


54 : 1988 


269 : 2015 


383 : 2016 


455 : 2015 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 2) 
LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 


Title 
Specification for carbon black for 
paints (first revision) 
Specification for iron oxide 
pigments for paints (second 
revision) 
Specification for green oxide of 
chromium for paints (second 
revision) 
Ordinary portland cement — 
Specification (sixth revision) 
Coarse and fine aggregate for 
concrete — Specification (third 
revision) 
Portland slag cement — 
Specification (fifth revision) 


IS No. 
456 : 2000 


460 
(Part 1) : 1985 


1489 


(Part 1) : 2015 
(Part 2) : 2015 


8042 : 2015 


10403 : 1983 


Title 
Plain and reinforced concrete — 
Code of Practice (fourth revision) 
Specification for test sieves 
Wire cloth test sieves (third 
revision) 
Portland pozzolana cement — 
Specification 
Fly ash based (fourth revision) 
Calcined clay based (fourth 
revision) 
White portland cement — 
Specification (third revision) 
Glossary of terms relating to 
building finishes 


IS 2114 : 2018 


ANNEX E 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Flooring, Wall Finishing and Roofing Sectional Committee, CED 05 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity (L/109, Sarita Vihar, New Delhi) 
Ardex Endura India Pvt Limited, Bengaluru 


Building Materials & Technology Promotion Council, New Delhi 


Carborundum Universal Limited, Chennai 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


CSIR — Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


CSIR — Central Glass & Ceramic Research Institute, Naroda 
CSIR — Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 


Choksi Laboratories Limited, Indore 


Construction Chemicals Manufacturers Association, Navi Mumbai 


Construction Industry Development Council, New Delhi 


Delhi Development Authority, New Delhi 


Directorate General of Border Roads, New Delhi 


Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


Ultratech Cement Limited, Mumbai 
Gyan Construction Company, Mumbai 


H. R. Johnson (India) Limited, Dewas 


Indian Council of Ceramic Tiles & Sanitaryware, New Delhi 


Institution of Engineers (India), New Delhi 
Lloyd Insulation (India) Pvt Limited, New Delhi 


Mapie Construction Products India Pvt Limited, Bengaluru 


Military Engineer Services, Engineer-in-Chief’s Branch, New Delhi 


Modern Tiles & Marble, New Delhi 


Morbi Dhuva Glaze Tiles Association, Morbi 


Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai, Mumbai 


MYK Laticrete India, Hyderabad 


National Council for Cement and Building Materials, Ballabgarh 


Representative(s) 


Suri ASHOK Khurana (Chairman) 


Suri K. P. PAULSON 
Suri GOPINATH KRISHNAN (Alternate) 


Suri S. K. Gupta 
Suri Pankas Gupta (Alternate) 


Suri R. RAJAGOPALAN 
Dr N. RAMASUBRAMANIAN (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJESH KUMAR KAUSHAL 
Suri ARUN Kumar Tvaat (Alternate) 


Suri S. K. SINGH 
Suri ACHAL Kumar MITTAL (Alternate) 


Dn SATYENDRA NATH MISRA 
Dr RAKESH KUMAR 


Suri R. D. MATHUR 
Suri Ramesh Basappa (Alternate) 


Suri UPEN PATEL 
SHRI SAMIR SURLAKER (Alternate) 


Suri P. R. Swarup 
Suri Ravi JAIN (Alternate) 


CHIEF ENGINEER (Dwk) 
SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER (P) (Alternate) 


Cor INDRA Kumar JAGGI 


Suri J. K. BHAGCHANDANI 
Suri AKHILESH Maurya (Alternate) 


SHRI B. KUMAR 
REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI G. S. PATNAIK 
Suri Arun Rao (Alternate) 


SHRI ARUN Rao 
Suri P. K. SuanMa (Alternate) 


Suri K. K. KAPILA 


SHRI Mouit KHANNA 
Suri K. K. Mirra (Alternate) 


Dr G. S. Ravi SHANKAR 
Suri ABHIJIT Dutta (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI MALA MOHAN 
SHRIMATI Namrata Konui (Alternate) 


SHRI SUBHASH KAPOOR 
Suri KaMeswar Rau (Alternate) 


SHRI NILESH JETPARIA 
Suri JERAM Mapuav Kavar (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Dr P. ARJUNAN 
Suri N. RADHAKANTH (Alternate) 


Dn S. K. BREJA 


IS 2114 : 2018 


Organization Representative(s) 
National Highways Authority of India, New Delhi Suri S. C. JINDAL 
Suri R. P. KHANDELWAL (Alternate) 


National Test House, Kolkata Suri D. V. S. PRASAD 
Suri ALOKE Dev (Alternate) 


National Tiles Corporation, Panchkula SHRI PREM CHAND GUPTA 
Suri S. R. Gara (Alternate) 


New Delhi Municipal Corporation, New Delhi REPRESENTATIVE 
Premier Polyfilm Limited, Ghaziabad Dr SANJEEV K. VERMA 
Suri R. K. Naran (Alternate) 
Research, Designs and Standards Organization, Ministry of EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR (Wonks) 
Railways, Lucknow SHRI AsHUTOSH KUMAR (Alternate) 
Responsive Industries Limited, Mumbai SHRI RISHABH AGARWAL 


SHRI ABHISHEK AGARWAL (Alternate) 


Shriram Institute of Industrial Research, New Delhi DR P. K. KAICHER 
Dr Laxmi Rawat (Alternate) 


Somany Ceramic Ltd, Bahadurgarh Suri G. G. TRIVEDI 
Dr Ashutosh GoeL (Alternate) 


Super Tiles and Marble Private Limited, Mumbai SHRI ASHOK RAJPUROHIT 
SHRI SUDHAKAR Moni (Alternate) 


Xebec Design and Facilities Private Limited, New Delhi SHRI DEEPAK GAHLOWT 
SHRI SAMIR BANERJI (Alternate) 


BIS Directorate General Suri SANJAY PANT, Scientist ‘F’ AND HEAD (Civit. ENGG) 
[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI SRIKANTH YAJJALA 
Scientist ‘C’ (Civil Engg), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 05 (10641). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central |: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.1.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 26 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : C.LI.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


