i IS 4645:1993

( Reaffirmed 2002 )

Indian Standara

I

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR STORAGE ~PAPER AND BOARD ( First Revision )

OF

UDC

672.2.004.4 : 00.76

@ BIS 1993

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN, 9

INDIAN
BAHADUR DELHI NEW

STANDARDS
SHAH 110002 Price Group 2 ZAFAR MARG

June 1993

Paper and Allied Products

( Excluding

Packaging

Materials

), CHD 15

FOREWORD This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, draft finalized by the Papmerand Allied Products (Exr:luding Packaging Materials ) Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division Council. after the Sectional

The paper producing units have to keep large stock of finished paper of various types, varieties, sizes, etc. Similarly wholesale dealers and big consumers like government offices and printing presses have also to keep stock of different types of papers to meet their day-to-day requirements. Paper is liable to be attacked by insects like termites and cockroaches if certain precautions are not taken during the storage. Paper is highly combustible material and it is necessary to guard it against fire risks. Further the quality. of the paper deteriorates with increased humidity and as such it is necessary to maintain surtable environmental conditions. In big godowns, large quantities of paper are moved in and out daily. To facilitate its handling, it is necessary that it should be stocked and placed in certain order. This standard was originally published in 1968 to provide a guideline for minimizing deterioration of paper from all the factors mentioned above and to make the handling of paper safe and easy. In the present revision, an attempt has been made to incorporate the changes in the storage practices evolved during the last two decades to bring it at par with the present day practices.

IS 4645 : -1993,

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR STORAGE .PAPER AND BOARD ( First Revision )
1 SCOPE. 1.1 This standard lays down the recommended practices to be followed for the storage of paper and board.

OF

air per hour and the exhaust fans shall be placed on either walls, a little below the cei!ing or on the tcp of roofing. 3 MODE OF STACKTNG
3.1 Each stack of flat paper or board shall be built in the form of rectangular blocks with alternate layer of bundles in cross direction with a sufficiently broad base to permit stacking up to a suitable height and to be arranged in such a way that an air space is left at its centre. For stacking of paper to a suitable height, it is advised that a makeshift stair be built with bundles of paper conveniently placed to faciliHowever, reels m?y be tate smooth movement. stacked on their sides 5 to 6 tiers high provided sufficient care is taken to prevent damage to the reel sides as well as core while handling.

2 REFERENCES The Indian Standards listed below sary adjuncts to this standard: are neces-

Title IS No. Mild steel and medium tensile 432 ( Part 1 ) : 1982 steel bars ( third revision ) Hard-drawn 432 ( Part 2 ) : 1982 revision ) 2 WAREHOUSE
2.1 The STRUCTURE

steel wire ( third

construction shall be climatically suitable, damp proof and moth proof. The structure shall be strong and well-built. It shall be of cement concrete, brick and mortar or of The soil shall be chemisteel and aluminium. cally treated before laying down the foundaThe walls of the warehouse shall have tions. cement plaster and the floor shall be of cement concrete. The internal walls shall be painted with coal tar or oil paint up to a height of at least 2 metres to make it damp proof and moth proof. The floor shall be treated with water The height of the strucprooti:ig ccmpcunds. ture shall be at least 5 meters and the area depending on space available and the quantity ROCfiilg of the structure of paper to be stored. shall be leak prcof sha!l be constructed from RCC or of asbestos sheets. 2.2 There shall be sutlicient windows opening outwards and on a height cf 2 metres from the floor level. Placing of windows shall be such so as to allow cross and natural ventilation and each window shall be properly secured with reinforced glass panes and wire nettings for prevention of direct sunlight, rain, fire and theft. Besides windows, there shall be ventilators just Electribelow the ceiling for air circulation. cal air circu!ator and exhaust arrangement for removing moisture and dampness if provided, shall be installed in such a way that the entire godown space shall have at least 10 changes of 1

3.2 Each stack shall preferably have paper or board of same variety having the same size and substance and should have proper identification by display of identification cards. For facility of handlmg. movement space shal! be provided The stacks shall be built all round the stacks. up on raised p!atform resting on concrete blocks. prcferab!y precast ( precast RCC slab ) manufactured from vibrated cement ccncrete processed with vacuum and reinforced with mild steel ( see IS 432 : l960 ) and designed for the superimposed load. Alternatively. movable metal trays/stands painted with non-corrosive paint may be used for stacking flat paper. This wil! also facilitate easier movement of paper with the help of the mini hydraulic trucks. The metal trays/stands should be 15 cm high from ground. A space of at least 45 cm shall be maintained bet\s,een the stacks in the same row and from the stacks to the w>.lls to chow clenning and dusting of the godowns and to pass round in case of fire or for inspection. The raised platforms would allow the flocr underneath to be cleaned or swept and spraying of insecticides \vhen needed. 3.2.1 Varieties of paper in small lots may be stored in steel racks suitably built with flat shelves running para!!el to the direction in which reams are inserted and they should stand at least 45 cm apart from the walls.

IS 4645 : 1993

3.3 Where manual handling and carriage of load on head is done, the height of the stack shall not exceed 2 metres. Reams of paper packed and secured with gummed tape can be stacked heavily but reams tied with jute strings shall not be stacked so heavily to avoid string marks ,on the sheets of paper. 3.4 Gangway or lane between two rows of stacks shall be at least 100 cm wide for manual or small hand trolley operation, but it shall be at least 300 cm wide in a godown having a forklift handling equipment. 3.5 While stacking consideration paper, should be given to age, frequency of use and weight of the stocks. Stocks which are in greater demand shall be kept in easily accessible positions and it shall also be ensured that these are drawn in rotation. Piling of fresh deliveries immediately on top of existing stock shall be avoided. 4 GENERAL PRECAUTIONS 4.1 Damage by Insects and Rodents 4.1.1 Termites, rats and cockroaches are formidable enemies of paper storage. To prevent the attack of these, suitable pesticides shall be sprayed, dusted and applied on walls and floor from time to time. Depending on the atmospheric conditions, the frequency of spraying pesticides may vary; but it should be at least once every month. Cellulose in paper attracts moisture from atmosphere which encourages growth of termites and hence all possible care shall be taken to keep the godown dry and clean.

4.1.2 The use of wooden avoided.

racks may be totally

4.1.3 Constant watch is necessary to detect any signs of attack by termites and to maintain clean and hygienic conditions in the godown. 4.2 Care Against Environmental Damage 4.2.1 Special care shall be taken to ensure that paper is not kept stacked in one place for long. For proper aeration, paper stock shall change place at least once every quarter. 4.2.2 Paper loses its printable smooth surface if stored for a long time in any damp godown. It also loses its brightness if stored for a. long time in any store exposed to excessive sunlight and heat. Therefore, suitable care should be taken to guard against these deteriorations. 4.3 Protection Against Fire

4.3.1 Electrical wirings inside the godown shall be laid through metal or plastic conduit pipe which shall be properly earthed and the main fuse and switch shall be installed outside the godown. 4.3.2 Each godown shall be adequately equipped with chemical fire extinguishers which shall be installed on the inside and outside walls of the store house in places within easy reach. Automatic fire alarms should be installed in the godown. Godown may preferably have thermostat controlled water spraying ducts for automatic prevention of fire. Fire fighting authorities should be consulted for protection of a big store against fire and adequate arrangement shall be made.

IS 4645:1993 ANNEX A

( Foreword )
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION Paper and Allied Products ( Excluding Packaging Materials ) Sectional Committee, CHD 15
Chairman
DR A.R.K. Rae Seshashaye

Representing
Paper Mills, Erode

Members
( Alternate to Dr. A. R. K. Rao ) SHRI S. B. BANDOPADHYAYA CHAIRMAN-CUM-MC+. DIRECTOR SHRI C. P. GUJRAL ( Alternate ) CHIEF CHEMIST DY CHIEF CHEMIST( Alternate ) SHRI V. N. CHHABRA SHRI S. J. MAHIMKAR ( Alternate ) SHRI S. K. CHOPRA SHRI P. R. RAY ( Alternate j DR ASHOK RUMAR DR N. J. RAO ( Alternate ) DR M . B. JAUHARI DR A. G. KULKARNI ( Alternate ) DR N. D. MISRA SHRI R. K. SHARMA ( Alternate ) DR S. V. SINGH SHRI G. M. MATHUA ( Alternate ) DR S. P. S. DHAKARAY SHRI P. P. SHARMA ( Alternate ) DR S. K. KAPOOR SHRI Y. V. SOOD ( Alternate ) SHRI B. MOHAN DAS SHRI V. V. LAAD ( Alternate ) SHRI S. R. GHOSH SHRI D.C. SAIKIA ( Alternate ) SH~I S. P. GUPTA SHRJ S. K. MOHATTA ( AZternate ) SHRI V. V. LAXMINARAYANAN SHRI H. K. MANIYAR ( AZterrzate ) SHRI P. V. MEHTA SHR A. K. CH4TERJEB ( AZternate ) SHRI S. MIHTA SHRI D. M. SHRAMA ( AZternate ) SHRI MUKESH GUPTA SHRI P. K. PURI SHRI S. K. MISRA ( Alternate ) SHRI R. RAMASWAMY SHRI R. N . KHURANA ( Alternate j SHRI D. SUBBA~RAO SHRI P. C. MUKUNDAN ( Alternate ) SHRI M. V. C. RAO SHRI V. N. SEHGAL SURI T. R. NEHRA ( Alternate ) __..~ SHRI V .SHIVARAMAKRI&NAN . SHRI C . SIVARAMAN SHRI V BP.I.ASUBRAMANIAN ( AZternate ) p;;ITR;DS~~~~~~~~~ DR R. K. SINGH, DIRECTOR ( Chem )
SHRI K. KALYANASUNDRAM

Govt. of India Stationery Nepa Limited, Nepanagar Central Revenues Con:rol

Office, Calctitta Lab, New Delhi Printers, Ltd. New Delhi

All India Federation Hindustan Institute

of Master

Paper Corporation of Paper Technology,

Calcutta

Saharanpur Assc, Saharanpur

Indian Pulp & Paper Technical Indian Paper Mills Assc, Forest Research Institute

Calcutta & Colleges, Dehra Dun

Ministry Central

of Defence

( DGQA

), New Delhi Institute, Saharanpur

Pulp and Paper

Research

The Myjore Regional Federation Security Directorate

Paper Mills Ltd, Laboratory

Bangalore ( CSIR ), Jorhat Assc of India, Bombay

Research

of Paper Traders Printing General

Press, Hyderabad of Technical Development, New Delhi

India Security Press,

Nashik Road Entreprenures, Bombay New Delhi

National Alliance of Young J. K. Mills, Jaykaypur All India Indian

Small Paper Mills Ass, Paper Mills Assc

Agro

New Delhi

Indian Paper Makers Assc, Calcutta Central Forensic Science Lab, New Delhi Director Director of Printing, Ministry of Urban Dev, New Delhi General of Supplies and Disposals, New Delhi

I T C Ltd, Calcutta Railway Board, New Delhi Director General, BIS ( Ex-officio

Member )

Member Secretary
DR R. K. JHA Deputy Director ( Chem. ), BIS

Standard Mark
The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau ofIndian Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously cheked ~by Details of conditions under BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.
---_--_-

I

I

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under -the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of .sttpdardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters m tne country. Copyrigbt
_

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these -publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS Revision of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodica!ly; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision Users of Indin Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and GStandards Monthly Additions'. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving $he following reference: Dot
: No.

CHD 01.5 ( 0116 ) Amendments Issued Since Publication

Amend No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

-

BUREAU OF INDIAN Headquarters:

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 11002 Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Regional Central Offices :
: Manak Bhavan,

Telegrams Common

: Manaksanstha

to

all

Offices )

Telephone (33101 31 1 331 13 75 37 84 99, 37 86 26, f53 38 43, I 53 23 84 r235 02 16, I 235 15 19, r632 92 95, 1 632 78,91, 37 85 61 37 86 62 53 16 40 235 04 42 235 23 15 632 78 58 632 78 92

9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002

Eastern : l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern Southern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036

: C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) BOMBAY 400093

Branch : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORB. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD, GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.
Printed at Printwell Printers, Allgarh, India

