IS 14205 (Part 1) :1994 IEC Pub 45-1:1991

( Reaffirmed 2002 )

W7dh Wm7
$1'm -mFiTsq
`wm I

RRrf&

Indian Standard
STEAM TURBINE
PART 1 SPECIFICATION

UDC 621:165

@ Ells 1994

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

IN

DIANST

AN

DARDS
MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

ZAFAR

August 1994

Price Group

12

Rotating Machinery Sectional committee, ET 15 CONTENTS 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18, 19, Scopeand object . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...1 Normative references . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...1 Terms and definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...1 Guarantees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . - . . . . . . ...8 Governing(control) Operationand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...9 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...12

maintenance

Components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...16 Foundationsand Feed pumpdrives buildings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...18 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...19 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...20

Turbineauxiliarysystems

Instrumentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...23 Protection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...24 Vibration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..28 Noise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...29

Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...29 Delivery and installation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...30 Design informationto resupplied bythepurchaser . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...30

Design informationto beprovided bythe supplier . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...34 Turbine plant with regenerativefeed governors waterheating . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...35

Annex A--Electronic

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...37

NATIONAL FOREWORD This Indian Standard which is identical with IEC Pub45-1 (1991), issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission (lEC), was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation of the Rotating Machinery Sectional Committee (ET 15) and approval of the Electrotechnical Division Council. The text oflEC deviations. Standard has been approved as suitable forpublication as lndian Standard without

CROSS REFERENCES In this adopted standard, reference appears to certain International Standards for which Indian Standards also exist. The corresponding Indian Standards which are to be substituted intheir place are listed below alongwiththeir degree ofequivalence fortheeditions indicated: InternationalStandard IEC651 :1979 CorrespondingIndian Standard lS9779:1981 Sound Ievelmeters Degreeof Equivalence Technically equivalent

IEC953-1

:199o

Identical 14198 (Part l)'; 1994 Rules for steam turbine thermal acceptancetests:Partl Method A-- Highaccuracyfor largecondensingstearhturbines . . ,.. (Continued on third cover) .,. . .

IS 14205 (Part l) :1994 IEC Pub 45-1:1991

Indian Standard
STEAM TURBINE
PART 1 SPECIFICATION 1 Scope and object

This part of International Standard IEC 45 is applicable primarily to steam turbines driving generators for electrical power services. Some of its provisions are relevant to turbines for other applications. The purpose of this part is to make an intending purchaser aware of options and alternatives which he may wish to consider, and to enable him to state his technical requirements clearty to potential suppliers.

2

Normative

references

The following standards contain provisions which, through reference in this text, constitute provisions of this part. At the time of publication, the editions indicated were valid. All standards are subject to revision, and parties to agreements based on this part are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent editions of the standards indicated below. Members of IEC and ISO maintain registers of currently valid International Standards.

IEC 651:1979, IEC 953-1:1990,

Sound level meters. Ru/es for steam turbine thermal acceptance tests - Part 1: Method A.

IEC 953-2:1990,

Rules for steam turbine thermal acceptance

tests - Part 2: Method B.

ISO 2372: 1974, Mechanical 200 rev/s. Basis for specifying

vibration of machines evaluation standards.

with operating

speeds

from

10 to

ISO 7919-1:1986, Mechanical vibration of non-reciprocating rotating shafts and evaluation - Part 1: General guidelines. 3 Terms and definitions

machines

- Measurements

on

For the purposes of this part, the following terms and definitions apply: 3.1 Turbine type turbine: A turbine whose initial steam is significantly superheated.

superheat

wet-steam turbine: A turbine whose initial steam is saturated to as saturated-steam turbine.)

or nearly so. (Also referred

reheat turbine: A turbine from which the steam is extracted part-way expansion, reheated (one or more times) and readmitted to the turbine.

through

the

1

IS 14205 [Part l) :1994 IEC Pub 45-1:1991 non-reheat turbine: A turbine in which the steam is not reheated. A turbine provided with separate inlets for steam supplied at two

mixed-pressure turbine: or more pressures.

back-pressure turbine: A turbine whose exhaust heat will be used to provide process heat, and whose exhaust is not directly connected to a condenser. The exhaust pressure will normally be above atmospheric pressure. (Also referred to as a non-condensing tucbine.) condenshtg turbine: A turbine whose exhaust is directly connected exhaust pressure will normally be below atmospheric pressure. to a condenser. The

regenerative-cycle turbine: A turbine from which some of the steam is extracted through the expansion in order to heat feed water.

part-way

extract ion turbine: A turbine in which some of the steam is extracted part-way through the expansion in order to provide process steam. if the turbine includes means for controlling the pressure of the extracted steam, it is called a controlled (or automatic) extraction turbine. combined cycle: A combination of boiler, steam turbine and gas turbine, in which the gas turbine exhaust normally contributes to the heat input to the steam cycle.

single-line combined-cycie: A combined-cycle plant in which the steam turbine and gas turbine both drive the same generator. It is not possible to segregate the separate outputs of the steam turbine and the gas turbine; and definitions, such as those of heat rate or output given later in this standard, no longer apply.

NOTE

- The terms in 3.1 may be combined

to define the features

of any particular

unit.

3.2

Methods of initial steam admission (control) valves supply steam uniformly to the admission inlet

full-arc: All of the governing belt of the first stage.

partial-arc: The inlet belt to the first stage is divided into discrete arcs of admission, steam being supplied separately to each arc through, normally, one governing valve; governing valves operate wholly or partially in sequence.

3.3

Conditions are may

terminal conditions: The terminal conditions for a steam turbine or turbine-generator the conditions imposed on the plant at their terminating points of the contract. These typicatly comprise: in!tial and hot reheat steam conditions; cold reheat pressure; final feed water temperature; exhaust pressure; power output; speed; extraction requirements. w

-

IS 14205 (Part l) :1994 IEC Pub 45-1:1991 Speclfled or rated terminal conditions: The conditions at the terminating points of the turbine or turbine-generator contract, with which specified output and/or heat rate shall be stated and/or guaranteed. Note that some nticiear steam generators supply steam at a pressure which increases as ioad reduces, and the turbine design must aliow for ?his.

steam conditions: The conditions which define the thermodynamic state of steam, normaily (static) pressure and temperature or ckyrtess fraction (or quaiity). Steam pressure should aiways be quoted in absoiute units, not as gauge pressure.

inltiai

steam

conditions:

The steam conditions at iniet to the main stop vaives.

maximum steam conditions: red to operate continuously.
NOTE

The highest steam conditions

at which the turbine is requi-

- The highest steam conditions

should

not exceed those permitted

by 6.2a)

and 6.2 b).

induction steam conditions: The steam conditions of any additional turbine at any pressure iower than the initiai pressure. dual steam conditions: The combination priate to a mixed-pressure turbine.

steam entering

the

of initial and induction steam conditions

appro-

reheat steam conditions: The steam conditions (Aiso referred to as hot reheat steam conditions.) cold reheat steam ceding the reheater. conditions: The steam

at the iniet to the reheat

stop vaives.

conditions

at the outiet of the turbine

pre-

extraction steam condltlons: The steam conditions at the extraction turbine, of steam extracted for feed-heating or process purposes.

connections

of the

exhaust

conditions:

The steam conditions at the exhaust connection

from the turbine.

NOTE - Use of the word "design" in respeot of any steam conditions, power output, speed, avoided in the contract doouments. This terminology should oniy be applied to the vaiues calculations such aa the design pressure for a pressure vessel.

etc., should be used in design

3.4

Speeds The speed at which the turbine is specified to operate at its rated output.

rated speed:

maximum continuous continuous service. overspeed trip setting:

speed:

The upper iimit of the operating

speed

of the turbine for

The speed at which the overspeed

trip is set to operate.

3

IS 14205 (Part l) :1994

IEC l%b 45-1: l'ggl --temporary speed rise: The transient increase in Wrbine speed following a load rejection, with the speed governing system in operation. The rated temporary speed rise applies if the rated output is rejected at the rated speed. maximum transient speed: Maximum rotational speed following rejection of maximum capability by disconnecting the generator from the electric system (with auxiliary supplies previously disconnected) and the speed governing (control) system in operation. permanent speed rise: The final steady-state rejection, with normal governor control. increase in turbine speed following a load

maximum speed rise: The transient increase in turbine speed following a load rejection, with the speed governing system inoperative and the overspeed trip operative. The rated maximum speed rise applies if the rated output is rejected at rated speed.

3.5

PDwers
NOTE - All these powers where stated otherwise). or outputs refer to operation of the turbine at rated terminal conditions (except

power: The power supplied by the turbine or its driven machine. The definition should state the position of measurement and arty deductions for losses or auxiliary power. (Also referred to as output or load.) net power at coupling: The power at the turbine coupling, turbine auxiliaries if driven separately. generator excitation output: power. Power at the generator terminals, less the power supplied to

after the deduction

of any external

maximum continuous rating (MCR) (aiectricai generating set): The power output assigned to the turbine-generator by the suppiier, at which the unit may be operated for an uniimited time, not exceeding the specified iife, at the specified terminai conditions. This is the rating which wiil normaiiy carry a guarantee of heat rate. The governing (control) vaives wiii not necessarily be fuiiy open. (Also referred to as rated output, rated power, or rated ioad.) maximum continuous rating (MCR) (other than eiectrlcai generator drives): The power output assigned to the turbine by the suppiier, at `which the unit may be operated for art unlimited time, not exceeding the specified iife, at the specified terminai conditions. This is the rating which wiii normaiiy carry a guarantee of heat rate. The governing (controi) vaives wiii not necessarily be fully open. The power shaii be that deiivered at the turbine coupiing, or the coupling of the driven machine, as may be agreed. (Aiso referred to as rated output, rated power, or rated load.)

maximum capabliity: The power output that the turbine can produce with the governing (controi) valves fuiiy open and at the specified terminai condit~ons. (Also referred to as vaives-wide-open capability.) maximum overioad capability: The maximum power output that the unit can produce with the governing (controi) vaives fuiiy open, and with the terminai conditions specified for overload, e.g. with final feed water heater bypassed, or with increased injtial steam pressure.

4

IS 14205 (Part 1) :1994 IEC Pub 45-1:1991 most economhxi continuous rating (E(X): The output at which the minimum heat rate or steam rate is achieved at the speci?ied terminal conditions,

net electrical power: The generator minus the electrical auxiliary power.

output

(with external

excitation

power

deducted)

electrical auxiliary power: Power taken by turbine and generator auxiliaries not driven by the turbine. This will normally include all power used for control, lubrication, generator cooling and sealing. It may also inc!ude additional auxiliaries such as motor-driven boiler feed pumps. The purchaser and contractor should agree on which additional auxdiaries should be included.

3.6

Steam flow rate and steam rate

initial steam flow rate: The flow rate of steam at initial conditions to the turbine, including any steam supplied to valve stems, gh?mds, or balance pistons, and any steam supplied to auxiliary plant such as boiler feed pump turbines, steam!.$team reheaters, ejectors, etc.

steam

rate: The ratio of initial steam flow rate to power output.

3.7

Heat rates are given in greater detail)

(See afso IEC 953, where the definitions heat rate: The ratio of external of therms! efficiency.

heat input to the cycle to power output. It is the reciprocal

guarantee heat rate: The heat rate upon which the guarantee or offer is based for a stated output with the rated terminal conditions, and for tt~s cycle described in 19.1. Any assumption with regard to extraneous flows, make-up, heat addition or removal, shall be stated. In all cases, the formula used to define the heat rate shall be stated in the contract.

uncorrected test heat rate: The heat rate obtained stated in the contract.

by inserting test results in the formula

fully-corrected heat rate: The heat rate which would have been achieved during the test if the terminal conditions had been as specified, and all ancillary plant outside the supplier's responsibility had performed exactly in accordance with its guarantee.

3.8

Efficiency

thermal efficiency: The reciprocal of heat rate, and therefore defined as the ratio of power output to external heat input to the cycle. If guaranteed, the definition of thermal efficiency shall be stated in the contract.

5

IS 14205 (Part l) :1994 IEC Pub 45-1:1991 3.9 Operational regimes (modes) rating (MCR) or a high fraction of

base-load operation: Operation at maximum continuous this throughout a proionged period.

two-shift operation: Operation at MCR or a high fraction of this for about 16 h or iess out of 24 h per day, the remaining time being shut down.

one-shift operation: Operation at MCR or a high fraction of this for about 8 h out of 24 h per day, the remaining time being shut down. ioad cyciing: basis. Operation alternating between high and iow ieveis of ioad on a reguiar

peak-ioad operation: Operation at high load for short periods, typicaiiy 1 h to 3 h, at times of peak demand. The number of peaks per day is not impiied. The remaining time is spent shut down.
NOTE - Although the above definitions are of a general nature, they may be made more specific by stating whether the turbine is or is not subject to periodid shutdown, which might typically be categorized as a 36 h shutdown or a 48 h shutdown.

3.10

Methods of load variation

constant-pressure operation: Operation in which the initiai steam pressure is maintained sensibiy constant, and where ioad is reduced by graduaiiy ciosing the governing (controi) vaives either in paraiiei (fuii-arc admission) or in sequence (partiai-arc admission).

siiding-pressure operation: Operation in which ioad is changed by variation of the initiai steam pressure; the governing (controi) valves, which operate in paraiiei, aii remaining at their fuiiy-open position. modified siiding-pressure: Operation in which ioad changes in the range from 100 `A to about 90 YO of rated output are achieved by operating aii the governing (controi) vaives in paraiiei, the initiai steam pressure remaining constant; beiow about 90 % of rated output changes of ioad are, where practicable, achieved by variations of the initiai steam pressure, whiie the governing (controi) vaives remain near the position corresponding to 90 YO of rated output.

hybrid operation: Operation of a partiai-arc admission machine in which ioad is reduced by sequential ciosing of the governing (controi) vaives to a vaiue corresponding to the minimum aiiowable number of governing (controi) vaives remaining fuiiy open, the initiai steam pressure remaining constant; further reduction of ioad is achieved by reduction in initiai steam pressure whiie those governing (controi) vaives are open remain at or near their fuiiy-open position. throttie governing: The governing (controi) vaives operate in paraiiei, or nearly so, this being the normai controi mode of a fuii-arc admission turbine in constant-pressure operation. nozzie governing: The governing (controi) vaives ciose in sequence, normai controi mode of a partiai-arc admission turbine in constant-pressure this being operation. the

6

IS 14205 (Part l) :1994 IEC Pub 45-1:1991 , 3.11 Operational life in months or years, measured

calendar age: The total elapsed life of the plant, expressed from first synchronization. running 3.12

hours: The number of hours during which the machine Contro! and protection

has been on load.

governing system: The combination of devices and mechanisms which convert control signals into valve positions in a characteristic manner. This includes the speed governor, the speed control mechanism, the speeder device (speed changer), the unloading systems and any steam valve operating devices.

turbine-generator protection system: The overall system provided to protect the turbinegenerator from faults within itself or elsewhere in the electrical transmission system.

steady-state condition: A condition which has constant with limited random deviations. stable operation: A system is said to be stable following a speed or load disturbance.

mean values

of speed and load

if it achieves

a steady-state

condition

steady-state regulation (speed governing droop): Steady-state speed change expressed as a percentage of rated speed, when the load of an isolated unit is changed between rated load and zero load, with identical setting of the speed governing (control) system, assuming zero dead band. steady-state incremental speed regulation (Incremental speed droop): The rate of change of the steady-state speed with respect to load at a given steady-state speed and load, assuming zero dead band. The value is the slope of the tangent to the steady-state speed/load curve at the load under consideration. dead band of the speed governing (control) system: The total magnitude of the change in steady-state speed (expressed as a percentage of rated speed) within which there is no resultant change in the position of the governing (control) valves. The dead band is a measure of the sensitivity of the system. maximum load inaccuracy or non-linearity: The maximum deviation in load, expressed as a percentage of rated load, of the load-speed curve from the straight line corresponding to the overall speed droop, when operating under defined conditions of control equipment environment (e.g. temperature, humidity) and po'vver supply (e.g. voltage, oil pressure).

governor environmental stability: The change in load, expressed as a percentage of rated load, resulting from a given change of any independent variable other than set point or speed. Such variables are lapsed time, temperature, vibration, barometric pressure, supply voltage and frequency.

7

IS 14205 (Part l) :1994 IEC Pub 45-1:1991 short-term stabil Ry: The change in demanded load, expressed as a percentage of rated load, for any fixed set point and speed aver any period of 30 min for which the ambient conditions are within the defined envelope.

long-term stability: The change in average demanded load, expressed as a percentage of rated load, for fixed set point and speed between two periods of 30 min at an interval of 12 months. For both test periods the ambient conditions should be within the required envelope, but may not necessarily be closely similar.

4 4.'1

Guarantees General

Guarantees of several kinds may be stated in the contract, for example on efficiency, heat (or steam) rate, output, or auxiliary power. Guarantees may also be required for characteristics such as governing (control) system functions, Vibration level or noise.

All guarantees ambiguity.

with their provisions shall he stated and formulated

completely

and without

4.2

Turbine plant thwmai

efficiency or heat rate or steam rate

The guaranteed heat (or steam) rate is giyen on the assumption that the acceptance tests shall be in accordance with the provisions of IEC 953, including the need for agreement of correction procedures. The contract shall state whether IEC 953-1 or IEC 953-2 will be used. The turbine plant thermal efficiency or heat rate or steam rate guarantee may, for example, be confined to one specified load or to their weighted values at a series of loads, in accordance with the terms of the contract.

Where the regenerative feed water heaters are not included in the turbine supplier's contract, the purchaser shall preferably supply with his specificatiofi a diagram of the feed water heating system with sufficient information to enable the heat rate guarantees of the complete set to be formulated. Altemative!y, the supplier shall state in his tender the number and distribution of the feed water heaters, the feed water heater terminal temperature differences, and the pressure differences between the turbine and the heaters, which have been used in formulating the guarantee.

Similar steps shall be taken in wet-steam turbines where either the moisture separators, the reheaters, or both, are not included in the turbine contract.

or

Where regenerative also be applied.

feed water heaters

are included,

the requirements

in clause

19 shall

8

IS 14205 (Part l) :1994 IEC Pub 45-1:1991 The turbine supplier shall be given the opportunity either of adjusting his guarantee in the contract stage, should the performance of plant not in his supply, such as heaters, valves, piping, or pumps, differ from that on which his guarantee was based, or of applying agreed corrections to the thermal acceptance test results.

4.3

Output or steam flow capacity

The turbine shall be demonstrated to provide its rated output, or alternatively its rated steam flow capacity, when the terminal conditions are as specified in the contract. The test shall be carried out in accordance with the provisions of lE~ 953.

4.4

Auxiliary plant power on the power consumption of continuously running auxiliary plant, a shall be agreed. The power consumption of each such item shall be the turbine is at specified output and specified terminal conditions purchaser and the supplier.

If a guarantee is given list of such plant items either measured when or agreed between the

4.5

Steam tables

The steam tables or formulation to be used for the guarantees and the computation of test results shall be consistent with the International Skeleton Tables established at the Sixth International Conference on the Properties of Steam (ICPS) in 1963, and should preferably be based on the 1967 International Formulation Committee (IFC) Formulation for Industrial Use that was approved at the seventh ICPS in 1968.

They shall be agreed contract. 4.6 Tolerances tolerances

upon by the purchaser

and the supplier,

and shall be stated in the

Commercial 4.7 Ageing

are not within the scope of this part.

Any allowance to be made for the effect on the corrected test heat rate, steam rate or thermal efficiency due to lapse of time since first synchronization shall be made with prior agreement between purchaser and supplier, and shall be in accordance with the provisions of IEC 953-2.

5 5.1

Governing Governing

(control) (control) system the speed

5.1.1 The turbine governing (control) system shall be capable of controlling from standstill upwards. This control may be manual or otherwise.

9

IS 14205 (Part l) :1994 IEC Pub 45-1:1991 5.1.2 For turbines driving a generator, be capable of controlling: the turbine governing (control) system shall also

a) speed at all loads between no-load and full load inclusive, the generator is operated isolated;

in a stable manner when when the gen-

b) the energy input to the interconnected system, in a stable manner, erator is operating in parallel with other generators (see 6.1.1). 5.1.3 The governor and its system shall be so constructed will not prevent the turbine from being safely shut down.

that failure of any component

5.1.4 If the governing (control) system is of the electro-hydraulic type, then the electronic equipment additionally shall comply with the requirements specified in annex A. 5.1.5 The governor and the steam valve operating device shall be so designed that the instantaneous loss of any load Up to the maximum obtainable under rated conditions or the abnormal conditions specified in 6.3.1 shall not lead to traiwient overspeed sufficient to cause the turbine to trip. 5.2 Speed and load adjustments when operating at zero load, the speed of the

Unless otherwise stated in the contract, turbine shall be adjustable as follows: when driving a generator, rated speed; when driving a mechanical

within at least the range from 5 O/. below to 5 load, within the range to be agreed.

`/0

above

The minimum time required for speed and load adjusting devices to change the set point from zero to rated load at rated speed shall not normally exceed 50 s, but may be agreed between purchaser and supplier. Means shall be provided for adjustment of the set points.

5.3

Governor

characteristics for mechanical and electro-

The speed droop and deadband characteristics required hydraulic governing systems are as required by table 1.

Numerical values are given for guidance. Special consideration shall be given to the needs of industrial turbines and for turbines for generating purposes where the rated output is more than 5 Y. of the system capacity.

5.4

Valve testing type turbines, and for those turbinps which have a single stop valve or

For industrial

governing valve, or where the governing valves are operated by a single actuator, means shall be provided whereby the emergency and governing valves may be partially stroked to check freedom of movement, without interrupting operation of the turbine.

10

IS 14205 (Part l) :1994 IEC Pub 45-1:1991

For other types of turbine, the control gear shall be provided on-load testing of any of the valves specified in 7.5 in turn.

with means

of full-closure

The supplier shall state the extent of any output restriction involved.

5.5

Overspeed

trip (emergency

governor)

5.5.1 In addition to the speed governor, the turbine and generator shall be protected against excessive overspeed by a separately actuated overspeed protection system which operates the trip. The overspeed trip shall operate normally at a speed of 10 `A in excess of rated speed, with a tolerance of 1 % of rated speed in each direction (i.e. at a speed not more than 11 % nor less than 9 % in excess of rated speed). In exceptional circumstances (for example, in order to conform to the requirements of 5.1.5), and by agreement, it may be necessary to provide a normal trip setting above 10 Y. (with the 1 % tolerance above and below the selected figure). In any case, should the speed governor fail in the event of a sudden load rejection, the overspeed trip should operate at a speed which is sufficiently low to limit the maximum overspeed to a safe value, i.e. to prevent any damage to any part of the turbine or driven machinery; or to any electric motors which may remain connected to the generator following load rejection, and to the equipment which they drive. The overspeed trip settings shall be stated by the supplier in the operating instructions.

5.5.2 For industrial and other small turbines, an overspeed trip system shall be provided, independent of the governor, the operation of which shall close the emergency stop valves and governing valves. 5.5.3 For all other types of turbine, at least two entirely separate overspeed shall be provided, functionally independent of the governor, the operation which shall close all the emergency stop valves and governing valves. trip devices of either of

It shall be possible, while the set is in operation at rated speed, to demonstrate the correct functioning of each of the overspeed trip devices while the set is protected by the second device against overspeed, and without affecting the position of the main steam valves. Means shall be provided so that, when one of the overspeed devices is being tested for correct functioning, it shall not be possible to block or impede the second device from operation if called upon. 5.5.4 For industrial type turbines, reset without stopping the turbine. the overspeed trip system shall be capable of being

5.5.5 For all other types of turbine, the overspeed trip mechanism shall be capable of being reset when the turbine speed has decreased to a speed not lower than the rated speed.

11

IS 14205 (Part 1) :1994 IEC Pub 45-1:1991 Table 1 - Governor droop and deadband ..-- characteristics

I
Turbine

Governor MCR, MW

type Up to 20

Mechanical 20 to 150 Over 150

Eiectrohydraulic Up to 20 20 to 150 Over 150

Overall droop, % Incremental droop, % --Average incremental droop over the range 0,9 MCR to MCW, % a) range (O to 0,9) x MCR { b) rqfe (0,9 to 1,0)
X

Maxinwn = No limit

a)3t08 b) Not greater than 12

MCR

} Minimum = 0,4x overall droop

--..
Deadbsnd. % of rated speed

0,40

" For nozzle governed (controlled) turbines employing partial arc admission, the average the range 90 % to 100 % of the output controlled by any nozzle group governing valve, shall not exceed three times the overall droop.

value of droop over other than the last,

6 6.1

Operation

and maintenance

Normal operation

6.1.1 For normal operation, the characteristics of the turbine shall be such that the turbine and driven machine can be run in parallel with any existing machines provided the latter can run correctly in parallel with each other and possess no abnormal features either individually or collectively.

6.1.2 Start-ups of superheat turbines can be classified to the thermal condition of the turbine at the time. The temperatures to which the various components (such as but it is also usual to classify the starts in terms of the ation; the features which follow give typical correlations,

into various categories according true ruling crfteria are the metal the HP inner casing) have cooled, elapsed time after previous operand may be taken for guidance.

Typical start-up categories

are: 72 h (metal temperatures below

a) cold start, after a shut-down period exceeding approximately 40 ?. of their fully-load values in "C);

b) warm start, after a shut-down period of between 10 h and 72 h (metal temperatures between approximately 40 0/' and 80 % of their full-load values in "C);

c) hot start, after a shut-down period of less than approximately 80 % of their full-load values in "C); d) very hot restart, full-load values).

10 h (metal

temperatures

above

within 1 h after a unit trip (metal

temperatures

at or near their

12

iS 14205 (Part 1) : 1994 IEC Pub 45-1:1991

.~i;:~~~it

[;.; the rais of bad chan,;I? ?equirod for each ciass of significant load cycle, taking into arIy hmi!a?irms iL :l;her parts of the plant, such as the steam generator.
Tha permitted governing may iead rate of .MK? charrgo, (see and the significance (controi), turbine, which stresses of a load as well durirrg in some cycle, are re!ated each to the characload change design, on all cf turbine depend

A">TE teristics

of tire steam

generate{ (controi;

6.1 .4) and to the mock within high the

of turbine'

operation as to the load

during particular can and

!!.@. tb?Ottlt3 these factors,

or nazzle-gove-rring thermal

F:,:~;>id changes reduction in their

of steam life.

tempwaii~re to und~iirably

changes

components,

hence

to excessive

Ir: addition to the major load t:;ydes defined, further minor variations from stable conditions (i.e. increments of less than `1 O `A of MCFl) may be accepted, and these need not be stated. 51.4 The purchaser shall provide, bona fide, the characteristics of the steam generator, ?O include the variation in pr ~~ssure and initial and reheat temperatures with steam flow and shutdown regimes envisaged. ~ate, for a~l of the s~arf categori~s, load cycles

L. 1.5 The purchaser shall :+ocify whether a turbine by-pass system is to be employed and if so s}tali state its dutir%, steam conditions and flow rates, and by whom it shall be supplied, & 1,6 The purchaser `;ources. b. 2 shall ailw specify the parameters of steam available from auxiliary

1.imirs of variation of rat~?d conditions ~f accepting variations from the rated conditions within the

The turbine shall be capable limits stated below: a) Initial pressure initial pressure

~"he average

at the turbine inlet over any 12 months of operation

shall not

exceed the rated pressure. In maintaining this average, the pressure shall not exceed 105 % of the rated pressure. Further accidental swings not exceeding 120 "/. of the rated pressure are permitted, provided that the aggregate duration of such swings :2 mcrnfhs of operation does not exceed 12 h (but see note at the end of 6.2). over any

N(-YTE

- Sei~ definition

of rated

:Iio:+m conctltions

in 3,3

13

IS 14205 (Part l) :1994 IEC Pub 45-1:1991 An increase in initial pressure will normally permit the turbine to generate power in excess of its normal rating, unless action is taken through the control system to restrict the steam flow rate. The generator and associated electrical equipment may be unable to accept such additional output, and undesirable stresses may also be imposed on the turbine; the purchaser shall accordingly provide load-responsive protective means to limit the turbine output under such circumstances.

The purchaser shall provide means to ensure that the turbine exhaust pressure before the reheater cannot exceed 125 `Yo of the specified pressure at this point when the turbine is operating at its rated output. b) Initial, and where applicable, reheat temperature

For rated steam temperatures up to and including 566 `C, the permissible variations are as stated in the succeeding paragraphs. FcIr rated temperatures in excess of 566 "C, the permissible variations shall be the subject of agreement between the purchaser and the supplier. The average steam temperature at any inlet to the turbine over any 12 months of operation shall not exceed the rated temperature. lrI maintaining this average, the temperature shall not normally exceed the rated temperature by more than 8 K. If, exceptionally, the temperature exceeds the rated temperature by more than 8 K, the instantaneous value of the temperature may vary between this figure and a value of 14 K in excess of the rated temperature, provided that the total operating time between these two limits does not exceed 400 h during any 12 months operating period. Operation between limits of 14 K and 28 K in excess of the rated temperature may be permitted, for brief swings of 15 min or less, provided that the total operating time between these two limits does not exceed 80 h during any 12 months operating period. In no case shall the temperature exceed the rated temperature by more than 28 K (see note at the end of 6.2.)

Should steam be supplied to any terminal point on the turbine through two or more parallel pipes, the steam temperature in any of these pipes should not differ from that in any other by more than 17 K, except that during fluctuations not exceeding 15 min in duration within any four-hour period, a temperature difference not exceeding 28 K shall be admissible. The steam temperature in the hottest pipe shall not exceed the limits given in the preceding paragraph.

c) Back-pressure

turbine exhaust pressure shall not exceed the specified exhaust pressure over any

The average exhaust pressure 12 months operating period.

In maintaining this average, the exhaust absolute pressure shall not exceed pressure by more than 10 % nor drop more than 20 % below it. d) Condensing turbine exhaust pressure

the rated

The turbine shall be capable of operating with any variation in exhaust arising from the range of cooling water temperature or flow specified, or alternatively the range of exhaust pressure specified. The supplier shall declare any limitations in these respects.

14

IS 14205 (Part 1) :1994 IEC Pub 45-1:1991

e) Speed
The turbine shall, unless otherwise agreed, be capable of operating duration or on output between 98 % and 101 ?4 of rated speed. Operation at speeds agreement. further removed without restriction on

from rated speed shall not be permitted

except

by

NOTE - The limitations placed on variations of initial pressure and initial temperature in 6.2 a) and 6.2 b) respectively are appropriate for a turbine supplied with steam from a fossil-fired boiler or other hightemperature source.

For a turbine supplied with steam at or near saturated conditions', for example from a nuclear reactor, the limitations to be placed on initial steam conditions shall be agreed between the purchaser, the reactor supplier and the turbine supplier.

6.3

Abnormal

operation shall specify his requirements cooling section isolated; if operation is required in any of the

6.3.1 The purchaser following categories: a) b) c) d)

part of the condenser

some or all of the feed water heaters out of service; overload, and how it shall be achieved; mode which imposes unusual conditions.

any other operating

6.3.2 The supplier shall state any limitations arising from specified abnormal operation. This may include such matters as structural loading or adjustment in output power, and they shall include the permitted duration for such limitations.

6.4

Installation

conditions

6.4.1 The purchaser shall specify whether the installation k indoors or outdoors, with or without a roof, and the conditions in which the turbine unit must operate, including maximum and minimum temperatures, relative humidity, unusual dust problems, precipitation and wind speed (if outdoors), and other related factors. 6.4.2 The purchaser shall provide which the plant is to be designed. 6.5 Maintenance on the anticipated any relevant data concerning seismic conditions for

When requested by the purchaser, the supplier shall give information frequency and scope of maintenance for the turbine plant. 6.6 Operating instructions

The supplier shall provide operating instructions wholly relevant and free from ambiguity, which will enable the plant which he has supplied to be operated safely. The instructions shall include reference to all limitations include the supplier's requirements for steam purity. on plant operation, and may also

15

~a~i~inc. .,: . , pcAesta!s and supports shall be designed to withstand N normal and emergency service loads, rMowaMe piping forces .M?d moments, and movement caused by tem per%tLKo. `l-he casing design shall be such that thermal stresses in service are minimized. ~~~f~ @ adequately ~uppi]~ed to maintain good alignme~t with fhe rotors. ~~~rf)in[j ~~si:~g:,

7.4.1

f?ol~r$ wbcn completed

shall be d}v"mnically balanced

7.4.2 The critical speeds of the combirw:i turbine and driven machine shall be sufficiently removed from the rated speed to avoid any adverse effect on the operation of the unit over the range of spoe:js from 6 % below th~ witt)d speed to that obtained following a full load rejection when the speed rJoverning system ! ails, to operate.

rna~hine is not supplied i)y the turbine manufacturer, agreement shall be Wlwr'e the driven reac!~ed as to the party responsible for ~t?e critical speeds of the combined turbine and driven rrIachirfo

IS 14205 (Part 1) :1994 IEC Pub 45-1:1991

7.4.3 An facturer's calculated overspeed overspeed

overspeed test of each turbine rotor shall be carried out, preferably at the manuworks. The overspeed test shall be at a speed exceeding by 2 % the maximum overspeed that would occur if the speed governor failed and if the maximum were limited by the action of the overspeed trip device only. The duration of the test shall not exceed 10 mini and it shall only be performed once.

When the normal setting of the overspeed trip is at 10 % excess speed, the overspeed shall not be in excess of 20 % above rated speed,

test

7.4.4 Rotors and their couplings (and gearing where used) shall be designed to withstand those conditions imposed by generator short-circuits, or by other specified disturbances within the electrical system. The purchaser turbo-generator shall provide protection devices to reduce of any electrical fault on the system. or eliminate the effect on the

7.5

Valves

The turbine shall be provided with an appropriate number of governing (control) valves. These shall be suitable for controlling the initial steam SUpply to the turbine over the entire speed and load range. In addition, suitable emergency stop valve(s) shall be provided in series with these governing valves. The valves which first receive steam shall each be provided with a steam strainer located as closely as practicable, upstream of the valve. For small industrial type turbines, the emergency and governing (control) functions may be combined into a single valve. On those turbines which operate with a reheat steam cycle, an appropriate number of reheat governing (control) valves shall be provided. Suitable reheat emergency stop valves shall be provided in series with these governing (control) valves. The valves which receive steam first from the reheater shall each be provided with a steam strainer located as closely as practicable upstream, except where: " a) the first valve is of the swinging flap type (in which case provided between the first and second valves), or b) 7.6 a) reheat is carried out in a steam/steam Main bearings and housings Journal bearings shall be transversely split with renewable liners, pads or shells. reheater.

the strainer

shall be

b) Thrust bearings shall be designed to accommodate thrust in either axial direction. The thrust bearing shall have provision for adjustment of rotor axial position during maintenance. c) It shall be practicable to renew all the bearings without dismantling bearings shall be designed for pressure any cylinder. and to

d) Journal and thrust ensure proper drainage.

lubrication

17

IS 14205 (Part l) :1994 IEC Pub 45-1:1991 e) Bearing housings shall provide protection against the ingress of moisture or foreign matter and the leakage of lubricant. f) To minimize the effects of electrical currents generated by electrostatic friction effects, the shafts of the turbine and the driven machine shall be earthed (grounded). In cases where these machines are supplied by separate suppliers, the purchaser and supplier shall agree to the location of the shaft earthing points. For the smaller industrial turbines, earthing is not usually necessary.

7.7

Cy/inder and interstate

g/ands materials to

Glands at the ends of the rotors and between stages shall be of suitable minimize distortion or growth at the operating temperature.

The construction of the glands shall be such as to minimize event of rubbing while in operation. 7.8 Thermal insulation

damage

to the rotor in the

When specified, the turbine shall be insulated. The purchaser shall state the required outer surface temperature of the insulation material (not normally exceeding the ambient temperature by more than 40 K, but in accordance with national standards). The insulation shall be so designed that turbine maintenance is facilitated. The purchaser shall state any limitation on insulation materials.

8

Foundations

and buildings

The turbine supplier shall provide the purchaser with the relevant information (static and dynamic loads, outline drawings, seating details, forces and moments, permissible foundation deflections, thermal expansions, etc.) at the interface between his own design responsibility and that of the purchaser or his foundation designer, to enable design and construction of the total support system to proceed. The turbine suppiier shaii ensure that the defections, naturai frequencies of vibration, and other properties of parts of the foundation designed or suppiied by him wili have no adverse effect on the operation of the plant over the range of speeds specified in 5.2 and 5.3. Detaiis of ioads transmitted to the turbine, when in service and when not in service, including aii piping forces and moments, shali be agreed with the turbine suppiier.

Uniess agreed otherwise, the purchaser shaii provide a suitabie foundation biock, on which the turbine suppiier shali be given the opportunity to comment at the design stage. The naturai frequencies of vibration of the foundation should not correspond to any iow muitipie of the operating speed of the unit.

18

IS 14205 (Part l) :1994 IEC Pub 45-1:1991 Sufficient space and necessary openings in the foundations and building structure shall be provided for installation of the equipment. Suitable openings shall be provided in the building to admit the equipment. The purchaser shall provide sufficient space round the equipment for servicing, including space for removing the rotors and setting down the upper halves of the turbine casings. Where ancillary equipment connected to the turbine (for example, moisture separators and reheaters) is mounted on a separate foundation supplied by others, the turbine supplier shall specify the permissible movement relative to the turbine foundation.

9 9.1

Feed pump drives Information required

Feed pumps may be driven by a variety of means, which can differ in their thermodynamic infiuence on the cycle. The turbine supplier will usuaiiy require information, as iisted beiow, before design detaiis or the determination of heat rate can be finaiized.

9.1.1

Drive by auxiliary turbine

Where the pump is driven by an auxilia~ turbine using steam extracted from the main turbine, or where exhaust steam from the auxiiiary turbine discharges into the main turbine or its system: when the main turbine supplier suppiies the feed pump and its driving turbine, the i) purchaser shaii, at an early stage, provide the turbine suppiier with information showing the required feed pump generated head as a function of feed water fiow rate; ii) when the main turbine suppiier supplies the separate turbine driving the feed pump, but does not supply the pump, the purchaser shali, at an early stage, provide the turbine suppiier with information showing the variation of the required pump input power and speed and feed pump generated head, as functions of feed water fiow rate;

iii) when the main turbine suppiier suppiies neither the separate turbine driving the feed pump, nor the pump, the purchaser shall, at an eariy stage, provide to the main turbine suppiier sufficient information to enabie the feed water enthalpy rise across the pump and the steam fiow to the separate turbine to be derived, over the range of feed water fiow rate. in i) and ii) above, this information shall cover the range from the minimum ioad on the main turbine at which the turbine-driven feed pump is to be independentiy capable ot meeting the feed flow requirements, up to the maximum feed water fiow rate for which the pump and its driver are to be designed.

An additional margin of power and speed, above that required for the maximum power rating, shali be aiiowed before fixing the capability of the auxiliary turbine; the amount of this margin shall be agreed between the purchaser and the main turbine supplier.

19

IS 14205 (Part l): 1994 IEC Pub 45-1:1991 If the main turbine supplier does not supply inter-connecting piping conveying steam from the supply point on the main turbine, or from the main steam pipes (or from other sources), to the feed pump turbine, the purchaser shall state to the main turbine supplier the drops in steam pressure and temperature to be allowed in this piping.

9.1.2

Drive by electric motor through a

Where the pump is driven by an electric motor, sometimes directly, sometimes speed-changing gear, and sometimes through an interposed hydraulic coupling:

i) when the turbine supplier supplies the whole of this equipment, the purchaser shall, at an early stage, provide the turbine supplier with information showing the required feed pump head against feed water flow rate; ii) when the turbine supplier supplies the driving equipment but not the pump, the purchaser shall, at an early stage, provide the turbine supplier with information showing the required pump power (measured at the pump inlet coupling) and feed pump generated head as functions of feed water flow rate and also the pump maximum speed; iii) when the turbine supplier does not supply ` .Ie feed pump, motor, speed-changing gear, or hydraulic coupling, the purchaser shall, at an early stage, provide the turbine supplier with information showing the enthalpy rise in the feed water as a function of feed water flow rate.

9.1.3

Margins on pump duty

In all instances, the specified feed pump flow rate shall include attemperation water requirements for superheater, reheater, and turbine by-pass, where these are provided.

9.2

Genera/

9.2.1 Where the feed pump is driven by an auxiliary turbine, the auxiliary turbine supplier and the pump supplier shall agree all the relevant interface information, including the direction of rotation. Consideration shall be given to the supply arrangements for lubricating oil, control fluid, sealing water to the feed pump and gland sealing steam to its driving turbine, bearing in mind that these may need to be separate from those of the main turbine. The requirement for fitting turning gear shall be agreed between the auxiliary turbine and feed pump suppliers.

9.2.2 Consideration shall be given reverse rotation of the feed pump.

to tiny

requirement

for

preventing

or restricting

10 10.1

Turbine

auxiliary oil

systems

Lubricating

The turbine shall have a main oil pump which shall be driven mechanically itself or (by agreement) by an electric motor.

by the turbine

20

IS 14205 (Part l) :1994 IEC Pub 45-1:1991

An auxiliary oil pump, driven from a source entirely separate from the main oil pump, shall be provided to operate when starting up or shutting down the turbine, and to come into operation automatically as a replacement to the main pump in the event of low oil pressure, to enable the turbine to remain in service. Provision shall be made to on-load test the auto-start of all back-up lubricating oil pumps by simulating low oil pressure.

An emergency standby pump, preferably d.c. motor driven, of adequate size to permit a safe run-down of the set, shall be provided to start automatically in the event of the failure of an auxiliary oil pump or of its electrical supply; alternatively, by agreement, a gravity oil tank may be provided for this purpose.

A jacking oil system shall be provided to supply high pressure oil to each turbine generator bearing, if this is necessary, to lift the rotors to reduce starling torque bearing wear when barring (turning) or during starting.

and and

Multiple oil coolers and filters shall be provided of sufficient capacity so that any one oil cooler or filter can be taken out of service with the set in operation. The inlet and outlet changeover valves to the coolers or filters shall be arranged so that they are not capable of shutting off the flow of oil to the bearings while the set is in operation. For industrial type turbines, single oil coolers and filters may be provided.

All pipes, valves, cooler bodies and filter bodies shall be of steel or other appropriatemateria[. Brittle materials such as cast grey iron are not suitable. Pipe joints shall be welded wherever practicable. Precautions shall be taken to minimize internal corrosion in oil tanks and drain pipes.

The supplier shall specify the properties of the lubricating oil to be used. When initial flushing is not carried out by the supplier, the oil used shall be to his approval.

The design of the lubricating system shall be such that during normal operation, the operating temperature of the oil at each main bearing drain will not, in general, exceed 75 `C. There are applications on small turbines where this temperature may be increased to 85 "C. Precautions shall be taken against fire caused by leakage of lubricating oil.

10.2

Contro/ f/uid

The fluid used in the control system and for operation of Ure steam valves may be either oil from the lubricating system, or fluid from an entirely separate system. The pumps supplying the separate control fluid shall be duplicated, with automatic changeover on failure of one pump. Arrangements shall be made, if necessary, to sustain during the starthg period of the standby pump. the pressure of the control fluid

21

IS 14205 (Part 1) :1994 IEC Pub 45-1:1991 When a fluid other than oil from the Iubncating system is used, the fluid shall be to the supplier's approval. The same requirements regarding materials, pipe construction and the duplication of coolers and filters as in 10.1 shall apply unless othewise agreed.

10.3

Sealing system for rotor and va/ve glands

The sealing system at the ends of the rotors and valve glands shall, unless otherwise agreed, be so arranged, for example by the provision of a gland steam condenser, that no steam issues into the turbine hall. Where appropriate, the control of sealing steam for the glands shall be fully automatic under all modes of operation. Relief valves shall be fitted to the steam pipework as necessary. When auxiliary steam is required, such as for start-up, the supplier shall state his requirements for the steam conditions and quantity.

10.4

Drains

Each turbine casing, steam chest, or other vessel, and all pipes conveying steam, including bled steam pipes to feed water heaters, shall be adequately drained at all points where water may accumulate.

Drainage shall normally be to a suitable drains vessel, and the drain pipes shall incorporate suitable valves, traps, or orifice plates before discharge into the drains vessel.

10.5

Vents fan and lubricating system

Veht piping shall be provided from the gland steam exhauster exhauster fan(s) to a specified outdoor location, or as agreed.

10.6

Turning gear

Turning gear (sometimes known as barring gear) shall be provided to rotate the rotor system slowly (continuously or discontinuously), if necessary, to limit thermal distortion of the rotor(s) when not turning under steam. Interlocks shall be provided, if necessary, to ensure that turning cannot commence until an adequate SUpply of lubricating oil is available and the drive is fully engaged. The turning gear shall disengage automatically when the turbine speed increases above the turning gear speed.

10.7

Piping

All piping for steam, water, oil, or air services shall preferably be in steel complying with the requirements of the appropriate international or national standard. The standards should be stated in the contract. Welded joints shall be used wherever practicable. Other materials ment between the purchaser and the turbine supplier. may be used by agree-

The turbine supplier shall state the magnitude and direction of application of the pipework forces and moments, applied at the agreed major terminating points of his equipment, which are acceptable to his plant. 22

IS 14205 (Part l) :1994 IEC Pub 45-1 `: 1991

11 11.1

instrumentation General to enable the turbine to be reliably

Such instruments shall be provided as are necessary and efficiently operated and supervised.

The scope of instrumentation that is economically justified will depend on the rating of the turbine and the conditions under which it is to operate. The following requirements apply to large turbines. 11.2 Standard instruments primary measuring elements for at least the following shall be provided:

Where applicable,

a)

Pressures initial and reheat steam stop valves and strainers; extraction(s), extractions exhausts lubricating inlets immediately upstream of the initial and reheat

for extraction turbines; to feed water heaters;

from each cylinder; oil supply to bearings;

fluid supply to the control system.

b)

Temperatures initial and reheat steam; steam at exhaust from high pressure and intermediate extractions to feed water heaters; pressure cylinders;

oil at cooler outlet; oil in the bearing drains, or bearing metal. c) Levels 11.3 level of oil in main lubricating oil tank; level of fluid in control fluid tank. equipment the following shall be provided:

Supervisory

Equipment a)

for measuring

Speed.

rotational speed of the turbine; (frequently this instrument is not included in

b) Load electrical output of the generator the turbine contract);

c) Rotor and pedestal "rnovemenc axial clifferential movement of selected rotors, each relative to its casing or pedestal, measured at the end remote from the thrtist bearing. Axial movement of pedestals relative to the foundation; and the phase angle

d) Vibration: vibration of pedestals or rotors. Rotor eccentricity, of the vibration, may also be required:

IS 14205 (Part 1) :1994 IEC Pub 45-1:1991 e) hfeta/ temperatures: provision shall be made for the measurement of all metal temperatures or temperature differences considered necessary for the safe operation of the turbine, or for enabling stresses in turbine casing walls or other components to be assessed, to provide information on safe rates of run-up or load change; f) Va/ve position: positions of all initial and reheat steam valves, unless otherwise agreed, except that only fully-open or fully-closed indication is required for reheat emergency valves; g) For saturated steam turbines, which incorporate moisture separators and reheaters; reheating steam flow (or reheater drains flow), and levels in separator and reheater drain tanks; h) In addition, equipment necessary listed in clause 12 shall be provided. to provide the alarm and trip initiating signals

11.4

Additions/

instruments elements may be specified by the purchaser, or recommen-

Additional primary measuring ded by the supplier.

For large turbine plant the instrumentation cooling water temperature; condenser pressures pressure;

may typically include:

and liquid levels in various vessels; at inlet and outlet of feed water heaters and other

steam and water temperatures heat exchangers; inlet and outlet pressures condensate,

of feed pumps;

feed water and initial steam flow rates.

NOTE - Primary measuringelements for such measurementsmay be suppliedby others.

1 t.5

Test measuring

points

For the purpose of carrying out performance tests for heat rate or other reasons, measuring points shall be provided for all test measurerhents and observations. These measuring points shall be additional to those required for the normal operation and control of the turbine, and shall be agreed between supplier and purchaser.'

Agreement measuring

shall be reached upon responsibility for, and provision of, those points located at positions outside the contractual scope of supply.

required

12 12.1

Protection General depends upon the rating of The following requirements

The extent of protection which can be economically justified the turbine and the conditions under which it has to opeiate. apply to large turbines.

24

IS 14205 (Part l) :1994 iEc Pub 45-1:1991

12.2.1 A separate and indlspendent turbine protection system shall be provided. This system shall be so designed that in the event of a trip signal occurring, its operation shai} ~esult in !he immediate closure of all steam valves (i.e. emergency stop valveS, governing fcnntml) valves, reheat emergency valves, and reheat governing (control) valves), and in return (check) valves (whe,re these are titted) in the cold tile pav~g)r closing of the reheat steam pipes, in the bled steam lines to the feed water heaters, and in other systems normaliy supplied with steam from the turbine; thereby enabling the turbine to run down safely in the event of an incident which could othenvise cause damage to the turbine or it~ auxiliary equipment.
r-mm

12.2.2 Ttte protection equipment shall be designed on a fail-safe principle, such that loss d control fluid pressure shall cause immediate closure of the emergency stop valves and lhe governing (con:.ol) valves 12.2.3 Removal of the condition that has initiated the operation of the trip system shall not cause the trip gear to rtw@ automatically, nor the steam valves to re-open. The trip system shaii be arranged so that it can be reset only by the c?perator. Until the trip system has been reset, it shall be impassible to re-open any of the steam valves.

12 .2,4 !isl O?

The

trip

initiating :;y ;:.tc. c) :~! overspeed

system shall be based on, but not necessarily confined to, the following devices, opwation of any one of which shall cause operation of the trip trip (see 5.ti);

c)

emergency

stop push-button,

locally and remotely operated;

NOTE alarms,

- Increase which may

in ccrrrdensef pressure above be set at Mwent pressures.

a set value shall be arranged Further increase in condenser

to actuate one (or more) pressure shall result in a

ufli! tfk,.

I+) f) g)
h)

h?w steam inlet pressvre !OW lubricating

trip (where required);

oil pressure trip;

loss of speed governor trip (for electric governors);
trips initiated

generator
i)

by the generator or its auxiliary statar winding cooling water; Uip automatically

systems;

for

example

loss

of

::iectrical[y-operated

initiated by electrical

fault operation.

12.3

Protection

system - a!arnw specified) be tripped for:

~~,iarms shall be raised, but tlm turbine shall not (unless otherwise

a) b) c) d}

excessive

thrust bearing wear; at the low pressure (oil or metal); cylinder exhaust;

high steam temperature
excessive

bearing temperature vibration.

excessive

25

IS

14205

(Part

1) :1994

IEC Pub 45-1:1991 12.4 Protection system - other devices in the contract, initiate tripping

Other protection devices, which shall not, unless specified of the turbine shall be provided. These include: 12.4.1 Low-pressure casing and condenser pressurization

The low pressure cylinders and the condenser shall be protected against excessive pressure by valves or relief diaphragms of sufficient size to keep the pressure within permitted limits. 12.4.2 Water ingress from the teed water heating system

Protection against water entering the turbine from the feed water heating plant shall be specified by the purchaser to the supplier of the feed water heating plant. The main features of such protection shall include at least: a) Each bled steam line from the turbine shall be arranged so that all the heater surface must be flooded before any water can flow to the turbine. The heaters should preferably be located lower than the turbine. b) For every feed water heater, there shall be two independent means of automatically preventing water from entering the turbine from the extraction system; the system shall be designed so that no single failure of equipment results in water entering the turbine.

In generaI, these independent 2) and either 1) i) or 1) ii), or 3) and either 1) i) or 1) ii), or 2) and 3). 1) i) ii)

means can be a combination either of the following items:

Provision of gravity drainage Provision of an automatic the heater.

from the heater, with open manometdc drainage

seal, or from

alternative

route, of large capacity,

NOTE - 1) i) is to be preferred

to 1) ii), if conditions permit its use.

2) Provision of automatic isolating valves in the bled steam lines between turbine and the feed water heater, and in drain lines cascading into the heater. 3) Provision of automatic isolating valves for all sources of feed water heater. This will normally require an automatic by-pass around the heater.
NOTE - The time of operation of each of the automatic isolating valves required

the

to the

by 2) and 3) above,

from receipt of closing signal to the fully closed shell equivalent to the larger of: a)

position should be such that for water flows into the

water flowing from two ruptured tubes (from tube ends), or

b) water flow equivalent to 10 % of the heater tube side flow at MCR, the valve should be closed before the water has filled the usable storage volume between the high level alarm (which initiates the valve closure) and the automatic isolating valve.

Items 1) ii), 2) and 3) shall normally be initiated by high water heater shell, with suitable precautions to ensure reliable operation.

level sensors

in the

26

IS 14205 (Part l) :1994 IEC Pub45-1 :1991

c) Non-return (check) valves, normally provided in extraction tines to timit speed rise on loss of load (see 19.3), should be located as closely as practicable to the turbine extraction points. Isolating vaives and power-closed non-return valves, where provided, for testing (by closing) while the plant is in operation. shall be arranged

Power-assisted and free-swinging non-return freedom while the plant is in operation.

valves shall be arranged

for checking for

d) Where more than one bank of heaters is supplied from a single bled steam line, then either each heater shall have its own valves, or, if the valves are in the common line, water from a flooding heater shall flow into the associated heater and completely flood it before it is possible for water to flood the common bled steam pipe up to the turbine. e) Each heater shall be provided with high water level detector switches, in duplicate and each arranged for testing for correct operation while the plant is in operation, Operation of such switches shall initiate operation of the protective devices.

12.4.3

Moisture separator

and reheater

overpressure

The vessels containing the moisture separators and reheaters shall be protected against over-pressurization by suitable relief valves, bursting diaphragms, or other agreed means.

12.4.4

Low steam inlet pressure

unloader

(if required)

Reduction in steam inlet pressure to the turbine below a set value shall be arranged to close the governing valves and so to reduce the turbine load progressively down to an agreed low value. Restoration of steam inlet pressure shall not result automatically in reopening of the governing valves, unless otherwise agreed.

Further reduction in steam inlet pressure shall result in a turbine trip (see 12.2.4).

- Where it is intended that the turbine shoukt operate at partial load, at controlled, reduoed, initial steam pressure, the protective devices of the low steam inlet pressure unloader and the low steam inlet pressure trip (see 12.2.4) should be ao arranged as to continue to proteot the turbhe against a rapid decreaae in inlet steam pressure, but automatic reopening of governing valves during normal operation is permitted.

NOTE

12.4.5

Unwanted

steam to the exhaust of the high pressure turbine

Protection against unwanted steam admission is necessary if a turbine by-pass is used. This is nwrnally achieved

by the provision of at least one non-return

(check) valve.

27

;?,4iS ~tie pe;lk..tl~-peak & the relational

displacement in %

in PHI, V is the r.rn.s. vibration velocity in mmls and f

frequency

`f-he pmmwrecf criterion displacement. ?3,~

for the description

of shaft

vibration

is the peak-to-peak

shaft

Yioration measured

at the bearing housing

Va!ws of vibration voiocity, measured in a radial direction at the bearing housing, of 2,!3 rnrms or better, are usually obtainabk for turbines in good balance, running under steady conditions at their specified operating speeds, but it may be possible for a turbine to continue in satisfactory operation at higher values.

Peak-m peak displacements correspondii~f] to this figure (which is in accord with Quality Band A of Class \V in 1~0 2372) are given in table 2.

Tiib!e 2

Rated turbine speed

Peek-t~ak displacement measured at thebearing housing
".-- @m) 75 60

(Hz)
16,67 26

30 60 60 100 200

42 25 21

I
speeds ca~i) be derived from ~, 1 250 (in the units

12 6

N{;,?

E

The

displacements

at other

the relationship:

speed

x dispiacemen!

quoted),

IS 14205 (Part l) :1994 IEC Pub 45-1:1991 13.3 Vibration measured at the shaft

Shaft vibration is usually measured relative to the bearing housing; in any case, the vibration measurements shall be carried out in accordance with ISO 7919-1. Vibration measured on the shaft is likely to be considerably greater (by a factor of 2 or more) that that measured at the bearing housing, depending on the nodal pattern of the shaft, the axial position of the pick-up, the bearing design and other factors.

14 14.1

Noise Noise emitted by the individual plant components

The noise of machinery is measured on an imaginary surface around the machine, at 1 m from the machine surface and at a height of 1,2 m above the level of the floor, walkway, or other position provided for personnel access. The surface noise level is defined as the maximum lA'-weighted vel, measured on the slow response of a sound level meter type 1, with the microphone positioned as described above. r.m.s. sound pressure lecomplying with IEC 651,

14.2

Noise level in the vicinity of the turbine unit

The noise level in the vicinity of the steam turbine unit depends upon many factors such as the noise power generated by the various turbine components, the noise power generated by components of other plant in the station, the relative location of the turbine and the "othe.r,,plant components, and the acoustics of the surrounding area and building, including the arnbunt of sound-attenuating material present.

When all of the above factors are within the turbine supplier's scope, the purchaser may state to the turbine supplier his requirements regarding the permissible noise level in the vicinity of the turbine. When the factors are not all within the turbine supplier's scope, it may be necessary for the purchaser, the turbine supplier, and those responsible for the other factors, to cooperate to meet the purchaser's requirements. Suppliers of other components or plant in the vicinity of the turbine shall themselves be responsible for the noise it produces.

If these requirements are not met by the basic design of plant, they may be achieved the supply of suitable acoustic screens or enclosures.

by

15 15.1

Tests General required by this pa~ shall be carried out in accordance with the stated

All the tests provisions.

Any further tests required by the purchaser, and the extent of any witnessing purchaser or his representative, shall be stated in the purchaser's specification.

by the

29

IS 14205 (Part 1) :1994 IEC Pub 45-1:1991 15.2 Hydraulic tests

As part of the Quality Assurance Program, all parts subjected in normal service to a pressure above atmospheric shall be tested hydraulically so that the pressure loads shall be at least 50 % in excess of the maximum that could occur at any load with rated terminal conditions (as defined in 3.3). The hydraulic test may, by agreement, be omitted where, in service, leakage would not be to atmosphere. The hydraulic test may also be omitted by agreement when the manufacturer can, by other means, satisfy the purchaser of the integrity and suitability of the component.

15.3

Performance

tests speci-

The extent of any performance tests required shall be stated in the purchaser's fication, together with the extent of the supplier's expected participation. Thermal acceptance tests shall be carried out in accordance with IEC 953-1

or IEC 953-2.

Speed and load governing

tests shall be carried out in accordance

with IEC 1064.

15.4

Test resu/ts and data

The supplier shall make available to the purchaser such certificates or reports as may be necessary to confirm that the objectives of all tests specified in the contraot have been achieved.

16 16.1

Delivery

and installation to site and temporary protection

Transport

Before shipping from the works, all turbine components shall be suitably protected against corrosion, stress corrosion and handling damage during transport to site and any storage period before installation. Storage conditions and duration shall be specified and agreed between the purchaser and the supplier.

16.2

Erection and commissioning

The erection and commissioning procedures shall be in accordance with recommendations and instructions issued by the supplier either on drawings or by other means. It is recommended that where erection and commissioning do not form part of the contract, the purchaser should, as a minimum, use the services of the supplier's supervisor.

17 17.1

Design

information

to be suppiied

by the purchaser

General

The purchaser wiii normaiiy provide a detaiied specification of his requirements to the suppiier. it is recommended that the requirements `or other reievant information inciude at ieast those iisted beiow.

30

IS

14205

(Part

l)

:1994

[EC Pub 45-1:1991

17.2 a)

Characteristics

of the turbine and its accessories terminals guarantee or at the turbine coupling. purposes, when required in

Rated output as defined in 3.5 at generator

b) Weighting factors for thermal performance pursuance of the requirements of 4.2. c) Speed of rotation, or system frequency,

and operational

speed range required.

d) e) f) 17.3

The total required running hours. Details of turbine location and any physical limitations. Any seismic conditions to be taken into account. Steam ar?d water conditions

a) Rated steam conditions at the inlet to each set of turbine stop valves at the rated output and maximum steam conditions. b) Steam pressure at each exhaust flange of the steam turbine at the rated output.

NOTE - This includes the pressure at the turbine exhaust flange when the turbine supplier does not supply the condenser. When the turbine supplier also supplies the condenser, the information required is as in 17.4.

c) For a fossil-fired plant, if the turbine is arranged for reheating and the reheater is not supplied by the turbine supplier: the cold reheat pressure(s); the pressure drop(s) in the reheater(s), the set pressure(s) and

between

cylinders,

for safety valves on reheat system(s). with an external water separator, not supplied by the

d) If the turbine turbine supplier: -

is provided

the pressure drop in the steam; the efficiency the destination of water separation; of the separator drains; (see 12.4.3), if they are steam/steam

the set pressure of the safety valves or other devices not within the turbine supplier's scope. If a water separator is followed by either single-stage reheaters, not supplied by the turbine supplier: the pressure drop in the reheated the pressure drop in the reheating the terminal temperature the destination appropriate, difference steam; steam pipe(s); of each reheater

or multi-stage

stage;

of the reheater

drains. shall be defined as a function of steam flow

Where rate. e)

these parameters

If water is injected for temperature -

control of either initial or reheat steam:

the source of supply, the rate of flow and the enthalpy of the water,

31

IS 14205 (Part l) :1994 IEC Pub45-1 :1991 f) g) If make-up water is to be supplied to the condenser quantity and temperature of the water. for heating or other auxiliary purposes: for purging and boiler losses:

If steam is required to be extracted

the flow rates and pressures required, the destination and enthalpies of the drains, whether the extraction pressure is to be controlled, and whether account is to be taken of such extractions in the guarantees. h) For low pressure steam supplied to a mixed-pressure pressure; mean temperature steam flow rate; method of control of steam input; maximum power output required with high-pressure
may require that the high-pressure

steam turbine:

(or dryness fraction) and range;

steam only.

NOTE - The supplier will specify.

steam flow does not fall below a value which he

i) Availability and conditions sealing at start-up. j) The chemical characteristics

of steam from auxiliary of the steam supply.

sources,

for example

for gland

k) For boiler feed pumps, the purchaser should provide the information listed in clause' 9, together with ail other information necessary for the thermodynamic and mechanical integration of the plant. Where possible, the information should provide details of the variation of these parameters with feed water rate or turbine output. NOTE - In items c), d), e) and g) above, some exchange

of information will be required between the purchaser and the supplier, since the final design of equipment not in the supplier's scope will be affected by the pressure distribution in the final turbine design.

17.4

Conditions for condensers extent of supply)

and coo/ers (where this equipment

is in the supplier's surface material and the average tem-

a) Source of supply and quality of cooling medium, or heat exchange to be used, and cleanliness factor to be used in the design. b) Maximum and minimum temperatures temperature over the annual period. c) Any limitation perature rise. on quantity of cooling of the cooling medium medium,

available,

or on permissible

d) Maximum and minimum pressures pressure drop between them. t 7.5 a) Applications: Particulars installation

at terminal

points of cooling water system and

and mode of operation

of the driven machine (if not supplied by the turbine supplier):

name of manufacturer; complete dimensions of outline, interface, and holding-down arrangements;

full statement torques absorbed, the turbine;

of relevant characteristics, including and any axial thrust or journal bearing 32

all normal or abnormal loads to be absorbed by

IS 14205 (Part l) :1994 IEC Pub 45-1:1991 requirements for auxiliary services such as lubricating oil and cooling water; the speed of the output shaft; or

if the machine is driven through a gearbox,

any requirements regarding balancing, alignment, provision for expansion, other matters which can influence satisfactory operation of the assembled unit.
NOTE - The direction of rotation shall be agreed with the turbine supplier.

b) The nature of the load to be carried by the turbine, mode of operation. c) The number, nature, rise to abnormal torques. and intensity of disturbances

and the expected

pattern and

of the electrical

system

giving

The manufacturer of the generator, if not the same as the supplier of the turbine, shall provide to the turbine supplier details of the abnormal torques thereby imposed on the turbine; determination of these abnormal torques may require collaboration between the generator and turbine manufacturers. d) The relevant factors affecting the operation 1) operational 2) 3) 4) duty (see 6.1 .3); (see 3.10); of the turbine for example:

adoption of sliding pressure maximum temporary

required rate of load pick-up (see 6.1.3 c)); abnormal operating conditions (see 6.3.1); (see 6. 1.4);

5) characteristics

of the steam generator

6) capacity of turbine by-pass system, if utilised (see 6.1 .5). e) The relevant factors affecting the economic optimization of the plant. These include the purchaser's evaluation figures to enable optimization of the turbine itself and of its condensing plant to be carried out. For fixed initial steam conditions and steam flow rate, output can be increased and heat rate reduced, by judicious selection of various turbine plant parameters, including those relating to the condenser and its cooling water system.

The purchaser -

should state the figures he will use in his evaluation in guaranteed

for: heat rate; power not already

the benefit to him and one unit improvement

the cost to him of one additional kiiowatt of auxiliary electrical allowed for in the heat rate guarantee; the incremental make-up water; -

cost to him of one unit of volumetric flow of cooling water and of or dimensions which he will take into account.

any other plant characteristics

f) Proposed control system defining those functions (e.g. starting and synchronizing, loading, shutting down, etc.) which are to be carried out manually from local or remote control positions and those to be carried out automatically). g) h) The information Installation listed in A.6 (annex A) if an electronic (see 6.4). 33 governor is required.

conditions

IS 14205 (Part l) :1994 IEC Pub 45-1:1991 i) k) 1) Thermal insulation requirements (see 7.8).

Permissible Additional

noise level (see clause 14). instrumentation required (see 1.4). is required.

m) Whether

low steam inlet pressure unloader (see 12.4.4)

17.6

Foundations

If the purchaser is responsible for design of the foundation, he shall supply the turbine supplier at an early date with an outline drawing of the foundation based on information provided by the supplier in clause 8. 17.7 Terminal points points of the plant to be supplied.

Terminal 17.8 a)

Delivery site conditions Point of delivery. available on site, and

b) Conditions affecting transport and access to site, facilities any requirements for extended periods of storage. 17.9 Tests testing (see 15.3).

Extent of performance

18

Design

information

to be provided

by the suppiier it is recom-

The suppiier shaii provide detaiied information of his piant to the purchaser. mended that at ieast the foilowing items are inciuded.

18.1 For stabiiity of the turbine and for the mechanical design of the terminai points and pipework systems, the forces and moments from the principai steam pipes have to be iimited. The suppiier shaii furnish adequate information to aiiow the purchaser to design the pipework systems in accordance with these requirements.

Simiiar information may be required in respect of the feed water piping where the feed water heaters or simiiar piant are within the suppiier's scope.

18.2

For the reievant operating

conditions, the thermai expansion

of the terminai

points.

18.3 For aii pipe connections to the purchaser's pipework systems, dimensions terminai points, together with weid preparations and weiding recommendations.

of the

18.4 A recommended time scheduie for the necessary interchange of technicai information and drawings, to integrate the turbine-generator and its association equipment into the overaii piant design.

34

IS 14205 (Part l) :1994 IEC Pub 45-1:1'991 18.5 Requirements for the steam conditions sealing during start-up. 18.6 Information on turbine foundations and quantity, for auxiliary steam for gland

as detailed in clause 8.

19 19.1

Turbine

plant with regenerative of information

feed water

heating

Exchange

Turbines for electrical power generation are usually arranged for regenerative feed water heating. The basis of the arrangement (see clause 4) and the relevant details, indicated below, shall be agreed between the purchaser and the supplier for one or more specific loads. a) The number of bled-steam provided: feed water heating stages, and which of them are to be

1) from the main turbine; and 2) from any auxiliary turbine which may be supplied for driving other equipment, such as a boiler feed pump or auxiliary generator or similar plant. b) The number and arrangement of individual heat exchanger vessels for each stage from a of feed water heating; and whether each vessel is supplied independently turbine tapping point, or from a header which supplies steam to all vessels of the same feed water heating stage. c) The position of feed pumps in the feed water heating cycle, the pressure of the feed water at the discharge of each pump, and the rise in enthalpy of the feed water across each pump. d) The desired feed water temperature at the appropriate permissible deviation from the desired value. terminal point, and the with

Also, whether the final feed water temperature can be allowed to vary naturally turbine load and, if not, the purchaser's requirements in this respect.

e) The method of cascading heater drains, and at which point or points (if any) the drains are pumped forward into the feed water system. f) The terminal temperature difference for each heater, i.e. the difference between the saturation temperature of the steam in the heater and the temperature of the feed water leaving the heater.
NOTE - If there is de-superheating of the bled steam before it is admitted to the saturation zone of the feed water heater, the complementary feed water heating in the de-superheater must be taken into account. g) The terminal temperature difference for each drain cooler (other than flash type), whether independent or integral with a bled steam heater, i.e. the difference between the temperature of the heater condensate leaving the drain cooler and the temperature of the feed water entering the drain cooler.

h) The rise in enthalpy of the condensate water system not provided by the supplier. j) The pressure drop in saturation

over any heat exchanger(s)

in the feed or the

drop from each extraction outlet on the turbine to the heater, temperature from extraction outlet to heater.

35

IS 14205 (Part l) :1994 IEC Pub 45-1:1991 k) The type and the location in the system of the bled steam evaporator (if provided), the quantity of make-up water required, the blow-down allowances for the evaporator, and the enthalpy of the raw water entering the evaporator. 1) If the condensate from auxiliary plant is to be dealt with by the feed water heating system: the quantity and the enthalpy of such condensate, and its point of introduction into the feed water heating system. m) Particulars of any operating condition governed otherwise than by the output of the turbine, for example, deaerator pressure when a minimum value is specified, together with the source and conditions of any alternative steam supply available to satisfy such requirements. n) Where steam is supplied for feed water heating purposes from sources other than the main turbine: the pressure, enthalpy, and flow rate from each source, and the destination of the condensed steam. Similarly, where heat is supplied by media other than steam, the relevant details.

19.2

Inclusion of the feed water heating system performance

into the turbine guarantee

When the turbine supplier supplies the feed water heating system, its performance be included in the guarantee of performance, unless otherwise agreed.

shall

When the turbine supplier does not supply the feed water heating system, the information listed in 19.1 shall be stated in the guarantee of performance.

The turbine supplier shall be given the opportunity of adjusting his guarantees should the feed water heating system finally agreed upon differ from the system on which the guarantee was based. 19.3 Provision of non-return valves in bled steam pipes from the turbine

The supplier shall determine the amount of overspeed which the turbine will experience due to entrained steam, resulting from a loss-of-load incident or a turbine trip. The number and type of non-return (check) valves to be placed in the bled steam extraction pipes from the turbine shall, when the feed-heating plant is not supplied by the turbine supplier, be agreed between the purchaser and the turbine supplier, and will be based upon the overspeed calculations. It may be possible to eliminate non-return (check) valves from some extraction lines, provided that the quantity of steam which could return to the turbine has been evaluated and that the resulting effect on overspeed is acceptable.

IS 14205 (Part 1) :1994 IEC Pub 45-1:1991

Annex A
(normative)

Electronic

governors

A.1 A. 1.1

General Scope

This annex covers the electronic section of electro-hydraulic governing (control) systems and overspeed protection equipment used on steam turbines. The requirements of clause 5 shall also be observed where applicable. A. 1.2 "Classification of governing (controlj systems

A. 1.2.1 Electronic governors are classified as follows to distinguish between the differing standards of performance, particularly reliability, required for various applications.

Type A: Fault-tolerant systems, in which at least one fault can be detected and repaired with no loss or only limited loss of system availability, and no loss of overspeed limiting capability. Such governing (control) systems may, for example. have three parallel redundant principal processing paths in which a failure in one path, detected by comparison, will give an alarm, and in which control will be maintained by voting arrangements between the paths.

Type B: Systems in which faults will be detected and will result in unloading or tripping of the unit for a proportion of single faults including all those resulting in a loss of overspeed limiting capability. Such governors may, for example, have two processing paths or one path with performance monitoring.

Type C: Systems (control)

with the same characteristics as type B, except that the governing system output may be placed in a "hold" state for' certain fault conditions in preference to unloading or tripping the turbine. In this state, the governing (control) system will make no contribution to limiting overspeed, although the system output may be manually controlled.

Type D: Simple governing (control) complete loss of availability.

systems,

in which

failures

will probably

cause

a

A.1 .2.2 Governors may also be classified admission valve hydraulic relays.

according

to their interface

with the steam

Type a): Systems with a separate electro-hydraulic controller for each steam valve, each having fault monitoring provision and possibly internal redundancy. This arrangement will normally be used with governors of type A or type B.

37

IS 14205 (Part l) :1994 IEC Pub 45-1:1991 Type b): Systems with a common interface for all valves of the turbine or control group. This arrangement will normally be used with governors of types B, C, or D.

A. 1.3

Overspeed

protection

The requirements of 5.3 apply to mechanical and electrical overspeed protection equipment, either of which may be used with electronic governors. Electronic overspeed protection may also be used with mechanical governors or in combination with mechanical overspeed equipment.

For central power station type turbines, the electronic equipment shall be designed so that no single fault shall either cause a trip or prevent a trip. Any suitable form of redundancy may be used. For industrial type turbines, it may be acceptfible equipment with the governing (control) system. A. 1.4 Control method to combine the overspeed electronic

Electronic governors may use analogue or digital control, or a combination of the two. The use of shared-purpose equipment (i.e. equipment which is partly outside that provided by the turbine supplier) is not generally permitted.

A.1.5

Power supplies

For governors of type A, at least two independent electric power supplies shall be provided by the purchaser, so as to maintain unimpaired performance of the governor during loss of a single supply for any period.

A.2

Facilities

to be provided

The governor shall include the following features: a) b) c) Test points for on-line checks and tests. Alarms to indicate mode of equipment Simple replacement failure.

of modules {on-line for type A). if this

d) `Where partial-arc control is used, the facilities to change to full-arc operation, is necessary for any particular purpose. e) Such other facilities as the purchaser remote and/or local control; interfaces with other control systems; may specify, for example:

unloading and trip provision; variable droop; wide-range andlor narrow range control;

38

IS IEC

14205 Pub

(Part

l)

:1994

45-1:1991

different

sets

of valves

to be controlled

(initial,

reheat,

extraction,

etc.);

speed and/or load limiting; load and/or pressure control; direct control of valve position.

A.3

Performance

characteristics

The performance characteristics of an electro-hydraulic governing system are largely determined by the mechanical and hydraulic components controlling the valve positions and by the characteristics of the valves themselves. Unless otherwise agreed, the overall characteristics given in 5.2.2 shall be taken as the specified values for systems incorporating electronic governors. The speeder device (load reference) exceeding 0,5 `%. of rated output. Values given for guidance shall be capable of adjusting the output in steps not

of non-linearity

and stability are given in table A. 1..

Table A.1 - Non-linearity

and stability

Turbine MCR Non-lkraarity

MW % of MCR

lJpto20 -

2oto150

0ver150 Not greater than = over range O-1OO% MCR

Stabilii short-term Long-term

%of MCR 2,5 10 1,5 10 1 10

A.4

Environment
within whichever

The equipment shall be capable of satisfactory and continuous operation of the classes of environmental conditions in table A.2 is specified. For all three classes, the following standard environmental

conditions shall also apply:

-

vibration:

10 Hz -65

Hz, 0,15 mm amplitude kPa correctly in the presence of radio interference of a nature

air pressure:

68 kPa -106

The equipment shall function and level to be specified. The equipment

shall not generate

radio interference

exceeding

a level to be specified.

39

IS 14205 (Patil) :1994 lEC Pub 45-1:1991 Table A.2 - Environment classes

class 1
2 3

Ambient temperature r=we o"cto+40w
-25 %?to +55 "C -10 "c to +70 "c

Ambient relative humidity 45%to75%
45%toloo% 45%toloov0

Typioal oomiitions
Oontrol

rooms and equipment rooms Outdows or plant-sited Spa&l mmdiiorrs

A.5 A.5. I

Tests Works tests

The tests to be witnessed by the purchaser shall be subject to prior agreement.
A.5.2 Site tests

Such tests shall be carried out as are necessary to set the equipment to work in aii specified modes.

A.6

Documentation

The purchaser shaii provide the foiiowing information in his specification: a)
b) c)

details of operating environment (see A.4);
detaiis of electrical power suppiies avaiiabie; unit or process;

outiine of controi scheme of generating

d)

iist of control functions required, including facilities described in A.2 as optionai;

e) categories of governor (A, B, C or D) and interface a) or b) which are acceptable (see A.1 .2); f) speciai requirements for tests.

(Continued from second cover) International Standard IEC 953-2:1990 Corresponding Indkm Standati IS 14198 (Part 2): 1994 Rules for steam turbine thermal acceptance tests : Part 2 Method B -- Wide range of accuracy for various types and sizes of turbines IS 11724:1985 Basis for specifying the rules in evaluating the mechanical vibration of machines in the operat"mn range 10 to 200 revls Degree of Equivalence Identical

ISO 2372:1974

Identical

The concerned technical committee has reviewed the provisions of following lEC/lSO standards referred to in this adopted standard and has decided that it is acceptable for use in conjunction with this standard: IEC 1064:1991 Acceptance tests for steam turbine speed control system on

ISO 7919-1 : 1986 MWhanioal vibration of non-reciprocating machines -- Measurements rotating shafts and evaluation : Part 1 General guidelines

Only the English language text given in the International Standard has been retained while adopting it as Indian Standard, and as such the page numbers given here are not the same as in IEC Publication. For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the results of a test, shall be rounded off in acmrdance with IS 2.1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised'. The number of signif~nt places retained in the rounded off value should be same as that of the specified value in this standard.

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statuto~ institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications maybe reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of neeessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS.
Review of Indian Standards

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically, a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has bc!cn developed from Doc : No. ET 15 (3551)

Amendments

Issued Since Publication

Amend No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headqkwters: Mrmak Bhavan, 9 F3ahadur Shah Z-far Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones: 3310131,3311375 Regional Offices: Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 : 1/14 C. I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone 3310131 { 3311375 378499,378561 { 378626,378662 603843 { 602025 2350216,2350442 { 2351519,2352315 6329295,6327858 { 6327891,6327892

Eastern

Northern:

Southern:

C. 1.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113

Western

: Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) BOMBAY 400093

Branches : AHMADABAD.

BHUBANESHWAR. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.
Printed at Simco Printing Press, lklhi

