тта чїч IS 15351 : 2015 
| Reaffi 201 
Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2019) 


qi ачап — wer этне eU 

+ {ис AAs sug чча et 

ucigasi (werstdtg.) et sit 
qaet — Тале 


("т quU) 


Agro Textiles — Laminated High 
Density Polyethylene (HDPE) Woven 
Geomembrane for Water Proof 
Lining — Specification 
( Second Revision ) 


ICS 59.060.20; 93:160 


O BIS 2015 


яя чїч equ 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
"Hm чач, 9 жетй stat Rb, we f&evít-110002 
unam МАМАК BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2015 Price Group 7 


Technical Textiles for Agro-tech Sectional Committee, TXD 35 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Technical Textiles for Agro-tech Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textile Division Council. 


This standard was first published in year 2003 and revised in 2008. This standard has been taken up for revision 
to include the following major changes: 


a) Requirement for carbon black content has been modified. 
b) Requirements for the breaking load before and after UV exposure have been modified. 
c) Test method for UV exposure has been modified. 


d) Requirements for impact failure load, tear resistance, puncture resistance, bursting strength, seam strength 
before UV exposure have been modified. 


e) Requirements for seam strength after UV exposure and hydrostatic resistance after UV exposure have 
been incorporated. 


f) Requirement for ash content has been incorporated. 


Laminated high density polyethylene woven fabric, so called geomembranes, are very low permeability synthetic 
liners used to control fluid or gas migration within soil, rock, earth or any other geotechnical material, as integral 
part of a manmade product, structure or system. As a synthetic component used within the ground, they are 
technically geo-synthetic, the prefix ‘geo’ indicating usage on or in the earth. The other primary geo-synthetics 
are geo-textiles, geo-nets, geo-grids, geo-composites and geo-composite clay liners. 


The original use of geomembranes was for the distribution, storage and containment of potable agricultural 
water supplies. It still remains as an important element of this market, except now it has been broadened to 
contain a wide variety of liquids. 


Geomembranes have become the design choice as part of a cover system due to a variety of factors such as 
imperviousness, chemical resistance, inertness to surrounding soils, ease and variety of seaming, mechanical 
strength and elongation, ease of application and economics, product durability and ageing over the designed life 
of the containment system. 


The primary function of geomembrane applied in ponds/reservoirs is to prevent loss of water due to seepage. The 
successful performance of geomembrane is based on a good quality material, installation and appropriate design 
of ponds/reservoirs. To improve the service lifetime of geomembrane, it is essential that the geomembrane are 
placed on the pond/reservoir surface according to the dimensions and contours of the pond/reservoir ensuring 
full contact with the sub grade. To achieve this onsite laying, joining and fixing is imperative. 


The guidelines and method for installation of HDPE geo membranes is given in Annex G for information only. 
The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex H. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised) . The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 15351 : 2015 


Indian Standard 


AGRO TEXTILES — LAMINATED HIGH DENSITY 
POLYETHYLENE (HDPE) WOVEN GEOMEMBRANE 
FOR WATERPROOF LINING — SPECIFICATION 


( Second Revision ) 


I SCOPE 


This standard prescribes requirements for high density 
polyethylene (HDPE) woven geomembrane laminated 
with low density polyethylene (LDPE) or suitable 
combination of LDPE and LLDPE for use as lining 
for canal, pond and reservoir to control seepage. 
However, the material is not suitable for lining of roof/ 
terrace and for proper disposal of industrial effluents, 
etc. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex А contain provisions 
which through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. АП standards are 
subject to revision and parties to agreements based on 
this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards indicated in Annex A. 


3 MATERIALS 


3.1 HDPE Tapes 


Tapes shall be manufactured from HDPE granules 
(see IS 6192) which shall be UV stabilized by 
incorporating 2.5 + 0.5 percent of carbon black with 
uniform dispersion and if required a suitable UV 
stabilizer may be added. The width of the tape used in 
the fabric shall be minimum 1.20 mm and linear density 
of the tape shall be minimum 88.8 Tex (800 Denier). 
In case the waterproof lining is to be used for drinking 
water, the tape used for lamination shall be of food 
grade quality (see IS 10146). 


3.2 HDPE Fabric 


HDPE geomembrane shall be manufactured from 
suitable HDPE woven fabric (see IS 6899). The HDPE 
woven fabric shall have a minimum of 40 tapes/dm in 
warp and weft direction. 


4 TYPES 


Based on the thickness and mass, in g/m?, of waterproof 
woven fabric, the material is classified as follows: 


a) Туре 1 — Having thickness of 0.25 mm and 
mass of 250 g/m?, Min; 

b) Typell — Having thickness of 0.50 mm and 
mass of 420 g/m?, Min; 

c) Туре Ш — Having thickness of 0.75 mm and 
mass of 650 g/m?, Min; and 

d) Type IV— Having thickness of 1.00 mm and 
mass of 950 g/m?, Min. 


5 MANUFACTURE 


5.1 Lamination 


5.1.1 Geomembrane shall be manufactured from HDPE 
fabric (see IS 6899) to meet the final requirements of 
mass (g/m?) as given in Table 1. The HDPE woven 
fabric shall be laminated on both sides with low density 
polyethylene film (LDPE) or with suitable combination 
of LDPE and linear low density polyethylene (LLDPE). 
The coating thickness shall be as agreed to between 
the buyer and the seller subject to a minimum of 
25 micron. The coating lamination thickness shall be 
measured at a pressure of 2 + 0.01 kPa by Method A 
of IS 13162 (Part 3). The coating film shall be UV 
stabilized by incorporating 2.5 + 0.5 percent of carbon 
black with uniform dispersion and if required a suitable 
UV stabilizer may be added. 


5.1.2 If two or more layers of HDPE fabric are used, 
these shall be bonded together by sandwich lamination. 
For sandwich lamination, the coating thickness shall 
be as agreed to between the buyer and the seller subject 
to a minimum of 35 micron. The sandwich lamination 
thickness shall be measured at a pressure of 2 + 0.01 
kPa by Method A of IS 13162 (Part 3). 


5.1.3 In case the waterproof lining is to be used for 
drinking water, the films used for lamination shall be 
of food grade quality (see IS 10146). 


NOTE — Lamination is very important and critical requirement 
for the product and its proper process control shall be ensured 
during manufacturing. 


5.2 Panel Width 


The minimum width of the laminated fabric panel to 
manufacture geomembrane shall be 1 800 mm. A 


IS 15351 : 2015 


combination of panel width may be used to obtain 
desired width of geomembrane. Narrow width panels 
not less than 900 mm in width may also be used but 
such pieces shall not exceed 1 piece per roll of finished 
material of specified width. 


5.3 Joints/Seams 


If two or more pieces of geomembranes are used, the 
geomembrane shall be joined/seamed together by a 
suitable heat sealing process keeping an overlap of at 
least 2.5 cm. 


6 REQUIREMENTS 


6.1 Workmanship 


The geomembrane shall be uniform in colour, texture 
and finish. It shall be free from pin holes, undispersed 
raw material, particles of foreign matter, etc, and the 
laminated film shall not peel off from the fabric. 


6.2 The geomembrane made from laminated HDPE 
fabric shall also conform to the requirements given in 
Table 1. 


7 PACKING AND MARKING 


7.1 Packing 


The geomembrane shall be packed in roll form in 
length of 500 m or as agreed to between the buyer and 
the seller. The rolls shall be packed by HDPE fabric 
laminated on both sides with LDPE or of the same 
construction and specifications as that of the rolls. 


7.2 Marking 


7.2.1 The geomembrane roll shall be marked legibly 
with the following information: 


a) Indication of the source of manufacture; 
b) Type of geomembrane; 


c) Declared length and width of the 
geomembrane; 


d) Mass per square meter of the geomembrane; 
e) Batch No and date of manufacture; and 
f) Any other information desired by the buyer. 


Table 1 Requirement for Laminated HDPE Woven Geomembrane for Water Proof Lining 
(Clauses 5.1.1 and 6.2) 


SI No. Property Requirement Method of Test, 
Ref to 
TypeI Type II Type III Type IV 
(1) 2) (3) (5) (6) (7) 
i) Thickness (mm), Min 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 IS 7016 (Part 1) 
ii) Mass (g/m?), Min 250 420 650 950 IS 7016 (Part 1) 
iii) Dimensions (length and width) <————As declared + 1 percent with no negative tolerance ——————» ^ Annex А of 
IS 11652 
iv) Carbon black content, percent < 2.5+0.5 > 15 2530 
v) Breaking load on 20 x 10 cm strip, IS 13162 (Part 5) 
N, Min before U.V exposure: 

a) Warpway 3 300 6 600 8 200 10 700 

b) Weftway 3 000 6 000 7 400 9 700 
vi) Strain at maximum load, percent 20+5 20+5 20+5 20+5 IS 13162 (Part 5) 


vii) Breaking load on 20 x 10 cm 
strip, N, Min after U.V exposure 
of 1000 h for warp and weft 

viii) Impact failure load, at 1524 mm 1 150 
drop, Min, gram force at 50 
percent failure 


ix) Tear resistance, N, Min 100 

x) Puncture resistance, N, Min 300 

xi) Bursting strength (Ball burst), 60 
N/cm?, Min 

xii) Seam strength before UV 15 


exposure (N/mm), Min 
xiii) Seam strength after UV exposure 


€— — — 80 percent of the actual original value ——— — — ——» 


«— — — 80) percent of the actual original value ——— — — ——? 


Annex B and 
IS 13162 (Part 5) 


1 840 2 875 4 025 Аппех С 
250 300 350 Method АІ of 
IS 7016 (Part 3) 
500 725 900 Annex D 
110 135 200 IS 7016 (Part 6) 
40 42 IS 15060 


Annex B and 


N/mm, Min IS 15060 
xiv) Hydrostatic resistance No leakage No leakageal5 ^ Noleakageat20 Мо leakage at25 Annex E 
at10 Kg/cm? kg/cm? kg/cm? kg/cm? 
xv) Hydrostatic resistance after UV €X——————————— 80 percent of the actual original value ———————___ Annex B and 
exposure of 1000 h Annex E 
xvi) Ash content, percent, Max 1 1 1 Annex F 


NOTE — For hydrostatic resistance test, the test specimen shall be selected such that at least one joint is covered, if provided. 


7.2.2 BIS Certification Marking 


The geomembrane roll may also be marked with the 
Standard Mark. 


7.2.2.1 The use of the Standard Mark is governed by 
the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 
1986 and Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The 
details of conditions under which the license for the 
use of the Standard Mark may be granted to 
manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the 
Bureau of Indian Standards. 


IS 15351 : 2015 


construction and type dispatched to a buyer against 
one dispatch note shall constitute a lot. 


8.2 Unless otherwise agreed to between the buyer and 
the seller, the number of geomembrane fabric rolls/ 
pieces to be selected at random from a lot shall be as 
given in col 3 of Table 2. 


9 NUMBER OF TEST SPECIMENS AND 
CRITERIA FOR CONFORMITY 


Number of test specimens and criteria for conformity 
shall be as given in Table 3. 


8 SAMPLING 
Table 3 Number of Test Specimens and Criteria 
8.1 Lot for Conformity 
АП geomembrane fabric rolls/pieces of same (Clause 9) 
Table 2 Scale of Sampling SI Characteristic No. of Criteria for 
(Clause 8.2) No. Rolls/ Conformity 
Pieces 
SI No. of Sample Sub- Permissible No. (0 (2) (3) (4) 
No.  Rolls/pieces Size Sample of Defective ў ч j . . 
in Lot Size Rolls/Pieces i) Material, According The defective rolls/pieces 
manufacture, tocol30f do not exceed the 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) workmanship, Table 2 corresponding number 
; thickness, mass, given in col 5 of Table 2 
i) Up to 50 3 2 0 length and width 
i) ГЕ i М 0 A E ii) All other According АП the test specimens 
iii) E 5 requirements tocol4of shall pass the tests 
iv) 301-500 13 2 Table 2 
v) 501 and above 20 2 3 
ANNEX A 
(Clause 2) 


LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 


IS No. Title 

2454 : 1985 Method for determination of colour 
fastness of textile materials to artificial 
light (Xenon lamp) (first revision) 

2530 : 1963 Methods of test for polyethylene 
moulding materials and polyethylene 
compounds 

6192 : 1994 Textiles — Monoaxially oriented 
high density polyethylene tapes — 
Specification (second revision) 

6899 : 1997 Textiles — High density polyethylene 
(HDPE) woven fabrics — 
Specification (second revision) 

7016 Methods of test for coated and treated 


fabrics: 

Determination of roll characteristics 
(first revision) 

Determination of tear strength (first 
revision) 


(Part 1) : 1982 


(Part 3) : 1981 


IS No. Title 
(Part 6): 1984 Determination of bursting strength 
(first revision) 
Specification for polyethylene for 
its safe use in contact with foodstuffs, 
pharmaceuticals and drinking 
water 
Textiles — Woven sacks for packing 
cement — High density polyethylene 
(HDPE)/polypropylene (PP) — 
Specification (second revision) 
Geotextiles — Methods of test 
Determination of thickness at 
specified pressures 
Determination of tensile properties 
using a wide width strip 
Geotextiles — Tensile test for joint/ 
seams by wide width method 


10146 : 1982 


11652 : 2000 


13162 
(Part 3) : 1992 


(Part 5) : 1992 


15060 : 2001 


IS 15351 : 2015 


ANNEX B 
[Table 1, SI No. (vii), (хш) and (xv)] 


DETEMINATOIN OF RESISTANCE TO THE EXPOSURE OF ULTRAVIOLET 
LIGHT (XENON-ARC TYPE APPARATUS) 


B-1 PRINCIPLE 


Specimens of HDPE geomembrane are exposed for 
1 000 h of ultraviolet exposure in a Xenon-arc 
apparatus. The exposure consists of 120 min cycles 
consisting of 102 min of light only, followed by 18 
min of water spray and light. After the exposure, the 
specimens are subjected to breaking strength test as 
prescribed in IS 13162 (Part 5), Seam strength test as 
prescribed in IS 15060 and hydrostatic resistance test 
as prescribed in Annex E. The test results are compared 
to the test results for unexposed specimens and the 
deterioration which has taken place due to ultraviolet 
exposure is assessed. 


B-2 ATMOSPHERIC CONDITIONS FOR 
CONDITIONING AND TESTING 


Condition the test specimens to moisture equilibrium 
from the dry side in the standard atmosphere of 65 + 2 
percent relative humidity and 27 + 2°C temperature. 
When the specimens have been left in such an 
atmosphere so that both the faces are exposed to the 
standard atmosphere as far as possible for 24 h, they 
shall be deemed to have reached the state of moisture 
equilibrium. 


B-3 PREPARATION OF TEST SPECIMENS 


B-3.1 Cut 5 test specimens each for testing breaking 
strength, seam strength and hydrostatic resistance test 
from the test pieces. 


B-3.2 Specimens shall not contain dirt, irregular spots, 
creases, holes or other visible faults. 


B-4 APPARATUS 


B-4.1 The working details of Xenon-arc apparatus are 
described in IS 2454. 


B-4.1.1 The apparatus shall be capable of exposing the 
specimens to cycles of light only, followed by water 
spray and light under controlled atmospheric conditions. 


B-4.1.2 The apparatus shall be equipped with an inner 
and outer borosilicate filter glass as described in IS 
2454. 


B-5 PROCEDURE 


B-5.1 Operate the Xenon-arc apparatus as directed in 
IS 2454 to provide 120 min cycles as follows: 


102 min of light only at 65 x 5?C black panel 
temperature, and 30 + 5 percent relative 
humidity, followed by 18 min of light and 
water spray. 


B-5.1.1 Set the minimum level of radiation to 
0.5 W/m?, 1 nm bandpass at 340 nm. 


B-5.2 Randomly expose five specimens each for testing 
breaking strength, seam strength and hydrostatic 
resistance for 1 000 h exposure time. Place test 
specimens in the apparatus such that the side most 
likely to be exposed to the effects of ultraviolet light 
will be exposed in the apparatus. 


B-5.3 At the end of exposure time, remove the test 
specimens for testing breaking strength, seam strength 
and hydrostatic resistance as per the method prescribed 
in IS 13162 (Part 5), IS 15060 and Annex E, 
respectively. 


B-5.4 Test five unexposed specimens (zero exposure 
time) and five exposed specimens for breaking 
strength, seam strength and hydrostatic resistance as 
per the method prescribed in IS 13162 (Part 5), IS 
15060 and Annex E, respectively. 


B-6 CALCULATIONS 


B-6.1 Calculate the average breaking strength, seam 
strength and hydrostatic resistance for all exposed and 
unexposed specimens. 


B-6.2 Calculate the percent loss of breaking strength, 
seam strength and hydrostatic resistance for the 
exposed specimens from the average results. 


IS 15351 : 2015 


ANNEX C 
[Table 1, SI No. (viii)] 
DETERMINATION OF IMPACT RESISTANCE 


C-1 TERMINOLOGY 


C-1.1 Impact Failure Load — The load at which 50 
percent of the specimens fail when tested by this 
method. 


C-2 ANNULAR SPECIMEN CLAMP 


C-2.1 Two Piece Annular Specimen Clamp, having 
an inside diameter of 12.7 cm and conforming to the 
following requirements: 


a) Тһе lower or stationary half of the clamp shall 
be rigidly mounted so that the plan of the 
specimen is horizontal and at an angle of 90? 
with respect to the upright shaft-supporting 
member of the apparatus. 

b) The upper or movable portion of the clamp 
shall be designed to maintain positive and 
planer contact with the lower portion of the 
clamp when in position. This portion of the 
clamp shall be provided with suitable means 
for maintaining sufficient contact with the 
lower clamp to hold the specimens firmly in 
place during the test. 

c) Gasketing materials prepared from rubber or 
similar material shall be affixed to the 
specimen contact surfaces of both clamps. 
This provides а cushion which minimizes 
thickness variation effects and also allows 
firm gripping of the specimen and minimizes 


slippage. 


C-2.2 Adapter — An electromechanical (pneumatic) 
or similar suitable device for use in supporting and 
instantaneously releasing the dart so that it will fall 
freely on to the centre of test specimen in the specimen 
holder. 


C-2.3 Dart — It consists of 3.81 cm diameter 
hemispherical head fitted with 0.64 cm diameter shaft 
11.5 cm long, to accommodate removable mass. The 
head shall be constructed of aluminium, phenolic 
plastic or other low density material of similar 
hardness. The shaft shall be attached to the centre of 
the flat upper surface of the head with its longitudinal 
axis at 90? to the surface. The shaft shall be made of 
aluminium with a 1.27 cm long steel tip (tip with 
suitable material) at the end for supporting it in the 
adapter. 


C-2.4 Masses — The stainless steel detachable masses 
are as follows: 


One mass of 3 000 + 5g, two masses of 1 000 + 5g 
each, two masses of 500 x 2g each, two masses of 300 
x 2g each, two masses of 200 + 2g each and two masses 
of 100 + 2g each having approximate dimensions of 8 
to 10 cm in diameter and approximately 1 cm thickness 
with a hole in the centre of minimum 0.65 cm in 
diameter. 


NOTE — Additional masses may be constructed for use, if it is 
necessary to extend mass beyond that attainable when using all 
the masses in the set suggested above. 


C-2.5 Positioning Device — Means shall be provided 
for positioning the dart at the following drop heights 
from the impinging surface of the dart head to the 
surface of the test specimen: 


Positioning Drop Height 
mm 

Normal impact resistant fabric 660 

High impact resistant fabric 1 524 


C-2.6 Cushioning and Shielding Devices — To 
protect personnel and to avoid damaging of the 
impinging surface of the dart. 


C-3 TEST SPECIMENS 


Test specimens shall be large enough to extend outside 
the specimen clamp gaskets at all points. The 
specimens shall be representative of the material under 
test and shall be free from pinholes, wrinkles, folds or 
other obvious imperfections, unless such imperfections 
constitute variables under test. 


C-4 PROCEDURE 


C-4.1 Place the specimen over the bottom portion of 
the clamp, making certain that it is uniformly flat, free 
of folds and that it covers the gasket at all points. Clamp 
the specimen in place of applying annular pressure with 
the top portion of the clamp. Position the dart vertically 
with the steel shaft tip inserted in the adapter and the 
impinging surface of the dart at the appropriate height 
from the fabric surface. Release the dart. Take care to 
avoid multiple impacts in cases where the dart bounces 
off the specimen. Attempt to catch the dart in such 
cases to prevent damage to the impinging surface. 


C-4.2 Observe the failure as any break through the 
fabric readily by viewing the specimen under back 
lighting conditions and examine the specimen to 
determine whether it has failed or not. Use a new 
specimen for each impact. 


IS 15351 : 2015 


C-4.3 Before beginning the test, make a few trial runs 
to establish approximately the working range of masses 
which will break the fabric. Then for at least 3 dart 
masses selected to give percentage failure between 20 
and 80, a minimum of 10 test specimens at each dart 
mass shall be tested. 


C-5 DETERMINATION OF IMPACT FAILURE 
LOAD 


Plot the percentage of failures against total mass of 
the dart on a graph paper and determine the results 
graphically. Read the value of impact failure load from 
the graph as the dart mass at which 50 percent of the 
specimens fail. 


ANNEX D 
[Table 1, SI No. (x)] 
DETERMINATION OF PUNCTURE RESISTANCE 


D-1 PRINCIPLE 


A test specimen is clamped without tension between 
circular plates of a ring clamp attachment secured in a 
tensile testing machine and a force is exerted against 
the centre of the unsupported portion of the test 
specimen by a piercing instrument attached to the load 
indicator until rupture of the specimen occurs. The 
maximum force recorded is the value of the puncture 
resistance of the specimen. 


D-2 TENSILE TESTING MACHINE 


The tensile testing machine with a constant rate of 
extension of 5 + 0.2 mm/s shall be equipped with a 
bursting attachment of such design that the specimen 
is held securely by a ring clamp mechanism until a 
rupture of the specimen is produced. The ring clamp 
mechanism shall consist of concentric plates with an 
open internal diameter of 44.0 + 0.05 mm capable of 
clamping the test specimen without slippage and with 
the centre of the specimen pressed against a piercing 
instrument shaped like a flared, flat-tip screwdriver, 
having a width of 7.92 + 0.25 mm and a thickness of 
0.8 + 0.1 mm at the extreme tip. The piercing tip edges 
shall be rounded to a 0.25 mm radius. The piercing 


instrument shall be oriented to intercept the warp and 
weft threads of the mounted specimen at an angle of 
approximately 45°. If the machine is of pendulum type, 
it shall be of such capacity that the maximum load 
required to burst the specimen shall be not greater than 
85 percent or less than 15 percent of the rated capacity. 


D-3 TEST SPECIMENS 


Five circular specimens shall be cut, each having a 
diameter of least 12.5 mm greater than the outside 
diameter of the ring-clamp mechanism of the testing 
machine. 


D-4 PROCEDURE 


Mount each specimen, centering it in the ring clamp. 
Allow the piercing device to descend at a rate of 300 
mm/min until puncture of the laminated fabric occurs. 
Record the force required to completely penetrate the 
specimen. 


D-5 CALCULATION 


The average puncture resistance of the material shall 
be the arithmetic mean of the results of five tests as 
reported in Newton. 


IS 15351 : 2015 


ANNEX E 
[Table 1, SI No. (xiv) and (xv)] 
DETERMINATION OF HYDROSTATIC RESISTANCE 


E-1 PRINCIPLE 


The hydrostatic resistance of the geomembranes shall 
be determined by Mullen-type hydrostatic tester. 


E-2 APPARATUS 


The testing machine shall permit the clamping of the 
material to be tested between two circular clamps about 
76 mm in diameter having coaxial apertures of their 
centre 31.5 + 0.5 mm in diameter. The surfaces of the 
clamps between which the specimen is to placed shall 
be concentrically grooved. The grooves shall be spaced 
0.8 mm apart and of a depth not less than 0.15 mm. 
The grooves shall not start closer than 3.18 mm from 
the edge of the aperture. The lower clamping surface 
shall have a recession concentric to the aperture capable 
of accepting an O-ring having a cross-sectional 
diameter of 4.7 + 0.1 mm. 


The machine shall have means of applying hydraulic 
pressure to the underside of the clamped specimen until 
the specimen fails. The pressure shall be generated by means 
of a piston forcing water into the pressure chamber of the 
apparatus at the rate of 1.4 + 0. 1cm?/s. The machine shall 
be fitted with a pressure gauge maximum-reading type, 
with the scale divided to read in kg/cm? units. Accuracy 
shall be 1 kg/cm? on readings from 0 to 60 kg/cm?. When 
the gauge is calibrated, it shall be mounted in the same 
relative position as on the bursting tester. 


NOTE — Any machine that operates on the above principle 
and maintains the specified displacement rate of 85 ml/min, 
and in addition possesses the opening in the upper clamping 
surface of 31.5 + 0.50 mm, is a valid machine for this test. 


E-3 TEST SPECIMENS 


The test specimen cut from the geomembrane shall be 
of such size that the smallest dimension is at least 
12.7 mm greater than the outside diameter of the ring- 
clamp mechanism of the testing machine. 


E-4 METHOD 


Before clamping the specimen into the testing machine, 
bring the water level up flush with the top of the lower 
clamp so that no air pocket exists between the water 
surface and the geomembrane being tested. The 
temperature of the water shall be the same as the 
atmospheric temperature of the testing room. Increase 
the pressure steadily in the chamber in which a screw 
shall operate to force a liquid pressure medium at a 
uniform rate of 1.4 + 0.1 cm?/s. Take a reading at the 
first appearance of water through the geomembrane 
being tested. Make ten different determinations and 
take the average as the hydrostatic resistance of the 
geomembrane. Discard an isolated high or low result 
that is not repeated in duplicate when a consistent 
average has been obtained without the abnormal 
reading and substitute a re-test. 


ANNEX F 
[Table 1, SI No. (xvi)] 
DETERMINATION OF ASH CONTENT 


F-1 PRINCIPLE 


The procedure is used to find out the inorganic residue 
in geomembrane sample by ashing it in a muffle 
furnace. А weighed amount of tape/fabric sample is 
heated to 550?C. The polymer sample (organic portion) 
is burnt at 550?C until constant mass of inorganic 
matter is obtained. The residue (inorganic matter) is 
reported in terms of percentage ash content in a given 
sample. 


F-2 APPARATUS 
F-2.1 Weighing Balance, accurate to 0.001 g. 


F-2.2 Silica Crucibles, sufficient volume to 
accommodate 30 g of sample in such a way that level 
of the sample after filling the crucible does not cross 
half the height of crucible. 


F-2.3 Bunsen Burner 


F-2.4 Silica Triangle and Tripod 


IS 15351 : 2015 
F-2.5 Muffle Furnace, capable of being controlled 
thermostatically at 550 + 10°С. 


Е-2.6 Desicator, containing an effective drying agent 
(for example silica gel) that does not react chemically 
with ash components. 


F-2.7 Gloves and Crucible Holder 


F-3 SAFETY 
F-3.1 Burn the sample in an effectively ventilated hood. 


F-3.2 Keep the hood closed and do not inhale the fumes 
of combustion. 


F-3.3 Wear gloves and use sample (crucible) holder, 
to introduce crucible in the furnace. 


F-3.4 Sample shall be folded properly to accommodate 
it in silica crucible. 


F-4 PROCEDURE 


F-4.1 Heat the clean crucible at 550 + 10°C for 
10 to15 min and cool it in a desicator. 


F-4.2 Weigh the empty crucible to nearest 0.001 g. 


F-4.3 Weigh 30 + 2 g of geomembrane sample in the 
crucible (nearest to 0.001 g). 


F-4.4 Heat the crucible directly on burner so that the 
sample burns slowly and loss of ash is avoided. 
Continue burning until no more smoke is evolved. 


F-4.5 Transfer the crucible in the muffle furnace, which 
is already maintained at approximately 550?C and keep 
the crucible inside for about 2 h. 


F-4.6 Remove the crucible from the furnace and cool 
it to the room temperature in a desicator. Weigh it and 
record the weight to accuracy of 0.001 g. 


F-4.7 Keep the crucible in the muffle furnace for 
another half an hour, cool in a desicator and weigh 
again. Repeat the procedure until constant mass is 
obtained. 


F-5 CALCULATION 


Weight of ash 


Weight of geomembrane 
sample 


Percent ash content — x100 


ANNEX G 
(Foreword) 
GUIDELINES FOR INSTALLATION OF HDPE GEOMEMBRANE 


G-1 PREAMBLE 


G-1.1 The primary function of geomembrane applied 
in ponds/reservoirs is to prevent loss of water due to 
seepage. The successful performance of geomembrane 
is based on a good quality material, installation and 
appropriate design of ponds/reservoirs. 


G-1.2 To improve the service lifetime of 
geomembrane, it is essential that the geomembrane are 
placed on the pond/reservoir surface according to the 
dimensions and contours of the pond/reservoir ensuring 
full contact with the sub grade. To achieve this onsite 
laying, joining and fixing is imperative. 


G-2 LOGISTICS 


Geomembrane are packed and transported by 
appropriate means to protect the geomembrane and 
avoid any type of damage. Rolls of geomembrane are 
loaded manually/with a crane and tie beam and can be 
unloaded in a similar manner at the destination. Use 
of hooks shall be avoided for loading and unloading 
of the geomembrane at site. 


G-3 STORAGE AT SITE 


G-3.1 The geomembrane shall be stored so as to be 
protected from puncture, dirt, grease, water, moisture, 
mud, mechanical abrasions, excessive heat or other 
damage. The rolls shall be stored on a prepared surface 
and to be stacked not more than three rolls. 


G-3.2 The owner of the site where the geomembrane 
is to be installed shall provide storage space in a 
location sufficiently near the sub grade to be lined to 
minimize any additional handling. 


G-3.3 The storage area shall be protected from theft, 
vandalism, vehicular traffic and any other source which 
could create potential damage to the liner. 


G-4 EARTHWORK AND SITE PREPARATION 


G-4.1 Site Considerations 


G-4.1.1 The site selected for pond/reservoir shall not 
be within the path so that, it obstructs or impinge the 
flow of the natural course of the water, rain fed Nallah 
ог a stream as well as in the pathway of concentrated 


surface runoff from the hills or elevated grounds 
upstream of the pond/reservoir, as there are chances 
of underground seepage of water into the pond/ 
reservoir and geomembrane is subjected to upliftment. 


G-4.1.2 The proposed pond/reservoir site shall not be 
natural pit, a well or stone mines. 


G-4.1.3 The selected site shall be free from hard rocks, 
a natural water source, mountain, etc. 


G-4.1.4 The proposed site shall be free of any 
decomposable organic materials/vegetation as it can 
result in upliftment due to generation of gases beneath 
the geomembrane. 


G-4.2 Design and Sub-grade Preparation 


G-4.2.1 The excavation of the pond/reservoir shall be 
done by means of a JCB or Pock Lain Machine. 


G-4.2.2 The slope to bed ratio (V: H) shall be 1:1.5 
minimum. 


G-4.2.3 The embankments constructed shall be stable, 
as the unstable embankments will collapse resulting 
into tensile or tear failure of geomembrane. 


G-4.2.4 The top width of the embankment shall be at 
least 1.5 m wide. 


G-4.2.5 Sub-grade surface shall be levelled and made 
free of undesirable angular and sharp fragments, 
foreign and organic matter, stones and pebbles, as the 
presence may lead to cause pinholes and or puncture 
the geomembrane. 


G-4.2.6 Soil sterilization may be necessary to kill roots 
certain types of grasses by using an effective sterilant/ 
chemical, however the sterilant or the chemical used 
shall not be detrimental to the liner and shall be applied 
in accordance with the geomembrane manufacturer's 
recommendations. 


G-4.2.7 The bed and slopes of the constructed pond/ 
reservoir shall be inspected for burrows of crab's 
rodents, etc. All such burrows shall be emptied by 
removing the crabs and rodents and disposed off to a 
safe site away from the pond/reservoir site. 


G-4.2.8 The empty burrows and potholes (cavity 
between the stones) on the bed/slope of pond/reservoir 
shall be filled with soil. Thereafter it shall be compacted 
and the entire area shall be cleaned and leveled. The 
entire area shall be uniform and smooth. 


G-4.2.9 A Layer of soft soil shall be applied and the 
top layer of soft bed and slope shall be compacted by 
water showering at least 90 percent of proctor density 
by vibro compaction equipment or by any other 
suitable equipment or manually. 


IS 15351 : 2015 


G-4.2.10 The compaction shall be achieved at least up 
to a depth of 300 mm from the final sub- grade level of 
inside of the pond. 


G-4.2.11 Perfect compaction and leveling of bed and 
slopes will give good support to the geomembrane. 


G-4.2.12 In let and outlet structures shall be properly 
designed, faulty design and construction of inlet and 
outlet structures shall result in flooding or overtopping 
of embankments damaging the geomembrane. 


G-5 ANCHOR TRENCH 


G-5.1 For the purpose of anchoring the geomembrane, 
an anchor trench of 1 feet x 1 feet x 1 feet shall be 
excavated at a distance of 80 to 100 cm away from the 
inside edge of the top of the embankment. 


G-5.2 Rounded corners shall be provided in the trench 
to avoid sharp bends in the geomembrane. It is 
imperative that the anchor trench is complete in all 
respects before lining work is undertaken to ensure 
the speed of lining and schedule. 


G-5.3 The anchor trench shall be back filled after filling 
the pond, till then filled sand bags shall be kept as 
counter weight. 


G-6 COMMENCEMENT OF GEOMEMBRANE 
INSTALLATION WORK 


G-6.1 Before starting the geomembrane installation, 
the contractor shall issue a certificate of satisfactory 
site conditions, to enable to commence geomembrane 
installation work. 


G-6.2 Chain linked fencing shall be put around the 
pond/reservoir to prevent stray entry of men and 
animals to protect any damage to the geomembrane. 


G-7 GEOMEMBRANE LAYING OPERATIONS 


G-7.1 While laying the geomembrane precaution shall 
be taken to avoid any damage to the lining system. 


G-7.2 The reservoir area shall be declared as a “МО 
SMOKING ZONE' and all personnel shall wear flat 
rubber soled foot wear (similar to bathroom slippers). 


G-7.3 The method of unrolling the geomembrane 
panels shall be such that it shall not cause scratches or 
crimps in the geomembrane and any damage to the 
sub grade surface. 


G-7.4 Geomembrane panels shall be placed properly 
on the bed and the slopes with an overlap of 
50 to 75 mm for field seaming, or as specified, but not 
less than 50 mm. 


G-7.5 At corners of the pond/reservoir the panels shall 
be properly matched and laid according to the size and 


IS 15351 : 2015 


geometry of corners of the embankment slopes 
(commonly the shape shall be an inverted triangle) and 
joined with adjacent liner panels on the slope. 


G-7.6 Counter weight of filled sand bags along the 
edges of geomembrane panels and toe of the bunds 
shall be provided in order to minimize the risk of flow 
of wind under the panels. 


G-7.7 The geomembrane interface where seams are to 
be made shall be clean and free from dust. 


G-7.8 Geomembrane shall not be laid during rains, 
any precipitation, in the presence of excessive moisture, 
in an area of standing water, or during high winds, 
fog, dew, etc. 


G-7.9 Any area of panel seriously damaged shall be 
marked and repaired. 


G-7.10 Geomembrane deployment shall stop in 
excessive temperatures since this will result in 
imperfect seaming. 


G-8 FIELD SEAMING OF GEOMEMBRANE 


The fundamental mechanism of seaming geomembrane 
sheets together is to temporarily reorganize the polymer 
structure (by melting or softening) of two opposing 
surfaces to be joined in a controlled manner so that, 
after the application of pressure, results in the two 
sheets being bonded together and the joined sheets shall 
perform as one single geomembrane sheet. Therefore, 
field seaming is a very important and crucial operation 
and any negligence on this part shall compromise 
severely the performance of geomembrane system 


G-9 SEAMING 
GEOMEMBRANE 


OPERATIONS OF 


G-9.1 Seams shall be oriented parallel to the slope that 
is oriented down, not across the slope. 


G-9.2 Wherever odd shaped geometric location or 
corners are identified, the field seams shall be 
minimized. 


G-9.3 Horizontal seam shall be located on the base of 
the slope, not less than 1.50 m from the toe of the slope. 


G-9.4 When seaming, panels shall be adjusted to ensure 
that the seams are aligned with the fewest possible 
number of wrinkles and ‘fish mouths’. 


G-9.5 Seaming shall extend to at least 20 cm into the 
anchor trench. While welding a seam, proper overlap 
shall be monitored and maintained. 


G-9.6 A pressure type joint, employing the SS or HDG 
flats, neoprene seals, and SS or HDG bolts and nuts 
shall be used to seal the junctions, inlet and outlet 
structures and pipes. 


10 


G-9.7 Seam area shall be inspected to assure that it is 
clean and free of moisture, dust, debris of any kind. 


G-9.8 Welding technicians shall periodically check the 
machine operating temperature and speed and shall 
record this information. 


G-10 SINGLE FUSION HOT AIR WELDING 


In single fusion hot air welding, a device consisting of 
a resistance heater, a blower and a temperature 
controller is used to blow hot air between the two 
geomembrane sheets in the overlap. The hot air at 400 
to 450°C shall melt the geomembrane opposing 
surfaces. 


Immediately following the melting of surfaces, 
pressure is applied to the seamed area to bond the two 
sheets using a roller. 


G-11 FACTORS AFFECTING THE FIELD 
SEAMS 


G-11.1 Many factors contribute to the quality of field 
seam such as ambient temperature, moisture, wind, dust 
and quality of the field personnel. 


G-11.1.1 Ambient Temperature 


Field seaming shall be performed when weather 
conditions are favorable. Seaming below 5°C and 
above 40°C may result in a decrease in the overall 
quality of installation. 


G-11.1.2 Moisture 


Moisture caused due to precipitation or high humidity 
is likely to result in improper bonding resulting in 
failure of seams. Therefore the surface of panel in 
seaming must remain dry at all times. 


G-11.1.3 Wind 


Winds causing displacement of geomembrane panels 
may interfere with the proper alignment of seams, 
resulting in wrinkles or “fish mouths’. 


G-11.1.4 Dust 


The geomembrane panels shall be maintained in a 
broom clean condition with no dust allowed on or near 
the seaming areas. 


G-11.1.5 Quality of Field Personnel 


The critical parameters for the hot air fusion welding 
machine are temperature and speed which shall be 
strictly maintained. Therefore well trained 
professionals/technicians shall be employed for field 
seaming. Excessive melting weakens the geomembrane 
and inadequate melting results in poor strength. Hence 
a well trained technician will be able to apply adequate 
melting and pressure making proper seams. 


G-12 FIELD TESTING OF SEAMS 


G-12.1 To ensure the quality of seams, it is necessary 
to have a check on the seams at site by visual and 
manual methods to identify any defective field seams 
involving presence of unbonded or open seams, fish 
mouth created due to wrinkles and restraints, burning 
of liner due to excessive heat during thermal bonding. 


G-12.2 Any one of the following advance test methods 
can be performed for testing of seams: 


a) Airlance method, 
b) Mechanical point stress/Pick test, and 
c) Vacuum box testing. 


G-12.2.1 Air Lance Method 


The air lance method uses a jet of air at approximately 
350 kPa pressure coming through an orifice of 5 mm 
diameter. It is directed beneath the upper edge of the 
overlapped seam to detect unbonded areas. When such 
an area is located, the air passes through causing 
inflation and fluttering in the localized area. The 
audible sound also changes when unbonded areas are 
encountered. This method works on relatively thin, less 
than 1.00 mm, flexible geomembrane, but it works only 
if, the defect is open at the front edge of the seam where 
the air jet is directed. 


G-12.2.2 Mechanical point stress/Pick test 


The mechanical point stress or the Pick test uses a dull 
tool (such as a blunt screw driver) under the top edge 
of the seam. With care, an installer can detect an 
unbonded area which is easier to separate than a 
properly bonded area. It is a rapid test that obviously 
depends completely on the care and sensitivity of the 
person doing it. Detectibility is similar to that using 
the air lance method and both are very operator 
dependent. 


G-12.2.3 Vacuum Box Test 


A vacuum box assembly consisting of a rigid housing 
with a transparent window and having a soft rubber 
gasket attached to the bottom porthole or assembly and 
а vacuum gauge will be used. Soap solution in plastic 
bucket with a mop shall be made available. The excess 


11 


IS 15351 : 2015 


sheet overlap if any, shall be properly trimmed away. 
Then a strip of geomembrane of length 300 mm shall 
be wetted by the length of box with the soap solution. 
The box shall be placed over the wetted area and 
compressed. Create a vacuum of 0.15 kg/cm? 
to 0.35 kg/cm’. Care shall be taken to ensure that a 
leak proof seal is created. Vacuum shall be maintained 
for a sufficient time that is for a period of approximately 
10 to15 s. Examine the geomembrane through the 
viewing window for presence of any soap bobbles. In 
case no such soap bubbles appear after 10 to15 s, close 
the vacuum valve and open the bleed valve. Thereafter 
move the box over the next area adjoining the tested 
area with a minimum 75 mm overlap. Repeat the 
process as described above. In case animated soap 
bubbles appear, all such areas shall be marked, repaired 
and then retested. 


G-13 POST INSTALLATION PRECAUTIONS 


G-13.1 If there is no proposal of fixing cover system 
over the geomembrane, the pond/reservoir shall be 
filled as soon as possible after installation work to 
ensure that the geomembrane fully adheres to the sub 
grade surface. 


G-13.2 The geomembrane shall be loosened from the 
anchor trench wherever, it is found to be stretched, 
after filling the pond/reservoir. 


G-13.3 The inlet pipe through which liquid intake is 
being done in the pond/reservoir where liquid falls 
continuously at a particular area, such point shall be 
fixed with an extra piece of geomembrane to avoid 
damage at that particular point due to force of the drop. 


G-13.4 A shade net shall be laid at corner of the pond/ 
reservoir. There are chances of some reptiles entering 
into the pond, in spite of fencing. These reptiles can't 
come out of the pond/reservoir as they cannot crawl 
on the geomembrane. Hence to prevent damage to the 
geomembrane, shade nets shall be installed at the 
corners over the geomembrane. 


G-13.5 If a submersible pump is used to draw the liquid 
from the pond/reservoir than an anti-vibration 
mounting or a float shall be used under the submersible 


pump. 


IS 15351 : 2015 


ANNEX H 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Technical Textiles for Agro-tech Sectional Committee, TXD 35 


Organization 
The Synthetic & Art Silk Mills Research Association, Mumbai 


Business Co-ordination House Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 


Central Agricultural University, Imphal 


Central Institute for Research on Cotton Technology, Mumbai 
Central Institute of Plastics Engineering & Technology 


(CIPET), Ahmedabad 


Central Institute of Plastics Engineering & Technology 
(CIPET), Bhopal 


Chandra Shekhar Azad University of Agriculture and 
Technology, Kanpur 
CTM Technical Textiles Ltd, Ahmedabad 


Department of Jute & Fibre Technology, Kolkatta 


Directorate General of Supplies & Disposal, New Delhi 
Flora Agrotech, Vapi 


Garware Wall Ropes Limited, Satara 

Gujarat Green Revolution Company Limited, Vadodara 
Horticulture Training Centre, Pune 

Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi 
Indian Institute of Packaging, Mumbai 

Indian Jute Industries’ Research Association, Kolkata 
Indian Technical Textile Association, Mumbai 
Lamifab & Paper (P) Ltd, Aurangabad 

Maharashtra State Horticulture & Medicinal Plant Board, Pune 
National Committee on Plasticulture Applications in 
Agriculture & Horticulture, New Delhi 


National Jute Board, Kolkatta 


Navsari Agricultural University, Navsari, 


Neo Corp International Limited, Pithampur 


Office of the Textile Commissioner, Mumbai 


Reliance Industries Ltd, New Delhi 


12 


Representative(s) 
Dn U. К. GANcopapHyay (Chairman) 


SHRI SAMIR GUPTA 
SuniMArTI RitikA Gupta (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Dr S. K. CHATTOPADHYAY 
Dn В. GuruprasaD (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Suri P. K. SAHOO 
Dr Asay Kumar NEEMA (Alternate) 


Dn ASHOK KUMAR 
Dn JirENDRA YApav (Alternate) 


SHRI Amit AGARWAL 
SuniMATI JYOTI AGARWAL (Alternate) 


Dn SwaAPAN KUMAR GHOSH 
Pnor S. C. Ray (Alternate) 


ADDITIONAL DIRECTOR GENERAL (QA) 
SHRI SANJAY LOHIYA 


Suri SANJAY RAUT 
Suri S. G. PALUSKAR (Alternate) 


Dr Y. P. SINGH 
Suri P. D. Котак (Alternate) 


SHRI RAVINDRA DESHMUKH 
Suri SAMPAT YADAV (Alternate) 


DR T. V. S. RAJPUT 
Dr NEELAM Park. (Alternate) 


Dr SANJAY CHATTOPADHYA 
Dr TANWEER ALAM (Alternate) 


Suri P. K. CHOUDHURY 
Suri D. К. Biswas (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI SHASHI SINGH 
Ms Priyanka РвАЈАРАТІ (Alternate) 


SHRI KAMLEISH Оноот 
Suri KisHort LaL Duoor (Alternate) 


SHRI JEEVAN RAGHUNATH BUNDE 


SHRI KRISH S IYENGAR 
Suri K. K. Kausnar (Alternate) 


SHRI TAPOBRATA SANYAL 


SHRI ALOK KUMAR Kuastaair (Alternate) 


Dr B. G. SALANKI 
Dr V. P. Uspapia (Alternate) 


SHRI SUNIL KUMAR TRIVEDI 
SHRI Аѕнок Kumar Gupta (Alternate) 


SHRI AJAY PANDIT 
Suni M. BALASUBRAMANIAN (Alternate) 


Suri M. S. VERMA 
SHRI SHRICHAND SANTANI (Alternate) 


IS 15351 : 2015 


Organization Representative(s) 


Shri Ambica Polymer Pvt Ltd, Ahmedabad SHRIMATI JYOTIKA NAGRI 
Mns. Anusa МАГМІҮА (Alternate) 


Texel Industries Limited, Kalol SHRI SHAILESH R MEHTA 
Suri SusuiL PAcHIsIA (Alternate) 


Textiles Committee, Mumbai Suri К. V. КАО 
Suri R. CHANDRAN (Alternate) 


The Bombay Textile Research Association, Mumbai Suri V. К. PATIL 
Suri RAVIKANT (Alternate) 


The Synthetic & Art Silk Mills Research Association, Mumbai DR ManisHA MATHUR 
SHRIMATI ASHWINI SUDAM (Alternate) 


BIS Directorate General SHRI PRABHAKAR Ral, Scientist “Е” and Head (TXD) 
[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
Suri J. К. GUPTA 
Scientist ‘C’ (TXD), BIS 


13 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TXD 35 (1313). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.L. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


