( Reaffirmed 2002 )

IS:10291-1982

Indian Standard
SAFETY CODE FOR DRESS DIVERS IN CIVIL ENGINEERING WORKS
Safety
Chairman
SHltI

in Construction

Sectional

Committee,
Represer. ting

BDC

45

D. N.

CHOPRA

In personal capacity ( A-9133, Vacant Vihar, Jvew Delhi 110057 ); and Institution of Engineers ( India ), Calcutta

Members Central Public Works Department, New Delhi CHIEF ENGINEER ( TIEAINING) SUPERINTENDING ENGINFEE ( TRAINING ) ( Alternate ) Central Water Commission, New Delhi DIRECTOR ( CGPC ) DEPUTY DIRECTOIL( CGPC 1 ( Alternate ) ' ' Directorate General of Mines Safety, Dhanbad DIRECTOR, MINES SAFE& JOINT MINES DIRECTOR, SAFETY ( Alternate ) Ministry of Labour and Emolovment SHRI H. N. GUPTA I SHRI G.~AIDYANATHAN ( Alternate ) ' Ministry of Railways SHRI S. P. S. JAIN The Institution of Surveyors, India, New Delhi SHRI R. L. KUMAR Hindustan Pre-Fab Ltd, New Delhi SHRI G. K. MAJ~MDAI~. &RI H. S. PASRICHA ( Alternate ) Ministry of Home Affairs SIIRI G. B. MPNON Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters, DR H. C. PARMESWARAN New Delhi SHRI D. K. DINKAR ( Alternate ) Steel Authority of India Ltd ( Durgz Steel Plant ) SHRI K. N. RAMAMURTHY SHRI S. R. C. RAO Alternate I ~~--- ( \ --~-- ) Builders' Association of India, Bombay REPRESENTATIVE SHRI J. M. OBROI ( Alternate ) Hindustan Construction Co Ltd, Bombay SHRI M. S. RUDRAKSHI SHRI S. T. RANDE ( Alternate ) Gammon India Limited, Bombay SHRI S. R. SIVASWAMY SH~I D. M. DHARAP ( Alternate ) National Buildings Organization, New Delhi &RI K. S. SRJNIVASAN SHRI SASHI~ANT ( Alternate ) NatioDn;LiBuildings Construction Corporation, New SI~RI SUSIXIL KUMAR PaOE C. G. SWAMlNATIr.4N Centri Road Delhi Research Institute (CSIR ), NCW

( Continued on page 2 )

INDIAN

@ Copyrrghf 1982 STANDARDS INSTITUTION

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyri,ght Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the pub!ishrr shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS :10291- 1982 (Continuedfrompage
Members 1) Representing

SBTEI TILAR RAJ TARULIA Indian Institute of Architects, New Delhi SHI~I B. T. UNWALLA Concrete Association of India, Bombay SHRI Y. K. MCHTA ( &ernafe ) SIIJX G. VENI<ATASFLTJ Ministry of Shipping and Transport S 11x1PIN ABFULA KTJMAR ( Alternate ) Sr:n~ R. S. VERM~ Geological Survey of India, Calcutta SHRI I'. L. NARUL~ ( Alternate ) SHRI G. R~M.AN, Director General, IS1 ( Ex-ojicio Member ) Director ( Civ Engg ) SHRI VIJAY RBJ Assistant Director ( Civ Engg ), IS1

2

IS:10291-1982

Indian Standard
SAFETY CODE FOR DRESS DIVERS IN CIVIL ENGINEERING WORKS

0.
0.1 This

FOREWORD

Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 30 August 1982, after the draft finalized by the Safety in Construction Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council.

0.2 Many works in the field of civil engineering require workmen to carry out their jobs in under-water works, deep foundations and tunnel works, etc. Working in such conditions requires several precautions to be observed to safeguard the workmen against severe hazards to life. IS : 4138-1977" has already been prepared which lays down the safety requirements for WOIk in compressed air under taken in construction works, such as foundations of bridges, docks and tunnels. This standard of dress divers with has been prepared to cover workin, (+ conditions helmet equipment. 0.2.1 Since in civil engineering works, diving beyond 60 m depth is not required, the provrsions of this standard are applicable for diving only up to 60 m depth. 0.3 Adoption of these predetermined safety measures in the diving operations in civil engineering works will not only reduce accidents to the minimum but also promote quicker and risk-free working of the workmen resulting in increased efficiency and thereby effecting overall This standard has, therefore, been formulated with a view to economy. give necessary guidance with regard to safety requirements, to all those entrusted with the execution of diving operations in civil engineering works. 6.4 In the formulation of this standard due weightage has been given to international coordination among the standards and practices prevailrng in different countries in addition to relating it to the practices in the field In this regard, assistance has been taken from the in this country. following publication in the preparation of tables for duration cf ilive and decompression time as specified in 6.1 and 6.2.
*Safety code for iorking in compressed air

(first revision ).

3

IS : 10291- 1982
BR 2806 DIVING MANUAL, MINISTRY ( NAVY ) Her Majesty's Office, LONDON, 1972. OF DEFENCE

0.5 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in The number of significant places retained accordance with IS : 2-1960". in the rounded value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

off

1. SCOPE
1.1 This standard covers the safety aspects relating to diving operations, where divers in the standard diving dress or helmet are employed on works of civil engineering construction and maintenance. 1.1.1 This standard does not cover employment of divers in other operations, such as, exploration of sea bottom, under-water rescue, open sea conditions, etc. 2. PERSONNEL 2.1 Qualifications water unless: of Divers No person shall be employed under-

a) he has attained

the age of 18 years,

b) he has been certified as being fit for diving by a qualified medical practitioner within the previous six months. Radiographs of his chest and bones should be taken at not more than 12 months intervals, c) before taking up emplopyment he has been satisfactorily tested to the maximum pressure he is to work in diving dress in water or to an equivalent pressure in a compression chamber, and d) he has a thorough knowledge of diving signals ( see Appendix A ).

2.1.1 Helmet divers shall be competent in the use of helmet diving equipment. This will include the ability to walk on to a ladder, remain on the ladder for five minutes without interruption of air supply, descend into the water, conduct a circular search in the bottom under conditions of no visibility and in at least 0.6 metre depth of mud or soft silt, work on platform suspended under water, etc. *Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). 4

IS:10291- 1982 2.2 Diving Supervisor - A competent supervisor shall be present at He shall be familar all times when diving operations are in progress. He shall with this code and shall take charge of the diving operations. also be fully familiar with the decompression procedures including theropatic decompression in recompression chamber ( see IS : 4138-1977" ). It is essential that he has previous experience as a diver.
2.2.1 The responsibilities of the supervisor shall include the following:

a) Ensure that all persons connected with the diving operations under his supervision comply with the requirements of this code, b) Allocate c) Ensure duties of the diving the safety crews during diving operations,

of all personnel

under his supervision,

d) Ensure that sufficient number of signalmen and stand-by divers are present at the site during the whole of the operation, and e) Carry physical examination before each use. 2.3 Responsibility of the of all the diving equipment personally

Employer diving operations code in so far as examination of shall they

4 b)

Every employer of workmen undertaking comply with the requirements of this effect any one employed by him, The employer shall arrange by the code, and

for any medical

required of

The divers fitness register containing fitness shall be kept by the employer. 2.4 Signaller - The signaller shall be medically He shall have been certified by competent knowledge of first aid artificial respiration. 3. SAFEGUARDS 3.1 Where any person is employed under-water requirements shall be complied with:

details

certificates

fit and mentally alert. authority for having

as a diver,

the following

a) A lifeline shall be provided for his use and arran.gements shall be made for an effective signalling between the diver and the signal attendent ( see Appendix A ), b) Adequate attendance number of competent persons upon him to ensure his safety, shall be employed in

*Safety code for working in compressed air (Jht 5

revision ).

IS : 10291- 1982
c) A stand-by diver provided with sufficient available to render assistance in emergency. ditions, he shall be fully dressed, and d) A control mencement point shall be established of diving operations. equipment shall be In hazardous conbefore corn-

on the surface

3.2 A diver shall not be permitted to corrmence work on empty stomach or within 2 hours of the consumption of a substantial meal. He shall not dive EO long as he is under the inAuence of alcohol or intoxicating drugs consumed by him and if such effects are visible the supervisor sha]] prohibit him from diving. 3.3 While operating at night two red lights fixed approximately 2 apart horizontally and visible all round shall be displayed at the control point. While diving operations are in progress whether time or in night, no power driven vessel shall be operated and no water explosion shall be carried cut in the vicinity. metres surface in iay under-

are carried out at 3.4 Diving at an Altitude - If diving operations altitude, for example in a mountain lake adjustment shall be made to the decompression schedules to compensate for the surface pressure being less than one bar.
No~x--Recommended are given below: adjustments to be made lo the decompression schedules

a) Dives between altitudes the depth of dive,

of 100 to 300 m: Add 25 prrccnt

of the depth to calculate of the depth depth to to

b) Dives between altitudes of 300 to 2 000 m: calculate the depth of dive,

Add 30 pcrcrnt

c) Dives,between altitudes of 2 COOto 3 000 m: Add 50 percent calculate the depth of dive, and d) No adjustments are required for altitudes up to 100 m.

of the

3.5 Access - Divers shall not be expected to climb up long vertical A light ladder co constructed ladders with or without their equipment. that it can be angled and can protrude into the water shall be used, as far as possible. 4. EQUIPMENT

4.1 Helmet - Tile non-return inlet valve through which pump enters the helmet shall be inspected daily. Damage
threads and bearing surfaces are the main points to guard 4.1.1 After use, the helmet shall be wiped out, firstly dampened in fresh water and then with a dry cloth SO salt and dampness.

air from :i,e to the screw against.

with
`m to

a cloth get rid of

6

IS : 102914.1.2 The visors :,hall be inspected daily and any cracked Spare glacses shall be maintained at the site.

1982

ones replaced.

4.2 Airpipe - Before bringing in use any length of air-pipe, it shall be ensured tlrat it can withstand the intended air pressure with a factor of safety of, at least, two and is composed of materials acceptable for such use. 4.3 Telephone - Divers' telephone,: have to work under most unfavourThe helmet is always damp and there is a possibility ab!c con litions. Care, attention and of moisture entering the te!ephone diaphragm. gentle han*lling are es<ential to maintain reliable communication. All cable connections shall be checked daily to rectify loose connections. 4.4 Ladder - The lad& for gettin, u in and out of the water shall have the railing carried up, at least, one metre above the top rung so that when the (liver has his feet on the top rung, he has the support to steady himself. 4.5 Air Pump -- `LXe air compressor or pump and the connected system shall be tested daily for leakage and to determine that the pressure can within the system, at the full working pressure of the be maintained tlive? after the pump or the compressor has stopped. and deliver 4.5.1 A hand pump shall turn, without undue friction, the required quantum of air aqain:t high pressure. The water jackets fitted round the cylin,!er.; shall be kept fitted with water to ensure cooling. The water slrall be changed ai soon a+ it warms up. 4.5.2 The gauges shall he tested every six months, an error is suspected. or earlier whenever

4.5.3 Power driven compressors should always be used where more than one diver is employe{l or where continuous diving is called for. 4.5.3.1 The capacity of the compressor shall be such supply at least two divers in the maximum depth envisaged. that it can

4.5.3.2 `The compressor shall always supply its air through a receiver, the capacity of which shall be such that the diver can be brouyht to the surface in safety in the event of a breakdown of the compress or ( see 5.2 ). There shall be a separate receiver to supply air to each it is recommended that the diver carries on his diver. In addition, back two cylinders filled with compressed air, which he may avail of for bailing out of water, in the event of failure of air supply from the surface. 4.5.3.3 The intake of the air compressor shall be away from the sources of any smoke or harmful gases and the filter used shall be replaced as and when required. 7

IS:10291-1982 4.5.4 The air shall be cooled to ambient temperature, to remove any possible impurities and moisture.
dried and filtered

4.6 Diving Dress - When in regular use, dresses shall be hung up at These shall not be spread out in the sun. night over a jackstay to drain. 4.6.1 Special care shall be taken when the dress is to be maintained Any salt shall be washed and the dress in between uses at long intervals. dried before storage in a cool place in the dark. 4.6.2 Repairs to the dress shall be promptly the manufacturer's instructions. carried out according to.

4.7 Medical Lock - Where the maximum operating depth exceeds 20 m, a suitably constructed medical lock shall be provided and maintained and used solely for the treatment of persons working in compressed air. The medical lock and its use shall conform to the provisions. of IS : 4138-1977". 5.

SUPPLY OF AIR

and in adequate quantity In order to at a suitabIe pressure consistent with the depth of working. avoid contamination of air supply, the compressor and cylinders shall be The compressor and the air hoses properly maintained at all times. Except in an emergency, shall be suited for air used for respiration. the compressor designed for industrial use shall not be used for air supply as the effciency of its filters is inadequate. Hose pipes previously used for industrial purposes shall not be used as these are likely to be contaminated with dirt. 5.2 Air Requirement - The minimum air supply required for a diver,. in normal working conditions is 45 litres per minute but may go up to 75 litres per minute in case of hard work. The total air output requirements may be decided by multiplying the diver's requirements by the. For example, hard work at 30 metres depth absolute pressure in bars. will require 75 litres x 4 bars absolute, that is, 300 litres per minute of compressor capacity.

5.1 The air supply shall be fit for respiration

6. DECOMPRESSION 6.1 Decompression
may be carried ou c in water or in the medical lock on the surface. When the depth exceeds 10 m, suitable decompression. It shall be carried out in accorarrangements shall be provided at site. dance with the decompression tables given in IS : 4138-1977* for depths. up to 35 m and for greater depths the decompression time shall be calculated by adding 5 minutes to the time for the corresponding depths as given in the table under 6.2. .*Safety code for working in compressed air (Jirsl w&ion ). 8

IS : 102!H6.2 Duration of Dive placed on the duration be applied: Depth (ml

1982

ofdive.

Up to about 18 m depth, there is no limit For greater depths, the following may Decompression Time ( min ) 35 35 30 35 35 30 35 30 30 30 35 25 30 35 25

Duration of Time from Leaving Surface to of Ascent Beginning ( min ): Max Normal working hours 95 75 65 55 45 40 35 30 25 25 20 20 20 15

up to 18 18-21 21-24 24-27 27-30 30-33 33-36 36-39 39-42 42-45 45-48 48-51 51-54 54-57 57-60

APPENDIX A [ Clauses 2.1(d) and 3.1 (a) ]
STANDARD LINE SIGNALS A-l. A stout long line shall be used for signals. The line shall be laid over the right shoulder of user from the rear and under the left arm clear of all parts of other equipment and the end of the line shall be secured round the belt at the back and over the standing part of the line, so that the user can be pulled out when in difficulties. Various signals shown in Table 1 shall have the meaning as indicated against each:
9

IS:10291-1982
TABLE 1 STANDARD SIGNALS AND THEIR MEANINGS

(' Clause A-l ) SL No. 1.
SICZNAL

MEANING User Attendant I am alright, stop lowering me. I am stopping

One pull on the line

Are you atright? lowering you.

2.

Two pulls

on

the line

User Attendant

Pay out more line and lower me further. I am paying out more line I am lowering you. I am taking I am pulling Danger, `Danger' in slack you up. line or

3.

Three pulls on the line

User Attendant

Take in slack line or pull me up. or

4.

Succession

of pulls

User Attendant

help me out. I am pulling you out

"

NOTE - All signals shall be repeated from either end to ensure that these are understood and are being acted upon.

