NAT HA IS 4464 : 2020 
Indian Standard 


aaa aa A Ste cht EAT 
afit eni fererzor ht refer 3n fat 
MUT HT HIS 
(FUGA) 


Code of Practice for Presentation 
of Drilling Information and Core 
Description in Geotechnical 
Investigation 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 93.020 


@ BIS 2020 


anda HIS Sm 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 serere TH HM, +ç fref — 110002 


— SÍ MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


January 2020 Price Group 5 


Geological Investigation and Subsurface Exploration, WRD 05 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Geological Investigation and Subsurface Exploration Sectional Committee had been approved by the Water 
Resources Division Council. 


With the increased number of river valley projects and other major civil engineering works being undertaken in 
the wake of planned development of the country, tremendous amount of coring type of diamond drilling is being 
carried out. Each organization handling the individual projects is maintaining a record of the drilling data in its 
own way. In some cases (specially in case of small works) it also happens that no record of the drilling data is 
maintained at all. As drilling is a very costly process, it is of utmost importance that full information from the holes 
drilled should be maintained in a standard way for reference and utilization on a future date, should the need arise. 


This Indian Standard was first published in 1967. Based on experience gained through the use of the standard it 
had been revised in 1985 which included the following major changes: 


a) numbering system of sheets in the proforma; 


b) addition of systematic rock description, rock weathering classification, discontinuity spacing and rock 
strength; and 

c) addition of a new proforma for consolidated drilling log. 
The present revision has been taken up to reflect the field experiences gained in the area. 
For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the results of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rounding off numerical values (revised). The number of significant places retained in the rounded 
off value should be the ‘same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 4464 : 2020 


Indian Standard 


CODE OF PRACTICE FOR PRESENTATION OF 
DRILLINGINFORMATION AND CORE DESCRIPTION 
IN GEOTECHNICALINVESTIGATION 


( Second Revision ) 


1SCOPE 


This standard gives recommended proforma for 
keeping drill core records of exploratory drilling 
and for presenting drilling information relating to 
geotechnical investigations for river valley projects. 
General guidance for core description and for giving 
details in the proforma is also given. 


2 STANDARD PROFORMA FOR KEEPING 
DRILL RECORDS 


2.1 This proforma (see Annex A) is expected to provide 
an accurate and comprehensive record of the geological 
conditions encountered together with any other relevant 
information obtained during drilling. 


2.2 One sheet of the proforma should be used for one 
shift of drilling only, and should be filled by specially 
trained core observers who shall be present whole 
time on the drilling job. The number of core observers 
required to cover a drilling machine will thus depend 
on the number of shifts the machine is running. 


2.3 The proforma duly filled together with the cores 
should be examined at site by the engineering geologist 
of project for preparation of the geological log of hole. 


2.4 Where an engineering geologist is not readily 
available, the information should be recorded by the 
core observer in 'drilling log book’ at site, the proforma 
of which is given in Annex B, so that field observations 
are readily available in one register. 


3STANDARD PROFORMA FOR PRESENTING 
DRILLING INFORMATION 


3.1 Proforma 


The proforma which should be used for presenting 
drilling information is given in Annex C. 


3.2 Paper 
3.2.1 Size of Paper 


The overall width of the paper may be so chosen as 
to avoid wastage of printing paper. The length of the 
paper may be chosen to accommodate a log of 30 m or 


60 m length of the hole as found necessary. It is found 
from experience that except for deep holes, most of the 
holes on construction projects are within this depth. For 
deeper holes, two or more sheets may be used. 


3.2.2 It is desirable to use tracing paper for the proforma 
as this will enable prints being taken directly from the 
original log and will remove the necessity of tracing the 
same. However, keeping in view the developments in 
computerized drawings, digitization of the format can 
be done and value or date can be readily filled. This will 
enable standard production of geological logs which 
can also be sent or received in soft copy. 


3.3 Scale 


In the metric system a scale of 1 : 100 may be used for 
representing the depth in the bore hole. However, in 
case of deeper holes, 1 : 200 scale may also be used 
without compromising the quantum of data needed for 
detailed log sheet (s). 


3.4 Width of the Columns 


The recommended width of each column for 
convenience of record of geological log of a drill- 
hole is given in Annex C. These have been kept at the 
minimum required for legible filling of the data therein. 


3.5 Thickness of the Lines of the Column 


The main lines of the columns may be drawn in black 
ink so that they may come out very prominently on the 
print. The other lines, which may be drawn in pencil, 
will come in fainter shade and are meant to serve only 
as guides for plotting purposes. 


In case of digitized drawings, main lines of the columns 
may be of 17^ points thickness and other lines may be 
of % or % point thick. 


3.6 Details of the Columns 
3.6.1 General 


The columns in the proforma are intended to be 
exhaustive so as to incorporate the full details which 
can be had from the cores. The number of holes should 
be prominently given in the rectangle at the right hand 
top corner. If there are n number of sheets used in one 


IS 4464 : 2020 


hole, these may be numbered as 1/n (sheet 1 of n), 
2/n (sheet 2 of n), 3/n (sheet 3 of n) and so on .The 
procedure given in 3.6.2 should be followed for filling 
up the proforma. 


3.6.2 Standard Method of Core Description 


3.6.2.1 It is endeavoured to incorporate as much 
information in the columns, as is conveniently possible, 
without making the proforma too cumbersome. The 
general principle adopted is to present the data in 
graphical form but in some cases where it is not 
possible to give graphical representation, resort to 
tabular representation may be made. Digital form of 
log may also be used with proper authentication. 


3.6.2.2 The horizontal columns on top of the proforma 
are self explanatory. The detailed procedure for filling 
the vertical columns are given below: 


a) Elevation — The depth mark at every metre be 
shown, while every 3 metre is to be written in 
the description column. A horizontal line should 
be drawn and its R. L. written, corresponding to 
every significant entry in the subsequent columns, 
for example, at the start and at the end of a litho 
unit or a major shear zone (the same may also be 
shown). 


b 


= 


Lithology — After the cores have been examined 
carefully, the description in regard to their lithology 
should be entered in this column using accepted 
symbols. In cases where many subdivisions of 
a standard rock type have to be used suitable 
derivatives from the accepted symbol may be 
evolved and used but explained. 


A horizontal line should be drawn in the description 
and log column at every change of the lithology of the 
cores and thus only one symbol would be used in the log 
column between two horizontal lines. Corresponding 
to this entry in the log column, the name of the rock 
type should be entered in block letters against it in the 
description column of the lithology. Below this line 
in brackets and in small letters should be entered the 
depths of the hole between which the particular rock 


type is met, for example (10 m — 15 m). If necessary, 
a brief geological description of the rock type, such as 
colour, grain size or any other feature (for example, 
greyish white, fine grained and calcareous) may be 
given in the column observation and interpretation. 
The tendency to describe bed rock only should not 
be practiced. Description of overburden in terms of 
boulders or cobbles with matrix needs to be completed 
as information about overburden also is very important 
in many engineering designs, for use of equipment for 
construction as well as for geological interpretation. 
Care should be taken that all entries are accommodated 
within the vertical space available against the respective 
log column. 


c) Systematic Rock Description — The following 
standard sequence of systematic description is 
proposed: 


1) Weathered state, 
2) Structure, 

3) 
4) 


Colour, 

Grain size: 

1) subordinate particle size, 

11) texture, 

111) alteration state, and 

iv) cementation state as relevant. 
5) 
6) 
7) 

It is considered that the qualifications are more 

important in core descriptions than the actual rock 

name and, for this reason, the name should be placed 

last. Such a system is appropriate to an engineering 

description where classification by mechanical 

properties is more significant than classification by 

mineralogy and texture. The description for each litho 

unit met with should be written under the columns 

‘Special Observations and Interpretations of the 


Proforma’. The following examples are provided for 
illustrative purposes. 


Rock strength, 
Minerals, rock type as observed, and 


rock name. 


Fresh Foliated Dark Grey Coarse Very Strong Hornblende Gneiss 
i ii iii iv v vi(a) vi 
Moderately Thickly Cream Medium- Strong Dolomitic Limestone 
Weathered Bedded Grained 
i ii 111 iv V vi(a) vi 
Completely Thinly Mid-grey Very coarse Porphyritic Kaolinized 
weathered Flow banded 
i ii iii iv iv(b) vi(c) 
Weak Tourmaline Granite 
M vi(a) vi 


Weathering classification — Weathering should be 
graphically represented as per the BGd classification 
of ISRM (1981). This classification is reproduced 
below for ready reference. Weathering grade has been 
represented by symbols W1 to W5 depending upon the 
extent of weathering as per the description given below. 
If weathering is of W2 grade, respective column should 
be shaded by pencil (or medium grey colour is used in 
digital versions). 


Item Description Grade 


Fresh No visible sign of rock W 
material weathering; perhaps 
slight discoloration on major 
discontinuity surfaces. 


1 


Slightly Discolouration indicates W 
weathered weathering of rock material 
and discontinuity surfaces. 
All the rock material may be 
discoloured by weathering 
and may be somewhat 
weaker externally than in its 
fresh condition. 


Moderately Less than half of the rock W 
weathered material is decomposed 
and/or disintegrated to a 
soil. Fresh or discoloured 
rock is present either as a 
discontinuous framework or 
as core stones. 


Highly More than half of the rock W 
material is decomposed 
and/or disintegrated to a 

soil. Fresh or discoloured 
rock is present either as a 
discontinuous framework or 

as core stones. 


weathered 


Completely All rock material is W 

weathered decomposed and/or 
disintegrated to soil. The 
original mass structure is still 
largely intact. 


d) Size of Core Pieces — As the main interest on 
engineering projects is the evaluation of the 
physical condition of the rock type, this column 
is of great interest. A 100 percent core recovery 
may on one hand be consisting of big rods of 
cores while on another may be composed of small 


e 


wm 


IS 4464 : 2020 


included in one column. As in general the cores 
are broken in small pieces the lower ranges have 
been given more representation and the column is 
divided into <10 mm, 10 to 20mm, 20 to 60 mm, 
60 to 100 mm and above 100 mm groups. If core 
pieces are smaller than 60 mm, it means rock mass 
is shattered/crushed. A horizontal line should be 
drawn at each change of the size of core entered 
and the zone from the zero size line to the size line 
recorded should be shaded by inclined pencil lines 
(or % point lines in digital versions). 


Structural Condition — In this column the 
structural condition ofthe cores should be entered, 
for example, heavily sheared and crushed, 
moderately sheared, blocky and massive, etc. 
Suitable symbols should be entered in the log 
column with horizontal lines separating each 
entry and their description or name with the 
depths entered in the description column, in the 
same manner in which the lithology column is 
filled. Special features, like major joint planes, 
fractures, faults, etc, may be graphically plotted 
with their actual amount of dips in the log column 
here. Other useful details, such as the condition of 
weathering may also be recorded in this column 
with suitable symbols as indicated in 3.6.2.2(c). 


Discontinuity Spacing — Considerations of 
discontinuity spacing should lead to an appraisal 
of rock mass structure; this may be assisted by 
field observation. In the case of sedimentary rock, 
where bedding may be the dominant discontinuity, 
it is possible to recognize and define a bedding 
spacing from borehole cores. This system has the 
advantage that the scale is related to that used in 
the mechanical analysis of soils. The following 
classification should be followed: 


Classification Bedding Plane 
Spacing 
Very thickly bedded 2 000 mm 
Thickly bedded 600 to 2 000 mm 
Medium bedded 200 to 600 mm 
Thinly bedded 60 to 200 mm 
Very thinly bedded 20 to 60 mm 
Laminated 6 to 20 mm 
Thinly laminated «6mm 


broken pieces of less than 10 mm each. The entry 
in this column should be in a graphical manner 
to give a visual idea of the condition of the core. 
If the core pieces are bigger than 100 mm, they 
are accounted for in the Rock Quality Designation 
(RQD). Therefore, core pieces of 100 mm and 
longer have been included in one column. On the 
other hand core pieces of less than 10 mm size are 


For igneous and metamorphic rocks the separation 
of the integral rock discontinuities (such as foliation, 
flow-banding, etc) may be described by adaptation 
of the bedding plane spacing scale given above, for 
example, medium foliated gneiss. It is suggested that 
“close” and ‘very close’ are applied to that part of the 
scale where a sedimentary rock would be described as 
‘laminated’ or ‘thinly laminated’. 


IS 4464 : 2020 


Terms, such as blocky, intact, uniform, etc, may be used 
providing these terms are defined in the preamble to the 
bore-hole records and are based on in-situ inspection of 
the rock mass or by deduction from several boreholes. 


g) Core Recovery — In this column the core recovery 


h 


j 


k 


m 


wn 


— 


wa 


— 


should be plotted in graphical form. A horizontal 
line should be drawn at the interval of each run of 
drilling and the line representing the percentage of 
core recovery entered should be shaded by inclined 
pencil lines. The percentage of core recovery may 
also be written in the column, in addition. 

Rock Quality Designation (RQD) This 
classification is based on a modified core recovery 
procedure, which in turn, is based indirectly on the 
number of fractures and the amount of softening 
or alteration in the rock mass as observed in the 
rock cores from a drill hole. ROD shall be based 
on IS 11315 (Part 11) : 1985. 


Fracture Frequency — RQD given above however, 
does not take into account the joint opening and 
condition; a further disadvantage being that with 
fracture spacing greater than 100 mm the quality 
is excellent irrespective of the actual spacing. This 
difficulty is overcome by using fracture frequency. 
Fracture frequency is a measurement of number of 
joints/fractures per metre length. The rock quality 
relation between RQD and fracture frequency is 
given as under: 


Description of ROD, Fracture 
Rock Quality Percent Frequency 
perm 
Very poor 0-25 Over 15 
Poor 25-50 15-8 
Fair 50-75 8-5 
Good 75-90 5-1 
Excellent 90-100 Less than 1 


Size of Hole — A horizontal line should be drawn 
at the change of the size of the hole and a vertical 
line with arrow heads with the size of the hole ( 
NX, BX, etc ) written in the middle of it should 
be drawn in the entire portion of the column, 
representing the particular size of the hole. Thus if 
the entire hole is of NX size only one vertical line 
will be drawn from top to bottom of the column 
with arrow heads on both the ends with NX 
written along it, midway. But if there is a change, 
one portion, with the two arrow heads, will have 
NX written in it, while the other will have BX; and 
so on for AX and EX. 


Casing — Each vertical column in this heading is 
meant for different sizes of the casings normally 
used during drilling. The blank column is meant to 
cover any special size which might have been used 
in some cases. A horizontal line should be drawn 


n 


p 


q 


r 


S 


— 


— 


= 


— 


— 


in each column at the depth to which the respective 
sizes of the casing have been lowered and as all of 
these have to extend up to the top, vertical line 
from top to the horizontal lines drawn below with 
arrow heads on each end should be drawn in each 
of the columns. Horizontal lines may further be 
drawn within the columns to indicate the stages in 
which the individual type of casing was lowered 
to its final depth. 


Depth of Water Level — The depth of the 
water level as observed during drilling should 
be recorded in this column. A horizontal line 
should be drawn at the depth to which the hole 
had progressed when the reading was taken and 
just above this line, the depth to water level from 
surface should be entered. For example, if the 
depth to water in the hole was 25 m when the hole 
had been drilled to 30 m depth, a horizontal line 
should be drawn in this column at 25 m depth (see 
IS 5313). 


Drill Water Loss — The loss of drilling water 
should be recorded graphically in this column. 
A horizontal line should be drawn separating the 
different drilling runs. The percentage of water loss 
in individual runs should be entered by vertical 
lines corresponding to the respective losses and 
the portion between the zero percent loss and the 
line representing the loss in the run should be 
shaded by inclined pencil lines. In case the losses 
are given in qualitative terms rather than percent 
of loss, for example, complete, partial or no water 
loss, 100 percent, 50 percent and 0 percent values 
respectively, as shown in the title of the column 
may be used [ see Note under (s)]. 


Permeability — The permeability of the material 
of any section, as calculated, may be entered in 
this column. The permeability values should either 
be entered in Lugeons or cm/s. 

NOTE — A Lugeon unit of permeability is a water loss of 
one litre per minute per metre of drill hole at a pressure of 10 
atmospheres maintained for ten minutes. 

Penetration Rate — The rate of penetration is 
primarily dependent on the type of the rock. It, 
of course, depends on many other factors like 
the intensity of joints, nature of infilling material, 
degree of weathering of the rock, etc; even then 
it is very useful in interpreting the geological 
conditions together with other details. It is, 
therefore, suggested that a suitable vertical column 
for the graphical or numerical presentation of the 
rate of penetration in mm/minute may be provided. 


Special Observations and Interpretations — This 
column is meant for recording the interpretations 
drawn on the basis of factual data recorded in the 
previous columns. The physical condition and 
quality of the overburden and rock, causes as to 
breaking up of the drill core, presence of confined 


IS 4464 : 2020 


or free ground water conditions, and record of overburden zone. In many cases the classification 
grouting done, if any, and results of percolation and composition of the overburden assumes great 
and permeability data should be detailed in significance both for the project and for academic 
relation to the foundation features. In addition purpose; 

to the tests specified above it will be desirable to c) Endeavour should be made to record all the 
carry out standard penetration test (see IS 2131 : information which can be had from the hole, 


1981) especially for weathered rock for assessing 


| á i though it may look irrelevant for the specific job 
its bearing capacity. 


in hand. Drilling being a very costly affair, this 


NOTE — In interpreting water losses caution should be information will otherwise be lost forever; and 
exercised to eliminate the effect of water losses occurring at a 


horizon other than that for which the observation is recorded. d) Strength — It will be desirable to indicate in the 
In this connection interpretation on the basis of a combined final presentation of drilling data the strength 
study will be advantageous. characteristics of the rock material. For this 
t) Conclusions — The entries in this column should purpose, a scale of strength, based on uniaxial 
be restricted to the specific results for which the compressive tests, is recommended as under 
exploratory hole was drilled. Dependent on the Table 1. 
requirements of the civil engineering structure, . 
significant data and interpretations may be drawn Table 1 Strength of Intact Rock Material 
for the following: ( Clause 3.6.2.3 ) 
1) Nature and depth of overburden material; 
: SI ualitative description Compressive 
2) Depth and elevation to fresh and sound rock; No. » P eh (Mpa) 
3) nn of recommended stripping/foundation (1) 0) 6) 
Ye i) Extremely Weak «I 
4) Permeability of foundation rocks and need or ii) Very Weak ias 
otherwise of grouting; 
ii) Weak 5-25 
5) Nature and depth of ground water table (free, 
confined or perched) iv) Medium Strong 25-50 
6) Results of tests conducted on cores/weak V). Siong Mp 
zones, etc; and vi) Very Strong 100-250 
7) Possible implications of significant weak Vi) Extremely Strong 7250 
zones and methods of remedial treatment, etc. Terms in first Column (*) redefined according to ISO 14689 


3.6.2.3 General 


a) If data for filling any column has not been observed — 3.6.2.4 Core photography- In order to have a permanent 


or is not available, the respective column should record, the core boxes should be photographed clearly 
be left blank; depicting hole numbers, box numbers and depth. A 


b) Details of all the reaches of the cores recovered — pietre Ina eS 


should be entered even if they may belong to the 


ANNEXA 
( Clause 2.1 ) 


DAILY DRILL REPORT 
Project 
Location 
Drilling Machine i. Machine No Hole No Date 
ii. Machine Type Co-ordinates Shift From | To (h) 
(h) 
Feed: Screw/ hydraulic Bearing of hole Collar 
elevation 
Pump i. Make/Pump No Angle with horizontal Ground 
elevation 
ii. Capacity Depth drilled during the |: | From (m) | To (m) Depth of At At end 
shift water level start | of shift 
in the hole of (m): 
shift 
(m): 
iii. Pressure Used 
(N/mm?) 
CASING LOWERED | RUN LENGTH | GEAR RATE OF TYPE AND | WATER | COLOUR SR. SIZE | CORE RECOVERY | TYPE REMARKS 
DRILLED | / Rpm | PENETRATION | SIZEOF LOSS OF NO OF OF OF 
(m) (mm/minute) HOLE (see Drill | RETURN | CORE | CORE ROCK 
Size | From | To |From| To (mm) observer's | WATER | PIECES | PIECES | Length | Percentage Type of core 
(mm) | depth | depth | (m) | (m) remark 1) (mm) (m) of Core barrel 
(m) (m) recovery Single / 
Double / 
Triple 


SUPPLIES 


Petrol Diesel Lubricant Misc 
0) a) 0 


Drill Foreman/Supervisor 
Officer — in — Charge 


Type and 
Size 


BITS USED 


mam C 


Operator 
Drill Observer 


Old / New with Carat load, and Make Stones per Carat 
Number 


0707 : HOH SI 


DRILL OBSERVER’S REMARKS 


1) Water loss during driling may either be 
recorded as: 


1) complete when no water is coming out; 
partial; or nil water loss; or 


11) in percentage of return water [ 100 percent 
loss when no water is coming back and 
no water loss ( 0 percent ) when all the 
drilling water is coming back ]. 

2) Penetration speed in special zones (soft or 
broken zones); and other details of drilling like 
heavy vibration recorded during drilling. 


IS 4464 : 2020 


3) Reasons for heavy core loss as integrated with 


4) 


5 


— 


speed of drilling and rate of penetration. 


Any special conditions not recorded; for 
example, depth at which blasting was done 
while driving casing, depth at which hole 
was grouted, artesian water conditions (if any 
observed) during drilling. 


If water flows are encountered at the collar of 
the drill, then the pressure head and discharge 
atthe collar should be recorded. On completion 
of the hole, the pressure decline over a period 


IS 4464 : 2020 


ANNEX B 


( Clause 2.4 ) 


CONSOLIDATED DRILLING LOG 


TOP R.L 


Angle with Horizontal: Machine: 


Project Site: 


Driller: 


Bearing of angle hole: 


Hole No: 


Logged by: 


Water table R.L.: 


Location: 


River water R.L.: 


Co-ordinates: 


S en[eA (L d `S) 1S9], uonouuoid puepuejg “EZ 

Ë $ uonenoued | “zz 

È SMO[G JO "ON | "IC 

suos3n7 'Oc 

omuru Jod sot] ur SSOT | "6I 

= souu ur sun], | “81 

x 

= senqurssoT| "I 
` enn | 

E E 3 E puta 9I 

ec Tentuy | “sI 

‚wwyN uromssoJlq | `+I 

qeis wdog | EI 

seyouSunpup 19O | “TI 

vjensjouonduoseq | "II 

posn yq pue [oueq 2109 Jo odAL | “OI 

InO[OO I9WM SEAA '6 

S3109 JO ‘ON [eLIOS '8 

GO pue AloA0991 9109 JUNIJ 'L 

Uni 9107) '9 

pop aus] | cg 

epoujoudeq| `+ 

Surseo Jo qdoq `€ 

9[ou Jo 9Z1§ € 


own pue oje(q 


IS 4464 : 2020 


ANNEX C 


GEOLOGICAL LOG OF DRILL HOLE 


[SHEETNO | 
» 
PROJECT CHANAIGE/LOCATION FEATURE 
BEARING OF HOLE ANGLE WITH HORIZONTAL TOTAL DEPTH 
COLLAR ELEVATION GROUND ELEVATION (M) TYPE(S) OF CORE BARREL 
STARTED COORDINATES: DRILLING AGENCY 
COMPLETED DRILLING MACHINE 


SIZE OF CORE Percent Core 
Structural 
T E 


2 


Special Observation 
and Interpretatin 


© Depth in m 
20 to 60 mm 
80 to 100 mm 
ption 
TYPE OF Bit 
FRCT. FREQUENCY / m 
SIZE OF HOLE 
PERM (LUGEON) 1 


0.00 
quei aen 


IS 4464 : 2020 


ANNEX D 


10 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
“BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: WRD 05 (680). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


