WAT WAH IS 16363 : 2015 
Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2019) 


way — sade Set fae A 
seat Yeoratfa cat waraat a few 
fastest 


Geosynthetics — Guidelines for 
Installation of Geotextile Used in 
Subsurface Drainage Application 


ICS 59.080.70 


© BIS 2015 


ada AM Rt 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
© HAF FS, 9 aeee WAL Í, ae feeeit-110002 
l rch a MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


August 2015 Price Group 3 


Geosynthetics Sectional Committee, TXD 30 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Geosynthetics 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textile Division Council. 


Control of water is critical to the performance of buildings, pavements, embankments, retaining walls and other 
structures. Drains are used to relieve the hydrostatic pressure against underground and retaining walls, slabs and 
underground tanks and to prevent loss of soil strength and stability in slopes, embankments and beneath pavements. 
In transportation applications, if the base course does not drain rapidly enough, stress from the traffic loadings is 
transferred to the sub-grade with little or no reduction, resulting in accelerated road failure. The removal of water 
shall be performed in a controlled fashion. Otherwise, severe erosion, piping, or settlement of soils may result in 
undermining adjacent structures. To accomplish this task the drainage system should fulfil two criteria: 


a) Have maintained permeability by providing relatively unimpeded flow of water; and 
b) Filtration of base soil by preventing the migration of soil fines into the drain. 


These criteria can be met by using several layers of specially graded aggregates. This often proves to be extremely 
expensive requirement to meet. The same result can be achieved at a fraction of the cost by using selected 
geotextiles, which act as filters around the aggregate drainage system. The introduction of geotextile lined drainage 
systems has enhanced the technical benefits and economical application of blanket and trench drains under and 
adjacent to pavement structures. The excellent filtration and separation characteristics associated with geotextiles 
permits the use of a single layer of open graded aggregate base or trench aggregate enveloped in a geotextile. 


The stability of the sub-grade soils depends on ground water table. Some clay soils can swell or shrink as their 
water content increases or decreases, respectively. Also, most soils are considerably weaker when they have high 
water contents or have not been drained prior to loading. This means that weather-related or seasonal fluctuations 
in groundwater levels can adversely affect permanent structures founded on undrained soils. Therefore, draining 
the saturated soils can increase their strength and stability. Lower the permeability of the sub-grade soils, the 
closer together the drainage layers/zones shall be to provide effective dewatering. 


The traditional methods of sub-grade dewatering by digging a trench or providing a coarse aggregate drainage 
layer or a pipe system or use of fine sand as a filter are time consuming and costly and provide inconsistent 
properties. Geotextiles are being used in lieu of select grades of sand for effective dewatering to accept seepage 
and act as properly graded filter to prevent piping of sub-grade soil because they are less expensive, provide 
more consistent properties and are much easier to install. Geotextiles have been used in the drains of embankments 
where they are easily accessible if maintenance is required and where malfunction can be detected. 


The excellent filtration and separation characteristics associated with filtration geotextiles permits the use of a 
single layer of an open graded base or trench aggregate enveloped in a geotextile. The thin filtration geotextile 
reduces the required excavation as well as the cost of the drained structural section. The increase in service life 
of flexible pavements by 25 percent and that of rigid pavements by 50 percent has been identified by use of an 
efficient functioning edge drain system using geotextile. 


Filtration and separation fabrics are non-woven or woven polypropylene or polyester fabrics with specified 
strength characteristics used as permeable separators to restrain soil or other particles subjected to hydrodynamic 
forces while allowing the passage of fluids into or across a geotextile and to prevent inter-migration of adjacent 
soil layers of vastly different particle sizes and particle distributions. The primary geotextile characteristics 
influencing filter functions are opening size (as related to soil retention), flow capacity and clogging potential 
which are indirectly measured by the apparent opening size, permittivity and gradient ratio test. The geotextile 
shall also have the strength and durability to survive construction and long-term conditions for the design life of 
the drain. Additionally, construction methods have a critical influence on geotextile drain performance. 


(Continued to third cover) 


IS 16363 : 2015 


Indian Standard 


GEOSYNTHETICS — GUIDELINES FOR 
INSTALLATION OF GEOTEXTILE USED IN 
SUBSURFACE DRAINAGE APPLICATION 


1 SCOPE 


This standard prescribes guidelines for installation of 
geotextile used in subsurface drainage application. 


2 INSTALLATION OF GEOTEXTILE IN SUB- 
GRADE DEWATERING 


2.1 Excavations shall be done according to project 
plans and in such a way so as to prevent large voids 
from occurring in the sides and bottom of the trench. 
The graded surface shall be smooth and free of debris. 
Clear and grade the installation area. Remove all sharp 
objects and large stones. Cut trees and shrubs flush 
with the sub-grade. Removal of topsoil and vegetation 
mat is not necessary, but is recommended where 
practical. Excessive soft spots or voids may be 
unsuitable for geosynthetic installation. The problem 
area may be enhanced by using a geosynthetic at the 
bottom of the excavation prior to backfilling. 


2.1.2 Deployment of the Geosynthetic 


2.1.2.1 Unroll the geosynthetic in the direction of 
construction traffic. Hold the geosynthetic in place with 
pins, staples, fill materials or rocks. Do not drag the 
geotextile on the ground or mishandle in any way. 
Loosely place the geotextile in the trench without 
wrinkles or folds, and with no void spaces between 
the geotextile and the ground surface so that the 
placement of the overlying material will not tear the 
geotextile. Successive sheets of geotextiles shall be 
overlapped a minimum of 300 mm, with the upstream 
sheet overlapping the downstream sheet. 


2.1.2.2 In case of slopes, place the geotextile with the 
machine direction oriented up-down. Lap the upper 
sheets over the lower sheets. When the geotextile is 
placed on a slope steeper than 6V:1H, securely anchor 
the laps to the ground surface with pins or stakes as 
necessary to prevent the slippage and tearing of the 
geotextile. Start placement of fill material on the 
geotextile at the toe of the slope and proceed upwards. 


2.1.2.3 On curves, the geosynthetic may be folded or 
cut to conform to the curves. The fold or overlap shall 
be in the direction of construction and held in place by 
pins, staples, or piles of fill or rock. 


2.1.2.4 If geotextiles are placed under water or in areas 
where water will flow, the geotextile may be placed 
with the machine direction parallel to the direction of 
water flow. Overlap sheets such that upstream sheet is 
placed over the top of the downstream sheet. 
Adequately secure the geotextile to prevent slippage. 
As the geotextile is placed under water, place the 
backfill material on it to the required thickness. Do 
not place geotextile more than 15 m ahead of the 
specified cover material. 


2.1.2.5 After placing the drainage aggregate in trenches 
equal to or greater than 300 mm wide, the geotextile 
shall be folded over the top of the backfill material in 
a manner to produce a minimum overlap of 300 mm. 
In trenches less than 300 mm but greater than 100 mm 
wide, the overlap shall be equal to the width of the 
trench. Where the trench is less thanl100 mm wide, the 
geotextile overlap shall be sewn or otherwise bonded. 


2.1.2.6 When field sewn seams are required, sew field 
seams with polymeric thread consisting of 
polypropylene or polyester and as resistant to 
deterioration as the geotextile being sewn. Use a colour 
of thread that contrasts with the geotextile being sewn 
so that the stitches are exposed for inspection when 
the geotextile is placed. Seams shall meet the testing 
requirements given below: 


a) Use two rows of lock type stitching, to make 
the seams. The two rows of stitching shall be 
12 mm apart with a tolerance of + 6 mm and 
not cross except for restitching. 

b) The minimum seam allowance (the minimum 
distance from the edge of geotextile to the 
nearest stitching shall be: 


Flat or Prayer Seam, Type SSa-1 40mm 
“I” Seam, Type SSn-1 25 mm 
Butterfly — folded Seam, 25 mm 


Type SSd-1 

c) Obtain the geotextile manufacturer’s 
recommendation for the type of seam and 
stitch to be used. If the contractor does not 
obtain and provide this information, use a “J” 
seam with at least three stitches per 25 mm. 
The flat or prayer seam may be used for repair 


IS 16363 : 2015 


or damaged in-place geotextile. 
2.1.2.7 In case the geotextile is damaged during 
installation, or drainage aggregate placement, a 
geotextile patch shall be placed over the damaged area 
extending beyond the damaged area a distance of 
300 mm, or the specified seam overlap, whichever is 
greater. 


2.1.2.8 Placement of drainage aggregate shall proceed 
immediately following placement of the geotextile. The 
geotextile shall be covered with a minimum of 300 mm 
of loosely placed aggregate prior to compaction. If a 
perforated collector pipe is to be installed in the trench, 
a bedding layer of drainage aggregate shall be placed 
below the pipe, with the remainder of the aggregate 
placed to a minimum required construction depth. The 
aggregate shall be compacted with vibratory equipment 
unless the trench is required for structural support. 


2.1.2.9 The geotextile shall be laid at the proper 
elevation and alignment as shown on the construction 
drawings. The geotextile may be temporarily secured 
in place with ties, staples, pins, sand bags or backfill 
as required by fill properties, fill placement procedures 
or weather conditions. 


3 INSTALLATION OF GEOTEXTILE IN 
ROADBASE DRAINAGE 


3.1 New Construction 


When constructing a new road with an open graded 
base course designed to provide blanket drainage also, 
a filtration geotextile shall be deployed prior to 
placement of the base course in the same manner as a 
separation geotextile. Commonly, the base course 
terminates along the road edges into deepened edge 
drains. These edge drains shall also be wrapped with 
the geotextile. 


3.2 Retrofit 


Excavations for retrofit edge drains shall be done in 
such a way so as to prevent large voids from occurring 
in the sides and bottom of the trench. The edge drain 
can be an aggregate trench drain with a collector pipe 
in the bottom. 


3.3 Geocomposite Edge Drain 


Alternately, a geocomposite edge drain can be used. 
The excavator, if properly equipped, shall lay a 
geocomposite drain into a narrow trench and backfill 
with sand between the drain and the exposed base 
course. 


4 INSTALLATION OF GEOTEXTILE IN 
STRUCTURAL DRAINAGE 


4.1 Excavation shall be done according to project plan 


and in such a way so as to prevent large voids from 
occurring in the sides and bottom of the trench. 


4.2 Place a filtration geotextile on the excavated stable 
slope in back of the wall, then place 150 mm of 
permeable crushed rock 6 to 25 mm in size over the 
geotextile, and cover the rock with another layer of 
filtration geotextilre. 


4.3 A prefabricated geocomposite drain may also be 
used in horizontal or vertical applications. In vertical 
application, install the drain over the waterproofed wall 
with the filter fabric side away from the wall surface. 
As additional drain sections are added, insure that there 
is positive fabric overlap. Overlap panels in the 
direction of water flow. If a drainpipe discharge system 
is used, place the bottom of the drain behind the 
geotextile-covered drain pipe and aggregate. Soil shall 
be placed and compacted adjacent to the drain. 


4.4 In horizontal applications (for example plazaks), 
lay the initial drain section horizontally, filter fabric 
side up. Make sure that the drain properly attaches to 
an outflow drain and that additional drain sections 
properly overlap, insuring a continuous flow path. 
Place temporary ballast atop the drain until the 
permanent decking is placed. 


5 PLACEMENT OF THE AGGREGATE 


5.1 Prior to covering, the geosynthetic shall be 
inspected by a certified inspector or the Engineer to 
ensure that the geosynthetic has not been damaged 
during installation. Damaged geosynthetic shall be 
repaired immediately. Cover the damaged area with a 
geosynthetic patch which extends an amount equal to 
the required overlap beyond the damaged area. 


5.2 The subbase or base shall be placed by end dumping 
onto the geosynthetic from the edge of the 
geosynthetic, or over previously placed subbase or base 
aggregate. A minimum fill soil thickness of 150 mm 
is required. 


5.3 Any ruts occurring during construction shall be 
filled with additional subbase or base material, and 
compacted to the specified density. 


5.4 Place, spread, and compact granular fill material 
in such a manner that minimizes the development of 
wrinkles in or movement of the geotextile. 


5.5 Caution should be used when selecting compaction 
equipment. When thin lifts are used, vibratory 
compaction is not recommended until a minimum 30 
cm compacted thickness is achieved. Use of such 
equipment may result in damage to the geosynthetic. 


5.6 Replace at no additional cost to the Department 
any roll of geotextile damaged before, during, or after 
installation. Proper replacement consists of replacing 


the affected area and overlapping the geotextile one 
foot on all sides adjacent to the damaged area. 


5.7 If placement of the backfill material causes damage 
to the geosynthetic, the damaged area shall be repaired 
as previously described above. The placement 
procedure shall then be modified to eliminate further 
damage from taking place. 


6 PROTECTION OF GEOTEXTILE 


6.1 Protect the geotextile at all times from ultraviolet 
(UV) rays, contamination by surface runoff and 
construction activities. Traffic or construction 
equipment shall not be permitted directly on the 
geotextile except as directed. 


6.2 During installation, cover the geotextile with 
specified cover material as soon as possible. Do not 
leave in uncovered condition for more than five days, 
except when used with temporary, wrapfaced, 
mechanically stabilized earth walls and asphalt 
overlays. 


6.3 Place the cover material on the geotextile in such a 
manner that the geotextile is not torn, punctured or 
shifted. Use a minimum 150 mm thick cover layer or 
twice the maximum aggregate size, whichever is 
thicker. Do not end-dump cover material directly on 
geotextiles other than riprap geotextile. 


6.4 Limit the construction vehicles in size and mass so 
that the rutting in the initial layer above the geotextile 
is not more than 75 mm deep or half the layer thickness, 
whichever is lesser. Do not turn vehicles on the first 
layer. 


7 OTHER FILTER CONSIDERATIONS 


7.1 Ensure intimate contact between the soil and the 
geotextile during construction in order to prevent 
clogging or blinding of the geotextile. Voids between 
the soil and the geotextile can expose the geotextile to 
a slurry or muddy water mixture during seepage which 
promotes erosion of soil behind the geotextile and 
hence clogging of the geotextile. 


NOTES 


1 Very fine grained non-cohesive soils, such as rock flour, 
present a special problem, and design of drain installations in 
this type of soil should be based on tests with expected hydraulic 
conditions using the soil and geotextile. 


IS 16363 : 2015 


2 As a general rule slit-film geotexiles are unacceptable for 
drainage applications. They generally have very low POA 
(percent open area) or permeability. The wide filament in many 
slit films is prone to move relative to the cross filaments during 
handling and thus change AOS and POA. 


7.2 If there is reasonable expectation of an ochre 
formation in certain areas (an iron deposit usually a 
red or tan gelatinous mass associated with bacterial 
slimes) on the geotextile, discourage the use of 
geotextile because it becomes more prone to clog and 
once ochre clogging occurs, it is very difficult to 
impossible to remove as chemicals or acids used for 
ochre removal may damage geotextiles. Also, high 
pressure jetting through the perforated pipe is relatively 
ineffective on clogged geotextiles. 


8 INSPECTION 


8.1 The owner or owner’s representative may randomly 
inspect geotextile before, during and after (using test 
pits) installation. 


8.2 Any damaged or defective geotextile (that is frayed 
coating, separated junctions, separated layers, tears, 
etc) shall be repaired/replaced in accordance with 9. 


9 DAMAGE REPAIR 


9.1 Repair damaged geosynthetic immediately. Clear 
the damaged area and an additional 90 cm around it of 
all fill material. Cover the cleared area with a piece of 
the geosynthetic. The patch should extend at least 
90 cm beyond the perimeter of the damage. Replace 
the aggregate and compact to the specified density. 


9.2 Repair or replace all torn, punctured or 
contaminated geotextiles during construction at no cost 
to the Agency. Repair by placing a patch of the 
specified geotextile over the affected area. Overlap the 
existing geotextile with the patch. 


9.3 Where geotextile seams are required to be sewn, 
repair any damaged sheet by sewing unless otherwise 
indicated on the plans or special provisions. 


9.4 For roadbed sub-grade separation, correct 
geotextile failures, as evidenced by soil pumping or 
roadbed distortion, by removing any covering material 
in the affected area and placing a geotextile patch on 
the exposed geotextile. Cover the patch with the 
specified cover material and compact before 
proceeding. 


IS 16363 : 2015 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Geosynthetics Sectional Committee, TX 30 


Organization 


The Bombay Textile Research Association, Mumbai 


Business Coordination House, New Delhi 


Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 


Central Soil and Materials Research Station, New Delhi 


CIDCO, Mumbai 
Coir Board, Kochi 


Department of Jute and Fibre Technology, Kolkatta 


Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals, New Delhi 


E. I. Dupont India Pvt Ltd, Gurgaon 


Ganga Flood Control Commission, Patna 


Garware Wall Ropes Ltd, Pune 


Gujarat Engineering Research Institute, Vadodara 


Indian Jute Industries’ Research Association, Kolkata 


Indian Jute Manufacturer Association, Kolkatta 
Jaya Shree Textiles, Hooghly 


Kusumgar Corporates, Mumbai 


Macaferri Environmental Solutions Pvt Ltd, Navi Mumbai 
Maharashtra Maritime Board, Mumbai 


National Highways Authority of India, New Delhi 


National Jute Board, Kolkatta 


Office of the Textile Commissioner, Mumbai 


Premier Polyfilms Ltd, Ghaziabad 


Reliance Industries Ltd, New Delhi 


Strata Geosystems (I) Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


Supreme Nonwovens Pvt Ltd, Hyderabad 


Techfab India, Mumbai 


The Synthetics & Art Silk Mills Research Association, Mumbai 


Representative(s) 


Dr A. N. Desai (Chairman) 
Suri V. K. Patt (Alternate) 


SHRI SAMIR GUPTA 
SaRrmMarTI RitikA Gupta (Alternate) 


SHRI SUDHIR MATHUR 
Suri Jar BAHAGWAN (Alternate) 


SHRI NRIPENDRA KUMAR 
Suri MAnisH Gupta (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Dr U. S. SARMA 
Suri M. Kumaraswamy PILLay (Alternate) 


Dr Swapan GHOSH 
Suri K. R. Gupta (Alternate) 


ADDITIONAL DIRECTOR GENERAL (Qa) 


Suri R. GANESH 
SHRIMATI VEDIKA Kapoor (Alternate) 


Suri S. Masoop Husain 
Suri Ravi BHUSHAN Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI TIRUMAL KULKARNI 
Suri S. J. Cuirnis (Alternate) 


Suri L. V. ASHARA 
RESEARCH OFFICER (Alternate) 


Suri P. K. CHOUDHURY 
Suri Kousuik Das (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
SHRI PAWAN SHARMA 


Suri Y. K. KusuMGAR 
Dr M. K. TALUKDAR (Alternate) 


Dr RATNAKAR MAHAJAN 
REPRESENTATIVE 


Suri R. K. GANDHI 
Suri R. P. SincH (Alternate) 


Suri T. SANYAL 
Suri A. K. Kuastaair (Alternate) 


Suri AJAY PANDIT 
Suri M. BaALucuamy (Alternate) 


Dr SANJEEV K. VERMA 
SHRI HARINDER Kumar (Alternate) 


Suri M. S. VERMA 
Suri V. RAVIKANTH (Alternate) 


SHRI NARENDRA DALMIA 
SHRI SHAHROKH Bacu (Alternate) 


Suri C. K. CHAUDHURI 
Suri C. K. Jain (Alternate) 


SHRI ANANT KANO! 
Dr SauraBu Vyas (Alternate) 


Dr ManisHa MATHUR 
SHRIMATI ASHWINI SUDAM (Alternate) 


Organization 
Urja Products Pvt Ltd, Ahmedabad 
Veermata Jijabai Technological Institute, Mumbai 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 16363 : 2015 


Representative(s) 
SHRI JANAK NANAVATY 
Suri S. P. BORKAR 


SHRI PRABHAKAR Ral, Scientist ‘ʻE’ and Head (TXD) 
[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
Suri J. K. GUPTA 
Scientist ‘C’ (TXD), BIS 


(Continued from second cover) 


Survivability is defined as resistance to mechanical damage during road construction and initial operation. The 
ability of a geosynthetic to survive installation and reasonable service loads shall be assured if it is to perform as 
designed. Installation damage to a geotextile is a function of the following: 


a) Geotextile thickness, 

b) Compactive effort and lift thickness, 

c) Type and weight of construction equipment used for fill spreading, 
d) Grain size distribution of backfill, 

e) Angularity of backfill, 

f) Polymer used in the manufacture of geotextile, and 

g) Geotextile manufacturing process. 


Geotexiles normally used for drainage application are mainly made from polyester (PET) or polypropylene (PP). 
PP is lighter than water, strong and very durable. PET is heavier than water, has excellent strength and creep 
properties, and is compatible with most common soil environments. Geotextiles are mainly of two types, namely, 
woven and non-woven geotextiles. Knitted and stitch bonded geotextiles are occaisionally used in the manufacture 
of speciality products. Non-woven geotextiles are highly desirable for subsurface drainage and erosion control 
applications as well as for road stabilization over wet moisture sensitive soils. Out of woven geotextiles, slit film 
fabrics geotextiles are commonly used for sediment control, that is silt fence and road stabilization applications 
but are poor choices for subsurface drainage and erosion control applications. Monofilament woven geotextiles 
have better permeability making them suitable for certain drainage and erosion control applications. High strength 
multifilament woven geotextiles are primarily used in reinforcement applications. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TXD 30 (1074). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


