Inda AAF IS 17737 (Part 4) : 2021 
Indian Standard 


maga fase ma 


ATT 4 Aten AR Hare 


Mobile Device Security 


Part 4 Assessment and Evaluation 


ICS 33.050.10, 35.030 


© BIS 2021 


anda Ara aa 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 SENAR TH Ari, ay freh — 110002 


ea ana af MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2021 Price Group 7 


Information Systems Security and Privacy Sectional committee, LITD 17 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 4) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
Information Systems Security and Privacy Sectional committee had been approved by the Electronics and 
Information Technology Divisional council. 


There is no ISO/IEC Standard on this subject. 
This standard is one of the series of Indian Standards on Mobile device security. Other parts in this series are: 
Part 1 Overview 
Part 2 Security requirements 
Part 3 Security levels 
As mobile based services especially, financial services are gaming popularity, focus on the security of data and 
content on mobile devices is obvious. Mobile devices need additional protection because their extensive mobility 
(portability) and always on connectivity (generally using untrusted public network) places them at higher exposure 


to threats than other client devices such as desktop and laptop devices which are normally used only within the 
organization’s facilities and on the organization’s networks. 


It requires a totally different approach and strategy to address security of mobile devices as compared to normal 
computer based systems and applications. Mobile devices uses mobile ecosystem that involves various subsystems 
and components to provide an environment to enable the operations and connectivity of mobile devices and 
information systems. Therefore, security of mobile needs to be addressed at different layers (subsystems and 
components) of the mobile ecosystem covering mobile device technology stack (including firmware, embedded 
components, operating system, pre-installed applications like mobile browser, device management software 
agent, VPN client, Email client, etc.), Third party mobile applications, networks and communication interfaces 
(including cellular, Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, NFC), mobile infrastructure (including mobile app store and services) and 
enterprise mobile support/monitoring services (enterprise mobility management [EMM]/device management 
software and mobile application management [MAM]). All these components of the mobile ecosystem 
shall be considered for defining and assessing the security of mobile devices to meet the common security 
objectives-confidentiality, integrity and availability. 


This series of standards is applicable to the following: 
a) Organizations designing, developing, and manufacturing mobile devices; 
b) Customers seeking confidence in the security of mobile devices used by them; 
c) Organizations seeking confidence in the security of mobile devices used by them; and 
d) Organizations performing security assessment of mobile devices. 
In the formulation of this standard, assistance has been derived from the following documents: 


NIST Special Publication 1800-4b (Draft) — Mobile Device Security, Approach, Architecture, and Security 
Characteristics Cloud and Hybrid Builds 


NIST Special Publication 800-124 Revision 1; Guidelines for Managing the Security of Mobile Devices in the 
Enterprise, June 2013 


The composition of the Committee and Panel, responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex D. 


IS 17737 (Part 4) : 2021 


CONTENTS 
Page No. 
0 INTRODUCTION re 1 
1 SCOPE fe 3 
2 REFERENCES ise 3 
3 TERMINOLGY el 3 
4 APPROACH, METHODOLOGY AND INPUTS REQUIRED FOR 
SECURITY ASSESSMENT AND EVALUATION 3 
41 General 3 
4.2 Approach and Methodology 5 
43 Inputs Required 6 
ANNEXA CHECKLISTS FOR MOBILE OPERATING SYSTEM SECURITY 7 
ANNEX B CHECKLIST FOR MOBILE PRE-INSTALLED APPLICATION SECURITY re 9 
ANNEX C MOBILE DEVICE SECURITY CONTROL VERIFICATION = 11 
ANNEX D COMMITTEE COMPOSITION byg 13 
BIBLIOGRAPHY ae 16 
LIST OF TABLES 
Table 1 Limited Mobile Device Security Control Requirements for Security Level 1 se 4 
Table 2 Mobile Device Security Control Requirements for Security Level 2 ay 4 
Table3 Checklist for Mobile Operating System Based on SANS Mobile Device 
Security Checklist s 7 
Table 4 Checklist for Mobile Operating System based on CIS Google Android Benchmark, 
v1.2.0-08-06-2018 wee 7 
Table 5 Checklist for Mobile Operating System based on CIS Apple iOS 12 Benchmark, 
v1.0.0 - 10-19-2018 2 8 
Table 6 Checklist for Mobile Pre-installed Application Security se 9 


Table 7 Mobile Device Security Control Verification m 11 


iii 


This page has been intentionally left blank 


IS 17737 (Part 4) : 2021 


0 INTRODUCTION 


Mobile device consists of a set of components of the mobile technology stack covering mobile device hardware 
(processor, storage, execution environment); mobile firmware; mobile operating system; and pre-installed 
(bundled) apps. 


A mobile ecosystem is an interconnected, interdependent set of various systems and core components which 
include mobile device technology stack, mobile network, mobile applications, and vendor mobile infrastructure. 


For overall security of mobile device, the security of the mobile device technology stack as well as the security of 
the mobile device due to mobile ecosystem need to be addressed. 


In addition to the security requirements, the mobile devices used for personal and enterprise in different scenario 
are defined through security levels which need to be assed and evaluated. 


This page has been intentionally left blank 


IS 17737 (Part 4) : 2021 


Indian Standard 


MOBILE DEVICE SECURITY 
PART 4 ASSESSMENT AND EVALUATION 


1SCOPE 


This standard (Part 4) describes approach and 
methodology for assessment and evaluation of mobile 
device security for security levels defined in Part 3 
“Security levels” of this standard. 


Security assessment and evaluation for two security 
levels cover mobile OS security; mobile pre-installed 
application security; and mobile device security 
controls. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards/documents given below contains 
provisions, which through reference in this text 
constitute provisions of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the editions indicated were valid. All 
standards/documents are subject to revision, and parties 
to agreement based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most recent 
editions of the standards listed as follows: 


IS No./Other Publication Title 


IS 17737 (Part 1): 2021 Mobile device security: 


Part 1 Overview 


IS 17737 (Part 2): 2021 Mobile device security: 


Part 2 Security 
requirements 


IS 17737 (Part 3): 2021 Mobile device security: 


Part 3 Security levels 
CIS Benchmarks (Android and iOS) 
OWASP Top 10 Mobile Security Risks, 2016 


OWASP MASVS, Version 1.1 
SANS Mobile Device Checklist 


3 TERMINOLGY 


For the purpose of this standard (Part 4) the definitions 
given in IS 17737 (Part 1) : 2021 shall apply. 


4APPROACH, METHODOLOGY AND INPUTS 
REOUIRED FOR SECURITY ASSESSMENT 
AND EVALUATION 


4.1 General 


There are two levels of security defined for mobile 
device in the Part 3 of this standard. These levels are 
as follows: 


a) Security Level 1: Baseline Security 
b) Security Level 2: Comprehensive Security 


4.1.1 Security Assessment and Evaluation - Security 
Level 1 


The security level 1 defines the basic security 
requirements of mobile device. It covers: 


a) Mobile OS security requirements as given in 6.4.1 
of Part 2 of this standard; 


b) Mobile pre-installed application security 
requirements as given in 6.4.2 of Part 2 of this 
standard; and 


c) Limited mobile device security control 


requirements as given in Table 1. 


Mobile device security controls requirements as given 
in Table 1 shall be verified 


4.1.2 Security Assessment and Evaluation - Security 
Level 2 


The security level 2 is comprehensive security of 
mobile device. It covers: 

a) Mobile OS security requirements as given in 6.4.1 
of Part 2 of this standard; 

b) Mobile pre-installed application security 
requirements as given in 6.4.2 of Part 2 of this 
standard; and 

c) Mobile device security control requirements as 
given in Table 2. 


Mobile device security controls requirements as given 
in Table 2 shall be verified. 


IS 17737 (Part 4) : 2021 


Table 1 Limited Mobile Device Security Control Requirements for Security Level 1 
( Clause 4.1.1 ) 


Security Characteristics Security Controls 


a) Device protection (device integrity) 1) Application black/whitelisting, 
2) Application verification, 
3) Verified application and OS updates 
b) Data protection 1) Protected storage: 
i) Device encryption, 
ii) Remote wipe 
2) Protected communications: 
i) Virtual private network (VPN) 
c) Data isolation 3) Device resource management 
d) Identity and authorization 1) Local user authentication to applications, 
2) Local user authentication to device 
e) Monitoring 1) Root and jailbreak detection 
f) Privacy protection 1) Informed consent of user, 


2) Privacy notification provided to user 


Table 2 Mobile Device Security Control Requirements for Security Level 2 
( Clause 4.1.2 ) 


Security Characteristics Security Controls 


a) Device protection (device integrity) 1) Baseband integrity checks, 
2) Application black/whitelisting, 
3) Device integrity checks: 
i) Boot validation, 
4) Application verification, and 
5) Verified application and OS updates 
b) Data protection 1) Protected storage: 
i) Device encryption, 
ii) Secure containers, 
iii) Trusted key storage, and 
iv) Remote wipe. 
2) Protected communications: 
i) Virtual private network (VPN), and 
ii) To include per-App VPN. 
3) Data protection in process: 
i) Encrypted memory, and 
ii) Trusted execution environment. 
c) Data isolation 1) Sandboxing, 
2) Memory isolation, 
3) Trusted execution environment, 
4) Device resource management, and 
5) Baseband isolation. 
d) Identity and authorization 1) Local user authentication to applications, 
2) Local user authentication to device, 
3) Remote user authentication, and 
4) Credential and token storage and use. 
e) Monitoring 1) Auditing and logging, and 
2) Root and jailbreak detection. 
f) Privacy protection 1) Informed consent of user, and 


2) Privacy notification provided to user. 


4 


4.2 Approach and Methodology 


The mobile OS security requirements and mobile 
pre-installed application security requirements for 
security level 1 and 2 are the same. But the mobile 
device security control requirements are different; at 
security level 1 only limited mobile device security 
control requirements are applicable whereas at security 
level 2 all mobile device security control requirements 
are applicable. 


The assessment and evaluation of these security 
requirements at security level 1 and 2 are described 
below: 


4.2.1 Mobile Operating System Security Requirements 
Verification 

A mobile operating system is a software, which runs 
at the highest, privilege level and can directly control 
hardware resources. The OS handles most user 
interaction and provides the execution environment 
for apps. Most mobile operating systems are tied to 
specific hardware, with little flexibility. A mobile OS is 
responsible for identifying and defining mobile device 
features and functions, including application sandbox, 
Kernel, Media Services, Runtime Environment, etc. 

A new mobile device comes with operating system 
having default configuration setting. In order to make it 
secure, the default operating system setting needs to be 
configured with secure settings before use. 


The security of the mobile operating system shall be 
verified by checking its configuration settings using a 
checklist with focus on security configuration issues 
that are unique to the mobile platform. 


The checklist shall be based on the following security 
principles (see 6.4.1 of Part 2 of this standard): 


a) Data at rest; 

b) Data in transit protection; 

c) Access control; 

d) Application updates; 

e) Integrity violation checking; 
f) Security updates; and 

g) Verified boot mechanism. 


A checklist covering above security principles or 
following checklists may be used: 


1) SANS checklist, 

2) CIS checklist for Android, and 

3) CIS checklist for iOS. 
A checklist for mobile operating system based on 
SANS & CIS checklists is given in Annex A. 


42.2 Mobile Pre-installed Application Security 
Requirements Testing 


Pre-installed Application is a software already 
installed and licensed on a mobile device bought from 


IS 17737 (Part 4) : 2021 


an original equipment manufacturer (OEM). The 
examples include, calendar, calculator, mobile browser, 
device management software agent, VPN client, Email 
client, etc. 


These pre-installed apps shall be tested as per latest 
OWASP Top 10 mobile security risks and OWASP 
Mobile Application Security Verification Standard 
(MASVS) LI: 


a) Following tests shall be carried out as per OWASP 
Top 10 mobile security risks: 


1) Ml: 
2) M2: 
3) M3: 
4) Må: 
5) MS: 
6) M6: 
7) M7: 
8) M8: 
9) M9: 
10) M10: Extraneous Functionality. 


b) Following tests shall be carried out as per OWASP 
Mobile Application Security Verification Standard 
(MASVS) LI: 


1) VI: Architecture, Design and Threat Modeling 
Requirements; 


Improper Platform Usage; 
Insecure Data Storage; 
Insecure Communication; 
Insecure Authentication; 
Insufficient Cryptography; 
Insecure Authorization; 
Client Code Quality; 
Code Tampering; 

Reverse Engineering; and 


2) V2: Data Storage and Privacy Requirements; 

3) V3: Cryptography Requirements; 

4) V4: Authentication and Session Management 
Requirements; 

5) V5: Network Communication Requirements; 

6) V6: Platform Interaction Requirements; and 


7) V7: Code Quality and Build Setting 
Requirements. 


MASVS based checklist is given in Annex B. 


4.2.3 Mobile Device Security Control Requirements 
Verification 
The high level security risks and security threats posed 
to a mobile device (mobile hardware, firmware, mobile 
OS, and pre- installed Apps) comes from: 

a) Mobile Device based Security Risks (Untrusted 
Mobile Device); 
b) Mobile Network based Security Risks (Untrusted 
Network); 


c) Mobile User Behavior based Security Risks (User 
Behavior and Awareness); and 


d) Malicious Apps and Malware based Security 
Risks (Untrusted Third Party Applications and 
malicious Systems). 


These security risks and& threats to a mobile device can 
be addressed through a set of Security Characteristics 
which can be associated with Security Controls. 


IS 17737 (Part 4) : 2021 


The methodology for aassessment of these security 
control requirements is based on: 


1) Verifying the security control mechanisms 
defined; and 


2) Implementation of defined security controls in 
a mobile device. 


Verification of the security control mechanisms defined 
shall be done for its adequacy. This shall be carried out 
by reviewing the security documentation provided by 
the device manufacturer. 


After verifying the adequacy of security controls 
defined, implementation of the security control shall be 
undertaken. This shall be carried out by testing/audit of 
the security controls. 


The testing/audit shall be done using the combination 
of followings: 


i. Independent testing/audit carried out by 
independent test lab. 


ii. Demonstration of testing by manufacturer 
to independent test lab and verification of 
internal test reports of the mobile device. 


iii. Verification of third party test/audit reports 
and certificates of the mobile device. 

iv. Verification of the details of components 
used with part numbers along with sources 
of supply. 

The assessment and evaluation checkpoints for security 
controls are given in Annex C. 


4.3 Inputs Required 


4.3.1 Inputs Required for Security Level 1 


The following documentation shall be provided by the 
device manufacturer: 


a) Device details (providing make, model, serial 
number, operating system, mobile pre-installed 
applications, location of manufacturing, etc.) 
submitted for assessment and evaluation. 


b) Mobile device detailed 
capabilities and features. 


specifications with 


c) Security policies and practices used for the mobile 
device. 


d) Implementation details of the security controls 
identified in Table 1. 


e) Any other document(s) that will provide more 
insight over the implementation of security. 


4.3.2 Inputs Required for Security Level 2 


The following documentation shall be provided by the 
device manufacturer: 


a) Device details (providing make, model, serial 
number, operating system, mobile pre-installed 
applications, location of manufacturing, etc.) 
submitted for assessment and evaluation. 


b) Mobile device detailed 
capabilities and features. 


specifications with 


c) Security architecture document covering security 
design details. 


d) Security policies and practices used for the mobile 
device. 


e) Implementation details of the security controls 
identified in Table 2. 


f) Details of components used with part numbers 
along with sources of supply. 


g) Internal test reports of the mobile device. 


h) Third party test/audit reports and certifications 
obtained for the mobile device. 


j) Any other document(s) that will provide more 
insight over the implementation of security. 


NOTE — It is expected that the security documentation 
will specify the implementations required by the Standard. 
Documentation can be provided in three ways. First option 
is to provide full comprehensive document explaining the 
controls completely. Second option is to provide the limited 
documentation sufficient to provide confidence to the 
Evaluator regarding the implementation. Third option is to 
visit the vendor/developer/manufacturer’s premises and show 
the documents pertaining to the controls so that the team of 
Evaluators gains confidence in the implementation of security 
controls. 


ANNEX A 


IS 17737 (Part 4) : 2021 


( Clause 4.2.1 ) 
CHECKLISTS FOR MOBILE OPERATING SYSTEM SECURITY 


Table 3 Checklist for Mobile Operating System 
Based on SANS Mobile Device Security Checklist 


A. Android OS Security Settings 


SI. Description 


a) Ability to encrypt information at rest 


b) Supports locks after timeout 


c) Supports unlocking mobile with biometrics or longer 
passwords (> 4). 


d) Lock or secure security settings so users cannot delete or 
change mandatory settings 


e) Supports disabling developer access. 


f) Supports disabling third party app store access. 


g) Supports tools to evaluate and uninstall apps with 
excessive permissions. 


h) Supports installation of OS platform updates. 


j) Supports checking OS versions installed and checking 
latest available security & patch level. 


k) Supports feature for remote location services for lost. 


1) Supports erasing network settings to forget old networks 
not in use. 


m) Supports prompting “trust this computer” when plugging 
mobile to another device/computer. 


11) | Do not root your device 

12) | Ensure ‘Smart Lock’ is set to ‘Disabled’ 

13) | Ensure ‘Lock SIM card’ is set to ‘Enabled’ 

14) | Ensure ‘Find My Device’ is set to ‘Enabled’ 

15) Ensure ‘Automatic date & time’ and ‘Automatic time 
zone’ are set to ‘Enabled’ 

16) | Ensure ‘Remotely locate this device’ is set to ‘Enabled’ 

17) | Ensure ‘Allow remote lock and erase’ is set to ‘Enabled’ 

18) | Ensure ‘Scan device for security threats’ is set to ‘Enabled’ 

19) | Ensure ‘Improve harmful app detection’ is set to ‘Enabled’ 

20) Ensure ‘Ask for unlock pattern/PIN/password before 
unpinning’ is set to ‘Enabled’ 

21) | Ensure ‘Sleep’ is set to “1 minute or less’ 

22) | Ensure ‘Wi-Fi assistant’ is set to ‘Disabled’ 

23) | Keep device Apps up to date 

24) | Ensure ‘Add users from lock screen’ is set to ‘Disabled’ 

25) | Ensure ‘Guest profiles’ do not exist 

26) | Review app permissions periodically 

27) | Ensure ‘Instant apps’ is set to ‘Disabled’ 


n) Supports strong password or two-factor authentication. 


p) Supports disabling auto connect to WiFi networks. 


B. Android OS Privacy Settings 


NOTE — It is recommended that latest versions of SANS 
checklist be referred. 


Table 4 Checklist for Mobile Operating System 
based on CIS Google Android Benchmark, 


v1.2.0-08-06-2018 
A. Android OS Security Settings 
1 Ensure device firmware is up to date 
2) Ensure “Screen Lock’ is set to ‘Enabled’ 


3) Ensure ‘Make pattern visible’ is set to ‘Disabled’ 
(if using a pattern as device lock mechanism) 


4) Ensure ‘Automatically Lock’ is set to ‘Immediately’ 

5) Ensure ‘Power button instantly locks’ is set to ‘Enabled’ 
6) Ensure ‘Lock Screen Message’ is configured 

7) Do not connect to untrusted Wi-Fi networks 

8) Ensure ‘Show passwords’ is set to ‘Disabled’ 


9) Ensure ‘Developer Options’ is set to ‘Disabled’ 


10) | Ensure ‘Install unknown apps’ is set to ‘Disabled’ 


1) Ensure ‘Notifications on the lock screen’ is set to 
‘Disabled’ 

2) Ensure ‘Location Services’ is set to ‘Disabled’ 

3) Ensure ‘Back up to Google Drive’ is ‘Disabled’ 

4) Ensure ‘Web and App Activity’ is set to ‘Disabled’ 

5j Ensure ‘Device Information’ is set to ‘Disabled’ 

6) Ensure ‘Voice and Audio Activity’ is set to ‘Disabled’ 

7) Ensure ‘YouTube Search History” is set to ‘Disabled’ 

8) Ensure "YouTube Watch History’ is set to ‘Disabled’ 

9) Ensure “Google Location History’ is set to ‘Disabled’ 

10) | Ensure ‘Opt out of Ads Personalization’ is set to ‘Enabled’ 


C. Android OS Chrome Browser Settings 


1) Ensure ‘Microphone’ is set to ‘Enabled’ 

2) Ensure ‘Location’ is set to ‘Enabled’ 

3) Ensure ‘Allow third-party cookies’ is set to ‘Disabled’ 
4) Ensure “Safe Browsing’ is set to ‘Enabled’ 

5) Ensure ‘Search and site suggestions’ is set to ‘Disabled’ 
6) Ensure ‘Do Not Track’ is set to ‘Enabled’ 


IS 17737 (Part 4) : 2021 


Table 5 Checklist for Mobile Operating System 
based on CIS Apple iOS 12 Benchmark, 
v1.0.0 - 10-19-2018 


7) Notifications 


a) Ensure ‘Notification Settings’ are configured for all 
‘Managed Apps’ 


A. Benchmark Guidance 


B. Configuration Profile Recommendations for End-User 


C. Configuration Profile Recommendations for Institutionally 
Owned Devices 


Owned Devices 1) General 
1) General a) Ensure ‘Controls when the profile can be removed’ is set 
a) Ensure a ‘Consent Message’ has been ‘Configured’ 1o Never 


b) Ensure ‘Controls when the profile can be removed” is set 
to ‘Always’ 


2) Restrictions 


2) Restrictions 


a) Functionality 


a) Functionality 


i) Ensure ‘Allow screenshots and screen recording’ is set 
to ‘Disabled’ 


1, Ensure ‘Allow voice dialing while device is locked’ is set 
to ‘Disabled’ 


li) Ensure ‘Allow voice dialing while device is locked’ is set 
to ‘Disabled’ 


ii. Ensure ‘Allow Siri while device is locked’ is set to 
‘Disabled’ 
iii. Ensure ‘Allow managed apps to store data in iCloud” is 


set to ‘Disabled’ 


iii) Ensure "Allow Siri while device is locked” is set to 
‘Disabled’ 


iv) | Ensure ‘Allow iCloud backup’ is set to ‘Disabled’ 


iv. Ensure ‘Force encrypted backups’ is set to ‘Enabled’ 


v. Ensure ‘Allow users to accept untrusted TLS certificates’ 
is set to ‘Disabled’ 


v. Ensure ‘Allow iCloud documents and data? is set to 
‘Disabled’ 


vi. Ensure ‘Allow iCloud Keychain’ is set to ‘Disabled’ 


vi. Ensure ‘Allow documents from managed sources in 
unmanaged destinations’ is set to ‘Disabled’ 


vii. | Ensure ‘Allow managed apps to store data in iCloud’ is 
set to ‘Disabled’ 


viii. | Ensure ‘Force encrypted backups’ is set to ‘Enabled’ 


vii. | Ensure ‘Allow documents from unmanaged sources in ix. Ensure "Allow Erase All Content and Settings” is set to 
managed destinations” is set to “Disabled” ‘Disabled’ 
viii. | Ensure ‘Treat AirDrop as unmanaged destination’ is set X Ensure ‘Allow users to accept untrusted TLS certificates? 


to ‘Enabled’ 


is set to ‘Disabled’ 


ix, Ensure ‘Allow Handoff' is set to ‘Disabled’ 


xi. Ensure “Allow installing configuration profiles” is set to 
‘Disabled’ 


Xx: Ensure “Force Apple Watch wrist detection” is set to 
‘Enabled’ 

Xi. Ensure ‘Show Control Center in Lock screen’ is set to 
‘Disabled’ 


xii. Ensure “Show Notification Center in Lock screen' is set 
to ‘Disabled’ 


xii. | Ensure ‘Allow adding VPN configurations’ is set to 
‘Disabled’ 


xiii. | Ensure ‘Allow modifying cellular data app settings’ is set 
to ‘Disabled’ 


b) Apps 


1: Ensure “Force fraud warning’ is set to ‘Enabled’ 


ii. Ensure "Accept cookies” is set to “From websites I visit” 
or From current website only' 


xiv. | Ensure “Allow USB accessories while the device is 
locked’ is set to ‘Disabled’ 


xv. | Ensure ‘Allow pairing with non-Configurator hosts’ is set 
to ‘Disabled’ 


3) Domains 


xvi. | Ensure ‘Allow documents from managed sources in 
unmanaged destinations’ is set to ‘Disabled’ 


a) Ensure ‘Managed Safari Web Domains’ is ‘Configured* 


xvii. | Ensure ‘Allow documents from unmanaged sources in 
managed destinations’ is set to ‘Disabled’ 


4) Passcode 


a) Ensure ‘Allow simple value’ is set to ‘Disabled’ 


xviii. | Ensure ‘Treat AirDrop as unmanaged destination’ is set 
to ‘Enabled’ 


b) Ensure ‘Minimum passcode length’ is set to ‘6’ or greater 


xix. | Ensure ‘Allow Handoff is set to ‘Disabled’ 


c) Ensure ‘Maximum Auto-Lock’ is set to ‘2 minute’ or less 


d) Ensure ‘Maximum grace period for device lock’ is set to 
‘Immediately’ 


xx. | Ensure ‘Force Apple Watch wrist detection’ is set to 
‘Enabled’ 


e) Ensure ‘Maximum number of failed attempts’ is set to ‘6’ 


xxi. | Ensure ‘Allow setting up new nearby devices’ is set to 
‘Disabled’ 


5) VPN 


a) Ensure ‘VPN’ is ‘Configured’ 


xxii. | Ensure ‘Show Control Center in Lock screen’ is set to 
‘Disabled’ 


6) Mail 


xxiii. | Ensure ‘Show Notification Center in Lock screen’ is set 
to ‘Disabled’ 


a) Ensure ‘Allow user to move messages from this account’ 
is set to ‘Disabled’ 


IS 17737 (Part 4) : 2021 


b) Apps 7) Notifications 
re Ensure ‘Force fraud warning’ is set to ‘Enabled’ a) Ensure ‘Notification Settings’ are configured for all 
ii. Ensure "Accept cookies” is set to 'From websites I visit” ‘Managed Apps’ 
or From current website only" 8) Lock Screen Message 
3) Domains a) Ensure ‘If Lost, Return to... Message” is ‘Configured’ 


a) Ensure ‘Managed Safari Web Domains’ is Configured 


D. Additional Recommendations 


4) Passcode 


1) Ensure device is not obviously jailbroken 


a) Ensure ‘Allow simple value’ is set to ‘Disabled’ 


b) Ensure ‘Minimum passcode length’ is set to ‘6’ or greater 


c) Ensure ‘Maximum Auto-Lock’ is set to ‘2 minutes’ or less 


d) Ensure ‘Maximum grace period for device lock’ is set to 


2) Ensure ‘Software Update’ returns "Your software is up to 
date.’ 


3) Ensure ‘Automatic Downloads’ of ‘App Updates’ is set 
to ‘Enabled’ 


4) Ensure ‘Find My iPhone/iPad’ is set to ‘Enabled’ on 


seep end-user owned devices 
e) Ma Maximum numberof filed attempts 15 setter 5) Ensure the latest iOS device architecture is used by 
5) VPN high-value targets 
a) Ensure ‘VPN’ is ‘Configured’ 
6) Mail 
a) Ensure ‘Allow user to move messages from this account’ 


is set to ‘Disabled’ 


b) Ensure ‘Allow Mail Drop’ is set to ‘Disabled’ 


ANNEX B 
( Clause 4.2.2 ) 
CHECKLIST FOR MOBILE PRE-INSTALLED APPLICATION SECURITY 


Following checklist is adopted from OWASP MASVS, 
Version 1.1. 


Table 6 Checklist for Mobile Pre-installed 
Application Security 


SI. No. Description 


4) No sensitive data is shared with third parties unless it is 
a necessary part of the architecture. 


3) The keyboard cache is disabled on text inputs that 
process sensitive data. 


6) No sensitive data is exposed via IPC mechanisms. 


7) No sensitive data, such as passwords or pins, is exposed 
through the user interface. 


SI. No. Description 
A.Architecture, Design and Threat Modeling Requirements 
1) All app components are identified and known to be 
needed 
2) Security controls are enforced on the client side and the 


respective remote endpoints 


C. Cryptography Requirements 


3) A high-level architecture for the mobile app and 
all connected remote services has been defined and 
security has been addressed in that architecture 


4) Data considered sensitive in the context of the mobile 
app is clearly identified 


B. Data Storage and Privacy Requirements 


1) The app does not rely on symmetric cryptography with 
hardcoded keys as a sole method of encryption. 

2) The app uses proven implementations of cryptographic 
primitives. 

3) The app uses cryptographic primitives that are 


appropriate for the particular use-case, configured with 
parameters that adhere to industry best practices. 


1) System credential storage facilities are used 
appropriately to store sensitive data, such as PII, user 
credentials or cryptographic keys. 


4) The app does not use cryptographic protocols or 
algorithms that are widely considered depreciated for 
security purposes. 


2) No sensitive data should be stored outside of the app 
container or system credential storage facilities. 


5) The app doesn’t re-use the same cryptographic key for 
multiple purposes. 


3) No sensitive data is written to application logs. 


6) All random values are generated using a sufficiently 
secure random number generator. 


IS 17737 (Part 4) : 2021 


SI. No. | Description SI. No. Description 

D. Authentication and Session Management Reguirements 4) The app does not export sensitive functionality through 

1) If the app provides users access to a remote service, IPC facilities, unless these mechanisms are properly 

ange protected. 
some form of authentication, such as username/ 
password authentication, is performed at the remote 5) Java Script is disabled in Web Views unless explicitly 
endpoint. required. 

2) If stateful session management is used, the remote 6) Web Views are configured to allow only the minimum 
endpoint uses randomly generated session identifiers to set of protocol handlers required (ideally, only https is 
authenticate client requests without sending the user’s supported). Potentially dangerous handlers, such as file, 
credentials. tel and app-id, are disabled. 

3) If stateless token-based authentication is used, the 7) Ifnative methods of the app are exposed to a WebView, 
server provides a token that has been signed using a verify that the WebView only renders JavaScript 
secure algorithm. contained within the app package. 

4) The remote endpoint terminates the existing session 8) Object deserialization, if any, is implemented using 
when the user logs out. safe serialization APIs. 

5) A password policy exists and is enforced at the remote G. Code Quality and Build Setting Requirements 
endpoint. 1) The app is signed and provisioned with a valid 

6) The remote endpoint implements a mechanism to certificate, of which the private key is properly 
protect against the submission of credentials an protected. 

BESES sive Mher Or Hines 2) The app has been built in release mode, with settings 

E. Network Communication Requirements appropriate for a release build (for example, non- 

1) Data is encrypted on the network using TLS. The debuggable). 
secure channel is used consistently throughout the app. 3) Debugging symbols have been removed from native 

2) The TLS settings are in line with current best practices, Minang 
or as close as possible if the mobile operating system 4) Debugging code has been removed, and the app does 
does not support the recommended standards. not log verbose errors or debugging messages. 

3) The app verifies the X.509 certificate of the remote 5) All third-party components used by the mobile app, 
endpoint when the secure channel is established. Only such as libraries and frameworks, are identified, and 
certificates signed by a trusted CA are accepted. checked for known vulnerabilities. 

F. Platform Interaction Requirements 6) The app catches and handles possible exceptions. 

1) The app only requests the minimum set of permissions 7) Error handling logic in security controls denies access 
necessary. by default. 

2) All inputs from external sources and the user are 8) In unmanaged code, memory is allocated, freed and 
validated and if necessary sanitized. This includes data used securely. 
received via the UI, IPC mechanisms such as intents, : : 

tom URLS. andnetwork sourdes 9) Free security features offered by the toolchain, such as 
PONT ? > ik byte-code minification, stack protection, PIE support 
3) The app does not export sensitive functionality via and automatic reference counting, are activated. 


custom URL schemes, unless these mechanisms are 
properly protected. 


10 


ANNEX C 
( Clause 4.2.3 ) 


IS 17737 (Part 4) : 2021 


MOBILE DEVICE SECURITY CONTROL VERIFICATION 
Table 7 Mobile Device Security Control Verification 


Security Security Controls Inputs Required Assessment and Evaluation Checkpoints 
Characteristics Requirements 
a) Device protection 1) Baseband integrity | Details of chip set/baseband | Check the part number of the chip 
(device integrity) checks processor used in the mobile | set/processor used and its specifications from OEM’s 
device. Specification Sheet/Website. 
Verify that the chip set/ processor is used by the mobile 
device and has integrity checking feature — manufacturer 
to demonstrate. 
2) Application Details of application | Check the availability of the App 
black/whitelisting black/whitelisting mechanism | black/whitelisting feature in the mobile device. 
used in the mobile device. Assess the feature — manufacturer to demonstrate. 
3) Device integrity checks: | Device integrity checks - | Check whether mobile device has this feature and it is 
Boot validation Boot process details of the | functioning — manufacturer to demonstrate. 
mobile device. 

4) Application verification | Details of application | Check that the capability to verify application source 
verification mechanism used | before it is installed exists and verify the same — 
in the mobile device. manufacturer to demonstrate. 

5) Verified application and | Details of application and | Check that the capability to verify application and OS 

OS updates OS update verification | update source before it is installed exists and verify the 
mechanism used in the | same — manufacturer to demonstrate. 
mobile device. 

b) Data protection 1) Protected storage: --- Check if device has capability to protect data in storage. 

i) Device encryption | What type of encryption is | Check what encryption is used by the device and it is 
used by device and its details | adequate and certified. 
along with certification, if | Verify that the data in storage on device is actually 
any; encrypted — manufacturer to demonstrate. 

ii) Secure containers Details of containerization | Check that device has containerization capability. Verify 
feature used by the device. that containerization is used by the device and is secure 

— manufacturer to demonstrate. 

iii) Trusted Key Details of storing the trusted | Check that device securely stores the trusted keys and it 

Storage keys is effective — manufacturer to demonstrate. 

iv) Remote wipe Details of remote wipe | Check the mechanism used for remote protection of 
feature or any other safe | data such as remote wipe. 
guards used for protecting the | Verify that the same has been implemented and it is 
data remotely. effective — manufacturer to demonstrate. 

2) Protected --- Check if device has capability to protect data in transit. 

communications: 
i) Virtual private Details of protecting | Check the mechanism used protecting confidentiality 
network (VPN) confidentiality and integrity | and integrity of information in transit such as 
of information in transit using | VPN/ cryptography. 
VPN/ cryptography. Verify that the same has been implemented and it is 
effective - manufacturer to demonstrate. 
ii) To include per-App | Details of per App VPN used | Check per App VPN mechanism defined. 
VPN in the device Verify that the same has been implemented and it is 
effective — manufacturer to demonstrate. 
3) Data protection in = Check if device has capability to protect data in 


Process: 


i) Encrypted memory 


Details of encrypted memory 
used in the device 


processing. 
Check mechanism used for encrypted memory. 


Verify that the same has been implemented and it is 
effective — manufacturer to demonstrate. 


ii) Trusted execution 
environment 


Details of the trusted 
execution environment used 
in the device. 


Check mechanism used for protecting execution 
environment. 


Verify that the same has been implemented and it is 
effective — manufacturer to demonstrate. 


Device manufacturer to write APIs to communicate 
with TEE as per requirements. 


11 


IS 17737 (Part 4) : 2021 


Security Security Controls Inputs Required Assessment and Evaluation Checkpoints 
Characteristics Requirements 
c) Data isolation 1) Sandboxing Details of sandboxing feature | Check that device has sandboxing capability. 
used by the device. Verify that sandboxing is used by the device and is 
effective — manufacturer to demonstrate. 
2) Memory isolation Details of memory isolation | Check that device has memory isolation capability. 
feature used by the device. Verify that memory isolation is used by the device and 
is secure — manufacturer to demonstrate. 
3) Trusted execution | Details of the trusted | Check mechanism used for trusted execution 
environment execution Environment used | environment. 
by the device. Verify that the same has been implemented and it is 
effective — manufacturer to demonstrate. 
4) Device resource | Details of the device resource | Check mechanism used for device resource management 
management management feature used by | and features. 
the device. Verify that the same has been implemented — 
manufacturer to demonstrate. 
5) Baseband isolation Details of baseband isolation | Check mechanism used for baseband isolation. 
used in the mobile device. Verify that the same has been implemented and it is 
effective — manufacturer to demonstrate. 
d) Identity and 1) Local user authentication | Details of local user | Check mechanism used for local user authentication to 
authorization to applications authentication to applications | applications. 
feature used in the mobile | Verify that the same has been implemented & it is 
device. effective — manufacturer to demonstrate. 
2) Local user authentication | Details of local user | Check mechanism used for local user authentication to 
to device authentication to device | device. 
feature used in the mobile | Verify that the same has been implemented and it is 
device. effective — manufacturer to demonstrate. 
3) Remote user | Details of remote user | Check mechanism used for remote user authentication. 
authentication authentication feature used in Verify that the same has been implemented and it is 
the mobile device. effective — manufacturer to demonstrate. 
4) Credential and token | Details of credential and | Check mechanism used for credential and token storage 
storage and use token storage and its usage in | and use. 
the mobile device. Verify that the same has been implemented and it is 
effective — manufacturer to demonstrate. 

e) Monitoring 1) Auditing and logging Details of auditing and | Check mechanism used for auditing and logging. 
logging feature used in the | Verify that the same has been implemented — 
mobile device. manufacturer to demonstrate. 

2) Root and jailbreak | Details of root and jailbreak | Check mechanism used for root and jailbreak detection. 
detection detection feature used in the | Verify that the same has been implemented and it is 
mobile device. effective — manufacturer to demonstrate. 

f) Privacy 1) Informed consent of user | Details of informed consent | Check mechanism used for informed consent of user. 

protection of user feature used in the | Verify that the same has been implemented and it is 
mobile device. effective — manufacturer to demonstrate. 
2) Privacy notification | Details of privacy notification | Check mechanism used for privacy notification 


provided to user 


provided to user feature used 
in the mobile device. 


provided to user. 


Verify that the same has been implemented and it is 
effective — manufacturer to demonstrate. 


12 


IS 17737 (Part 4) : 2021 


ANNEX D 
(Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Information System Security and Privacy Sectional Committee, LITD 17 


Organization 


Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology, 
New Delhi 


Bharat Electronics Limited, Bengaluru 


Centre for Development of Advanced Computing, 
Pune 


Centre for Internet and Society, Bengaluru 


Confederation of Indian Industry, New Delhi 


Data Security Council of India, Noida 


Defence Research Development Organization, 
Ministry of Defence, New Delhi 


HCL, Noida 
ISI Calcutta 


Indian Cellular and Electronics Association, 
New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 


Infosys Technologies Limited, Bengaluru 


KCPL 
Lady Shri Ram College for Women, New Delhi 


Larsen and Toubro Limited, Mumbai 


Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology, 
New Delhi 


Ministry of Science and Technology, Department of 
Science & Technology, New Delhi 


Narnix Technolabs Private Limited, New Delhi 


National Accreditation Board for Certification 
Bodies, New Delhi 


National Payments Corporation of India, Mumbai 


Oxygen Consulting Services Private Limited, Pune 


Patanjali Associates Private Limited, New Delhi 


Representative (s) 
SHRI ARVIND KUMAR (Chariman) 


MS SANGEETHA MANGAL 
SHRI DEVESH KUMAR SINGH (Alternate) 


Dr M. Sasi KUMAR 
SHRIMATI P. R. LAKSHMI ESWARI (Alternate) 


SHRI SUNIL ABRAHAM 
SHRI AMBER SINHA (Alternate I) 
SHRI GURSHABHAD GROVER (Alternate II) 


Cor SUHAIL ZAIDI 
SHRI RAMESH KARWANI (A/ternate) 


SHRI ADITYA 


Ms NOOPUR SHROTRIYA 
SHRI G. ANIL (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJEEV CHHABRA 
PROF BIMAL Roy 


SHRI RAJESH SHARMA 
Ms Arpita DE (Alternate) 


PROF ANIL PRABHAKAR 


SHRI SRINIVAS POOSARLA 
SHRI RAJEEV THYKATT (Alternate I) 
Ms Aswatny ASOK (Alternate IT) 


DR V. K. KANHERE 
Ms SUSHILA MADAN 


Suri N. SATHYAN 
SHRI TIRUMALA Rao K. (Alternate) 


SHRI S. K. NEHRA 
SHRI RAKESH MAHESHWARI (Alternate I) 
SHRI SANTOSH SONI (Alternate ID) 
DR SOMNATH CHANDRA (Alternate III) 
SHRI TARUN PANDEY (Alternate IV) 


SHRI SUJIT BANERJEE 
Dr RAJEEV SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI KISHOR N. NARANG 


Suri A. S. BHATNAGAR 
Ms ANAJNA JAIN (Alternate) 


MR SATYA KANUNGO 
SHRI SATEESH PALAGIRI (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJIV KUMAR AGARWALA 
SHRI SACHIN PRAKASH JADHAV (Alternate) 


SHRI KANTI MOHAN RUSTOGI 


13 


IS 17737 (Part 4) : 2021 


Organization 


Qualcomm India Private Limited, Bengaluru 


Reserve Bank Information Technology Private 
Limited, Mumbai 


Smart Chip Private Limited, Noida 


Standardization Testing and Quality Certification 
(STQC) 


Tata Consultancy Services Limited, Mumbai 


Telecommunication Engineering Center, New Delhi 


The Perspective, New Delhi 

WYSE Biometrics System Private Limited, Pune 
In personal capacity 

In personal capacity, Kolkata 

BIS Directorate General 


Representative (s) 


Dr VINOSH BABU JAMES 
SHRI PRASHANT LOTLIKAR 
SHRI DEEPNARAYAN TIWARI (Alternate) 


Ms NISHA CHAUHAN 
SHRI PANKAJ AGARWAL (Alternate I) 
SHRI ANKIT GUPTA (Alternate ID) 


SHRI A. K. SHARMA 
SHRI A. K. UPADHYAYA (Alternate I) 
SHRI NAKUL AGGRWAL (Alternate II) 


SHRI SATEESH SRINIWSAIAH 
SHRI NATARAJAN SWAMINATHAN (Alternate I) 
SHRI ABHIK CHAUDHURI (Alternate II) 
SHRI ANUPAM AGRAWAL (Alternate III) 


SHRI S. SRIDHAR 
SHRI ARVIND CHAWLA (Alternate) 


SHRI RAHUL SHARMA 

SHRI YOGENDRA D. WADASKAR 
SHRIMATI AMUTHA ÅRUNACHALAM 
Dr GARGI KEENI 


SHRIMATI REENA GARG, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (LITD) 


[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


SHRI KSHITIJ BATHLA 
Scientist ‘C’ (LITD), BIS 


14 


IS 17737 (Part 4) : 2021 


Mobile Security Standards Panel, LITD 17 P4 


Organization 


Standardization Testing and Quality Certification 
(STQC) 


Telecommunication Engineering Center, New Delhi 
Apple India Private Limited, Bengaluru 
Cellular Operators Association of India, New Delhi 


Fime India, Bengaluru 


Google India, Bengaluru 
HCL, Noida 


Indian Cellular and Electronics Association, 
New Delhi 


KCPL 
Pavone Technologies, New Delhi 


Samsung India, Gurugram 


Sony India, Mathura 


Transsion India Limited, Noida 
UL India Private Limited, Bengaluru 


VIVO Mobile India Private Limited, Delhi 


Vincular Testing Labs India Private Limited, 
Bengaluru 


Xiaomi Corporation, Bengaluru 


Representative(s) 
Suri A. K. UPADHYAYA (Convener) 


Suri P. K. SINGH (Co-Convener) 
Mr JUNAID A. SIDDIQUEE 
SHRI ROHIT SINGH 


SHRI ANGAJ BHANDARI 
SHRI HARDIK MIRANI (Alternate) 


Ms TUHINA JOSHI 
SHRI SANJEEV CHHABRA 


SHRI RAJESH SHARMA 
SHRI TARON MOHAN (Alternate) 


DR V. K. KANHERE 
SHRI ABHINAV SHARMA 


SHRI BAPPA MONDAL 
SHRIMATI Noor KHAN (Alternate) 


SHRI MANOJ KUMAR GUPTA 


SHRI RAHUL GAUR 
SHRI VINOD KUNDRA (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHISH MATHUR 
Suri AJAY JAIDKA (Alternate) 


SHRI PAIGHAM DANISH 


SHRI VISHAL TOMAR 
SHRI SACHIN Duir (Alternate) 


Ms SuRBHI JAIN 
SHRI MANISH JAIN (Alternate) 


15 


IS 17737 (Part 4) : 2021 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 
1) https://www.cisecurity.org/benchmark/google android/ for Android OS 


2) https://www.cisecurity.org/benchmark/apple_ios/ for iOS 
3) https://www.sans.org/score/checklists/mobile-device 


16 


This page has been intentionally left blank 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: LITD 17 (14999). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T, Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


