IS/IEC 519-5 (1980)

Indian Standard

SAFETYINELECTROHEATINSTALLATION
PART 5 SPECIFICATION FOR SAFETY IN PLASMA INSTALLATION

ICS

25.180.10 : 25.160.30 ; 13.110

0 BIS 1995

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

November

1995

Price Group

3

Industrial Electroheating

Equipment Sectional Committee, ET 17

NATIONAL

FOREWORD

This Indian Standard (Part 5 ) which is identical with IEC Pub 519-5 (1980) is one in the series of standards on Safety in electroheat installation covering requirements for safety in plasma installation. This standard shall be read in conjunction with part 1 of this standard covering general requirements. The text of the IEC Standard has been considered and adopted by ET 17 Industrial Electroheating Equipment Sectional Committee of BIS and approval of Electrotechnical Division Council. CROSS REFERENCE In this Indian Standard the following International place the following: International Standard IEC 501 : Safety requirements for arc welding equipment - Plugs, sockets, outlets and couplers for welding cables IEC 519-1 Safety in electroheat installations Part 1 : General requirements IEC 519-4 Particular requirements installations for arc furnace Standards are referred to. Read in their respective Indian Standard IS 8804 : 1993 Plugs sockets and terminal arrangements and welding cable connectors for manual welding equipment Cfirst revision) IS/IEC 519-1 (1984) Safety in electroheat tions : Part 1 General requirements. installa-

IS 9080 (Part 4) : 1981 Safety requirements in electroheat installation : Part 4 Particular requirements for arc furnace installations IS 13263 : 1992 Methods of test for plasma equipment for electroheat installations In the case of IS0 700 : 1982 considering that Indian Standard identical to this is not available the Technical Committee responsible for this standard has decided that the provision given in IS0 are acceptable for use in conjunction with this standard.

IEC 680 : Test methods for plasma equipments for electroheat installations IS0 700 : 1982 Power sources for manual arc welding with covered electrodes and for the TIG process

IS/IEC

519-S (1980)

Indian Standard

SAFETYINELECTROHEATINSTALLATION
PART 5 SPECIFICATION FOR SAFETY IN PLASMA INSTALLATION

SECTION

ONE

-

SCOPE

AND

DEFINITIONS'

1.

Scope

This standard specifies safety requirements applicable to arc plasma heating installations using hand-operated torches or mechanically-operated torches, for example for welding, cutting or spraying. This standard also specifies than the power supply: that gas supply circuits, electrical gear, and all other equipment general safety requirements for arc plasma furnace installations other is, the furnace itself, its foundation and structure, cooling circuits, equipment from power supply onwards, furnace handling and control associated with the use of the furnace.

These requirements shall be considered mendations, as far as they apply:

in conjunction

with the following

international

recom-

1) IEC Publication 501 : Safety Requirements outlets and Couplers for Welding Cables. 2) 1E C Publication 5 19-l : Safety: in Electra-heat

for Arc Welding

Equipment

-

Plugs,

Socket-

Installations,

Part 1: General

Requirements.

As welding and similar equipment are excluded from the scope of Publication 519-I any reference to that publication in the following text will be made by giving the number of the clause considered.

3) JSO/R 709.

2.

Definitions

The terms relating -I E C Publication JEC Publication

to the present 519-l ; 519-4;

requirements

are defined in the following

publications:

I E C Publication

680: Test Methods

for Plasma

Equipment

for Electroheat

Installations;

I EC Publication ISO/R

501, Clause 2;

700, Clause 2.

1

IS/rEC

519-S (1980)

SECTION TWO - SAFETY USING HAND-OPERATED

REQUIREMENTS IN PLASMA HEATING INSTALLATIONS TORCHES OR MECHANICALLY-OPERATED TORCHES

3. 3.1

Design and installation General requirements See I EC Publication
Note. -

features

519-l.

In cases where voltages over 80 V d.c. are involved, a notice stating the voltage should be prominently displayed.

3.2

Electric circuit See I EC Publication 519-l.

3.3

Torch sockets, plugs and connection cables See I EC Publication 501.

3.4

Torch The electrodes of the arc plasma torch are placed in chambers connected with the cooling and energy supply circuits. The plasma-producing gas is injected into the inter-electrode space. The clamping of electrodes shall be such as to ensure permanent electrical contact during operation of the torch so that no unintended heating can occur under normal working conditions.

The watertightness of the cooling circuit shall be ensured under normal operating conditions. The electrical insulation shall be such as to guard the operator from any harmful effect during ignition and operation of the torch. An insulating material or an insulating covering for the body of the hand-operated torch is preferable. But where a metal body is used, the latter shall be connected to an earth leakage circuitbreaker at the input to the power supply so as to isolate it in, the event of an electrical fault. The circuit-breaker will isolate the electrical supply when the leakage current through the torch body exceeds 10 mA. An on-off push button may be provided on the torch body for control of the power supply by the operator; other devices, for example a foot lever, ensuring equivalent safety can be provided iFstead of the push button.

3.5 3.5.1

Cooling circuit Tl& cooling-water hoses of installations using hand-operated and flexibility so as not to interfere unduly with the handling torches shall have a sufficient of' the torch. length

3.5.2

Taking into account the high pressure necessary to obtain the specified flow rate in the water hoses, their mechanical strength shall not be appreciably affected by accidental exposure to hot particles from welding or cutting operations or from the torch itself.

3.5.3

If the direction of cooling-water codes on the connecting fittings be used.

flow is important, it shall be indicated by arrows of the torch and hoses. Also non-interchangeable

and/or colour couplers can

2

rs/rec 3.5.4

519-S (19W

The torch cooling-water pipes and fittings shall remain watertight even in the event of sudden blocking up of the outflow during operation at the specified flow rate, taking into account also the effects of heat on the hoses,' and `ultra-violet radiation. The operator shall have access to the cooling circuit control and monitoring devices and, if possible,

3.5.5

shill be able to read their indications. 3.5.6 The torch shall be electrically isolated when the cooling rate is below that specified. 3.5.7 Flexing at the coupling of the water inlets and outlets to the torch shall be minimized as jar as possible at the torch body and the couplings be provided at least with a basic insulation fo reduce the possibility of electrical breakdown within the torch body. Gas circuit The compressed gas containers installed close to the place of use of the plasma torch shall be protected against possible overheating, electrical discharges, and ejections of incandescent material. Similar precautions shall be taken for portable compressed gas containers. circuit is disconnected or when the flow

3.6 3.6.1

3.6.2

The gas admission hose(s) of installations and flexibility so as not to unduly interfere

using hand-operated torches shall have sufficient with the handling of the torch.

length

3.6.3

The gas admission hose(s) shall be so designed as to withstand the pressure required to obtain the specified flow rate, which should not be appreciably diminished by accidentaz exposure to hot particles. Their resistance to heat and ultra-violet radiation shall meet the requirements under normal operating conditions. the gas pressure occurring

3.6.4

The fastening of gas pipes to the connecting fittings shall withstand in the event of circuit blockage, for example by a ball joint. Safety rules for the use of industrial in force in the country concerned. gas in high-pressure tanks:

3.6.5

consult

the work

regulations

3.6.6

A safety device shall prevent ignition of the torch when the gas circuit minimum rate of flow specified by the torch manufacturer is not attained. Deposition of powder or wire Distributing apparutus The wire or powder electrical connection connection connection distributor ; circuit ; shall comply with existing regulations

is shut off or when the

3.7 3.7.1

and standards

as regards:

to a gas-pressure to the torch.

3.7.2

Material to be deposited It shall comply facturer. with the powder grain sizes or wire diameters specified by the equipment manu-

3.8 3.8.1

IdentiJcation plates and circuit diagram The identification plate fixed on each plasma torch shall bear the following data (see ISO/R 700):

3

IS/IEC -

519-S (1980) name of manufacturer type of torch ; rated current : types of gas which may be used in the appliance; cooling-water flow rate minimum resistivity. and pressure and, if required, maximum permissible hardness and ;

3.8.2

When the employment of different gases for plasma production calls for the employment of appropriate electrodes, the name of the gas or its atomic or chemical symbol shall be specified on the appropriate electrode or its casing. plate: See ISO/R 700, third part.

3.8.3

Data to be shown on the torch rating

3.8.4

All other data required book provided

for operation

as well as the circuit diagram

shall be given in the instruction

with the torch.

3.9

Protection against radio interference The power supply and ignition system of the torch shall be so designed ference regulations in force in the country concerned. as to comply with inter-

4. 4.1

Operation General See I E C Publication 5 19- 1.

Compliance with work safety regulations During operation of the equipment the working conditions of operators shall be in accordance with work safety regulations in force in the country concerned (for example in the field of toxicity, temperature rise, noise, etc.). 4.2 Protective means of the operator Operators of plasma torches shall wear protective means adapted to the type of work performed: apron, gloves, insulating face shield to protect especially the eyes against heat, glare, ultra-violet and infra-red radiation, appropriate insulating footwear.

In addition noise. Workers

they shall use suitable

means

such as ear protectors

to protect

themselves

against

in the vicinity

should

also be protected

by effective screening

of the work place.

4.3

Starting and stoppi-,i: The necessary operations to start and stop the equipment shall be performed in an order ensuring safe working. The cooling liquid flow and the gas supply to the torch shall be adjusted before ignition of the electric arc. Each day the earth leakage circuit-breaker will be tested before starting work.

4

IS/IEC

519-5 (1980)

Cooling and gas supply shall not be interrupted until the electrode voltage of the torch has been cut off. Safety devices shall be provided to neutralize any error in the specified sequence of operations. A sign or other equivalent means of information placed close to the equipment necessary operations to start and stop the equipment in their correct order. shall list the

4.4

Protection against toxic substances liable to be produced during opevation

qf the torch

If the use of a plasma torch gives rise to the production of toxic compounds, these shall be evacuated in a suitable way, to give a concentration of compounds below the recognized threshold limit in the operator's 4.5 breathing zone.

Protection against overheating (jkr installations using hand-operated torches) No part of the torch intended to danger. to be handled during operation shall reach a temperature likely

to expose the operator 4.6

Protection against damage to water and gas pipes Protection against damage to electric cables All connections between the torch and the fixed part of the equipment be constantly protected against damage caused by ejection of hot particles shall as far as possible or by being trodden on.

5.
5.1

Maintenance General See IEC Publication 519-l.

5.2

Electric cables, cooling pipes, flexible tubing of gas circuit (for installations using hand-operated torches)

In view of possibility of damage caused by accidental ejection of hot particles, it is essential periodically to check the insulation of cables and the condition of hoses in order to replace them as soon as necessary to ensure safe working.

SECTION

THREE

-

SAFETY

REQUIREMENTS

IN PLASMA

FURNACE

INSTALLATIONS

6.

Design and installation

features-Operation-Maintenance all the applications of these furnaces which may range from the

It is impossible to enumerate stationary to the moving type.

It is therefore necessary to refer to the standards and recommendations in force for electroheat equipment, possibly under pressure or moving, with due regard to the dangers likely to result from its application.

5

IS/IEC 519-5 (1980) In view of the similarity of plasma relevant sec!ions in I E C Publications as far as they apply. Attention is drawn to the different atmosphere of plasma furnaces and that of arc furnaces. furnaces and of arc furnaces as far as safety is concerned, the 519-4: Safety in Arc Furnace Installations, shall be considered

The requirements

for other applications

will be dealt with in an appendix

to be issued subsequently.

Bureau ofIndian

Standards

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau ofIndian Standards Act,1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.
Copyright

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS.
Review of Indian Standards

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from DOC.NO. ET 17 ( 3475 ).

Amendments

Issued Since Publication

Amend No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 3310131,331 13 75 Regional Offices : Central
: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg

Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone 3310131 { 331 13 75 37 84 99,37 85 61 378626,378662 603843 1 602025 23.5 02 16,235 04 42 1 235 15 19,235 23 15 632 92 95,632 78 58 632 78 91,632 78 92

NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern
: l/14 C. LT. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola

CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 335-336, Sector 34-A CHANDIGARH 160022

{

Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113

Western

: Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East)

BOMBAY 400093 Branches : AHMADABAD. COIMBATORE.

JAIPUR.

BHOPAL. BANGALORE. BHUBANESHWAR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. KANPUR, LUCKNOW. PATNA THIRUVANANTHAPUR. l'rlntd at Det Kay
Printers, New Qelhi-110015,

India

