anda HAF IS 1448 [P : 155] : 2020 
Indian Standard 


YAA Us Seah searc At 
uadtarut ug fal 
pat: 155] 
TARA ía aan A anfa qe 
¿arar ara farses 


AT HIT ATA HAT 


Methods of Test for 
Petroleum and its Products 


[P : 155] 
Determination of Trace Nitrogen in Liquid Petroleum 
Hydrocarbons by Oxidative Combustion with 
Chemiluminescence Detector 


ICS 75.080 


O BIS 2020 


anda AM A 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Te TH HM, ay freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


January 2020 Price Group 3 


Methods of Sampling and Test for Petroleum, its Products, Gaseous Fuels and Lubricants Sectional Committee, 
PCD 01 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard [P : 155] was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft finalized by the 
Methods of Sampling and Test for Petroleum, its Products, Gaseous Fuels and Lubricants Sectional Committee 
had been approved by the Petroleum, Coal and Related Products Division Council. 


Determination of nitrogen in petroleum distillates is a subject of importance as presence of even trace amount 
of nitrogenous compounds adversely affects some process catalysts used in petroleum and chemical refining. 
Using this test method, the trace total nitrogen naturally found in liquid hydrocarbons can be determined. 


This standard is formulated based on experience of petroleum laboratories and considerable assistance has been 
derived from ASTM D 4629-12 “Determination of Trace Nitrogen in Liquid Petroleum Hydrocarbons by Syringe/ 
Inlet Oxidative Combustion and Chemiluminescence Detection”. 


Generally, the instrument for testing of nitrogen comprises injection system, horizontal furnace with combustion 
tube and the detector. Recently, there have been test instruments with vertical furnace, which are capable to 
test nitrogen as low as ppb levels. The operation and test conditions for testing is provided by the instrument 
manufacturers. This standard thus provides flexibility to test nitrogen in hydrocarbons at ppb levels too. 


The standard covers determination of total nitrogen by two different type of instruments one with horizontal 
furnace or second with vertical furnace. It is experienced that instrument with vertical furnace and auto injectors 
have better precision than the instrument with horizontal furnace. Users can opt for either type of instrument as 
per the test requirement. 


In reporting the results of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or 
calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 “Rules for rounding off numerical 
values (revised y. 


IS 1448 [P : 155] : 2020 


Indian Standard 


METHODS OF TEST FOR 
PETROLEUM AND ITS PRODUCTS 


[P: 155] 
DETERMINATION OF TRACE NITROGEN IN LIQUID PETROLEUM 
HYDROCARBONS BY OXIDATIVE COMBUSTION WITH 
CHEMILUMINESCENCE DETECTOR 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard [P : 155] describes the procedure 
for measuring total trace nitrogen naturally found in 
liquid hydrocarbons (boiling range from approximately 
50 to 400°C), with viscosities between approximately 
0.2 and 10 cSt at room temperature. 


1.2 This method is not applicable to diatomic nitrogen 
(N,) and has reduced sensitivity to compounds with 
nitrogen-nitrogen bonds that decompose to produce 
nitrogen gas. 


NOTES: 


1 Instruments with horizontal furnace can determine the total 
trace nitrogen in naphtha, distillates and oils containing 0.3 to 
100 mg/kg total nitrogen. Instruments with vertical furnace and 
auto injector are capable for determination of nitrogen in liquid 
hydrocarbons at concentrations ranging from 50 to 300 ng/g 
(mass in ppb). It is also applicable to highly volatile samples 
such as pentane through the use of cooled sampling system. 


2 This test method can be applied to sample types outside the 
range of the scope by dilution of the sample in an appropriate 
solvent to bring the total nitrogen concentration to within 
the range covered by the test method. However, it is the 
responsibility of the analyst to verify the solubility of the 
sample in the solvent. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions, which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
the standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 


IS No. 
1448 


Title 


Methods of test for petroleum 

and its products 

[P : 16] : 2014/ 
ISO 3675 : 1998 


Density, relative density or 
API gravity of crude petroleum 
and liquid petroleum products 
by hydrometer method (third 
revision) 


IS No. 
[P : 32] : 1992 


Title 


Density and relative density 
(second revision) 


3 PRINCIPLE 


The liquid hydrocarbon is injected into a stream of inert 
gas (argon or helium). The liquid is vapourized inside 
horizontal or vertical type of furnace based on the 
design of instrument and carried to a high temperature 
zone where it is mixed with oxygen, organically 
bonded nitrogen is converted to nitric oxide. The nitric 
oxide reacts with ozone and is converted into excited 
nitrogen dioxide. A photomultiplier tube detects the 
light emitted as the excited nitrogen dioxide decays and 
the resulting signal is a measure of nitrogen contained 
in the liquid hydrocarbon. 


4 SIGNIFICANCE 


Many of the process catalyst, used in petroleum refining 
are poisoned due to trace amounts of nitrogenous 
compounds present in the feedstocks. The standard can 
essentially measure bonded nitrogen in process feeds 
and can be used for controlling nitrogen compounds in 
finished products. 


5 APPARATUS 


NOTE — Requirement of accessories for apparatus may 
slightly differ for instruments from different manufacturers. 
However, for such selection, recommendation of the instrument 
manufacturer shall be followed. 


5.1 Furnace (Electric) 


Based on the design of the instrument, either a horizontal 
furnace or vertical furnace may be used. The furnace 
is operated at a temperature sufficient to volatilize and 
pyrolyze the entire sample and oxidize the organically 
bound nitrogen; typical furnace temperature may be 
around 1 000°C or as recommended by the manufacturer. 


5.2 Combustion Tube 


Fabricated to meet the instrument manufacturer’s 
specifications. 


IS 1448 [P : 155] : 2020 


5.3 Drier Tube 


Since, the reaction products include water vapour, 
it is necessary to eliminate before it reaches the 
detector. This is achieved with the use of a magnesium 
perchlorate [Mg (ClO,),] scrubber or a membrane 
drying tube (permeation drier) or as recommended by 
instrument manufacturer. 


5.4 Chemiluminescent Detector 


Capable of measuring light emitted from the reaction 
between nitric oxide (NO) and ozone. 


5.5 Totalizer 


With variable attenuation and capable of measuring, 
amplifying, and integrating the current from the 
chemiluminescence detector. A built in microprocessor 
or attached computer system may perform these 
functions. 


5.6 Micro-litre Syringe 


Capacity of 5, 10, 25, 50, 100 or 250 ul, with needle 
that is long enough to reach the hottest portion of inlet 
section of the furnace when injecting the sample. The 
syringe may be part of an automatic sampling and 
injection device used with the instrument. 


5.7 Recorder 


5.8 Sample Inlet System 


Either of the following can be used: 


5.8.1 Manual Sample Injection with Syringe 


Auto sampler having a yringe and constant rate injector 
system, capable for injecting precise amount of sample 
with controlled rate. 


5.8.2 Boat Inlet System 


To facilitate analysis of samples that would react with 
the syringe or syringe needle. The pyrolysis tube for 
boat inlet use may require specific construction to 
permit insertion of a boat fully into the inlet section 
of the furnace. The boat inlet system external to the 
furnace shall be cooled to a temperature below room 
temperature to aid in dissipating the heat from the 
boat when it is removed from the furnace. Cooling 
the boat inlet system may also reduce the chances of 
the sample combusting in the boat before introducing 
into the furnace and may be necessary when running 
volatile samples such as naphtha using a boat inlet 
system. 


5.9 Quartz Insert Tube 


Quartz insert tube with an oxidation catalyst, as 
recommended by the instrument manufacturer that aids 
in complete oxidation. Generally cupric oxide may be 
used as oxidation catalyst. This is inserted into the exit 
end of the pyrolysis tube. 


5.10 Vacuum System 


The chemiluminescence detector may be equipped 
with a vacuum system to maintain the reaction cell at 
reduced pressure (typically 20 to 25 mm Hg). This can 
improve the signal to noise ratio of the detector. 


NOTE — It is observed that instruments that uses vacuum 
system gives better precision and accurate results. 


5.11 Analytical Balance — With a precision of 
+ 0.01 mg. 


6 REAGENTS 


6.1 Follow Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS) of 
reagents for safety precautions. 


NOTES: 


1 Requirement of reagents and chemicals may slightly differ for 
instruments from different manufacturers. However, for such 
selection, recommendation of the instrument manufacturer 
shall be followed. 


2 High temperature is employed in this test method. Since the 
instrument is operated at high temperature, exercise care when 
using flammable materials near the pyrolysis furnace. 


6.2 Quality of Reagents 


Unless specified otherwise, only “Analytical Grade” 
chemicals shall be used for testing. It need to be 
ascertained that the reagent is of sufficiently high purity 
to permit its use without lessening the accuracy of the 
determination 


NOTE — ‘Pure chemicals’ shall mean chemicals that do not 
contain impurities which affect the results of analysis. 


6.3 Magnesium Perchlorate, Mg (ClO,), — For 
drying products of combustion (if permeation drier is 
not used.) 


6.4 Inert Gas — Helium or argon (ultra high pure). 
6.5 Oxygen — 99.996 percent minimum pure. 


6.6 Solvents — For dilution and matrix matching 
such as, toluene, isooctane, xylene, acetone, cetane. 
(Other solvents similar to those occurring in samples 
can also be used). Solvents should contain less than 
0.1 ug/ml nitrogen. For samples with less than 
300 ng/ml nitrogen, solvents with less than 30 ng/ml 
shall be used. 


6.7 Nitrogen Stock Solution (1 000 ug N/ml) 


Stock solution is prepared by accurately weighing 
1.195 g of carbazole or 0.565 g of pyridine, into a 
tared 100 ml volumetric flask. 15 ml of acetone is then 
added while using carbazole to dissolve it. Dilute to 
volume with the selected solvent. Calculate the exact 
concentration of the stock solution based on the actual 
mass of pyridine or carbazole and the purity of the 
chemical used. This stock is further diluted to desired 
nitrogen concentrations. 


NOTES: 


1 Pyridine is used with low boiling solvents (boiling point 
<220°C) and carbazole with high boiling solvents (boiling 
point >220°C). 

2 Working standards are to be remixed on a regular basis 
depending upon frequency of use and age. Typically, working 
standards have a useful life of about 3 months, and are 
refrigerated when not being used. 


6.8 Cupric Oxide Wire — As recommended by 
instrument manufacturer. 


6.9 Quartz Wool 
6.10 Pyridine 
6.11 Carbazole 


7 APPARATUS ASSEMBLY 


7.1 Install the apparatus as in the 


manufacturer’s manual. 


provided 


7.2 Set the flow of various gases and the pyrolysis 
temperature as recommended by the instrument 
manufacturer. 


8 CALIBRATION AND STANDARDIZATION 


8.1 Prepare various calibration standards using 1 000 
ug N/ml stock solution covering the required range of 
analysis and consisting matrix similar to that of sample 
to be tested. Generate calibration curve using atleast 
two calibration standards in addition to the solvent 
blank. 


8.2 Determine volume or mass of the material to 
be analyzed by using either of the volumetric or 
gravimetric method described below. 


8.2.1 Volumetric measurement of the injected material 
is obtained by filling the syringe to the 80 percent level, 
retracting the plunger so that the lower liquid meniscus 
falls on the 10 percent scale mark, and recording the 
volume of liquid in the syringe. After the material was 
injected, again retract the plunger so that the lower 
liquid meniscus falls on the 10 percent scale mark 
and record the volume of liquid in the syringe. The 
difference between the two volume readings is the 
volume of material injected. 


8.2.2 Alternatively, an automatic sampling and 
injection device may be used to inject a reproducible 
volume of the material into the furnace. 


8.2.3 Gravimetric measurement of the injected 
material is obtained by weighing the syringe before 
and after injection to determine the quantity of 
material injected. The gravimetric procedure provide 
better precision than the volumetric procedure, when 
a balance with a precision of at least + 0.01 mg is 
used. 


IS 1448 [P : 155] : 2020 


8.3 For injecting the sample into the furnace, insert 
syringe needle through the inlet septum up to the syringe 
barrel and inject the sample or standard at a uniform rate 
as specified by the instrument manufacturer (generally 
0.2 to 1.0 ul/s). Rate of injection of sample is based 
on factors such as viscosity, hydrocarbon type and 
nitrogen concentration. The user must ensure a method 
whereby sample is injected with consistent and uniform 
rate of injection. An automatic sampling and injection 
device may be used at a reproducible rate of injection. 


NOTES: 


1 For the most consistent injection rate and best analytical 
results, a constant rate injection unit or automatic sampling and 
injection device may be helpful. Coke formation at the outlet 
of the combustion tube may indicate too rapid of an injection 
rate. Consult manufacturer for recommendations. 

2 In case of, direct injection below 5 mg/kg of nitrogen, the 
needle septum blank is increasingly important. Error due to 
this can be avoided by inserting the syringe needle into the hot 
inlet and allowing the needle-septum blank to dissipate before 
injecting the sample. 


8.4 If a boat inlet system is used, then the material to 
be analyzed is injected into a quartz boat using one of 
the procedures described in 8.2 and the quartz boat is 
moved into the hot portion of the combustion tube. 
Details of operation as available in manufacturer’s 
manual may be referred. 


8.5 Calibration curve shall be generated in one of the 
following manners depending on the capability of the 
instrument used. 


8.5.1 For systems that use a microprocessor or 
computer system for data collection and calibration 
curve generation, calibration curve shall be based 
on the linear regression minimum of three repeat 
measurements of each calibration standard. 


8.5.2 For those detectors not equipped with a 
microprocessor or computer system for generating a 
calibration curve, construct a standard curve as follows: 


a) Repeat the determination of each calibration 
standard and the blank three times. 


b) Determine the average net response of each. 


c) Construct a curve plot of detector response 
(integration counts) versus nanograms of nitrogen 
injected and apply the best straight line fit through 
the plotted data. 


8.6 The response curve should be linear with a 
minimum R? of 0.999. The intercept should not be 
forced through zero. The calibration curve shall be 
checked each day that instrument is used. 


8.7 Quality Control 


Once in amonth, run a blank (diluents mixture) and any 
mid-range internal standard on the prepared calibration 
line. The observed results shall remain within the 


IS 1448 [P : 155] : 2020 


precision of this method. In case large deviations are 
observed or desired precision is not met, recalibrate the 
instrument again. 


9 PROCEDURE 


NOTE — Volatile samples should be kept in airtight containers 
and should be analyzed as soon as possible so as to prevent 
reduction of nitrogen or contamination due to exposure or 
contact with sample container. 


9.1 Concentration of nitrogen in the test specimen must 
be less than the concentration of the highest standard 
used in the calibration. Injection volumes may vary 
from 3 to 100 ul depending on the instrument being 
used and shall be similar to the size of the injected 
standards used for calibration. 


9.2 Flush a clean syringe several times with the 
sample to be tested. Inject 1t into the furnace using the 
procedure outlined in 8.2 to 8.4. For samples with total 
concentration of nitrogen in the range 1 to 100 mg/kg, 
quantity of sample injected is typically up to 10 ul. 
For samples with total concentration of nitrogen less 
than 1 mg/kg, injected sample can be up to 100 ul. 
Follow the manufacturer’s manual on sample size 
based on type of sample and level of nitrogen present. 


9.3 To obtain one result, measure each test specimen 
a minimum of three times and calculate the average 
detector response. 


10 CALCULATION 


10.1 For samples introduced volumetrically, density 
values at ambient temperature shall be used for 
calculation. 


10.2 Calculate the nitrogen content of the sample in 
mg/kg for the average of the three determinations that 
make up a single result as follows: 


Nit fie ee 1 
itrogen, mee = 7D) (1) 
or 
i TAR 
Nitrogen, mg/kg = =——=— 2 
gen, mg/kg (SxM) (2) 
Where, 


= density of sample, g/ml; 
= slope of the calibration curve, counts/ng N; 
V= volume of sample, ul; 
K= dilution factor; 
M= mass of sample, mg; 
I= average detector response, integration counts; 
and 
I = intercept of the calibration curve, integration 
counts. 


10.3 For analyzers equipped with a calibration adjust, 
calculate the nitrogen content of the sample in mg/kg 
as follows (the average of three determinations makes 
up a single result): 


Nitrogen, mg/kg = er (3) 
(VxD) 
or 
Nitrogen, mg/kg = EA (4) 
(M) 
where, 


= density of sample, g/ml, 
V= volume of sample, uL, 
K= dilution factor, 
= mass of sample, mg, 
= visual display reading ofthe sample, ng N; and 
B= average of visual display readings of the blank, 
ng N. 


11 REPORT 


For results equal to or greater than 1 mg/kg, report the 
nitrogen result to two significant figures when two or 
more significant figures are available. For results less 
than 1 mg/kg, report the nitrogen result to the nearest 
tenth of an mg/kg. 


12 PRECISION AND BIAS 


12.1 The precision of this test method as determined by 
statistical examination of inter laboratory results is as 
follows (see Table 1). 


12.1.1 Repeatability 


The difference between two test results obtained by the 
same operator with the same apparatus under constant 
operating conditions on identical test material would, 
in the long run, in the normal and correct operation of 
the test method, exceed the following values in only 
one case in twenty, where X = the average of the two 
test results. 


r=0.1825(X)05149 


12.1.2 Reproducibility 


The difference between two single and independent test 
results obtained by the different operators working in 
different laboratories on identical test material would, 
in the long run, in the normal and correct operation of 
the test method, exceed the following values in only 
one case in twenty, where X = the average of the two 
test results. 


R = 0.8094(X)9519 


12.2 The bias of this test method cannot be determined 
since an appropriate standard reference material 
containing a known trace level of nitrogen in a liquid 
petroleum hydrocarbon is not available to form the 


basis of a bias study. 


Table 1 Repeatability and Reproducibility 


( Clause 12.1) 


SI No. Concentration (mg/kg N) r R 

(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) 100 2.0 8.7 
11) 75 1.7 7.5 
iii) 50 1.4 6.1 
iv) 25 1.0 4.2 
v) 10 0.6 2.6 
vi) 1 0.18 0.81 
vii) 0.3 0.10 0.44 


IS 1448 [P : 155] : 2020 


12.3 Precision data for levels below 300 mg/g N shall 
be taken from the instrument manufacturer based on 
requirements. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
“BIS Catalogue” and “Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: PCD 01 (2670). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


