NAT AWA IS 8757 : 2021 
Indian Standard 


Hs Ma À Harg 
Urine sreataeit 


(FAT JETT ) 


Glossary of Terms Associated 
with Fire Safety 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 01.040.13; 13.220.01 


© BIS 2021 


anda AM Sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Tea TH AMT, ay freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


November 2021 Price Group 7 


Fire Safety Sectional Committee, CED 36 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Fire Safety Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 


A series of Indian Standards covering fire safety aspects of buildings and different firefighting equipment and 
appliances have been published and these include a large number of terms relating to fire engineering, fire safety 
and fire technology. The use of some of the terms and the need to eliminate any ambiguity and misunderstanding 
in their interpretation had necessitated the preparation of standard on glossary of terms associated with fire safety. 
This standard was, therefore, brought out in 1978 to fulfil this need. A separate standard IS 7673 : 2004 ‘Glossary 
of terms for firefighting equipment (first revision) ° has been published giving definitions of terms associated with 
firefighting equipment. 


This standard published as glossary of terms associated with fire safety was first revised in 1999. 


This second revision has been brought out to update the definitions based on the experience gained during these 
years as also to bring it in line with the National Building Code of India 2016 (SP 7 : 2016). In this revision, besides 
the modification of the existing definitions, number of new terms have also been included. In the formulation of 
this standard due weightage has been given to international co-ordination among standards and practices prevailing 
in different countries in addition to relating it to the practices in the field in this country. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 8757 : 2021 


Indian Standard 


GLOSSARY OF TERMS ASSOCIATED 
WITH FIRE SAFETY 


( Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard covers definition of general and safety 
terms relating to the phenomenon of fire, fire as related 
to building materials and structures and method of tests 
connected therewith and means of escape. 


2 TERMINOLOGY 


2.1 Abnormal Heat — Additional heat resulting from 
use up to and including, under normal conditions, that 
results in a fire. 


2.2 Accelerant — Substance used to initiate and 
develop fire, for example, flammable liquids. 


2.3 Acceptance Criteria — Criteria that form the basis 
for assessing the acceptability of the safety of a design 
of a built environment. 


2.4 Activation Time — Time interval from 
the response of a sensing device until the fire 
fighting/suppression systems, smoke extraction and the 
lime are fully operational. 


2.5 Active Smoke Barrier — Smoke barrier that moves 
from its retracted position into its fire-operational 
position automatically when called upon to do so. 


2.6 Agent Outlet — Outlet in a piping system by 
means of which an extinguishing agent can be applied 
towards the source of fire. 


2.7 Air-conditioning — The process of treating air so 
as to control simultaneously its temperature, humidity, 
purity and distribution to meet the requirements of the 
conditioned space. 


2.8 Alarm Time — Time interval between ignition of a 
fire and activation of the alarm. 


2.9 Alternative Escape Route — Sufficiently separated 
by either direction and space, or by fire resisting 
construction, to ensure that one is still available should 
the other be affected by fire. 


2.10 Ambient Temperature — The temperature of the 
surroundings (unregulated outdoor temperature). 


2.11 Anoxia — Severe lack of oxygen in the blood or 
the brain. 


2.12 Arson — Crime of setting a fire usually with a 
malicious intent. 


2.13 Asphyxiation — The suspension of respiration 
and animation, as the result of the inhalation of 
substances, such as carbon dioxide, methane, nitrogen, 
etc, when present in atmosphere to an extent sufficient 
materially to decrease its normal oxygen content. 


2.14 Assisted Evacuation — Strategy that exists 
during which a designated person or persons provide 
assistance, during an emergency, to another person 
to leave a building or a specific part of the built 
environment and to reach a final place of safety. 


2.15 Atrium — A large-volume space created by a 
floor opening or series of floor openings connecting 
two or more stories that is covered at the top of the 
series of openings and is used for purposes other than an 
enclosed stairway; lifts hoist-way; an escalator opening; 
or as a utility shaft used for plumbing, electrical, air 
conditioning, or communications facilities. 


2.16 Auto-door Release — A device when fitted to 
self-closing door allows to remain the door open under 
normal conditions but on the actuation of the alarm, 
releases the door which returns to the closed position. 


2.17 Auto Ignition — Ignition resulting from a rise of 
temperature without a separate ignition source. 


2.18 Auto-Ignition Temperature — Minimum 
temperature at which a material will ignite by itself 
in air and sustain combustion without initiation by an 
external spark or flame under specified test condition. 


2.19 Automatic Fire Detection and Alarm System — 
A system comprising components and sub-systems 
required for automatically detecting smoke, heat or fire 
initiating an alarm and other actions as appropriate. 
This system also includes manually operated electronic 
fire alarm (MOEFA) system. 


NOTE — MOFFA system (with or without automatic fire 
detection and alarm system) includes all or some of the 
components such as manual call stations (initiating an alarm 
for fire and other actions as required), talk-back system and 


public address system. 


2.20 Back Draft — Rapid flaming combustion caused 
by the sudden introduction of air into a confined 


IS 8757 : 2021 


oxygen-deficient space that contains hot products of 
incomplete combustion. 


2.21 Balusters — Plain moulded or turned posts for 
use of staircases, terraces and balconies (short pillars 
used as support to handrail of staircases). 


2.22 Balustrades — Assemblages of balusters or other 
ornamental treatment for forming a safeguard at the 
sides and the heads of stair flights and landing and also 
to terraces, balconies, etc. 


2.23 Barrier Movement — Travel distance 
(for example, height drop) of an active barrier from its 
retracted position to its fire operational position. 


2.24 Basement — Any storey of a building wholly or 
partly below grade plane that is not considered the first 
storey above grade plane. 


2.25 Blast Effect — Damage caused by shock waves 
from an explosion. 


2.26 BLEVE (Boiling Liquid Expanding Vapour 
Explosion) — An explosion caused by rapid expansion 
of flammable gas stored in a container resulting in 
sudden release of huge quantities of atomised burning 
liquid which appear as a fire ball up and radiating 
intense heat all-around. 


2.27 Boil Over — In a flammable liquid storage tank, it 
is the discharge with exceptional violence of part of the 
contents of burning tank. 


2.28 Boiling Point — Minimum temperature at which 
the vapour pressure of the liquid is equal to atmospheric 
pressure. 


2.29 Brand — A freely burning fragment of substance 
which may fall or become airborne either by wind or by 
convection currents. 


2.30 Building — Any structure for whatsoever 
purpose and of whatsoever materials constructed and 
every part thereof whether used as human habitation 
or not and includes foundation, plinth, walls, floors, 
roofs, chimneys, plumbing and building services, fixed 
platforms, verandah, balcony, cornice or projection, 
part of a building or anything affixed thereto or 
any wall enclosing or intended to enclose any land 
or space and signs and outdoor display structures. 
Tents, SHAMIANAHS, tarpaulin shelters, etc, erected 
for temporary and ceremonial occasions with the 
permission of the Authority shall not be considered as 
building. 


2.31 Burn — Injury or damage caused by flame/heat 
to living beings. 


2.32 Burn Back — Flames going back over an area 
previously extinguished, may be due to incomplete 
cover or fire extinguishing media foam degradation. 


2.33 Burning Behaviour — All the physical 
and/or chemical changes that take place when a material, 
product and/or structure burns or is exposed to fire. 


2.34 Calorific Potential/Heat of Combustion — 
Calorific energy which could be released by the 
complete combustion of a unit mass of a material. 


2.35 Cavity Wall — A wall formed from/built into 
thicknesses, separated by an air space. The two 
thicknesses being connected by occasional ties of metal 
or brick. Also known as hollow wall. 


2.36 Ceiling (Suspended, Fire-Resisting) — A ceiling 
assembly capable of contributing, wholly or in part to 
the overall fire resistance of the floor above and/or its 
supporting members. This ceiling can be designed as a 
horizontal fire barrier to prevent the vertical spread of 
fire. 


2.37 Channelling Screen — Smoke barrier installed 
beneath a balcony or projecting canopy to direct the 
flow of smoke and hot gases from a room opening to 
the spill edge. 


2.38 Charring — The formation of a light, friable, 
mainly carbonaceous constituent residual on wood 
or other organic matter resulting from incomplete 
combustion and/or devolatilization following exposure 
to heat. 


2.39 Chimney Effect (Flue Effect) — The upward 
movement of hot fire effluent caused by the convection 
currents confined within an essentially vertical 
enclosure. 


2.40 Co-efficient of Thermal Expansion — The 
proportional increase in length, volume of superficial 
area of a body per degree rise in temperature at a 
constant pressure. 


2.41 Column or Stanchion (Fire-resisting) — A 
structural member (that transmits, predominantly 
through compression, the weight acting on top of it 
to other structural elements below) with or without 
any additional protection, capable of satisfying one 
of the criteria of fire resistance namely, resistance to 
collapse (stability), integrity and insulation during rise 
in temperature. 


2.42 Combustible — An object that is capable of 
combustion. 


2.43 Combustible Material — A material which 
either burns itself or adds heat to a fire, when tested for 
non-combustibility. 


2.44 Combustion — Exothermic reaction of a 
combustible substance with an oxidiser, usually 
accompanied by flames, and/or glowing and/or emission 
of smoke. 


2.45 Common Path of Travel — That portion of the 
exit access which the occupants are required to traverse 
before two (or more) separate and distinct routes or 
two (or more) exits become available. Common paths 
of egress travel shall be included within the permitted 
travel distance. 


2.46 Compartmentation — The divisions of a 
building into fire-tight compartments by fire-resisting 
elements of building construction in order to contain 
a fire and smoke (products of combustion) within the 
compartment of origin for a specific period of time. 


2.47 Compartment Floor — A fire-resisting floor 
used in dividing a building vertically into separate 
compartments. 


2.48 Compartment Wall — A fire-resisting wall 
used in dividing a building horizontally into separate 
compartments. 


2.49 Conductive Floor — Floor which is rendered 
electrically conductive by integral or applied floor 
finish for preventing static sparks. 


2.50 Conflagration — A fire which involves not 
only the building in which it originates, but also 
other buildings and property over a considerable area 
adjacent to it. 


2.51 Consumable Power Supplies — Any form of 
power that, when not available, prevents an active 
smoke barrier from moving to the required fire 
operational position. 


2.52 Containment — Restricting the spread of fire to 
surrounding structures or areas. 


2.53 Convection — Process of transfer of heat by 
movement of fluid or air. 


2.54 Cooling — A process of fire extinguishment 
control by reduction of temperature. 


2.55 Corrosion Damage — Physical and/or chemical 
damage or impaired function caused by chemical 
action. 


2.56 Covered Area — Ground area covered by the 
building immediately above the plinth level. The area 
covered by the following in the open spaces is excluded 
from covered area: 


a) Garden, rockery, well and well structures, plant 
nursery, water pool, swimming pool (ifuncovered), 
platform round a tree, tank, fountain, bench, 
CHABUTARA with open top and unenclosed on 
sides by walls and the like; 

b) Drainage culvert, conduit, catch-pit, gully pit, 
chamber, gutter and the like; 


IS 8757 : 2021 


c) Compound wall, gate, unstoreyed porch and 
portico, slide, swing, uncovered staircases, ramp 
areas covered by CHHAJJA and the like; and 


d) Watchman’s booth, pump house, garbage shaft, 
electric cabin or substations, and such other 
utility structures meant for the services of the 
building under consideration. 


2.57 Critical Fire Load — Fire load required in a 
compartment to produce a fire of sufficient severity 
to cause failure of a fire barrier(s) or structural 
member(s) located within or bounding the fire 
compartment. 


2.58 Cryogenic Gases — Substances in a gaseous 
state which cannot be liquefied by pressure alone and 
are therefore cooled to a low temperature for storage 
and temperature in the liquid state. 


2.59 Dangerous Contaminant — A substance not 
normally found in a pure state and the presence of 
which even in small quantity may be dangerous 
owing to it acting as a catalyst or by itself entering 
into a potentially dangerous reaction. 


2.60 Dead End — An area from which escape is 
possible in one direction only. 


2.61 Deflagration — Combustion wave (explosion) 
propagating in subsonic velocity. 


2.62 Deflection — Movement of a smoke barrier 
when subjected to the buoyant force of the hot smoke, 
the movement of air, air pressure or any combination 
thereof. 


2.63 Detonation — Detonation of explosion and 
characterized propagating at supersonic velocity by 
a shock valve. 


2.64 Discharge Rate — Number of persons which 
can pass through one unit of exit width in a given 
time. 


2.65 Discharge Value — The maximum number of 
persons who can effectively egress through a given 
number of units of exit width in a given period of 
time having regard, in multi-storey buildings, to the 
capacity of the staircase(s). 


2.66 Door Assembly, Fire-Check/Fire Door — 
Any combination of fire door, frame, hardware and 
other accessories that together provide a specific 
fire resistant rating to the opening in terms of its 
stability, integrity and insulation properties (in case 
of insulated doors), when installed in the openings in 
fire separation walls. Fire door is a component of fire 
door assembly. 


IS 8757 : 2021 


2.67 Door Assembly, Fire-resisting — A door which, 
together with its frame, is capable of satisfying the 
criteria of fire resistance with respect to collapse, flame 
and smoke penetration and excessive temperature rise. 
Such a door may be automatic or self-closing. 


2.68 Draft — Current of air accelerating towards a fire 
supplying air for combustion. 


2.69 Duct Assembly, Fire-resisting — A duct 
(including its hardware) which conveys liquid, gas 
of services through building, and which is capable of 
satisfying the criteria of fire resistance with respect 
to collapse, flame penetration and rise of temperature 
beyond any prescribed value. 


2.70 Dust Explosion — Rapid oxidation type of 
explosion in a suspension of combustible dust in air. 


2.71 Dust-tight Enclosure — A type of enclosure for 
electrical equipment located in dusty atmospheres, 
which prevent ingress of dust within its interior. 


2.72 Egress — A route of travel from any point inside 
a building to a point outside the building. 


2.73 Emergency Lighting — Lighting provided for 
use when the supply to the normal lighting fails. 


2.74 Escape Chute — Open slide like escape used for 
emergency evacuation. 


2.75 Escape Hatch — An emergency means of 
providing escape from a room or part of a building in 
the form of a removable or breakable panel in a wall 
or floor. 


EXIT STAIRWAY 


EXIT DISCHARGE, 


“STAIRWAY + 


EXIT ACCESS 


2.76 Evacuation Drill — Rehearsal of the evacuation 
procedure involving participation of the occupants of 
the premises. 


2.77 Evacuation Procedure — A predetermined plan 
of action designed to achieve the safe evacuation of the 
occupants of a building to a place of safety. 


2.78 Evacuation Time — The time taken for all 
occupants of a building or part of a building, on receipt 
of an evacuation signal, to reach a final exit. 


2.79 Exit — That unobstructed component of means 
of egress which is between the exit access and the 
exit discharge or public way. Exit components include 
exterior exit doors at the level of exit discharge, interior 
exit stairways, exit passageways, exterior exit stairways 
and exterior exit ramps. See Fig. 1. 


2.80 Exit Access — That portion of a means of egress 
that leads to an exit (for example, doorways, staircase 
lobby, verandah, corridor or passageway leading to an 
exit). 


2.81 Exit Discharge — The component of a means of 
egress between the termination of an exit and a public 
way. 


2.82 Fire Exit — A way out leading to an escape route 
with or without panic bar hardware provided on the 
door. 


2.83 Horizontal Exit — An arrangement which allows 
alternative egress from a floor area to another floor at 
or near the same level in an adjoining building or an 
adjoining part of the same building with adequate fire 
separation. 


EXIT ACCESS 


: EXIT PASSAGEWAY - 


EXIT DISCHARGE 


SEPARATION AS REQUIRED 
FOR EXIT ENCLOSURE 
(TO BE CONTINUOUS) 


EXIT > 


Fic. 1 COMPONENTS OF MEANS OF EGRESS 


4 


2.84 Exit Sign — Sign which clearly indicates the exit. 


2.85 Exit Width — Unit of the minimum width 
required for a single file of persons to pass through an 
exit of 500 mm width. 


2.86 Explosion (Decomposition Type) — 
Instantaneous decomposition of certain endothermic 
compounds with evolution of hot gases and extremely 
rapid rise of surrounding air pressure. 


2.87 Explosion (Pressure Release Type) — Rupturing 
of pressure containers due to abnormally high pressure. 


2.88 Explosion (Rapid Oxidation Type) — An 
extremely rapid oxidation reaction with evolution of 
light, heat and dynamic energy capable of causing 
structural or other physical damage. 


2.89 Explosion Suppression — Appliance containing 
an explosion suppressant which can be expelled by the 
action of internal pressure. This pressure may be stored 
pressure or may be obtained by a chemical reaction 
such as the activation of an explosive or pyrotechnical 
device. 


2.90 Explosion Vent — An opening in a vessel or 
building, usually covered by a fragile diaphragm, or 
a hinged or spring-loaded flap, which in the event of 
an explosion in the vessel or building allows gaseous 
products to escape. This venting process is also known 
as ‘explosion relief”. 


2.91 Exposure Hazard — The risk of fire spreading 
froma building structure, or other property to an adjacent 
separate building or structure, or to another part of the 
same building or structure, by radiated heat across the 
intervening space. Factors determining the exposure 
hazard include the width of the intervening space, the 
heights of the buildings and their construction, types of 
windows, doors, etc. 


2.92 Fail-safe — Designed to return to a safe condition 
in the event of a failure or malfunction, etc. 


2.93 Fire 


a) The process of combustion characterized by the 
emission of heat accompanied by smoke or flame 
or both. 


b) Combustion spreading uncontrolled in time and 
space. 


2.94 Fire Ball — A spherical mass of flame, which may 
occur if a large quantity of flammable vapour suddenly 
ignites in the air as it occurs following BLEVE. 


2.95 Fire Barrier (or Fire Resisting Barrier) — 
A vertically or horizontally aligned member such 
as a wall or a fire curtain or floor. These may be 
with discontinuities created by openings with a 


IS 8757 : 2021 


specified fire resistance rating, where such members 
are designed and constructed with a specified fire 
resistance rating to limit the spread of fire that also 
restricts the movement of smoke. 


2.96 Fire Break — An open space separating 
buildings, stored products or other combustible 
materials being itself free of combustible material and 
designed to restrict spread of fire. 


2.97 Fire Classification — Standardized system of 
classifying fires in terms of the nature of fuel. These 
are: 


Class A— Fire involving solid materials, usually 
of an organic nature, in which 
combustion normally takes place with 
the formation of glowing embers. 

Class B— Fires involving liquids liquefiable 
solids. 

Class C— Fires involving gases. 

Class D— Fires involving. 

Class E— Fires involving electrical hazards. 

Class F— Fires involving cooking oil and fat. 


2.98 Fire Compartment — A space within a building 
enclosed by fire barrier or fire resistant walls on all 
sides, including the top and bottom. 


2.99 Fire Exposure — Extent to which persons, 
animals or items are subjected to the conditions 
created by fire. 


2.100 Fire Extinguishment — Process that eliminates 
combustion. 


2.101 Fire Fighting Shaft — An enclosed shaft 
having protected area of 120 min fire resistance rating 
comprising protected lobby, staircase and fireman’s 
lift, connected directly to exit discharge or through 
exit passageway with 120 min fire resistant wall at 
the level of exit discharge to the exit discharge. 
These shall also serve the purpose of exit 
requirement/strategy for the occupants. The respective 
floors shall be approachable from fire-fighting shaft 
enabling the fire fighters to access the floor and 
also enabling the fire fighters to assist in evacuation 
through fireman’s lift. The firefighting shaft shall be 
equipped with 120 min fire doors. It shall be equipped 
with firemen talk back, wet riser and landing valve in 
its lobby, to fight fire by fire fighters (see Fig. 2 for a 
typical firefighting shaft.) 


2.102 Fire Growth — Stage of fire development 
during which the heat release rate and the temperature 
of the fire are increasing. 


IS 8757 : 2021 


FIRE EXIT 
STAIRCASE 


FIRE DOOR 


FIREMAN 
TALK BACK 


FIRE MAIN 


FIREMAN'S LIFT 


NOTES 


LOBBY (WITH FLOOR 
PLAN AND STAIRWAY 
MARKING SIGN DULY 
DISPLAYED) 


a FIRE DOOR 


1 Where such lobbies and staircase in the firefighting shaft are naturally ventilated/cross-ventilated, the shaft may not be enclosed and 


fire door need not be provided. 


2 For all enclosed firefighting shaft, the shaft’s lobby should have floor plan duly displayed for the information of firefighters. 


3 The figure shows a typical firefighting shaft layout. Other such options are also possible. 


Fic. 2 TYPICAL FIRE FIGHTING SHAFT 


2.103 Fire Hazard Analysis/Fire Hazard 
Assessment — Evaluation of the possible causes 
of fire, the possibility and nature of subsequent fire 
growth, and the possible consequences of fire. 


2.104 Fire Hazards — Characteristics of materials, 
building construction and occupancy which affect the 
initiation, development and spread of fire. 


2.105 Fireman’s Lift — A lift or a group of lifts 
invariably associated with all the features and 
requirements of a firefighting shaft. Such lift(s) are 
installed to enable fire services personnel to reach 
different floors with minimum delay. The lift also serves 
the purpose of meeting the requirement of evacuation 
lift for assisted evacuation. 


2.106 Fire Load — Calorific energy, of the whole 
contents contained in a space, including the facings of 
the walls, partitions, floors and ceilings. 


2.107 Fire Load Density — Fire load divided by floor 
area. 


2.108 Fire Operational Position — Final configuration 
of a device, for example, a smoke barrier, specified by 
its designer to achieve and be sustained in the ultimate 
fire condition of the design. 


2.109 Fire Point (Flash Point) — The lowest 
temperature at which a liquid gives off sufficient 
flammable vapour in air to produce sustained 
combustion after the removal of the ignition source. 


2.110 Fire Prevention — The concept of elimination 
of all probable causes of fire outbreak. 


2.111 Fire Propagation Index — A comparative 
measure of the contribution to the growth of fire of a 
combustible. 


2.112 Fire Protection — Design features, systems, 
equipment, buildings or other structures to reduce 
danger to persons and property by detecting, 
extinguishing or containing fires. 


2.113 Fire Resistance — The property of an element of 
building construction and is the measure of its ability to 
satisfy for a stated period, some or all of the following 
criteria: 


a) Load bearing capacity (Stability) (R) — The 
ability of a load bearing element to withstand fire 
exposure without any loss of structural stability. 

b) Integrity (E) — Resistance to penetration of flame 
and hot gases. 


c) Insulation (1) — Resistance to temperature rise 
on the unexposed face up to a maximum of 


180 °C at any single point and average temperature 
of 140 °C. 


2.114 Fire Resistance Rating — The time that a 
material or construction will withstand the standard 
fire exposure as determined by fire test done in 
accordance with the standard methods of fire tests of 
materials/structures. 


NOTES 
1 The fire resistance rating shall be specified in terms of 
minutes. 


2 Fire resistance rating for non-structural material/assembly 
shall bear a label of compliance to such rating as per the approval 
of competent authority based on testing and evaluation. The 
label shall be permanently affixed to the material/assembly and 
may carry other relevant details such as name and type of the 
product, and manufacturer’s details. 


2.115 Fire Resistant Wall — Fire resistance rated 
wall, having opening(s) with specified fire resistant 
rating, which restricts the spread of fire from one part 
of a building to another part of the same building. 


2.116 Fire-resisting Beam — A structural member 
with or without any additional protection, capable of 
satisfying one or more of the criteria of the resistance 
namely, resistance to collapse in case of fire. 


2.117 Fire-resisting Damper — A movable closure 
within a duct, which on operation is intended to 
prevent the passage of fire or smoke or gases and which 
together with its frame will be capable of satisfying the 
criteria of fire resistance with respect to collapse and 
flame penetration. 


2.118 Fire Resistive Construction — The type of 
construction in which the structural members including 
walls, partitions, columns, floors and roofs are designed 
to withstand resistance to fire for a specified period. 


2.119 Fire Retardant (Flame Retardant) — A 
substance or treatment applied to combustible material 
to increase its ignition temperature, decrease its 
tendency to propagate flame across its surface and 
increase its resistance to pyrolysis and destruction by 
heat. 


2.120 Fire Risk — Probability of a fire combined with 
a quantified measure of its consequence. 


2.121 Fire Safety Engineering — Application of 
engineering methods based on scientific principles 
to the development or assessment of designs in the 
built environment through the analysis of specific fire 
scenarios or through the qualification of risk for a group 
of fire scenarios. 


2.122 Fire Safety Management — Application and 
service life maintenance of procedures to achieve fire 
safety objectives. 

NOTE — Procedures include fire protection measures, 


evacuation plans and the training of occupants to use such 
measures and plans. 


IS 8757 : 2021 


2.123 Fire Safety Objective — Desired outcome with 
respect to the probability of an unwanted fire relative to 
essential aspects of the built environment. 


2.124 Fire Separating Wall — A wall or walls that 
create fire separation between two tenants or dwelling 
units. Such walls include, tenant separation walls, 
corridor walls, vertical shafts, room separations. Walls 
that separate hotel room from the corridor or adjoining 
room are also fire separation walls. Fire separation walls 
are used to contain fire to the hotel room or the dwelling 
unit where fire has originated. Unlike fire walls, these 
walls can be added or changed during interior design 
project; and these walls do not necessarily extend from 
basement to roof and extend beyond roof. 


2.125 Fire Separation — The distance in metre, 
measured from the external wall of the building 
concerned to the external wall of any other building 
on the site, or from other site, or from the opposite 
side of street or other public space for the purpose of 
preventing the spread of fire. 


2.126 Fire Stop — A fire resistant material, or 
construction, having a fire resistance rating of not less 
than the fire separating elements, installed in concealed 
spaces or between structural elements of a building 
to prevent the spread/propagation of fire and smoke 
through walls, ceilings and like as per the laid down 
criteria. 


2.127 Fire Vent — An opening in the enclosing walls 
or roof of a building, intended for releasing heat and 
smoke in the event of fire and automatically or manually 
opened or both. 


2.128 Fire Wall or Fire Separating Wall — A fire 
resistance rated wall having fire protected openings, 
which restricts the spread of fire and extends 
continuously from the foundation to the roof, and 
through the roof at least 1 m above the roof in case 
of combustible roof, with sufficient structural stability 
under fire conditions to allow collapse of construction 
on one side or either sides without collapse of the wall. 


2.129 Fitness for Purpose — Ability of a product, 
process or service to serve a defined purpose under 
specific conditions. 


2.130 Flame — Rapid, self-sustaining and subsonic 
propagation of combustion in a gaseous medium, 
usually with emission of light. 


2.131 Flame Arrestors — A device fitted to prevent 
the passage of flames. 


2.132 Flame-proof Enclosure — An enclosure for 
electrical machinery or apparatus that will withstand, 
when covers or other access doors are properly secured, 
in internal explosion of the flammable gas or vapour 
which may enter or which may originate inside the 


IS 8757 : 2021 


enclosure without suffering damage and without 
communicating the internal flame (or explosion) to the 
external flammable gas or vapour. 


2.133 Flammable — A combustible material which 
ignites very easily and either burns very intensely or 
has a rapid flame spread. 


2.134 Flammability — Degree of ease with which a 
material catches fire and its intensity. 


2.135 Flammability Limit — Concentration of fuel 
vapour in air either above which or below which 
propagation of a flame does not occur in the presence 
of an ignition source. 


2.136 Flame Retardant — Substance added or a 
treatment applied to a material in order to suppress or 
delay the appearance of a flame and/or reduce the flame 
rate. 


2.137 Flash (Fire) — A flame of very short duration. 


2.138 Flashover — A stage in the development of a 
contained fire at which all the combustibles in the 
enclosures flash into fire simultaneously. 


2.139 Flash Point — The minimum temperature at 
which a liquid gives off sufficient vapour to produce 
a flammable vapour-air mixture at the lower limit of 
flammability. 


2.140 Floor Fire-resisting — A floor, with or without a 
ceiling beneath, which, when exposed to fire conditions 
from below, is capable of satisfying for a stated period 
of time the criteria of tire resistance with respect to 
collapse, flame penetration and excessive temperature 
rise. 


2.141 Flue Effect — The upward thrust of convection 
currents of hot gases through vertical openings. 


2.142 Free Area — Total area of all designed openings 
and clearance gaps in and/or around the perimeter of a 
smoke barrier. 


2.143 Fuel — A substance (which may be gaseous, 
liquid or solid) that will produce energy as heat 
(in useful amounts) when ignited. 


2.144 Glazing Assembly, Fire-resisting — Glazing 
including the associated hardware, capable of satisfying 
for a stated period of time the criteria of fire resistance 
with respect to collapse and flame penetration. 


2.145 Gross Area — Total floor area contained within 
a building, including the horizontal area of external 
walls. 


2.146 Height and Area Limitation — Maximum 
limitations in respect of height and floor areas of 
building to: 


a) prevent excessive area subject to a single tire, 


b) assure opportunity to occupants to evacuate safely, 
and 


c) assure manageable tire service. 
2.147 Hardware 


2.147.1 Hardware, Fire Exit — A door-latching 
assembly incorporating an actuating member or bar that 
releases the latch bolt upon the application of a force 
in the direction of egress travel and that additionally 
provides fire protection where used as part of a fire door 
assembly. 


2.147.2 Panic Hardware — A door-latching assembly 
incorporating an actuating member or bar that releases 
the latch bolt upon the application of a force in the 
direction of egress travel. 


2.148 Horizontal Exit — A defend in place or a staging 
arrangement, providing safety from fire and smoke 
originating from the area of incidence, by allowing 
alternative egress from a compartment to an area of 
refuge or another compartmentat or near the same level. 
This also includes such egress from a compartment to 
an adjoining building (see 2.83). A horizontal exit shall 
be through a fire door of 120 min rating in a fire resistant 
wall. Horizontal exit require separation with the refuge 
area or adjoining compartment through 120 min fire 
barrier. The adjoining compartment of the horizontal 
exit should allow unlocked and ease of egress and exits 
for the occupants using defend in place strategy. 


2.149 Hot Work — Work involving flames or 
temperatures likely to be sufficiently high to cause 
ignition of flammable gas. 


2.150 Housekeeping — State of maintenance and 
cleanliness of an occupancy, affecting the frequency 
and growth of fires. 


2.151 Hyperbolic Chambers — Enclosures within 
which air pressure is much higher than under normal 
atmospheric conditions. 


2.152 Ignitability — Degree of ease with which a 
material can be ignited. 


2.153 Ignition — Initiation of combustion. 


2.154 Ignition Source — Source of energy that initiates 
combustion. 


2.155 Ignition Temperature — The lowest temperature 
of a substance at which sustained combustion can be 
initiated. 


2.156 Incandescence — Emission of light produced by 
a material when intensely heated. 


2.157 Incendiarism — Intentional and culpable 
generation of fire. 


2.158 Inerting — Filling an enclosed space with an 
inert gas to prevent formation of explosive vapour-air 
mixture. 


2.159 Inhibition — A process of fire extinguishment 
by the use of an agent which interrupts the chemical 
reactions in the flame. 


2.160 Insulation Criteria — Resistance to temperature 
rise on the unexposed face up to a maximum of 180 °C 
at any single point and average temperature of 140 °C. 


2.161 Integrity — Ability of a barrier to maintain 
its soundness for the purpose for which it is intended 
without the transmission of significant quantities of 
flames or hot gases to the non-exposed side. 


2.162 Integrity Criteria — Criterion by which the 
ability of a separating element to prevent the passage of 
flames and hot gases is assessed. 


2.163 Intrinsically Safe Circuit — Circuit in which 
any spark or thermal effect is incapable of causing 
ignition of a mixture of flammable or combustible 
material in air under specified conditions. 


2.164 Intrinsically Safe System — Assembly in which 
all electrical circuits that can be used in hazardous 
locations are intrinsically safe circuits. 


2.165 Landing, Staircase — A level space at the top or 
bottom of a staircase and/or at each floor level. 


2.166 Life Safety Application — Application of the 
smoke and heat control system in its fire operational 
condition for the period of time required for the 
occupants of the premises to be alerted, and to be able 
to exit the premises, with the smoke and heat control 
system assisting in the protection of the means of 
escape. 


2.167 Lift Lobby — A space from which people 
directly enter a lift car(s) and into which people directly 
enter upon exiting a lift car(s). 


2.168 Lightning Arrestor — A device for the 
protection of apparatus from damage by a lightning 
discharge or other accidental electrical surge. 


2.169 Lightning Conductor — A metal strip connected 
to earth at its lower end, and its upper end terminated 
in one or more sharp points where it is attached to the 
highest part of a building. By electrostatic induction 
it will tend to neutralize a charged cloud in its 
neighbourhood and the discharge will pass directly to 
earth through the conductor. 


IS 8757 : 2021 


2.170 Lining Material — Any material used for 
lining walls, ceiling or floors of building for insulation, 
decoration or other purposes. 


2.171 Linking Balcony — An arrangement which 
provides access to an adjacent protected area, via a 
balcony. 


2.172 Load Bearing Capacity — Criterion by which 
the ability of a building element or structure to sustain 
an imposed load when exposed to fire is assessed. 


2.173 Lobby, Fire-Fighting Access — A protected 
lobby and permanently ventilated having specified 
dimensions, suitable for use as a means of access for 
fire-fighting purposes. 


2.174 Lobby, Permanently Ventilated — A protected 
lobby provided with ventilation which is permanently 
open. 


2.175 Lobby, Protected — A lobby forming part or 
whole of the horizontal component of a protected 
escape route. 


2.176 Lobby Ventilation — A protected lobby 
provided with means of ventilation to the open air for 
use when required. 


2.177 Low Hazard — These are contents of such low 
combustibility that no self-propagating fire can occur 
in these. 


2.178 Lower Limit of Flammability — Minimum 
concentration of fuel vapour in air below which 
propagation of flame does not occur in the presence of 
an ignition source. 


2.179 Means of Egress — A continuous way of travel 
from any point in a building or structure to a public 
way, consisting of three separate and distinct parts, that 
is, exit access, exit and exit discharge. See Fig. 1. 


2.180 Means of Escape — A way out of a building or 
structure that does not conform to the strict definition 
of ‘means of egress’ but does provide an alternate way 
out. 


2.181 Mezzanine — A part-floor in between two other 
floors of a building. 


2.182 Mixed Occupancy — A multiple occupancy 
where the individual building occupancies are 
intermingled. 


2.183 Moderate Hazard — These are contents that are 
liable to burn with moderate rapidity and to give off 
considerable volume of smoke but from which neither 
poisonous fumes nor explosions are to be feared in the 
event of a fire. 


IS 8757 : 2021 


2.184 Movement Time — Time needed for all the 
occupants of a building to reach a place of safety or 
safe refuge once they have begun to evacuate. It also 
refers to the time needed for all the occupants of a 
specified part of a built environment to move to an 
exit and pass through it and into a place of safety. 


2.185 Multiple Occupancy — A building in which 
two or more classes of occupancy exist. 


2.186 Mushroom Effect — A horizontal spread of 
hot gases at ceiling or roof level due to the vertical 
restriction of convection currents. 


2.187 Naked Lights — Open flames or fires, exposed 
incandescent material, or any other unconfined source 
of ignition. 


2.188 Non-combustible — Not capable of undergoing 
combustion under normal atmospheric pressure and 
oxygen concentration. 


2.189 Non-flammable — Not capable of burning 
with a flame under specified conditions. 


2.190 Occupant Load — Maximum number of 
persons that might occupy a building or portion 
thereof at any one time. 


2.191 Occupant Load Factor — A factor used in 
calculating the population density when planning 
means of escape from a building or part of a building. 


2.192 Occupancy, Building — Purpose for which a 
building, or part of a building is used, or intended to 
be used. 


2.193 Occupancy Group (or Use Group) — The 
principal occupancy for which a building or a part 
of a building is used or intended to be used; for the 
purpose of classification of a building according to 
the occupancy, an occupancy shall be deemed to 
include subsidiary occupancies (that is incidental 
occupancies) which are contingent upon it. 


2.194 Occupation Density — Number of persons per 
square metre of the usable floor area of a room for 
a given activity. Used to calculate in particular the 
number and the width of the exits of a room or space. 


2.195 Oxidation — Chemical reaction in which the 
proportion of oxygen or other electronegative element 
in a substance is increased. 


2.196 Oxidizing Agent — Substance capable of 
causing oxidation. 


2.197 Partition, Fire-resisting — A partition 
either load-bearing or non-load-bearing capable of 


10 


satisfying the criteria of fire resistance with respect to 
collapse, flame penetration and excessive temperature 
rise. 


2.198 Party Wall — Generally called a separating 
wall now. A wall common to two buildings or two 
pieces of land. 


2.199 Performance Based Design — Design that is 
engineered to achieve specified objectives and acceptance 
criteria. 


2.200 Petrochemicals — In a genuine sense are those 
flammable chemicals which are derived (in whole or 
part) from petroleum or natural gas constituents. 


2.201 Place of Safety — Places within a building 
where people can stay little longer until evacuation, for 
example, refuge areas, terrace and fire/smoke separated 
compartments. 


2.202 Population Density — The number of persons in 
a given area for whom means of egress shall be provided 
as determined by the functional use(s) of the building or 
floor. 


2.203 Pressurization — The establishment of a 
pressure difference across a barrier to protect a stairway, 
lobby, escape route or room of a building from smoke 
penetration. 


2.204 Pressurization Level — The pressure difference 
between the pressurized space and the adjoining 
area served by the pressurized space expressed in 
Pascal (Pa). 


2.205 Products of Combustion — Total gaseous, 
particulate and aerosol effluents from a fire or pyrolysis. 


2.206 Protected Area — Area giving an adequate degree 
of fire resisting enclosure from other areas and from 
which there is alternative means of escape. 


2.207 Protected Corridor — A corridor forming whole 
or part of the horizontal component of a protected escape 
route. 


2.208 Purging — Freeing an enclosed space from 
flammable or toxic vapours/gases by blowing air or inert 
gas. 


2.209 Pyrolysis — Irreversible chemical decomposition 
of a material due to an increase in temperature without 
oxidation. 


2.210 Pyrophoric Material — Material capable of auto- 
ignition when brought into contact with air. 


2.211 Radiation (Heat) — Transfer of heat through a gas 
or vacuum other than by heating of the intervening space. 


2.212 Ramp — The construction, in the form of 
an inclined plane that is steeper than or equal to 
1:20 (5 percent) from the horizontal, together with 
any intermediate landing, that makes it possible to pass 
from one level to another. 


2.213 Reactivity, Air — Property possessed by 
certain chemicals of causing dangerous reactions when 
exposed to air. 


2.214 Reactivity, Water — Property possessed by 
certain chemicals of causing dangerous reactions when 
coming into contact with water. 


2.215 Refuge Area — An area within the building for 
a temporary use during egress. It generally serves as a 
staging area which is protected from the effect of fire 
and smoke. 


2.216 Response Time — Time taken for an active 
smoke barrier to move to its fire operational position 
after initiation. 


2.217 Roof (External Fire Exposure, Resistance, 
etc) — The ability of a roof deck and covering to resist 
both penetration by external fire and flame spread over 
the external surfaces. 


2.218 Roof Screen or Roof Curtain Boards — A 
vertical screen or substantial non-combustible material 
fitted internally to the roof of a building to divide 
the roof into bays so that smoke and hot gases from 
a fire are contained within the bay of origin if used 
in conjunction with automatic fire vents, their early 
actuation is effected. 


2.219 Roof Venting — A system of vents which will 
open automatically in the event of a fire and allow the 
escape of smoke and hot gases. 


2.220 Roof Exits — A means of escape on to the roof 
of a building, where the roof has access to it from 
the ground through alternative stair case or adjacent 
building. 


2.221 Room Access — A room which forms the only 
escape route from an inner room. 


2.222 Secondary Fire — A fire which has started some 
distance from the seat of the original fire but is due to 
the latter. 


2.223 Self-Extinguishing — Incapable of undergoing 
sustained combustion after removal of the external 
source of heat. 


2.224 Self-heating An exothermic reaction 
occurring without the application of external heat. 


11 


IS 8757 : 2021 


2.225 Separating Element — Physical barrier intended 
to resist the passage of fire from one side of the barrier 
to the other side. 


2.226 Shaft, Fire-resisting — A space bounded by 
fire-resisting elements of building construction and 
intended for the passage of persons, services or things. 


2.227 Shutter Assembly, Fire-resisting — Shutter 
which, together with its frame; is capable of satisfying 
the criteria of fire resistance with respect to collapse 
and flame penetration. 


2.228 Sleeping Risk — A form of occupancy or a 
part of a building in which bedroom or dormitory 
accommodation predominates, such as in hotels, 
boarding schools, hospitals and similar establishments. 


2.229 Smoke — Visible suspension in atmosphere of 
solid and/or liquid particles resulting from combustion 
or pyrolysis. 


2.230 Smoke and Heat Control System 
Arrangement of components installed in a construction 
works to limit the effects of smoke and heat from a fire. 


2.231 Smoke and Heat Exhaust Ventilation System 
(SHEVS) — Set of components jointly selected to 
exhaust smoke and heat in order to establish a buoyant 
layer of warm smoke above cooler, cleaner air. 


2.232 Smoke Barrier — A continuous membrane, or 
a membrane, where such membrane is designed and 
constructed to restrict the movement of smoke. It also 
refers to a device to channel, contain and/or prevent the 
migration of smoke (fire effluent). 


NOTE — Smoke barriers can also be referred to as smoke 
curtains, smoke blinds or smoke screens. 


2.233 Smoke Compartment — A space within a 
building enclosed by smoke barriers on all sides. 


2.334 Smoke Damper — Movable device for smoke 
control, open or closed in its normal position, which is 
automatically or manually actuated. 


2.235 Smoke Density — The proportion of solid matter 
present in the smoke, measured on various arbitrary 
scales. 


2.236 Smoke Exhaust — An opening, or a 
fire-resisting shaft or duct provided in a building to act 
as an outlet, usually from a basement, for smoke and 
hot gases produced by an outbreak of fire. 


2.237 Smoke Vent — Opening in the enclosing walls 
or roof ofa building, intended to release heat and smoke 
in the event of fire, automatically and/or manually 
opened. 


IS 8757 : 2021 


2.238 Smoke Reservoir Region within a 
construction works limited or bordered by smoke 
barriers or structural elements so as to retain a thermally 
buoyant smoke layer in the event of a fire. 


2.239 Smothering — A process of fire extinguishment 
by the limitation or reduction of oxygen. 


2.240 Smouldering — Slow combustion of material 
without visible light and generally evidenced by smoke 
and an increase in temperature. 


2.241 Soot — Finely divided particles, mainly 
carbon, produced and deposited during the incomplete 
combustion of organic material. 


2.242 Spark, Electric — Instantaneous electrical 
discharge between bodies at different electrical 
potentials accompanied by heat and light. 


2.243 Spark, Fire — A small incandescent particle. 


2.244 Spill Edge — Edge of a soffit beneath which 
a smoke layer is flowing and adjacent to a void, for 
example, the edge of a balcony or canopy or the top 
edge of a window through which the smoke is flowing 
out of a room. 


2.245 Spontaneous Combustion — A biological or 
chemical reaction in an object or a body which produces 
its own heat resulting in combustion. 


2.246 Spontaneous Heating — A kind of heating 
internally developed by a body due to bacteriological 
and/or chemical reaction without drawing off heat from 
its surroundings. 


2.247 Stack Pressure — Pressure difference caused 
by a temperature difference creating an air movement 
within a duct, chimney or enclosure. 


2.248 Staircase, Enclosed — A staircase physically 
separated, for example, by walls, partitions, screens, 
etc from the floors of a building through which it 
passes, and which does not form part of a protected 
escape route. 


2.249 Staircase, Fire-fighting A staircase, 
designated for use by the fire services in obtaining 
access into a building for fire fighting purposes and 
provided with fire fighting access lobbies. 


2.250 Staircase, Open — A staircase not separated in 
any way from the floors through which it passes. 


2.251 Staircase, Protected — A staircase, protected 
from the remainder of a building by fire-resisting 
construction, accessible only through self-closing, fire 
resisting doors, and forming the vertical component of 
a protected escape route. 


12 


2.252 Stairway Lobby Approach — Protected 
stairway separated from the accommodation space in 
a building by protected lobbies. 


2.253 Starvation — A process of fire extinguishment 
by the limitation or reduction of fuel. 


2.254 Static Electricity — Electricity, generated 
as a result of friction between two non-conducting 
substances. 


2.255 Static Smoke Barrier — Smoke barrier 
permanently fixed in its fire operational position. 


2.256 Stop Over — An overflow of the contents of 
the tanks less violent than boil over when the oil is 
within 3 m of the top of the tank. 


2.257 Structural Fire Protection — Structural 
features in the layout and/or construction of a building 
intended to reduce the effects of a fire. 


2.258 Substrate — Material that is used or is 
representative of that used immediately beneath a 
surface in end use. 


2.259 Surface Spread of Flame Classification — 
The division into classes of combustible building 
materials according to the rate at which flame spread 
over their surfaces. 


2.260 Temperature-time Curve — Standardized 
time related variation of temperature prescribed in a 
specified way during a standard fire resistance test. 


2.261 Thermal Conductivity — Time rate of heat 
flow through unit area, per unit temperature gradient, 
in the direction perpendicular to the area. 


2.262 Thermal Decomposition — Process whereby 
the action of heat or elevated temperature on an item 
causes changes to the chemical composition. 


2.263 Thermocouple — A junction of wires dissimilar 
metals used for measuring temperature. 


2.264 Thermal Insulation — Fire resistance ability 
of a separating element when exposed to fire on one 
side to restrict the transmission of heat. 


2.265 Thermal Insulation Material — Material used 
for the confinement of heat to a particular location. 


2.266 Thermostat — An automatic control device 
responsive to changes of temperature. 


2.267 Time-Temperature Curve — A graph that 
shows the increase in temperature of a fire as a 
function of time, beginning with ignition and ending 
with burnout or extinguishment. 


2.268 Tinder — Material which can be ignited by an 
ordinary lighted match, and materials such as wood, 
cardboard, paper, textiles, etc. 


2.269 To Burn — To consume or be consumed by 
rapid oxidation with the production of heat, usually 
with incandescence or flame, or both. 


2.270 Toxicity — The nature and extent of adverse 
effects of a substance on a living organism. 


2.271 Travel Distance — The distance to be travelled 
from any point in a building to a protected exit or 
external escape route or final exit measured along the 
line of travel. 


2.272 Trunking, Fire-resisting — Trunking, not its. 
If part of the structure, which conveys liquid, gas or 
services through a building and is capable, for a stated 
period of time of satisfying the criteria of fire resistance 
with respect to collapse and flame penetration. 


2.273 Ultimate Load — The maximum load which a 
structure is designed to withstand. 


2.274 Upper Limit of Flammability — Maximum 
concentration of fuel vapour in air above which 
propagation of flame will not occur in the presence of 
an ignition source. 


2.275 Vent, Emergency — Opening fitted with easily 
tupturable shutter of diaphragm fitted on equipment 
ducts or buildings to relieve pressure of explosions. 


2.276 Venting Fire — The process of facilitating heat 
and smoke to leave a building as quickly as possible 
by such paths so that lateral spread of fire and heat 
is checked, firefighting operations are facilitated and 
minimum fire damage is caused. 


13 


IS 8757 : 2021 


2.277 Vent, Smoke (Roof) — Automatic or manually 
closing openings on the roof of a building to vent 
smoke and hot gases of a fire. 


2.278 Ventilation — Simultaneous supply of outside 
air and the removal of inside air from an enclosed space. 


2.279 Vertical Opening — Any aperture through 
vertical opening floors in buildings, such as lifts, 
ducting, stairs, services. These openings can act as 
channels for the vertical spread of fire and smoke. 


2.280 Vertical Spread — The upward propagation of 
fire. 


2.281 Vestibule — Small lobby or enclosed space 
between the outer doors and the interior of a building. 


2.282 Visual Strobes/Flashing — An audio-visual fire 
alarm for alerting persons with hearing impairment 
with flashing light. The strobe frequency should be 
from 0.5 Hz to 4.0 Hz. 


NOTE — Care should be taken to ensure that overlapping 
strobes do not combine to result in a higher frequency of 
flashing. 


2.283 Void Edge Screen — Smoke barrier deployed 

beneath the edge of a balcony or projecting canopy. 
NOTE — Void edge screens can be used either to create a 
smoke reservoir beneath the balcony or canopy or to restrict 


the length of spill edge in order to create a more compact spill 
plume. 


2.284 Void-sealing Screen — Smoke barrier deployed 
across a void to create a smoke reservoir beneath the 
smoke barrier. 


2.285 Volatility — The tendency of a liquid to 
vapourize. 


IS 8757 : 2021 


ANNEX A 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Fire Safety Sectional Committee, CED 36 


Organization 


In personal capacity (K-33A, Green Park, 
New Delhi) 


Advance Firetec and Research Lab Pvt Ltd, 
New Delhi 


Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 
CSIR-Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


Central Industrial Security Force, New Delhi 
Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Centre for Fire Explosive & Environment Safety, 
Delhi 


Chennai Petroleum Corporation Limited, Chennai 


City and Industrial Development Corporation, 
Navi Mumbai 


Delhi Fire Services, New Delhi 

Delhi Metro Rail Corporation Limited, New Delhi 

Directorate General of Quality Assurance, Ministry 
of Defence, New Delhi 

Directorate of Fire and Emergency Services, Panaji 

Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


Fire and Security Association of India, Gurugram 


Fire Safe India Foundation, Mumbai 


FM Engineering International Limited, Bengaluru 
Fyrprotek (Fire Engineers & Consultants), 

New Delhi 
GAIL (India) Limited, New Delhi 


Hilti India Private Limited, Gurugram 


Indian Association of Structural Engineers, 
New Delhi 


Representative(s) 
Suri S. K. DHERI (Chairman) 


SHRI S. K. NANDI 
SHRIMATI INDU SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI A. K. TANDLE 


SHRI SUVIR SINGH 
SHRI A. A. ANSARI (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJNATH SINGH 
SHRI A. K. VERMA (Alternate) 


CHIEF ENGINEER (CSQ) (E) 
SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER (TLQA) (Alternate) 


Dr K. C. WADHWA 


SHRI J. P. K. HEPAT 


SHRI ARVIND MANDKE 


DIRECTOR 
CHIEF FIRE OFFICER (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI PAPIYA SARKAR 
SHRIMATI RASHMI BHARDWAJ (Alternate) 


CONTROLLER QA (FE) 
JOINT CONTROLLER QA (FE) (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR 


SHRI S. K. NASKAR 
SHRI DINESH DEBBARMA (Alternate) 
SHRI NISHANT SINGLA (Young Professional) 


SHRI RAJNISH AGGARWAL 
SHRI SURESH MENON (Alternate) 


SHRI MILINDKUMAR DESHMUKH 


SHRI SRIKANTH YAJJALA 
SHRI MANIKANDAN KRISHNAMOORTHY (Alternate) 


SHRI GULSHAN KHURANA 


Suri D. P. NANDA 
SHRI R. P. SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI BRI BHUSAN SINGH 
SHRI ARAVIND CHAKRAVARTY V. (Alternate) 


SHRI S. C. MEHROTRA 
SHRI SITARAM AGGARWAL (Alternate) 


14 


Organization 
Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 


Indian Oil Corporation Limited, Noida 


Institution of Fire Engineers (India), New Delhi 
J & K Fire and Emergency Services, Srinagar 
Johnson Controls (I) Pvt Ltd, Pune 


Karnataka Fire Services, Bengaluru 
Lloyd Insulations (India) Limited, New Delhi 


Maharashtra Fire Services, Mumbai 
Ministry of Home Affairs, New Delhi 


Military Engineer Services (E-in-C’s Branch), 
New Delhi 


Mumbai Fire Brigade, Mumbai 


National Association of Fire Officers (NAFO), 
Mumbai 


Nohmi Bosai (India) Pvt Ltd, Gurugram 
NTPC Ltd, Noida 


Oil Industry Safety Directorate, Noida 
Pacific Fire Controls, Delhi 


Proion Consultants, New Delhi 


Reliance Refineries Limited, Jamnagar 
State Bank of India, Mumbai 
Tamil Nadu Fire and Rescue Services Department, 


Chennai 


Techno Fire Protection Services Pvt Ltd, Pune 


The Automotive Research Association of India, Pune 


The Indian Institute of Architects, Mumbai 


Telangana State Disaster Response and Fire Service 
Department, Hyderabad 


U.P. Fire Services, Lucknow 
UL India Pvt Limited, Bengaluru 


West Bengal Fire Services, Kolkata 


IS 8757 : 2021 


Representative(s) 


PROF VISHAL KUMAR 
PROF UMESH KUMAR SHARMA (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


PRESIDENT 
GENERAL SECRETARY (Alternate) 


Suri V. K. SINGH 
SHRI BASHIR AHMED SHAH (Alternate) 


SHRI SANTOSH MUZUMDAR 
SHRI AsHISH D. SAWANT (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Suri K. K. MITRA 
SHRI SANJEEV ANGRA (Alternate) 


SHRI S. S. WARICK 
SHRI D. K. SHAMI 


Suri N. K. GOYAL 
Lr CoL K. V. VINAYAKA (Alternate) 


CHIEF FIRE OFFICER 
DEPUTY CHIEF FIRE OFFICER (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI AJIT RAGHAVAN 


SHRI SANTOSH KUMAR JHA 
SHRI DOONDESHWAR V. (Alternate) 


SHRI S. C. GUPTA 
SHRI B. R. GADEKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI RAKESH KUMAR ARORA 
SHRI DAKSH ARORA (Alternate) 


SHRI SANDEEP GOEL 


SHRI VARADENDRA KOTI 
SHRI UMESH KHANDALKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI VINAYAK GOKHALE 
FIRE OFFICER (Alternate) 


SHRI M. SHAHUL HAMEED 
SHRIMATI MEENAKSHI VIJAYAKUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI D. G. KOIMATTUR 


SHRI CHARUDATTA S. MUKHEDKAR 
Suri R. D. CHAUDHARI (Alternate) 


AR VIJAY GARG 


SHRI C. LAKSHMI PRASAD 
SHRI V. PAPAIAH (Alternate) 


SHRI AMAN SHARMA 


SHRI SURESH SHANMUGAM 
SHRI RENOY RAJAN (Alternate) 


SHRI G. K. BHATTACHARYA 


15 


IS 8757 : 2021 


Organization Representative(s) 
In personal capacity (D-317, 2nd Floor, Nirman Suri R. C. SHARMA 
Vihar, New Delhi) 
In personal capacity (A-45, Sector-70, Noida) Dr H. S. KAPRWAN 


In personal capacity (27A, Tapovan Senior Citizens Suri T. R. A. KRISHNAN 
Foundation, Coimbatore 641 010) 


BIS Directorate General SHRI SANJAY PANT, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (CIVIL ENGINEERING) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


SHRI ARUN KUMAR S. 
SCIENTIST ‘E’ (CIVIL ENGINEERING), BIS 


16 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 36 (16042). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


