( Reaffirmed 2005 )

IS:8160-1976

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR TANGENT GALVANOMETERS
Electrical Instruments Sectional Committee, ETDC 48

Chairman PROF ( DR) J. K. CHOUDHURY Jadavpur University, Calcutta Members
SHRI V. K. BATRA

Representing National Physical laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi National Test House, Calcutta Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals ( Inspection Wing ), New Delhi ( Minis-

DR A. S. BHADURI SHRI B. P. GHOSH ( AIfernn~e ) SHRI J. L. CHHABRA SHRI J. S. PASSI ( Alternate )

ADDITIONAL CHIRP ELECTRICAL ENGINEER ( CENTRAL RAILWAY ) ( Altsrnate ) Controllerate of Inspection Electronics ( Ministry of COL R. C. DHINGRA Defence ), Bangalore Institute for Design of Electrical Measuring InstruSHRI R. N. GANDHI ments, Bombay SHRI G. CHANDRASEKARAN ( Alternate ) Development Commissioner Small Scale Industries, SHRI A. N. Grrosa Ministry of Industrial Development, New Delhi SHRI P. P. MALHOTRA ( Alternate ) Instrumentation Ltd, Kota SWRI D. A. GOPALAKRISHNA SHRI S. C. ARZARE ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Posts & Telegraphs (DepartSHRI K. B. KAMAT ment of Communications ), New Delhi SHRI S. C. MUKHERJEE ( Alternate ) All India Instrument Manufacturers' & Dealers' AssoSHRI S. D. KULKARNI ciation, Bombay SHRI B. K. GARODIA ( Alternate ) Indian Electrical Manufacturers' Association, Bombay SHRI J. R. MAHAJAN SHRI S. P. RANADE ( Alternate ) Department of Industries, Government of Punjab, SHRI S. S. MAW Chandigarh SHRI K. L. KOHLI ( Alternate ) British Physical Laboratories India Pvt Ltd. I Bangalore SHRI K. P. R. NAMBIAR SHRI N. L. RAO ( Alternate ) ( Continued on page 2 ) @ INDIAN Copyright 1976 INSTITUTION

CHIEF ELECTRICAL ENGINEER Research, Designs & Standards Organization try of Railways ), Lucknow ( CENTRAL RAILWAY )

STANDARDS

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS:8160-1976 (Continuedfrom page
Members SHRI V. H. NAVKAL SHRI S. P. BROOTA ( Alternate ) SHRI E. N. NARAYANASWAMY
CAPT

1) Representing The Bombay Electric Supply and Transport taking, Bombay Under-

P. R. PARSAD

SHRI

SHRI C. V. K. RAO (Alternate ) Central Scientific Instruments Organization ( CSIR ), P. V. N.`RAMANATHAN Chandigarh DR R. N. MATHUR ( Alternate ) SHRI K. N. RAMASWAMY Direg;;te General of Technical Development, New

Department of Industries and Commerce, Government of Tamil Nadu, Madras Directorate of Standardization, Ministry of Defence, New Delhi

SHRI R. S. SOUNDHIRARAJAN ( Alternate ) Oriental Science Apparatus Workshop, Ambala Cantt LAKSHMISAGAR SHRI K. S. GUPTA (Alternate) The Motwane Manufacturing Co Pvt Ltd, Gyan Baug SHRI DINESHN. SARBAHI ( Maharashtra ) Dz G. R. T~SHNIWAL Toshniwal Industries Pvt Ltd, Ajmer SHRI S. C. MAHZSWWARI( Alternate) Bharat Heavy Electrical Ltd, Bhopal SHRI M. S. WANDALKAR SHRI S. K. KASLIWAL ( Alternate ) Director General, IS1 (Ex- O&o Member ) SHRI S. P. SACHDZV, Director ( Elec tech )
SHRI

Secretary
SHRI HARCHARANSINGH

Deputy Direetor ( Elec tech ), ISI

2

IS : 8160 - 1976

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR TANGENT GALVANOMETERS
0. FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 23 August 1976, after the draft finalized by the Electrical Instruments Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council. 0.2 Tengent galvanometer is used for the measurement of current in terms of magnetic field and deflection. This standard has been prepared to lay down certain minimum requirements consistent with quality and uniform test procedures for tangent galvanometers for the guidance of the manufacturers and users. 0.3 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard specifies the requirements and tests for tangent galvanometers for use in laboratories. 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall apply. 2.1 Anti-Parallax Mirror - The plane mirror mounted underneath the dial or scale for the purpose of avoiding error of reading due to parallax. 2.2 Base The non-magnetic part fitted with levelling screws. A circular plate over which the terminals are fixed. the specified 2.3 Base Plate -

2.4 Bobbin-A circular non-magnetic ring over which number of turns of insulated wire are wound. 2.5 Body of Compass are fitted. Box -

The housing inwhich the scale, pointer, etc

*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised).

3

IS : 8160 - 1976 2.6 Compass Box - An instrument which angles may be measured. which provides a line of reference from

2.7 Jewel - The part which forms bearing a frictionless motion. 2.8 Levelling Screws - A threaded base for levelling the instrument.

with the pivot in order to have

screw with knurled head fitted at the force on a current box

2.9 Magnet - A bar magnet which exerts a permanent carrying conductor placed in its field. 2.10 Pillar is mounted. 2.11 Pivot A non-magnetic A support cylindrical

part on which the compass with pointer into revolves. sharp

over which a magnet needle

2.12 Pointer - A non-magnetic at right angle to the magnet. 2.13 Scale degrees. The circular

terminating four equal

ends and in

dial having

quadrants

graduated

2.14 Sensitivity - The current required to produce a deflection of 45" in the galvanometer with the plane of the bobbin ( coil ) in the magnetic meridian. 2.15 Tangent Galvanometer - A galvanometer with a moving magnet, so arranged that the tangent of angle of deflection is proportional to the current to be measured. 2.16 Terminals - That portion of a circuit or piece of apparatus which is intended for the reception of conductors and by means of which it may be connected electrically to another circuit or piece of apparatus. 3. GENERAL 3.1 Compass REQUIREMENTS Box or any other AND MATERIALS

3.1.1 Body - The body shall be of bakelite, aluminium non-magnetic material, free from mechanical defects.

3.1.2 Scale - It shall be of aluminium, brass or any other non-magnetic material graduated in degrees and divided into four equal quadrants from 0 to 90". 3.1.3 Anti-Parallax Mirror - A plane mirror shall be mounted or-scale of the compass box for the purpose of avoiding error due to parallax. under dial of reading

3.1.4 Pointer - The pointer shall be light and rigid and made of nonmagnetic material. It shall be so shaped as to lend itself to easy and 4

IS : 8168 - 1976 accurate readings. The length of the pointer other than knife edge pointer shall Abe such that the tip extends over more than one-third, but not more than two-thirds of the length of the shortest scale mark. 3.1.5 Magnet - A permanent bar magnet properly aged and having high coercivity shall be used. The north pole of the magnet shall be marked with one red dot. The pointer shall be fixed at right angle to the magnet. 3.2 Pillar - The pillar shall be of non-magnetic material of adequate thickness, the upper part of which shall fit flush under the groove of the compass box. shall be of suitable insulating and non-magnetic 3.3 Bobbin -Bobbin material and its internal diameter shall be not less than 15 times the length of the magnet. 3.4 Base - Base shall be of suitable and fitted with levelling screws. insulating and non-magnetic material and non-

3.5 Base Plate --Base plate shall be of magnetic material of diameter not less than 3.6 Terminals having properly

suitable insulating 100 mm.

- The terminals shall be of brass electroplated with nickel knurled heads. The diameter shall be not less than 12 mm.

3.7 Level&g Screws -The screw rods of the levelling screws shall be of brass electroplated with nickel and shall be not less than 5 mm in diameter. The diameter and thickness of knurled disc shall be not less than 25 mm and 5 mm respectively. Levelling screws shall be provided with check nuts. 4. CONSTRUCTION 4.1 The magnet with the magnet shall be horizontal. centre. The centre of the coil shall coincide

4.2 The bobbin shall be fitted exactly perpendicular to the shall be capable of free and smooth rotation. Enamelled diameter and appropriate number of turns shall be wound The overload capacity of the windings shall be adequate. be provided on the base plate for connection of these turns. properly marked indicating the number of turns. 5. MARKING galvanometer shall be marked

base plate and wire of suitable on the bobbin. Terminals shall They shall be

5.1 The tangent b)

with the following:

a) Manufacturer's Manufacturer's

name or trade-mark, serial number 5 and type,

IS : 8160 - 1976 c) Sensitivity, d) Number f) Country of turns, of manufacture. galvanometer may also be marked with the IS1 e) Current rating, and

JL1.1 The tangent Certification Mark.

NOTE-The use of the IS1 Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of the Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The IS1 Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have -been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised-and supervised by IS1 and operated by the producer. IS1 marked products are also continuously checked by IS1 for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the IS1 Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers or processors, may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution.

6. TESTS 6.1 Type Tests - The following shall constitute be carried out in the sequence given below: a) Insulation c) resistance test ( 6.3 ), all tappings ) ( 6.5). b) High voltage test ( 6.4 ), and Sensitivity test (for the type tests and shall

6.1.1 .Number of Samples aid Criteria for Conformity - Type tests shall be applied to three test specimens; in the event of one specimen failing to comply in any respect, a further set of three specimens shall be taken all of which shall comply with the requirements of this standard. 6.2 Routine Tests - The following shall constitute routine tests and shall be carried out in the sequence given below: a) Insulation c) Sensitivity resistance test ( 6.3 ), test ( for all tappings ) ( 6.5 ). b) High voltage test ( 6.4 ), and

6.3 Insulation Resistance Test - When the moving system is insulated the insulation resistance between the from the body of the galvanometer, two terminals connected together and the metallic body or case when measured at 500 & 50 V dc after one minute of electrification shall be not less than 100 megohms. 6.4 High Voltage Test -When the moving system is insulated from the no breakdown, arcing or sparking shall occur body of the galvanometer, when an ac voltage of 1 000 V ( rms ) is applied gradually and maintained 6

IS : 8160- 1976 for a period of 1 minute across the two terminals

the metallic body or case.

connected

together and

6.5 Sensitivity Test ( For All Tappings ) - The measurement of sensitiThe sensitivity shall be vity shall be done by using a suitable ammeter. determined for all the tappings from the current required to produce a deflection of 45" in the galvanometer. The sensitivity of the galvanometer, when new, as measured for different tappings on both sides of zero, shall not differ by more than 5 percent of the marked value. 6.5.1 This value of current is a constant at a place denoted by K and depends upon the number of turns of wire on the bobbin and is derived from the following equation: I= where I Hf Z= .N= current passing through the coil; horizontal component of earth's magnetic field; mean radius of the coil; number of turns on the coil; the angle of deflection; and a constant, called reduction factor of the galvanometer. 2+NtanB= Xtane

e= K=

INDIAN ON ELECTRICAL IS

STANDARDS

INSTRUMENTS

:
Direct acting electrical indicating instruments (jrrt revision) Electrical apparatus comprising resistors (ret&cd) for laboratory and industrial uses ( rcuiscd) Part XI Electrical measurements Part X Measuring

12481968 I565-1966 1765-1966

dc potentiometers

1885 ( Part XI )-I966 2032 (Part 2419-1963 2442-1963 2992-1965 3107-1974 3635-1966 3636-1966 6236-1971 7889-1975 7890-1975 7914-1975 8143-1976 8160.1976

Electrotechnical

vocabulary:

X)-1969 Graphical instruments

symbols

used in electrotechnology: instruments

Dimensions of electrical-indicating dc moving coil galvanometers

Insulation resistance testers ( hand-operated Portable revision) multipurpose direct acting

) indicating instruments (Jrsr

electrical

Methods of test for resistance of metallic electrical resistance material Method of test for temperature coefficient of precision resistor wires

Direct recording electrical measuring instruments Vibration galvanometers

Ballistic galvanometers Standard cells Plugs and keys for resistance boxes Tangent galvanometers

AMENDMENT NO. 1 IS:8160-1976 SPECIFICATION

NOVEMBER 1980 FOR TANGENT GALVANOMETERS

Corr*en&g a-

(Page 3, etause 0.2) - Substitute'Tengent galvatmmeter' for `Tengent galva.uometer*. *

Reprography Unit, ISI, Rev Delhi

