( Reaffirmed 2006 )

Indian Standard

PETROLEUMANDITS PRODUCTSMETHODSOFTEST [ P:142]
DETERMINATION AVIATION OF WATER TURBINE SEPARATION CHARACTERISTICS SEPAROMETER OF FUELS BY PORTABLE

UDC

662.753~323 [ 621.438] : 621*928*4

c, BIS 1993

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR MARG

NEW DELHI 110002 July 1993 Price Group 8

Methods of lest for Petroleum,

Petroleum

Products and Lubricants

Sectional Committee,

PCD 1

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Methods of Test for Petroleum, Petroleum Products and Lubricants Sectional Committee had been approved by the Petroleum, Coal and Related Products Division Council. Two test methods that pertain two different modes of test equipment operation have been described in the standard. The primary difference between the modes of operation is the rate of fuel flow through Selection of test method is dependent on the particular fuel to be the fibre glass coalescing material. tested. These test methods provide a measure of the presence of surfactants in various types of aviation turbine fuels, viz., Jet A-l, Jet A, Jet B, MIL JP 4, MTL JP 5, MIL JP 7 and MIL JP 8, conforming to turbine fuels, kerosene type `, ASTMD 1655-90 for aviation IS 1571 : 1992 6 Specification ` Specification for aviation turbine fuels `, MIL-T-5624 ` Turbine fuel, aviation, Grade JP-4 and JP-5 `, MIL-T-38219 cTurbine fuel, low volatility, JP-7 ' and MIL-T-83133 ( Turbine fuel, aviation, kerosene type, Grade JP-8 ' issued by the Bureau of Indian Standards, American Society for Testing and Materials, USA and US Military Specification respectively. Like test methods IS 1448 [ P : 137 ] : 1991 6 Water separation characteristics of aviation turbine fuels ' and Field test methods - the Minisonic Separometer Surfactants ( MSS ), these test methods can detect carry over traces of refinery treating residues in fuel as produced. They can also detect surface active substances added to or picked up by the fuel during handling from point of production to point of use. Certain additives may also have an adverse effect on the rating. Some of these substances affect the ability of filter separators to separate free water from the fuel. The effects of fuels containing static dissipator additives have, however, not been included. Considerable assistance have been taken from the publication ASTMD 3948-87 ` Determination of water separation characteristics of aviation turbine fuels by portable separometer ' issued by the American Society for Testing and Materials, USA, while preparing this standard. In reporting the results of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 ` Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )`.

IS 1448 [ P : 142 ] : 1993

Indian Standard

PETROLEUM ANDITSPRODUCTSMETHODSOFTEST
[P: 1421 OF DETERMINATION OF WATER SEPARATION CHARACTERISTICS AVIATION TURBINE FUELS BY PORTABLE SEPAROMETER 1 SCOPE 1.1 These test methods provide a rapid portable means for field and laboratory use to rate the ability of aviation turbine fuels to release entrained or emulsified water when passed through fibre glass coalescing material. 1.2 The procedure sections of these test methods contain two test methods that pertain to two different modes of test equipment operation. The primary difference between the modes of operation is the rate of fuel flow through the fibreglass coalescing material. Test method selection is dependent on the particular fuel to be tested. 1.3 This standard may involve hazardous materials, operations and equipment. It does not attempt to address all of the safety problems associated with its use. It is the responsibility of the user of this standard to establish appropriate safety and health practices and determine the applicability of regulatory limitations prior to use. 2 NORMATIVE REFERENCES The lollowing standards contain provisions which through reference in this text, constitute provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, the editions indicated were valid. All standards are subject to revision, and parties to agreements based on this siandard are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent editions of the standards indicated below: IS No. 1070 : 1992 1839 : 1961 Title Reagent grade water Toluene, (third revision )

and passed through a filter separator and to which prescribed quantities of a known surface active agent ( typically bis-Zethylhexyl sodium sulfosuccinate in tcluene ) have been added. 4 SUMMARY OF TEST METHODS These test methods use a Micro-Separometer* to perform a test. A water/fuel sample emulsion is created in syringe using a high-speed mixer.The emulsion is then expelled from the syringe at a programmed rate through standard fibre-glass coalescer and the effluent is analysed for uncoalesced water by a light transmission measurement. The results are reported on a 0 to 100 scale to the nearest whole number. High ratings indicate the water is easily coalesced implying that the fuel is relatively free of surfactant materials. A test can be performed in 5 to 10 min, 5 SIGNIFICANCE AN-D USE 5.1 These test methods provide a measure of the presence of surfactants in aviation turbine fuels. Like Test Method IS 1448 [ P : 137 ] : 1991 and Field Test Method, these test methods can detect carry over traces ofrefinery treating residues in fuel as produced. They can also detect surface active substances added to or picked up by the fuel during handling from point of production to point of use, Certain additives may also have an adverse effect on the rating. Some of these substances affect the ability of filter separators to separate free water from the fuel.
NOTE- The effects of fuels containing static dissipator additives have not been investigated but test programs using these additives are under review.

reagent grade.

3 DEFINITIONS 3.1 Micro Separometer Rating ( MSEP)

A numerical value indicating the ease of separating emuislified water from fuel by coalescence as affected by the presence of surface active materials ( surfactants ). NOTE - MSEP ratings obtained using Test Method A and Test Method B are termed MSEP-A and MSEP-B, respectively. The MSEP rating is comparable to the Water Separometer Index, Modified (WSIM) and the Minisonic Separometer Surfactants ( MSS ) of Test Methods IS 1448 [ P : 137 ] : 1991 and Field Test Method respectively.

5.2 The Micro-Separometer has a measureinent range from50 to 100. Values obtained outside of those limits are undefined and invalid. In'the event a value greater than 100 is obtained, there is a good probability that the fuel contained material that reduced the light transmittanse that was removed from the fuel during the coalescing portion of the test. Thus, the processed fuel had a higher light transmitlance than the fuel sample used to obtain the 100 reference level resulting in the final rating measuring in excess of 100. 5.3 Method 1 which specifies the use of the test Mode A function of the separometer will give approximately the same rating for Jet A, Jet A-l, MIL 1P 5, MIL JP 7 and MIL JP 8 fuels a& Test Methods IS 1448 [ P : 137 ] : 1991 and Field Test Method using the Minisonic Separometer Surfactants (MSS,). Using Method 1, water separation characteristic
l Available from EMCEE Electronics, Venice, FL-34292

3.2

Reference

Fluids

Fuels that have been, as a minimum clay treated and, as required, subjected to a water wash process 1

Inc, 520 Cypress Ave,

IS 1448

[P : 142 ] : 1993

ratings of Jet B and MIL JP 4 fuels will not nccessarily be equivalent to Test Method IS 1448 [ P : 137 ] : 1991 but will give approximately the same rating as Field Test Method. All Micro-Separometer have test Mode A capability.
NOTE - Correlation of Micro-Separometer ratings are given in Annex C. 5.4 In addition MSEP-A

All Micro-Separometers have the aforementioned features: however. the ootional test Mode B cauabilitv for Method 2 is availabli only on Mark V instrimenti. Table 2 lists the manual and audio operating characteristics of the various instruments. 6.2.1 The Mark III and Mark V standard instruments are described in 6.3, the Mark V deluxe instrument is described in 6.4,
Micro-Separometer, Standard Instruments

to the test Mode Acapability specified in Method l? the Mark V instrument may have the test Mode B optlon, specified in Method 2, which is used to determine water separation ratings for MIL JP 4 fuels containing fuel system corrosion and icing inhibitors. These ratings are approximately the same as those obtained using Test Method IS 1448 [P :137 ] : 1991. 5.5 Selection of Method 1 or Method 2 depends on the suecific fuel and soecification reauirement. Table 1 ide&tifies the recomhended test m&hod for various fuels and indicates which Micro-Separometer models have a particular test mode function.
Table 1 Applicable Method and Associated Test Mode for Various Fuels Micro-Separometer Mark III and Mark Vtand Model (S) V+A Deluxe A LB Available Fuel* Test Mode(s) Applicable Test Method 1 1 Method 1 Method 2

6.3

Mark

III and

Mark

V

6.3.1

The main power controls located on the fixed panel, include the POWER switch and the associated indicating light. The power controls also include two circuit breakers on the control panel which provide ac and dc power circuit protection. When the main POWER switch is ON, the electronic circuits are energized, and will function when the associated pushbuttons are depressed. The indicator light will go out when the battery charge becomes too low for proper operation. 6.3.2 Mode selection for Mark V standard instruments having the optional test Mode B capability, is accomplished by positioning the tes: Mode A/B ( toggle ) switch, located on the front pant!, toward the applicable letter and manually engagil.2 the proper syringe drive gear ratio. For test Mode A operation, lift the gear release knob which will cause the gear carriage to move to the right. Test Mode B operation is initiated by lifting the gear release knob, depressing the gear carriage to the left and then pressing the knob down to lock the gear carriage in place. The annunciator lamp located above the CLEAN pushbutton will illuminate only when the proper syringe drive speed has been engaged for the test mode selected. 6.3.3 The RESET pushbutton resets the electronic program and position the syringe drive to the down position. The RESET function can be used at any time during the test. 6.3.4 The CLEAN pushbutton activates the emulsifier motor for the cleaning operation, and positions the syringe drive in the UP position. The automatic programmed test sequence can be initiated at the end of the clean cycle. 6.3.5 The START pushbutton initiates the automatic test sequence portion of the program, which begins with the emulsifier motor and the meter being activated. ( Refer to Table 3 for the test program sequence.) 6.3.6 The turbidimeter is located under the main control panel and consists of a well in which the sample vial is placed, a light source, and a photocell. 6.3.7 The METER control knob is adjusted during the full-scale adjustmbnt period to give a numerical rating of 100 using a vial of test fuel inserted in the turbidimeter well. 6.4 Micro-Separometer Mark V Deluxe 6.4.1 All of the controls are located in a pushbutton array on the control panel. The pushbultons illuminate when depressed thus indicating operational status. A

Associated Test Mode of Operation A A A A A A A A A A A

Jet A Jet A-l Jet B MIL JP5 MIL JP7 MIL JP8

1
1

I
1

A MIL JP4 2 Not applicable B *Mark V instrument having only single syringe drive speed. +Mark V instrument having multiple syringe drive speed. z'&See precautionary statements given in Annex D.

5.6 The basic difference between Methods 1 and 2 is the flow rate at which the water/fuel emulsion is forced through the standard fibreglass coalescer cell. The lapsed time required to force the emulsion through the coalescer cell in Method 1 is 45 +2 s, whereas Method 2 requires 25 * 1 s. 6 APPARATUS The Micro-Separometer is a completely portable and self-contained unit capable of operating on an internal rechirgeable battery pack or being connected to an ac power source using power cords which are available for various voltages. Connection to an ac power source will provide power to the unit and effect battery recharge. The accessories as well as the expendable materials for six tests can be packed in the cover of the lockable case. 6.2 The various Micro-Separometer models as associated control panels are shown in Fig. 1. The emulsifier is on the right side of the raised panel and the syringe drive mechanism is on the left side. The control panel containing the operating controls is mounted on the fixed panel in the left side of the case.
6.1

IS 1448 [P :142 ] : 1993 Table 2 Manual and Audio Operating Characteristics of the Various Model 1140 Micro-Separometer Instruments ( Clause 6.2 )
Available T&t Mode(s)

Mark III Standard A A NiA Not required Not available N/A AandB

Mark V Deluxe Aand B

Function Test mode select Mode A Mode B Syringe drive Speed selection Clean cycle Depress Pushbutton Automatic Initiate Cancel I-Meter 1st Meter Adjnst 2nd Meter read 2nd Meter Adjust Collect sample Visually determined Meter activates -Preceded Meter adjust knob manipulated by a pulsed tone Depress ARROWED Pushbutton Short tone and C/S Annunciaton illuminates 3rd Meter read Record Measurement Meter activates-Preceded by a pulsed tone Pulsed tone sounds 5 s into 3rd Meter read. after 5 s into 3rd meter read lamp read Meter adjust knob manipulated sequence START RESET DEPRESS PUSHBUTTON START RESET START RESET by a pulsed :one Depress ARROWED Pushbuttons START RESET CLEAN CLEAN CLEAN START N/A Not required Not available N/A Toggle switch `A' Position `9' Position Manually Engage gears Pushbutton Depress A Depress B Not required

Meter activates -Preceded

Table 3 Test Sequence ( Clause 6.3.5 )
MicroSeparometer Action Operator Activity ' Tiie .

Sequence 6) Mode A 0 4 10 30 30 4 10 45 55 4. 5 5 B 0 4 10 30 30 4 10 25 56 4 5 5 A 0 0.14 0.44 0.14 1.18 1.28 2.13 3.09 3.13 3.18 3.23

Elapsed (mm/s) Mode B 0 0.14 0.44 0.14 1.18 1.28 1.53 2.49 2.53 2.58 3.03

Start sequence Pulsed tone Meter on Emilsifier on No activity Pulsed tone Meter on Syringe drive Starts down No activity Steady tone Meter on One second tone?

Depress start switch Prepare for meter read Full-scale adjustment 1 Observe emulsification Placed emulsified sample into syringe drive Prepare for meter reading Full-scale adjustment 2 Coalescence period Collect sample* Place sample into turbidimeter well Prepare for meter reading Read results Record results

*On1 Mark V Deluxe instruments have simultaneous visual and audible indication at when the operator is to collect the sam le. tort& MarkV ms ' ti uments have l-s tone occurring at tte midpoint of the meter on period which indicates when the resu Pts should be read and recorded.

3

IS1448

[P:

142]:1993
6.5.5

circuit breaker located on the control panel provides protection for the ac power circuit. 6.4.2 By depressing the ON pushbutton, the electronic circuits are energized. The ON pushbutton light will pulse on and off when the instrument is being operated by an ac source and will constantly remain ON when the battery ( dc ) pack is used. The lettered pushbuttons will sequentially illuminate on and off indicating "ready"operationa1 status. NOTE - Of the lettered ( A-B f pushbuttons, only the A
and B pushbuttons are applicable to this test method.

Pipet ( B ) with Plastic lip ( F )

h

automatic hand pipet with a disposable plastic tip. Apipet is supplied with each Micro-Separometer. 6.5.6 WireAid (H) A piece of wire with a loop on one end, used during test to release the air trapped in the barrel of the syringe when the plunger is being inserted. A wire aid is applied with each Micro-Separometer. 6.5.7

Water Container
for distilled water ( not shown or

6.4.3 The RESET pushbutton can be depressed at any time to cancel the test in progress and restore the program to the initial start mode. The lettered pushbuttons will commence to sequentially illuminate, thus indicating a "ready" operational status enabling test mode selection. 6.4.4 Selection of test Mode A or test Mode B pro rams is accomplished by depressing either the A or % lettered pushbutton. The depressed pushbutton will illuminate and the sequential illumination of the other lettered pushbuttons will cease. The START pusbutton will also illuminate. 6.4.5 The START pushbutton, when depressed initially, will initiate the CLEAN cycle causing the syringe drive mechanism to travel to the UP position and the emulsifier motor to operate for the cleaning operation. 6.4.6 `The START pushbutton, when depressed after the CLEAN cycle will initiate the automatic program sequence causing the read indicator and the two ARROWED pushbuttons to illuminate, indicating that a full-scale adjustment period is in effect. A numerical value will also appear on the meter. 6.4.7 The turbidimeter is located under the main control panel and consists of a well in which the sample vial is placed, a light source and a photocell. 6.4.8 By depressing the appropriate ARROWED pushbutton, the displayed value on the meter can be increased or decreased, as required, to attain the'100 reference level for the vial of fuel sample in the turbidimeter. 6.5 Accessory equipment and expendable material needed to perform the test are shown in Fig. 2 and consist of the following. 6.51

A clean container supplied ). 6.5.8

Beaker, Catch Pan or Plastic Container

Supplied with each Micro-Separometer may be used to receive the waste fuel during the coalescence period of the test ( not shown ). 6.6 Anew syringe, pipet tip test sample vials, syringe lug and Alumicel coalescer are used in each test. ! hese expendable materials are available in a kit containing supplies for air tests. This kit termed Micro-Separometer Six Pack is designed to fit inside the top lid of the Micro-Separometer ( Fig. 3*). 7 REAGENTS 7.1 Aerosol OT sodium sulfosucSolid (100% dry ) bis -2 ethylhexyl cinate 7.2 Dispersing Agent 1 mg of Aerosol OT per Toluene solution containing millilitre of toluene.
NOTE-Warning

: Flammable. Vapour harmful.

7.3

Reference Fluid Base?

A surfactant-free clean hydrocarbon material which is used to verify proper operation and is prepared in the manner described in Annex A. NOTE - Warning : Flammable. Vapour harmful. 7.4 Reference Fluids (For checking the operational preformance of the Micro-Separometer instrumentation. Consist of increasing concentrations ( 0 to 1.2 ml ) 1) of dispersing agent added to the reference fluid base. The MSEP-A ratings for this range of concentration appear in Table 4 for Jet A, Jet A-l, MIL JP 5, MIL JP 7 and MIL JP 8 fuels and Table 5 for Jet B fuels using Mark V units and Method B are shown in Table 6. The reference fluids shall be tested as described in Sections 10 (Method A) and 13 ,( Method B). If the results do not fall within the range of limits showu in Tables 4,s or 6 the reference fluid shall be discarded and a fresh quantity of reference fluid prepared and the check repeated. Repeated out of tolerance test results are cause for returning the instrument to the
*A kit containin six each of these test expendables is available from EMCE B Electronics, Inc, 520 Cypran Ave, Venice, FL- 34292. tAMICFO-PREP fuel and surfactant test IFAST) kit containin' all of the e uipment and expendables required to re are re P erence fluid 7Jases and reference fluids are availab PP e rom EMCEE Electronics Inc, 520 Cypress Ave, Venice, FL- 34292.

Syringe Plug (A )

A plastic plug used to stopper the syringe during the CLEAN and EMULSION cycles. 6.5.2 6.5.3

Syringe Barrel (B ) and Plunger ( C )
plastic syringe. for proper

A disposable

Vials (D )

2S-mm outside diameter vial premarked alignment in the turbidimeter well.
6.54

Alumicel"

Coalescer ( E ) labelled for us'? wiih jet fuel, an expendable, precalibrated aluminium coalescer cell with a tapered end to fit the syringe.
*A registered trade mark of EMCEE Electronics.

4

IS1448 factory for adjustment and calibration *.

[P :142

I:1993

NOTE - The reference fluid base should have standard MSEP rating of 99+ without any dispersion agent; otherwise, the results may not be indicative of the accuracy of the instrument. Values obtained outside the measurement range from 50 to 100 are undefined and invalid.

7.4.1 Reference fluid shall be prepared by adding dispersing agent as described in 7.2 to a suitable quantity of reference fuel base obtained in a properly equilibrated container or graduate.
NOTES 1 If a new or non-equilibrated coF_@iFer_kiis used, the additive may absorb on the walls and the MSEP ratings may improve significantly. To equilibrate the container surface, an additive blend should be held for a minimum of 24 h. discarded, and replaced with a fresh blend. 2 For field use, it is convenient to dilute 10 ml of the dispersin agent ( as prepared in 7.2 ) with 90 ml of toluene. QThis dilution differs from 7.2 by a factor of 10. Prepare reference fuel blend by using the micropipetcf 6.5. 1 to add 50 1of the diluted dispersed agent directly into 50 ml of reference fluid base contained in the syringe. Each 50 1 addition represents 0.1 ml/l of dispersion agent.

Table 4 Expected Performance with Jet 4 Jet A-l, MiL JP 5, ,.&iIIJ$P T, MIL JP 8. Reference Fluid Cotitaitiing 8, Dispersing Agent Using Method 1 (Test Mode A bperaiion ) ( Clause 7.4 )
Concentration of Dispersg, Agent $I
z.2 E 0:8

Standard Rating

Lhnits for Acceptable Performance+ VMirr M&X 100 :: kz 51 Y? ;I

z; 80 2:

*Expected range of values obtained by using increasing
amounts of dispersing agent used to verify instrument calibration.

7.5 7.6

Toluene ( see IS 1839 :. 1961)
NOTE -See precautionary statements given in Annex D.

8.4 Syringe drive travel times during the coalescing test period were initially calibrated at the factory for each mode of operation and have a significant bearing on the final test results.
NOTE -- Syringe drive travel times exceeding the upper limit will cause the final results to measure high; conversely, travel times below the lower limit will cause the final results to measure low.

Water

(see IS 1070

- Clean, distilled : 1992 ).

and

surfactant

free

8 PREPARATION 8.1

OFAPPARATUS

Locate the instrument on a clean workbench in area where the temperature is between 18 and 29" C 65 to 85" F ) and does not vary more than t 3'C I5" F ). 8.2 Open the case and remove the six-pack box from the lid. Raise the right panel until completely vertical and locked in place. If ac power is available, connect the power cord and turn the instrument on. If the internal battery power is used, assure that the batteries are charged sufficiently to perform the desired number of tests. Low battery power is indicated when the power lamp does not illuminate. Connect the instrument to an ac power source for at least 16 h ( full charge ) prior to use. Approximately 25 tests can then be performed. 8.2.1 Mark III and Mark V Standard instruments are turned on by moving the POWER ( toggle ) switch to the ON position. Proper operation will be indicated by the red power indicator lamp illuminating. 8.2.2 Mark V Deluxe instruments are turned on by depressing the switch (pushbutton) marked ON. The ON power indicator light will alternately pulse on and off when the instrument is connected to an ac power source and will stay on continuously when operated by the battery pack. Flickering of the power indicator light, during any portion of a test sequence being performed using battery power, indicates that recharging is necessary. . 8.3 Have ready a supply of syringes, vials, Alumicelcoalescers, syringe plugs, and pipet tips, as well as a clean container with distilled water. All of the items except the container and water are furnished in the six-pack provided with the instrument. In addition, have the wire aid and pipet readily available.
*`AMicroX&parometer operation manual is furnished with each instrument.

8.4.1 Mark III instruments should have the calibration of the syringe travel time checked every 50 tests or when results are suspect, or both. If the syringe drive is not within the 45 t2 s limits, return the instrument to the factory for adjustment.
NOTE - Check the travel time during an actual or simulated test using a new syringe with fuel and an Alum&l coalescer.

8.4.2 Mark V Standard and Deluxe instruments have self-check circuitry to detect out of tolerance syringe drive travel times. The alert indicator lamp illuminates and depending on the ( marked SYR degree (more t b an 3 s ) of the out of tolerance condition, three short ( 1 s )tones will also sound. An occasional out of tolerance alert may be experienced due to some intermettent condition which, probably, will not be indicative of instrument failure. However, repeated alerts are cause for returning the instrument to the factory for adjustment. 9 SAMPLE PREPARATION 9.1 Under no circumstances shall test fuel be prefiltered as filter media can remove the very materials, surfactants, that the test method is designed to detect. If the test fuel is contaminated with particulate matter, allow such materials to settle out of the fuel before testing. 9.2 Special precautions concerning sample containers and sampling technique are discussed in Annex B. Extreme care and cleanliness are required in taking samples either directly into the test syringe or into a sample container. Before pouring the test sample from the container, wipe the container outlet thoroughly with a clean, lintless wiper: pour the test sample into a clean beaker or directly into the bar-rel of the test syringe.
NOTE -Test method results arc known to be sensitive to trace contamination from sampling containers.

5

ISl448[P

:142]

:1993 10.2 Remove a plunger from a new 50 -ml syringe, insert a plug into the tapered bottom of the syringe, add approximately 50 ml of fuel into the barrel of the syringe, and place the syringe barrel on the emulsifier mount turning to lock in place. Assure that the syringe barrel is properly aligned concentrically with the mixer shaft and is not touching the propeller. 10.3 Initiate the CLEAN cycle by depressing the applicable pushbutton as designated by the annunciator light.
NOTE -Do not operate the mixer without having syringe with fuel in place. The mixer bearings on the fuel 1 deuend _ for lubricatidn.

with Jet B Table 5 Ex cted Performance F luid Containing a Dispersing Reference Agent Using Method 1 (Test Mode A Operation ) ( Clause 7.4 )
of Diswrsine

Consentration -

Standard Rating 99

Limits for Acceptable Performance*
Min

Agen<ml/l
0

MU
100

96

0.3 90 86 ;: z f: 78 81 94 1:2 79 69 90 *Expected range of values obtained by using increasing amounts of disnersing agent used to verify instrument calibration.

10.3.1 Mark III and Mark V Standard instruments have pushbutton labelled "CLEAN" to initiate the CLEAN cycle. 10.4 Add about 1.5 to 20 ml of the fuel to be tested into new vial. Wipe the outside of the vial with a clean, lintless wiper and insert the vial into the turbidimeter well aligning the black mark on the vial with the line on the front panel. 10.5 At the end of the clean cycle, when the mixer motor stops, remove the syringe barrel from the emulsifier, discard the fuel, and drain the syringe thoroughly. Add 50 2 1 ml of fresh tie1 sample into the syringe.
NOTE- Handle the syringe in such a manner as to minimize warming of the fuel sample by body heat.

Table 6 Expected Performance with MIL JP-4 Reference Fluid Containing a Dispersing Agent Using Method 2 (Test Mode B Operation ( Clause 7.4 )
Concentration of Dispersing Agent, ml/l
0

)

Standard Rating 99 :Y

Limits for Acceptable Performance*
Min Max

93 ;:

100 zz

0.2 ,:: 0:s 74 2: 3: 1.0 2: 59 69 1.2 60 5.5 65 *Expected range of values obtained using increasing amounts of dispersing agent used to verify instrument calibration.

9.3 If the sample for test is not within the test temperature limits, allow the sample to stand until an intolerance temperature is attained. METHOD 1 -TEST MODE A OPERATION

10.6 Using a fresh plastic tip on the hand pipet, add 50 1 of distilled water to the fuel sample as follows: push in the plunger, immerse the tip just below the water surface, release the plunger, and withdraw from the water slowly to avoid water drops adhering to the outside of the tip. Immerse the tip of the pipet just below the fuel surface in the centre of the syringe ( see Fig. 4 to ensure the water drops break away clearly and f) all to the bottom. Push and hold in the plunger, withdraw the pipet, and release the plunger. 10.7 Place the syringe barrel on the emulsifier turning to lock in place. mount

10 PROCEDURE 10.1 Select Test Mode A Operation Mark III and Mark V Standard instruments 10.1.1 with a single syriitge drive speed only have test Mode A capability; therefore,- no action is required. For Mark V Standard instruments with test 10.1.2 Mode A and B capability, more the Mode selection ( toggle ) switch to the "A" position. Manually select proper syringe drive speed for test Mode A by lifting the gear release knob. If the gear ratio is not set for test Mode A operation, the gear carriage, which is spring loaded will move from left to right. The annunciator lamp above the CLEAN pushbutton will illuminate when the. proper gear ratio is enagaged for the mode selected. For Mark V Deluxe instruments, depress the 10.13 pushbutton marked "A" which will illuminate indicating that test Mode A has been selected. The correct syringe drive speed is set automatically. 6

NOTE - Caution : Assure that the syringe barrel is properly aligned concentrically with the mixer shaft. Proper alignment can be verified grasping the syringe barrel and moving the same until the propelier on the end of the mixer shaft is free and not touching. Misalignment can cause plastic shavings to form and collect on the coalescer filter material resulting in erroneous test results.

10.8 66th the syringe in place, depress the START pushbutton (see Fig. 5 ) to initiate the automatic test Mode A program listed in Table 3. If for any reason it is desired to interrupt the sequence and start over, the RESET pushbutton will cancel the test in progress and reset the program to the beginning of the CLEAN segment of the test cycle. 10.9 The automatic program with a read meter indication ( four short tones ) followed by a 10-s full-scale adjustment period. During this period adjust the meter to read 100 (see Fig. 6 ). If the adjustment cannot be completed at this time, final adjustment can be accomplished during the second meter adjust period occurring later in the test sequence.

IS 1448[ P : 142 1 : 1993

Fro. 1

MIcRo-SEpARommR

MODBLS AND ASS~CIATEDCONTROL PANELS
7

IS 1448[ P : 142] : 1993

FIG. 2

ACCESSORIES AND SUPPLIES

FIG. 3

KIT OF SUPPL~SS

IS 1448 [ P : 142 ] : 1993

FIG. 4

WATER ADDITION

FIG

5

EMULSIFICATION

9

IS 1448 1 P : 142 ] : 1993

FIG. 6

ADJUSTING METER

FIG. 7

PLUNGER INSERTION 10

IS1448[P

:142]

:1993

10.9.1 Mark III and Mark V Standard instrument have a meter adjust knob that is used to set the meter reading to the 100 value.
NOTE Caution : Any movement of the METER control knob other than setting the reading to the 100 value during the first and second meter adjust periods will cause erroneous test results.

((1 min ), a steady ( 4 s duration ) tone will alert the operator that meter is about to activate. 10.15 At the end of the tone, the METER will automatically activate for approxrmately 10 s.

1O.PS.l Mark III instrument MSEP-A ratings read at the midpoint of 10-s meter read cycle.

are

10.9.2 Mark V Deluxe instruments have two ARROWED pushbuttons that are used to set the 100 value during this period. Operational status during this period is indicated when the pushbuttons illuminate.

10.152 Mark V Standard and Mark V Deluxe instrument MSEP-A ratings are read at the midpoint of the 10-s meter read cycle indicated by a short l-s tone.
Numerical values obtained outside the measurement range from 50 to 100 are undefined and invalid (see 5.2 ).

NOTE-

10.10 After the full-scale adjustment mixer motor activates and the emulsion initiated.
NOTE -A
emulsifier head

period the process is

11 REPORT 11.1 Report the results obtained and 10.X5.2 as the MSEP-A rating. 12 PRECISION AND BIAS in 10.15.1

few dross of fuel mav seen from the hold in the d&g the high-speed mixing operation. This should not affect the test results.

sequence, remove the syringe barrel from the emulsifier and insert the plunger using the wire aid to release the entrapped air ( see Fig. 7 ). To ensure that only entrapped air is expelled without fuel loss, cock the syringe barrel at a slight angle with the wire aid held depressed against the upper portion of the barrel. Then depress the plunger to release the entrapped air. Remove the wire aid from the syringe. Remove thc.plug from the syringe and replace it with an Alumicel coalescer. Place the entire syringe assembly into the syringe drive mechanism. Position a waste container beneath the Alumicel coalescer to collect the unwanted portion of the processed fuel sample during the coalescing period. dOTE -Caution : Atumicel coalescers should be electrically bonded to the Micro-Separometer to prevent buildup of an electrostatic charge that could result in inanition of flammable teat fluids. E&h Mark V instrument is%rrnished with a ground lead that has an alligator clip on one end and the banana plug on the other. Fasten the aliigatorclip to the Alumicel coalescer and insert the plug in the chassis round jack ( see Fig. 8 ). Other suitable grounding meth ol!s may be used for previous models.

10.11 After the emulsification

12.1 The precision for Method 1 as determined by statistical analysis of the test results was obtained by the ten operation/ instrument pairs on identical fuel samples at a common site is as follows. 12.1.1 Repeatability The difference between successive measured MSEPAratings obtained by the same operator with the same Micro-Separometer under constant.operating conditions on identical test material would, in the long run and in the normal and correct operation of the test method, exceed the following values for only one case in twenty ( see Note1 ). 12.1.1.1

Reference fuels

MSEP-A ratings for Jet A, Jet A-l, MIL JP 5, MIL JP 7 and MIL JP 8 reference fuel will have the repeatability as shown % Fig. 10 ( see Note 2 ). 12.1.1.2

Field samples

10.12 Four short tones will indicate the second meter adjust period. If required, the operator should adjust the meter reading to 100. The syringe drive mechanism will start down at the end of the meter adjust period forcing the water/ fuel emulsion through the Alumicel coalescer. During this operation remove the vial from the tnrbidimeter well and discard the fuel.
10.13 Collect the last 15 ml of fuel sample being processed from the Alumicel coalescer ( see Fig. 9 ). To lessen the amount of air introduced into the fuel during this operation, position thevial at a slight angle and allow the fuel to flow down the inner surface. 10.13.1 Only the Mark V Deluxe instruments have a collect sample annunciator lamp marked C/S ) that will illuminate and a pulsed tone o d short duration will sound indicating when the last 15 ml of fuel should be collected.. 10.14 Wipe the outside of the vial with a clean, lintless wiper to remove any fingerprints and fuel. Place the sample vial into the turbidimeter well aligning the marks on the vial and on the control panel in front of the well. At the end of the settling time

MSEP-A ratings for Jet A, Jet A-l, MIL JP 5, MIL JP 7 and MIL JP 8 field samples obtained by using test mode A of the Mark V instrument will have the repeatability as shown in Fig. 11 ( see Note 3 ). 12.1.2 Reproducibility

The difference between two single and independent
measurements of MSEP-A may be obtained by different operator/ instrument pairs at the same location on identical test material would, in the long run, in the normal and correct operation of the test method, exceed the following values for only one case in twenty ( see Note 1 ).

12.1.2.1 Reference fuels
MSEP-A ratings for Jet A, Jet A-l,, MIL JP 5, MIL JP 7 and MIL JP 8 reference fuels will have reproducibility as shown in Fig.10 ( see Note 2 ). 12.12.2

Field samples

MSEP-A ratings for Jet A, Jet A-l, MILJP 5, MIL JP 7 and MIL JP 8 field samples using test Mode A of

the Mark V instruments will have the reproducibility as shown in Fig.11 (see Note 3 ).
NOllZS 1 These results are based on a 1983 ten laboratory cooperation test program using reference fuels and field samples.

11

IS 1448 [ P : 142] : 1993
The repeatability and reproducibilit values were estimated from results obtained at the same 7ocation and on several consecutive days, by different operator/ instrument pairs testing .identical samoles. Results. particularly for repro uctbthty, obtamed at different lames and locatrons may, therefore, not be comparable according to these estimates, since they may contam errors due to sampling and environmental factors. In practice, two results obtained at different laboratories (location ) would be acceptable if their difference did not exceed the ublished :eproducibility. In the event that the difference % Id exceed the reproducibility there would be no means of testing whether the results were acceptable or not. The need for additional cooperative testing to establish re reducibility when samples are shipped between la goratories ( and therefore may not be identical at the time of testing ) is`being studied. . 2 This result is based on a laboratory cooperative test program using reference fluids prepared in accordance wrth Annex A. 3 These results are based on a laboratory coo rative bst program usin TYPE A ( field sampies of Mp" I>JPS ) fuels containing fuef system corrosion and icing inhibitors. Due to large number of additive combinations and concentrations, there may be field samples other than those used to develop the precision of this test method, that may not respond within the expected limit. 4 The results of precision programs with the MicroSeparometer and its correlation wtth other rating methods arc discussed ia Annex C. NOTE -Caution : Do not operate the mixer without having a syrin e with fuel in place. The mixer bearings depend on the fue e for lubrication.

13.3.1 Mark V Standard instruments ton labelled "CLEAN"

have a pushbut-

13.32 Mark V Deluxe instruments utilize the pushbutton labelled "START" to initiate the CLEAN cycle. 13.4 Add about 15 to 20 ml of fuel to be tested into a new vial. Wipe the outside of the vial with a clean, lintless wiper and insert the vial into the turbidimeter well, aligning the black mark on the vial with the line on the front panel. 13.5 At the end of the clean cycle, when the mixer motor stops, remove the syringe barrel from the emulsifier, discard the fuel and drain the syringe thoroughly. Add 50 * 1 ml of fresh fuel sample into the syringe.
NOTE -Caution : Handle the s ringe in such a manner as to minimize warming of the fue Ysample by the body heat.

12.2 Bias A bias statement is under investigation.

METHOD

2 -TEST

MODE B OPERATION

13 PROCEDURE 13.1 Select Test Mode B operation. Mark V Standard instruments with two-speed syringe drive speeds and all Deluxe instruments have the test Mode B capability. 13.1.1 For Mark V Standard instruments with test Mode A an.d B capability, move the mode :selection ( toggle ) switch to the B position. Proper syringe drive speed for test Mode B is selected by lifting and holding the gear release knob while moving the gear carriage from left to right. The proper gear ratio is then set by releasing and pressing down on the gear release knob prior to releasing the gear carriage. Proper speed selection is indicated by illumination of the annunciator lamp above the CLEAN pushbutton. 13.1.2 For Mark V Deluxe instruments, depress the pushbutton marked B which will illuminate. indicating that test Mode B has been selected. The correct syringe drive speed is set automatically. 13.2 Remove a plunger from a new 50 ml syringe, insert a plug into the tapered bottom of the syringe, add approximately 50 ml of fuel into the barrel of the syringe, and place the syringe barrel on the emulsifier mount turning to lock in place. Assure that the syringe barrel is properly aligned concentrically with the mixer shaft and is not touching the propeller. 13.3 Initiate the CLEAN cycle by depressing the applicable pushbutton as designated by the annunciator light. 12

13.4 Using a fresh plastic tip on the hand pipet, add 50 1 of distilled water to the fuel sample as follows: push in the plunger, immerse the tip just below the water surface, release the plunger, and withdraw from the water slowly to avoid water drops adhering to the outside of the tip. Immerse the tip .of the pipet just below the fuel surface in the centre of the syringe ( see Fig.4 ) to ensure the water drops break away cleanly and fall to the bottom, push and hold in the plunger, withdraw the pipet, and release the plunger. 13.7 Place the syringe barrel on the emulsifier mount, turning to lock in place. NOTE-Caution : Assure that the syrin e barrel is properly aligned concentrically with the mixers a aft. Proper ahgnment can be verified by grasping the s ringe barrel and moving it until the repeller on the end o Ythe mixer shaft is free and not toucung. P. Misalignment may cause plastic shavings to form and collect on the coalescer filter material resulting in erroneous test results.

13.8 With the syringe in place, depress the START pushbutton ( see Fig. 5 ) to initiate the automatic test Mode B program listed in Table 3. If for any reason it is desired to interrupt the sequence and start over, depress the RESET pushbutton to cancel the test in progress and reset the program to the beginning of the "CLEAN" segment of the test cycle. 13.9 The automatic program starts with a read meter indication ( four short tones ) followed by a 10-s full-scale adjustment period. During this period adjust the meter to read 100 ( see Fig. 6 ). If adjustment cannot be completed at this time, final adjustment can be accomplished during the second meter adjust period occurring later in the test sequence. NOTE - Caution : An movement of the meter control
knob, other than setting tz e reading to the 100 value during the first and second meter adjusts periods, will cause erroneous test results.

13.9.1 Mark V Standard instruments adjust knob that is used to set the meter 100 value. 13.9.2 Mark V Deluxe instruments ARROWED pushbuttons that ye used value during this period. Operational cated when the pushbuttons illuminate.

have a meter reading to the have two to set the 100 status is indi-

IS 1448[ P : 142 ] : 1993

FIG. 8

COALBSC~NC~

--..-

_

_

FIG. 9

TAKING SAMPLE

13

IS 1,448 [P 13.10 After the full-scale adjustment period, the mixer motor activates and the emulsion process is initiated.
NOTE -A few drop of fuel may seep from the hole in the emulsifier head durmg the high-speed mixing operation. This should not affect the test results.

:142]

:1993

15

PRECISION

AND BIAS

13.11After the emulsification sequence, remove the syringe barrel from the emulsifier and insert the plunger using the wire aid to release the entrapped air (see Fig.7 ). ( To ensure that only the entrapped air is expelled without fuel loss, cock the syringe barrel at a slight angle with the wire aid held depicssed against upper portion of the barrel. Then depress the plunger to release the entrapped air. ) Remove the wire aid from the syringe. Remove the plug from the syringe and replace it with an Alumicel coalescer. Place the entire syringe assembly into the syringe drive mechanism. Position a waste container beneath the Alumicel coalescer to collect the unwanted portion of processed fuel sample during the coalescing period. NOTE -Caution : Alumicel coalescers shall be clectrically bonded to the Micro-Separometer to prevent buildup of an electrostatic charge that could result in ignition of flammable test fluids. Each Mark Vinstrument is furnished with a ground lead that has an alli ator cli on one end and a banana plug on the other. The aP. hgator c7.. up IS fastened to the Alumicel coalescer and the plug is inserted in Ihe chassis ground jack (see Fig. 8 ). Other suitable grounding methods may be used for previous mode!s.

15.1 The precision for Test Mode B operation of this test method as determined by statistical analysis of the test results obtained by ten operator/instrument pairs on identical fuel samples at a common site is as follows; 15.1.1 Repeatability The difference between successive ineasured MSEPB ratings obtained by the same operator with the same Micro-Separometer under constant operating conditions on identical MIL JP 4 test material would, in the long run and in the normal and correct operation of the test method, exceed the following values for only one case in twenty (see Note 1 under 12 ). 15.1.1.1 Reference fuels MSEP-B ratings for MIL JP 4 reference fuels will have a repeatability of nine ( maximum difference between two consecutive measurement obtained by the same operator using the same instrument ). 15.1.1.2 Field samples MSEP-B ratings for MIL JP 4 field samples will have a repeatability of 16 ( maximum difference between two consecutive measurements obtained by the same operator using the same instrumeni ). 15.1.2 Reproducibility The difference between two single and independent measurements of MSEP-B ratings obtained by different operator/instrument pairs at the same location on identical MIL JP 4 test material would, in the long run, in the normal and correct operation of the test methods, exceed the following values for only one case in twenty (see Note under 13.1.0 ). 15.1.2.1 MSEP-B have the between operators different Reference fuels ratings for MIL JP 4 reference fuels will reproducibility of ten ( maximum difference two measurements obtained by two different on the identical test samples using two instruments at the same testsite)

13.12 A short tone will indicate the second meter adjust period. If required, the operator should adjust the meter reading to 100. The syringe drive mechanism will start down at the end of the meter adjust period forcing the water/fuel emulsion through the Alumicel coalescer (see Fig. 8 ). During this operation remove the vial from the turbidimeter well and discard the fuel. 13.13 Collect the last 1.5 ml of fuel sample being processed from the AIumicel coalescer (see Fig. 9 ). To lessen the amount of air introduced into the fuel during this operation position the vial at a slight angle and allow the fuel to flow down the inner surface. 13.13.1 Only the Mark V Deluxe instruments have a collect sample annunciator lamp ( marked C/S ) that will illuminate and a tone of short duration will sound indicating when the last 15 ml of fuel should be collected. 13.14 Wipe the outside of the vial with a clean, lintless wiper to remove any fingerprints and fuel. Place the sample vial into the turbidinieter well aligning the marks on the vial and on the control panel in front of the well. At the end of the settling time ( 1 min ), a steady tone (4-s duration ) will alert the operator that the meter is about to activate. 13.15 At the end of the tone, the meter will automatically activate for approximately 10 s. 13.16 MSEP-B ratings are read at the midpoint of the 10-s meter read cycle indicated by a short 1-s tone.
NOTE -

15.1.2.2 Field samples MSEP-B ratings for MIL JP 4 field samples will have the reproducibility 19 ( maximum difference between two measurements obtained by hvc different operators on the identical test sample using two dlfferent instruments at the same test site ).
1 TXis result is based on laboratory cooperative test prpgram using MIL JP 4 fuels as a reference fuel prepared In accordance with Ann&x A. 2 This result is based on laboratory coo rative test program using field sam les of MIL JP 4 fue T s containing fuel system corrosion an s. Icing inhibitors. The fuels did not contain any si ificant amounts of static dissipator additives ( SDA). Rue to the large number of additive combinations and concentrations, there may be field samples other than those used to develop the precision of this test method, on which data could be generated, using this test method correctly, that may not fall within the expected limits.

Numerical values obtained outside the measurements tange from 50 to 100 are undefined and invalid ( see 5.2).

,

14 REPORT 14.1 Report the results MSEP-B rating. obtained in 13.16 as the 15

15.2 Bias A bias statement is being investigated. '

IS 1448 [ P : 142 ] : 1993

ANNEX A ( czuusf?7.3 )
PREPARATION A-l GENERAL OF REFERENCE FLUID BASE that will cause particle size segregaavoid handling tion. A-4.2 A-4.3 A-4.4 A-4.5 A-4.6 A-5 A-5.1

This procedure describes the preparation within an 8-h da;1 of a 20 -1 ( 5 -gal ) lot of reference fluid base. This procedure has been found to give a filtrate having 100 MSEP rating. A-2 SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE

Fine Glass Wool Isopropyl Alcochol Toluene Water Salt 90 percent

NOTE -Warning

A fuel is flowed at a constant rate through a fresh column of granular clay and collected in a clean storage receiver. The fuel should conform to Jet A, Jet A-l or Jet B and the aromatic content should be between 10 and 20 volume percent. Reference fluids may also be of MIL JP 4, MIL JP 5, MIL JP 7 and MIL JP 8 fuel origin. Additional processing such as water washing followed by flowing the fuel througha salt bed prior to clay treating may be required to attain a standard 99+ rating and, the AOT Standard Ratings shown in Tables 4,5 and 6, or both. A-3 A-3.1 APPARATUS Glass Column

in a squeeze bottle. : Flammable. Vapour harmful. preferably distilled. OF APPARATUS

Rock salt or equivalent.

PREPARATION

Mount the column vertically.

A-5.2 Measure approximately 500 ml of clay in the graduated cylinder, tapping gently to settle. A-5.3 Place the funnel on top, the column with its out centered. Quickly pour the clay into the funnel, aiming the funnel so that the clay falls in the centre of the column. Remove the funnel and tap the column gently all around, settle and level the clay bed. Tamp a fist- sized wad of glass wool carefully down on top of the bed. A-5.3.1 When water washing of the fuel is required place approximately 12.5 to 15.0 mm ( 125 to 150 in) of salt on top of the wad of glass wool and then another wad of glass wool on top of the salt. A-6 FILTRATION PROCEDURE

Containing a sealed in coarse fritted glass disk near the bottom and with a 4-mm metering type TFBfluorocarbon stopcock outlet at the bottom. The inside diameter of the column is 55 to 65 mm, and the length above the fritted disk shall be at least 1 m. A-3.2 Siphon diameter of 5 to 10 mm apart. The suction leg to reach the bottom of leg shall be SO to 100 Glass tubing having an outside with the legs 100 to 150 mm shall be 380 to 400 mm long the feed container. The other mm longer. A-3.3 Feed Container

A-6.1 Position a full 20-l (5-gal) feed container with its opening level with the top of the column. Remove the cap and insert the siphon, short leg in the can, longer leg in the column.. A-6.2 Place the 2-l beaker under the column.

A standard square or round 20-l ( 5-gal ) epoxylined can in which the sample is obtained. A-3.4 Receiver Can A new 20 -1(5-gal) epoxy-lined can or one which has been used only with clay- filtered fuel. Plastic containers shall not be used. A-3.5 Funnel

A-6.3 Make sure the column stopcock is wide open. Put slight air pressure in the feed can to start the siphon. The glass wool packing should prevent the clay bed from being disturbed at startup.
NOTE -In a well- prepared column, the fuel may bc seen in advance down the column in a nearly horizontal plane; the clay. If the advancing front no bubbles will rise throu is tilted more than 45" or tP ere is much bubbling.thc quality of the percolation may be impaired.

With a lr3 to 20-mm outlet. A-3.6 Graduated Cylinder

Of 0.5 to l-l capacity. A-3.7 Graduated Cylinder

A-6.4 As soon as the fuel is flowing through the column outlet, adjust the metering screw to attain a rate of 50 to 60 ml/min. Check by measuring with the small graduated cylinder for 1 or 2-min intervals. A-6.5 When at least l-l has been collected, turn off the stopcock without disturbing the metering screw setting. Remove the beaker and support the 20-l (S-gal ) receiver can under the column so that the outlet tube extends about 1 mm into the opening. Open the stopcock. Protect the opening from dirt. NOTE-Warning : When percolating flammable fuel, seal
between the outlet and receiver opening with alurninium foil, ground the receiver, and pur e it with dr mtrogen before starting flow into it. A stmt .H ar purge of t Y IC column before the step in A-6.3 is desirable.

Of 50 to lOO-ml capacity. A-3.8 Beaker

2-l capacity. A-4 MATERIALS A-4.1 Attapulgus Clay

30/6O mesh, LVM ( calcined ) grade or equal. Store the clay protected from atmospheric moisture and 16

IS 1448 A-6.6 Recycle the beaker of filtrate to the feed can or discard it. A-6.7 When the level of fuel has dropped nearly to the top of the clay bed, turn off the stopcock, remove, and cap the receiver can. A-6.8 For lengthy with dry nitrogen.
NOTE percolation

[ P : 142 1 : 1993

A-8.1

Scope

storage,

purge the receiver

can
)

A-8.1.1 Occasionally it may become necessary to further process the base ftiel to prevent interaction between ADT and fuel additives not removed by the clay treatment. Base fuels containing icing inhibitors typically require this type of processing. A-8.2 Summary of Qrocedure A-8.2.1 A given amount of water is mixed with the base fuel and is then allowed to stand for a period of time to let the fluids separate into layers. The watt'r ic then removed and the fuel is processed as described in A-6. A-8.3 Procedure A-8.3.1 Mix 0.95 I( 1 qt ) of water (A-4) thoroughly with 5 gal (19.0- 1 ) of base fuel by agitating by any convenient means. A-8.3.2 Allow the container to stand for sufficient time to allow the water to completely settle out to the bottom of the container. A-8.3.3 Remove the water from the bottom of the container using a pump, pipet, or any other means available. A-8.3.4 Repeat A-8.3.1, A-8.3.2 and A-8.3.3 as required, to assure removal of all water soluble substances and then proceed to the filtration process. A-8.3.5 filtration Initiate the filtration process of A-6 using a media prepared as described in A-5.3.1.

At the specified flow rate, the 2q-! ( 5-gal will be in 6 to 6; h running time.

A-7 CLEAN A-7.1

THE COLUMN

Drain the column.

A-7.2 Dismount the column, open it over a solid waste can, and with the stopcock wide open, below out the clay. A-7.3 With the column inverted over a liquid waste receiver, run alcohol from the squeeze bottle into the outlet. Tilt the column to rinse the entire disk area and the entire inside of the column. When the clay residue has been entirely rinsed out, disassemble and rinse,thestopcock parts, dry and reassemble them and blow the entire assembly dry. A-7.4 If the column still appears dirty, rinse it thoroughly with hot water, then with distilled water, invert it and rinse as in A-7.3 with alcohol, then with acetone and blow dry. This should seldom be,necessary. A-8 WATER WASHING THE BASE FUEL

ANNEXB (Ciause 9.2

)

SAMPLING TECHNIQUE B-l For any test that seeks the presence of trace allowed to stand for atleast 24 h. The fuel should then be dis osed of and the sample Container flushed with the fuel constituents, steps must be taken to assure testing of to I!e tested prior to taking the sample. a representative sample. The round-robin precision study for these test methods showed that flushing of B-2.1 Sample Source the sampling container was most important. This Draw the sample from a moving stream of fuel whose indicates that trace amounts of surfactant material in source is removed from tank water bottoms by as aviation turbine fuels can be absorbed on, or desorbed great a distance as feasible. from, metal surface. Asuggested technique for taking separometer samples follows; it has been found to B-2.2 Sample Line give representative samples. Any similar approach The line may consist of a short 6.4 to 12.7 mm (l/4 to should be satisfactory. The technique is shown here only as a guide to good practice. l/2-in ) diameter tube with its open end facing the moving stream. The other end ( outside the pipe ) B-2 SAMPLE CONTAINER should be equipped with a suitable shut off valve and This should be a scrupulously clean metal can, spout. In turbulent fuel streams it has been determined preferably epoxy-lined. The size will be governed by that salmpling taps flush with the pipe wall satisthe number of replicate tests tobe run. factorily.
NOTE - New cans, not epoxy-lined, arc sometimes coated with surfactant t pe roll oils or solder flux residues which can affect MSE % iest results. Epoxy cans also ma have mold release"or similar residues which can also af ?ect the MSEPtest results. Such cans can usually be clcancd by three consecutive rinses with the fuel to be sampled prior lo taking the sam le for test. Preferably the sam le container should be fille B with the same grade of fuel to K e sampled ( filtered through at least an 0.8 m membrane filter ) and

B-2.3

Taking

the Sample

Flush the sample line with atleast 0.95 1 (1 qt ) of the fuel to be sampled. Open and close the sample valve several times. Rinse the sample can with three separate 0.95 1 amount of the fuel to be sampled ( for a l-gal can ). Include the cap and inner seal, if used, in the rinsing. Draw the sample and put the cap in place 17

IS 1448 [I' :142]

: I993

ANNEX C ( Clnuse 5.3 )
CORRELATION OF MICRO-SEPAROMETER MSEP-A RATINGS

(1.1

INTRODU(:TION

The program to establish the precision of the MicroSeparometer involved cooperative testing by the ten laboratories usiug seven Jet B blends and seven Jet B blends and parallel testing with Field `Test Method. The correlation of MSEP-A Ratings is shown beiow. C-l.1 Earlier programs with Field Test Method involved cooperative testing iu conjunction wiG Test Method IS 1448 [ P :I37 ] :1991. Correlation of MSS Ratings with WSIM Ratings established at that time have been extended to MSEP-A Ratings using the MSS rating as the common reference. C-2 PRECISION OF MSEP-A RATINGS C-2.1 Using fuels that simulated field experience by addition of corrosion inhibitors, etc as well as reference blends prepared in accordance with 7.4, the precision of the Micro-Separometer was shown to be equivalent to the precision of Field Test Method Minisonic Scparometer. C-2.2 Analysis revealed that precision of MSEP-A Ratings varies with rating levels as shown in Fig. 10, which was dcvcloped originally for Test Method IS 1448 [ P :137 ] :1991 and confirmed with Field Test Method. C-3 CORREIATION MASS RATINGS OF MSEP-A ANI)

C-3.1 The relationship be!ween the MSEP-A and MSS Ratings is a function offuel type as described in the following equations: MSEP-A (Jet A ) = I .276 (MSS) - 23.805

= 1.338 (MES) - 32.366 MSEP-A (Jet A ) MSEP-A (both fuels) = 1.247 (MSS) - 22.952 C-4 MSEP-A RATINGS LEVEL VERSUS FUEL TYPE C-4.1 The Micro-Separometer Rating level for Jet B fuel is higher than Jet A fuel using either the standard dispersing ageut (see 7.3 ) or other additives typical of fuels in the field. MSS Ratings as the comUsing Field Test Method mon reference, the MSEP-Arelationship for Jet B fuel containing standard dispersing agents is as follows: MSEP-A(JET B)= 0.60 WSIM + 40 C-5 CORRELATION OF MSEP-A WITII FIELD EXPERIENCE RATINGS

Fuel blends that simulate field samples reveal that fuels containing corrosion inhibitors exhibit higher MSEP-A Ratings than blends with other additives including standard dispersing agents..

ANNEXD' (Cfouses 5.5 and 7.5 )
I'RECALJTIONARY D-l AVIATION JET A-l) WARNING Keep away Ilames. Keep container Avoid breathing Avoid prolonged D-2 TOLLYENE WARNING -Flammable. Keep container closed. Vapour harmful. Keep away from heat, sparks and open tlames. TURBINE Combustible. from heat,. FUEL (JET A OR STATEMENTS Avoid breathing Avoid prolonged Vapour harmful. sparks, and open D-3 AVIATION TIJRBINE FUEL (JET B) if of vapour or spray mist. or repeated contact with skin.

closed. of vapour or spray mist. or repeated contact with skin

WARNINGExtremely flammable. Harmful inhaled. Vapours may cause flash fire. Keep away from heat, sparks and open flame. Keep container closed. Use with adequate ventilation.

Use with adequate ventilation.

Avoid buildup of vapours and*eliminate all sourespacially nonexplosion proof ces of ignition, electrical apparatus and heaters. Avoid breathing Avoid prolonged 18 vapour or spray mist. or repeated contact with skin.

Use with adequate ventilation.

IS 1448 D-4 AVIATION TURBINE AND MIL J P 5) WARNING -Extermely inhaled. FUEL (MIL JP 4 flammable. Harmful if Use with adequate ventilation.

[ P : 142 ] : 1993

Avoid buildup of vapours and eliminate all sources of ignition, especially nonexplosion proof electrical apparatus and heaters. Avoid breathing Avoid prolonged vapour or spray mist. or repeated contact with skin. FUEL ( MIL JP 8 ) flammable. Harmful if

Vapours may cause flash fire. Keep away from heat, sparks and open flame Keep container closed. Use with adequate ventilation. Avoid buildup of vapours and eliminate all sources of ignition, especially nonexplosion proof electrical apparatus and heaters. Avoid breathing Avoid prolonged D-5 AVIATION vapour or spray mist. or repeated contact with skin. FUEL (MIL JP 7) flammable. Harmful if

D- 6 AVIATION TURBINE WARNING -Extremely inhaled.

Vapours may cause flash fire. Keep away from heat, sparks and open flame. Keep container closed. Use with adequate ventilation. Avoid buildup of vapours and eliminate all sources of ignition, especially nonexplosion proof electrical apparatus and heaters. Avoid breathing Avoid prolonged vapour or spray mist. or repeated contact with skin.

TURBINE

WARNING -Extremely inhaled.

Vapours may cause flash fire. Keep away from heat, sparks and open flame. Keep container closed. _

19

Standard Mark The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau OJ Indian Standards Act, 2986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on

products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well decked system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote marking and quality certification of harmonious development of the activities of standardization, goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards Monthly Additions'. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following reference: Dot : No. PCD I ( 1001 )

Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of lssue Text Affected

BUREAU OF 1NDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern Southern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 600113 Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all offices ) Telephone I 331 01 31 331 13 75 37 84 99, 37 85 61 37 86 26, 37 86 62
! 53 38 43,

53 16 40 235 04 42 235 23 15 632 78 58 632 78 92

53 23 84 : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 235 02 16, 235 15 19, i 632 92 95, 632 78 91,

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) BOMBAY 400093 Branches
: AHMADABAD.

BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHAT'J. IIYDERABAD. LUCKNOW. KANPUR. JAIPUR. PATNA. 1 HIRUVANANTHAPURAM.
Printed at Ner India Printing Press. Khuria. In&

