NAT 1% IS 17773 : 2022 
Indian Standard 


чЧач-чїхчөг зат sisfras утте — 
ferra atk Heraa Ht fife ват 
(UU3UH3ITS/3IT$3ITSU3TR 2 : 2014, VASFI) 


Closed-Circuit Ammonia 
Refrigeration System — Code of 
Practice for Design and Installation 
(ANSI/IIAR 2 : 2014, NEQ) 


ICS 71.060; 13.300; 27.200 


© BIS 2022 


anda AM эъ 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR Чач, 9 serere TH AMT, 99 {И — 110002 


Vee МАМАК BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


September 2022 Price Group 16 


Refrigeration апа Air Conditioning Sectional Committee, MED 03 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Refrigeration 
and Air Conditioning Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering Division Council. 


This standard provides the recommended practice for safe design, and installation of closed-circuit ammonia 
mechanical refrigerating systems. It lays down the requirements for safety of persons and property on or near 
the premises where the refrigerating systems are located. Additional requirements may be necessary because of 
particular circumstances, project specifications or other jurisdictional considerations. This standard is not intended 
to serve as a comprehensive technical design manual and shall not be used as such. 


Experience shows that ammonia is difficult to ignite above 650°C and is very stable under normal conditions. The 
ignition point of ammonia is limited to a range of 160 000 ppm to 250 000 ppm. This concentration far exceeds 
the 50 ppm Permissible Exposure Level (PEL) published by National Institute for Occupational Safety and 
Health (NIOSH), United State of America. For any deviation between the waste constituents with concentration 
limits specified in this standard and the limits specified in the Hazardous and Other Waste (Management and 
Transboundary Movement) Rules, 2016 issued by Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, the limits 
specified in rules shall prevail. 


Ammonia's strong odour alerts those nearby to its presence at levels well below those that present a hazard. 
This “self-alarming” odour is so strong that a person is unlikely to voluntarily remain in an area where ammonia 
concentrations are hazardous. 


The principal hazard to persons is ammonia vapour, since exposure occurs more readily by inhalation than by 
other routes. As with any hazardous vapour, adequate ventilation is the key to effective control. 


Ammonia in vapour form is lighter than air. Ammonia vapour rises and diffuses simultaneously when released into 
the atmosphere. It is biodegradable, and when released, it combines readily with water and/or carbon dioxide to 
form relatively harmless compounds. Ammonia may also neutralize acidic pollutants in the atmosphere. 


Assistance has been drawn from the following publications in formulation of this standard: 


АМЅІЛІАК 2: 2014 Safe design of closed-circuit ammonia refrigeration systems 


AAR-1 : 2016 Safe design of closed-circuit ammonia refrigeration systems (For Indian 
conditions) 


IIAR standards are copyright-protected materials and therefore apply all restrictions in copyright laws and 
regulations. Providing access to Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) does not yield to any copyright assignment 
or license. ПАК material protected by copyright is for the exclusive use of BIS and for use by the technical 
standardization committees as reference material or for adoption as a national standard. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard 1s given in Annex L. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the rules of the test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 2022 *Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision) . The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


CONTENTS 


SECTION 1 GENERAL 


SCOPE 
REFERENCES 


TERMINOLOGY 


SECTION 2: DESIGN AND INSTALLATION 
CONSIDERATIONS AFFECTING CONSTRUCTION 


LOCATION OF AMMONIA REFRIGERATION MACHINERY 
GENERAL SYSTEM DESIGN REQUIREMENTS 
MACHINE ROOMS 


AREAS OTHER THAN MACHINE ROOMS 


SECTION 3: EQUIPMENT AND COMPONENTS 


COMPRESSORS 

REFRIGERANT PUMPS 

CONDENSERS 

EVAPORATORS 

PRESSURE VESSELS 

PIPING 

PACKAGED SYSTEMS AND COMPONENTS 
OVER PRESSURE PROTECTION DEVICES 
INSTRUMENTATION AND CONTROLS 


AMMONIA DETECTION AND ALARMS 


This standard has been provided by BIS and ПАК. It shall not be copied or distributed by 
other means to other parties without the written permission of ПАК. 


IS 17773 : 2022 


Page No. 


27 
29 
30 
33 
36 
38 
40 
41 
46 


47 


IS 17773 : 2022 


SECTION 4 


NNEX A ALLOWABLE EQUIVALENT LENGTH OF DISCHARGE PIPING 


NNEX B METHODS FOR CALCULATING RELIEF VALVE CAPACITY FOR 
EAT EXCHANGER INTERNAL LOADS 


A 
A 
H 
ANNEX C DUPLICATE NAMEPLATES ON PRESSURE VESSELS 
ANNEX D STRESS CORROSION CRACKING 

A 


NNEX E EMERGENCY PRESSURE CONTROL SYSTEMS EMERGENCY 
PRESSURE CONTROL SYSTEM DESIGN AND INSTALLATION GUIDELINES 


NNEX F MACHINE ROOM SIGNS 

NNEX G ALTERNATIVE VENTILATION CALCULATION METHODS 
NNEX H PIPE FITTINGS, FLANGES AND BOLTING 

NNEX J SAFE PRACTICE IN CASE OF LEAK AFFECTING OCCUPANTS 
NNEX К PHYSICAL PROPERTIES OF AMMONIA 


NNEX L COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


LIST OF TABLES 
Table 1 Purity Requirements 
Table2 Minimum Design Pressure 
Table3 Seamless Carbon Steel Pipe Data for Weld Joints 
Table 4 Seamless Carbon Steel Pipe Data for Threaded Joints 
Table 5 Seamless Stainless Steel Pipe Data for Weld Joints 
Table 6 Seamless Stainless Steel Pipe Data for Threaded Joints 
Table 7 Maximum Allowable Hanger Rod Spacing 
Table 8 | Recommended Minimum Thickness for Various Pressure Vessel 
Sizes (Ready Reckoner) 
Table 9 Velocity Requirement for Line Sizing 
Table 10 Safety Valve Capacity (Air) in kg/h for High Pressure Receivers 
Table 11 Safety Valve Capacity (Air) in kg/h for Low Pressure Receivers 
Table 12 Typical Moody Friction Factors, Steel Tubing Piping (NPS) 
Table 13 Typical Moody Friction Factors, Steel Piping 
LIST OF FIGURES 
Fig.1 Principal Machinery Room Door 
Fig.2 Auxiliary Machinery Room Door 
Fig.3 Elbow Drawing 
Fig.4 НЗ Flange Drawing 


This standard has been provided by BIS and ПАК. It shall not be copied or distributed by 
other means to other parties without the written permission of IIAR. 


49 


51 


57 


57 


58 


61 


64 


66 


71 


72 


74 


62 
63 
66 
70 


IS 17773 : 2022 


Indian Standard 


CLOSED-CIRCUIT AMMONIA REFRIGERATION 
SYSTEM — CODE OF PRACTICE FOR DESIGN AND 
INSTALLATION 


SECTION 1 GENERAL 
1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard covers the code of recommended 
practice for the safe design and installation of 
closed-circuit vapour compression ammonia 
refrigeration systems. 


1.2 The requirements outlined in this standard apply 
to stationary closed-circuit mechanical refrigerating 
systems utilizing ammonia as the primary refrigerant. 


1.3 This standard provides normative requirements 
relating to the equipment, design, safety, and installation 
of the following: 


a) Stationary closed-circuit ammonia refrigerating 
systems and their components in industrial 
occupancies and limited charge self-contained 
systems for commercial occupancies; and 

b) Indirect closed-circuit ammonia refrigerating 
systems for industrial, commercial, public 
assembly and large mercantile occupancies. 


1.4 This standard does not apply to: 
a) Ammonia absorption and adsorption refrigerating 
systems; and 
b) Replacements of machinery, equipment or piping, 
meeting the functional equivalents. 
1.5 Applicability 


1.5.1 Conflicts — Where there is a conflict between 
this standard and the National Building Code of India 
or the National Electrical Code, the requirements of 
the code shall take precedence unless otherwise stated 
in such code. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 


this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
listed below: 


IS No. Title 

SP 7: 2016 National building code of 
India (third revision) 

SP 30: 2011 National electrical code 2011 
(first revision) 

662 : 2020 Anhydrous ammonia — 
Specification (second revision) 

778 : 1984 Specification for copper alloy 


gate, globe and check valves 
for water works purposes 
(fourth revision) 


1239 (Part 1): 2004 Steel tubes, tubulars and other 
wrought steel fittings: Part 1 


Steel tubes (sixth revision) 


1239 (Part 2): 2011 Steel tubes, tubulars and other 
steel fittings: Part 2 Steel pipe 
fittings (fifth revision) 

Water fittings — Copper 
alloy float valves (Horizontal 
plunger type) — Specification 
(fourth revision) 

Steel 
vessels 


1703 : 2000 


2002 : 2009 for pressure 
for intermediate 
and high temperature 
service including boilers 
(third revision) 


Steel 


plates 


2041 : 2009 plates for pressure 
vessels used at moderate 
and low temperature 


(third revision) 


This standard has been provided by BIS and ПАК. It shall not be copied or distributed by 
other means to other parties without the written permission of ПАК. 


IS 17773 : 2022 


IS No. 


3594 : 1991 


3615 : 2020 


3589 : 2001 


ISO 4126-1 : 2013 


4544 : 2000 


4503 : 1967 


4671 : 2018 


ISO 5922 : 2005 


IS 8910 : 2010/ 
ISO 404 : 1992 


ISO 21922 : 2021 


11714 
(Part 1 to 5) : 1986 


ISO 13971 : 2012 


ISO 14737 : 2021 


16656 : 2017/ 
ISO 817 : 2014 


Title 


Code of practice for fire 
safety of industrial buildings: 
General storage and 
warehousing including cold 
storage 


Glossary of terms used 
in refrigeration апа аг 
conditioning (second 
revision) 


Steel pipes for water and 
sewage (168.3 to 2540 mm 
outside diameter) — 
Specification (third revision) 


Safety devices for protection 
against excessive pressure: 
Part 1 Safety valves 


Ammonia — Code of safety 
(first revision) 


Shell and tube type heat 
exchangers 


Expanded polystyrene 
for thermal insulation 
purposes — Specification 


(first revision) 
Malleable cast iron 


General technical delivery 
requirements for steel and 
steel products (first revision) 


Refrigerating systems and 
heat pumps — Valves — 
Requirements, testing and 
marking 


Specification for steel tubes 
for heat exchangers 


Refrigeration systems and 
heat pumps — Flexible 
pipe elements, vibration 
isolators, expansion joints 
and non-metallic tubes — 
Requirements and 
classification 


Carbon and low alloy cast 
steels for general applications 


Refrigerants — Designation 
and safety classification 


IS No. Title 

16678 (Part 2) : Refrigerating systems апа 
2018/ISO 5149 heat pumps — Safety and 
Part 2 : 2014 environmental requirements: 
Part 2 Design, construction, 
testing, marking and 

documentation 
16678 (Part 3) : Refrigerating systems and 


2018/ISO 5149-3: 
2014 


heat pumps — Safety and 
environmental requirements: 
Part 3 Installation site 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given in 
IS 3315 and the following shall apply. 


3.1 Actuator — Mechanism for transmission of 
movement or force. 


3.2 Acute-Toxicity Exposure Limit (ATEL) — The 
maximum recommended refrigerant concentration 
determined in accordance with the established systems 
and intended to reduce the risks of acute toxicity 
hazards to human in the event of a refrigerant release. 


3.3 Accumulator — A low pressure vessel, separating 
refrigerant liquid and gas installed after the expansion 
device but before the liquid enters the evaporator in 
gravity flooded systems. 


3.4 Air-Cooled Condenser — A refrigerant condenser 
in which heat removal is accomplished entirely by heat 
absorption by the air flowing over condensing surfaces. 


3.5 Air-Cooled De-super-heater — A part of the 
system/equipment designed to cool the ammonia 
refrigerant vapour after it is discharged from the 
compressor and before it enters the condenser. 


3.6 Air Cooler, Dry — It is a forced circulation air 
cooler wherein heat transfer is a combination consisting 
of air circulation and refrigerant cooling. 


3.7 Air Cooler Spray Type — It is a forced circulation 
air cooler wherein the coil surface capacity is augmented 
by a liquid spray during the period of operation. 


3.8 Air Duct — A tube or conduit for conveying air. 


3.9 Ammonia — 
ammonia. 


Refrigerant-grade anhydrous 


3.10 Approved — Acceptable to the jurisdictional 
authorities. 


This standard has been provided by BIS and ПАК. It shall not be copied or distributed by 
other means to other parties without the written permission of ПАК. 


3.11 Approximate Lethal Concentration (ALC) — 
The concentration of a substance, or refrigerant in this 
standard, that was lethal to even a single test animal 
but no less than 50 percent of the animals in that group 
when tested by the same conditions as for an LC50 test. 


3.12 Authorized Personnel — Persons who, have 
been specifically granted permission to enter a restricted 
area. 


3.13 Automatic Expansion Valve — А controlling 
device that regulates the flow of the volatile mixture 
of refrigerant into an evaporator of a closed-circuit 
ammonia refrigerating system and which 1s actuated by 
evaporator pressure or temperature or liquid level. 


3.14 Automatic Liquid Refrigerant Drain Valve — 
Valves provided for liquid ammonia condensate 
draining from hot gas defrost lines or other ammonia 
lines where liquid ammonia is likely to condense and 
accumulate. 


3.15 Auxiliary Door — Any non-principal door 
communicating with a machinery room. 


3.16 Booster Compressor — A compressor for 
discharging gas to the suction of a higher-stage 
compressor either directly or through an intermediate 
pressure vessel or heat exchanger. 


3.17 Boiling Point — It is the temperature at which 
liquid changes its phase to vapour at atmospheric 
pressure at sea level. 


3.18 Burning Velocity (S) — Velocity in cm/s, 
relative to the unburnt gas, at which a laminar flame 
propagates in the direction normal to the flame front, 
at the concentration of refrigerant with air giving the 
maximum velocity. 


3.19 Building Code — The National Building Code of 
India. 


3.20 Building Opening — A permanent or operable 
area that allows outdoor air in to the building envelope 
including operable doors (for example, swinging doors, 
slide doors, roll- up doors, fire doors, access hatches), 
operable make- up air intakes (where the intakes are not 
equipped with the ability to close automatically when 
ammonia is present), and other vents with permanent 
openings. 


3.21 Cascade Refrigeration Systems — Two or more 
independent refrigerant circuits where the condenser 
of one system rejects heat in the evaporator of another 
system. 


3.22 Closed-Circuit Ammonia Refrigerating System — 
A refrigerating system using mechanical compression to 
transfer the refrigerant from the low pressure side and to 
deliver it to the high pressure side of the system. 


IS 17773 : 2022 


3.23 Compressor — А specific machine with or 
without accessories, for compressing ammonia 
refrigerant vapour. See also booster compressor, 
positive displacement compressor. 


3.24 Compressor Positive Displacement — It is a 
refrigerant compressor in which increase of refrigerant 
gas/vapour pressure is attained by decreasing the 
internal volume of the compressor chamber. 


3.25 Compressor Open — Compressor having a 
drive shaft penetrating the refrigerating tight housing. 


3.26 Coefficient of Performance (Refrigerating) — 
It is the ratio of the rate of heat removal to the rate 
of energy input, in consistent units, for a complete 
refrigerating plant or some specific portion/part of 
that plant, under designated operating conditions. It is 
dimensionless value. 


3.27 Compound Refrigeration Systems — A 
multi-stage refrigerating system in which a single 
charge of refrigerant circulates through all stages of 
compression (see multi-stage refrigerating system). 


3.28 Combustible — A material that does not meet 
the definition of non-combustible material. 


3.29 Coil — Part of the refrigerating system 
constructed from pipes or tubes suitably connected 
and serving as a heat exchanger (evaporator or 
condenser). 


3.30 Condenser — А heat exchanger in which 
compressed refrigerant, to a suitable pressure, is 
condensed by the rejection of heat to an appropriate 
external cooling medium. 


3.31 Condenser, Natural Draught Water-Cooled 
Condenser — A condenser that obtains cooling effect 
by the evaporation of water in natural air stream on 
the external surface of the tubes for the heat removal 
necessary to refrigerant vapour on the inside of the 
tubes. It is a condenser (without forced/induced air 
circulation) that is exposed to the atmosphere, cooled 
with water only. 


3.32 Condenser, Evaporative — A condenser that 
obtains cooling effect by the evaporation of water in 
a forced/induced airstream on the external surface of 
the tubes for the heat removal necessary to liquify 
refrigerant vapour on the inside of the tubes. See also 
air-cooled condenser, double-pipe  (tube-in-tube) 
condenser, desuperheater condenser, shell-and-tube 
condenser. 


3.33 Condenser Water Cooled — It is a refrigerant 
condenser in which heat rejection is accomplished 
entirely by raising the temperature of the water used 
as cooling medium. 


This standard has been provided by BIS and ПАК. It shall not be copied or distributed by 
other means to other parties without the written permission of ПАК. 


IS 17773 : 2022 


3.34 Condensing Unit— Combination of one or 
more compressors, condensers and or liquid receivers 
(when required) and the required accessories. 


3.35 Condenser Coil — That part of a condenser 
constructed of pipe or tubing not enclosed in a pressure 
vessel. 


3.36 Containers, Refrigerant — А pressurized 
cylinder for the storage of refrigerant. 


3.37 Control — It is any manual or automatic device 
for regulation of a system or component on system in 
normal operation. 


3.38 Controlled-Pressure Receiver — An intermediate 
pressure receiver used to flash-cool refrigerant and to 
control the feed pressure. Also known as inter stage 
open or closed flash cooler and economizer in case of 
screw compressors (see also pressure vessel). 


3.39 Corrosion Allowance —An extra thickness added 
to the designed thickness of wall of pressure vessel or 
shell and tube heat exchanges. This acts as a safety 
factor against expected metal loss throughout the life 
span in equipment. 


3.40 Critical Point — A point on the saturation curve 
where the refrigerant liquid and vapour states of a 
substance meet and become indistinguishable. They 
have identical volume, density, and enthalpy and there 
is no latent heat. The density, pressure, specific volume, 
and temperature at the critical point are referred to as 
the critical density, critical pressure, critical volume, 
and critical temperature respectively. 


3.41 Design Pressure — The maximum pressure 
for which a specific part of a refrigerating system is 
designed. 


3.42 Defrosting — It is the process of removing 
unwanted ice or frost from a cooling surface. 


3.43 Dehumidification —It is the process of 
condensation of water vapour from air by cooling 
below dew point or by removal of water vapour from 
air by chemical or physical method. 


3.44 Desuperheater — A device which provides 
sensible cooling to the refrigerant vapour. 


3.45 Direct Expansion — Evaporator arrangement 
whereby liquid refrigerant is fed through an expansion 
valve or device and evaporates completely before 
leaving the evaporative as vapour. 


3.46 Double-Pipe (Tube-in-Tube) Condenser/ 
Desuperheater — A type of condenser/desuperheater 
constructed of one or more assemblies of two tubes, 
one within the other, in which refrigerant vapour is 
condensed/desuperheated either in the annular space or 


the inner tube. See also air-cooled condenser, condenser, 
desuperheater, evaporative condenser, shell-and-tube 
condenser. 


3.47 Downstream Pressure Regulator — A control 
valve which regulates the flow of oil or refrigerant gas 
or liquid through the device which is actuated toward 
open position by a pressure falling below regular or set 
point downstream of the valve. 


3.48 Economizer — A vessel used in screw compressor 
installation to inject additional gas at intermediate 
pressure along the length of screw to get enhanced 
capacity. 


3.49 Elevated Temperature Flame Limit (ETFL) — 
The minimum concentration of refrigerant hat is cap 
able of propagating a flame through a homogeneous 
mixture of the refrigerant and air. It is normally 
expressed as a refrigerant percentage by volume. 


3.50 Engineering Control — The use of sensors, 
actuators, and other equipment to achieve a safe level 
of performance from a system or subsystem without aid 
of human interaction. 


3.51 Equipment —An assembly, sub-assembly, 
accessory or component of a refrigeration system. 


3.52 Equipment Enclosure — An enclosure designed 
to house refrigeration equipment and devices associated 
with a closed-circuit refrigeration system, or both, that 
is not intended for occupancy. 


3.53 Evaporator — That part of a closed-circuit 
ammonia refrigerating system designed to vapourize 
liquid refrigerant to produce refrigeration (cooling 
effect). 


3.54 Evaporator Coil —That part of an evaporator 
constructed of pipe or tubing not enclosed in a pressure 
vessel. 


3.55 Extended Surface — It is heat transfer surface, 
one side of which is increased in area by addition of 
pins, discs, or other means. 


3.56 Evaporator Pressure Regulator — A control 
valve which regulates the flow of primarily gaseous 
refrigerant from an evaporator section and which is 
actuated toward open by a pressure above set point 
upstream of the valve, maintains constant evaporator 
pressure irrespective of load function. 


3.57 Exit — A passageway adjacent to the door through 
which people leave a building. 


3.58 Fade Out Vessel — Vapour receiver connected 
to the low temperature side of a limited charge cascade 
system which is of sufficient size to limit the rise in 
pressure during system standstill. 


This standard has been provided by BIS and ПАК. It shall not be copied or distributed by 
other means to other parties without the written permission of ПАК. 


3.59 Field Test — A test performed in the field to prove 
system tightness. 


3.60 Forced Feed Oil Lubrication — A lubrication 
system in which oil is provided by an internal or external 
mechanical oil pump. This does not include splash type 
or drip type compressor lubrication systems. 


3.61 Flammable Concentration Limit (FCL) — The 
refrigerant concentration limit, in air, determined in 
accordance with the standard and intended to reduce the 
risk of fire or explosion in normally occupied, enclosed 
spaces. 


3.62 Flow Regulator — A control valve which 
regulates the flow of liquid through the device which is 
actuated by flow rate changes and pressure to maintain a 
predetermined flow rate irrespective of load fluctuations. 


3.63 Heat Exchanger — Device designed to transfer 
heat between two physically separated fluids. 


3.64 Header — A pipe or tube to which other pipes or 
tubes are connected. 


3.65 Heat Pump — A refrigerating system used to 
transfer heat in to a space or substance. 


3.66 High Pressure Side — The parts of a 
closed-circuit ammonia refrigerating system subjected 
to approximate condenser pressure. 


3.67 High Side Float Valve — A control valve which 
regulates the flow of refrigerant or oil. This type of 
valve is actuated open by a rising liquid level upstream 
of the valve. 


3.68 Hot Gas Bypass Regulator — A control valve 
which regulates the flow of refrigerant gas which 
is actuated toward open by a pressure falling below 
regulator set point downstream of the valve. 


3.69 Immediately Dangerous to Life and Health 
(IDLH) — Maximum concentration from which 
unprotected persons are able to escape within 30 minutes 
without escape-impairing symptoms or irreversible 
health effects. 


3.70 Indicating Device — An instrument that measures 
and registers certain operating conditions used for 
monitoring and control, such as temperatures and 
pressures, which can be read on a gauge, control display 
screen, or both. 


3.71 Indirect Systems — A system in which a secondary 
coolant that is cooled or heated by the refrigeration 
system is circulated to the air or other substance to be 
cooled or heated. 


3.72 Indirect-Closed System — A system in which a 
secondary coolant passes through a closed circuit in the 
air or other substance to be cooled or heated. 


IS 17773 : 2022 


3.73 Indirect Open-Spray System — А system in 
which a secondary coolant is in direct contact with the 
air or other substance to be cooled or heated. 


3.74 Informative Annex — An annex that is not part 
of the standard but is included for information purposes 
only. 


3.75 Inside Dimension — Inside diameter, width, 
height or cross-sectional diagonal. 


3.76 Internal Gross Volume — The volume as 
determined from internal dimensions of the container, 
with no allowance for the volume of the internal parts. 


3.77 Joint-Mechanical — А gas tight connection 
obtained by joining metal parts with a positive-holding 
mechanical construction such as flanged, screwed or 
flared joints or compression fittings. 


3.78 Knock Out Drum — A low pressure vessel 
installed before compressor to ensure compressor 
protection from accidental liquid refrigerant coming 
from evaporator/surge drum/accumulator. 


3.79 Limited Charge System — А system in which, 
the internal volume and total refrigerant charge are such 
that, with the system idle, the allowable pressure is not 
exceeded when complete evaporation of the refrigerant 
liquid occurs. 


3.80 Lower Flammability Limit (LFL) — The 
minimum concentration of the refrigerant that 
propagates a flame through a homogeneous mixture of 
refrigerant and air. 


3.81 Low Side — The parts of a closed-circuit 
ammonia refrigerating system subjected to approximate 
evaporator pressure and/or the high stage suction 
(inter-stage) pressure of a two-stage system. 


3.82 Low Side Float Valve — A control valve which 
regulates the flow of volatile liquid refrigerant into an 
evaporator. This type of valve is actuated by a rising 
liquid level downstream of the valve towards closed 
position. 


3.83 Machinery — The refrigerating equipment 
forming a part of the refrigerating system including, but 
not limited to, any or all of the following: compressor, 
condenser, receiver, evaporator and connecting piping. 


3.84 Machinery Room — A space orareathatis designed 
specifically to safely house refrigerating equipment 
which includes, but is not limited to compressors, 
condensers, receivers, economizers, purgers, refrigerant 
pumps and other refrigeration related equipment. 


3.85 Maximum Allowable Working Pressure 
(MAWP) — The maximum allowable working pressure 
permitted on a closed-circuit ammonia refrigerating 
system. 


This standard has been provided by BIS and ПАК. It shall not be copied or distributed by 
other means to other parties without the written permission of ПАК. 


IS 17773 : 2022 


3.86 Mechanical Refrigerating System — See 
closed-circuit ammonia refrigerating system. 


3.87 Multistage Refrigerating System — A 
refrigerating system in which compression of 
refrigerant is carried out in two or more steps. 


3.88 Monitored — A means of continuous regulatory 
supervision, such as notification of staff, a third-party 
alarm service or a responsible party. 


3.89 Normative Annex — An integral part of the 
mandatory requirements of the standard, which, 
for reasons of convenience, is placed after all other 
normative elements. 


3.90 Non-combustible Material — A material which 
either does not burn itself or adds heat to a fire, when 
tested for non-combustibility in accordance with 5.3.5. 


3.91 Occupied Space — That portion of the premises 
accessible to or occupied by people, excluding 
machinery rooms. 


3.92 Oil Pot — A vessel to collect oil at one place from 
one or all drain points for ease of draining. 


3.93 Oil Separator — A device for separating oil and 
vapour from the refrigerant, usually installed in the 
compressor discharge line. 


3.94 Over Feed Systems (Pumps Excess Liquid in 
the Evaporators) — It is the quantity of refrigerant 
supplied to evaporators greater than the minimum 
amount required to meet the cooling loads. The 
mixture of low temperature liquid and vapour leaves 
the evaporator and returns to a vessel designed to 
separate the liquid from vapour prior to vapour being 
compressed and the liquid again returns to evaporators. 


3.95 Occupational Exposure Limit (OEL) — The 
time weighted average (TWA) concentration for a 
normal 8 h workday and 40 h work week to which 
nearly all workers can be repeatedly exposed without 
adverse effects. 


3.96 Oxygen Deprivation Limit (ODL) — The 
concentration of a refrigerant or other gases that results 
in insufficient oxygen for normal breathing. 


3.97 Packaged System — A fabricated and assembled 
self-contained closed-circuit refrigeration system, or a 
large portion thereof, either enclosed within its case or 
framework or unenclosed. 


3.98 Parts Per Million (PPM) — Parts per million 
concentration in air. 


3.99 Principal Machinery Room Door — An exterior 
door that has been designated as a primary emergency 
exit door for a machinery room. 


3.100 Public Assembly Occupancy — A premises 
portion thereof where large numbers of people 
congregate and from which occupants cannot quickly 
vacate. 


3.101 Saturation Pressure — The pressure at which 
vapour and liquid can exist in equilibrium at a given 
temperature. 


3.102 Design Pressure — Pressure chosen for the 
strength calculation of each component. It is used for 
the necessary materials, thickness and construction for 
components with regard to their ability to withstand 
pressure. 


3.103 Set Pressure — The pressure at which a 
pressure-relief device or pressure control is set to operate. 


3.104 Test Pressure — The pressure to which a piece 
of equipment or a system is subjected, according to 
pressure test or leak test procedures. 


3.105 Maximum Allowable Pressure — Maximum 
pressure for which the equipment is designed as 
specified by the manufacturer. 


3.106 Strength Test Pressure (Hydraulic) — Pressure 
that is applied to test the strength of a refrigerating 
system or any part of it. 


3.107 Ultimate Strength of a System — Pressure at 
which a part of the system ruptures or bursts. 


3.108 Plate Heat Exchanger — Multiple corrugated 
plates arranged to form a discrete flow path within 
the boundary of the plates for each of the fluid media 
between which heat is transferred. 


3.109 Positive Displacement Compressor — A 
compressor in which an increase in pressure is attained 
by changing (decrease) the internal volume of the 
compression chamber. 


3.110 Pressure Imposing Element — Any device or 
portion of the equipment used to increase the refrigerant 
pressure. 


3.111 Pressure Limiting Device — A pressure 
responsive mechanism designed to automatically stop 
the operation of the pressure imposing element at a 
predetermined pressure. 


3.112 Pressure Relief Safety Devices — A pressure 
actuated valve or rupture member designed to 
automatically relieve excessive pressure. 


3.112.1 Pressure Relief Device — A pressure actuated 
valve or rupture member designed to automatically 
relieve excessive pressure. 


3.112.2 Pressure Relief Valve — A pressure actuated 
valve held closed by a spring or other means and 


This standard has been provided by BIS and ПАК. It shall not be copied or distributed by 
other means to other parties without the written permission of ПАК. 


designed to automatically relieve pressure in excess of 
its setting, also called a safety valve. 


3.112.3 Dual Pressure Relief Device — Two pressure 
relief devices (valves or rupture members) mounted 
on a three-way valve that allows one device to remain 
active while the other is isolated. 


3.112.4 Pilot Operated Relief Valve — A 
pressure-relief valve in which the major relieving 
device is combined with and is controlled by a 
self-actuated auxiliary pressure relief valve. 


3.112.5 Rupture Member — A device that will rupture 
at a predetermined pressure differential. 


3.112.6 Changeover Device — A valve controlling 
two safety devices and so arranged that only one can be 
made in operative at any one time. 


3.113 Piping — The interconnecting parts of an 
ammonia closed-circuit ammonia refrigerating system 
which contain and convey the ammonia refrigerant. 
Piping includes pipe, flanges, bolting, gaskets, 
valves, fittings, the pressure-containing parts of other 
components, such as expansion joints, strainers, 
filters, and devices which serve such purposes as 
mixing, separating, snubbing, distributing, metering or 
controlling flow, pipe hangers, supporting fixtures and 
structural attachments. 


3.114 Pressure Vessel — Any refrigerant containing 
receptacle part in a closed-circuit ammonia refrigerating 
system. 


3.115 Restricted — Open to access by only authorized 
personnel and specifically excluding public access. 


3.116 Proof Test — Design confirmation by testing 
a production sample to verify that it will not fail when 
exposed to a predetermined pressure that exceeds its 
rated design pressure. 


3.117 Pump Down — It is the operation by which the 
refrigerant in a charged system is pumped down in to 
liquid receiver. 


3.118 Pump Down Charge— The quantity of refrigerant 
stored at some point in the refrigeration system for 
operational, service, or stand by purposes. 


3.119 Purging — It is the act of blowing out gas from a 
refrigerant containing vessel, usually for the purpose of 
removing non-condensable. 


3.120 Readily Accessible — Capable of being reached 
safely and quickly for operation, repair, and inspection 
without requiring those to whom ready access is required 
to climb over or remove obstacles or to resort to the use 
of portable access equipment. 


IS 17773 : 2022 


3.121 Receiver — A pressure vessel in a closed-circuit 
refrigerating system designed to hold the varying volume 
of liquid refrigerant resulting from changes in system 
operating conditions and to store the liquid refrigerant 
when the system is pumped down. 


3.122 Refrigerant — Anhydrous Ammonia used for heat 
transfer in a closed-circuit ammonia refrigerating system 
used the vapour-compression cycle, which absorbs heat 
at a low temperature and low pressure of the fluid and 
rejects heat at a higher temperature and higher pressure 
of the fluid, usually involving change of state of the fluid. 


3.123 Refrigerant-Pressure-Actuated Condenser 
Water Regulator — A device which regulates the 
flow of cooling water through a condenser and which is 
actuated towards open by high side pressure rising above 
the regulator set point. 


3.124 Refrigerant Pump — A mechanical device 
for moving liquid ammonia refrigerant within a 
closed-circuit ammonia refrigerating system. 


3.125 Refrigerant Concentration Limit (RCL) — The 
refrigerant concentration limit in the air determined in 
accordance with IS 16678 (Part 1)/ISO 5149-1 intended 
to reduce the risks of acute toxicity, asphyxiation, and 
flammability hazards in normally occupied enclosed 
spaces. 


3.126 Refrigerant Detector — A device that is capable 
of sensing the presence of ammonia refrigerant vapour. 


3.127 Self-contained — Having all essential 
equipment, piping and devices to form a complete 
closed-circuit mechanical refrigeration system, except 
energy and control connections, and contained in a case 
or framework. 


3.128 System — A set of components working together 
as a mechanism or interconnected network. 


3.129 Sealed System — Refrigerating system in which 
all refrigerant containing components are made tight by 
welding, or a similar permanent connection. 


3.130 Self-Contained System — Complete 
factory-made and tested closed-circuit refrigerating 
system in a suitable frame or enclosure, that is 
fabricated and transported complete in one or more 
sections and which has no refrigerant-containing parts 
that are connected on site by other than companion or 
block valves. 


3.131 Shall (shall not) — Term used where the 
provision is mandatory. 


3.132 Shell and Tube Condenser — A type of 
condenser with tubes secured into a tube sheet at one or 
both ends of an enclosing shell. 


This standard has been provided by BIS and ПАК. It shall not be copied or distributed by 
other means to other parties without the written permission of ПАК. 


IS 17773 : 2022 


3.133 Shell and Tube Evaporator — A type of 
evaporator where tube screen closed in a shell. 
Refrigerant can be either in the shell or tubes. 


3.134 Secondary Coolant — Any liquid used for the 
transmission of heat without vaporization. 


3.135 Should (should not) — Term used where 
the provisions are not mandatory but are (are not) 
recommended good practice under most but not all 
conditions. 


3.136 Strainer — Pressure-containing component 
through which fluid flows for the purpose of separating 
contaminants from the flow stream. 


3.137 Sub-Cooled — Reduced to a temperature below 
the saturation temperature for the existing pressure. 


3.138 Super Heat — Additional sensible heat content 
in a vapour which raises the temperature of the vapour 
above the saturation temperature corresponding to its 
pressure. 


3.139 Surge Drum — A receiver installed on the 
low-pressure side of a refrigeration system that is 
close-coupled to one or more evaporators and provides 
liquid feed and a liquid-from-vapor disengaugement space 
to ensure that dry vapour is returned to the compressor. 


3.140 System Flooded — А system in which only 
part of the refrigerant passing over the heat transfer 
surface is evaporated, and the portion not evaporated is 
separated from vapour and is recirculated. 


3.141 Thermostat — An automatic control device 
actuated by temperature and designed to be responsive 
to temperature. 


3.142 Threshold Limit Value Time Weighted 
Average (TLV-TWA) — The refrigerant concentration 
in air for a normal 8 h work day and a 40 h work week 
to which repeated exposure, day after day, will not 
cause an adverse effect in most persons. 


3.143 Toxicity — The ability of a refrigerant to be 
harmful or lethal due to acute or chronic exposure by 
contact, inhalation, or ingestion, temporary discomfort 
at a level that is not impairing is excluded. 


3.144 Trained Technician — An individual having 
adequate training and experience which qualify that 
individual to service, maintain and operate a closed- 
circuit ammonia refrigerating system according to 
written procedures. 


3.145 Tight Construction — Solid construction with 
holes or openings that are either sealed or provided 
with tight- fitting doors to control the transfer of liquid, 
moisture, air and vapour. 


3.146 Tight-Fitting Door — А tightly constructed 
door with seals to minimize gap clearances between the 
entire door perimeter and its fixed door frame, which is 
intended to control the transfer of liquid, moisture, air 
and vapour. 


3.147 Trained Operator — Ап individual having 
training and experience, which qualify that individual 
to service, maintain and operate and perform basic 
system inspections on a closed-circuit refrigeration 
system with which he or she has become familiar or in 
accordance with written procedures. 


3.148 Valve — А pressure-containing component 
that stops, permits, or controls flow. See also piping, 
automatic expansion valve, automatic liquid refrigerant 
drain valve, check valve, control valve, downstream 
pressure regulator, dual pressure-relief device, evaporator 
pressure regulator, flow regulator, high side float valve, 
hot gas bypass regulator, low side float valve, motorized 
valve, oil drain float valve, pressure-relief device, 
pressure-relief ^ valve, — refrigerant-pressure-actuated 
condenser water regulator, self-closing valve, shutoff 
valve, solenoid valve, thermostatic expansion valve, 
three-way valve, motorized valve either electrically or 
pneumatically actuated. 


3.149 Valve-Four Way — Valve used to reverse 
refrigerant flow direction, used for reverse cycle 
defrost. 


3.150 Valve Charging — A valve used to charge or add 
refrigerant to the system or add oil to the compressor 
crankcase. 


3.151 Check Valve — It is a valve allowing fluid flow 
in one direction only. 


3.152 Float Valve — Refrigerating valve controlled 
by liquid level and valve actuated by float in a liquid 
container. 


3.153 Purge Valve — A device to allow fluid to flow 
out of system, particularly non-condensable gases 


3.154 Balanced Relief Valve — А pressure relief 
valve that incorporates means of minimizing the effect 
of back pressure on the operational characteristics of 
the valve (operating pressure, closing pressure, and 
relieving pressure). 


3.155 Control Valve — A control valve is a valve used 
to control fluid flow by varying the size of the flow 
passage as directed by a control signal. 


3.156 Motorized Valve — A valve operated by a motor. 


3.157 Oil Drain Float Valve — See high side float 
valve, except controlling oil. 


This standard has been provided by BIS and IIAR. It shall not be copied or distributed by 
other means to other parties without the written permission of IIAR. 


3.158 Over Flow Valve — Pressure relief device 
discharging to the low pressure side of the refrigerating 
system. 


3.159 Pressure Regulator (Differential Pressure 
Regulating) Valve — An automatic valve that is 
responsive to difference between its own inlet and 
outlet or any other pressure and functions to throttle the 
fluid flow when necessary to prevent the set pressure 
from falling or rising from a selected value. 


3.160 Pressure Regulator (Back/Inlet Pressure 
Regulating) Valve — An automatic valve that is 
responsive to its own inlet pressure and functions to 
throttle the fluid flow when necessary to prevent the set 
pressure from falling below a selected value. 


3.161 Pressure Regulator (Outlet Pressure 
Regulating) Valve — An automatic valve that is 
responsive to its own outlet pressure and functions to 
throttle the fluid flow when necessary to prevent the set 
pressure from rising a selected value. 


3.162  Pilot-Operated Relief Valve — A 
pressure-relief valve in which the major relieving 
device is combined with and is controlled by a 
self-actuated auxiliary pressure relief valve. 


3.163 Self-Closing Valve — A manually-operated 
stop valve that will automatically return to the closed 
position by means of (a spring or by weight, or by quick 
closing ball) other device when the operating handle is 
released. 


3.164 Shut-Off Valve — Externally actuated valve 
solely designed to stop flow for the purpose of isolating 
a sub-section of the system, also referred to in practice 
as, but not limited to — ‘block’, ‘hand’, ‘service’, ‘stop’, 
or ‘ball’ valve. 


3.165 Solenoid Valve — Control valve actuated by 
an electrically charged coil, designed to functionally 
stop/start flow. 


3.166 Thermostatic Expansion Valve — A control 
valve which regulates the flow of refrigerant into an 
evaporator of a closed-circuit ammonia refrigerating 
system and which is actuated by changes in evaporator 
pressure and superheat of the refrigerant gas leaving the 
evaporator. The basic function is to control the amount 
of super heat. 


3.167 Three Way Valve — A manually operated 
valve with one inlet which alternately can stop flow to 
either of two outlets. A service valve for dual mounted 
pressure relief valves. 


3.168 Welded Joint — Permanently sealed joint, 
created by the joining of metal parts in a molten state. 


IS 17773 : 2022 


SECTION 2: DESIGN AND 
INSTALLATION CONSIDERATIONS 
AFFECTING CONSTRUCTION 


4 LOCATION OFAMMONIA REFRIGERATION 
MACHINERY 


4.1 General 


The location of ammonia refrigeration machinery 
shall comply with this clause. Ammonia refrigeration 
machinery located in a machinery room complying with 
6 or located outdoors in accordance with 4.2.2 shall be 
permitted in conjunction with a secondary coolant that 
serves any occupancy in accordance with 5.2.5. 


4.2 Permissible Equipment Locations 


Ammonia refrigeration machinery shall be located in 
a machinery room complying with 6 unless otherwise 
permitted by the standard. 


4.2.1 Listed Equipment 


Listed equipment containing not more than 3 kg of 
ammonia and installed in accordance with the listing 
and the manufacturer’s instructions shall be permitted 
in any occupancy area without a machinery room. 


4.2.2 Outdoor Installations 


Ammonia refrigeration machinery shall be permitted 
to be installed outdoors. Ammonia refrigeration 
machinery, other than piping, installed outdoors shall 
be located not less than 6.5 m from building openings, 
except for openings to a machinery room or openings to 
an industrial occupancy complying with 7.2. 


4.2.3 Industrial Occupancies 


The following ammonia refrigeration machinery shall 
be permitted to be installed outside of a machinery 
room in industrial occupancies complying with 7: 


a) Evaporators used for 
dehumidification; 


refrigeration ог 


b) Low-probability pumps; 
c) Condensers; 


d) Valves, including but not limited to control and 
pressure-relief valves, and connecting piping, any of 
which are associated with items a), b), c), and d); and 


e) An ammonia refrigeration system or portions 
thereof with a total connected compressor drive 
power not exceeding 74.6 kW. 


4.2.4 Public Assembly, Commercial and Large Mercantile 
Occupancies 


Where approved, ammonia refrigeration machinery shall 
be permitted outside of a machinery room for applications 
other than human comfort ina public assembly occupancy, 
commercial occupancy or large mercantile occupancy. 


This standard has been provided by BIS and ПАК. It shall not be copied or distributed by 
other means to other parties without the written permission of ПАК. 


IS 17773 : 2022 


The quantity of ammonia shall be limited such that a 
complete discharge from any independent refrigerant 
circuit will not result in an ammonia concentration 
exceeding 300 ppm (IDLH) in any room or area where 
equipment containing ammonia is located. 


5 GENERAL 
REQUIREMENTS 


SYSTEM DESIGN 


This clause applies to general design requirements for 
closed-circuit mechanical refrigeration system. 


5.1 General Design Requirements 


5.11 Refrigerant-Grade 
Specifications 


Anhydrous Ammonia 


Refrigeration grade anhydrous ammonia that meets 
or exceeds the minimum requirements of IS 662 shall 
be used for the initial charge and subsequent top-up 
(fill the system to the operating intended inventory) of all 
ammonia refrigerating systems. 


5.1.1.1 A grade specifying less than 99.95 percent 
ammonia shall not be used. 
5.1.1.2 Purity requirements are shown in the Table 1. 
Table 1 Purity Requirements 
(Clause 5.1.1.2) 


SI No. Characteristic Purity 
Requirements 
(1) Q) (3) 
1) Ammonia content 99.95 percent, Min 
ii) Non-basic gas in vapour phase 25 ppm, Max 
ii) ^ Non-basic gas in liquid phase 10 ppm, Max 
iv) Water 33 ppm, Max 
v) Oil (as soluble in petroleum ether) 2 ppm, Max 
vi) Salt (calculated as NaCl) None 
vii) Pyridine, hydrogen sulphide, None 


Naphthalene 


5.1.1.3 See Annex К for additional information 
regarding the characteristics and properties of ammonia. 


5.1.1.4 See Annex D for information regarding stress 
corrosion cracking with anhydrous ammonia. 


5.20 Volume Calculation for 
Concentration of an Ammonia Release 


Determining 


For the purpose of applying 4.2.4 the volume used 
to calculate the potential ammonia concentration in 
the event of a release shall comply with this clause. 
The volume used to calculate the potential ammonia 
concentration shall be the gross volume of a room or 
space into which the ammonia is expected to be relesed. 


The following equation can be used to demonstrate 
that the ammonia concentrations would never exceed 
40 000 ppm: 


10 


C = С х (vapour specific volume) х (100 %)/V 


where 


С = Volumetric concentration 
of ammonia in %; 

G = Amount of ammonia 
released, kg; 

V = Room volume, m?; and 

Vapour specific = Vapour specific volume 

volume for on hydrous ammonia, 


m*/kg. 


5.2.1 Wall Opening 


Where spaces adjacent to those containing refrigeration 
systems, equipment or portions thereof are connected by 
permanent wall openings, the volume of such adjacent 
spaces shall not contribute to the calculated volume 
used for ammonia release concentration calculations 
unless, based on the size and elevation of permanent 
wall openings or a mechanical ventilation system, 
the designer determines that migration and dilution 
or a release over the combined spaces will occur. The 
volume shall be the combined space, provided that the 
openings or mechanical ventilation are clearly identified 
as the basis for the design analysis. 


5.2.2 Space above Suspended Ceilings 


The space above a suspended ceiling shall not be included 
in the volume calculation unless the space above the 
ceiling functions as a part of the air distribution system. 


5.2.3 Interconnected Floor Levels and Mezzanines 


Where a refrigeration system, or portion thereof, is 
located in a room or space containing multiple floor 
levels connected through an open atrium or where there 
is a mezzanine open to a room or space, the combined 
volume of interconnected floors and mezzanines is 
permitted in the volume calculation. 


5.2.4 Mechanical Ventilation Considerations 


Where a refrigeration system, or portion thereof, is 
located in an area served by a mechanical ventilation 
system which also serves additional spaces, within an air 
handler, or in an air distribution duct system, the volume 
of the rooms or spaces connected by the ventilation or 
duct system, including the volume of the connected 
supply and return air ducts exterior to the room and any 
connecting plenum, shall be used. 


NOTE — The following exception shall be noted: 


The smaller of the volumes on either side of a damper shall 
be used where portions of the ventilation or duct system are 
subject to being isolated by dampers, other than: 


а) Fire dampers; 
b) Smoke dampers; 
c) Combination fire and smoke dampers; or 


d) Dampers that continuously maintain not less than 
10 percent airflow. 


This standard has been provided by BIS and IIAR. It shall not be copied or distributed by 
other means to other parties without the written permission of IIAR. 


5.2.5 Use of Ammonia Refrigeration with Secondary 
Coolants 


Ammonia refrigeration machinery located in a 
machinery room complying with 6 or outdoors in 
accordance with 4.2.2, shall be permitted to be used 
in conjunction with a secondary coolant that serves 
any occupancy, provided that the system is one of the 
following types and that use the secondary coolant: 


a) Indirect closed system; and 
b) Double-indirect open-spray system. 


5.2.6 Vacuum 


Refrigeration equipment shall be designed for a vacuum 
of 98 kPa (737 mm of mercury). 


5.2.7 Minimum Design Pressure 


The minimum ammonia design pressures stipulated 
for various types of equipments are listed in Table 2. 
However, the maximum allowable pressure shall be 
determined by taking into account the following factors: 


a) 


The maximum ambient temperature; 

The possible presence of non-condensable gases; 
The setting of any pressure relief device; 

The method of defrosting; 

The application (for example, cooling or heating 
application); 

Solar radiation (for example, impact on receiver 
exposed to direct solar radiation); and 


g) Fouling. 


Note that the maximum working pressure of particular 
systems may require higher design pressures and the 
strength and leak test pressure will be accordingly 
higher. 


The design pressure shall not be less than the pressure 
arising under all operating, shipping, and standby 
conditions. 


When selecting the maximum allowable working 
pressure (MAWP) and the minimum/maximum design 
metal temperature (MDMT), suitable allowance shall 
be provided for setting pressure-limiting devices to 
avoid nuisance shutdowns and loss of refrigerant at 
maximum operating conditions. 


The pressure data in Table 2 shall not be used in lieu 
of the stipulated minimum design pressures for the 
various types of equipment specified in the Equipment 
sections of this standard. 


5.2.8 System Design Temperature 


5.2.8.1 All components of the closed-circuit ammonia 
refrigerating system shall be designed to meet the 
requirements of the minimum and maximum system 
design temperatures. 


11 


IS 17773 : 2022 


For details refer to ISO 13971. 


The following exceptions and note pertain to the 
minimum design pressure list of equipment: 


a) Low side system components designed for 
1 034 kPa and high side components designed 
for | 720 kPa are acceptable if they are suitably 
protected with relief valves; 

b) Minimum low side design pressure for 

reciprocating compressors shall be 1720 kPa 

gauge (17.2 bar gauge); 

c) Minimum high-side design pressure shall be the 

greater of: 


1) 1 720 kPa gauge (17.2 bar gauge) where hot 
gas defrost is utilized or hot gas pressure may 
be applied to the evaporator; 

2) The high side hot gas source design pressure 

where hot gas defrosts is utilized or hot gas 

pressure may be applied to the evaporator; 
and 

3) The design saturation pressure corresponding 

to the highest expected refrigerant evaporating 

temperature. 

d) When ammonia liquid or oil is to be transferred 

from pressure vessels by pressurized ammonia 

gas, the pressure vessel design pressure shall 
accommodate the maximum possible transfer 
pressure and take into account the lowest 


possible coincident metal temperature; 


Application design pressure which exceeds these 
minima shall prevail; 


Valves are permitted within the design 
pressure-temperature envelope. For temperature 
please refer ISO 13971; 


For controls designed specifically for and 
usable for low side use exclusively, minimum 
design pressure shall be 1720 kPa gauge 
(17.2 bar gauge). Obtain the MAWP from the 
controls manufacturer and their final testing 
requirements under applicable code; 


g) 


h) Other types and styles of evaporators may 
be utilized within a closed-circuit ammonia 
mechanical refrigeration system. When types 
and styles of evaporators which are not listed 
are utilized, consult the equipment manufacturer 
to determine the minimum design pressure 
rating. 

NOTE — When high pressure/high temperature heating 
applications (that is, heat recovery/heat pumps) using 
ammonia within a closed-circuit ammonia mechanical 
refrigeration system which are not listed above are to be 
used, consult with the equipment manufacturer to determine 
the minimum design pressure rating. 


This standard has been provided by BIS and IIAR. It shall not be copied or distributed by 
other means to other parties without the written permission of IIAR. 


IS 17773 : 2022 


Table 2 Minimum Design Pressure 
(Clause 5.2.7) 


SI No. Types of Equipment Minimum Design Pressure 
(bar gauge), kPa (g) 
Rounded off 
(1) Q) (3) (4) 
i) Compressors: High-stage with water-cooled or evaporative condensing 21 2 070 
ii) High-stage with air-cooled condensing 27 2 760 
iii) Booster and reciprocating 21 2070 
iv) Air-cooled condensers and air-cooled desuperheater 27 2 760 
у) Evaporative condensers 21 2 070 
vi) Atmospheric/natural draft condenser 21 2 070 
уп) Shell-and-tube condensers and double-pipe condensers 21 2070 
уш) Plate heat exchanger condensers 21 2 070 
ix) Forced air evaporator coils 17 1 720 
x) Shell-and-tube evaporators (refrigerant in shell) 17 1 720 
x1) Shell-and-tube evaporators (refrigerant in tubes) 17 1 720 
xii) Plate heat exchanger evaporators 17 1 720 
хш) Water/brine immersed evaporator coils (refrigerant in tubes) for example, 17 1 720 
block ice plant coils, Ice bank tank coils 
xiv) Natural draft evaporator coil pressure vessels: 17 1 720 
xv) High side service utilizing water-cooled or evaporative condensing 21 2 070 
xvi) High side service utilizing air-cooled condensing 27 2 760 
хуп) Low side service 17 1 720 
xvii) Refrigerant pumps-refrigerant pressure containment envelope: 21 2 070 
хїх) High side service utilizing water-cooled or evaporative condensing 27 2 760 
хх) High side service utilizing air-cooled condensing low side service 17 1 720 
хх1) Refrigerant valves at fluid and operating temperatures of —30?C to + 116°C 21 2 070 
xxii) Controls 21 2 070 
xxii) Receiver: High pressure receiver for example, storage receiver, oil 21 2070 
separator, oil pot, priority vessels, 
xxiv) Intermediate pressure receiver: for example, intermediate cooler 17 1 720 
(open/closed), economizer 
xxv) Low pressure receiver : for example, recirculator/pump circulation vessel, 17 1 720 
surge drum, accumulator, knockout drum, slop pots 
xxvi) Piping, tubing, fitting 
High side 21 2 070 
Low side 17 1 720 
5.3 Materials 5.3.1.3 АП refrigeration system components shall be 


5.3.1 General 


5.3.1.1 All materials used in the construction of the 
equipment as described from 6 to 12 shall be suitable 
for ammonia refrigerant at the working temperature 
and pressure to which component shall be subjected. 


5.3.1.2 No materials shall be used that will deteriorate 
because of the presence of ammonia refrigerant, 
lubricating oil, or a combination of both or any normal 
contaminant such as air or water. 


12 


installed in locations to mitigate from external damage 
and include guarding or barricading as necessary. 


5.3.1.4 All moving or rotating components shall have 
appropriate guarding. 


5.3.1.5 Refrigerant shall be stored only in approved 
designed cylinders or vessels. 


5.3.1.6 Used equipment to be installed in a new 
design/project shall meet the minimum safety 
requirements of this standard. 


This standard has been provided by BIS and IIAR. It shall not be copied or distributed by 
other means to other parties without the written permission of IIAR. 


5.3.2 Metallic Materials 


Cast iron and malleable iron shall only be used when 
suitable for the particular application in accordance 
with the requirements of IS 16678 (Part 2)/ISO 5149-2. 
Cast iron, malleable iron, nodular iron, steel, cast steel, 
and alloy steel may be used as specified in IS 16678 
(Part 2)/ISO 5149-2, ISO 5922 for malleable cast iron, 
ISO 3755 for cast steel, and ISO 14737 for carbon and 
alloy steels. 


5.3.2.1 Zinc, copper, and copper alloys shall not be 
used in contact with or for containment of ammonia. 
Copper-containing anti-seize and/or lubricating 
compounds shall not be used in contact with ammonia 
piping. Copper as a component of brass alloys may be 


a) The requirement of equipment vessel is as follows: 


IS 17773 : 2022 


used for bearings or other non-refrigerant-containment 
uses. 


5.3.2.2 Other metallic materials, such as aluminum, 
aluminum alloys, lead, tin, and lead-tin alloys may be 
used if they conform to 5.3.1. Where tin and tin-lead 
alloys are used, the alloy composition shall be suitable 
for the temperatures of application. 


5.3.3 Non-metallic Materials 
5.3.3.1 Non-metallic materials may be used if they 
conform to 5.3.1. 


Following is the ready reference for the materials to be 
used for various items used in closed-circuit ammonia 
systems: 


SI No. Service Material Specification 

(1) Q) (3) (4) 

i) HP receiver, 
oil separator, Steel plates IS 2002 Grade 2/IS 2041 Grade R260 
LP accumulator, 
Oil rectifiers, 
Oil collection vessels, and 
Tanks, (up to —20°C application) 

ii) LP accumulator, 
oil vessels, etc. for below —20°C application Steel plates IS 2041 Grade R260 

b) Valves 
Manually operated valves shall be of following types: 
SI No. Service Type Material Specification 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
1) Refrigerant All types Steel or Stainless steel ISO 21922 
(for example isolating valves, 
check valves, control valves) 

ii) Cooling water: Butterfly valve Cast iron, Cast steel 
over 75 mm 50 mm and Ball valve IS 778 
below IS 1703 

iii) Water supply, bleeds, and Ball valve, Butterfly valve Cast steel 
drain Swing check IS 778 
Chilled water— supply and IS 778 
return lines 

iv) Defrost water — supply Ball valve Cast steel 
and return IS 778 


NOTE — All water line valves above 50 mm shall be of flanged construction. All water valves of 50 mm and below shall be ball 
valves with cast steel body, SS working parts, 3 section type, and weldable end type. 


13 


This standard has been provided by BIS and ПАК. It shall not be copied or distributed by 
other means to other parties without the written permission of ПАК. 


IS 17773 : 2022 


c) Piping materials guideline 


SI No. Service Material Specification 

(1) (2) (3) (4) 

1) Refrigerant, including oil, purger, vent, Steel pipe (seamless) Heavy duty high quality carbon 
line (above —20°C) steel pipe as per Table 5 

ii) Refrigerant piping (for —20?C and Steel pipe (seamless) = 
below) 

iii) | Evaporative condenser tube Steel pipes or S.S.304 L E 

iv) Water circulating pipelines/chilled water Galvanized steel (ERW) IS 1239 (Part 1) or IS 1239 
lines (up to 150 NB ) medium duty class M (Part 2) [heavy duty/class H] 

v) Water circulating pipelines/chilled water Galvanized steel (ERW) IS 3589 — ERW, heavy duty/ 
lines (up to 200 NB and higher) medium duty class M class H 

vi) Маке up water supply, bleeds, drains, Galvanized steel (ERW) IS 1239 (Part 1) or IS 1239 


defrosting water, etc 


5.3.4 Heat Exchanger Tube Specifications 


Tubes shall be made by automatic welding process 
or seamless process or shall be either hot finished or 
cold drawn. For welded tubes, the tubes shall be made 
from flat-rolled steel by an automatic welding process 
with no addition of filler metal. Seamless tubes may be 
supplied either in hot finished or cold drawn condition 
at the manufacturer’s option, unless otherwise specified 
by the purchaser. Cold drawn tubes shall be suitably 
heat-treated. It shall be as per IS 11714 (Part 1 to 5) 
with following exception: 


The chemical composition of tube shall be 
C 0.06-0.18, S < 0.035, Mn 0.27-0.63, Si < 0.25, 
P x 0.035. It shall have a yield strength (MPa) of => 180, 
the tensile strength (MPa) of > 325 and has elongation 
percentage of > 35. 


5.3.5 Test for Non-Combustibility 
Material can be tested for combustibility as given below; 


а) A fire test method whereby a 1-1/2 by 1-1/2 by 
2 in high test specimen is inserted within a 3 inch 
diameter refractory tube preheated to 750°C. The 
specimen is left in the chamber for a maximum 
of 30 min. The test material is to be considered 
as non-combustible when at least three of the four 
test specimens conform to the following criteria: 

b) When the weight loss of the specimen is 

50 percent or less, the recorded temperature of the 

surface and interior thermocouples shall not at any 

time during the test rise more than 30°C above the 
furnace temperature at the beginning of the test 
and there shall be no flaming from the specimen 

after the first 30 s. 


When the weight loss of the specimen exceeds 
50 percent, the recorded temperature of the surface 
and interior thermocouples shall not at any time 
during the test rise above the furnace temperature 
at the beginning of the test and there shall be no 
flaming from the specimen. 


с) 


medium duty class М 


14 


(Part 2) or IS 3589, [medium 
duty/class M] 


5.4 Purging 


Means shall be provided to separate, collect, and 
remove air and other non-condensable gases from 
the refrigeration system. Non-condensable gases may 
be purged to atmosphere through water or vented to 
atmosphere. For detail refer 15.4.1. 


5.5 Oil Removal 


Provisions in design shall be made for removing oil 
from piping and equipment where oil is likely to collect 
the following: 


a) Arigid-piped oil return or transfer system; 


b) A vessel equipment with a shut-off valve in series 
with a self-closing shut-off valve; and 


c) A valve and piping assembly at the draining 
point where oil is removed from the system. 
At a minimum, a shut-off valve in series with a 
self-closing shut-off valve is required. 


5.5.1 Temporary Piping 


Where draining of oil requires the use of temporarily 
attached rigid piping, such piping shall be supported 
and shall have tight connections. 


5.5.2 Detailed operating procedures suitable for each drain 
point shall be provided for oil draining operations. Safety 
and personal protective equipment shall be specified. 


5.5.3 Oil draining shall be conducted only by a trained 
technician(s). The oil draining process shall not be left 
unattended by the trained technician(s) while in progress. 


NOTE — Permanently piped automatic oil drain return 
systems shall be taken as an exception. 


5.6 Insulation/Supports 


5.6.1 Equipment with cold surfaces, not intended for 
heat exchange, shall be properly insulated to prevent 
or control condensation. See 5.9 condensation control 
regarding piping and fittings. 


This standard has been provided by BIS and ПАК. It shall not be copied or distributed by 
other means to other parties without the written permission of ПАК. 


NOTE — Valve groups or equipment with cold surfaces аге 
permitted to be left un-insulated to accommodate access for 
service, provided the vapor retarder is sealed to the piping or 
equipment. 


5.6.2 Hot discharge lines less than 2.3 m high and 
those near passageways, aisles, or walkover stairs and 
landings (that is, on roofs) shall be suitably guarded or 
insulated to reduce surface temperatures to tolerable 
limits or be unreachable by design from personnel 
using the path of travel. 


5.7 Foundations, Piping, Tubing, and Equipment 
Supports 


5.7.1 Supports and foundations shall be adequate to 
prevent excessive vibration and movement of the 
piping, tubing, and equipment. 


5.7.2 Supports shall meet or exceed the manufacturer’s 
recommendations. 


5.7.3 Supports and anchorage for refrigeration 
equipment shall be designed in accordance with SP 7. 


IS 17773 : 2022 


5.7.4 Structural supports shall be non-combustible. 
Base supports (for example, roof “sleepers”, shims) 
for piping or equipment may be pressure treated 
lumber. 


Please refer IS 8910/ISO 404. 


Specifications — Fe 67.47-74.85 percent, Cr 17-19 
percent, Ni 8-10 percent, S 0.15-0.35 percent, P 0.06 
percent, Mn 0-2 percent, C 0-0.12 percent. 


Density 7.7kg/dm*, specific heat at 20°C 460 J/kg.K. 
5.7.5 Recommended Material 


a) Liquid, vapour, discharge and hot gas lines carbon 
steel pipe must be as per Table 3; and 


b) All threaded pipe carbon steel will be as per 


Table 4. Threaded joints are allowed only up to 
40 NB. 


NOTE — Metal temperatures between —29°C and —101°C 
provided the maximum circumferential or longitudinal tensile 
stress resulting from coincident pressure, thermal contraction 
or bending between supports does not exceed 35 percent of 
allowable stress for the material mentioned above. 


Table 3 Seamless Carbon Steel Pipe Data for Weld Joints 
(Clauses 5.7.5 and H-1) 


SI No. Pipe Nominal Size in Wall Thickness in Pipe ID in Pipe OD in Pipe Weight in 
mm mm mm mm kg/m 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
i) 15 3.73 13.84 21.30 1.620 
ii) 20 3.91 18.88 26.70 2.200 
iii) 25 4.55 24.3 33.40 3.240 
iv) 32 4.85 32.5 42.20 4.470 
v) 40 5.08 38.14 48.30 5.410 
vi) 50 3.91 52.48 60.30 5.440 
vii) 65 5.16 62.68 73.00 8.630 
viii) 80 5.49 71.92 88.90 11.290 
ix) 100 6.02 102.26 114.30 16.080 
x) 125 6.55 128.2 141.30 21.770 
xi) 150 TAL 154.08 168.30 28.260 
xii) 200 8.18 202.74 219.10 42.550 
xiii) 250 9.27 254.46 273.00 60.290 
xiv) 300 10.31 303.18 323.80 79.710 
xv) 350 11.13 333.34 355.60 94.550 
Table 4 Seamless Carbon Steel Pipe Data for Threaded Joints 
(Clauses 5.7.5, 13, 13.1, 13.2.2 and H-1) 
SI No. Pipe Nominal Size in Wall Thickness in Pipe ID in Pipe OD in Pipe Weight in 

mm mm mm mm kg/m 
(1) 0) (3) (4) (5) (6) 

1) 15 3.73 13.8 21:3 1.62 

ii) 20 3.91 18.9 26.7 2.2 

iii) 25 4.55 24.3 33.4 3.24 

iv) 32 4.85 32:5 42.2 447 

у) 40 5.08 38.1 48.3 5.41 

15 


This standard has been provided by BIS and ПАК. It shall not be copied or distributed by 
other means to other parties without the written permission of ПАК. 


IS 17773 : 2022 


Table 5 Seamless Stainless Steel Pipe Data for Weld Joints 
(Clauses 5.3.3.1, 13.2.1, 13.5.2.5 and H-1) 


SI No. Pipe Nominal Size in Wall thickness in Pipe ID in Pipe OD in Pipe Weight in 
mm mm mm mm kg/m 
(1) 0) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
1) 15 2.770 15.76 21:3 1.270 
ii) 20 2.870 20.96 26.7 1.680 
iii) 25 3.380 26.64 33.4 2.500 
iv) 32 3.560 35.08 42.2 3.380 
у) 40 3.680 40.94 48.3 4.050 
vi) 50 2.770 54.76 60.3 3.930 
vil) 65 3.050 66.9 73.0 5.260 
viii) 80 3.050 82.8 88.9 6.450 
ix) 100 3.050 108.2 114.3 8.360 
x) 125 3.400 134.5 141.3 11.570 
xi) 150 3.400 161.5 168.3 13.840 
xii) 200 3.760 211.58 219.1 19.960 
xiii) 250 4.190 264.72 273.1 27.780 
xiv) 300 4.570 314.76 323.9 36.000 
xv) 350 4.780 346.04 355.6 41.300 
Table 6 Seamless Stainless Steel Pipe Data for Threaded Joints 
(Clause H-1) 
SI No. Pipe Nominal Size in Wall Thickness in Pipe ID Pipe OD Pipe Weight 
mm mm mm mm kg/m 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
i) 15 3.75 13.8 21.3 1.62 
ii) 20 3.91 18.9 26.7 2.2 
iii) 25 4.55 24.3 33.4 3.24 
iv) 32 4.85 32.5 42.2 4.47 
v) 40 5.08 38.1 48.3 5.41 


Table 7 Maximum Allowable Hanger Rod Spacing 
(Clause 5.7.5 and 13.2.1) 


16 


SI No. NPS Diameter Maximum Span Minimum Rod Diameter 

mm m mm 

(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) 25.40 2.13 9.53 
ii) 31.75 2.74 9.53 
iii) 50.80 3.05 9.53 
iv) 63.50 3.35 12.70 
v) 76.20 3.66 12.70 
vi) 101.60 4.27 15.88 
vii) 127.00 4.88 15.88 
viii) 152.40 5.18 19.05 
ix) 203.20 5.79 22.23 
х) 254.00 6.71 22:23 
xi) 304.80 7.01 2223 
xii) 355.60 7.62 25.40 
xiii) 406.40 8.23 25.40 
xiv) 457.20 8.54 31:75 
xv) 508.00 9.15 31.75 


This standard has been provided by BIS and ПАК. It shall not be copied or distributed by 


other means to other parties without the written permission of IIAR. 


5.7.6 Seismic restraints shall be provided as per 4.3.5 of 
Part 8, Section 3 of SP 7. 


5.8 Service Provision 


5.8.1 All serviceable components of a closed-circuit 
ammonia refrigerating system shall be provided with 
safe access, which can be permanent or portable, for 
maintenance and inspection. An unobstructed readily 
accessible opening and passageway not less than 
0. 914 m in width and 2.21 m in height shall be provided 
for equipment and components of the system requiring 
routine maintenance. 


The following exceptions shall be noted: 


a) Refrigerant evaporators that are suspended 
overhead and require routine maintenance shall be 
permitted to use portable means of access; and 


b 


ma 


Air filters, brine control or stop valves, fan motors 
or drives, and remotely de-energized electrical 
connections shall be permitted to be provided access 
by an unobstructed space not less than 762 mm in 
depth, width, and height. Where an access opening 
is immediately adjacent to these items and the 
equipment is capable of being serviced, repaired, 
and replaced from this opening, the dimensions 
shall be permitted to be reduced to 559 mm by 
762 mm provided the largest piece of equipment 
can be removed through the opening. 


5.8.2 Access to refrigerating system connections located 
outdoors shall be limited to authorized personnel only. 


5.8.3 Design provisions for maintenance and functional 
testing of controls shall be provided. 


5.8.4 When a pressure gauge is permanently installed 
on the high side of the refrigeration system, its dial 
shall be graduated to be at least 1.2 times (120 percent) 
the design pressure. 


5.9 Condensation Control 


5.9.1 Piping and fittings that convey brine, refrigerant, 
or coolants that during normal operation could reach 
a surface temperature below the dew point of the 
surrounding air and that are located in spaces or areas 
where condensation could cause a hazard to the building 
occupants or damage to the structure or electrical or 
other equipment shall be properly insulated (see 5.5) 
or treated to mitigate such an occurrence. 


Every refrigerant-containing component shall be 
factory tested and proven tight by the manufacturer at 
not less than the design pressure for which it is rated. 


5.9.2 Ultimate Strength Requirements 


5.9.2.1 Every component which are subject to pressure 
during operation of close circuit ammonia refrigeration 
system, such as valves, pumps, and controls mechanism 
shall be listed individually. They shall be designed 


17 


IS 17773 : 2022 


constructed and assembled to have an ultimate strength 
sufficient to withstand three times the design pressure 
for which it is rated. This shall however exclude the 
following: 


Compressors, pressure vessels (including piping 
interconnecting evaporator), condensers and heating 
coils with refrigerant as working fluids. 


5.9.2.2 Components exempted from the requirement 
of 5.9.2.1 shall comply with additional requirements 
listed in this standard and IS 2002 or IS 2041 where 
applicable. 


5.9.2.3 Secondary coolant sides of components other 
than those specified in IS 2002 or IS 2041, shall be 
designed, constructed and assembled to have ultimate 
strength sufficient to withstand 1 720 kPa gauge or 
two times the design pressure for which they are rated, 
whichever is greater. 


5.10 Signage and Nameplates 
5.10.1 Machinery Room Signage 


5.10.1.1 See 5.10.5 pipe markings and 5.10.6 
equipment labels. 


5.10.1.2 See Annex F (informative), machine room 
signs. 


5.10.1.3 See 6.13.4 and 6.15 for alarm signage. 


5.10.2 Emergency Shutdown Signage 


It shall be the duty of the person in charge of the 
premises on which the closed-circuit ammonia 
refrigerating system is installed to provide a schematic 
drawing or panel giving directions for the emergency 
shutdown of the system at a location that is convenient 
to access by the trained refrigeration system staff and 
trained emergency responder personnel familiar with 
the system. 


When a refrigerating machinery room is used, the 
emergency procedures shall be posted outside and 
immediately adjacent to or on each principal door. 


Schematic drawing(s) or signage shall include the 
following: 


а) Instructions (details/steps) for shutting down the 
system in case of emergency; 


b) The name and contact telephone numbers of 
the refrigeration operating, maintenance and 
management staff, emergency responders, and 
safety personnel; 


с) The names and telephone numbers of all corporate, 
local, state, and central agencies to be contacted as 
required in the event of a reportable incident; 

d) Type and quantity ofrefrigerant(s) in the system(s); 
and 


е) Field test pressures applied. 


This standard has been provided by BIS and IIAR. It shall not be copied or distributed by 
other means to other parties without the written permission of IIAR. 


IS 17773 : 2022 


5.10.3 Wind Indicator 


5.10.3.1 When a wind indicator (sock or pennant) is 
installed, it shall be suitable for the environment and 
mounted where itis readily visible for use as incorporated 
into the facility emergency action and response plan 
shall comply with schedule 3 of Chemical Accidents 
(Emergency Planning, Preparedness and Response) 
Rules, 1996 issued by Ministry of Environment, Forest 
and Climate Change. 


5.10.4 Valve Tagging 


Valves required for system emergency shutdown 
procedure(s) shall be clearly identified on a readily 
available diagram and shall be updated when changes 
are made to the system. These valves shall also be 
uniquely identified (example, tags, signs, etc) on the 
actual system. 


5.10.5 Pipe Marking 


All piping mains, headers and branches shall be 
identified as to the physical state of the refrigerant 
(vapour, liquid, or both), the relative pressure level of 
the refrigerant, and the direction of flow. 


5.10.6 Equipment Labels 


5.10.6.1 The refrigeration system equipment shall be 
provided with permanent labels. 


5.10.6.2 Compressors, compressor units, condensers, 
receivers, — thermosyphon vessels,  recirculator, 
intercoolers, accumulators, transfer vessels, heat 
exchangers, and any other similar equipment having 
an internal volume of more than three cubic feet 
(0.085 cubic meters) containing the refrigerant shall 
each be equipped with a permanent label that sets forth 
the type of refrigerant in such, the type of equipment, 
and its title that matches with the refrigeration 
management plan drawings. 


5.10.7 Nameplates 


Each component shall have a nameplate with minimum 
data that describes or defines the manufacturer's 
information and its design limits/purpose. See section 
3 equipment and components. 


5.10.8 Duplicate Nameplates 


5.10.8.1 Where duplicate nameplates are required for 
pressure vessels and heat exchangers constructed as per 
the design given in this clause, the nameplate should be 
as per 5.10.8.5.1. 


5.10.8.2 A duplicate nameplate, if used, shall be 
installed on the skirt, supports, jacket, or other 
permanent attachment to a vessel. 


18 


5.10.8.3 Duplicate nameplates shall be permanently 
marked “DUPLICATE.” 


5.10.8.4 Duplicate nameplates shall be obtained 
only from the original equipment manufacturer or its 
assignee. 


5.10.8.5 The installer shall certify to the manufacturer 
that the duplicate nameplate has been applied to the 
proper vessel, as per the following details: 

5.10.8.5.1 Nameplate details 


Each pressure vessel shall have stamped upon its 
front plate in a conspicuous position the following 
particulars: 


a) Manufacturer’s name; 

b) Manufacturer’s serial number; 

c) Year of manufacture; 

d) Maximum WP at Temperature---- Deg C; 

e) Indian Standard Number (IS No.); 

f) Pneumatic test pressure; 

g) Date of test; and 

h) Inspection authorities official stamp (if applicable). 


The figures and letters of stamping shall be at least 8 mm 
high when stamped directly on vessel or 4 mm high 
when stamped on a permanently attached nameplate. 


The figures and letters shall be legible and stamped 
fully into the plate. Deep stamping shall be avoided 
when stamped directly on vessel. 


Stamping of vessel may be made directly on the 
vessel or may be stamped on a permanently attached 
nameplate so fixed as not to be covered by lagging or 
insulation. 


Permanently attached nameplates shall be used on all 
vessels of steel plate less than 7 mm thick. 


The installer shall provide a copy of the certification to 
the owner, who shall retain the copy for the certificate. 


NOTE — Annex C (Informative) provides further information 
on duplicate nameplates. 


5.10.9 Equipment Enclosures 


5.10.9.1 Enclosures shall be designed to allow the 
equipment or components to operate effectively and 
safely in the location in which they are to be installed. 


5.10.9.2 Enclosures shall allow for proper service 
and maintenance of the equipment/components on 
site by access panels and/or doors, or by removing 
the enclosure along with contents from the system for 
remote service. 


5.10.9.3 Enclosures shall provide protection from 
inadvertent physical and/or environmental damage and 
meet the cleanliness requirements of the area. 


This standard has been provided by BIS and IIAR. It shall not be copied or distributed by 
other means to other parties without the written permission of IIAR. 


5.11 Pressure Vessel 
For details refer 12 of Section 3. 


6 MACHINE ROOMS 


This clause provides requirements for the design of 
machinery rooms housing stationary closed-circuit 
ammonia refrigeration systems or system components. 


6.1 Room Layout 


6.1.1 The refrigeration machinery room can contain 
much of the fixed equipment for a refrigerated facility. 
Equipment installed in machinery rooms shall be 
located in such a manner as to allow easy access from 
any part of the room in the event of an emergency. 


Provide adequate clearances for maintenance operations 
and inspections taking equipment manufacturer’s 
instructions into account. 


6.1.2 See service provisions 5.8 for safe access opening 
and passageway clearance requirements for serviceable 
equipment and components. 


6.2 Construction 


6.2.1 Machine rooms shall be constructed in accordance 
with the National Building Code in force and the 
requirements of this clause (see 4.3.5 and 12.4.1.5 of 
Part 8/Section 3 of SP 7). 


6.2.2 The machinery room shall be separated from the 
remainder of the building by tight-fitting construction. 
See 6.10 for entrances and exits. 


6.2.3 Where piping or equipment is supported by the 
roof or ceiling structure, the structure shall be designed 
to support the expected static and dynamic, including 
seismic, loads. 


6.2.4 Fire prevention shall be part of the machinery 
room design considerations. 


6.2.4.1 The machinery room shall be separated from 
the remainder of the building by a one-hour (1 h) 
fire-resistance rated separation. 


6.2.5 Foundations and supports for compressor units 
and other equipment located within the machinery 
room shall be of non-combustible construction and 
capable of supporting loads imposed by such units. 
Manufacturer’s recommendations shall be considered. 
Supports and anchorage for refrigeration equipment 
and piping shall be designed in accordance with the 
National Building Code (see SP 7). 


6.2.6 A compressor or condenser supported from the 
ground shall rest on a concrete or other approved 
housekeeping pad base and/or shall be furnished with 
an approved support base for sitting directly on and 
anchoring to the foundation. 


19 


IS 17773 : 2022 


6.2.7 All machinery shall be mounted in such a 
manner as to prevent excessive vibration from being 
transmitted to the building structure or connected 
equipment that could cause damage. Isolation 
materials such as rubber are permitted between the 
foundation and equipment. 


6.2.8 There shall be no airflow to or from an occupied 
space through a machinery room unless the air is 
ducted and sealed in such a manner as to prevent 
any refrigerant leakage from entering the airstream. 
Access doors and panels in duct work and air-handling 
units shall be gasketed and tight fitting. 


6.2.9 The design shall consider and eliminate or reduce 
sources of abnormal sounds or vibrations of piping, 
fans, pumps, pressure actuated pumping systems and 
hydraulic pipe pressure surges/shocks. 


6.2.10 Additions to or renovation of existing machinery 
rooms may be impractical for a variety of reasons and 
should be done only with careful consideration and in- 
depth review. 


6.3 Accessibility 


6.3.1 Refrigerating systems shall be accessible to the 
fire department at all times as required by the fire code 
IS 3594 and Part IV of SP 7. 


6.3.2 See 5.8 service provisions for safe access 
opening and passageway clearance requirements for 
serviceable equipment and components. 


6.3.3 АП manually-operated valves inaccessible from 
floor level shall be operable from portable platforms, 
fixed platforms, ladders, or shall be chain- operated. 


6.3.4 Isolation valve(s) identified as being part ofa system 
emergency shutdown procedure(s) shall be readily 
accessible to be directly operable or chain-operated from 
a permanent work surface. These valves shall be clearly 
identified. See 5.10.4 valve tagging. 


6.3.5 Access to the refrigerating machinery room shall 
be restricted to authorized personnel. Doors shall be 
clearly marked and permanent signs shall be posted at 
each entrance to indicate this restriction. 


6.3.6 Access for emergency response vehicles shall be 
in accordance with all state and local codes. 


6.3.7 Consult applicable codes, standards апа 
regulations for the access requirements which shall be 
followed to access refrigerating machinery which are 
located on different structure levels. 


6.3.8 The following site considerations shall be 
considered during the design review where a 
refrigerated facility is to be constructed or expanded. 


This standard has been provided by BIS and IIAR. It shall not be copied or distributed by 
other means to other parties without the written permission of IIAR. 


IS 17773 : 2022 


6.3.8.1 Proximity to surface waters — Topography of 
the site shall prevent any possibility of an ammonia 
spill from reaching surface waters such as drain water, 
creeks, streams, rivers, lakes, or ponds per all state 
and central regulations. A site drainage plan shall be 
prepared for this purpose. 


6.3.8.2 Proximity to off-site and major traffic 
thoroughfares — Machinery rooms shall be located 
on the site with due consideration for proximity to 
off- site major traffic thoroughfares, nearby neighbors, 
and prevailing winds. Machinery room location 
considerations shall include safety, noise hazards and 
off-site effects. Refer to local and state codes for the 
requirements. 


6.3.8.3 Proximity to sensitive receptors — Machinery 
rooms shall be located to minimize the impact on nearby 
sensitive receptors, such as schools and nursing homes. 
Refer to local and state codes for any requirements. 


6.3.8.4 Arrangement of machinery room to overall 
facility — The machinery room location relative to the 
rest of the refrigerated facility is important. Following 
are lists of possible locations: 


6.3.8.4.1 Preferred locations 
a) Ground level; 


b) Separate building (or sharing a building with 
another utility system); 


c) Peninsular part of main building with three 
exposed walls and exposed roof, remote from 
heavily occupied areas; and 


d) Along exterior of main building having one or 
two exposed walls and exposed roof, remote from 
heavily occupied areas. 

6.3.8.4.2 Least desirable 


a) Inner areas of building with no exterior wall 
exposure; 


b) Adjacent to (horizontally or vertically) heavily 
occupied areas such as office and employee 
welfare facilities or areas; 


c) Basement of building; and 
d) Building floors above ground level. 


6.4 Combustible Materials 


6.4.1 Flammable 
Flammable material having flash point below 37.8°C 
(100°F) shall not be stored in machinery room. 


NOTE — This provision shall not apply to spare parts, tools 
and incidental materials necessary for the safe and proper 
operation and maintenance, of the refrigerating system. 


20 


6.5 Open Flames 


6.5.1 Fuel-burning appliances and equipment having 
open flames that use combustion air from the machinery 
room shall not be installed in a machinery room. 


6.5.2. Fuel-burning appliances and equipment with 
continuously operating surface temperatures in excess 
of 427?C shall not be installed in a machinery room. 


The following exceptions shall be noted: 


a) Fuel-burning appliances and equipment that do 
not operate in excess of 427?C are permitted in 
the same machinery room where combustion 
air is ducted from outside the machinery room 
and sealed in such a manner as to prevent any 
refrigerant leakage from entering the combustion 
chamber, or where a refrigerant detector 
automatically shuts off the combustion process in 
the event of refrigerant leakage; 


b) The use of matches, lighters, sulfur sticks, 
welding equipment and similar portable devices 
are permitted, other than during charging or 
discharging of oil or ammonia, where the 
machinery room meets the requirements of 6; and 


c) Machinery rooms where internal combustion 
engines are used as the prime mover for the 
compressors. 


6.6 Piping 


6.6.1 Machinery or piping shall not cause condensation 
or drips onto electrical equipment (see 5.9 condensation 
control). Where this is unavoidable, electrical 
equipment must be suitably protected. 


6.6.2 Piping and fittings shall be properly insulated, 
where applicable, and adequately placed to mitigate 
condensation hazards that could cause a hazard to 
personnel (for example, slips on a wet walking surface) 
or damage to the structure (for example, mold or 
mildew) or other equipment (see 5.9 condensation 
control). 


6.6.3 All pipes piercing the interior walls, ceiling or 
floor of the machinery room shall be tightly sealed to 
the walls, ceiling or floor through which they pass. 


6.6.4 All piping shall have appropriate pipe markers 
attached to indicate its use and the direction of flow. 
See pipe marking 5.10.5. 


6.6.5 There shall be no refrigerant cylinders with 
temporary or permanent connections to the system 
unless actual transfer of refrigerant is being conducted 
by a qualified individual(s). The transfer in progress 
shall not be left unattended. 


This standard has been provided by BIS and ПАК. It shall not be copied or distributed by 
other means to other parties without the written permission of ПАК. 


6.7 Eyewash/Shower 


6.7.1 An eyewash and body shower unit shall be located 
within each machinery room. 


NOTES 


1 Additional eyewash and body showers may be needed in a 
machinery room to ensure that no equipment which contains 
ammonia inside that machinery room is more than 10 s or 
16.8 m from at least one unit 


2 Consider installing an eyewash and body shower external to 
each machinery room and readily accessible via an exit. This 
eyewash and body shower located external to a machinery 
room would be used if the unit(s) located inside the machinery 
room could not be safely accessed in abnormal conditions 
(for example, if there was an ammonia release inside the 
machinery room). 


6.8 Electrical Safety 


6.8.1 Electrical equipment and wiring shall be installed 
in accordance with SP 30. 


6.8.2 A machinery room shall be classified as per 
the Indian Electricity Rules 1956 (Rev 2010-11, as a 
“Non-hazardous (unclassified) location," when the 
machinery room is provided with an independent 
mechanical ventilation system that meets the 
requirements of 6.14 ventilation. 


6.8.3 As per the /ndian Electricity Rules 1956 
(Rev 2010-11, where a mechanical ventilation system 
is not provided in accordance with 6.14, the room shall 
be classified as Class I, Group D, Division 2 location. 


6.8.4 Electrical 
documented. 


classification shall be clearly 


6.8.5 Electrical equipment in the machinery room shall 
be minimized to equipment directly associated with the 
refrigeration system. 


6.9 Drains 


6.9.1 Adequate floor drains shall be provided to 
properly dispose of all waste water. The accumulation 
of or the running of wastewater across the floor shall be 
avoided or be kept to a minimum. 


6.9.2 When required, a means shall be provided 
to prevent contamination (keep out unintended 
substances-oil, secondary coolants, etc of the drainage 
system. 


6.10 Entrances and Exits 


6.10.1 Machinery room doorway exits shall be 
adequate in number to ensure an unencumbered means 
for persons to escape in an emergency. 


6.10.2 Machinery room doors communicating with the 
building shall be self-closing, tight-fitting fire rated 
doors. 


21 


IS 17773 : 2022 


6.10.3 The machinery room shall have a door(s) that 
opens directly to the outside, or to a vestibule that 
leads directly to the outside. The door(s) shall be 
self-closing, tight-fitting. 


6.10.4 Exterior exits shall not be under any fire escape 
or any open stairway. 


6.10.5 Refrigerating systems shall be provided with 
approved informative signs, emergency signs, charts 
and labels. 


6.10.6 Each site shall have an appropriate evacuation 
plan on display. Contact information for persons 
responsible for emergency procedures shall be clearly 
shown on the plan. See 5.10.2 for emergency shutdown 
signage requirements. 


6.11 Lighting 


6.11.1 Machinery rooms shall be equipped with light 
fixtures to provide a minimum of 320 lumens/m? at 
the working level, 0.91 m above the floor or platform. 
See 7.1 for lighting requirements for equipment and 
components located outside. 


6.11.2 Control of the illumination source shall be 
provided at the access entrance(s). In lieu of manual 
controls, the use of occupancy sensors to control 
lighting or continuous illumination is permitted. 


6.12 Refrigeration Machinery Remote Controls 


6.12.1 Refrigeration System Emergency Shut-off 


A clearly identified switch with an approved 
tamper-resistant cover shall be located outside and 
adjacent to the designated principal machinery 
room door(s) which shall provide off-only control 
of refrigerant compressors, refrigerant pumps, and 
normally closed automatic refrigerant valves located 
in the machinery room. Additionally, unclassified 
electrical equipment shall automatically shut off 
whenever the refrigerant vapour concentration in the 
machinery room exceeds the vapour detector's upper 
detection limit or 25 percent ofthe Lower Flammability 
Limit (LFL) or [40 000 ppm], whichever is lower. 


6.13 Refrigerant Detection 


Each machinery room shall contain refrigerant detection 
that will activate an alarm and mechanical ventilation 
as described in this section. А trouble signal indicating 
fault in the power system for the detection shall be 
reported to a monitored location so that corrective 
action can be taken. 


6.13.1 Alarm 


6.13.1.1 A monitored location shall be notified when an 
ammonia leak is detected. 


This standard has been provided by BIS and IIAR. It shall not be copied or distributed by 
other means to other parties without the written permission of IIAR. 


IS 17773 : 2022 


6.13.1.2 Restrict access to the machinery room to 
authorized, trained personnel only. 


6.13.1.3 The leak detection sensors shall activate visual 
and audible alarms inside the machinery room and 
outside each entrance to the machinery room. 


6.13.1.4 An audible alarm shall provide a sound 
pressure level of at least 15 dBA above the ambient 
sound pressure level of the area in which it is installed. 


6.13.1.5 The meaning of each alarm shall be clearly 
marked by signage near the visual and audible alarms. 


6.13.2 Placement 


6.13.2.1 The leak detection sensors, or the inlet of 
sampling tubes that draw air to the leak detection 
sensors, shall be mounted in a position where refrigerant 
from a leak is most likely to concentrate. 


6.13.3 Detection Levels 


6.13.3.1 Detection of ammonia vapour concentrations 
below 25 ppm requires no alarm or detection device 
action. An authorized, trained personnel shall respond 
and address any indication (for example, odour) of 
ammonia at this level. The source must be identified 
and resolved or the appropriate repair implemented in 
a timely manner. 


6.13.3.2 Detection of ammonia vapour concentrations 
at or above 25 ppm shall activate a visual indicator(s) 
(for example, strobe or other distinct type) and an 
audible alarm in the area in which they are installed. 


6.13.3.2.1 The visual indicator and audible alarm 
can be automatically reset when the ammonia vapour 
concentration falls below 25 ppm. 


6.13.3.3 Detection of ammonia vapour concentrations 
at or above 150 ppm shall activate a visual indicator(s) 
and an audible alarm in the area in which they are 
installed and turn on the emergency ventilation 
system at the emergency ventilation rate. Ventilation 
fans activated at the 150 ppm detection level shall be 
latched in and shall require a manual reset within the 
machinery room. 
NOTE — Where operational containment is provided as 
a means to prevent ammonia vapour from escaping to the 
environment, the ventilation system can be shut off at a remote 
location, regardless of concentration level, and according to a 
pre-developed procedure for implementing operational 
containment. 


6.13.3.4 Detection of ammonia vapour concentrations 
that exceeds the detector's upper detection limit or 
40 000 ppm, whichever is lower, shall activate all visual 


22 


and audible indicators and automatically shut down 
normally closed automatic refrigerant valves, ammonia 
pumps, and compressors in un-classified locations. 


6.13.3.4.1 Emergency lighting and power to the 
emergency ventilation system, as well as other 
critical systems, shall remain powered (for example, 
independent circuit) to stay on during an emergency 
machinery room equipment shutdown. 
NOTE — Where operational containment is provided as 
a means to prevent ammonia vapour from escaping to the 
environment, the ventilation system can be shut off at a remote 
location, regardless of concentration level, and according to 
a pre-developed procedure for implementing an operational 
containment shutdown provided in accordance with 6.12.1. 


6.13.4 Signage 


The meaning of each alarm shall be clearly marked by 
signage near the visual and audible alarms. 


6.13.5 Testing 


6.13.5.1 The facility shall establish a time schedule 
for testing of the ammonia detectors and the alarm 
system. The manufacturer's recommendations shall be 
followed or modified based on documented experience. 


6.13.5.2 Where no recommendations are provided, 
these devices shall be functionally tested on an annual 
basis. 


6.14 Ventilation 


6.14.1 Ventilation for Occupants 

During occupied conditions, outdoor air shall be 
provided at a rate of not less than 0.002 5 m?/s per m? 
of machinery room area or 0.009 m/s per occupant, 
whichever is greater. 


6.14.2 General Exhaust 
Equipment 


and Air Conditioning 


Machinery room exhaust fans and air conditioning 
equipment that is not intended for exhausting ammonia 
vapour shall be de-energized and fan dampers, where 
provided, shall close upon detection of ammonia. 


6.14.3 Exhaust Ventilation 


Machinery rooms shall be vented to the outdoors by 
means of a mechanical exhaust ventilation system. 


6.14.3.1 Mechanical exhaust ventilation system shall 
be automatically activated by ammonia leak detection 
or temperature sensors, and the system shall also be 
manually operable. 


6.14.3.2 Mechanical exhaust ventilation systems shall 
be designed to produce not less than the temperature 


This standard has been provided by BIS and ПАК. It shall not be copied or distributed by 
other means to other parties without the written permission of ПАК. 


control ventilation rate required by 6.14.6 and the 
emergency exhaust ventilation rate required by 6.14.7. 


6.14.3.3 Exhaust air ducts from the machinery room 
shall only serve the machinery room. 


6.14.4 Fan Options 


Multiple fans or multispeed fans shall be permitted to 
provide both temperature control exhaust ventilation 
in accordance with 6.14.6 and emergency exhaust 
ventilation in accordance with 6.14.7. Fans used for 
both temperature control and emergency ventilation 
shall be controlled in a manner that provides equal to 
or greater than the emergency ventilation rate when 
emergency ventilation is activated. 


6.14.5 Inlet Air 


6.14.5.1 Outdoor make-up air shall be provided to 
replace air being exhausted and shall be designed to 
maintain negative pressure in the machinery room, not 
to exceed 6.4 mm water column. 


6.14.5.2 Make-up air supply locations in the machinery 
room shall be positioned to prevent short-circuiting of 
the make-up air directly to the exhaust. 


6.14.5.3 Make-up air openings shall be covered with 
a corrosion-resistant screen of not less than 6.35 mm 
(‘4") mesh or equivalent protection. 


6.14.5.4 Intakes for make-up air shall be positioned 
to draw uncontaminated outdoor air and avoid 
recirculation of exhausted air. 


6.14.5.5 Intakes for make-up air to the machinery room 
shall only serve the machinery room. 


6.14.5.6 Motorized louvers or dampers, where utilized, 
shall fail to the open position upon loss of power. 


6.14.5.7 Where direct openings or openings with ducts 
are not provided to supply make-up air, make-up air 
shall be provided by fans or fans with ducts. 


6.14.6 Temperature Control Ventilation 


6.14.6.1 Temperature control mechanical ventilation 
design capacity shall be the volume required to limit 
the room dry bulb temperature to 40?C, taking into 
account the ambient heating effect of machinery in 
the room. The emergency ventilation system shall be 
permitted to be used to supplement temperature control 
ventilation, and vice-versa. 

NOTE — A reduced temperature control ventilation rate shall 

be permitted where a means of cooling is provided or room 

electrical equipment is designed to accommodate temperatures 


exceeding a dry bulb temperature of 40°С, in accordance with 
SP 30. 


23 


IS 17773 : 2022 


6.14.6.2 Partial operation of multiple fan system or 
multi-speed fans shall be permitted to deliver the 
temperature control ventilation design capacity. 


6.14.6.3 Temperature control mechanical ventilation 
shall be continuous or shall be activated by both of the 
following; 


a) A thermostat measuring space temperature; and 


b) A manual control switch, where temperature 
control ventilation 1s designed to contribute to 
emergency ventilation. 


6.14.7 Emergency Ventilation 


6.14.7.1 Emergency ventilation systems shall provide 
not less than 30 air changes per hour based on the gross 
room volume. The emergency ventilation system shall 
be permitted to include temperature control ventilation 
fans that meet the requirements of 6.14.6.3, b) and 
6.14.8.4. 


NOTE — Where approved, emergency mechanical ventilation 
shall not be required for a limited-charge refrigeration system 
that will not yield an ammonia concentration exceeding 
40 000 ppm in the machinery room following a release of the 
entire charge from the largest independent refrigeration circuit, 
based on the volume calculation determined in accordance 
with 5.2. The designer shall provide a copy of the calculations 
to be retained at the site. 


6.14.7.2 Emergency mechanical ventilation shall be 
activated by both of the following: 


a) Ammonia leak detection complying with 6.13; 
and 


b) A manual control switch provided in accordance 
with 6.12.2. 


6.14.7.3 Emergency ventilation shall be powered 
independently of the equipment within the machinery 
room and shall continue to operate regardless of whether 
emergency shutdown controls for the machinery room 
have been activated. 


6.14.7.4 A monitored location shall be notified upon 
loss of power to or failure of the emergency mechanical 
ventilation system. 


6.14.8 Emergency Exhaust Requirements 


6.14.8.1 Machinery room exhaust shall be to the 
outdoors not less than 6 m from a property line or 
openings into buildings. 


6.14.8.2 Machinery room exhaust shall discharge 
vertically upward with a minimum discharge velocity 
of 762 m/min at the required emergency ventilation 
flow rate. 


This standard has been provided by BIS and IIAR. It shall not be copied or distributed by 
other means to other parties without the written permission of IIAR. 


IS 17773 : 2022 


6.14.8.3 Machinery room exhaust fans, regardless of 
function, shall be equipped with non-sparking blades. 


6.14.8.4 Emergency exhaust fan motors located in 
the air stream or inside the machinery room shall be 
of the totally-enclosed type. Fan motors meeting this 
requirement are not required to be listed for use in 
hazardous (classified) location. 


6.14.9 Testing 


6.14.9.1 Schedule for testing the mechanical ventilation 
system shall be established based on manufacturer’s 
recommendations, unless modified based on 
documented experience. 


6.14.9.2 The mechanical ventilation system shall be 
tested at least twice in a year. 


6.14.9.3 Alarm testing shall comply with 17.3. 


6.14.9.4 Partial operation of a multiple-fan system 
or multi-speed fans shall be permitted to deliver the 
temperature control ventilation design capacity. 


6.14.9.5 Temperature control mechanical ventilation 
shall be continuous or shall be activated by both of the 
following: 


a) A thermostat measuring space temperature; and 
b) A manual control switch, where temperature 
control ventilation is designed to contribute to 
emergency ventilation. 
6.15 Signage 
Signage shall be provided according to this clause. 


6.15.1 Graphical Symbols and Safety Colors and safety 
signs 


Blue colour indicates health — indicates 'can 
cause serious or permanent injury’. 


Red colour indicates flammability — indicates 
‘must be pre-heated before ignition occurs’. 
Yellow colour indicates instability — means 
‘normally stable even under fire conditions’. 


a) Zero — Chemicals in this level pose no health 
hazard and there is no precaution necessary. 
Chemicals that are entirely safe under normal use 
can be labelled with a zero in this category; 


24 


b) One — Level one for the health hazard category 
is for any chemical that can only cause a mild 
reaction or injury due to exposure. In most 
situations, no extra personal protective equipment 
is needed beyond perhaps gloves; 


c) Two — Level two is for chemicals that can cause 
temporary incapacitation or residual injury, but 
only if there is intense or prolonged exposure to 
the chemical; 


d) Three — This level is for chemicals that can cause 
either a temporary or a moderate residual injury 
when there is even a short exposure period; and 


e) Four — Level four chemicals can cause serious 
injury or death with even brief or limited 
exposure. Extreme precaution is necessary at this 
level. Personal protective equipment needs to be 
worn before working with this chemical or even 
the container that holds it. This is especially true 
during an emergency such as a chemical spill. 


6.15.2 Alarm signage 


An alarm signage shall be provided in accordance with 
6.13.4 and 17.6. 


6.15.3 Restricted Access Signage 


Each machinery room entrance door shall be marked 
with a permanent sign to indicate that only authorized 
personnel are permitted to enter the room. 


7 AREAS OTHER THAN MACHINE ROOMS 


This clause applies to areas other than machinery 
rooms and which are industrial occupancies only. АП 
equipment shall be suitably designed, appropriately 
oriented, and adequately protected for safe operation in 
the area in which they are to be installed and according 
to the provisions given below. 


7.1 Common Considerations 


When installing refrigerant containing components of 
a closed-circuit ammonia refrigeration system outside 
a machinery room, the following considerations must 
be addressed: 


Refer to IS 4544 for emergency eyewash and shower 
equipment guidelines. Suitable equipment for quick 
drenching and flushing of the eyes and body shall be 
provided for immediate emergency use in work areas 
where operating or maintenance activities could expose 
personnel to ammonia. See 6.7 of machine room 
requirements. 


Condensers, receivers and other outside refrigerating 
equipment and components shall have lighting per local 
state government rules, factory act, to permit adequate 
night time inspection. 


NOTES 


1 See 8 to 16 for specific requirements for equipment and 
components in specific areas. 


This standard has been provided by BIS and IIAR. It shall not be copied or distributed by 
other means to other parties without the written permission of IIAR. 


2 See 7.2 for installation locations for area specific 
considerations. 


3 See 17 for ammonia detection and alarm requirements. 


7.1.1 Physical Protection — The components shall be 
protected from physical damage by activities in the 
areas in which they are installed. Methods of protection 
could include but are not limited to the following: 


a) Barriers, guardrails, bollards, fencing, or other 
structural elements to distance equipment from 
activities in the area; and 


b) Equipment enclosure and/or framework protection 
designed into its exterior structure to reduce 
damage if impacted. 


7.1.2 Environment — The components shall be 
specifically designed to operate in the environmental 
conditions of the area in which they are to be installed. 
Methods of protection could include but not be limited 
to the following: 


а) 
b) 
c) 


Materials or finishes and coatings; 
Protection from temperature extremes; 


Protection from dust/dirt airborne particles with 
adequate filtration; 


d) 
e) 


Appropriate electrical components for the area; 


Maintain an acceptable noise level for the area 
based on the applicable standard or provide 
appropriate sound attenuation; 


Components and equipment shall be designed and 
approved to structurally withstand the expected 
static and dynamic seismic and wind loads based 
on the applicable code (see 5.7.6); and 


g) Protection from outdoor ultraviolet exposure. 


7.1.3 Personnel 


Restrict access to the components to authorized 
personnel only. Methods of restrictions could include 
but are not limited to the following: 


a) Company enforced policies, training, and signage 
defining restricted areas; 


b) Fence or barricade the restricted areas; and 
с) Equipment designed with security features. 


7.1.4 Provide safe access for the inspection and 
maintenance of the components including all required 
clearances for servicing. See 5.8 service provisions. 


71.5 АП components that require servicing ог 
replacement shall be provided with isolation valves 
individually or as a group. Pump-out provisions 
shall be provided for all components and piping 
branches/circuits that can be isolated. The pump out valve 
shall be installed to allow for safe and efficient evacuation 
and/or the removal of the ammonia by a reclaim, recycle, 
or recovery device. Purging to a water container and/or to 


25 


IS 17773 : 2022 


the atmosphere is another safe and appropriate method for 
the controlled removal of the refrigerant. The pump out 
valves shall be capped for use by authorized and qualified 
personnel only, unless pump out valves are permanently 
piped to a central pump out system. 


7.1.6 Only semi-hermetic seal-less or hermetically sealed 
ammonia pumps shall be used in occupied indoor areas 
other than machinery rooms. 


7.1.7 Ammonia gas or liquid pressure-pumping systems 
shall be located in a machinery room or an equipment 
enclosure. If neither of these locations are practical for 
the system operational design and layout, areas in which 
these systems are located shall meet the requirements of 
7.1. 


7.1.8 Ventilation 


In indoor areas that contain refrigeration equipment, other 
than forced air evaporators, air cooled and/or evaporative 
condensers, piping, and valves, provide a mechanical 
ventilation system(s) per the requirements of this clause. 
Detection and alarm levels to activate the ventilation 
systems shall comply with 17. 


7.1.8.1 Ammonia refrigeration systems in indoor 
areas other than machinery rooms are permitted to use 
alternative ventilation methods as prescribed in the 
following sections. Situations where this may apply 
include the following. 


a) Ammonia refrigerating equipment located in 
processing and production areas; 
b) 


Ammonia refrigerating equipment located in 


interstitial spaces; 


In locations where there are sensitive off site 
receptors, such as densely populated areas, nursing 
homes, or schools, operational containment is 
permitted. Refer to 7.1.8.2 for additional provisions 
required for this alternative ventilation method; and 


с) 


d) Where all refrigeration equipment is self-contained 
[the entire refrigeration circuit resides on an 
assembled package(s)] and the release ofthe entire 
charge will not raise the ammonia concentration 
above 40 000 ppm or 25 percent of the lower 
flammability limit (LFL), emergency or normal 
ventilation is not required. Ventilation to maintain 
room temperature is required if necessary to 
prevent room dry bulb temperature from rising 
above 40?C. 


1) Provide апа retain calculations which 
demonstrate that the ammonia concentrations 
will never exceed 40 000 ppm if ammonia 
were released from the system. Ammonia 
detection and alarm(s) shall be provided for 
notification of an ammonia release to personnel 
in accordance with 17. 


This standard has been provided by BIS and IIAR. It shall not be copied or distributed by 
other means to other parties without the written permission of IIAR. 


IS 17773 : 2022 


7.1.8.2. Ammonia refrigeration equipment or systems 
in an area other than a machinery room, may use the 
following alternative ventilation method for the design 
of the mechanical ventilation system(s): 


a) Provide localized (spot) ventilation designed 
to maintain the ammonia concentrations below 
40 000 ppm if ammonia were released from the 
system; 

The leak rate used for this ventilation calculation 
shall be 0.320 kg/s; 


The open room area in which the refrigeration 
equipment resides shall be used as the volume for 
determining the concentration level; 


b) 


Ducts, enclosures or hoods may be used for parts 
of the ventilation system; and 


Retain the design calculations used to determine 
the ventilation rate and the ventilation equipment 
selection. 

NOTE — Annex G (Informative) contains sample calculations 


for the design of a ventilation system using alternative 
ventilation methods. 


7.1.8.3 Operational containment is permitted when the 
following provisions are met: 


a) A refrigerant detection system meeting the 
requirements of 17 and a ventilation system 
meeting the requirements of 7.1 must be 
provided; 

b) An operational containment shall be initiated at a 
detection level determined by the site refrigeration 
management designee, emergency responders, 
and/or owner. A pre-determined procedure shall 
be initiated to ensure that personnel are not located 
within the machinery room before operational 
containment is initiated; 


Provide an “ON/OFF/AUTO” override for 
emergency ventilation at a secured remote location 
that can be used for operational containment 
shutdown of the ventilation system; 


Automatically de-energize all unclassified 
electrical equipment at the detection level set forth 
in 6.13 or upon stopping ventilation using manual 
controls; 


с) 


d) 


Equipment or controls that must remain energized 
for monitoring or controlling equipment shall be 
designed for operation in a hazardous location; 
and 


Airflow dampers on fans, air inlets and air outlets 
shall close when an operational containment is 
actuated. 


26 


7.1.8.4 Ventilation for systems located outdoors 


7.1.8.4.1 When a refrigerating system or a component 
of a refrigerating system is located outdoors and 
is enclosed or partially enclosed by a penthouse, 
lean-to, or other structure, it shall be at least 6 m from 
building entrances and exits and natural or mechanical 
ventilation shall be provided. The requirements for 
such natural ventilation are as follows: 


The free-aperture cross section for the ventilation of a 
machinery room shall be at least: 


F=0.138G°° (ST) 
where 
Е = the free opening area, т>; and 
С = the mass of refrigerant in the largest system, 


any part of which is located in the machinery 
room, kg. 


7.1.8.5 Ventilation systems for equipment pits located 
indoors 


7.1.8.5.1 When refrigeration equipment containing 
ammonia is located within an indoor pit that is 1.52 m 
or more below the floor or grade level, emergency 
ventilation shall be provided in accordance with 6.14.7. 


7.1.8.5.2 Make-up air shall be provided near the floor 
of the indoor pit. Air shall be directed toward the 
equipment or components and away from the pit exit. 


7.1.8.5.3 The ventilation provisions of the room in 
which it is located shall be met. The volume of the pit 
shall be included in the air quantity calculations. 


7.2 Locations 


This clause provides a partial list of areas outside the 
machinery room where refrigeration equipment and 
components might be installed. Each location lists 
specific installation considerations for the area. Every 
facility is unique and must be individually evaluated 
for safe component locations. Equipment located in 
the following areas shall meet the requirements of 5.8 
service provisions. Additionally, design criteria specific 
to the individual components are contained within the 
specific equipment clause of this standard. 


7.2.1 Processing and Production Areas 


7.2.1.1 Installed equipment shall meet the cleanliness 
requirements (for example, food safety) of the area. 


7.2.2 Storage Areas-Refrigerated and Non- Refrigerated 


7.2.2.1 Protect component(s) from material handling 
equipment. 


This standard has been provided by BIS and ПАК. It shall not be copied or distributed by 
other means to other parties without the written permission of ПАК. 


7.2.3 Loading Docks-Refrigerated and Non- Refrigerated 


7.2.3.1 Protect component(s) from material handling 
equipment. 


7.2.4 Outdoors On-Grade, Stands on the Roof 


7.2.4.1 Equipment and components shall be designed 
to operate in outdoor conditions and meet the 
requirements of 7.1 common considerations. 


7.2.5 Penthouses 


7.2.5.1 Penthouses open to the interior space are 
considered part of the refrigerated storage area and 
shall be treated as such. 


7.2.5.2 Penthouses isolated from the interior space 
shall be treated as an equipment enclosure. See 3.52 
and 5.10.9. 


7.2.6 Unoccupied Spaces, Attics, Interstitial Spaces 
and Basements 


7.2.6.1 Equipment located in any of these areas shall 
follow the requirements as defined in the specific 
equipment requirement. 


7.2.6.2 Other refrigeration components shall require a 
minimum level | alarm and detection level (see 17). 


7.2.7 Electrical Room 


7.2.7.1 Electrical rooms without spark producing 
equipment (that is, rooms containing only transformers). 


7.2.7.1.1 Install the evaporator unit so that it is protected 
from impact or damage. 


The evaporator can be a direct ammonia or a secondary 
coolant unit. 


7.2.7.1.2 Install an ammonia detection sensor so that 
when ammonia is detected it de-energizes all applicable 
feed solenoids (for example, liquid, hot gas) at a value 
not greater than the corresponding TLV-TWA. 


7.2.7.1.3 The detector shall activate a visual and 
audible alarm inside the room and outside the room at 
the entrance of the electrical room. 


7.2.7.2 Electrical rooms with spark producing 
equipment (that is, across the line starters) shall not 
contain direct system evaporators. Indirect closed 
systems in which a secondary coolant passes through a 
closed-circuit in the evaporator unit, are permitted. 


27 


IS 17773 : 2022 


SECTION 3: EQUIPMENT AND 
COMPONENTS 


8 COMPRESSORS 


This clause applies to compressors which are used in 
closed-circuit ammonia refrigerating systems. 


Compressors are a vital component in a vapour 
compression industrial refrigeration system. 
Compressors are the principle prime movers 
responsible for providing the motive force for 
circulating refrigerant throughout a system and 
for creating a sufficiently high refrigerant pressure 
differential that allows the transfer of heat from spaces 
or products to the outside environment. Compressors 
are the single largest consumer of primary energy 
(usually electricity) in a refrigeration system. The 
compressor technologies are reciprocating and screw 
compressors. Depending on the plant size, pressure 
ratio and other parameters number of compressors, 
type or a combination can be decided. 


8.1 Design 


8.1.1 Minimum design pressure for high stage 
compressors with water-cooled, or evaporative 
condensing shall be 2 070 kPa gauge and for air cooled 
2 760 kPa gauge. 


NOTE — For reciprocating compressors, minimum low side 
design pressure shall be 2 070 kPa gauge. 


8.1.2 Minimum design pressure for booster 


compressors shall be 2 070 kPa gauge. 
8.2 Positive Displacement Compressor Protection 


8.2.1 When equipped with a stop valve in the 
discharge connection, every positive displacement 
compressor shall be equipped with a pressure relief 
device selected to prevent the discharge pressure from 
increasing to more than 10 percent above the maximum 
allowable working pressures of the compressor, and 
any other components located in the path between the 
compressor and the stop valve. Such pressure relief 
device shall be sized to accommodate the output of the 
compressor or in accordance with 15.2.7, whichever 
is larger. 


8.2.2 All exposed rotating components (for example, 
shafts, belts, pulleys, flywheels, couplings) shall be 
protected with screens or guards in accordance with 
approved safety standards. 


This standard has been provided by BIS and ПАК. It shall not be copied or distributed by 
other means to other parties without the written permission of ПАК. 


IS 17773 : 2022 


8.2.3 If rotation is to be in only one direction, a rotation 
arrow shall be cast in or permanently attached to the 
compressor frame. 


8.2.4 For ultimate strength requirements, see 5.9.2. 
8.3 Procedures/Testing 


8.3.1 Compressors shall be  hydrostatically/ 
pneumatically tested by the manufacturer at a pressure 
not less than 1.5 or 1.25 times the design pressure 
respectively for which they are rated. 


8.3.2 Compressors shall be tested and proven tight by 
the manufacturer at a pressure not less than the design 
pressure for which they are rated. 


8.4 Equipment Identification 


8.4.1 The following data shall be provided on 
nameplates or labels affixed to compressors: 
a) 
b) 
с) 


Manufacturer’s name; 

Manufacturer's serial number; 

Model number; 

Year of manufacture; 

Hydrostatic test pressure; 

Maximum allowable working pressure; 
Refrigerant ‘Ammonia’; 


Rotation speed in rpm, maximum and minimum 
for proper lubrication; 


Direction of 
(see 8.2.4); and 


Flow direction oil or refrigerant. 


rotation (where applicable) 


k) 


8.4.2 A compressor without a nameplate (see 8.4.1) 
shall not be used (or operated) in a project design 
(for example, used compressor) unless the applicable 
compressor operating limitations have been verified 
through the identification of the manufacturer and 
model number ofthe compressor from casting numbers. 


8.5 Compressor Installation Considerations 


Regardless of location, the following considerations in 
addition to the common considerations and site specific 
considerations must be addressed when installing a 
compressor. 


8.5.1 All compressors shall have valved pump out 
connections for removal of ammonia. 


8.5.2 Consideration shall be given to the additional heat 
load imposed on the refrigeration system when locating 
the compressor in a refrigerated space. 


8.5.3 Consideration shall be made to account for the 
impact on the compressor if operating in low ambient 


28 


temperatures, to avoid condensation of refrigerant in 
the compressor package or piping during operation or 
standby also proper lubricating oil needs to be selected 
and crankcase heating. 


8.5.4 Consideration shall be given to account for the 
impact on the compressor if operating in high ambient 
temperatures, to avoid overheating of compressor 
drive, oil and components. 


8.5.5 The compressor manufacturer's instructions shall 
be followed for installing compressor foundations, 
proper grouting, and proper isolation from the floor or 
structure of the building. 


8.5.6 When mounting compressors on building 
structures, consideration shall be taken to prevent 
excessive vibration. 


8.5.7 Whena variable frequency drive (VFD) is installed 
on a compressor, the building structure, foundation/ 
pad, anchorage, and mounting shall be installed to 
prevent excessive vibration and assure the compressor 
is stable at all frequencies during its operation. 


8.5.8 The refrigeration compressor design limitations 
specified by the compressor manufacturer shall be 
checked for the following: 


a) Compressor speed; 

b) Compression ratio; 

c) Compressor design discharge pressure; 

d) Compressor design maximum crankcase/ housing 
pressure; and 

€) Compressor designed for use with ammonia 
refrigerant. 


8.5.9 The compressor drive motor shall comply with 
relevant Indian Standards. 


8.5.10 Each compressor shall be fitted with a discharge 
check valve. Refer to 13.2.5.6 for stop valves. 


8.5.11 Each compressor shall be equipped with the 
following operable safety controls as a minimum: 


a) Low pressure cutout switch; 

b) High pressure cutout switch; 

с) Low oil pressure cutout switch (1f the compressor 
uses forced feed lubrication); and 

d) Oil pressure switch in case of oil pump. 


8.5.12 Before using in a new design, each compressor 
considered shall be inspected for any signs of alteration, 
modification, or physical repair that might affect the 
integrity of the compressor casing. Any compressor 
integrity issue shall be corrected and verified before 
operation. 


This standard has been provided by BIS and IIAR. It shall not be copied or distributed by 
other means to other parties without the written permission of IIAR. 


8.5.13 If the compressor casing has been altered, 
modified or repaired, the casing shall already have been 
recertified for pressure compliance by the manufacturer 
or insurance underwriter and recertification papers 
shall be maintained on site with the refrigeration 
management program. 


8.5.14 The compressor shall be fitted with indicating 
device(s) such that an observer can determine the 
compressor’s suction and discharge pressures, oil 
pressure (if the compressor uses forced feed lubrication) 
and discharge temperature. 


8.6 Alarms and Detection 


Compressors located indoors in areas outside the 
machinery room shall use level 4 detection. 


9 REFRIGERANT PUMPS 


This clause applies to mechanical refrigerant pumps 
applied for use in closed-circuit ammonia refrigerating 
systems. This requirement does not apply to liquid 
refrigerant transfer employing pressure differential to 
move liquid refrigerant. 


The refrigerant pumps are recommended for industrial 
refrigeration system where the system is designed 
with forced circulation of the refrigerant on the 
low-pressure side. 


The layout and dimensioning of the pumps depends 
on the refrigeration output, the circulation factor, the 
evaporation temperature, the design of the evaporator 
and the geometric layout of the system. 


9.1 Design 


9.1.1 Pump casing minimum design pressure 
requirements are as follows: 


a) High side service utilizing water-cooled, air-cooled, 
or evaporative condensing: 2 070 kPa gauge; and 


b) Low side service: 2 070 kPa gauge. 


NOTE — Application design pressures which exceed these 
minimum shall prevail. 


9.1.2 A hydrostatic or differential pressure relief device 
(or non-closeable vent pipe) shall be used for pressure 
protection of a liquid pump and its associated piping. 
The inlet connection for the relief device or vent pipe 
shall be located on the pump casing or piping between 
the stop valves at the pump inlet and outlet, except that 
when a check valve is located between the pump and 
its outlet stop valve, the relief device or vent pipe inlet 
shall be connected to the pipe between the discharge 
check valve and stop valve. The discharge of this relief 
or vent pipe shall connect either to the pump suction 
line upstream of the pump suction stop valve or to the 
vessel to which the pump suction is connected. This 


29 


IS 17773 : 2022 


pressure relief device or vent pipe shall be external to 
the pump housing. 


9.1.3 For ultimate strength requirements, see 5.9.2. 


9.1.4 Refrigerant pumps shall be suitable for the service 
in which they are being applied. For refrigerant pumps 
used in areas other than machinery rooms, see 7.1.6. 


9.1.5 Refrigerant pumps shall be installed with isolation 
valves. 


9.1.6 Refrigerant pumps shall be installed on an 
approved housekeeping pad base or be supplied with 
an approved structural support base. 


9.2 Procedures/Testing 


Refrigerant pumps shall be  hydrostatically/ 
pneumatically tested by the manufacturer at a pressure 
not less than 1.5 or 1.25 times the design pressure 
respectively for which they are rated. 


9.3 Equipment Identification 


Manufacturers producing refrigerant pumps shall 
permanently affix to the pump a nameplate providing 
the following minimum data: 


a) Manufacturer’s name; 

b) Manufacturer’s serial number; 

c) Manufacturer’s model number; 

d) Head differential pressure (ft, m, or psi or kg/cm’); 
e) Revolution per minute (RPM) (speed); 

f) Capacity (gpm or liters/s); 

g) Insulation classification; and 


h) Electric motor rating: volts, full load amps (FLA), 
frequency (Hz), phase, output (HP and/or KW). 


NOTE — The pump data sheet submitted shall include the 
following information: 


1) 
2) 
3) 
4) 


Refrigerant type (for example, ammonia); 
Operating condition data; 
Performance data; 


Construction data — including maximum (allowable) 
pressure at operating temperature, hydrostatic test 
pressure, bearing type, and impeller data; 


5) 
6) 
7) 
8) 
9) 


Materials — metals and gaskets; 

Motor (Driver) information-BkW/kW; 
Piping plan; 

Operating procedure; 


Inspections and tests verification — (performance and 
hydrostatic); 


10) Minimum circuit amps (MCA) and maximum over-current 


protection (MOCP) ~ (if applicable); 
Weight; and 


Direction of rotation shall be confirmed and documented 


11) 
12) 


(mark or label a directional arrow on the unit). 


This standard has been provided by BIS and ПАК. It shall not be copied or distributed by 
other means to other parties without the written permission of ПАК. 


IS 17773 : 2022 


9.4 Refrigerant Pumps Installation Considerations 


Regardless of location, the following considerations 
in addition to the common considerations and the 
site specific considerations must be addressed when 
installing refrigerant pumps: 


9.41 Refrigerant pumps are permitted to be 
semi-hermetic seal-less, hermetically sealed, or open 
drive. For pumps used in occupied areas other than 
machinery rooms or outdoors, see 7.1.6. 


9.4.2 Pump safeties shall be tied into an alarm and shut 
down system. 


9.4.3 Consideration for design load shall be given to 
the additional heat imposed on the refrigeration system 
from the motor heat when locating the pumps in a 
refrigerated space. 


9.4.4 Higher than design ambient temperatures shall be 
addressed when installing pumps in an unconditioned 
space. 


9.4.5 All pumps shall have valves pump out connections 
for removal of ammonia. 


9.5 Alarms and Detection 


9.5.1 For refrigerant pumps located in machinery 
rooms, see 6.13 refrigerant detection. 


9.5.2 Semi-hermetic seal-less and hermetically sealed 
refrigerant pumps located indoors in areas outside the 
machinery room shall be used. The refrigerant pump 
motor shall be designed so that the exterior pump wall 
will contain the rated pressure of the system. 


10 CONDENSERS 


10.1 Air-Cooled Condensers 
De-superheaters 


and Air-Cooled 


This clause applies to tube-and-fin and microchannel 
type air cooled condensers and air cooled 
de-superheaters which are applied to closed-circuit 
ammonia refrigerating systems. 


10.1.1 Design 


10.1.1.1 Minimum design pressure shall be 2 760 kPa 
gauge. 


10.1.1.2 For ultimate strength requirements, see 5.9.2. 


10.1.1.3 Where the refrigerant inlet and outlet lines 
of air-cooled condensers and de-superheaters can be 
automatically isolated, they shall be protected from 
hydrostatic pressure as per 15.5. 


10.1.1.4 All exposed rotating components (for example, 
shafts, fans, belts, pulleys, flywheels, couplings) shall 
be protected with screens or guards in accordance with 
approved safety standards. 


30 


10.1.1.5 Fan speeds shall not exceed the safe design 
speed recommended by the manufacturer for the 
temperature and the nature of the application. 


10.1.1.6 A condenser or portion of a condensing unit 
supported from the ground shall rest on a concrete or 
other approved housekeeping pad base. 


10.1.2 Equipment Identification 


The following data shall be provided on nameplates or 
labels affixed to the equipment: 


a) Manufacturer’s name; 

b) Manufacturer’s serial number; 

c) Model number; 

d) Year of manufacture; 

e) Design pressure; 

f) Direction of fan rotation; 

g) Electric motor power rooting in kW; and 


h) Electric supply: volts, full load amps, frequency 
(Hz), phase. 


NOTE — Nameplate data is not required on air cooled 
de-superheaters that are integral with condensers. 


10.1.3 Air Cooled Condenser Installation Considerations 


Regardless of location, the following considerations 
in addition to the common considerations and the 
site specific considerations must be addressed when 
installing air cooled condensers: 


a) Manufacturer’s recommended clearances Юг 
unobstructed airflow at the inlet and outlet of the 
air-cooled condenser shall be provided; 


b) Air cooled condensers shall be located and 
positioned to prevent short circuiting the discharge 
air and introduction of the warm discharge air into 
buildings; and 

c) Consideration shall be given to the location of 
the air-cooled condenser relative to the receiver 
that it will allow sufficient refrigerant head for the 
refrigerant to properly drain into receiving. 


10.1.4 Alarms and Detection 


Air cooled condensers located indoors in areas 
outside the machinery room shall use, at a minimum, 
level 2 detection see 17.6. 


10.2 Evaporative Condensers and Natural Draft 
Water Cooled Condenser 


This clause applies to evaporative condensers which are 
applied to closed-circuit ammonia refrigerating systems. 


10.2.1 Design 


10.2.1.1 Minimum design pressure shall be 2 070 kPa 
gauge. 


10.2.1.2 For ultimate strength requirements, see 5.9.2. 


This standard has been provided by BIS and ПАК. It shall not be copied or distributed by 
other means to other parties without the written permission of IIAR. 


10.2.1.3 Pressure vessels incorporated into evaporative 
condensers shall comply with 12 pressure vessels. 


10.2.1.4 Where the refrigerant coil inlet and outlet 
lines of evaporative condensers can be automatically 
isolated, the condenser shall be protected from 
refrigerant hydrostatic pressure per 15.5. 


10.2.1.5 The requirements specified are as under: 
a) Heavy duty steel to be used for fabrication; 
b) The guards to be powder coated to prevent rusting; 


c) The belt guard shall be removable type for easy 
removal of belts and adjustments; 

d) The belt guard to ensure all movable parts are 
guarded; 

e) The guard must be fitted so that it does not prompt 
operator to bypass and circumvented or overcome 
their use; 

f) The fitting of guard must be such that it is light 
weight, easily removable and reinstalled quickly 
and easily; and 

g) Maximum aperture in the net should not be bigger 
than 6 mm and should not be possible for operator 
to insert hand or finger. 


10.2.1.6 Fan speeds shall not exceed the safe design 
speed recommended by the manufacturer for the 
temperature and the nature of the application. 


10.2.1.7 All evaporative condensers shall be adequately 
anchored and supported. 


10.2.1.8 Access to evaporative condensers for normal 
service requirements shall not pose a hazard to service 
and maintenance personnel. 


10.2.1.9 The efficacy of the water distribution system 
and mist eliminators on each evaporative condenser 
shall be checked to meet the flow capacity and surface 
distribution design requirements. 


10.2.2 Equipment Identification 


The following data shall be provided on nameplates or 
labels affixed to the equipment or components of the 
equipment: 
a) Manufacturer’s name; 
b) Manufacturer’s serial number; 
c) Model number; 
d) Year of manufacture; 
e) Design pressure; 
f) Direction of fan rotation (and water circulating 
pump, if supplied); 
g) Electric motor rating for fan(s) (and water 
circulating pump, if supplied); and 


31 


IS 17773 : 2022 
h) Electric supply: volts, full load ampere, frequency 
(HZ), and phase. 


10.2.3 Evaporative 
Considerations 


Condensers Installation 


Regardless of location, the following considerations in 
addition to the common and the specific considerations 
must be addressed when installing evaporative 
condensers: 


a) Provide for unobstructed airflow into and out of 
the evaporative condenser with manufacturer's 
recommended clearances from structures or other 
condensers; 


b 


wm 


Evaporative condensers shall be located and 
positioned to prevent short circuiting the discharge 
air and introduction of the warm discharge air into 
buildings; 
c) Provide freeze protection, if applicable, for the 
sump and water piping; 
d) Provide proper drainage of overflow and waste 
water; and 


e) Consideration shall be given to the location of 
the evaporative condenser relative to the receiver 
such that it will allow sufficient refrigerant head 
for the refrigerant to/properly drain in receiving. 


10.2.4 Alarms and Detection 


Evaporative condensers located indoors (with the tops 
open to the outdoors) outside the machinery room shall 
use, at a minimum, level 2 detection (see 17.6). 


10.3 Shell-and-Tube Condensers 


This applies to shell-and-tube condensers which 
are applied in closed-circuit ammonia refrigerating 
systems. 


Equipment covered by this clause are horizontal 
condensers with closed water passes and vertical 
shell-and-tube with open water passes. 


10.3.1 Design 


10.3.1.1 The refrigerant side maximum allowable 
working pressure shall be at least 2 070 kPa gauge. 


10.3.1.2 For water side ultimate strength requirements, 
see 5.9.2. 


10.3.1.3 Pressure vessels incorporated into shell-and- 
tube condensers shall comply with 12 pressure vessels. 


10.3.1.4 Where the refrigerant inlet and outlet lines 
of shell-and-tube condensers can be isolated, the 
refrigerant side shall be pressure-relief protected 
per 15.2. 

NOTE — Where the condenser is not a pressure vessel 


it shall be protected from hydrostatic pressure per 15.5 in 
place of 15.2. 


This standard has been provided by BIS and IIAR. It shall not be copied or distributed by 
other means to other parties without the written permission of IIAR. 


IS 17773 : 2022 


10.3.1.5 Where the secondary coolant inlet and outlet 
lines of shell-and-tube condensers can be isolated, they 
shall be protected from hydrostatic over pressure. 


10.3.1.6 A condenser or portion of a condensing unit 
supported from the ground shall rest on a concrete or 
other approved housekeeping pad base. 


10.3.2 Shell-and-Tube | Condenser Installation 


Considerations 


Regardless of location, the following considerations 
in addition to the common considerations and the 
site specific considerations must be addressed when 
installing shell-and-tube condensers: 


a) Consideration shall be given for proper clearance 
for the maintenance and/or replacement of the 
condenser tubes; 


b) Water supply and discharge connections shall 
be made in accordance with the requirements of 
pollution control board; 


Consideration shall be given to the location of the 
shell-and-tube condenser relative to the receiver 
that it will allow sufficient refrigerant head for the 
refrigerant to properly drain in receiver; and 


c 


— 


d) The ambient temperatures in the location where 
the shell-and-tube condenser is installed shall be 
considered in the design of the also secondary 


coolant side of the condenser. 
10.3.3 Alarms and Detection 


Shell-and-tube condensers located indoors in areas 
outside the machinery room shall use, at a minimum, 
level 2 detection. See 17.6. 


10.4 Plate Heat Exchanger Condensers 


This clause applies to plate heat exchanger condensers 
which are applied in closed-circuit ammonia 
refrigerating systems. 


Equipment covered includes plate heat exchanger 
condensers of the plate-and-shell type and of the 
plate-and-frame type. 


10.4.1 Design 


10.4.1.1 The refrigerant side maximum allowable 
working pressure shall be at least 2 070 kPa gauge. 


10.4.1.2 For ultimate strength requirements, see 5.9.2. 


10.4.1.3 Pressure vessels incorporated into plate heat 
exchanger condensers (for example, the shell of a 
plate-and- shell condenser with refrigerant in a shell 
qualifying as a pressure vessel) shall comply with 
12 pressure vessels. 


10.4.1.4 Where the refrigerant inlet and outlet lines of 
refrigerant-containing plate packs can be isolated, the 


32 


refrigerant side of the plate pack shall be pressure-relief 
protected as per 15.2. 
NOTE — Where the condenser is not a pressure vessel, it shall 


be protected from hydrostatic pressure as per 15.5 in place of 
15.2. 


10.4.1.5 Where the process fluid (that is, 
non-refrigerant) inlet and outlet lines of plate packs can 
be isolated, they shall be protected from hydrostatic 
pressure per 15.5. 


10.4.2 Installation Consideration 


Plate heat exchanger condenser installation 
considerations regardless of location, the following 
considerations in addition to the common considerations 
and the site specific considerations must be addressed 
when installing plate heat exchanger condensers: 


a) Water supply and discharge connections shall 
be made in accordance with the requirements of 
Pollution Control Board; 


b 


— 


Consideration shall be given for proper clearance 
for the maintenance and/or replacement of the 
condenser plates; 


Consideration shall be given to the location of 
the plate heat exchanger condenser relative to the 
receiver that it will allow sufficient refrigerant 
head for the refrigerant to properly drain into 
receiving; and 


С 


— 


d) The ambient temperatures in the area the plate 
heat exchanger condenser is installed shall be 
considered in the design of the secondary coolant 


side of the condenser. 
10.4.3 Alarms and Detection 


Plate heat exchanger condensers located indoors 
in areas outside the machinery room shall use, at a 
minimum, level 2 detection (see 17.6). 


10.5 Double-Pipe Condensers 


This clause applies to double-pipe condensers which 
are applied in closed-circuit ammonia refrigerating 
systems. 


Equipment covered by this section are double-pipe 
condensers with closed water passes. 
10.5.1 Design 


10.5.1.1 The refrigerant side maximum allowable 
working pressure shall be at least 2 070 kPa gauge. 


10.5.1.2 For secondary coolant side ultimate strength 
requirements, see 5.9.2. 


10.5.1.3 Pressure vessels incorporated into 
double-pipe condensers shall comply with clause 12 
pressure vessels. 


This standard has been provided by BIS and ПАК. It shall not be copied or distributed by 
other means to other parties without the written permission of ПАК. 


10.5.1.4 Where the refrigerant inlet and outlet lines of 

double-pipe condensers can be isolated, the refrigerant 

side shall be pressure-relief protected as per 15.2. 
NOTE — Where the condenser is not a pressure vessel it shall 


be protected from hydrostatic pressure per 15.5 in place of 
15.2. 


10.5.1.5 Where the water inlet and outlet lines of 
double-pipe condensers can be isolated they shall be 
protected from hydrostatic pressure per 15.5. 


10.5.2 . Double-Pipe 
Considerations 


Condenser Installation 


Regardless of location, the following considerations 
in addition to the common considerations and the 
site specific considerations must be addressed when 
installing double-pipe condensers: 


a) Water supply and discharge connections shall 
be made in accordance with the requirements of 
Pollution Control Board; 


b 


ma 


Consideration shall be given for proper clearance 
for the maintenance and/or replacement of the 
condenser pipes; 


c 


ме 


Consideration shall be given to the location of 
the double-pipe condenser relative to the receiver 
that it will allow sufficient refrigerant head for the 
refrigerant to properly drain; and 

d) The ambient temperatures in the area the 
double-pipe condenser is installed shall be 
considered in the design of the secondary coolant 
side of the condenser. 


10.5.3 Alarms and Detection 


Double-pipe condensers located indoors in areas 
outside the machinery room shall use, at a minimum, 
level 2 detection (see 17.6). 


10.6 Procedures/Testing 


Air cooled condensers, evaporative condenser, shell 
and tube condenser, plate heat exchanger, double 
pipe condenser shall be strength tested at a pressure 
1.5 times the design pressure, and leak tested and 
proven tight at a design pressure pneumatically 
(dry air/dry nitrogen) by the manufacturer. 


10.7 Equipment Identification 


10.7.1 Manufacturers producing  shell-and-tube 
condensers shall provide the following minimum data 
on a nameplate affixed to the equipment: 


a) Manufacturer's name (preceded by the words 
"certified by" on nameplates); 

b) Shell/Plate side maximum allowable working 
pressure at temperature; 

c) Tube/Plate side maximum allowable working 
pressure at temperature; 


33 


IS 17773 : 2022 


d) Shell/Plate side minimum design metal 
temperature at pressure; 
e) Tube/Plate side minimum design metal 
temperature at pressure; 


f) Manufacturer's serial number; 
g) Model number (where applicable); 
h) Year of manufacture; and 


j) Manufacturers producing shell-and-tube 
condensers with integral pressure vessels 
(for example, condensers with refrigerant in a 
shell qualifying as a pressure vessel) shall provide 
design data. 


10.8 Nameplate Mounting 


10.8.1 The original nameplate shall be affixed to the 
equipment as specified in 5.10.8.5.1. 


10.8.2 Where duplicate nameplates are supplied, they 
shall comply with 5.10.8.5.1. 


11 EVAPORATORS 


11.1 Forced-Air Evaporator Coils 


This clause applies to evaporator coils and micro-channel 
heat exchangers which are applied to closed-circuit 
ammonia mechanical refrigerating systems. 


11.1.1 Design 


11.1.1.1 Minimum design pressure shall be 1 720 kPa 
gauge. 


11.1.1.2 For ultimate strength requirements, see 5.9.2. 


11.1.1.3 Where refrigerant coil inlet and outlet lines can 
be automatically isolated, they shall be protected from 
hydrostatic pressure per 15.5. 


11.1.1.4 All exposed rotating components (for example, 
fans, shafts, belts, pulleys, flywheels, couplings) shall 
be protected with screens or guards in accordance with 
governing safety standards. 


11.1.1.5 Fan speeds shall not exceed the safe design 
speed recommended by the manufacturer for the 
temperature and the nature of the application. 


11.1.1.6 АП evaporators shall be properly anchored and 
supported. 


11.1.2 Forced-Air Evaporator Coil Installation 


Considerations 


Regardless of location, the following considerations 
in addition to the common considerations and the 
site specific considerations must be addressed when 
installing forced-air evaporator coils in areas other than 
the machinery room: 


This standard has been provided by BIS and IIAR. It shall not be copied or distributed by 
other means to other parties without the written permission of IIAR. 


IS 17773 : 2022 


a) Manufacturer's recommended clearances for 
unobstructed airflow at the inlet and outlet of the 
forced-air evaporator shall be provided; 


b) Evaporators shall be arranged for proper 
air distribution to maintain required space 
temperatures; 


c) Optimal air flow for working conditions for the 
area personnel shall be considered; 


d) Evaporators shall be arranged to avoid short 
circuiting of air between evaporators; 

e) Evaporators will be arranged to minimize 

interference with area operation; 


f) Evaporators will be arranged such that they are 
not exposed to possible physical damage through 
traffic hazards from material handling equipment 
and vehicles (see 7.1.1); and 


g) A means for preventing freezing inside condensate 
drain lines shall be provided where lines are 
exposed to freezing temperatures (for example, 
sufficient line slope, heat trace, insulation, 
clean-out provisions). 


11.1.3 Alarms and Detection 


Forced-air evaporators located in refrigerated areas 
outside the machinery room (for example, freezers, 
cold rooms, docks) shall not require detection, although 
it is recommended. See 17.6 for detection level 
considerations. 


11.2 Shell-and-Tube Evaporators (with Refrigerant 
in Shell) 


This applies to shell-and-tube evaporators which are 
applied to closed-circuit ammonia refrigerating systems 
at any temperature level when evaporating refrigerant 
is used to cool another fluid. 


11.2.1 Design 


11.2.1.1 The shell maximum allowable working 
pressure shall be at least 1 720 kPa gauge or the pressure 
corresponding to the design saturated temperature of 
the anticipated process, whichever is greater. 


11.2.1.2 Pressure vessels incorporated into shell-and-tube 
evaporators shall comply with 12 pressure vessels. 


11.2.1.3 Where the tube-side inlet and outlet lines of 
shell and tube evaporators with refrigerant in shell 
can be isolated, the tube-side shall be protected from 
hydrostatic pressure as per 15.5. 


11.2.1.4 Heat loads from cleaning operations or process 
loads shall be considered when designing the relief 
capacity and control of process heat exchangers. 


34 


11.2.2 Shell-and-Tube Evaporators (with Refrigerant 
in Shell) Installation Considerations. 


See 11.3.2. 
11.2.3 Alarms and Detection 
See 11.3.3. 


11.3 Shell-and-Tube Evaporators (with Refrigerant 
in Tubes) 


This clause applies to shell-and-tube evaporators which 
are applied to closed-circuit ammonia refrigerating 
systems at any temperature level when evaporating 
refrigerant is used to cool another fluid. 


11.3.1 Design 


11.3.1.1 The shell side maximum allowable working 
pressure shall be at least 1 720 kPa gauge or the pressure 
corresponding to the design saturated temperature of 
the anticipated process, whichever is greater. 


11.3.1.2 Where the tube-side inlet and outlet lines of 

shell-and-tube evaporators (tubes) can be isolated, the 

tube-side shall be pressure-relief protected as per 15.5. 
NOTE — Where the tube-side of the evaporator is built and 
stamped in accordance with 11.3.1.3. 

Pressure vessels incorporated into shell-and-tube 

evaporators with refrigerant in tubes shall comply 

with 12. 


11.3.1.3 Heat loads from cleaning operations and 
process loads shall be considered when designing the 
relief capacity and control of process heat exchangers. 


11.3.2 Shell-and-Tube Evaporators (with Refrigerant 
in Shell or in Tubes) Installation Considerations 


Regardless of location, the following considerations 
in addition to the common considerations and the 
site specific considerations must be addressed when 
installing shell-and-tube evaporators: 


a) Consideration shall be given for proper clearance 
for the maintenance and/or replacement of the 
evaporator tubes; and 


b) The ambient temperatures in the area the 
shell-and-tube evaporator is installed shall be 
considered in the design of the secondary coolant 
side of the evaporator. 


11.3.3 Alarms and detection 


Shell-and-tube evaporators (with refrigerant in shell or 
in tubes) located indoors in areas outside the machinery 
room shall use, at a minimum, level 2 detection. 
See 17.6. 


This standard has been provided by BIS and ПАК. It shall not be copied or distributed by 
other means to other parties without the written permission of ПАК. 


11.4 Plate Heat Exchanger Evaporators 


This applies to plate heat exchanger evaporators which 
are applied to closed-circuit ammonia refrigerating 
systems. 


Equipment covered by this section include plate heat 
exchanger evaporators of the plate-and-shell type, 
and of the plate-and-frame type in which the heat 
transfer plate stack is axially contained between two 
pressure plates and where the plate joints may be fully 
elastomeric, paired plate sets welded with adjacent sets 
elastomeric, fully welded, or fully nickel brazed. 


11.4.1 Design 


11.4.1.1 Minimum refrigerant side design pressure 
shall be 1 720 kPa gauge or the pressure corresponding 
to the design saturated temperature of the anticipated 
process, whichever is greater. 


11.4.1.2 For ultimate strength requirements, see 5.9.2. 


11.4.1.3 Pressure vessels incorporated into plate heat 
exchanger evaporators (for example, plate-and-shell 
designed with refrigerant in a shell qualifying as a 
pressure vessel) shall comply with 12. 


11.4.1.4 Where the refrigerant inlet and outlet 
lines of refrigerant-containing plate packs can be 
isolated, the refrigerant side of the plate pack shall be 
pressure-relief protected as per 15.5. 

NOTE — Where the evaporator is not a pressure vessel, it shall 


be protected from hydrostatic pressure as per 15.5 in place 
of 15.2. 


11.4.1.5 Where the process fluid (that is, non-refrigerant) 
inlet and outlet lines of plate packs can be isolated, they 
shall be protected from hydrostatic pressure as per 15.5 
on the process side. 


11.4.1.6 Heat loads from cleaning operations or process 
loads shall be considered when designing the relief 
capacity and control of process heat exchangers. 


11.4.2 Plate Heat Exchanger Evaporators Installation 
Considerations 


Regardless of location the following considerations 
in addition to the common considerations and the 
site specific considerations must be addressed when 
installing plate heat exchanger evaporators: 


a) Consideration shall be given for proper clearance 
for the maintenance and/or replacement of the 
evaporator plates; and 


b) The ambient temperatures in the area the plate 
heat exchanger evaporator is installed shall be 
considered in the design of the secondary coolant 
side of the evaporator. 


35 


IS 17773 : 2022 


11.4.3 Alarms and Detection 


Plate heat exchanger evaporators located indoors 
in areas outside the machinery room shall use, at a 
minimum, level 2 detection. See 17.6. 


11.5 Scraped (Swept) Surface Heat Exchangers 


This applies to scraped (swept) surface heat exchangers 
which are applied to closed-circuit ammonia 
refrigerating systems. 


11.5.1 Design 


11.5.1.1 The shell maximum allowable working 
pressure shall be at least 1 720 kPa gauge or the pressure 
corresponding to the design saturated temperature of 
the anticipated process, whichever is greater. 


11.5.1.2 Pressure vessels incorporated into scraped 
surface heat exchangers shall comply with clause 12 
pressure vessels. 


11.5.1.3 Heat loads from cleaning operations or process 
loads shall be considered when designing the relief 
capacity and control of scraped surface heat exchangers. 


11.5.2 Scraped (Swept) Surface Heat Exchanger 
Installation Considerations 


Regardless of location, the following considerations 
in addition to the common considerations and the 
site specific considerations must be addressed when 
installing scraped (swept) surface heat exchangers: 


a) Consideration shall be given for proper clearance 
for the maintenance and/or replacement of 
components; and 


b) The ambient temperatures in the area the scraped 
(swept) surface heat exchanger is installed shall be 
considered in the design. 


11.5.3 Alarms and Detection 


Scraped (swept) service heat exchangers located 
indoors in areas outside the machinery room shall use, 
at a minimum, level 2 detection. See 17.6. 


11.6 Procedures/Testing 


Forced air evaporator coils, shell and tube evaporators, 
shell and tube evaporators (with refrigerant in tubes), 
plate heat exchanger evaporators, and scraped (swept) 
surface heat exchangers shall be strength tested at a 
pressure 1.5 times the design pressure, and leak tested 
and proven tight at a design pressure pneumatically 
(dry air/dry nitrogen) by the manufacturer. 


11.7 Equipment Identification 


Following data shall be printed on nameplate or label 
affixed to the equipment for shell and tube evaporators, 


This standard has been provided by BIS and ПАК. It shall not be copied or distributed by 
other means to other parties without the written permission of ПАК. 


IS 17773 : 2022 


shell and tube evaporators (with refrigerant in tubes), 
plate heat exchanger evaporators and scraped (swept) 
surface heat exchangers: 
a) Certification and stamping as per 5.10.8.5.1; 
b) Manufacturer’s name (preceded by the words 
“certified by,"; 
c) Shell/Plate side maximum allowable working 
pressure at temperature; 
d) Tube side maximum allowable working pressure 
at temperature; 
е) Shell/Plate side minimum design 
temperature at pressure; 


metal 


f) Tube/Plateside minimum design metal temperature 
at pressure; 


g) Manufacturer's serial number; 
h) Model number (where applicable); 
j) Year of manufacture; 


k) Test pressure (note test type; hydraulic or 
pneumatic); 


m) Pressure vessel design as per 5 and 12 of this 
standard; and 


n) A stamp shall be affixed to the equipment that 
includes the minimum design metal temperature 
(MDMT) that it is operated at in accordance with 
pressure vessel requirement, where applicable. 


11.8 Nameplate Mounting 


11.8.1 The original nameplate shall be affixed to the 
equipment as specified in 5.10.8.5.1. 


11.8.2 Where duplicate nameplates are supplied, they 
shall comply with 5.10.8.5.1. 


12 PRESSURE VESSELS 


Pressure vessels thickness calculations – Example for 
reference only: 


Material of construction : IS 2041 grade R260 
762 mm diameter x 3 936 mm straight length 


Circumferential stress (longitudinal joints) 


T PR 
SE —0.6P 
where 
t = minimum required thickness of shell in 
(mm); 
P - internal design pressure in (kg/cm?); 
R - inside radius of shell course under 


consideration, in (mm); 


S = maximum allowable stress value of 
materials in (kg/cm?); and 
E = joint efficiency for, or efficiency of, 


appropriate joint in cylindrical ог 
spherical shells, or the efficiency of 
ligaments between openings, whichever 
Is less. 


‘E’ for (Efficiency) 


DP test =0.7 
Spot X ray = 0.85 
100 % X ray = 1.00 
Thickness calculation for low pressure (L.P.) vessel 
51 No. Item Value Unit 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
1) Р 21.1 kg/cm? 
ii) R 381 mm 
iii) S 1 230.4 kg/cm? 
iv) E 0.7 % 
E 8 039.1 
848.62 
1= 9.47 mm 
Add corrosion allowance of 1.5 mm 
Т = 10.97 mm 


Use next higher size plate available i.e. 12 тт 
Formed Head (Ellipsoidal) Thickness Calculations 
Material of construction (MOC): IS 2041 grade R260 


The required thickness of plate will be as per formula 
given below: 


Circumferential stress (longitudinal joints) 
es PD 
2SE —0.2P 


t= minimum required thickness of head after 
forming, in (mm); 
= internal design pressure, in (kg/cm?); 

= inside diameter of the head skirt; or inside 
length of the major axis of an ellipsoidal head; 
or inside diameter of a conical head at the point 
under consideration, measured perpendicular 
to longitudinal axis; 


r= inside knuckle radius; 


This standard has been provided by BIS and ПАК. It shall not be copied or distributed by 
other means to other parties without the written permission of ПАК. 


S= maximum allowable stress value in tension as 
given in (kg/cm?); 

E- lowest efficiency of any joint in the head; 
for hemispherical heads this includes 
head-to-shell joint; for welded vessels, use the 
efficiency specified 


‘E’ for (Efficiency) 


DP test = 0.7 
Spot X ray = 0.85 
100% X ray = 1.00 
Thickness calculation for L.P. Vessel — Sample 
SI No. Item Value Unit 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
1) Р 21.1 kg/cm? 
ii) D 762 mm 
iii) S 1 230.4 kg/cm? 
iv) E 0.7 % 
= 16 078.2 
1718.34 
t = 0.37 inch 
t=9.35 mm 


Add corrosion allowance of 1.5 mm T = 10.85 mm 
Use next higher size plate available that is 12 mm 


Table 8 Recommended Minimum Thickness for 
Various Pressure Vessel Sizes (Ready Reckoner) 


(Clause 12) 


SI No. Vessel Plate Thickness — Dishend Thickness 
Diameter in mm IS 2041 in mm IS 2041 
in Inches Grade R260 Grade R260 

(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) 24 10 10 
ii) 30 12 12 
iii) 36 14 14 
iv) 42 16 16 
v) 48 18 18 


This applies to pressure vessels for use in closed-circuit 
stationary ammonia refrigerating systems. 


12.1 Design 


12.1.1 Pressure vessel maximum allowable working 
pressure (see Table 3) shall not be less than the 
following: 


a) High side service utilizing water-cooled, 
air-cooled, or evaporative condensing — 
2 070 kPa gauge; and 


b) Low side service — 1 720 kPa gauge. 


IS 17773 : 2022 


NOTE — When ammonia liquid is to be transferred from 
pressure vessels by pressurized ammonia gas, the pressure 
vessel design pressure shall accommodate the maximum 
possible transfer pressure and take into account the lowest 
possible coincident metal temperature. 


12.1.2 Pressure vessels exceeding 150 mm inside 
diameter shall comply with as 5.9.2 covering the 
requirements for design, fabrication, inspection and 
testing during construction of unfired pressured vessels. 


NOTE — For pressure vessels having inside diameters less 
than 150 mm, see 5.9.2 for ultimate strength requirements. 


12.1.3 The relief connection shall be a minimum 
of three-quarter inch 20 mm for pressure vessels 
(for example, oil separators) exceeding 150 mm inside 
diameter and a minimum of 25.4 mm for pressure 
vessels 10 mm cubic feet in volume or larger. 


12.1.4 Pressure vessels shall be provided with adequate 
opening(s) for the attachment of pressure relief 
device(s) as required in 15.3.2. 


12.1.5 The heads and shell of pressure vessels shall be 
hot formed or stress relieved after cold-forming. 


NOTE — It is recommended that high-side vessels receive 
post-weld heat treatment per Annex D (Informative). 


12.1.6 A vessel shall be designed and stamped with 
a minimum design metal temperature (MDMT) no 
higher than its lowest expected operating temperature. 


12.1.7 In applications where vessels are subject to 
external corrosion, the vessels shall be designed 
and specified with a minimum of 1.6 mm corrosion 
allowance. 


12.1.8 It shall be determined that the pressure vessel is 
piped for the pressure and temperature limitations as 
specified on the nameplate data. 


12.1.9 АП pressure vessels should be designed as per 
this standard (see 5 and 12). 


12.2 Procedures/Testing 


Pressure vessels shall be strength tested at a pressure 
1.5 times the design pressure, and leak tested and 
proven tight at a design pressure pneumatically (dry 
air/dry nitrogen) by the manufacturer. 


12.3 Equipment Identification 


12.3.1 Manufacturers producing pressure vessels shall 
provide data in accordance with the requirements of the 
relevant as per 5.10.8.5.1, but in any case shall provide 
the following minimum data on a metal nameplate 
affixed to the equipment as specified in 12.3.2: 


a) Manufacturer's name (preceded by the words 
“certified by”); 

b) Maximum 
temperature; 


allowable working pressure at 


This standard has been provided by BIS and IIAR. It shall not be copied or distributed by 
other means to other parties without the written permission of IIAR. 


IS 17773 : 2022 


c) Minimum design metal temperature at pressure; 
d) Manufacturer’s serial number; 

e) Year of manufacture; 

f) Model number (where applicable); 


g) Test pressure (note test type; hydraulic or 
pneumatic); 


h) Type of construction (in accordance with this 
standard); and 


j) A stamp shall be affixed to the equipment that 
includes the minimum design metal temperature 
(MDMT) that it is operated at in accordance to 
this standard. 


12.3.2 Nameplate Mounting 


12.3.2.1 The original nameplate shall be affixed to the 
equipment as specified as per 5.10.8.5.1. 


12.3.2.2 Where duplicate nameplates are supplied, they 
shall comply with 5.10.8.5.1. 


12.3.2.3 If any pressure vessel is insulated, the 
nameplate shall be mounted on an approved stand-off 
so it is not covered or the insulation at the nameplate 
location on the pressure vessel shall be removable to 
allow for nameplate inspection. 


12.4 Pressure Vessels Installation Considerations 


Regardless of location, the common considerations and 
the site specific considerations must be addressed when 
installing pressure vessels. 


12.4.1 Consideration shall be given for proper clearance 
for maintenance and physical protection. See 7.1.1. 


12.4.2 Pressure vessels supported from the ground shall 
rest on a concrete or other approved housekeeping pad 
base and/or shall come with an approved support for 
sitting directly on and anchoring to the foundation. 


12.5 Alarms and Detection 
Pressure vessels located indoors in areas outside 


the machinery room shall use at a minimum, level 2 
detection. See 17.6. 


13 PIPING 


This applies to piping for use in closed-circuit stationary 
ammonia refrigerating systems: 
a) Liquid, vapour, discharge and hot gas lines carbon 
steel pipe must be as per Table 9; 
b) Couplings, elbows and tees for threaded pipe 
should be minimum 2 100 kPa design pressure 
and constructed of forged steel; 


38 


c) Tongue and groove flanges should be used for 
piping, welded joints are preferred; 

d) Low side piping should be designed for 1 720 kPa 
design pressure and high side should be designed 
for 2 070 kPa for water cooled condensing with 
evaporative or shell and tube condensers. Use 
2 760 kPa minimum for air cooled design; 


е 


wm 


Use long radius welded elbows and butt-welded 
fittings on 50 mm and larger pipe (as per table 4) 
to all liquid lines; and 


Use a minimum of bolted flanged joints. If 
essential use tongue and groove joint. Use seal 
caps on all valves which are not manually operated 
on a regular basis. 

NOTE — No impact test is required for ferrous materials used 
in fabricating or piping system for metal temperatures between 
—29*C and – 101°C provided the maximum circumferential or 
longitudinal tensile stress resulting from coincident pressure, 
thermal contraction or bending between supports does not 
exceed 40 percent of allowable stress for the material. 


Table 9 Velocity Requirement for Line Sizing 
(Clause 13) 


SI No. Line Location Velocity 
(m/sec) 
(1) (3) (3) 
1) Suction line (NH,) 15.0-17.5 
ii) Discharge line (NH,) 17.5-20.0 
iii) Liquid line (NH,) condenser to receiver 0.5-0.6 
iv) Liquid line (NH,) receiver to system 1.0-1.5 
v) Wet return line (NH,) 8.0-10.0 
vi) Suction line (H,O) 1.0-1.2 
vii) discharge line (H,O) 2.0-2.5 


13.1 Carbon Steel Pipes Threaded 


All threaded pipe will be as per Table 4. Threaded joints 
are allowed only up to 40 NB. 


13.2 Stainless Steel, Welded 
13.2.1 Refer Tables 5 and 7 for weld joints. 


13.2.2 Refer Table 4 for threaded joints. Threaded 
joints are allowed only up to 40 NB. 


13.2.3 Pipe shall be new, clean and free of rust, scale, 
sand, debris and dirt, both internally and externally. 


13.2.4 Location of Refrigerant Piping 


13.2.4.1 Refrigerant piping crossing an open space that 
affords passageway shall not be less than 2.2 m above 
the floor unless the piping is located against the ceiling 
of such space. 


This standard has been provided by BIS and IIAR. It shall not be copied or distributed by 
other means to other parties without the written permission of IIAR. 


13.2.4.2 Passages shall not be obstructed by refrigerant 
piping. Refrigerant piping shall not be placed in any 
elevator, dumbwaiter, or other shaft containing a 
moving object, or to in any way hinder means of egress. 


13.2.4.3 Refrigerant piping shall not be installed in an 
unrestricted (for example, approved site public visitors, 
guests, or vendors could use) stairway, stair landing, or 
means of egress. 


13.2.4.4 All ammonia piping shall be properly protected 
for the area it is installed from physical or environmental 
damage. See 7.1 common considerations. 


13.2.4.5 Installing refrigerant piping underground is 
not prohibited. Any such piping installed underground 
shall be protected against corrosion. 


13.2.4.6 Stop valves shall be installed in the refrigerant 
piping of a refrigeration system at the following 
locations: 


a) At the inlet and outlet of a positive-displacement 
-type compressor, compressor unit, or condensing 
unit; 

At the main feed inlet(s) and outlet(s) of individual 
refrigeration equipment loads; and 


b) 
c) At the refrigerant inlet and outlet of a pressure 
vessel containing liquid refrigerant and having an 


internal gross volume exceeding three (3) cubic 
feet (0.085 cubic metres). 


13.3 Refrigerant Valves 


This applies to the equipment and system 
design requirements for valves used in the 
ammonia-containing and the lubricant-containing parts 
of closed-circuit ammonia refrigerating systems. 
NOTE — Valves within the refrigerant-containing envelope of 
other equipment such as slide valves in screw compressors; 
safety relief valves. 


13.3.1 Valves in Equipment and System Design 


13.3.1.1 Valves shall be oriented in accordance with the 
respective manufacturer’s specification. 

NOTE — The equipment and system design drawing(s) shall 

clearly show the following: 

a) The required valve orientation in all cases where normal 
fluid flow through the valve is opposite to the flow direction 
marking; and 

b) The required valve spindle/stem orientation where a 
specific orientation is necessary for proper operation of the 
system. 


13.3.1.2 Valve gasket materials shall match valve 
manufacturer’s specifications and be of the thickness 
specified. Flange bolts shall be tightened in accordance 
with 13.5.2. 


39 


IS 17773 : 2022 


13.3.1.3 Operating speed of control valve actuators 
shall be considered in the system design. 


13.3.1.4 The de-energized mode of control valves 
shall be considered in system design. 


13.3.2 Check valves installed upstream of other 
automatic valves have the potential to trap liquid. 
Provision for hydrostatic relief and liquid removal, to 
facilitate maintenance, shall be located downstream of 
the check valve (see 15.5). 


13.3.3 Strainers shall be fitted with provision for 
refrigerant removal to facilitate maintenance. 


13.3.4 Shut-off valves used to isolate equipment, 
control valves, controls or other components from other 
parts of the system for the purpose of maintenance or 
repair shall be capable of being locked out. 

NOTE — Control valves and other valves without a manually 


operable and lockable actuating element intended to stop flow 
for isolation purposes are not shut-off valves. 


For example, solenoid valves, check valves. 


13.3.5 Stop valves connecting refrigerant-containing 
parts to atmosphere shall be capped, plugged, blanked, 
or locked closed during shipping, testing, operating, 
servicing, or standby conditions if they are not in use. 


13.3.6 Valves required for system emergency 
shutdown procedure(s) shall be readily accessible and 
appropriately identified (see 5.10.4). 


13.4 Piping Hangers and Supports 


13.4.1 Piping hangers and supports shall carry the 
weight of the piping, as well as any other anticipated 
loads. 


For example, refrigerant weight; insulation; frost/ice; 
seismic/wind loads; etc. 


13.4.2. Sway bracing shall be included where 


necessary. 


13.4.3 Anchors, their attachment points, and methods 
shall be sufficient to bear all loads. 


13.4.4 For piping that is insulated, supports shall be 
designed and/or the insulation shall be selected to 
avoid damage to the insulation from compression. 


13.5 Piping Fabrication and Assembly 


Valves (or flange sets) with specialized tightening 
requirements shall be installed according to 
manufacturer's instructions. 


13.5.1 Piping joints shall be assembled and in alignment 
such that they do not induce distortion and stress and 
shall be in accordance with the assembly requirements. 


This standard has been provided by BIS and IIAR. It shall not be copied or distributed by 
other means to other parties without the written permission of IIAR. 


IS 17773 : 2022 


13.5.2 Flanges 


13.5.2.1 The mating surfaces of the gasketed joints 
shall be parallel, aligned and perpendicular to the pipe 
axis, in good condition and free of debris and corrosion. 


13.5.2.2 Gaskets shall be correctly dimensioned for the 
flange set. 


13.5.2.3 Nuts, bolts, cap screws, and washers shall meet 
manufacturer’s requirements for the application. Bolt 
threads shall extend completely through the mating nut. 


13.5.2.4 The fasteners shall be progressively tightened 
in a diametrically staggered (crisscross or star) pattern. 


13.5.2.5 All threaded pipe will be as per Table 5. 
Threaded joints are allowed only upto 40NB. 


13.5.2.6 Threaded joints shall be adequately supported. 


13.5.3 Special care shall be taken during fabrication and 
assembly to assure that the inside of the piping system 
is free of contaminants and stays free of contaminants. 


13.5.3.1 Pipe and system components shall be properly 
stored during staging and installation to prevent 
contaminants from getting inside the system. 


13.5.3.2 Cutting and welding procedures shall be 
used that keep the inside of the piping system free of 
contaminants. 


13.5.4 Service Provisions 


13.5.4.1 All serviceable components of the refrigerating 
system shall be so installed that they can be safely 
serviced (see 5.8). 


13.5.4.2 All serviceable components of the refrigerating 
system shall have hand isolation valves in practical 
locations (see 5.8). 


14PACKAGED SYSTEMSAND COMPONENTS 


This applies to the safe and efficient design, fabrication, 
and installation of packaged closed-circuit ammonia 
refrigerating systems and/or components of a system. 
These packages may or may not be enclosed (see 3.52 
and 5.10.9). 


Packaged systems are self-contained refrigeration 
equipment consisting of compressor, condenser, 
receiver, evaporators and suitable expansion device. 


14.1 General 


14.1.1 This clause is not intended to supersede the 
requirements for a machinery room even when the 
package is installed in a machinery room. 


40 


14.1.2 The refrigeration equipment and components 
shall be laid out on the package to provide proper 
clearances for the safe апа efficient service, 
maintenance, component replacement and operation 
per manufacturer’s requirements, when the package is 
installed. 


14.1.3 Equipment, components and piping installed as 
part of a package shall be located in such a manner as 
to allow safe egress from any part of the package in the 
event of an emergency. 


14.1.4 Packages that are enclosed at point of 
fabrication or after installation shall be vented for the 
proper operation of the equipment and for emergency 
ventilation in case of an ammonia leak. 


14.1.5 Packages enclosed or not enclosed shall take into 
account the installation considerations of this standard. 


14.2 Design 


14.2.1 The structure of the package shall be properly 
designed to hold the operating weight of all the 
equipment and components. If the package is enclosed 
and installed outdoors the structure shall be designed 
for snow, wind, and seismic requirements in which it 
will operate. 


14.2.2 The structure of the package shall be designed for 
the stresses caused by shipping and rigging required to 
get the package to the site and in place for installation. 
Temporary supports and bracing may be used. Rigging 
instructions shall be provided to accommodate the 
design of the structure. 


14.2.3 The structure of the package shall be designed to 
allow for any loads and/or stresses that will be imposed 
on the package after installation and start-up. The 
installed design shall prevent excessive noise and/or 
vibration or shall be investigated and corrected. 


14.2.4 The physical dimensions of the package shall 
meet the requirements of shipping as well as limitations 
of installation. 


14.2.5 Packaged equipment shall have pump out 
connections with valve for removal of ammonia. 


14.2.6 Consideration shall be made to account for the 
impact on the packaged equipment and components 
if operating in low ambient temperatures to avoid 
condensation of refrigerant in the packaged equipment 
or piping during operation or standby. The package shall 
be designed for use in the lowest ambient temperatures 
expected in which it will operate. 


This standard has been provided by BIS and ПАК. It shall not be copied or distributed by 
other means to other parties without the written permission of ПАК. 


14.2.7 Consideration shall be given to account for the 
impact on the packaged equipment and components 
if operating in high ambient temperatures to avoid 
overheating of equipment or components. The package 
shall be designed for use in the highest ambient 
temperatures expected in which it will operate. 


14.2.8 The package shall be designed to be protected in 
the environment it is installed. 


14.2.9 All manually operated valves shall be accessible. 
Isolation valve(s) identified as being part of a system 
emergency shutdown procedure(s) shall be directly 
operable or chain-operated from a permanent work 
surface (see 5.10.4). 


14.2.10 Pipes (where applicable) shall be labeled 
see 5.10.5. 


14.2.11 Equipment shall be labeled, see 5.10.6. 


14.2.12 Packages shall be equipped with lighting or 
installed in locations with light fixtures that provide 
a minimum of 320 lumens/m? (30 ft-candles) at the 
working level of 0.9 m above the floor or platform. 


14.2.13 Enclosed packages that require entrance for 
service, maintenance, inspection or operation shall 
have lighting control located at entrances. If continuous 
lighting exists, the lighting control does not need to be 
located at the entrances. 


14.2.14 Enclosed packages that require entrance shall 
be equipped with ammonia detection. 


14.2.15 Pressure vessels incorporated into packaged 
systems or components shall comply with 12. 


14.3 Fabrication 


14.3.1 АП equipment shall be set on the package to 
meet manufacturer's recommendations including 
proper support and clearances. 


14.3.2 All components and piping shall be properly 
supported to allow for transporting and rigging. 
Temporary supports and bracing may be used. 


14.3.3 Stationary or temporary rigging points shall be 
provided as required to position the package. 


14.3.4 All ammonia piping materials and installation 
shall meet the requirements of this standards. 


14.3.5 АП piping and components shall be adequately 
spaced to allow for insulation as required. 


14.3.6 Piping shall be properly pressure tested after 
fabrication and any leaks repaired. The package shall 
be shipped with a holding charge of dry nitrogen. 


14.3.7 Electrical equipment and wiring shall be installed 
in accordance with the /ndian Electricity Rules. 


41 


IS 17773 : 2022 


14.3.8 Gas fuel devices and equipment used with 
refrigerating systems in the package shall be installed 
in accordance with approved safety standards. 


14.4 Installation 


Installation of the system or components shall be 
in accordance with this standard, manufacturer’s 
recommendations and other applicable standards or 
codes. 


15 OVER PRESSURE PROTECTION DEVICES 


This applies to pressure relief devices installed on 
stationary closed-circuit ammonia refrigerating 
systems for the purpose of relieving excess pressure 
due to abnormal conditions or fire. 


15.1 Pressure Relief Devices 


15.1.1 Every closed-circuit ammonia refrigerating 
system shall be protected by a pressure relief device in 
accordance with IS 16678 (Part 2)/ISO 5149-2. Pressure 
relief valves to comply with design requirements 
against ISO 4126-1. Fusible plugs are not allowed to be 
used in the system 


15.1.2 The system design shall provide for all pressure 
relief devices to be installed as nearly as practicable 
directly to the pressure vessel or other parts of the 
system protected thereby, so that they are accessible for 
inspection and repair. 


15.1.3 All pressure relief devices shall be connected 
at the highest practical point on the pressure vessel or 
other parts of the system protected thereby, but in any 
case above the highest anticipated liquid refrigerant 
level. 


NOTE — For hydrostatic pressure relief, see 15.5. 


For oil drain pots and similar applications, connect at 
the highest point on the vessel. 


15.1.4 Relief valves shall not be located in refrigerated 
spaces unless precautions are taken to prevent moisture 
migration into the valve body or relief vent line. 


15.1.5 The seats and discs of pressure-relief devices 
shall be constructed of suitable material to resist 
refrigerant corrosion or other chemical action caused 
by the refrigerant. Seats and discs shall be limited in 
distortion, by pressure or other cause, to a set pressure 
change of not more than 5 percent in a span of five 
years. 


15.1.6 Setting of Pressure Relief Devices 


15.1.6.1 Pressure relief valve setting — All pressure 
relief valves shall be set to start to function at a pressure 
minimum 10 percent lower than the design pressure of 
the parts of the system protected. Refer to Tables 10 
and 11. 


This standard has been provided by BIS and ПАК. It shall not be copied or distributed by 
other means to other parties without the written permission of ПАК. 


IS 17773 : 2022 


15.1.6.2 Rupture member setting — All rupture members 
used in series with a relief valve shall have a nominal 
rated rupture pressure not to exceed the design pressure 
of the parts of the system protected. The conditions of 
application shall conform to the requirements. 


15.1.6.3 Provision shall be made to detect pressure build 
up between the rupture member and the relief valve due 
to leakage through the upstream relief device. 


15.1.7 Marking of Relief Devices 


15.1.7.1 All pressure relief valves for refrigerant 
containing components shall be set and sealed by the 
manufacturer. Each pressure relief valve shall be marked 
by the manufacturer with the data. If a pressure relief 
valve requires resetting, this shall be undertaken by 
the manufacturer or a company holding a valid testing 
certificate for this work. 


15.1.7.2 Each rupture member for refrigerant containing 
pressure vessels shall be marked with the data required. 


15.1.7.3 Capacity in standard cubic feet per minute 
[SCFM] (cum/sec) or in kg air/min (lb air/min) at 
15°C shall be stamped on device or available on request. 


15.2 Pressure Relief Protection 


15.2.1 Pressure vessels and other types of equipment 
built and stamped in accordance shall be provided with 
pressure relief protection in accordance with standard. 


15.2.2 Pressure vessels intended to operate completely 
filled with liquid refrigerant and are capable of 
being isolated by stop valves from other parts of a 
closed-circuit ammonia refrigerating system shall be 
protected with a liquid service relief device see also 15.5. 


15.2.3 Pressure relief devices shall be sized in accordance 
with 15.2.7. 


15.2.4 Pressure vessels less than 0.3 n internal gross 
volume shall be protected by one or more pressure relief 
devices. 


15.2.5 Pressure vessels of 0.3 m? or more internal gross 
volume shall be protected by at least one ofthe following 
options: 


15.2.5.1 One or more dual pressure relief device(s) 


Dual pressure relief valves shall be installed with a 
three-way valve to allow testing or repair. When 
dual relief valves are used, each valve must meet the 
requirements of 15.2.7. When multiple dual relief valve 
assemblies are used the following shall apply: 


15.2.5.1.1 The sum of the capacities of the pressure 
relief devices actively protecting the vessel must equal 
or exceed the requirements of 15.2.7. 


42 


15.2.5.1.2 The dual relief valve(s) shall be set to 
a fully seated position (one side open and one side 
closed). 


15.2.5.2 A single pressure relief device, provided that: 
the vessel can be isolated and pumped out; the relief 
valves are located on the low side of the system; and 
other pressure vessels in the system are separately 
protected in accordance with 15.2.7. 


15.2.6 When pressure relief valves are discharged into 
other parts of the closed-circuit ammonia refrigerating 
system, the system shall be equipped with pressure 
relief devices capable of discharging the increased 
capacity in accordance with 15.2.7 and the pressure 
relief valves discharging into the system shall be 
either: 


a) A type not appreciably affected by back pressure; 
ог 


b) A type affected by back pressure, in which case 
its set pressure added to the set pressure of the 
system pressure relief device shall not exceed 
the maximum allowing working pressure of any 
component being protected and shall comply 
with the following: 


1) The pressure relief valve that protects the 
higher pressure vessel shall be selected to 
deliver capacity in accordance with 15.2.7 
without exceeding the maximum allowable 
working pressure of the higher pressure 
vessel accounting for the change in mass flow 
capacity due to the elevated back pressure; 


2) The capacity of the pressure relief valve 
protecting the part of the system receiving 
a discharge from a pressure relief valve 
protecting a higher pressure vessel shall be 
at least the sum of the capacity required in 
15.2.7 plus the mass flow capacity of the 
pressure relief valve discharging into that part 
of the system; and 


3 


— 


The design pressure of the body of the relief 
valve used on the higher pressure vessel shall 
be rated for operation at the design pressure 
of the higher pressure vessel in both pressure 
containing areas of the valve. 


15.2.7 Pressure Relief Device Capacity Determination 


15.2.7.1 Pressure relief devices shall have sufficient 
mass flow carrying capability (capacity) to limit the 
pressure rise in a protected component to prevent its 
catastrophic failure. 


The minimum required relief capacity shall depend 
on the component being protected and the scenarios 
under which overpressure is being created. 


NOTE — Metric formula as cum/m x 1.204 — kg/min of dry air. 


This standard has been provided by BIS and IIAR. It shall not be copied or distributed by 
other means to other parties without the written permission of ПАК. 


IS 17773 : 2022 


Table 10 Safety Valve Capacity (Air) in kg/h for a) Overpressure due to external fire: 
High Pressure Receivers 1) Pressure vessels 
(Clause 15.1.6.1) The required discharge capacity of a pressure relief 
Design pressure 21 bar (2 100 kPa gauge) device for each pressure vessel shall be determined by 


the following equation: 
C=f DL [kg/s] 


Safety valve set pressure 19 bar (1 900 kPa gauge) 


SI  Diameterin  Lengthin Safety Valve Capacity (Air) 


No. mm mm kg/h where 

(1) Q) (3) (4) C= required discharge capacity of the relief device, 
i) 508 2743 200.67 air kg/s; 

ii) 508 3 658 261.56 f = capacity factor of the relief device which is 

.04 for ammonia; 

iii) 508 4877 356.75 o 0 | ili "i | | 

iv) did ms 335 46 [0.04 is in International System of Units (SI)] 

" T ds siio D — outside diameter of vessel, m; and 

vi) 762 РЕР 668.90 L- length of vessel, m. 

vii) 914 6 096 802.68 When one pressure relief device is used to protect more 
E iore p dope than one pressure vessel, the required capacity shall 
үш) | be the sum of the capacities required for each pressure 
ix) 1219 6 096 1070.24 vessel. 

x) 1372 6 096 1 204.02 2) Oil separators 

xi) 1 524 6 096 1 337.80 


The required discharge capacity for each oil separator 
xii) 1 778 6 096 1 560.77 shall be determined by the following equation: 


C." f DL [kg/s] 
Table 11 Safety Valve Capacity (Air) in kg/h for i 


; where 
Low Pressure Receivers | Б — 
(Оше 15:161) E T кана discharge capacity of the relief device, 
air kg/s; 
Design pressure 21 bar (2 100 kPa gauge) = capacity factor of the relief device which is 
Safety valve set pressure 16.8 bar (1 680 kPa gauge) 0.04 for ammonia; 
“Sl. Diameterin Lengthin Safety Valve Capacity (Air) = outside diameter of the oil separator, m; and 
No. mm mm kg/h = length ofthe oil separator, m. 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 3) Plate heat exchangers 
i) 762 3 658 401.34 The capacity of the pressure relief device for plate heat 
ii) 914 3 658 481.61 exchangers shall be based on the largest projected area 
iii) 016 2 438 356.75 of the exchanger using the following equation: 
iv) 016 3 048 445.93 C, Plate HX = f |L2+W2-H [kg / s] 
v) 1 219 3 048 535.12 
vi) 372 3 658 722.41 DERE 
vii) 372 4877 963.22 C, HX = Minimum required relief device 
УШ) 1524 4877 1070.24 cv for plate heat exchanger 
ix) 778 4 877 1 248.62 EN | | 
/ = relief device capacity factor 
15.2.7.2 The following scenarios shall be considered which is 0.04 for ammonia; 
when determining the pressure relief device capacity i = length of the plate pack m; 
for refrigerant containing components. It is permissible ; 
to use manufacturer’s data when determining relief W = width of the plate pack m; and 
requirements. All applicable scenarios shall be Н = Height of the plate pack m. 
considered and the capacity of the pressure relief 
device shall be based on the scenario with the largest 
capacity requirements: 
43 


This standard has been provided by BIS and ПАК. It shall not be copied or distributed by 
other means to other parties without the written permission of ПАК. 


IS 17773 : 2022 


4) Shell and tube heat exchangers 
The capacity of the pressure relief device for shell and 
tube heat exchangers shall be based on the sum of the 
capacities required for the heat exchanger and the surge 
drum (if fitted) as follows: 


C= f (D,L,+ D, Ly) [kg/s] 


where 
C= required discharge capacity of the relief device, 
kg/s; 
f= capacity factor of the relief device which is 
0.04 for ammonia; 
D, = outside diameter of the main vessel portion of 
the shell and tube heat exchanger, m; 
Lv — length of main vessel portion of the shell and 
tube heat exchanger, m; and 
D,- outside diameter of the surge drum, m 


LS = length of the surge drum, m. 
5) Product storage tanks 
For product storage tanks with cooling jackets, the 
capacity of the pressure relief device shall be based on 
the diameter of the storage tank and the height of the 
cooling jacket as follows: 


Cu = f° D H [kg/s] 


where 

C uk required discharge capacity of 
the relief device, kg/s; 

f — capacity factor ofthe relief device 
which is 0.04 for ammonia; 

D — outside diameter of the tank, m; 
and 

H — height ofthe active portion of the 


heat exchanger (distance between 
refrigerant supply and return) m. 


b) Potential for overpressure due to blocked outlet: 


1) Positive displacement compressor protection, 
see 8.2.1 for pressure relief protection for 
positive displacement compressors; 


2 


МУ 


Oil cooling heat exchangers (Annex В) 
provides a method for determining capacity 
for safety relief valves to relieve overpressure 
due to blocked outlets; and 

Hydrostatic relief protection, see 15.5 
describes the situations where hydrostatic 
relief is required for closed refrigerant circuits. 


3 


— 


с) Potential for overpressure due to internal heat load: 


Annex B provides a method for determining the 
capacity for safety relief valves to relieve pressure due 
to internal heat loads in heat exchangers. 


44 


d) Other potential overpressure scenarios: 


Evaluate other potential overpressure scenarios as 
applicable to the specific component being protected. 


15.2.8 Although not recommended, when combustible 
materials are stored within 6.1 m of a pressure vessel, 
the relief device capacity factor, f, in the formulas 
above becomes f = 1.25 [f = 0.1]. 


15.2.9 The rated discharge capacity of a pressure relief 
valve shall be determined. 


15.2.10 The rated discharge capacity of a rupture 
member discharging under critical flow conditions 
shall be determined by the following equations: 


C= 0.64 P, d? (Ib/min) 
d= 125 (CIP, )™ (in) 
[C= 1.1 x 105 P, d? (kg/s)] 
[d = 959 (С/Р, ^5 (mm)] 


where 
= rated discharge capacity in Ib/min [kg/s] of air; 
— smallest of the internal diameter of the in let 
pipe, retaining flanges or rupture member in 
inches [mm]; 
P, — rated pressure (psig) x 1.1 14.7 psi; and 
[P, — rated pressure (kPa gauge) x 1.1 + 101.3 kPa]. 


There shall be provisions to prevent plugging the piping 
in the event the rupture member relieves. 


15.3 Pressure Relief Device Piping 


Relief valve piping that discharges external to the 
closed-circuit ammonia refrigeration system is not part 
of the closed-circuit ammonia refrigeration system. 


15.3.1 Stop valves shall not be installed in the inlet 
or outlet piping of pressure relief devices unless 
procedures specified are followed. If a valve is used, it 
should be in locked open position with handle removed, 
so that no one can accidently close the valve. The 
pressure drop effects of full area stop valves shall be 
taken into account in the engineering of the relief vent 
piping system which should freely open to atmosphere, 
normally at least 5 m above the maximum height of 
occupied areas. 


15.3.2 The opening through all pipe, fittings, and 
pressure relief devices (if installed), including 3-way 
valves, between a pressure vessel and its pressure relief 
valve shall have at least the area of the pressure relief 
valve inlet. This upstream system shall be such that the 
pressure drop will not reduce the relieving capacity 
below that required or adversely affect the proper 
operation of the pressure relief valve. For compressor 
vessel connections, see 8.2.1. 


This standard has been provided by BIS and IIAR. It shall not be copied or distributed by 
other means to other parties without the written permission of IIAR. 


15.3.3 The pipe size should be 150 mm (6”) and 
200 mm (8”). The relief piping shall comply with the 
material requirements. 


15.3.4 The size of the discharge pipe from a pressure 
relief device shall not be less than the outlet size of the 
pressure relief device. The size and maximum equivalent 
length of common discharge piping downstream from 
each of two or more relief devices shall be governed 
by the sum of the discharge capacities of all the relief 
devices that are expected to discharge simultaneously, 
at the lowest pressure setting of any relief device that is 
discharging into the piping, with due allowance for the 
pressure drop in all downstream sections. 


15.3.5 Where piping inthe system and other components 
required to comply with this section may contain liquid 
refrigerant that can be isolated from the system during 
operation or service, 15.4 shall apply. 


15.3.6 Relief piping is intended for relieving only 
vapour from refrigerant relief valves. It is not permitted 
to use the relief piping system for the discharge of 
hydrostatic relief devices and any other fluid discharges 
(for example, secondary coolants, oil, etc). 


15.3.7 Discharge piping shall be supported as per the 
provisions of 13.4. 


15.4 Discharge from Pressure Relief Devices 


15.4.1 Atmospheric Discharge (Preferred Method) 


Pressure relief devices shall discharge vapour directly to 
the atmosphere (outdoors) provided that an engineering 
analysis, demonstrates that fire, health or environmental 
hazards will not result from atmospheric release of 
ammonia. In lieu of relieving directly to atmosphere, 
the following methods of discharging ammonia from 
pressure relief devices shall be permitted: 


a) Discharge through a treatment system; 
b) Discharge through a flaring system (see 15.4.1.7); 


c) Discharge through a water diffusion system in 
accordance with 15.4.2; and 


d) Discharge using other approved means. 


15.4.1.1 The maximum length of the discharge piping 
installed on the outlet of pressure relief devices 
discharging to the atmosphere shall be determined by 
the method in Annex A. 


15.4.1.2 Discharge piping from pressure relief devices 
piped to atmosphere shall have provision for draining 
moisture from the piping. 


15.4.1.3 The extremity of the pressure relief device(s) 
discharge piping relieved to atmosphere shall be 
6.1 m or more from any window, ventilation intake, or 
personnel exit. 


45 


IS 17773 : 2022 


15.4.1.4 The discharge from pressure relief devices 
to the atmosphere shall not be less than 4.8 m above 
the adjacent grade or roof level that is within a 6 m. 
horizontal distance. The termination of the discharge 
shall be arranged to avoid spraying of refrigerant on 
persons in the vicinity. 


15.4.1.5 The termination point of the vent discharge 
line shall be made in a manner that prevents foreign 
material or debris from entering the discharge piping. 


15.4.1.6 Discharge piping is permitted to be terminated 
2 m above platform surfaces that are occupied only 
during service and inspection provided that the 
termination is at least 5 m above the roof. 


15.4.1.7 Flaring systems, if installed, shall be tested to 
demonstrate their safety and effectiveness meets the 
design requirements as intended. 


15.4.2 Discharge through a Water Diffusion System 
(Tank of Water) 


The preferred method of discharge is to the atmosphere 
(see 15.4.1). If discharging through a water diffusion 
system (into a tank of water) is used, a tank shall 
be sized for containing 8.3 liters of water for each 
kilogram of ammonia that will be released in one hour 
from the largest relief device connected to the discharge 
pipe. The water shall be prevented from freezing (by a 
non-chemical means). The discharge pipe from the 
pressure-relief device shall distribute ammonia in 
the bottom of the tank but no lower than 10 m below 
the maximum liquid level. The tank shall contain the 
volume of water and ammonia without overflowing. 


15.5 Equipment and 
Overpressure Protection 


Piping Hydrostatic 


15.5.1 The manual isolation for any purpose of 
equipment and piping sub-section(s) shall be 
undertaken by trained technician(s) taking all necessary 
precautions to protect against overpressure due to 
thermal expansion of trapped liquid refrigerant. 


15.5.2 Equipment and piping sub-section(s) can be 
isolated and can trap liquid refrigerant in the isolated 
section as follows: 


a) Automatically during normal operation; 


b) Automatically during shut-down (by any means, 
including alarm or power failure); 


c) During planned isolation for standby or seasonal 
conditions (for example, situations when the 
valves in the ammonia lines to/from evaporative 
condensers are closed during cold weather 
conditions); or 


d 


— 


From equipment or component fault shall be 
protected against over pressure due to thermal 
expansion of trapped liquid refrigerant by either: 


This standard has been provided by BIS and IIAR. It shall not be copied or distributed by 
other means to other parties without the written permission of IIAR. 


IS 17773 : 2022 


1) A static relief device or check valve relieving 
to another part of the close-circuit system; or 


2) An expansion compensation device. 


If trapping of liquid with subsequent thermal expansion 
can occur only during maintenance that is, when 
personnel are performing maintenance tasks — either 
engineering or administrative controls shall be used to 
relieve or prevent the overpressure. 


15.5.3 Static pressure relief valves shall not be used as 
shut off valves (see 13.3.4). 


16 INSTRUMENTATION AND CONTROLS 


This clause applies to instrumentation and controls 
installed on closed-circuit ammonia refrigerating 
systems and components. 


16.1 General 


16.1.1 Instruments and controls shall be provided 
to indicate operating parameters of the refrigeration 
system and components and provide the ability 
to manually or automatically control the starting, 
stopping and operation of the system or components. 
The instruments and controls shall provide notice to 
a monitored location if the system’s critical operating 
parameters determined by the owner/operator are 
exceeded. 


16.1.2 The function, sequence and operating parameters 
of each control (if applicable) shall be documented and 
provided to the owner/operator. 


16.1.3 During a power failure, a means to monitor the 
status of the ammonia concentration levels shall be 
available. 


16.1.4 If it is intended to control safety functions of the 
system (for example, emergency exhaust, equipment 
shutdown), the basic control system shall be designed 
to be separate and independent to the extent that its 
functional integrity is not compromised during normal 
operations. For example, changing set points for system 
operation (for example, temperature, pressure, flow, 
vessel levels) shall not affect alarm levels. 


16.1.5 All electrical control systems must be in 
compliance with SP 30. 

16.2 Visual Liquid Level Indicators 

Bull’s eyes, tubular glass and flat “armored glass” 
linear sight glasses/sight columns, pressure gauges. 
16.2.1 Design 


a) Design of refrigerant containing parts shall meet 
the requirements of at least one of the following: 


1) Be listed either individually or as part of an 
assembly or a system; 


2) Prove satisfactory by successful performance 
under comparable service conditions; and 


3) Have a pressure-containment design based on 
an analysis consistent with the general design 
philosophy embodied and substantiated by one 
of the following: 


i) Proof tests as described in 5 and 12; and 
ii) Experimental stress analysis. 


b) Minimum design pressure for visual level 
indicators shall be 2 070 kPa gauge. 
NOTE — For visual level indicators designed specifically 


for and usable for low side use exclusively, minimum design 
pressure shall be 1 720 kPa gauge. 


16.2.2 All visual liquid level indicators used to 
observe the refrigerant level, such as in a vessel or heat 
exchanger, shall be installed in such a manner that they 
are protected from physical damage. 


16.2.3 Accumulators or intercoolers shall be equipped 
with high level indicator switches which actuate a high 
level alarm, and where practical, cause the associated 
compressor(s) to shut down when a high refrigerant 
level is detected. 


16.2.4 Linear liquid level indicators (sight columns) 
shall be fitted with internal check-type shutoff valves. 
This type of sight glass shall also have robust protection 
against accidental breakage 360 degrees around the 
glass tube, over the full length of the tube. 


Liquid-level-gauge columns using bull’s-eye type sight 
glasses are an exception to this. 
NOTE — It is recommended that linear visual liquid indicators 


(sight columns) be of the flat “armored glass” type in preference 
to the tubular glass type. 


16.2.5 Bull’s eye sight glasses shall be verified 
compatible for use with ammonia, and shall be an 
appropriate thickness for the diameter and type of glass 
that is used. 


16.2.5.1 Bull’s eye sight glasses shall be traceable 
through a serial number or other form of identification 
in a manner that does not compromise the glass 
structure or integrity. 


16.2.5.2 Sight glasses and linear liquid level indicators 
shall not be installed in areas subject to cyclic thermal 
expansion or liquid hammer. 


16.3 Controls, Electric and Pneumatic 


This applies to sensing devices which initiate 
control pulses or signals applied for use in ammonia 
closed-circuit refrigerating systems. 


Relay switches, contactors, and starters are not included 
in this clause. 


This standard has been provided by BIS and ПАК. It shall not be copied or distributed by 
other means to other parties without the written permission of ПАК. 


16.3.1 Design 
a) Design of refrigerant containing parts shall meet 
the requirements of at least one of the following: 


1) Be listed either individually or as part of an 
assembly or a system; 
2) Prove satisfactory by successful performance 
under comparable service conditions; and 
3) Have a pressure-containment design based on 
an analysis consistent with the general design 
philosophy embodied and substantiated by one 
of the following: 
i) Proof tests as described in 5 and 12; and 
ii) Experimental stress analysis. 


b 


— 


Minimum design pressure for control instruments 
or devices shall be 2 070 kPa gauge. 
NOTE — For controls designed specifically for and usable for 


low side use exclusively, minimum design pressure shall be 
1 720 kPa gauge. 


16.3.2 Procedures/Testing 
16.3.2.1 Leakage test 


Each completely assembled control shall be subject to 
a manufacturer's refrigerant side bench test using air 
or other suitable fluid which will enable observation of 
leakage. Each control shall be proven tight at a pressure 
not less than the design pressure for which it is rated. 


16.3.2.2 Functional test 


Each completely assembled control shall be subjected 
to a manufacturer's bench test which will simulate the 
field performance of the control in a manner which 
will determine that the completed device functions as 
designed or specified. 


16.3.3 Equipment Identification 


16.3.3.1 | Manufacturers producing electrical 
and/or pneumatic controls shall provide the following 
minimum nameplate data: 

a) Manufacturer’s name; 

b) Manufacturer’s serial number (where applicable); 

c) Model number; 

d) Electric supply: volts, full load amps, frequency 
(Hz), phase (where applicable); 

e) Pneumatic system: control range: maximum 
supply air pressure, minimum supply air pressure, 
required actual cubic feet per minute (ACFM), 
(where applicable); 

f) Flow direction (where applicable); and 

g) Any special characteristics of a control device 


shall be noted either on the name tag or in the 
accompanying literature. 


47 


IS 17773 : 2022 


17 AMMONIA DETECTION AND ALARMS 


This clause applies to ammonia detection and alarms 
installed on closed-circuit ammonia refrigerating 
systems. 


17.1 Scope 


The requirements given from 17.2 to 17.6 applies to 
detection in areas containing refrigeration equipment; 
and does not include detection outdoors, within piping 
or other system components. 


17.2 Power for Detectors and Alarms 


The power supply for the refrigerant gas detectors 
shall be on a dedicated branch circuit. If the machine 
room equipment power shuts down, the refrigerant 
gas detection system shall remain on. A trouble signal 
indicating fault in the power system shall be reported 
to a monitored location so that corrective action can 
be taken. 


17.3 Testing 


17.3.1 The facility shall establish a time schedule 
for testing of the ammonia detectors and the alarm 
system. The manufacturer’s recommendations shall 
be followed or modified based on documented 
experience. 


17.3.2 Where no recommendations are provided, 
these devices shall be scheduled for exercising on an 
annual basis. 


17.4 Detector Placement and Alarms 


17.4.1 The detection sensors, or sampling tubes that 
draw air to the detection sensors, shall be located with 
consideration for personnel safety and maintenance 
access. If the room is equipped with an exhaust 
system, the detection sensors shall be located within 
the airflow of the ventilation system. 


17.4.2 The audible alarm shall provide a sound 
pressure level of at least 15 dBA above the ambient 
sound pressure level of the area in which it is installed. 


17.4.3 The meaning of each alarm shall be clearly 
marked by signage near the visual and audible alarms. 
17.5 Machinery Rooms 


See 6.13 for refrigerant detection in machinery rooms. 


17.6 Other Areas 


Areas other than machinery rooms that require 
refrigerant detection per this standard shall adhere to 
the following requirements: 


This standard has been provided by BIS and ПАК. It shall not be copied or distributed by 
other means to other parties without the written permission of ПАК. 


IS 17773 : 2022 


17.6.1 Level 1 Ammonia Detection Required 


At least one ammonia detector in the room is required. 
The detector shall actuate an alarm that reports to a 
monitored location so that corrective action can be 
taken at a level no higher than 25 ppm. 


17.6.2 Level 2 Ammonia Detection Required 


At least one ammonia detector in the room is required. 
The detector shall actuate an alarm that reports to a 
monitored location so that corrective action can be 
taken at a level no higher than 25 ppm. 


There shall be audible and visual alarms inside the room 
for the room to warn that when the alarm is activated, 
access to the room is restricted to authorized, trained 
personnel only. 


17.6.3 Level 3 Ammonia Detection Required 


At least one ammonia detector in the room is required. 
The detector shall actuate an alarm that reports to a 
monitored location so that corrective action can be 
taken at a level no higher than 25 ppm. 


48 


There shall be audible and visual alarms inside the room 
for the room to warn that when the alarm is activated, 
access to the room is restricted to authorized, trained 
personnel only. 


Upon alarm, all valves feeding liquid or hot gas to 
equipment in the affected area shall be closed, and 
any pumps, fans, or other motors associated with the 
ammonia refrigeration equipment in the room shall be 
de energized. 


17.6.4 Level 4 Ammonia Detection Required 


At least one ammonia detector in the room is required. 
The detector shall actuate an alarm that reports to a 
monitored location so that corrective action can be 
taken at a level no higher than 25 ppm. 


There shall be audible and visual alarms inside the room 
for the room to warn that when the alarm is activated, 
access to the room is restricted to authorized, trained 
personnel only. 


This standard has been provided by BIS and ПАК. It shall not be copied or distributed by 
other means to other parties without the written permission of ПАК. 


IS 17773 : 2022 


SECTION 4 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 15.4.1.1) 


(Normative) 


ALLOWABLE EQUIVALENT LENGTH OF DISCHARGE PIPING 


A-1 ALLOWABLE EQUIVALENT LENGTH 
OF DISCHARGE PIPING 


The design back pressure due to flow in the discharge 
piping at the outlet of pressure relief devices, 
discharging to atmosphere, shall be limited by the 
allowable equivalent length of piping determined by 
equation | or equation 2. 


Equation 1: Allowable relief discharge piping length, 
English units 


Р, 
| 0.2146 (2 - P2) A 
fe 6f 


Equation 2: Allowable relief discharge piping length, 
SI units 


7.4381х107° d? (P2 – P?) axm% | 
L CENE LSU 0 2 2 
JC 500 f 


L 


equivalent length of discharge piping, m [ft]; 

rated capacity as stamped on the relief device 
in kg/s, or in standard cubic feet per minute 
(SCFM) multiplied by 0.076 4, or as calculated 
in 15.2.7.2, for a rupture member, or as 
adjusted for reduced capacity due to piping as 


specified by the manufacturer of the device, or 
as adjusted for reduced capacity due to piping 
as estimated by an approved method; 


Moody friction factor in fully turbulent flow 
(see typical values below); 


inside diameter of pipe or tube, in mm; 
= natural logarithm; 


absolute pressure at outlet of discharge piping, 
kPa; and 


allowed back pressure (absolute) at the outlet 
of pressure relief device, kPa. 


For the allowed back pressure (P,), use the percent of 
set pressure specified by the manufacturer, or, when 
the allowed back pressure is not specified, use the 
following values, where P is the set pressure: 


a) for conventional relief valves, 15 percent of set 
pressure, P, = (0.15 P) + atmospheric pressure; 


b) for balanced relief valves, 25 percent of set 
pressure, P, = (0.25 P) + atmospheric pressure; 
and 

с) for rupture members and pilot operated relief 
valves, 50 percent of set pressure, P, = (0.50 P) + 
atmospheric pressure. 

Typical Moody friction factors (f) for fully turbulent 
flow is given in Table 12 and Table 13: 


Table 12 Typical Moody Friction Factors, Steel Tubing Piping (NPS) 
(Clause A-1) 


SI No. Piping, Nominal Pipe Size Nominal Diameter — Inner Diameter (in.) f 
(NPS) (in.) (DN) 

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) 3/8 8 0.315 0.013 6 
ii) ГА 10 0.430 0.012 8 
iii) 5/8 13 0.545 0.012 2 
iv) % 16 0.666 0.0117 
у) 7/8 20 0.785 0.0114 
vi) 1 3/8 25 1.025 0.010 8 
vii) 13/8 32 1.265 0.010 4 
уш) 15/8 40 1.505 0.0101 

NOTE — 1 inch = 2.54 cm 
49 


This standard has been provided by BIS and ПАК. It shall not be copied or distributed by 
other means to other parties without the written permission of ПАК. 


IS 17773 : 2022 


Table 13 Typical Moody Friction Factors, Steel Piping 
(Clause A-1) 


SI No. Piping Nominal Pipe Size Nominal Diameter Inner Diameter (in.) 
(NPS) (in.) (DN) 

(0) (2) (3) (4) (5) 

i) 5 15 0.622 0.025 9 
ii) % 20 0.824 0.024 
iii) 1 25 1.049 0.022 5 
iv) 1 32 1.38 0.020 9 
у) 1% 40 1.61 0.0202 
vi) 2 50 2.067 0.019 
vii) 2% 65 2.469 0.0182 
viii) 3 80 3.068 0.017 3 
ix) 4 100 4.026 0.016 3 
x) 5 125 5.047 0.015 5 
xi) 6 150 6.065 0.014 9 


NOTE — 1 inch = 2.54 cm 


This standard has been provided by BIS and IIAR. It shall not be copied or distributed by 
other means to other parties without the written permission of IIAR. 


50 


ANNEX В 


(Informative) 


IS 17773 : 2022 


METHODS FOR CALCULATING RELIEF VALVE CAPACITY FOR HEAT EXCHANGER 
INTERNAL LOADS 


B-1 INTRODUCTION 


This informative Annex presents approaches for 
determining the capacity ofrelief valves for overpressure 
scenarios not explicitly covered in 15. This information 
can be used to documenta basis for relief device capacity 
determination for heat exchangers that may be subject 
to overpressure due to internal heat loads or blocked 
valves that can lead to high refrigerant pressures. 
Pressure relief devices need to have sufficient mass 
flow carrying capability (capacity) to limit the pressure 
rise in a protected component to prevent its catastrophic 
failure. The minimum required relief device capacity 
will depend on the specify component being protected 
and the scenarios under which overpressure is being 
created. The maximum relief device capacity is not 
limited by codes and standards. However, over-sizing 
relief valves shall be avoided to prevent unstable relief 
device operation. 


Although the methods presented in this informative 
Annex are intended to apply across a wide range of 
refrigeration equipment and operating conditions, it is 
not possible to neatly prescribe relief device sizing and 
selection criteria to cover all situations. The approach 
presented here is intended to be illustrative of the 
process that can be followed in establishing pressure 
relief requirements for specify situations. As such, the 
use of sound engineering principles and the application 
of engineering judgment are expected. 


It is important to emphasize that for all of the cases 
considered, the rate of refrigerant vapour production 
needs to be converted to an air mass flow since all 
of the relief devices are rated on an air basis. In the 
sections that follow are methods for relief capacity 
determination for different types of heat exchangers 
based on internal heat addition. 


B-2 NOMENCLATURE 


C шй = secondary fluid heat capacity, 
J/kg:K (Btu/Ibm-?F); 
C шыш = .clean-in-place fluid heat 
capacity, J/kg:K (Btu/Ibm-?F); 
C — minimum required discharge 
capacity of the relief device for 
a vessel, kg/s (Ibm/min of air); 
ЕРЕ = minimum required relief 


device capacity for plate heat 
exchanger, kg/s (lbm/min of 
air); 


vapor,sat 


А шава: 


rinem 
M sig cip 


m refrigerant 


minimum required discharge 
capacity of the relief device 
protecting an oil separator, kg/s 
(Ibm/min of air); 


minimum required discharge 
capacity of the relief device 
protecting a product tank heat 
exchanger, kg/s (Ibm/min of 
air); 

outside diameter of vessel or 
product tank, m (ft); 


outside diameter of surge drum, 
m (ft); 

outside diameter of the 
main vessel portion of the 
shell-and-tube heat exchanger, 
m (ft); 

relief device capacity factor that 
depends on refrigerant type and 
whether combustible materials 
are in close proximity to the 
pressure vessel; 


height of the plate pack or tank 
heat exchanger, m (ft); 


saturated vapour refrigerant 
enthalpy at the fully accumulated 
relief device set pressure, J/kg 
(Btu/lbm); 


saturated liquid refrigerant 
enthalpy at fully accumulated 
relief device set pressure, J/kg 
(Btu/lbm); 


length of the vessel or plate 
pack, m (ft); 


Log mean 
difference, °C (°F); 


length of surge drum, m (ft); 


temperature 


length of the main vessel portion 
of the shell-and tube heat 
exchanger, m (ft); 

secondary fluid mass flow rate, 
kg/s (Ibm/min); 

clean-in-place fluid mass flow 
rate, kg/s (Ibm/min); 


refrigerant vapour generation 
rate, kg/s (Ibm/min); 


This standard has been provided by BIS and ПАК. It shall not be copied or distributed by 
other means to other parties without the written permission of HAR. 


IS 17773 : 2022 


M sfrigerant,OC 


M .frigerant;tank 


Pr 


Pr 


Qu 


Тае 
refrigerant 


ref,sat 


return 


supply 


UA 


UA’ 


The relevant SI 


units and corresponding conversion 


mass flow rate of refrigerant 
vapour generated by the oil 
cooler, kg/s (Ibm/min); 


mass flow rate of refrigerant 
vapour generated in a tank heat 
exchanger, kg/s (Ibm/min) 


Prandtl number for fluid used to 
establish the nominal UA (2); 


Prandtl number for fluid used to 
establish the modified UA’ (—); 


heat exchanger heat flux, W 
(Btu/min); 


oil cooling heat exchanger heat 
load, W (Btu/min); 

maximum fluid supply 
temperature during СТР, °С (?F); 
refrigerant 
temperature, ?C (?F); 


refrigerant's saturation 
temperature at the relief valve 
set pressure, °C (°F); 


saturation 


load-side heat ^ exchanger 
secondary fluid return 
temperature, ?C (?F); 

load-side heat ^ exchanger 
secondary fluid supply 
temperature, ?C (?F); 

overall heat transfer 


coefficient-area product, W/m?K 
(Btu/min-°F); 

modified overall heat transfer 
coefficient area product, W/m?K 
(Btu/min-°F); 

width of the plate pack, m (ft); 
and 


refrigerant-to-product tank 
effectiveness (estimated as 
0.2 for bulk tanks) 


factors are given below for guidance: 


1°C 


1 т 


1J/kg/K 
1 kg/s 

1 J/kg 
1W 


33.8°F 

3.28 ft 

39.37 inch 

2.388 460-10 * ВТОЛЬ/Е 
2.205 Ibm/min 

0.000 43 Btu/Ibm 

0.056 8 Btu/min 


52 


]W/(m*K) = 0.1762 Btu/h/ft?/°F 
] Pa = N/m 

= 0.000 145 psig 

= 10° bar 


B-3 APPLICATION 


If a heat exchanger is built to the requirements of 
IS 4503 or 5 and 12 of this standard it requires pressure 
relief protection as per 15. 


In cases where conventional pressure relief protection 
is not required, it is often desirable to size a suitable 
“process” relief that will prevent over pressuring the 
heat exchanger during abnormal operation. The first 
step in determining the minimum required mass flow 
for relief protection is defining the scenarios likely to 
cause the overpressure situation. Heat exchangers are 
susceptible to over-pressure by internal heat loads from 
either product or other secondary fluid flow streams 
(e.g. clean-in-place systems). In either situation, the key 
consideration for relief device sizing is determining the 
rate of refrigerant vapour production by evaporation 
which will be dependent on the heat load and the 
refrigerant properties (saturation pressure temperature 
relationship and heat of vapourization). 


B-3.1 Shell-and-Tube, Plate and Frame, and Scraped 
(Swept) Surface Heat Exchangers 


Most scenarios involve alternate means of thermal 
energy input to the heat exchanger when the 
refrigerant side of the chiller has been isolated from 
the refrigeration system but the secondary fluid side 
remains active. Examples of thermal loads that could 
generate excessive pressure in a shell-and-tube or plate- 
and-frame heat exchanger may include but are not 
limited to product loads and clean-in-place (CIP) loads. 


Of primary concern are those thermal energy sources 
whose temperatures that exceed the saturation 
temperature corresponding to the heat exchanger's 
maximum allowable working pressure (MAWP) or 
pressure relief device set pressure. If the maximum 
fluid-side supply temperature is less than the saturation 
temperature corresponding to the heat exchanger's 
MAWP. If the maximum fluid-side temperature is 
greater than the saturation temperature corresponding 
to the heat exchanger's MAWP, vapour generation 
rates based on the “internal loads" shall be estimated to 
determine if a larger relief device capacity requirement 
results. 


The first step in the process of considering an internal 
heat load scenario that could generate an overpressure 
situation 1s to evaluate the normal capacity of the 
heat exchanger. The next step is to estimate the 
heat exchanger's capacity under the adverse load 
condition and determine the corresponding rate of 


This standard has been provided by BIS and IIAR. It shall not be copied or distributed by 
other means to other parties without the written permission of IIAR. 


refrigerant vapour generation. Lastly, the predicted 
rate of refrigerant vapour generation is converted to 
an equivalent air mass flow rate to allow relief device 
selection. 


Determining the rate of refrigerant vapour production 
can be accomplished by solving a system of equations 
that characterize the equipment heat transfer 
performance, as given by equation (3), and the balance 
of both refrigerant-side and fluid-side energy flows as 
given by equations (4) and (5), respectively. The system 
of governing equations is as follows: 


О = UA.LMTD m 
L MTD _ (Lees ~ ees) 
In | oun refrigerant | 
T uppt Е ; ro ‚. 4 
Q = Теа" Сона . (T oa E ES 5 
Q = TM). efrigerant’ (Л osi m hia ui 6 
where 

Q = heat exchanger heat flux, W 
(Btu/min); 

UA — overall heat transfer 
coeffcient-area product, W/m?K 
(Btu/min-°F); 

LMTD = Log mean temperature difference, 
3C CR) 

CN =  load-side heat exchanger 
secondary fluid return temperature, 
°C CF); 

udis =  load-side heat exchanger secondary 
fluid supply temperature, °C (°F); 

© = refrigerant saturation temperature, 
refrigerant 
°C (°F); 

a = secondary fluid mass flow rate, 
kg/s (Ibm/min); 

eX — secondary fluid heat capacity, 
J/kg-K (Btu/Ibm-?F); 

ЖО Ша refrigerant vapour generation rate, 
kg/s (Ibm/min); 

—— € saturated vapour refrigerant 
enthalpy at the fully accumulated 
relief device set pressure, J/kg 
(Btu/Ibm); and 

WE е saturated liquid refrigerant 


enthalpy at fully accumulated 
relief device set pressure, J/kg 
(Btu/Ibm). 


In a liquid-containing heat exchanger, the refrigerant 
temperature (T ) is assumed to be the saturation 


refrigerant 


53 


IS 17773 : 2022 


temperature corresponding to the pressure relief device 
set (opening) pressure. The enthalpy of vapourization 
Ch one" hi asa) for the refrigerant-side energy balance 
is evaluated at the pressure relief device set pressure as 
well. The return fluid temperature to the heat exchanger 
(T umn) 15 estimated based on the load which is a function 
of the fluid flow rate and return fluid from process, CIP 
set temperature, etc. The mass flow rate of fluid on the 
load-side of the heat exchanger (т, is required as 


well as the load-side fluid heat capacity (C, guia) 


The nominal value of the heat exchanger's overall 
heat transfer-area product (UA) is based on design 
operating conditions. Equation (3) is used to estimate 
a nominal or design UA. Once a nominal or design UA 
18 established, it can be adjusted or corrected for use 
in estimating the refrigerant vapour production rate 
arising in an overpressure situation. For example, if the 
fluid-side flow rate would be expected to vary from the 
design condition, the following relationship based on 
the Dittus-Boelter turbulent heat transfer correlation 
could be used to predict a modified UA based on an 
alternative fluid-side flow rate. 


m 0.8 N04 
еи = (=) 
M nid Pr 7 
where 
UA = nominal overall heat transfer coefficient area 


product, W/m?K (Btu/min-°F); 


UA’= modified overall heat transfer coefficient area 
product, W/m?K (Btu/min-°F); 
Pr = Prandtl number for fluid used to establish the 
nominal UA (—); and 
Pr’= Prandtl number for fluid used to establish the 


modified UA' (—). 


In addition, equation (7) accommodates changes in 
working fluids when transitioning from a design load 
condition to a different working fluid that may arise 
and create an overpressure situation (e.g. changing 
from a fluid beverage during load conditions to a 
CIP solution during clean-up) that forms the basis 
for sizing pressure relief protection for the heat 
exchanger. 


The above-mentioned known information (T "m 

vaporsat ^ liquid,sat ^ return’ M ша * Сава апі UA) can be 
used to simultaneously solve equations (3), (5), and 
(6) to find the remaining three unknown variables: 

m ИР? and Q. The quantity of interest is 
the refrigerant vapour flow rate, m... which 
represents the mass flow of vapour generated during 
the overpressure scenario. Once obtained, the resulting 
refrigerant mass flow rate must then be converted to an 
equivalent mass flow rate for air using the following 


relationship: 


This standard has been provided by BIS and IIAR. It shall not be copied or distributed by 
other means to other parties without the written permission of IIAR. 


IS 17773 : 2022 


У air refrigerant E A ir 

C, -2m.,. . 
r refrigerant C T 
refrigerant air refrigerant 


2.8 


The above formula assumes a refrigerant temperature 
of 9.84 °C (49.7 °F) and an air temperature of 15.85°C 
(60.53 °F). Values of the constants, С, апа — for 
ammonia are as follows: 


C ,. (Ammonia) = 356 
С ынаа (Ammonia) = 347 


The calculated air mass flow based on the estimated 
refrigerant vapour mass flow represents the minimum 
required relief capacity for the internal load scenario. 


Example: Scraped (swept) surface heat exchanger 


Heat exchanger characteristics for one manufacturer’s 
scraped (swept) surface heat exchanger: 


U = 300 Btu/hre ft? °F 
6f? <А < 14.5 f? 


150 psig < MAWP < 250 psig 
Heat load assumption 
Internal Load is created by 160 °F CIP fluid 
Q=UA+ LMTD €£U-*A«(T,, -T у) 


cip 
Q x M refrigerant ч (Л — ES hy uid sat ) 
О.А. (Тер Е Teatres) 


min 


Ch apor -H liquid )*60 "e 


ref 


Heat exchanger characteristics 


U = 300 Btu/hr-f?^-?F 

A = 14.5 fP 

МАЙР = 150 psig 

[Ah = 488 Btullb,, T „= 89.6 °F] 
Tas = 160°F 
300 2 — 45g :(160—89.6)?F 

P hr — ft —°F 

ref Btu min 


488) — -60 
( ) Tom hr 


=10.5 0 (аттопіа) 
тіп 


Ibm 


min 


№, =1.314-10.5 =13.8( 


| 


Heat exchanger characteristics 


U = 300 Btulhr-fr-°F 
A = 14.5 fr 
MAWP = 250 psig 
[Ah = 453 Btu/lb > T... = 120.8 °F] 
Ts = 160°F 


54 


300 14.5 f£ -(160 —120.8)°F 


Btu 
hr f? -*F 
(453) 814 буті" 
lbm hr 


= qe (ammonia) 


Ion 


min 


№, =1.324-6.3 = өз 


| 


B-3.2 Oil Cooling Heat Exchangers 


Over-pressurization can occur when a thermo siphon 
oil-cooled screw compressor package is started while 
the refrigerant-side of the oil cooler is isolated (valve 
out). In this case, the compressor will operate and reject 
heat to the oil cooler resulting in an increasing supply 
oil temperature back to the compressor over time. As the 
compressor continues to operate and reject a portion of 
its heat of compression through its oil to the oil cooling 
heat exchanger, a point will be reached when the 
on-board compressor safeties shutdown the unit on high 
oil temperature. A typical screw compressor package 
high oil temperature cutout is approximately 96?C. 
The saturation pressure corresponding to a refrigerant 
temperature equal to the oil at its high temperature 
cut-out of 96°С is 57.69 kg/cm? for ammonia. Since 
this pressure is significantly greater than the oil 
cooling heat exchanger's maximum allowable working 
pressure, the oil cooler will be subject to overpressure 
under this scenario. 


The mass flow rate of refrigerant vapour generated on 
the refrigerant-side of an oil cooler in an overpressure 
situation is given by: 


hi = Qoc 
NETUS Un реш DE Рамаза) 9 
where 
Осе = оп cooling heat load generated 


by the compressor operating 
at design suction pressure 
and discharge pressures with 
a corresponding supply oil 
temperature at the compressor 
high temperature cut-out limit, 
W (Btu/min); 

mass flow rate of refrigerant 
vapour generated by the oil 
cooler, kg/s (Ibm/min); 


saturated vapour refrigerant 
enthalpy ае fully accumulated 
relief device opening pressure, 
J/kg (Btu/Ibm); and 


M efrigerant,OC 


vapor,sat 


This standard has been provided by BIS and ПАК. It shall not be copied or distributed by 
other means to other parties without the written permission of ПАК. 


= saturated liquid refrigerant 
enthalpy atthe fully accumulated 
relief device opening pressure 
J/kg (Btu/Ibm). 


liquid,sat 


The best source for determining the overpressure 
condition oil cooling loads, О, is by information 
provided from the compressor manufacturers. Some 
compressor manufacturers’ computerized selection 
programs provide this information based on users 
inputting the design suction and discharge pressures 
along with oil supply temperatures. The programs return 
the resulting oil cooling load under the modified (high 
oil supply temperature) conditions. The oil cooling load 
imposed on the oil coolers can be evaluated at these 
modified conditions or alternatively, the full oil cooling 
load can be taken for sizing the relief device. 


The resulting oil cooling load at the elevated operating 
condition (О) can then be used to estimate the 
refrigerant mass flow rate using equation (9). The 
refrigerant mass flow rate is then converted to an 
air basis using equation (8); thereby permitting the 
selection of a relief device. 


B-3.3 Product Storage Tanks 


The scenario for refrigerant vapour generation in the 
heat exchanger due to internal loads arises during 
clean-in-place. 


The rate of refrigerant vapour generation during clean- 
in-place can be estimated as follows: 


EM sua. ciP ^ CP fuid,ciP * 


_ (T huid CIP, supply ~ Token 
refrigerant ,tank 
Uns = ЖУУ ) t 10 


IS 17773 : 2022 


where 


— mass flow rate of refrigerant 
vapour generated in the heat 
exchanger (Ibm/ min); 


refrigerant,tank 


refrigerant to product tank 

effectiveness (estimated as 0.2); 

CIP fluid mass flow rate, kg/s 

(Ibm/min); 

= СІР fluid heat capacity, W/m?K 
(approximated as 1 Btu/lbm- 
°F); 

= maximum fluid supply 
temperature during CIP, °C 
CF); 

= refrigerant's saturation 

temperature at the relief valve 

set pressure, °С (?F); 


M auia cip z 


C шас IP 


T авав 


ref,sat 


= saturated vapour refrigerant 
enthalpy at fully accumulated 
relief device set pressure, J/kg 
(Btu/Ibm); and 


— saturated liquid refrigerant 
enthalpy at fully accumulated 
relief device set pressure, J/kg 
(Btu/Ibm). 


vapor,sat 


liquid,sat 


After determining the refrigerant mass flow rate, the 
relief device capacity (on an air-equivalent basis) is 
found by using equation (8). The greater of these two 
capacities forms the basis for relief device selection for 
a product tank. 


A typical set point value and tolerance for a 2 068 kPa 
gauge (300 psig) system is given below: 


51 No. Set Point Value and Tolerance Pressure, in Pressure, in psig 
kPa Gauge 
(1) Q) (3) (4) 
1) Relief full open (+ 10 percent) 2 275 330 
+ 3 percent tolerance 2 130 309 
i) Relief valve point 2 068 300 
—3 percent tolerance 2 006 291 
ii) Potential seep point (— 10 percent) 1 861 270 
EPCS set point 
(EPCS set point is equal or below the seep point) 1 724 to 1 862 250 to 270 
iv) Design system operating 
pressure (—25 percent) 1 551 225 
(System operating pressure should 25 percent lower than 
the relief valve setting when selecting relief valves) 
Compressor off-set point 1551 225 


55 


This standard has been provided by BIS and ПАК. It shall not be copied or distributed by 
other means to other parties without the written permission of ПАК. 


IS 17773 : 2022 


A typical set point value and tolerance for a 7 124 kPa 
(250 psig) system is given below: 


SI No. Set Point Value and Tolerance Pressure, in kPa Pressure, in psig 
Gauge 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
1) Relief full open (+ 10 percent) 1 896 275 
+ 3 percent tolerance 1775 257.5 
ii) Relief valve point 1 724 250 
—3 percent tolerance 1 672 242.5 
ili) Potential seep point (—10 percent) (EPCS set 
point is equal or below the seep point) 1 862 270 
EPCS set point 1 448 to 1 552 210 to 225 
iv) Design system operating 
pressure (—25 percent) 1 379 200 


(System operating pressure should 25 percent 
lower than the relief valve setting when 
selecting relief valves) 


Compressor off-set point ] 379 200 


56 


This standard has been provided by BIS and IIAR. It shall not be copied or distributed by 
other means to other parties without the written permission of IIAR. 


IS 17773 : 2022 


ANNEX C 
(Informative) 


DUPLICATE NAMEPLATES ON PRESSURE VESSELS 


C-1 DUPLICATE 
PRESSURE VESSELS 


NAMEPLATES ON 


Duplicate nameplates may be desirable in certain 
circumstances, especially where the original nameplate 
may be obscured by insulation. Duplicate nameplate 
can be made as per 5.10.8.5.1. 


Experience has shown that attempting to access the 
original nameplate for inspection through windows, 
removable insulation sections, stanchion mounting, 
etc. tends to compromise the integrity of the insulation 
system. Moisture ingress into the insulation system 
follows, with possible damage to the pressure vessel. 
The use of duplicate nameplates helps prevent vessel 
damage from inspection ports and other deliberate 
damage to insulation. 


Unfortunately, using duplicate nameplates creates the 
possibility that the wrong (duplicate) nameplate will be 
applied to a vessel. While the easiest way to accomplish 
this is for the manufacturer to weld the nameplate to a 
support or other permanent vessel appurtenance that 
will not be insulated, field installation is also permitted. 


(Some inspection authorities consider the insulation 
jacket as a permanent attachment to the vessel, and 
therefore the duplicate nameplate may be applied to the 
jacket.) The manufacturer’s procedures for ensuring a 
proper match of duplicate to original must be rigorously 
followed. It is advisable to record the location of the 
original nameplate should inspection be necessary. 


Various inspection authorities, such as state vessel 
inspectors may demand to inspect and/or approve the 
duplicate and original nameplates before insulation 
is applied. While many inspection bodies will accept 
a duplicate nameplate as evidence compliance for an 
insulated vessel, authorized inspectors may always 
demand to inspect the original vessel, including 
its nameplate. In particular, when the inspector is 
concerned about the physical condition of the vessel or 
questions the provenance of the duplicate nameplate, he 
or she may require the entire insulation system or any 
part to be removed to permit inspection. Damage to the 
insulation system must be promptly and professionally 
repaired, and due allowance should be made for the 
shorter service life of the repaired insulation system. 


ANNEX D 
(Informative) 
STRESS CORROSION CRACKING 


D-1 BACKGROUND 


Stress corrosion cracking (SCC) is a generic term 
describing the initiation and propagation of cracks 
that can occur in metals when subjected to stress in 
the presence of an enabling chemical environment. 
The stress can originate from an externally applied 
force, thermal stress, or residual stress from welding 
or forming. 


D-2 Carbon steel is susceptible to SCC when stressed 
in the presence of ammonia and oxygen. 


Ammonia SCC has been recognized as a problem in 
the agricultural, chemical, and transport industries for 
many years. 


Studies have shown that the following factors contribute 
to the likelihood of SCC: 


a) Material yield strength greater than 344.7 MPa; 


b) Oxygen contamination; 


c) Residual or applied stress; and 
d) Water content less than 0.2 percent. 


D-3 SCC IN AMMONIA REFRIGERATION 
SYSTEMS 


SCC in ammonia refrigeration systems is less common, 
but there have been reports of SCC in vessels and 
piping. Vessels seem to be more susceptible to SCC 
because of their higher material yield strengths and 
residual fabrication stresses. High pressure receivers 
are particularly vulnerable due to their potential for 
higher oxygen content (non-condensibles) and lower 
water content but SCC has also been found in low 
pressure vessels and piping. 


Propagation of cracks via SCC is usually a gradual 
process. In ammonia refrigeration applications using 
carbon steel materials, stress corrosion cracks typically 
p ropagate from surface or sub-surface discontinuities 


57 


This standard has been provided by BIS and ПАК. It shall not be copied or distributed by 
other means to other parties without the written permission of ПАК. 


IS 17773 : 2022 


at the interior wall of a susceptible vessel or pipe. 
Sufficiently high stresses can propagate crack(s) 
through the material to emerge as a “pinhole leak” on 
the external surface. Discovery of a “pinhole leak” 
on a vessel is indicative of SCC and it is likely that 
additional cracks will be present in the same vessel. 
Repair of stress corrosion cracks is difficult and often 
not cost-effective. 


D-4 RECOMMENDATIONS TO INHIBIT SCC 
IN AMMONIA REFRIGERATION SYSTEMS 


The following recommendations are intended to 
minimize the likelihood of SCC for vessels constructed 
from carbon steel for use in ammonia refrigeration 
systems: 


а) The presence of non-condensable gases 
(specifically, oxygen) increases the probability 
of SCC. As such, purging of air from the system 
during both initial start-up and during operation 
and maintenance is important; and 


b) Post-weld heat treat (PWHT) all high temperature 
vessels, especially vessels such as high pressure 
receivers, and intermediate and low temperature 
water chillers, intercoolers and economizers, to 
relieve the residual stress of welding and forming. 
Where low temperature vessels are critical to the 
process, or may be held at temperatures above 
—5?C for long periods of time, consideration 
should be given to PWHT. 

Following exceptions may be noted: 

1) Compressor oil separators; and 

2) Specialized vessels, such as plate heat 
exchangers, containing internal components 
that could be damaged, for example, internal 
bushings, gaskets. 

NOTES 

1 PWHT may produce significant scale, which could cause 

operating problems in the system. 

2 Refrigerant-grade anhydrous ammonia shall meet or exceed 

the requirements of as per Table 1. 


ANNEX E 
(Informative) 


EMERGENCY PRESSURE CONTROL SYSTEMS EMERGENCY PRESSURE CONTROL SYSTEM 
DESIGN AND INSTALLATION GUIDELINES 


E-1 GENERAL 


E-1.1 Purpose 


This technical guideline describes requirements for 
emergency pressure control systems (EPCS), which 
provide a means of internally mitigating an overpressure 
event in a refrigeration system that is independent of 
other required safety features and functions prior to 
operation of a pressure relief device. 


E-1.2 Scope 


Emergency pressure control systems used as a means to 
mitigate an overpressure event involving an ammonia 
refrigeration system should comply with this technical 
guideline. 


E-1.3 Limitations 


An EPCS does not reduce or eliminate requirements 
for pressure relief devices set forth in other codes and 
standards. 


E-2 DEFINITIONS 


E-2.1 Crossover Valve — It is a valve that allows 
interconnection of two different portions ofa refrigeration 
system that normally operate at different pressures. 


58 


E-2.2 Emergency Pressure Control System 
(EPCS) — It is a system consisting of pressure 
sensors, independent compressor cut-off controls 
and automatically controlled crossover valves that 
will permit a high-pressure portion of a system to 
connect to a lower pressure portion of a system when 
opened. 


E-2.3 Header — It is a pipe to which other pipes or 
tubes are connected. 


E-2.4 Highside — Consists of those parts of a 
mechanical refrigerating system that are subjected to 
approximate condenser pressure. 


E-2.5 Lowside — Consists of those parts of a 
mechanical refrigerating system that are subjected to 
approximate evaporator pressure. 


A pressure sensor is a mechanical or electronic device 
that measures ammonia pressure. 


E-2.6 Seep — It is a nuisance loss of refrigerant from 
a relief valve that can occur when the vessel pressure 
approaches the relief pressure setting, or a nuisance loss 
of refrigerant from a relief valve that can occur after the 
valve discharges if the valve does not fully reset. 


This standard has been provided by BIS and IIAR. It shall not be copied or distributed by 
other means to other parties without the written permission of IIAR. 


Е-2.7 Zone — It is a general term used to identify а 
pressure level or temperature level of a refrigeration 
system. A zone will be associated with a compressor or 
group of compressors and the associated. 


E-2.8 Vessels Serving a common pressure 
level. The term does not pertain to individual 
temperature-controlled areas or rooms served by one 
or more compressor. 


E-3 REFERENCE STANDARDS 
E-3.1 IS 3594 and Part — IV of SP 7 shall be referred. 


E-4 EMERGENCY PRESSURE CONTROL 
SYSTEM (EPCS) RECOMMENDED. 


Each zone should be provided with an EPCS. Each 
EPCS, other than the lowest pressure zone, should 
include a crossover valve to allow an abnormally high 
pressure to be discharged to a lower pressure zone. 


E-4.1 Design and Installation Recommendations 
E-4.2 Crossover Valve Connections 


E-4.2.1 Crossover valves should be connected to 
locations that will allow pressure in each high pressure 
zone to discharge to a lower pressure zone. Connections 
between pressure zones should continue in the 
above-described manner until all major pressure zones 
in a system are connected with the EPCS, always with 
the intended flow traveling from a high pressure to a 
lower pressure. 


E-4.2.2 Where multiple low-pressure zones are 
present, low-pressure zones with the highest pressure 
should be connected to the next lowest pressure zone. 


E-4.2.3 Crossover valve connections should not be to 
pipes or tubes conveying liquid refrigerant. 


E-4.2.4 High pressure crossover valve connections 
should come from the top of a dry suction header, 
compressor discharge header or other main gas header. 


E-4.2.5 Low pressure crossover valve connections 
should discharge to the vapour space in a receiving 
vessel or to a common vapour header serving multiple 
receiving vessels. 


E-4.2.6 The designer of a refrigeration system should 
consider the ability of the low pressure portion of the 
system to receive the high pressure discharge from 
the EPCS crossover valve. Operation of the crossover 
valve should not cause a release of refrigerant from 
pressure relief devices on the low pressure portion of 
the system. 


E-4.2.7 Crossover valves and connecting piping 
and valves should have a minimum nominal size of 
1 inch. 


59 


IS 17773 : 2022 


E-4.2.8 Piping and tubing associated with a crossover 
valve should be independent of any other connections. 
The connection should not be in the same pipe or tube 
where a pressure relief device is connected. 


E-4.3 Crossover Valve Type 


The crossover valve should be of a type that fully opens 
when activated. 


E-4.4 Isolation Valves 


E-4.4.1 Each crossover valve should be provided with a 
stop valve on either side to allow isolation ofthe crossover 
valve for maintenance. 


E-4.4.2 Isolation valves should be locked in the open 
position during normal operations. 


E-4.5 System Operation 


E-4.5.1 The EPCS should be arranged for automatic 
operation. 


E-4.5.2 Where required by the fire department, the EPCS 
should be provided with a remote switch for manual 
activation. 


E-4.5.3 An EPCS should be arranged to activate at a 
pressure not greater than 90 percent of the pressure relief 
device setting. 


E-4.5.4 A dedicated, independent mechanical pressure 
switch or a combination of a mechanical and electronic 
pressure-sensing device dedicated to the EPCS should be 
provided to activate each EPCS. 


E-4.5.5 Pressure sensing equipment should continuously 
monitor pressure in the refrigeration system adjacent to 
each crossover valve. 


E-4.5.6 When a pressure sensor reaches the EPCS 
activation pressure, all of the following should occur: 

a) All compressors supplying the pressure zone that 
is in an over-pressure condition should be stopped 
by a means that 1s independent of all other safety 
controls; 

b) Associated crossover valves should open; and 


c) Condenser fans and pumps should be stopped if the 
system pressure falls below 90 psig. 


E-4.5.7 A means should be provided to signal personnel 
responsible for refrigeration system maintenance that an 
EPCS has been activated. 


E-4.5.8 Once an EPCS has been activated, it should 
remain active until manually reset. 


E-4.6 Inspection and Maintenance 
E-4.6.1 General 


EPCS crossover valves and isolation valves should be 
inspected and tested on an annual basis to verify proper 
operation. 


This standard has been provided by BIS and IIAR. It shall not be copied or distributed by 
other means to other parties without the written permission of IIAR. 


IS 17773 : 2022 


E-4.7 Written Procedures 


E-4.7.1 General 


Written procedures should be in place to describe the 
operation of the EPCS. Procedures should address the 
importance of maintaining isolation valves in the full 
open position unless maintenance is being performed 
on the crossover valve. 


E-4.7.2 Considerations for Pressure Set Points 


Seep through a relief valve is nuisance refrigerant loss 
due to pressure differential conditions across the valve 
or dirt and debris located at the seat. Seep is measured 
in bubbles per minute and can vary from manufacturer, 
design, type of seat material, pressure differential 
across relief, amount of dirt that is trapped after a relief 
discharges, and age of the relief valve. Relief valves 
are set with a tolerance of +/—3 percent, but when these 
reliefs are stored or left in operation for a long period of 
time, the reliefs can begin to seep at larger tolerances. In 
some cases, seep has occurred when pressure increases 
to within 10 percent of relief set pressure. 


One method to prevent seep, is to maintain a pressure 
on the relief valve of 90 percent or less of the rated 
relief valve pressure setting. When pressures higher 
than 90 percent of rated relief valve pressure setting 
are anticipated, it is possible to select soft seats that 
are bubble tight at higher pressures. Rupture disks in 
combination with a relief valve will result in tighter 
tolerances. 


The following shows examples of typical tolerances 
and pressures associated with relief valves and the 
EPCS. 
Example 1: 

Typical set point values and tolerances for a 

21 bar (2 100 kPa gauge) system 

Relief full open (+ 10 percent) 23 bar (2 300 kPa 

gauge) 

+ 3 percent tolerance 21.63 bar (2 163 kPa 

gauge) 


60 


Relief valve set point 23 bar (2 300 kPa gauge) 
—3 percent tolerance 23.37 bar (2 337 kPa 
gauge) 

Potential seep point (—10 percent) 18.9 bar 
(1 890 kPa gauge) 

EPCS set point 16.89 bar to 18.9 bar 
(1 689 kPa to 2 100 kPa gauge) (EPCS set 
point is equal or below the seep point) 

Design system operating Pressure 

(—25 percent) 15.75 bar (1 575 kPa gauge) 
(system operating pressure should be 
25 percent lower than the relief valve setting 
when selecting relief valves) 

Compressor off set point 15.75 bar (1 575 kPa 
gauge) 


Example 2: 


Typical set point values and tolerances for a 
16.89 bar (1 689 kPa gauge) system 

relief full open (+ 10 percent) 19.25 bar 
(1 925 kPa gauge) 

+ 3 percent tolerance 18 bar (1 800 kPa gauge) 
Relief valve set point 16.89 bar (1 689 kPa 
gauge) 

—3 percent tolerance 16.89 bar (1 689 kPa 
gauge) 

Potential seep point (-10 percent) 15.75 bar 
(1 575 kPa gauge) (EPCS set point is equal or 
below the seep point) 

EPCS set point 14.7 bar to 15.75 bar 
(1 470 kPa to 1 575 kPa gauge) 

Design system operating pressure 
(—25 percent) 14 bar (1 400 kPa gauge) 
(system operating pressure should Бе 
25 percent lower than the relief valve setting 
when selecting relief valves) 

Compressor off set point 14 bar (1 400 kPa 
gauge) 


This standard has been provided by BIS and ПАК. It shall not be copied or distributed by 
other means to other parties without the written permission of ПАК. 


IS 17773 : 2022 


ANNEX F 
(Informative) 
MACHINE ROOM SIGNS 


The following example of the principal and auxiliary 
machinery room doors are provided for reference only 
(see Fig. 1 and 2). 


F-1 KEY TO DOOR SIGNAGE 
F-1.1 Refrigeration Machinery Room — Authorized 
Personnel Only 


Color: Black text, yellow background 


Location: All entrances to machinery room 


F-1.2 Caution — Ammonia R-717 

Color: Black text, yellow background 

Location: All entrances to machinery room 
F-1.3 Caution — Eye and Ear Protection must be 
Worn in this Area 

Color: Black text, yellow background 

Location: All entrances to machinery room 
F-1.4 Warning — When Alarms are Activated 
Ammonia has been Detected 


a) Leave room immediately when alarms are 
activated; 


61 


b) Do not enter except by emergency trained 
personnel only; and 

c) Do not 
equipment. 


enter without personal protective 


Location: All entrances to machinery room. 


F-1.5 Refrigeration 
Emergency Use Only 


Machinery Shutdown, 


Colour: Black text, orange background. 
Location: Designated principal exterior machinery 
room door. 


F-1.6 Refrigeration Machinery Room 
Refrigeration Ventilation, Emergency Use Only 


Colour: Black text, orange background 


Location: Designated principal exterior 
machinery room door, also can be used for remote 
ON/OFF/AUTO ventilation switch. 


F-7 AMMONIA FIRE DIAMOND 


Colour: Black text, white, blue, red and yellow 
background 


Location: All entrances to machinery room 


This standard has been provided by BIS and ITAR. It shall not be copied or distributed by 
other means to other parties without the written permission of HAR. 


IS 17773 : 2022 


N 


М WARNING 


WHEN ALARMS ARE ACTIVATED 
AMMONIA HAS BEEN DETECTED 
1.LEAVE ROOM IMMEDIATELY 

2.DO NOT ENTER EXCEPT BY TRAINED & 
AUTHORIZED PERSONNEL 

3. DO NOT ENTER WITHOUT PERSONAL 
PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT 


1 [REFRIGERATION 
MACHINERY 


ROOM REFRIGERATION 
REFRIGERATION 
MACHINERY MACHINERY ROOM 


AUTHORIZED PERSONNEL ONLY 
SHUTDOWN VENTILATION 


EMERGENCY USE 
ONLY EMERGENCY USE 
ONLY 


EYE AND EAR 
AMMONIA PROTECTION REQUIRED 


IN THIS AREA 


Fic. 1 PRINCIPAL MACHINERY ROOM Door 


62 


This standard has been provided by BIS and ПАК. It shall not be copied or distributed by 
other means to other parties without the written permission of ПАК. 


IS 17773 : 2022 


М WARNING 


WHEN ALARMS ARE ACTIVATED 
AMMONIA HAS BEEN DETECTED 
1.LEAVE ROOM IMMEDIATELY 

2.DO NOT ENTER EXCEPT BY TRAINED & 
AUTHORIZED PERSONNEL 

3. DO NOT ENTER WITHOUT PERSONAL 
PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT 


1 |REFRIGERATION 
MACHINERY 
ROOM 


AUTHORIZED PERSONNEL ONLY 


EYE AND EAR 
AMMONIA PROTECTION REQUIRED 
R-71 7 IN THIS AREA 


Fic. 2 AUXILIARY MACHINERY ROOM DOOR 


63 


This standard has been provided by BIS and ПАК. It shall not be copied or distributed by 
other means to other parties without the written permission of IIAR. 


IS 17773 : 2022 


ANNEX G 
(Informative) 
ALTERNATIVE VENTILATION CALCULATION METHODS 


G-1 GENERAL 


The note to 6.14.7.1 describes alternative ventilation 
methods that are available for ammonia (NH,) 
refrigeration systems. This Annex contains sample 
calculations for the design of alternative ventilation 
methods. 


G-2 SAMPLE CALCULATION 


30 air changes per hour (ACH) for emergency 
ventilation rate. 


G-2.1 Design the ventilation system for an ammonia 
refrigeration skid package that contains 204.117 kg 
(450 Ib) of anhydrous ammonia (G) and is located in a 
machinery room that has a volume (F) of 2 831.68 т? 
(100 000 #0). 


1 kg =2.21b and 1m = 328 ft 
G-2.2 The emergency ventilation rate equation 
(30 ACH = 0.5 air changes/minute): 
О = V 0.5 (air changes/min) 
where 
О = airflow in 112/5 (ft/min); and 
V = room volume in m? (f? ). 


For this example: 
О = (100 000 ft) 0.5 (air changes/min) = 


G-3 SAMPLE CALCULATIONS 


Demonstrate that ammonia concentrations will 
never exceed 40 000 ppm [25 percent of the lower 
flammability limit (LFL)]. 


G-3.1 Demonstrate that the ammonia concentrations 
would never exceed 40 000 ppm if 100 Ib of anhydrous 
ammonia (G) were released from an ammonia 
refrigeration skid package located in a machinery room 
that has a volume (V) of 2 831.68 n? (100 000 ft^). 


G-3.2 The following equation can be used to 
demonstrate that the ammonia concentrations would 
never exceed 40 000 ppm: 


C = С (vapour specific volume) • (100 percent)/V 
where 


C- volumetric concentration of ammonia in 
percent; 

G — amount of ammonia released in the room in 

kg (Ib). For the purposes of these calculations it 

is assumed that the entire ammonia inventory 15 

released and vapourized inside the machinery 

room; and 


Vapour specific volume - the vapour specific volume 
for anhydrous ammonia in m? (f) = room volume, in 
m? (ft). 


Vapour specific volumes at 1.034 bar (15 psia) 


50 000 ft/min 
Sl No. Temperature (^C) | Temperature (^F) Specific Volume (f&/Ib) Specific Volume (kg/m?) 
(1) Q) (3) (4) (5) 
1) 444 40 20.688 0 331.389 
ii) 15.55 60 21.564 1 345.422 
iii) 26.66 80 22.433 8 359.342 
iv) 37.77 100 23.298 5 373.206 


This standard has been provided by BIS and ПАК. It shall not be copied or distributed by 
other means to other parties without the written permission of ПАК. 


For this example: 


С = (100 Ib) • (22.433 8 felb at 80 °F) * (100%)/ 
(100 000 ft?) = 2.24% 


The LFL percent for anhydrous ammonia is typically 
considered to be to 16 percent (160 000 ppm). 
Twenty-five percent of the LFL is 4 percent 
(40 000 ppm). Thus, under steady- state conditions, 
the ammonia concentration inside the machinery room 
(2.24 percent) would not exceed 40 000 ppm, even ifthe 
entire ammonia charge were released and vapourized 
within the machinery room. 


G-3.3 Even though the calculations demonstrate 
that under steady-state conditions the ammonia 
concentrations would never exceed 40 000 ppm, it is 
recommended that an emergency ventilation system 
be provided in the machinery room in this example. 
The emergency ventilation rate used would be at the 
discretion of the designers. 


G-4 SAMPLE CALCULATIONS 


Provide localized (spot) ventilation designed to 
maintain ammonia concentrations below 40 000 ppm. 


G-4.1 Design a localized (spot) ventilation system for 
an ammonia refrigeration skid package that contains 
113.4 kg (250 Ib) of anhydrous ammonia (С) and is 
located in a machinery room which has a volume (V) 
of 2 831.68 m? (100 000 f?) that will maintain the 
ammonia concentrations below 40 000 ppm. Assume 
temperature to be 15.55°C (60°F). 


G-4.2 The following equation can be used to calculate 
the ventilation rate for a localized (spot) ventilation 
system that will maintain the ammonia concentrations 
below 40 000 ppm. 

О = (403 • SG • 100% -ER-Sf)(M^ * LFL%. B) 


where 


О = airflow in 12/5 (ft/min); 
SG = specific gravity of ammonia liquid [SG = 
0.62 at 15.55?C (60?F)]; and 
ER = evaporation rate of liquid in lb/min. For the 


purposes of these calculations, it is assumed 
that the entire ammonia inventory 1s released 
and vapourized inside the machinery room 
over a 10 min period, that is, 250 lb over a 
10 min period (25 Ib/min). 


65 


IS 17773 : 2022 


Convert 25 lb/min to pnt/min: 1 pint = 0.01671 ft? 
NH liquid at 15.55°C (60°F) = 38.54 lb/ft? 


ER 25 l|b/min ft/38.5416 pnt/0.01671 f? = 
38.82 pnt/min 


Sf=a safety coefficient that depends on the percentage 
ofthe LFL necessary for safe conditions. Because it has 
been found desirable to maintain vapour concentrations 
of not more than 40 000 ppm, a Sf coefficient of 4 
(25 percent of the LFL) will be used for these 
calculations. 


MW = the molecular weight of ammonia liquid 
(MW= 17.03); 

LFL — the lower flammability limit. for ammonia 
(LFL = 16 percent); and 

B — a constant that takes into account the fact that 

the LFL decreases at elevated temperatures. B — 1 for 

temperatures up to 250?F; B = 0.70 for temperatures 

above 250?F, though it is unlikely that temperatures 

above 250?F would ever be applicable for an ammonia 

refrigeration system. 


For this example 
B=1 

Q= [(403) (0.62 at 60°F) (100%) 
(38.82 pints/min) • (4)]/[(17.03) * (16%) * (1)] 
14 238.9 f? min 


G-4.3 Industrial Ventilation 


G-4.3.1 Locate the exhaust openings near the sources 
of contamination, if possible, to obtain the benefit of 
“spot ventilation.” 


G-4.3.2 Locate the air supply and exhaust outlets such 
that the air passes through the zone of contamination. 
The operator should remain between the air supply 
and the sources of the contaminant. 


G-4.3.3 Replace the exhausted air by use of a 
replacement air system. 


G-4.3.4 Avoid re-entry of the exhausted air by 
discharging the exhaust high above the roof line and 
by ensuring that no window, outdoor air intakes, or 
other such openings are located near the exhaust 
discharge. 


This standard has been provided by BIS and ПАК. It shall not be copied or distributed by 
other means to other parties without the written permission of ПАК. 


IS 17773 : 2022 


ANNEX H 
(Informative) 
PIPE FITTINGS, FLANGES AND BOLTING 


The following criteria for materials have historically 
been commonly used in the ammonia refrigeration 
industry for ammonia pipe, fittings, flanges and bolting. 


H-1 PIPE 


Seamless carbon steel pipes for weld connection should 
be as per Table 3. 


Seamless carbon steel pipes for threaded connection 
should be as per Table 4. 


90° ELBOW 


Stainless steel pipes for weld connection should be 
Table 5. 


Stainless steel pipes for threaded connection should be 
Table 6. 


H-2 ELBOW 
(See Fig. 3). 


180° ELBOW 
45° ELBOW 
Fic. 3 ELBow DRAWING 
51 No. Nominal Pipe | Outside Diameter at Dimension Dimension Center to Center Back to Face 
Size (NPS) Bevel (O/D) in degree А іп degree В in degree O in degree K in degree 
(1) Q) Q) 3) (4) (5) (6) 
1) 1/2” 21.3 38 16 76 48 
il) 3/4" 26.7 38 19 76 51 
iii) 1” 33.4 38 22 76 56 
iv) 1.1/4” 42.2 48 25 95 70 
v) 1.1/2” 48.3 57 29 114 83 
v1) 2” 60.3 76 35 152 106 
vil) 2.1/2” 73 95 44 190 132 
уш) 3” 88.9 114 51 229 159 
ix) 3.1/2” 101.6 133 57 267 184 
x) 4” 114.3 152 64 305 210 
x1) a" 141.3 190 79 381 262 
xii) 6" 168.3 229 95 457 313 
66 


This standard has been provided by BIS and IIAR. It shall not be copied or distributed by 
other means to other parties without the written permission of IIAR. 


IS 17773 : 2022 


SI No. Nominal Pipe Outside Diameter at Dimension Dimension Center to Center Back to Face 
Size (NPS) Bevel (O/D) in degree Aindegree B in degree O in degree K in degree 


(1) Q) (2) 3) (4) (5) (6) 
xiii) 8" 219.1 305 127 610 414 
xiv) 10” 273 381 159 762 518 
ху) 12” 323.8 457 190 914 619 
xvi) 14" 355.6 533 222 1 067 711 
xvii) 16” 406.4 610 254 1219 813 
xviii) 18” 457 686 286 1 372 914 
xix) 20” 508 762 318 1 524 1016 
хх) 22” 559 838 343 1 676 1118 
хх1) 24” 610 914 381 1 829 1 219 
xxil) 26" 660 99] 406 — — 
xxiii) 28" 711 1 067 438 — — 
xxiv) 30" 762 1 143 470 — — 
Xxv) 32" 813 1219 502 — — 
хху1) 34” 864 1 295 533 — — 
xxvil) 1/2” 21.3 — — — == 
xxviii) 3/4" 26.7 — — == — 
xxix) 1” 33.4 25 — 51 41 
XXX) 1.1/4” 42.2 32 — 64 52 
XXX1) 1.1/2” 48.3 38 — 76 62 
xxxii) 2” 60.3 51 — 102 81 
xxxiii) 2.1/2” 73 64 — 127 100 
XXXIV) 3” 88.9 76 31.6 152 121 
XXXV) 3.1/2" 101.6 89 36.8 178 140 
XXXVI) 4” 114.3 102 42.1 203 159 
xxxvii) 5 141.3 127 52.6 254 197 
xxxviii) 6” 168.3 152 63.4 305 237 
XXXix) 8" 219.1 203 84.2 406 313 
xl) 10” 273 254 105.2 508 391 
xli) 12” 323.8 305 126.3 610 467 
xlii) 14” 355.6 356 147.3 711 533 
xliii) 16" 406.4 406 168.3 813 610 
xliv) 18" 457 457 189.4 914 686 
xlv) 20" 508 508 210.4 1 016 762 
xlvi) 22" 559 559 231.5 1118 838 
xlvii) 24" 610 610 252.5 ] 219 914 


NOTE — 1 inch = 2.54 cm 


67 


This standard has been provided by BIS and ПАК. It shall not be copied or distributed by 
other means to other parties without the written permission of IIAR. 


"ЧУП JO uorssrurd UPIM ou jnouirA sated 19gjo 0} sueour 1970 
Aq poinquisrp 10 pordoo oq jou [[eus 1] “AVI ров S19 Aq poprAoud uooq seu prepurys stum 


89 


H-3 FLANGES 
Technical Specifications Flanges 1 034 kPa Pressure Rating 


SI Length Bore 'B' 
No. Through 
Hub 'Y' 
Nominal Outside Thickness Diameter Threaded | Lapped Weld | Thread | Slipon | Lapped Weld Neck Counter Depth 
Pipe Size Diameter of of Flange | of Hub Slip on Neck length socket 'B3' Socket bore of 
(NPS) Flange 'O' С’ x’ Socket 121° Т Welding Welding Threaded Socket 
Welding Flange ‘СІ’ ‘D’ 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) 
1) 1/2” 88.9 11.2 30.226 15.748 15.748 47.752 15.748 22.352 22.86 15.748 9.652 — 
ii) 3/4” 98.6 12.7 38.1 15.748 15.748 52.324 15.748 27.686 28.194 20.828 11.176 — 
iii) ш 108 14.2 49.276 17.526 17.526 55.626 17.526 34.544 35.052 26.67 12.7 — 
iv) 1%” 117.3 15.7 58.674 20.574 20.574 57.15 20.574 43.18 43.688 35.052 14.224 — 
v) 1%” 127 17.5 65.024 22.352 22.352 61.976 22.352 49.53 50.038 40.894 15.748 — 
vi) 2" 152.4 19.1 71.724 25.4 25.4 63.5 25.4 61.976 62.484 52.578 17.526 — 
vii) 2 Мм” 177.8 22.4 90.424 28.448 28.448 69.85 28.448 74.676 75.438 62.738 19.05 — 
viii) 3” 190.5 23.9 107.95 30.226 30.226 69.85 30.226 90.678 91.44 77.978 20.574 — 
ix) 3%” 215.9 23.9 122.174 31.75 31.75 71.374 31.75 103.378 104.14 90.17 — — 
x) 4” 228.6 23.9 134.874 33.274 33.274 76.2 33.724 116.84 116.84 102.362 — — 
xi) 9* 254 23.9 163.576 36.576 36.576 88.9 36.576 143.764 144.526 128.27 — — 
xii) 6” 279.4 25.4 192.24 39.624 39.624 88.9 39.624 170.688 171.45 154.178 — — 
xiii) 8” 342.9 28.4 246.126 44.45 44.45 101.6 44.45 221.488 222.25 202.692 — — 
xiv) 10” 406.4 30.2 304.8 49.276 49.276 1016 49.276 276.352 277.368 254.508 — — 
xv) 12” 482.6 31.8 365.252 55.626 55.626 1143 55.626 327.152 328.168 304.8 Е — 
xvi) 14” 533.4 35.1 400.05 57.15 79.248 127 57.15 359.156 360.172 — — 
xvii) 16" 596.9 36.6 457.2 63.5 87.376 127 63.5 410.464 411.226 To be — — 
specified by 
purchaser 

xviii) 18" 635 40.1 504.952 68.326 96.774 139.7 68.326 461.772 462.28 — — — 
xix) 20" 698.5 42.9 558.8 73.152 103.124 144.526 73.152 513.08 514.35 ЕЕ — — 
хх) 24” 812.8 47.8 663.448 82.55 111.252 152.4 82.55 615.95 615.95 — — — 


NOTE — All dimensions in mm except NPS 


TOT * ELLLT SI 


"ЧУП JO uorssrurod UPIM ou NOUM sated 19g]o 0} sueour 1970 
Aq poinquisrp 10 pordoo әд jou үүецз 1] УГУП Pu? S1 Aq poprAoud uooq seu prepurys stum 


69 


Technical Specifications Flanges 2 068 kPa Pressure Rating 


SI Length Bore 'B' 
No. Through Hub 
ү? 
Nominal | Outside Thickness | Dia of Threaded Slip | Lapped Weld Thread Slipon | Lapped Weld Neck Counter Depth 
Pipe Size | Diaof | ofFlange Hub X’ on Socket Neck length socket 'B3' Socket bore of 
(NPS)  Flange 'O' С’ Welding ‘L21’ T Welding Welding Threaded Socket 
Flange ‘C1’ D’ 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) 
i) 1/2” 95.3 14.2 38.1 22.352 22.352 52.324 15.748 22.352 22.86 15.748 23.622 9.652 
ii) 3/4” 117.3 15.7 47.752 25.4 25.4 57.15 15.748 27.686 28.194 20.828 28.956 11.176 
iii) 1” 124 17.5 53.848 26.924 26.924 61.976 17.526 34.544 35.052 26.67 35.814 12.7 
iv) 1м? 133.4 19.1 63.5 26.924 26.924 65.024 20.574 43.18 43.688 35.052 44.45 14.224 
у) 1%” 155.4 20.6 69.85 30.226 30.226 68.326 22.352 49.53 50.038 40.894 50.292 15.748 
vi) 2” 165.1 22.4 84.074 33.274 33.274 69.85 28.448 61.976 62.484 52.578 63.5 17.526 
vii) 2.%” 190.5 25.4 100.076 38.1 38.1 76.2 31.75 74.676 75.438 62.738 76.2 19.05 
уш) 3” 209.6 28.4 117.348 42.926 42.926 79.248 31.75 90.678 91.44 77.978 92.202 20.574 
іх) 3 0” 228.6 30.2 133.35 44.45 44.45 81.026 36.576 103.378 104.14 90.17 104.902 — 
x) 4" 254 31.8 146.05 47.752 47.752 85.852 36.576 116.078 116.84 102.362 117.602 — 
xi) Dr 279.4 35.1 177.8 50.8 50.8 98.552 42.926 143.764 144.526 128.27 144.526 — 
xii) 6” 317.5 36.6 206.248 52.324 52.324 98.552 45.974 170.688 171.45 154.178 171.45 — 
xiii) 8" 381 41.1 260.35 61.976 61.976 111.252 50.8 221.488 222.25 202.692 222.25 — 
xiv) 10" 444.5 47.8 320.548 66.548 95.25 117.348 55.626 276.352 277.368 254.508 276.352 — 
xv) 12" 520.7 50.8 374.65 73.152 101.6 130.048 60.452 327.152 328.168 304.8 328.676 — 
xvi) 14” 584.2 53.8 425.45 76.2 111.252 142.748 63.5 359.156 360.172 = 360.426 — 
xvii) 16” 6477 57.2 482.6 82.55 120.65 146.05 68.326 410.464 411.226 -— 411.226 — 
xviii) 18” 711.2 60.5 533.4 88.9 130.048 158.75 69.85 461.772 462.28 — 462.026 — 
xix) 20" 714.7 63.5 587.248 95.25 139.7 162.052 73.132 513.08 514.35 — 512.826 — 
хх) 24” 914.4 69.9 701.548 106.426 152.4 168.148 82.55 615.95 615.95 — — — 


NOTE — АП dimensions in mm except NPS 


TOT * €LLLY SI 


IS 17773 : 2022 


H-4 BOLTING 


Properties for bolt are as follows: 
Tensile strength of 60 to 100 ksi 
Chemical Composition 

C: 0.295 

Mn: 1.2 percent, 

P: 0.04 percent, 

S: 0.05 percent , 

Elongation percent: Min -18 
Properties for nuts are as follows: 


Chemical composition 


Flange drawing for H3 is shown in Fig. 4 


(o 
LXX 


SOCKET WELD 
X 
ИИЙ Set | 
AAA e M 
RIRIS 060606060606] T 
o _ 
LAP JOINT 


C: 0.4 percent, 

Mn: 1 percent, 

51: 0.40 percent, 

P: 0.04 percent, 

S: 0.05 percent, 

Proof load stress 175 ksi Min, 

Hardness Rockwell: Min C-24, Max C-38. 


NOTE — The above materials refer to those common materials 
in joining piping flanges only. These materials or other 
commonly used qualifying materials selected for a safe design 
are permitted for bolts and studs for equipment closures, valve 
bonnet-body connection, etc. 


XX 


SLIP-ON WELDING 


ео 


WELDING NECK 


С 
-1 


2 


BLIND 


Fic. 4 H3 FLANGE DRAWING 


This standard has been provided by BIS and ПАК. It shall not be copied or distributed by 
other means to other parties without the written permission of ПАК. 


IS 17773 : 2022 


ANNEX J 
(Informative) 


SAFE PRACTICE IN CASE OF LEAK AFFECTING OCCUPANTS 


4-1 THE BRIEF PROCEDURE IN CASE OF 
LEAKS AFFECTING PEOPLE 


Liquid ammonia spill is more dangerous than gas 
leakage and when in contact with skin can cause third 
degree burns and may lead to blindness. 


J-1.2 Steps to be taken in Case Ammonia Leaks 


Do not spray water on ammonia liquid leak, wipe it 
with cloth as ammonia having large latent heat property 
can cause cloud formation if water is spread on it. 


Shower a person with ammonia injuries for 5 to 15 min 
with water. 


At this time the person should wear mask to ensure that 
ammonia vapours are not inhaled. 


J-1.3 During Showering Cautiously Remove the 
Clothes 


Decontaminate the victim as quickly as possible. Start 
with the eyes. The whole body, or exposed area, must be 
flushed with generous amounts of water; this includes 
the hair, ears, under the chin, and armpits. Water 
sources such as showers, hoses, eye wash stations, or 
stock tanks are acceptable. 


J-1.4 Eyes 


Ensure trained personnel and adequate first aid supplies 
are readily available. 


J-1.4.1 Contact with the Eyes 


Even if only a small amount of ammonia enters the 
eyes, irrigate the eyes with an abundance of water for 
a minimum of 15 min. Continually and thoroughly 
flush the entire eye surface and the inner lining of the 
eyelids. Eyes affected by ammonia close involuntarily, 
so the eyelids must be held open so that water can flush 
the entire eye surface, as well as the inner lining of the 
eyelid. 


Ifthere is no physician available, continue irrigation for 
an additional 15 min. 


Do not wear contact lenses when handling anhydrous 
ammonia. If ammonia gets in the eyes, the ammonia 
will get trapped under the lenses causing even more 
damage. They may also prevent immediate flushing of 
the eye surface. 


Serious eye injury should be treated by an 
ophthalmologist, but in an emergency, wash with large 
quantities of water for 15 min or more as quickly as 
possible. In fact, the only real hope for preventing 
permanent eye injury lies in quick and generous 
washing. 


71 


One suggestion for those likely to be exposed is to carry 
a small, eight-ounce squeezable squirt bottle filled with 
water, which can be used to get excess ammonia out of 
the eyes until a larger water supply can be reached. This 
small amount of water is not sufficient to remove all the 
ammonia. It is essential that the eyes be irrigated for a 
minimum of 15 min as soon as possible. 


Another emergency method is to duck the head in water 
and rapidly blink and move or rotate the eyes. 


J-1.5 Contact with the Skin 


It is essential that any ammonia spilled on the worker 
be removed immediately and that the worker be moved 
to an uncontaminated area quickly. 


Clothes that have been saturated by liquid ammonia may 
freeze to the skin. In any case, the victim, still clothed, 
should get immediately under a shower, if available, or 
jump into a stock tank, pond, or into any other source 
of water. Time is important. Remove clothes only after 
they are thawed and they can be freely removed from 
frozen areas. If the clothing is removed incorrectly, 
whole sections of skin can be torn off. 


No salves, creams, ointments, or jellies should be 
applied to the skin during a 24 h period following 
the injury since this will prevent natural elimination 
of the ammonia from the skin. After the 24 h period, 
the medical treatment is the same for thermal burns. 
A physician should view any second or third-degree 
freeze burns of the skin. 


J-1.6 Taken Internally 
The following should be done 1f ammonia is ingested: 
a) Call a physician; 
b) If conscious, have the victim drink large amounts 
of water; 


c) Do not induce vomiting if the victim is in shock, 
in extreme pain, or is unconscious; and 

d) If vomiting begins, place the victims face down 
with head lower than hips. This prevents vomit 
from entering the lungs and prevents severe injury. 


J-1.7 Inhalation 


Inall inhalation exposures, severe or minimal following 
should be done: 


a) Take the exposed workers at once to a clean, 
uncontaminated area; 

b) Watch workers exposed to low concentrations for 
a short period of time. They will usually require 
no treatment and can be released; 


This standard has been provided by BIS and IIAR. It shall not be copied or distributed by 
other means to other parties without the written permission of IIAR. 


IS 17773 : 2022 


c) For severe exposure to higher concentrations: Call 
a physician; 

d) Administer oxygen by an individual who is trained 
and authorized to do so by a physician. This will 
help relieve pain and symptoms of lack of oxygen; 

e) Begin artificial respiration immediately if the 
patient is not breathing; and 

f) Keep victim warm (but not hot) and rested until 
transported to the hospital. 


J-1.8 Summary 


In any accident involving contact with ammonia with 
the eyes or skin following should be done: 


a) Immediately flush the affected area with large 
quantities of clean water; 


b) Place the injured person into a container of clean 
water or under an emergency shower; and 


c) Provide the injured worker with first aid treatment 
and call a physician at once in the case of extreme 
exposure. Give the physician a complete account 
of the incident. 


Seconds count, therefore the ammonia should be 
washed away with water immediately. 


ANNEX K 
(Informative) 
PHYSICAL PROPERTIES OF AMMONIA 


K-1 AMMONIA CHARACTERISTICS 


The term ammonia, as used in this standard, refers to 
the compound formed by combination of nitrogen and 
hydrogen, having the chemical formula NH.. It is not 
to be confused with aqua ammonia, which is a solution 
of ammonia gas in water. Whenever the term ammonia 
appears in this standard, it means refrigerant-grade 
anhydrous ammonia. 


Experience has shown that ammonia is difficult to ignite 
and under normal conditions is a very stable compound. 


It requires temperatures of 450-500°C [723.2-773.2 K] 
to cause it to dissociate slightly at atmospheric pressure. 
The flammable limits at atmospheric pressure are 
15.5 percent to 27 percent by volume of ammonia in 
air. An ammonia-air mixture in an iron flask does not 
ignite below 651.1°C [925.3 K]. 


Since ammonia is self-alarming, it serves as its own 
warning agent so that a person is not likely to voluntarily 
remain in concentrations which are hazardous. 


SI No. Characteristics Metric SI 
(1) Q) (3) (4) 
1) Molecular symbol NH, NH, 
ii) Chemical name(inorganic compound) 717 717 
ii) ^ Safety group classification B2L B2L 
iv) Molecular weight 17.031 g/mol 17.031 g/mol 
v) Boiling point at one atmosphere —33.33?C 239.82 К 
vi) Freezing point at one atmosphere —77.66°C 195.5 К 
vii) Critical temperature 132.22?C 405.37 К 
vii) Critical pressure MPa (gauge) 115.6 kg/cm? (gauge) 11.34 kPa 
ix) Latent Heat at -28?F (—33°C) (240.15 К) and one 327.1 cal/g 1.369 MJ/kg 
atmosphere 
x) Relative density of vapour compared to dry air at 32?F 
(0°С) (273.15 К) and one atmosphere 0.596 7 0.596 7 
xi) | Vapour density at at -28?F (—33°C) (240.15 К) and one 0.889 6 kg/m? 0.889 6 kg/m? 


atmosphere 


72 


This standard has been provided by BIS and IIAR. It shall not be copied or distributed by 
other means to other parties without the written permission of IIAR. 


IS 17773 : 2022 


SI No. Characteristics Metric ST 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
хі) Specific gravity of liquid at —28°F (33°С) (240.15K) 
compared to water at 39.40 F (4.0 °C) (277.1K) 0.681 6 0.681 6 
xii) Liquid density at —28°F (—33°C) (240.15K) and one 681.6 kg/m’? 681.6 kg/m? 
atmosphere 
xiv) Specific volume of vapour at 32°F (0°C)(273.15K) 1.299 m?/kg 1.299 m?/kg 
xv) | Flammable limits by volume in air at atmospheric pressure 15.5 to 27 percent 15.5 to 27 
percent 
xvi) Ignition temperature 651.1?C 924.13 K 
xvii) Specific heat, gas at 15°C (288.15 К) and at one atmosphere 
xviii) At constant pressure (С) 0.518 4 cal/g°C 2.170 6 kJ/kgK 
xix) At constant volume (С) 0.392 8 cal/g°C 1.644 4 kJ/kgK 
xx) Ratio of specific heats k (с/с) also y at 15°С (288.15 К) 1.320 1.320 


NOTES 
1 One standard atmosphere = 14.696 psia (1.033 3kg/cm? absolute) (101.33 kPa absolute). 


2 Flammability - Although ammonia is combustible it burns to form water and nitrogen. It has a relatively high lower flammable limit 
(LFL) (16 percent v/v), relatively low heat of combustion (19 MJ/ mol) and relatively low burning velocity (7.7 cm/s). It is not possible 
to ignite ammonia from a mechanical spark, and it is not possible to sustain combustion in the open air. It is necessary to ensure that 
there are no naked flames or other sources of ignition, and no combustion equipment, such as gas boilers or heaters in the refrigeration 
machinery room. For these reasons it is not necessary to design ammonia machinery rooms as if for flammable atmospheres; there 
are no naked flames in the room and that the electrical supply to all equipment in the room is isolated in the event of a high ammonia 
concentration in the atmosphere. Equipment which must remain live in the event of an ammonia alarm, such as ventilation fans and 
emergency lighting should be certified for use in flammable atmospheres. 

3 Toxicity-The toxicity of ammonia does not require substantial special measures to be taken in the design of the machinery room. 
The self-alarming smell of ammonia ensures that there is no risk of a dangerous concentration arising in an occupied space without 
being noticed. Ammonia smell is detectable 5ppm onwards. The smell of ammonia is noticeable at about by almost all people at 
25 ppm and is overpoweringly unpleasant at 500 ppm, but is not likely to cause any injury at these levels. 


51 No. Gas concentration Effect on unprotected Human Being Time 
(PPM) 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) 25 Detected by most No health hazard exposure for long duration-Unlimited 
time 

ii) 50 Smell is very distinct. The experienced 8 hours per day and week is permitted in most countries 
person wants to get away from the area 

iii) 100 No dangerous effects on healthy persons, minor Do not stay longer than necessary 
irritation, anxiety 

iv) 400-700 Immediate irritation in eyes, nose and respiratory Under normal circumstances no serious injuries during 
organs. Persons used to ammonia also cannotstay 1 hour 

v) 1 700 Cough, cramp and serious irritation in nose, eyes, Hour exposure can lead to serious injuries 
respiratory organs 

vi) 2 000-5 000 Cough, cramp and serious irritation in nose, eyes, Hour exposure can lead to death 
respiratory organs 

vii) 7 000 Paralyzed, suffocation Lethal within few minutes 


4 Refrigeration classification as per IS 16656/ISO 817. 


SI No. Flammability Lower Toxicity Higher Toxicity 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Higher Flammability A3 B3 
ii) Lower Flammability A2 B2 
ш) Lower Flammabilty Burning velocity of less than 10 cm/s A2L B2L 
iv) No Flame Propogation Al Bl 


73 


This standard has been provided by BIS and ПАК. It shall not be copied or distributed by 
other means to other parties without the written permission of ПАК. 


IS 17773 : 2022 


ANNEX L 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Refrigeration and Air Conditioning Sectional Committee, MED 03 


Organization 


Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee 


Annapurna Electronics and Services Ltd, Hyderabad 

Bureau of Energy Efficiency, New Delhi 

Blue Star Ltd, Mumbai 

BSH Household Appliances Manufacturing Pvt Ltd, 
Chennai 

Carrier Aircon Ltd, Gurugram 

Central Power Research Institute, Bengaluru 

Centre for Science and Environment, New Delhi 


Danfoss Industries Pvt Ltd, Gurugram 


Electrical Research and Development Association, 
Vadodara 

Emerson Climate Technologies(India) Pvt Ltd, Karad 

Godrej and Boyce Manufacturing Company Ltd, 
Mumbai 

Honeywell International India Pvt Ltd, Gurugram 

Indian Institute of Chemical Engineers, Kolkata 

Indian Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air 
Conditioning Engineers (ISHRAE), New Delhi 

Ingersoll Rand, Bengaluru 

International Copper Association India, Mumbai 

Intertek India Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 

LG Electronics India Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 


National Thermal Power Corporation, Noida 


Refrigeration and Airconditioning Manufacturers 
Association, New Delhi 


Representative(s) 


Ркоғ (DR) RAvI KUMAR (Chairman) 


SHRI С. К. PRASAD 
SHRI J. S. Sastry (Alternate) 


SHRI SAMEER PANDITA 
SHRI KAMRAN SHAIKH (Alternate) 


SHRI JITENDRA BHAMBURE 
SHRI SUNIL JAIN (Alternate) 


SHRI VIJAYA KUMAR LOGANATHAN 
SHRI ANAND BALASUBRAMANIAN (Alternate) 


SHRI BIMAL TANDON 
SHRI D. BHATTACHARYA (Alternate) 


SHRI А. К. RAvI KUMAR 
SHRI GUJALA B. BALARAJA (Alternate) 


SHRI CHANDRA BHUSHAN 


SHRI MADHUR SEHGAL 
SHRI К. L. NAGAHARI (Alternate 1) 
Suri M. N. S. V. KRAN Kumar (Alternate П) 


SHRI GAUTAM BRAHMBHATT 
SHRI RAKESH PATEL (Alternate) 


SHRI CHETHAN THOLPADY 
Suri D. P. DESPANDE(A/ternate) 


SHRI BURZIN J. WADIA 
SHRI ABHIJIT A. ACHAREKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI SUDHIR KAVALATH 
DR NITIN KARWA (Alternate) 


DR D. SATHIYAMOORTHY 
DR Supe К. Das (Alternate) 


DR JvoriRMAY MATHUR 
SHRI ASHISH RAKHEJA 


SHRI MITTAKOLA VENKANNA 
SHRIJEYAPRAKASH GURUSAMY (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJEEV RANJAN 
SHRI SHANKAR SAPALIGA (Alternate) 


SHRI BALVINDER ARORA 
SHRI С. M. PATHAK (Alternate) 


SHRI ADITYA ANIL 
SHRI RAJAT SHRIVASTAVA (Alternate) 


SHRI О. К. SURYANARAYAN 
Suri S. К. ЈНА (Alternate) 


SHRI GURMEET SINGH 
Suri К. К. Menta (Alternate) 


74 


This standard has been provided by BIS and ПАК. It shall not be copied or distributed by 
other means to other parties without the written permission of ПАК. 


Organization 
Samsung India Electronics Pvt Ltd, Noida 


Sierra AirconPvt Ltd, Gurugram 


The Chemours India Pvt Ltd, Gurugram 
UL India Pvt Ltd, Bengaluru 


Voltas Ltd, Mumbai 


Voluntary Organizationn in Interest of Consumer 


Voice, New Delhi 


In personal capacity (506/2, Kirti Apartments, Mayur 


Vihar, Phase -1 Extension, Delhi) 


In personal capacity (H.No. 03, Savita Vihar, Delhi) 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 17773 : 2022 


Representative(s) 


SHRI GAURAV CHOUDHARY 
SHRI KALICHARAN SAHU (Alternate) 


SHRI DEVESH MUDGAL 


SHRI VIKAS MEHTA 
SHRI NISHIT SHAH (Alternate) 


SHRI V. MANJUNATH 
SHRI SATISH KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI SRINIVASU MOTURI 
SHRI A. D. KUMBHAR (Alternate) 


SHRI H. WADHWA 
Suri В. К. MuKHopapHyay(A/ternate) 


SHRI P. K. MUKHERJEE 


SHRI J. K. AGRAWAL 


SHRI RAJNEESH KHOSLA, SCIENTIST ‘E’ AND HEAD (MED) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) ] 


Member Secretary 


Ms KHUSHBU JYOTSNA KINDO 


SCIENTIST ‘C’ (MED), BIS 


Panel on Closed-circuit Ammonia Refrigeration System-Code of Practice for Design and Installation 


Organization 


Representative(s) 


In personal capacity (506/2, Kirti Apartments, Mayur Vihar, SHRI Р. К. MUKHERJEE (Convener) 


Phase-1 Extension, Delhi) 


Association of Ammonia Refrigeration, Mumbai 


Centre for Science and Environment, New Delhi 


Intertek India Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 


International Institute of Ammonia Refrigeration 


Refrigeration and Air Conditioning Manufacturers 


SHRI ANAND JOSHI 
SHRI ANIL GULANIKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI CHANDRA BHUSHAN 
SHRI С. М. PATHAK 


Ms YESENIA R. RECTOR 
SHRI SAMIR SHAH (Alternate I) 
SHRI HARSHAL SURANGE (Alternate ЇЇ) 


SHRI M. N. S. V. KIRAN KUMAR 


Association (RAMA) 
Voluntary Organizationn in Interest of Consumer Voice, Suri Н. WADHWA 
New Delhi Suri B. К. MuKHoPADHYAY (Alternate) 


75 


This standard has been provided by BIS and IIAR. It shall not be copied or distributed by 
other means to other parties without the written permission of IIAR. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 03 (14430). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 


Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 


Regional Offices: Telephones 


Central : 601/A, Konnectus Tower-1, 6^ Floor, DMRC Building, 
Bhavbhuti Marg, New Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8" Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, 2367 0012 


| 2323 7617 
Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 | 2320 9474 


Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg 
Chandigarh 160019 


265 9930 


Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western У Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri (East), | 2821 8093 
Mumbai 400093 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


