TAT ATT IS 15475 (Part 3) : 2022 
Indian Standard 


Ati & fera га гата A ета А 
&fedr 
“тт 3 Ranga, feratur site erra 
(чест gastaron ) 
Code of Recommended Practice for 
Amusement Rides Safety 


Part 3 Design, Manufacture and Erection 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 97.200.40 


© BIS 2022 


“теа 9799 St 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Na 19% HA, 9 elg Mls AH AMT, 18 feet - 110002 


MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


September 2022 Price Group 15 


Continuous Bulk Conveying, Elevating, Hoisting Aerial Ropeways and Related Equipment Sectional 
Committee, MED 6 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 3) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the 
Continuous Bulk Conveying, Elevating, Hoisting, Aerial Ropeways and Related Equipment Sectional 
Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering Division Council. 


Amusement parks in India are becoming quite common and people visit these parks quite often. In order to 
ensure their safety in amusement parks or while enjoying the rides, an attempt has been made to stipulate safety 
in the form of a National Code. It is hoped that organizers of amusement parks, manufacturers of rides would 
make use of these codes to ensure the overall safety of human beings and equipment at such places. 


This revision has been taken up to keep pace with the latest technological developments and international 
practices. This revision incorporates the following major changes: 


a) More safety provisions were added with new clauses 5, 6 and 7. 


The code of recommended practice for amusement rides safety is in six parts. This standard covers the 
requirements which need to be considered during the design, manufacture, and erection of amusement rides. 
Other parts in this series under the general title are as follows: 


Part 1 General information 

Part 2 Safety requirements 

Part 4 Selection, training, and supervision of operators 
Part 5 Operation and maintenance procedures 

Part 6 Performance tests 


Considerable assistance has also been derived from the following Standards for Safety of Amusement rides and 
amusement devices: 


ISO 17842-1 Safety of amusement rides and amusement devices — Part 1 : Design and manufacture 
ISO 17929 Biomechanical effects on amusement ride passengers 


This standard is not intended to contravene the provision of any of the existing Government regulations. It is the 
responsibility of the user of this code to establish appropriate safety and health practices and comply with 
regulatory and statutory requirements prior to the use of the ride or device for carrying a passenger for 
amusement. 


The composition of the committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex E. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 
2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places retained in 
the rounded-off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 15475 (Part 3) : 2022 


Indian Standard 


CODE OF RECOMMENDED PRACTICE FOR 
AMUSEMENT RIDES SAFETY 
PART 3 DESIGN, MANUFACTURE AND ERECTION 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard (Part 3) covers information, 
parameters, requirements, and procedures for the 
design, manufacture, and erection of amusement 
rides and devices. 


This standard does not contain rules to cover all the 
details of design, construction, or erection of ride or 
device. Where complete details are not given, it is 
the intention that the designer, manufacturer, 
subject to the approval of the user, and the 
inspecting authority shall follow such details of 
design, construction, and erection which will be 
safe for use of riders. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A, contain provisions 
which, through their reference in this text, 
constitute provisions of this standard. At the time 
of publication, the editions indicated were valid. 
All standards are subject to revision and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged 
to investigate the possibility of applying the most 
recent editions of the standards in Annex A. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


3.1 For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions, in addition to those given in IS 15475 
(Part 1) shall apply: 


3.1.1 Inspector — А person who, through 
education, experience, and/or training апа 
certification by a competent agency is able to 
properly evaluate an amusement ride or device to 
determine its conformance with related 
codes/specifications. 


3.1.2 Inspecting Authority — Duly authorized 
representative of the purchaser or any other 
competent authority recognized by the statutory 
regulations to inspect the amusement ride or device 
and determine its acceptability or otherwise on the 
basis of appropriate Indian Standards or accepted 
safety requirements. 


3.1.3 Statutory Requirements — The measures that 
must be taken to comply with any Governmental 
codes, regulations, ordinances, or rules that are 
applicable to an amusement ride, amusement 
device, or joy park. 


4 REQUIREMENTS FOR DESIGN ANALYSIS 
AND EXAMINATION 


4.1 Design and Manufacturing Drawings 


These are required for all assemblies, 
subassemblies, and individual components, the 
fracture or failure of which might endanger the 
stability or operational safety of the device. The 
drawings shall feature all the dimensions and cross- 
section values required for testing and approval, 
including details of materials, structural 
components, fasteners, connectors, and also 
relevant speed. The drawings shall include as a 
minimum, as applicable: 


a) General drawings in plan view, elevation, 
and sections, in a legible scale, depending 
on the size of the device; an indication of 
the necessary clearance around the moving 
parts; 

b) Detail drawings showing all the structural 
subassemblies which are not clearly 
discernible on the general drawings, as 
well as detailed drawings of connections 
and individual items of a structural, 
mechanical, or electrical nature, which 
could affect the safety of the device and its 
operation, shall be drawn to a larger scale; 

c) Illustrations of the following items may be 
necessary for this purpose: 

1) Slewing gear, hoisting and swiveling 
mechanisms, including their support 
arrangements, drives and controls, 
lifting and swiveling ranges; 

2) Carriages, gondolas, and similar, 
illustrated in all the required views 
and cross-sections, with details of the 
overall dimensions, the internal 
dimensions of importance to the 
passengers (seats, side, and back rests, 
leg and foot room), hand and foot 


IS 15475 (Part 3) : 2022 


holds and 
devices; 

3) Motion gear with details of load, 
guide, and stop wheels, bearings, 
axles, shafts and their attachment, 
freedom of movement in relation to 
the vehicle, steering and control, anti- 
rollback devices, safety devices 
against derailment and overturning, 
buffers, trailer devices, protection 
devices, drives and brakes and 
anchoring to the foundation; 

4) Pneumatic and hydraulic circuits and 
electrical апа electronic wing 
diagrams. 


locking and securing 


4.2 Principles of Analysis 


Verification shall comprise the following: 


a) 
b) 
с) 
d) 
е) 


f) 


Ultimate limit states analysis; 

Fatigue limit states analysis; 

Stability limit states analysis, that is, bar 
buckling, plate, and shell buckling; 

If required, verification of deformation 
limit states; 

Verification of safety against overturning, 
sliding, and lifting off; 

Dynamic analysis (excluding 
analysis). 


seismic 


The afore-mentioned verifications shall include at 
least the following details: 


a) 


b) 


с) 
d) 


е) 


Design loads, including unbalanced load, 
taking into account the possible operating 
conditions or alternative installations. In 
the case of moving parts, the velocity or 
the rotational speed and acceleration shall 
be stated. Special loads imposed during 
erection (for example, parts walked on 
which are not designed for that purpose) 
should Бе specified and listed for 
demarcation; 

Main dimensions and cross-section values 
of all load-bearing structural components 
and details relating to the assessment of 
the fatigue strength; 

Details of materials and components; 
Determination of the most unfavourable 
(maximum/minimum stress and stress 
range) stresses and details relating to the 
strength of the load-bearing structural 
components and fasteners. If calculation 
seems insufficient to evaluate limit states 
of assemblies, the analysis may be 
replaced by testing; 

Details of elastic deformations (flexure, 
torsion), when such details affect the 
stability or operating safety of the device; 


f) 


Details of those structural components that 
require special examination and inspection 
in accordance with verification of strength. 


4.3 Selection of Materials 


a) 


b) 


с) 


d) 


е) 


g 


h) 


Ш 


k) 


m) 


Steels for structural components Steels 

used for structural components should be 

in accordance with IS 2062 for any special 

steel that may be used; 

Aluminum alloys shall be selected in 

accordance with Indian standards IS 1285, 

IS 5384, IS 8147, IS 734; 

Timber Selection, design, and use of 

timber shall be in accordance with Indian 

standards IS 3629, IS 883, IS 399; 

Plastic composites Selection of plastic 

composites shall be in accordance with 

applicable Indian standards IS 2828, IS 

9833, IS 14534; 

The selection of concrete grades shall be 

in accordance with Indian standards. IS 

456 

Fasteners for structural components Bolts, 

screws, and studs shall be in accordance 

with Indian standard IS 1368. For 

machinery and mechanisms, other bolts 

according to appropriate standards may be 

used; 

Standards relating to ropes, chains, safety 

devices, connectors, and adapters In 

addition to the calculation of the load- 

bearing capacity of materials ог 

accessories, which relate directly to the 

safety of passengers or public, certificates, 

manufacturer’s markings, or testing shall 

also be provided. When ropes, chains, 

safety devices, connectors, and adapters 

are used, the following standards, in 

particular, should be observed: 

1) Steel wire ropes : IS 2266 

2) Termination for steel wire ropes : IS 
2485 

3) Clamps for wire ropes : IS 2361 

4) Components for slings : IS 2762 

5) Shackles : IS/ISO 2415 

Fibre ropes for general service — 

Determination of certain physical and 

mechanical properties as per IS 3871, IS 

9936, IS 5175; 

Natural fibre ropes, Manila and sisal. 3, 4 

and 8 strand ropes as applicable by IS 

3871; 

Fibre ropes for general service — Hemp : 

IS 11066 (Fibre ropes- Polyester); 

Chains used should be as per IS 2760, IS 

2429, IS 3109, IS 1834, IS 3077 and 

IS/ISO 3076. 


4.4 Design Parameters 
4.4.1 Passenger Weights 


For design purposes weight of passengers may be 
considered as follows: 


Adult = 85 kg or 6.07 kg/25 mm of hip width at the 
seat; 


12-year child = 45 kg or 4.5 kg/25 mm of hip width 
at the seat (Height 140 cm for the adult ride) 


4.4.2 Metal Structures 


For the design of metal structures, the various loads 
and stresses that can occur during the operation of 
the ride shall be considered but not limited to the 
following: 


4.4.2.1 Deadload 


Load forces of all fixed and movable construction 
parts, always present in the operation of the 
mechanical and electrical plants as well as the 
support structures. 


4.4.2.2 Passenger load 

A load of passengers and devices (seat and support) 
depending on the capacity of the ride and direction 
of travel. 


4.4.2.3 Permanent dynamic effects 


The dynamic effect of falling load at transfer points 
and rotating parts of the ride. 


4.4.2.4 Load due to inclination 


Loads due to the inclination of working-level and 
machines/passengers. 


4.4.2.5 Wind load 


Aerodynamic pressure depending on the local 
conditions and wind speed. 


4.4.2.6 Temperature 


The temperature effect may be considered when 
materials with very different expansion coefficients 
are used within the same component. 


4.4.2.7 Resistance due to friction and travel 


Frictional resistances be considered if they 
influence the sizes related to travel. 


IS 15475 (Part 3) : 2022 


4.4.2.8 Failure of safety devices 


Additional load due to the failure of safety devices 
provided to limit the useful load may be taken into 
consideration. 


4.4.2.9 Forces of ride 


Belt tensions, chain tensions, etc, shall be taken 
into consideration for the calculation as far as they 
have an effect on the structure. 


4.4.2.10 Wind load on the non-operating element 


Wind speed and aerodynamic pressures with 
reference to the above-ground height of the 
structural element. 


4.4.2.11 Buffer effects 


The reaction of the structure to collision with 
buffers at higher speeds. 


4.4.2.12 Locking of traveling devices 


Rail mounted equipment may be blocked by 
derailment or rail fracture. The maximum drive 
effect may be taken into consideration. 


4.4.2.13 Loads due to earthquakes 


Effects due to earthquakes may be considered in 
calculation as special load. 


4.4.2.14 Erection loads 


In certain cases, it may be necessary to check some 
structural parts under dead loads in particular 
mandatory situations. 


4.4.2.15 Forces on passengers due to action of the 
ride based on design. 


4.5 Design of Structural Parts for General Stress 
Analysis 


4.5.1 General 


The stresses arising in the structural parts shall be 
determined and checks shall be made to ensure 
adequate safety margin exists with respect to the 
following: 


a) Straining beyond the yield point or the 
permissible stress; 

b) Straining beyond the permissible crippling 
or buckling stress; and 

с) Exceeding the permissible fatigue 
strength. 


4.5.1.1 Conventional strength of materials 
calculation procedures shall be used to calculate the 


IS 15475 (Part 3) : 2022 


strength and suitable material shall be selected on 
the basis of their characteristic values. Allowable 
loads or stresses shall be reduced as deemed 
adequate by the designer/manufacturer to allow for 
special combinations of conditions which may 
include but are not limited to stress concentrations, 
shocks, dynamics, load cycles, degree of risk, and 
environment. 


4.5.2 Design of Joints 
4.5.2.1 Welded joints 


In the case of combined stresses in one plane a 
comparative value shall be established for all types 
of welds and compared with allowable stresses. 
The weld joint shall have at least the tensile 
strength and yield point of the steel of the welded 
structural members. 


4.5.2.2 Bolted joints 


Holes for bolted and riveted joints shall be drilled 
and reamed. Tolerance in the hole shall be as per 
recommended engineering practices. 


4.5.2.3 Rivets 
The rivets shall not be subjected to tensile load. 


4.5.2.4 Joints using high strength friction grip 
(HSFG) bolts with controlled tightening 


These types of bolted joints are especially 
recommended for the joining of members subjected 
to dynamic loads and offer a guarantee against 
loosening. 


5 DESIGN LOADS 
5.1 General 


In general actions, load, design as well as any 
structural assumptions for load-bearing parts of 
devices shall be chosen if so required due to the 
special nature of amusement rides and devices. 


5.2 Permanent Actions 


For amusement rides and devices in general a very 
precise assumption of permanent actions is 
possible. Where variations can occur, the values 
Gx sup, and Ging shall be taken into account when 
assessing the most likely structural response. 
Elsewhere a single characteristic value Gy is 
sufficient. The values are defined as follows: 


Gx Characteristic value of permanent 
action; 


Сир Upper characteristic value; 


Gk int Lower characteristic value. 


Included in the above values are the actual dead 
load of the load-bearing structure, the accessories, 
and the technical equipment required for operation, 
including cladding, fabrics, and other decorative 
elements. The wet and dry condition of material is 
accounted for іп Gxsup, and Ск. 


The permanent actions shall be determined in 
accordance with international standards. The actual 
weight of machine components, electrical 
equipment, and passenger units like carriages or 
gondolas shall be verified. 


5.3 Variable Actions 
5.3.1 Imposed Loads 
5.3.1.1 General 


These consist of the external loads and imposed 
deformations (for example, imposed loads, 
gyroscopic loads, dynamic loads, wind and snow 
loads, temperature or settlement) acting on a 
structural component, which may vary in 
magnitude, direction, and point of application 
(variation in time and space) during normal 
operation. 


5.3.1.2 Vertically imposed loads 


a) Passenger-carrying units 
On passenger-carrying units (vehicles, 
cars, gondola) the following loads shall be 
assumed. 


Qx is the characteristic value of the 
variable actions. 


For each person over 10 years of age: 


Ок = 085 kN for all fatigue 
calculations; 


Ок = 0.85 kN for static calculations 
(non-fatigue) for more than 4 
passengers per compartment except in 
the case below; 


Ок = 1.35kN - (n – 1) x 0.15 KN where 
1 <n € 4 for static calculation only and 
the load transferring members from the 
seat into center assemblies for 
individually supported or suspended 
seats with n = 1 to 4 passengers per 
single compartment. 


NOTES 


1 These static loads are not an operational and 
general weight limit or requirement and need not 
be used for overall calculations (for example, 


sliding, overturning, etc.) of the compartment or 
ride itself. 

2 Using special compartments for larger persons 
the above-mentioned values of load assumptions 
shall be corrected. 

3 The designer can consider possible higher 
weight depending on the seat configuration and 
type of ride. 


For each person of 10 years or less: 


Ок = 0.45KN in both fatigue and static 
cases. Where the reduced 
loadings for the person of 10 
years or less are employed the 
restrictions shall be clearly 
indicated at the ride and in the 
manual. 


b) Other vertical loads 
The following vertical imposed loads shall 
be applied for any area designed for access 
by foot. 


Universal, public access: 


qk = 3.5 kN/m? for floors, stairways, 
landings, ramps, entrances, exits, 
and other similar features in rides 
and facilities; 


qx = 5.0 kN/n?? for grandstands and their 
stairways and landings with fixed 
seats; and as a superior value, if 
particularly dense crowds are 
anticipated for the above-mentioned 
categories 


qx = 7.5 kN/n?? for grandstands and their 
stairways and landings without 
seats or non-fixed seats; and as a 
superior value, if particularly dense 
crowds are anticipated for the 
above-mentioned categories 


ак = 2.0 kN/m? for the revolving or 
boom area walked on by the 
public during operation (load and 
unload); or twice the full 
passenger load of all passenger 
units and carriages according to 
(a), whichever is the more 
unfavorable, in order to make the 
necessary allowance for change of 
passengers. 


Ок = 1.0 kN/step for stairs; alternatively, 
an area load in accordance with 
the above clauses, whichever is 
the more unfavorable. 


IS 15475 (Part 3) : 2022 


qx = 1.5 kN/m? for seat boards of rows 
Of seats per seat run and for 
floors between fixed rows of 
seats, unless higher loads result 
from the application of area loads 
(qk = 3.5 kN/m?). 


Not open for public access: 


qx = 1.5 kN/m? for all floors, platforms, 
ramps, staircases, catwalks, 
stages, and the like which are 
walked over by individual 
persons, or 


Qk = 1.5 kN for individual loads, 
whichever is the more 
unfavourable. 


5.3.1.3 Horizontal imposed loads 


The following horizontal imposed loads shall be 
applied for parapets, fences, railings, wall panels, 
and other similar features: 


When bounding floors intended for public access 
designed for ак = 3.5 kN/m?: 


px = 0.5 kN/m at hand rail height; 
px = 0.1 kN/m at intermediate rail height. 


When bounding floors intended for public access 
designed for gx = 5.0 kN/m? and 


qx = 7.5 KN/m?; 
px = 1 KN/m at hand rail height; 
px = 0.15 kN/m at intermediate rail height. 


When bounding floors not intended for public 
access designed for дк = 1.50 kN/m? : 


px = 0.30 kN/m at hand rail height; 
px = 0.10 kN/m at intermediate rail height. 


For wall panels where there is no special handrail, 
the above values shall be applied at handrail height, 
but, where appropriate, not higher than 1.2 m. 


5.3.1.4 Grandstands 


In order to achieve an adequate longitudinal and 
transverse stiffness in the case of grandstands and 
similar installations with seating or standing 
accommodation, a horizontal load acting at floor 
level in the most unfavorable direction in each case 
shall be entered in the calculation in addition to any 
eventual wind force in accordance with 5.3.4. The 
horizontal component load shall be taken as 1/10 


IS 15475 (Part 3) : 2022 


for temporarily installed and 1/20 for permanently 
installed grandstands of the imposed vertical load 
in accordance with 5.3.1.2 (b). 


5.3.2 Driving Forces and Braking Forces 


Driving forces and braking forces shall be 
calculated for the drive and brake selected (for 
example, d.c. motor, three-phase а.с. motor, 
hydraulic drive), and they shall be entered in the 
calculation at these values. In the case of hydraulic 
cylinders, the influences arising from start-up and 
braking shall be kept within manageable limits by 
suitable design measures and shall be taken into 
account in the calculation. In general, the braking 
and starting forces, B, shall be calculated according 
to the actual brake and motor performance 
(acceleration/deceleration): 


В = ay x (myemy)....... eese (1) 
where 
a = braking/starting acceleration; 


m= mass of moving parts without 
passengers; 


тр= total mass of passengers as per 5.3.1.2 
(a) above. 


In the case of circular movements, the appropriate 
parameters shall be applied in the formula. Care 
needs to be taken to allow for speed reduction units 
(for example, transmissions; gearboxes). An 
eventual impact factor shall be taken into account. 


In the case of speeds not exceeding 3 m/s, the 
driving forces and braking forces can be derived 
with a = 0.7 m/s’, if a more precise evaluation is 
not carried out. 


5.3.3 Bracing and Restraint Loads 


Such loads shall be taken into account when 
designing passenger restraints and containment, 
railings, and bracing devices within the passenger 
unit. All significant situations during the ride cycle 
including loading, unloading, and emergency 
situations shall be considered. The allowance shall 
also be made for the forces caused by passengers 
bracing themselves against restraints and other 
parts of the containment (for example, footrests). 
The magnitudes of maximum bracing forces are 
dependent upon the detailed design of the 
containment and as a result of the passenger’s 
deliberate actions. However, forces used in any 
calculations should never be less than 500 N per 
person. 


5.3.4 Wind Loads 


a) General 
In general standards for wind actions on 
buildings and structures shall be chosen in 
the following sequence: 
1) according to the provisions of IS 875 
(Part 3); 
2) according to the provisions of IS 802 
(Part 1). 
b) Wind loads in limit state 
The wind loads for permanently installed 
amusement devices shall be taken from 
the IS 802 (Part 1) and IS 875 (Part 3). 
For temporarily installed devices, the 
values in Table 1 may be applied which 
defines the approximate the wind pressure 
in a step function. 


Table 1 Wind Pressure Values for Temporarily Installed Amusement Devices 
[Clauses 5.3.4 (b), 9.3.1 (b)] 


SI. No. Height of structure Pressure q(z) (KN/m?) for reference wind speed 
a Vp € 15 m/s (operating vy < 28 m/s (out of 
m state) service) 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) 0 <2.< 8 0.20 0.35 
ii) 8 < Ze <20 0.30 0.50 
iii) 20 < ze < 35 0.35 0.90 
iv) 35 < ze < 50 0.40 1.0 
NOTES 


1 Wind load for structures with a height of more than 50 m are not defined in Table 1. 
2 Dynamic effects due to wind (gusts, buffering, vortex shedding) may occur at structures with low stiffness (low natural 


frequency). 


The wind load, Fw, on a structure or part may be 
calculated by the application of the above values in 
the following formula: 


Fw = О(г) х Сех Aref Va SE NINOS EN NUS (2) 
where 


Q(z. = wind pressure depending on height 


Ze; 
Ct = aerodynamic coefficient; 
Art = reference area. In general, the 


respective shape factors of particular structures 
and structural members shall be applied. 


5.3.5 Inertia Forces (Centrifugal Forces, 
Gyroscopic Forces, and Coriolis Forces) 


Inertia forces shall be determined according to the 
prevailing circumstances in each case. 


5.3.6 Intentional Collision During Operation 


The effects of collision loads need only be taken 
into consideration in respect of the structural 
components directly affected and their associated 
fixings. Collision shall be assumed to occur at the 
most unfavorable point of the structural component 
concerned, and the calculation shall be based on the 
mass of the fully occupied vehicle, motor, except 
when intentional collision only can occur with 
empty vehicles. If a collision can only occur at 
angles a < 90°, the collision force F (in Newtons) 
shall be assumed to be 


Е=9.8 х Мох Sina ................. (3) 
where 
Мы = mass of the fully occupied vehicle, in 
kg; 
a = angle between the vehicle and the 
structure. 


But in any case, the value for the calculation shall 
be not less than 


F- 9.81xMiaX 0.3 "—€———Ór— (4) 
Alternatively, dynamic analysis can be performed. 


Where collision is not intended to be part of the 
ride design or purpose collision shall be assumed to 
be an accidental action. 


5.4 Seismic Forces 


Seismic forces need only be considered by special 
request; they do not need to be combined with wind 
load cases. Seismic forces shall be applied in 
accordance with IS 1893 (Part 4). 


IS 15475 (Part 3) : 2022 


5.5 Applicable Coefficients 


Applicable coefficients for impacts, the vibration of 
structural components directly travelled over and 
collisions shall be considered. 


5.5.1 Impacts 


If impact forces are likely to arise in the structure 
or their individual parts during the travel motion 
(for example from the rail joints or from abrasive 
wear), then the moving loads under consideration 
(dead load and imposed load), shall be multiplied 
by an impact factor of not less than ¢; =1.2, unless 
the type of structure demands an even higher value. 
If substantially greater impact forces (for example, 
due to rail joints) are ascertained during trial runs 
on the completed structures, and if these impact 
forces cannot be reduced to their design value by 
construction, then the impact factor shall be 
increased accordingly in a revised calculation. 


Forces arising from start-up and braking, for 
example, in the case of hydraulic cylinders, are not 
considered to be impact forces (but normally 
imposed loads); see also 5.3.2 in this respect. 


5.5.2 Vibration of Structural Track Components 


In general, as a result of the vibration response of 
structural track components, for example, the track 
of a roller coaster, all resultant stresses shall be 
multiplied by the vibration coefficient фә =1.2. 


5.6 Structural Analysis — Principles 
5.6.1 General 


The limit states resulting from all different actions 
shall be determined separately for the individual 
actions given in 5. It shall be verified that no 
relevant limit state exceeds the design properties. 
The limit states due to the combinations of actions 
shall be calculated. It shall be verified that the 
design value of internal forces or moments does not 
exceed the corresponding design resistance of the 
respective part and that the ultimate and 
serviceability limit states are not exceeded. For 
tests see 4.2. Special consideration shall be given to 
the limit state verification regarding deformation 
and stability for structures, where the deformation 
limit can be a decisive value. Any favourable effect 
using methods of the theory of 2nd order may be 
taken into account (Second order analysis takes 
into account how the structure deforms while loads 
are being applied on it). 


All verifications shall be performed for the most 
unfavourable loading. In this respect, the 
permanent, variable, and accidental actions, as well 
as the dynamic (inertia) forces, shall always be 


IS 15475 (Part 3) : 2022 


assumed to have the position and magnitude which 
result in the most unfavourable limit states for the 
structural and mechanical components to be 
analyzed. For structural, mechanical components, 
and items of equipment that are not permanent 
fixtures, it shall also be ascertained as to whether 
more unfavourable conditions are likely to arise 
when such items are displaced or removed. 


Non-standard formulae shall be recorded in writing 
with the symbols in accordance with IS standards 
or to accepted standards. The sources of such 
formulae shall be stated if this source is publicly 
available. In other cases, the derivations of the 
formulae shall be presented to such an extent that 
their validity can be verified. 


If computer processing for calculation is used, 
special consideration shall be given to the 
requirements for the review of computer 
calculations during the design approval. Clear 
information concerning the software, formulae, 
units, etc. shall be submitted. Input and output data 
of importance for design shall be printed in their 
entirety. The review of such calculations shall be 
performed by independent parallel calculations 
and/or independent software. The correctness of the 
assumptions regarding the input and the output data 
shall be comprehensively reviewed during design 
approval. 


Design resistance, Ra, shall be evaluated in 
accordance with Formula (5). 


where 


Ry is the characteristic value of the resistance 
(for example, material property); 


ym = 1.10 is the partial safety factor of the 
resistance in static load combinations (for 
example, material property); 


Умғ1ѕ the partial safety factor of the resistance 
in fatigue load combinations (see Table 4, for 
example, material property); and 


ума = 1.0 is the partial safety factor of the 
resistance (for example, material property) in 
accidental combinations. 


For materials other than steel the values for ум may 
be taken from IS 800. 


5.6.2 Analysis Principles for Various Types of 
Devices 


5.6.2.1 Conditions for calculating rotating type 
devices Amusement rides and devices shall be 
calculated in operative, inoperative, fully loaded, 
partially loaded, and unbalanced conditions. 


One-sided loading shall be assumed as meaning 
that only those seats which are situated on 1/4 or 
3/4 of the perimeter are occupied. The verification 
of the ultimate limit state shall be carried out for 
these one-sided loading conditions. 


The overturning moment caused by one-sided 
loading when seats on at least l/6th of the 
perimeter are occupied shall not exceed the 
stability moment in existence at that time, without 
taking the anchor ties into consideration. For this 
one-sided loading, the fatigue strength shall be 
verified. This shall be done also for a one-sided 
loading on 5/6th of the perimeter. The 
corresponding sector portions shall be selected for 
the most unfavorable case, and the seats situated at 
the edge of the sector concerned shall be included 
in the count. 


An analogous procedure shall be adopted for multi- 
seated gondolas in lieu of single seats. If there are 
18 or more seats uniformly distributed around the 
perimeter, a higher one-sided loading may be the 
determining factor in respect of adequate safety 
against overturning in certain cases. In this regard, 
it shall be assumed that the ratio between Мк, 
(stabilizing moment) and Meas (overturning 
destabilizing moment) takes into account the partial 
safety factors according to Table 2. 


If a device is also intended by design to rotate in 
reverse, then both directions of travel shall be taken 
into consideration when dimensioning Ше 
components of the device. 


5.6.2.2 Design and analysis principles for 
passenger-carrying units 


The seats and gondolas shall be sized by taking into 
account the forces resulting from dead loads, 
imposed loads, and motion. If seats are mounted on 
pin joints, they shall be arranged in such a way that 
no constraints can arise. The fastening of the seats 
onto outriggers shall also be designed for these 
forces. The arm rests, back rests, safety straps, 
chains, ropes, and associated locking devices shall 
be capable of absorbing the aforementioned forces 
arising from the passenger load. The structure of 
seats and gondolas shall be designed and analyzed 
in such a way that the forces arising (such as start- 
up and braking forces, impact forces, out-of- 
balance forces, and forces exerted from the 
passengers onto restraints and railings) are securely 


transmitted into the structure and fatigue problems 
are excluded. 


5.6.2.3 Roundabouts with several motions 


a) 


b) 


с) 


General 


For roundabouts, in which the moving 
parts are rotated about several axes in 
different planes, all the forces which arise 
shall be determined. This shall be done by 
considering, as a minimum, the angular 
velocities, centrifugal forces, Coriolis 
forces due to the change of direction of 
one or more of the rotational axes, 
gyroscopic forces, starting and braking 
forces, and any impact forces which may 
arise. 


Roundabout with planar motion only 


Where the roundabout undergoes planar 
motion with constant speed rotation about 
two parallel axes only, the absolute 
velocities and accelerations (taking into 
account the relative motions and Coriolis’ 
accelerations) may be calculated. 


Roundabouts with outriggers running on 
rail tracks: 


1) Roundabouts with arms centrally 
guided 


With the internal or external location 
of the drive unit. On such 
roundabouts, due attention shall be 
paid to possible constraints and the 
bending and torsion moments in the 
arms that arise from the type of 
attachment of the gondolas or seats. 
The rails or running track shall be 
sized in such a way that the deflection 
due to wheel load does not exceed 
1/500 of the span between track 
supports. 


2) Roundabouts without a central guide 


Safety against overturning of the cars 
shall be ensured by banking off the 
rails or by safety rollers and the like, 
or if necessary by both these 
precautions. In the first step, the 
calculation of the safety against 
overturning of the substructure with a 
total partial safety factor of at least y 
= 1.0, the anchorage in the foundation 
soil shall not be акеп into 
consideration. In order to attain safety 
against overturning with partial safety 
factors in accordance with 5.7.1, the 


3) 


4) 


IS 15475 (Part 3) : 2022 


anchorage may Бе taken шо 
consideration in the calculation. 


Roundabouts with an undulating track 


On these installations, the inertial 
forces arising from the movement in 
space of the gondolas shall be taken 
into consideration. 


Roundabouts with several rotation 
gears 


On these installations, particular 
attention shall be paid to the effects of 
the Coriolis and Gyration forces on 
the structure. 


In the case of rotary motions which 
are not positively actuated (i.e. free 
spinning and or passenger actuated), 
the effects of the individual rotation 
gears shall be investigated. For boom- 
type roundabouts (for example, 
round-ups, twisters, hully-gullies), the 
gondolas of which may be raised, the 
effects of the forces arising during 
vertical movement, starting up and 
braking shall be taken into account, 
with due consideration for any 
unfavorable effects of impact forces 
and centrifugal forces. 


In this context, the effects of the 
above-mentioned forces on each 
outrigger, on the complete 
roundabout, and on the safety against 
overturning of the roundabout shall be 
investigated for the most unfavorable 
position in each case under static load 
combinations. Fatigue calculations in 
accordance with 5.9.3 shall be carried 
out. The telescopic jacks shall be 
supported without constraint and shall 
be sized adequately to withstand 
buckling. 


The same applies, if appropriate, to 
lift roundabouts. Unavoidable 
accelerations on the telescopic jack at 
the beginning and at the end of a 
lifting stroke shall be taken into 
consideration by making a suitable 
allowance for increased loading when 
the roundabout components are being 
sized unless these accelerations are 
attenuated with damping elements. 


If the pressure lines of the lifting 
cylinders fail, the lowering speed 
shall not exceed twice the normal 
operational lowering speed and in any 


IS 15475 (Part 3) : 2022 


5.6.2.4 


a) 


b) 


case no more than 1.0 m/s, subjected 
to the requirements of 5.3.2.7. 


Roller coasters with rail track-bound 


vehicles 


General (dynamics) 


The longitudinal gradient of the rail shall 
be limited in such a way that the resultant 
force at angles perpendicular to it does not 
fall below 0.2 g. This value also applies to 
the passenger unit with the highest speed 
in the case of trains. If the resultant force 
should fall below the above value, the 
passengers shall be secured against lift-off 
in accordance with 8.1. 


The maximum transverse inclination of 
the rail, at the spots at which the car is 
likely to come to a full stop for operational 
reasons (for example, at safety brakes), 
shall be limited to a maximum value of 
25? unless the design of the passenger 
containment system and the analysis of the 
biomechanical effect allow for a higher 
value. The path of the rail track shall be 
designed in such a way, that the 
instantaneous theoretical step in 
acceleration is limited to 2g. This is 
related to the center of mass and does not 
exclude the necessity for other 
calculations to be made for accelerations 
on passengers’ bodies. The velocity, 
accelerations, and forces сап be 
determined for the center of mass. Where 
there are multiple coupled cars the overall 
center of mass may be used. 


A simulation of the motion over time shall 
be carried out in order to determine speed, 
accelerations, and forces. 


Because the friction coefficients are liable 
to considerable variations in magnitude as 
a result of the running in time, the design, 
the surface finish of the rail, and the 
weather, it will be necessary to carry out a 
measurement of the actual velocity and 
accelerations. The data of Ше 
measurement shall be within the limit of 
design. 


To determine the individual wheel forces 
additional calculations will be necessary. 


For high speed tracks having tight loops or 
helices, the need for rigid body dynamics 
shall be considered. 


Supporting framework 


If the calculation is based on a continuous 
rail track above the support columns, a 


10 


с) 


d) 


column settlement by virtue of the 
reduction by 50 % of the moment at 
support, and a column heightening by 
virtue of the increase by 25 % of the 
moment at support shall be assumed. The 
increase or reduction of these moments 
need not be taken into consideration for 
the verification of fatigue in view of the 
low numbers of cycles anticipated. 


For exposed support columns without 
cladding anchored by the continuous rail 
in the overall structure, the assessment of 
the wind load may be ignored for the 
verification of the stability and of the 
safety against sliding. 


The safety of the installation against 
overturning, when it is subjected to wind 
load need not be verified as a general rule, 
unless exceptionally large horizontal 
forces are likely to arise, as a result of a 
particularly unfavourable shape, 
exceptionally large wind load areas of the 
framework components (decorations, 
lighting strips), or as a result of the partial 
or total cladding of the framework or 
track. 


Passenger units 


All forces arising in the chassis and 
superstructures shall be followed in the 
calculation from their point of origin, 
down to the supports. Thus, for example, 
in the case of passenger units with one 
oscillating and one rigid axle, the 
moments from forces transverse to the car 
above the oscillating axle, can only be 
absorbed by the rigid axle. 


Forces transverse to the car, for example, 
can only be transmitted through wheels 
that run against the side of the rail. 


If the load wheels are not designed in such 
a way that they are also capable of 
absorbing lateral forces, then special guide 
rollers shall be provided for this purpose. 


The vehicles shall be equipped with 
devices for the prevention of derailment 
and lift-off. Safety devices against lift-off 
(rollers or claws) shall in any case be 
calculated for the actual forces acting on 
them. As a minimum, they shall be sized 
for 50 % of the fully-loaded vehicle 
weight, even when there is no lift-off. 


Brakes 


Each stopping or speed regulation brake 
(at the end of the descent, stopping after 
each journey) shall be designed in such a 


way that the braking deceleration does not 
exceed a maximum value of 5.0 m/s’. 
Greater deceleration is permitted on 
condition that special devices for the 
protection (lap bars, etc.) of the passenger 
are provided; see 8. 


Safety brakes shall be arranged for the 
planned minimum distance between 
successive cars or trains in such a way that 
there will always be sufficient braking 
elements between any two cars or trains to 
prevent a collision. 


Each safety brake shall be designed in 
such a way that the braking deceleration 
does not exceed a maximum value of 7.0 
m/s”, unless a greater deceleration is 
permitted in which case special devices 
for the protection (lap bars, etc.) of the 
passenger shall be provided; see 8. 


Fatigue need not be considered for safety 
brakes, which are only operated in 
emergency cases. The maximum 
deceleration shall be assessed by using the 
highest attainable friction coefficient for 
the selected brake surface materials with 
the minimum load. 


With regard to the sizing of the effective 
deceleration length, it shall be assumed 
that the car is still able to come to a full 
stop, when applying a safety factor of 1.2 
(related to the friction coefficient), to the 
minimum friction coefficient experienced 
due to weather influences, wear, 
maximum speed and load. The limiting 
values shall be checked on the finished 
installation. During such tests, the 
minimum friction and maximum speed 
shall be produced as far as is possible 
using wet rails, wet brake elements, and 
wet fins. 


Speed regulation brakes shall Бе 
calculated by using fatigue load cases. 


5.6.2.5 Anti-rollback devices 


Installations, on which the cars or trains are 
conveyed on the ascent ramp by means of chains, 
ropes, friction wheels, or by self-propulsion, shall 
be provided with either safety devices to prevent 
running back, or with automatically acting brakes 
to prevent running back. 


If it is planned that several cars or trains are to be 
present at the same time on the section of track 


11 


IS 15475 (Part 3) : 2022 


situated between the end of the lift or ascent ramp 
and the station, or the brake situated before the 
station, then safety devices to prevent running back 
shall also be fitted in the uphill sections of the track 
after the valleys. 


However, if a passenger unit or train is intended to 
be able to travel backward along with the track and 
through the station then safety devices against 
running back can be omitted from the ascent ramps. 


Moreover, if there are several cars or trains on the 
track, safety devices against running back on the 
uphill sections may be dispensed with, on condition 
that the individual track sections are safeguarded 
by а fail-safe  block-zone system, with 
automatically controlled brakes. 


If by design, it is intended that there is to be only a 
single car or a single train on the track at any one 
time, safety devices against running back can be 
omitted from the uphill stretches after the valleys or 
when the car is intended to roll backward. The 
fatigue strength need not be verified for the anti- 
rollback devices. If the car is stopped by the anti- 
roll back device with a sudden impact then an 
impact factor shall be assumed for dimensioning 
purposes. This value shall be at least one-half of the 
vertical maximum running back height [л in 
centimeters (cm)] if no exact verification is carried 
out, and in any case, shall not be less than 2.0. A 
load of ¢ x О shall be assumed for dimensioning 
purposes where Q is defined as the dead load of the 
car plus the live load of passengers (fully loaded 
roller coaster car). 


$ 2 0.5xh 
ф shall not be less than 2 
The two conditions above shall be satisfied. 


If the deflection is known or can be determined 
reliably, the following formula shall be applied: 


$21414 ?h — 
боѕіпој 


where 


бо = total deflection of centre of 
mass along slope; 


a 


slope angle (see Fig 1); 


h height (see Fig 1). 


IS 15475 (Part 3) : 2022 


Key 
а slope angle 
h height 


Fic. 1 IMPACT FACTOR/RUNNING BACK ELEVATION 


Measured data and/or dynamic analysis can be used 
to determine impact loads also. 


5.7 Verification of Stability 
5.7.1 General 


Proof shall be provided of safety against 
overturning 5.7.2, sliding 5.7.3, and lifting 5.7.4 of 
amusement devices and their components. 
Favourably acting imposed loads and dead loads of 
components and accessories which are not always 
present shall not be taken into account, when 
providing proof of safety against overturning, 
sliding, and lifting. Only the lowest value of 
continuously acting favourable influences including 
material variations (for example, Сър, Gint) shall be 
taken into account. For foundations, a national 


standard or an internationally accepted standard 
shall be applied to the prevailing rules of this sub- 
clause. A frost-free foundation for amusement 
devices is only required in cases where lifting or 
lowering/settling due to frost could lead to damage 
or failure. Only the lowest value of continuously 
acting favourable influences shall be taken into 
account. If an adequate degree of safety cannot be 
achieved by virtue of a dead load of a structure 
alone, then further additional steps shall be taken to 
ensure it, such as counterweights, anchors, and 
buttresses. As the weight of amusement devices 
may be determined and verified accurately this 
allows a more precise determination of the safety 
factors to be made (see Table 2). 


Table 2 Safety Factor Against Overturning, Sliding, and Lifting 
(Clauses 5.6.2.1, 5.7.1, 5.7.3, 5.7.8, 5.8.1) 


SI. Loading y 

No. 

(1) (2) (3) 
i)  Favorably acting proportions of the dead load 1.0 
ii) | Unfavourably acting proportions of the dead load 1.1 

iii) | Unfavourably acting wind loads 1.2 

iv) Accidental combinations 1.0 
v)  Unfavorably acting proportions of loads other than the loads 1.3 


listed in items 2, 3 and 4 


a. If loads are resolved into components, then these components shall be multiplied by the 


same value of y. 


b. For devices higher than 20 m, у = 1.2 shall be replaced by y = 1.2 + 0.3 x (h-20)/40 where Л 


is the total height of device in metres 


12 


5.7.2 Overturning 


The safety against overturning shall be calculated 
from: 


УуМвк,ѕь 2 У YMEk ast 


where 


y = partial safety factors in 


accordance with Table 2; 


Mexstb= stabilizing moment proportions; 
Mexat= overturning destabilizing moment 
proportions. 


Care shall be taken to ensure that the loads entered 
in the calculation can be accommodated by the 
shear stiffness of the structure. 


IS 15475 (Part 3) : 2022 


5.7.3 Sliding 

The safety against sliding shall be calculated from : 
HL yNe 2 X yH 

where 


y = partial safety factors in accordance with 
Table 2; 


Ny- vertical load components; 

H= horizontal load components; 

и = coefficient of friction in accordance with 
Table 3. 


The coefficients of friction in Table 3 may be 
assumed for the determination of the frictional 
forces, unless higher values determined by tests are 
available in individual cases, or unless the effect of 
moisture requires the adoption of lower values. 


Table 3 Coefficient of Friction и 


(Clause 5.7.3) 
SI. No. Material Wood Steel Concrete 

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
1) Wood 0.40 0.4 0.6 
ii) Steel 0.4 0.1 0.2 
iii) Concrete 0.6 0.2 0.5 
iv) Clay 0.25 0.2 0.25 
v) Loam 0.4 0.2 0.4 
vi) Sand and gravel 0.65 0.2 0.65 


entered in the calculation at 70 % of the listed 
values. 


It shall be borne in mind that loosening by 
vibration may occur in the case of supports 
subjected to vibrating stress. 

H'EYNk + 2а 2 DY. 
If stability is not obtained by static friction alone, 
then the structure shall be anchored in the ground. 
In such cases, the safety against sliding shall be 
calculated in conjunction with the action of soil 
anchors. Under these conditions, the coefficients of 
friction in accordance with Table 2 shall only be 


where 


u = 0.7 u and и is the coefficient of friction in 
accordance with Table 3. 


Zn a= horizontal design load-bearing capacity of the 
anchor (see 5.8). 


13 


IS 15475 (Part 3) : 2022 


5.7.4 Lifting 
The safety against lifting shall be calculated from 
У уМвкыь > Y yNgxas 


where 


Y = partial safety factor in accordance 
with Table 2; 


Nexkstb= vertical stabilizing load components; 
Nekast= Vertical lifting destabilizing load 
components. 


With anchor ties the following relationship shall be 
applied: 


YyNrkstb + Zva = Y, y Nga ds 


where 


Zw = vertical design load-bearing capacity of 
the anchor (see 5.8). 


5.8 Ground Anchorage 
5.8.1 Calculation of Loads on Anchors 


The resulting load Z;4; acting on the anchorage shall 
be determined by vector summation, taking into 
account the partial safety factors shown in Table 2. 
This load 4, shall be 


Zres = У Y Z < Za 


ух Zu 


Dy x Z = Гв 


Zq favourably acting resultant of permanent actions 


Zw 


у safety factor in accordance with Table 2 


B angle of acting tensile force to the vertical 


unfavourably acting portion of variable actions 


FIG 2 ANCHOR LOADING 


5.9 Verification of Strength 
5.9.1 General 


A distinction shall be made between predominantly 
static stress and predominantly fluctuating stress. 
Fluctuating stress occurs both in the form of 
pulsating stress (stress which fluctuates within two 
limiting values without any change of sign, [Ao = 
mino /maxo]) and in the form of alternating stress 
(stress which fluctuates between two limiting 
values and changes its sign). For both situations the 


14 


stress range Ao = maxo - mino is significant for the 
calculation. 


Fatigue calculation of welded structural items shall 
be performed to relevant standards which are based 
either on the stress range ӧс concept or in 
mino/maxo stress concept, if the minimum lifetime 
requirements in 5.9.3.1 (c) are applied and a partial 
safety factor according to Table 4 at 95 % survival 
probability or equivalent is maintained. 


The resistance of notch details shall be determined 
as a Statistical value with 95 % of survival 
probability and a confidence interval of 75 %. 


The minimum lifetime requirements in 5.9.3.1(c) 
with at least the partial safety factors of Table 4 
shall be considered. 


Structures subjected to fluctuating stress which is 
likely to be exposed to more than n = 10% stress 
cycles during their expected service life shall be 
dimensioned by calculation of fatigue strength. 


The complete analysis of a device shall be based on 
a clearly specified and internationally accepted 
standard. 


5.9.2 Predominantly Static Stress 


Permissible stresses of materials used for structural 
components shall be taken from the selection of 
materials. 


With regard to general stress analysis of machinery 
components made of steel, including components 
that act simultaneously as structural components, 
the following relationships shall apply: 
Ra € Ren/ymo 
and 
Ra € Rw ум? 
where 
Ra 15 Ше design material resistance; 
Re 15 the yield strength; 
Rn 15 ће ultimate strength; 


ymo = 1.115 the partial safety factor for 
elastic strength resistance (yield); 


ym = 1.5 is the partial safety factor for 
ultimate strength resistance when Rey /Rm< 
0,75; 


ym = 2.015 the partial safety factor for 
ultimate strength resistance when Rey/Rm> 
0,75. 


The smaller of the two values Ra above shall be 
used. 


5.9.3 Fluctuating Stress 


5.9.3.1 Fatigue assessment of structural 
components 


An assessment of fatigue life as a result of repeated 
fluctuation of stress shall be carried out. 


IS 15475 (Part 3) : 2022 


a) Partial safety factors for fatigue 


For fatigue loads, a partial safety factor 
shall be applied: yr; = 1.0 


The following values for the partial safety 
factors for steel shall be applied: 


Table 4 Partial Safety Factor for Fatigue 
Resistance in Stress Range Concept 


(Clauses 5.6.1 and 5.9.1) 


SL Examination Rupture Rupture 
No. and access will not will affect 
affect the the 
collapse collapse 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Structural part умғ= 1.0 умг= 1.1 


accessible during 
regular thorough 
examination 


ii) Structural part умғ= 1.05 умғ= 1.15 
not accessible 
during regular 
thorough 
examination 


b) Fatigue loads 


When calculating Ao or At, the influence 
of dead loads which do not change in 
position, the components of variable 
actions which do not vary in time and 
position, snow loads, temperature loads, 
loads due to assembly and wind loads 
(without induced oscillation) need not be 
considered. In the case where wind loads 
induce oscillation, the wind pressure can 
be set to 50 % of the values in Table 1, 
column 2, if there is no other calculated 
critical value of the wind pressure due to 
the wind speed, at the natural frequency. 
An investigation of X wind-induced 
oscillation shall be performed to evaluate 
additional fatigue loads. 


When calculating Ao or At, the following 
actions shall be taken in account as a 
minimum: 


1) Dead loads with change of position; 

2) Moving imposed loads; 

3) Driving and braking forces 
according to 5.3.2; 


IS 15475 (Part 3) : 2022 


с) 


4) Load coefficients for impact and 
vibrations of parts directly travelled 
over; 

5) Intentional collision forces; 

6) Inertia forces; 

7) Centrifugal and Coriolis force; 

8) Gyroscopic effect. 


Where there is a movement of dead loads, 
when assessing Ao or At (for example, for 
lifted booms), the maximum and minimum 
stresses shall be calculated including dead 
loads: 


Ас = Omax — Omin 


At= Tmax — Tmin 
Number of load cycles 


The fatigue assessment of load-bearing 
parts shall consider the following number 
of load cycles if no тоге precise 
calculation about load cycles and a 
lifetime can be provided. 


Fatigue limit at 35 000 h: 


At least 35 000 operating hours shall be 
assumed in the fatigue calculation. of 
amusement devices not including loading 
and unloading time. The number of load 
cycles shall be determined for each 
specific amusement device and its 
components. 


Endurance limit: 


Safety-related ^ components shall Бе 
designed for endurance limits. In this 
context, the stress range Aop is understood 
to be the constant amplitude fatigue limit. 
When no stress range is higher than Aop 
for the respective detail category, infinite 
fatigue life can be assumed. If no detailed 
calculation of the load cycles will be 
provided endurance limit life calculation 
shall be used. 


Standard products: 


Mass-produced replaceable safety-related 
machinery components used as structural 
parts (for example, bearings and slewing 
rings) for which company standards are 
available are excluded. These shall be 
dimensioned for at least 5 000 operating 
hours. The replacement frequency of 
components shall be based on the 
calculated lifetime in hours or number of 
cycles. A theoretical lifetime calculation 
shall be submitted. 


16 


d) Fatigue assessment of machine 
components (welded and non-welded) 


Machine components are, for example, 
axles, pins, shafts, wheel bogies, coupling 
bars, restraint bars, etc. Assessment of 
welded parts may also follow the 
procedure given in 5.9.3.4 or IS 800 
(Section 3). 


The following described principle of 
assessments can be adopted to non-welded 
parts. Fatigue assessment is requested for 
parts with more than 10 000 load cycles. 


e) Fatigue resistance 


The fatigue resistance shall take into 
account: 


1) Material strength 

2) Construction parameters 
3) Size effects 

4) Shape effects 

5) Corrosion influence 

6) Surface influence 

7) Alternate strength 

8) Endurance limit strength 
9) Service strength 


The strength values shall consider notch 
case and stress ratio. 


The resistances shall comply with a 97.5 
% probability of survival. 


f) Fatigue stress 


Nominal stress or local stress shall be used 
for fatigue assessment. Stresses shall be 
determined in accordance with the general 
principles of stress analysis. 


The nominal stress method can be used for 
beam-like systems. Nominal stresses o, t 
shall be investigated. 


Local stress method on base of Finite 
Element Analysis is possible for shell or 
volume investigations. Main stresses oi, 
62, 63 shall be investigated. Main stress oi, 
сг shall be orientated on the surface, оз 
perpendicular to the surface. 


5.9.4 Bolts 
Bolts conforming to IS 1368 shall be used. 
5.9.5 Ropes & Chain 


Ropes & Chains conforming to IS 2266 & IS 3109 
(Part 1) shall be used. 


6 REQUIREMENTS FOR DESIGN AND 
MANUFACTURE OF RIDES 


6.1 Moving Walkways, Travelators and Similar 


The belt of moving walkways or travelators shall 
be either seamless or have not more than one joint 
which shall not protrude. 


A handrail, intermediate rail, and toe board 
according to 6.1.1 shall be provided on both sides 
of moving walkways or conveyor belts. A railing 
on only one side is allowed if the moving walkway 
or conveyor belt is used for access to or egress 
from passenger units. The maximum clearance 
between the belt and the toe board shall not exceed 
4 mm. 


The slope of a moving walkway or travelator shall 
not exceed 1 in 6 unless moving handrails are 
provided, in which case the slope shall not exceed 1 
in 4. 


In case of perpendicular egress from the moving 
walkway or travelator, the end of the moving 
walkway shall be guarded with a final handrail and 
an intermediate rail at 45? with respect to the 
direction of motion. Additionally, a trip board, or 
equivalent system, which can interrupt the power in 
case a passenger is pushed against the final 
handrail, shall be provided. The access to such a 
moving walkway shall be controlled by automatic 
or manual means to avoid danger due to 
congestion. An emergency stop button shall be 
fitted at both ends. 


Provision shall be made to protect the end of 
moving walkways or travelators to prevent trapping 
or pinching. The end return and tension rollers shall 
be suitably protected. If, because of the type of 
surface, such protection is not possible, 
perpendicular egress, according to the above clause 
shall be provided. 


The maximum relative speed shall not exceed 0.75 
m/s with parallel egress from the stationary 
platform and 0.5 m/s with perpendicular egress. If 
the walkway or travelator is used as part of the 
attraction itself then higher speeds may be 
accepted. See Fig 3. 


Effective brakes shall stop and hold the walk way in 
case of any interruption of the power supply. 


The minimum width of the travelator shall not be 
less than 0.60 m. 


17 


IS 15475 (Part 3) : 2022 


now 


=d 
oo- 


FIG. 3 TRAVELATOR DIRECTION IN RELATION TO 
PASSENGER ACCESS/EGRESS 


where, 


1 Boundary of travelator; 
2 Direction of travelator; 


3 Example of arrow depicting 
parallel access/egress from 
travelator; 

4 Example of arrow depicting 


perpendicular access/egress from 
travelator. 


6.1.1 Protection against falls from one level to 
another by railings or fencing 


a) General 


Fencing, railings, or other suitable means 
shall be provided where a person might 
fall 0.40 m or more due to a difference in 
the height of adjacent levels. Fences for 
this purpose are specified. Railings shall 
as a minimum consist of two guard rails (a 
top rail and an intermediate rail) In 
addition, where the fall height is more 
than 1.0 m a toe board of 100 mm height 
shall be fitted in order to protect people 
passing underneath. 


Fences and railings shall be constructed in 
accordance with IS 4912 with regard to 
entrapment. 


Fences or other suitable means are 
required to prevent falls from a height of 2 
m or more where the public has access. 


Where there is a low probability of serious 
injury (not giving direct access to moving 
machinery, nor falling from heights of 
more than 2 m) decorative fences are also 
allowed. In this case chains and ropes for 


IS 15475 (Part 3) : 2022 


b) 


the top and intermediate rails are also 
permitted, if they withstand the forces 
defined in 5.3.1.2 with a maximum 
deflection of 30 mm. Not tensioned 
chains, ropes, or other non-rigid materials 
are not permitted. 


Where there is a difference in levels up to 
0.60 m the risk assessment should 
determine if any area separation system is 
required. 


Handrail height Handrails shall have free 
space around them of 38 mm and the grip 
shall be in accordance with IS 4912. 


FIG. 4 GENERAL HANDRAIL CLEARANCES 


с) 


d) 


Classification of area separation systems 


Area separation systems are classified as 
follows: 


Л — predominantly visual area separation 
systems: colored stripes on the 
floor or fixed steps, poles, cones, or 
equivalent. 

J2 — physical area separation systems: 

flexible devices, such as ropes, 

chains, cords, etc., which need not 
withstand horizontal forces. 

J; — physical area separation systems: 

rigid devices, such as fencing or 


railings which сап withstand 
horizontal forces. 
Classification of access апа  egress 


openings in fences and railings 


The number of openings in fences and 
railings shall be limited to the number and 
width necessary for safe access and egress. 
Each opening shall not be more than 2.5 m 


18 


wide. The access and egress openings are 
classified as follows: 


K, — Openings without any direct control; 
К» — Openings controlled by attendants; 


K3 — Openings provided with barriers or 
gates indicating the access to a 
restricted zone by limiting the flow 
of | persons, (for example, 
mechanical gates, turnstiles, etc.); 


K4 — Openings provided with barriers or 
gates where the locking and 
unlocking are actuated by the 
operator or attendant; 


Ks — Openings provided with barriers or 
gates, the closed state of which, 
enables the ride to start and the 
open state of which causes the ride 
to stop. 


For each defined category of rides, or for 
each group or single ride being in the same 
ride category and having the same specific 
features, the minimum requirements for 
access and egress openings will be 
expressed by the above classification. 


7 MINIMUM DIMENSIONS OF THE SAFETY 
ENVELOPE 


To prevent passengers from being injured by 
stationary or moving objects or objects belonging 
to passenger units other than that in which they are 
located, and in the absence of other measures 
reducing the reach of the passengers, the following 


minimum general safety distances shall be 
provided: 
a) The minimum lateral safety distance min. 


b) 


с) 


d) 


Уш relates to speed and height of the seat 
sides, see Table 5. 

200 m (respectively 1.70 m for children up 
to the age of 10 years) above the floor of 
the passenger units (see Fig. 5); 

1.50 m above the seat (respectively 1.30 m 
for children up to the age of 10 years) if 
the passenger is positively restrained from 
standing up (see Fig. 6). 

1.0 m (respectively 0.9 m for children up 
to the age of 10 years) below the seat in 
suspended seats (see Fig. 7) 


IS 15475 (Part 3) : 2022 


Table 5 Minimum Lateral Safety Distances In Relation to Side Height of the Seat, from Inside Part of the 
Seat and If No other Hazards (Min. Yiat) 


(Clause 7 (a)) 


SI. No. Cat. Speed, v h < 400 mm 400 <h < 600mm h> 600 mm 
m 
| © ] = = 
qd) 0) (3) (4) (5) (6) 

1. А v«3 700 mm 500 mm 300 mm 
li. B 3<у<10 900 тт 700 mm 500 mm 
lii. C 10<v<20 1 000 mm 900 mm 500 mm 
iv. D y»20 1 000 mm 1 000 mm 700 mm 


If an over-shoulder restraint is used and the lateral Any special situation needs to be taken into 


movement of the upper body is limited the min. yia 
values similar to a side height of h> 600 mm may 
be used. If the reach envelope is limited by other 
installations (for example, cabin) then even fewer 


consideration in the definition of the minimum 
safety distances. Safety distances may be extended 
due to accelerations, darkness, sharp-edged 
elements, or vice versa. 


min. yi values may be adopted. 


Dimensions in millimetres 


1 seat surface 
2 floor surface 
3 safety envelope 


4 minimum lateral safety distance min. уа 


NOTE Values for children up to the age of 10 years are given in parentheses. 


FIG. 5 VERTICAL SAFETY DISTANCE FROM FLOOR AND LATERAL SAFETY DISTANCE 


19 


IS 15475 (Part 3) : 2022 


Dimensions in millimetres 


Key 

1 seat surface 

2 floor surface 

3 safety envelope 

4 minimum lateral safety distance min. уа 


NOTE Values for children up to the age of 10 years are given in parentheses. 


FIG. 6 VERTICAL SAFETY DISTANCE FROM SEAT AND LATERAL SAFETY 


If passenger units are free-ranging and controlled 
by the passenger, the distance in 7 applies only to 


fixed objects. 
Dimensions in millimetres 
a 
b 
—— 
[/ 

| ALD 

| ЖОЛУУ | 

| | | 

| | | 

| | P ' 
„7 
| і 

Кеу 
1 seat surface 
2 safety envelope 
3 safety envelope for children up to the age of 10 years 
4 corner centre radius 
a Minimum lateral safety distance min. yjat, 
b 


Minimum lateral safety distance min. уау for children up to age of 10 years. 


FIG. 7 MINIMUM SAFETY DISTANCE FOR LEGS IN SUSPENDED SEATS 


20 


IS 15475 (Part 3) : 2022 


7.1 Minimum Safety Distances between Passenger 
Containments 


of the unit to any other part at the seat’s 


of another unit in the most 


Additionally, the following distance shall 
be maintained: 120 mm from the outside 


height 
unfavourable operating condition (See Fig. 
8). For dodgem/bumper cars see minimum 
safety distances in Table 7. 


FIG. 8 SAFETY DISTANCE FOR FREE-RANGING VEHICLES 


If the passenger units are not free-ranging, the safety envelopes shall not overlap (see Fig.9). 


P ~ 


Dimensions in millimetres 


Key 
T distance element 


\ \ J J^ > 
E P 


Key 
1 safety envelope 


2 minimum lateral safety distance, min. yjat 


FIG. 9 RELATIVE POSITION OF SAFETY ENVELOPES 


8 RESTRAINT DEVICES 
PASSENGER MOVEMENT 


LIMITING 


Passenger restraints and their locking devices shall 
be designed in such a manner as to prevent the 
trapping and crushing of body parts. Passenger 
restraint devices shall have a configuration such as 
not acting on sensitive and fragile parts of the 
passenger’s body. Even if provided with warning 
lights and/or acoustic warnings they shall allow a 
visual and/or physical verification of their correct 
closing by the attendant. Powered passenger 
restraint devices may create additional hazards 
giving rise to injuries. Their movement shall be 
slow and the maximum exerted force shall not be 
more than 0.15 kN (0.08 kN if children are also 
admitted) measured on the active edge of the 
device. Locking and latching devices shall be 
designed in such a way as to prevent unlocking 
without deliberate and intentional action. Locking 
devices shall not lose their locking action in the 


21 


case of malfunction or emergency stop of the ride 
unless it is safe to do so. 


8.1 Passenger Restraints 


Each element of the ride, designated to 
accommodate passengers (passenger unit), shall be 
provided with adequate means їо restrain 
passengers within the device, and, if necessary, in 
their places, depending on the nature of the ride and 
the results of the DRA (Design Risk 
Assessment)This is a document that shall be 
produced by the designer of every device. The 
design risk assessment shall be used to guide the 
designer into making the correct decisions in the 
total design ethos (for example, material selection, 
PLC program, ergonomic characteristics, 
biomechanical effects, etc.) so that an acceptable 
level of risk resides (residual risk) from each design 
decision. Although not an operation and use risk 
assessment, the DRA shall be used to guide the 


IS 15475 (Part 3) : 2022 


structure and content of 
maintenance procedures). 


the operating and 


The design of restraint shall minimize by risk 
assessment at least the following risks for 
passengers: 


a) Hitting parts in relative motion or being 
trapped in between them; 

b) Being injured by contact with any part of 
the structure of the ride, including 
passenger restraint; 

c) Being struck by parts of the structure in 
which they are carried; 

d) Being hit by other passengers resulting 
from the type of motion induced by the 
ride. 


The design of restraint shall avoid the ejecting and 
falling out of the passenger unit 


In the case of malfunction or emergency stop, when 
the passengers are maintained in their places by the 
restraint devices, arrangements shall be made for 
unlocking the device by the authorized personnel, 
when it is safe to do so. 


Passenger restraints shall be provided as 
determined by the designer based оп risk 
assessment. 


This determination shall be based on the passenger 
restraint and containment analysis performed in 
accordance with criteria defined in this standard 
and shall take into consideration the nature of the 
amusement ride or device and the intended adult or 
child passenger's physical characteristics. 


The passenger restraint and containment analysis 
shall identify the need for a restraint system for 
reasons other than simply the acceleration or seat 


22 


inclination. The analysis shall also evaluate the 
need for locking or latching functions when 
restraints are required. 


The designer shall take into consideration the 
evacuation of passengers from any reasonably 
foreseeable position and/or situation on the ride or 
device, including emergency stops and stops in 
unplanned locations. The passenger restraint and 
containment analysis shall address whether 
individual or group restraints releases are 
appropriate. 


With DRA the designer specifies the state, locked 
or unlocked, of the restraint system in the event of 
unintended stop, for example, emergency stop or 
loss of power. 


Restraint devices shall be provided in cases where 
it is reasonably foreseeable that passengers could 
be lifted or ejected from their seats or riding 
positions by the acceleration of the amusement ride 
or device, or by seat inclination, during the ride or 
device cycle and other reasonably foreseeable 
situations, for example, the application of 
emergency brakes or vehicles stopped in inverted 
positions. 


The restraint diagram shown in Figure 11 shall be 
used as part of the passenger restraint and 
containment analysis for determining if restraint is 
required, and if required, what type. The restraint 
diagram identifies and graphically illustrates five 
distinct areas of theoretical acceleration. 


Each of the five distinct areas may require a 
different class of restraint. The restraint diagram 
applies for sustained acceleration levels only. It is 
not to be applied for impact acceleration. 


For the axis, convention refers to Fig. 10. 


A positive acceleration is defined in accordance with following the coordinate system: 


+ 


09 


presses the body into the seat downwards, described as "eyes down". 
lifts the body out of the seat, described as "eyes up”. 

presses the body sideward to the right, described as "eyes right". 
presses the body sideward to the left, described as "eyes left". 
presses the body into the seat backward, described as "eyes hack". 
pushes the body out of the seat forward, described as "eyes frant”. 


FiG.10 BODY COORDINATE SYSTEM 


23 


IS 15475 (Part 3) : 2022 


IS 15475 (Part 3) : 2022 


+H, 


-Aeg -129 -07g 0299029 407g +120 
ji = od у. 129 
ШШ GA т age 
Ve AE ZR ae 
: = b. "s 
а, LATI mU "um Ag *& 
r ООО 
т in 


downward Into seat (eyes down) 
lift (eyes up) 
acceleration (eyes back) 
deceleration (eyes front] 

Areal 

Arca 2 


“a, 


ee een e 


FIG. 11 RESTRAINT DIAGRAM 


Area 1 — A Class 1 no restraint is required. Based 
solely on Area 1 dynamic forces, no restraint is 
required; however, other criteria in this practice 
(that is, the ride analysis) may require a higher- 
class restraint device. 


Area 2 — A Class 2 restraint is required, unless 
passengers are provided sufficient support and the 
means to react to the forces, for example, handrails, 
footrest, or other devices, and if they cannot fall 
out, or be ejected from the compartment due to the 
acting forces. 


Area 3 — A Class 3 restraint is required. 
Area 4 — A Class 4 restraint is required. 
Area 5 — A Class 5 restraint is required. 
The application of the restraint diagram Fig.11 is 


intended as a guide. Any special situation needs to 
be taken into consideration in designing the 


24 


restraint system, for example, the duration of the 


acceleration. In particular, where lateral 
accelerations higher than ay > + 0.5g occur, seats, 
backrests, and restraints shall be designed 


accordingly. Unexpected stopping positions of the 
passenger units shall also be considered (for 
example, upside down). Any intended 
unconventional seating or passenger body position 
may need special consideration. In Figure 21 no 
information on the absolute acceleration limits is 
given. 


In boundary cases, the lower category of the 
restraint class may be chosen. 


Fig. 11 is a design guide. If Fig. 11 is used to 
validate the choice of restraint by measurements 
then data shall be filtered to 1 Hz (only for 
application of this figure) and applying a tolerance 
of + 0.05g. 


The determination of the class of the restraint, 
based on Fig.11, is as follows. 


8.2 Classification of Passenger Restraint Devices 


Restraint devices have the following requirements 
based on their classification according to Fig. 11. 
See also Table 6. 


Class 1: Unrestraint or no restraint at all. 


Class 2: А latching restraint device for each 
individual passenger or a latching collective 
restraint device for more than one passenger. A 
Class 2 restraint device shall have at least the 
following: 


a) Number of passengers per restraint device 
— The restraint device may be for an 
individual passenger or it may be a 
collective device for more than one 
passenger. 


b) Final latching position relative to the 
passenger — The final latching position 
may be fixed or adjustable in relation to 
the passenger. 


c) Type of latching — The passenger or 
operator may latch the restraint. 


d) Type of unlatching — The passenger or 
operator may unlatch the restraint. 


e) Restraint position monitoring — In 
addition to the operator responsibilities no 
independent restraint position monitoring 
is required. 


f) Means of activation — The restraint may 
be manually or automatically (for 
example, motorized) opened and closed. 


g) Redundancy of latching device — 
Redundancy is not required. 


Class 3: A latching restraint device for each 
individual patron or a latching collective restraint 
device for more than one passenger. A Class 3 
restraint device shall have at least the following: 


a) Number of passengers per restraint device 
— The restraint device may be for an 
individual passenger or it may be a 
collective device for more than one 
passenger. 


b) Final latching position relative to the 
passenger — The final latching position 
must be adjustable in relation to the 


25 


IS 15475 (Part 3) : 2022 


passenger, for example, a bar or a rail with 
multiple latching positions. 


c) Type of latching — The passenger or 
operator may manually latch the restraint 
or it may be automatically latched. The 
manufacturer shall provide instructions 
that the operator shall verify the restraint 
device is latched. 


d) Type of unlatching — The passenger may 
manually unlatch or the operator may 
manually or automatically unlatch the 
restraint. 


e) Restraint position monitoring — In 
addition to the operator responsibilities no 
independent restraint position monitoring 
is required. The design shall allow the 
operator to perform a visual or manual 
check of the restraint each ride cycle. 


f) Means of activation — The restraint may 
be manually or automatically (for 
example, motorized) opened and closed. 


g) Redundancy of latching device — 
Redundancy shall be provided for the 
latching device function. 


h) Monitoring of latching device — The 
latching device shall be periodically tested 
prior to being put into operation with a 
guest. The frequency and procedure of 
such a periodic test shall be determined by 
the mechanical design. 


Class 4: A redundant locking restraint device for 
each individual passenger. A Class 4 restraint 
device shall have at least the following: 


a) Number of passengers per restraint device 
— A restraint device shall be provided for 
each individual passenger. 


b) Final locking position relative to the 
passenger — The final locking position of 
the restraint shall be adjustable in relation 
to the passengers, for example, a bar or a 
rail with multiple positions. 


c) Type of locking — The restraint device 
shall be automatically locked. 


d) Type of unlocking — Only the operator 
shall manually or automatically unlock the 
restraint. 


e) Restraint position monitoring — In 
addition to the operator responsibilities an 
independent restraint position monitoring 


IS 15475 (Part 3) : 2022 


g 


h) 


system shall initiate a cycle stop or inhibit 
cycle start. The design shall allow the 
operator to perform a visual or manual 
check of the restraint each ride cycle. 


NOTE — For some amusement rides, for 
example, roller coasters, freefall towers, the 
position of the restraint cannot be monitored 
continuously. 


Means of activation — The restraint may 
be manually or automatically (for 
example, motorized) opened or closed. 


Redundancy of locking device — 
Redundancy shall be provided for the 
locking device function. 


Monitoring of locking device — The 
locking device shall be periodically tested 
prior to being put into operation with a 
guest. The frequency and procedure of 
such a periodic test shall be determined by 
the mechanical design. 


Class 5: A redundant locking restraint device for 
each individual passenger. A Class-5 restraint 
device shall have at least the following: 


a) 


b) 


Number of passengers per restraint device 
— A restraint device shall be provided for 
each individual passenger. 


Final locking position relative to the 
passenger — The final locking position of 
the restraint shall be adjustable in relation 
to the passengers, for example, a bar or a 
rail with multiple positions. 


Type of locking — The restraint device 
shall be automatically locked. 


26 


d) 


е) 


g 


h) 


dD 


Type of unlocking — Only the operator 
shall manually or automatically unlock the 
restraint. 


Restraint position monitoring — In 
addition to the operator responsibilities an 
independent restraint position monitoring 
system shall initiate a cycle stop or inhibit 
cycle start. The design shall allow the 
operator to perform a visual or manual 
check of the restraint each ride cycle. 


NOTE — For some amusement rides for 
example, roller coasters, freefall towers, etc. 
the position of the restraint cannot be 
monitored continuously. 


Means of activation — The restraint may 
be manually or automatically (for 
example, motorized) opened or closed. 


Redundancy of locking device — 
Redundancy shall be provided for the 
locking device function. 


Monitoring of locking devices — Direct 
position monitoring of the locking devices 
shall be required prior to the start of a new 
ride cycle. In case of a failure, a start shall 
be inhibited. As an accepted alternative the 
integrity of the redundant locking devices 
shall be verified within every two ride 
cycles. 


Restraint configuration — Two restraints, 
for example, a shoulder and lap bar per 
passenger or one fail-safe restraint device 
are required (see 8.2.1 for secondary 
restraint device requirements). 


IS 15475 (Part 3) : 2022 


Table 6 Minimum Requirements of Passenger Restraint Classes 


(Clause 8.2) 

SI. No. Class 1 2 3 4 5 

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 

1) Мо. of No Individual or Individual or Individual Individual for 
passengers per restraint collective for collective for for each each passenger 
restraint two or more two ог тоге passenger 

passengers passengers 

ii) Final No Non- Adjustable Adjustable Adjustable 
latching/locking restraint adjustable latching to latching to latching to 
position latching passenger passenger passenger 

iii) Latching/lockin No Manually ог Manually or Automaticall Automatically 
g restraint automatically ^ automatically y locking locking 

latching latching 

iv) Unlatching/Unl No Unlatching by Unlatching by Unlocking Unlocking Бу 

ocking restraint the passenger the passenger by the the operator 
(manually) or (manually) ог operator manually Or 
operator operator manually or automatically 
(manually or (manually or automaticall 
automatically) automatically) y 

у) Restraint device None None None Position of Position of the 
monitoring the restraint restraint device 

device 

vi) Means of None Manually or Manually or Manually or Manually or 
activation automatically ^ automatically automaticall automatically 

opened or opened or y opened or opened or 
closed closed closed closed 

vii) Redundancy None None Latching device Locking Locking device 

device and restraint 
device 

viii) Latching/lockin None None Redundancy Redundancy Direct locking 
g device check check device 
monitoring monitoring 

8.2.1 Secondary Restraint Device for attendants; 


Class5 Restraints 


If, in addition to the primary restraint 
device, which complies with the above 
mentioned requirements, a secondary 
device is present and necessary, the 
secondary device shall have at least the 
following characteristics: 


a) Collective; 
b) Not adjustable; 


c) Manually locked by the passenger; 


d) Manually unlocked by operators or 


27 


e) No warning at all; 
f) Redundancy only concerning locking 
device (functional). 


Otherwise, this secondary device may be the 
containment enclosure or collective cage. 


8.3 Amusement Rides With the Horizontal Axis 
8.3.1 General 


These are devices moving around a horizontal axis. 
See Fig.12 to 14. 


IS 15475 (Part 3) : 2022 


FIG. 14 MAIN HORIZONTAL AXIS (PASSENGER UNIT NOT PIVOTING AND WITHOUT MECHANICAI 
DRIVE) 


28 


8.4 Rail-guided channel or track-bound devices 


8.4.1 General See Fig.15. 


SAI SP 


IS 15475 (Part 3) : 2022 


ЕС. 15 TRACK-GUIDED DEVICES 


8.4.2 Area separation systems and access and 
egress openings Area separation systems for the 
general public shall comply with J3 requirements 


Access openings to the loading zones shall comply 
with K3 requirements in order to prevent access of 
passengers until the train comes to a stop. Egress 
openings shall comply with K3 requirements. 


Power-operated, rail-guided devices for children 
where the velocity does not exceed 2 m/s and 
where they are capable of being stopped within 2 m 
by the operator, shall be provided with an area 
separation system complying with J2 requirements. 
Access and egress openings shall comply with K2 
requirements. 


Miniature railways do not require an area 
separation system in amusement parks where all of 
the following conditions are met: 


a) the train route is clearly isolated from 
other amusement devices, shops, or roads; 

b) the train is driven by an operator; 

с) train's velocity does not exceed 5 m/s; 

d) acoustic warnings are provided on the 
train; 

е) acoustic and optical warnings are provided 
on level-crossings; 


f) The station area separation system shall 
comply with J; requirements. 


8.4.3 Passenger Units 


The passenger units shall be designed in such a 
way that: 


a) passengers inside and outside are not 
liable to come into contact with moving 
parts; 

b) passenger's hands or arms are not liable to 
be crushed or bruised by contact with the 
cars in front or behind the one they are 
traveling in; 

с) the chassis and superstructures of the 
vehicles have sufficient degrees of 
freedom and clearance to follow changes 
in transverse inclination, curves, humps, 
and troughs while allowing for permissible 
wear. 


Where there is contact between the cars or any 
guiding elements the cars shall be fitted with 
fenders at the front and/or rear, which are to be 
mounted at the same height. If there is a liability 
for offset during contact, for example, as a result of 
longitudinal or transverse swinging, then the 
fenders shall have a sufficient height to provide 
overlap. 


IS 15475 (Part 3) : 2022 


At least one fender per car shall have shock- 
absorbing properties, the damping is designed as a 
response function to the nominal speed. Damping 
may be dispensed with if the cars are safeguarded 
against collision by a block-zone system or other 
equivalent means like sensors. 


8.4.4 Restraints 


Restraints shall be fitted where necessary in 
accordance with 8. 


8.4.5 Miscellaneous 


The guiding elements of cars and trains shall ensure 
that contact with the track is maintained under all 
circumstances, by the provision of side guiding 
rollers, counter rollers, or equivalent systems 
adequate for the purpose. Special provisions shall 
be taken in the design of guiding elements in order 
to ensure that, even in the case of loss of one load 
wheel, side guide wheel, or up stop the wheel, the 
car or train cannot leave the rails. Wheel bandages, 
guide wheels, up-stop wheels are subject to wear. 
The permissible wear rates shall be specified by 
precise limits. Lateral movement of cars and 
gondolas shall be restricted to prevent collision 
with cars or gondolas on adjacent tracks or fixed 
objects. Safety distances have to be considered by 
using the extreme positions of the cars or gondolas. 
Pendulum gondolas, or similar passenger units, 
shall be provided with devices for limiting lateral 
or longitudinal oscillations of the gondola, during 
passenger loading and unloading. 


8.4.6 Roller Coaster Track 
8.4.6.1 Brakes 


Safety brake zones shall be arranged in such a way 
that there will always be sufficient braking 
elements between any two cars/trains. 


Safety brake zones shall be fail-safe and designed 
to stop the car or train in the most unfavourable 
conditions. 


30 


Consequently, the brakes shall not lock or jam and 
shall be applied in a controlled and progressive 
manner. 


A suitable redundancy of independent brake 
elements shall be provided and the brake shall stop 
the train/ vehicle for the most unfavourable 
condition with sufficient safety margin even in the 
case of a pressure drop in the brake system or a 
power loss. 


The mechanical parts of the brake elements shall be 
designed and calculated with the appropriate partial 
safety factors. 


In the event of delays during passenger loading, 
any risk of collision by following cars shall be 
prevented with certainty by appropriate means. 


All functions and operational states of the safety 
brake system shall be controlled and monitored by 
a safety-related control system. 


Operating fluid pressure and the acceptable 
pressure limits of each brake element shall be kept 
automatically controlled by the safety-related 
control system. 


Operational brakes shall be provided to stop the 
cars or trains automatically in the shortest 
practicable stopping distance, taking into account 
the maximum permissible deceleration (see also 
5.6.2.4). 


Maximum deceleration shall not exceed 0.7g for an 
emergency and 0.5g for normal stopping brakes 
(service brakes) unless special provisions for 
passengers are installed (lap bars, etc.) 


8.4.7 Dodgem/Bumper Cars 


For bumper cars, the minimum safety distances 
given in Table 7 shall be provided. See Fig. 16 


IS 15475 (Part 3) : 2022 


Table 7 Safety Distances for Dodgem Cars 
(Clause 7.1, 8.5.1) 


SI. Classes (defined by X Y S Ri R2 Ci C Сз C4 
No. passenger height or age) 
(1) (2) (3) U) © © (D © © ао aD (2 
i. Passengers from 4 to 8 Min 70 320 25 175 400 70 45 90 100 
years 
ii. Max 85 400 30 230 515 
ii. Passengers from 8 to 12 Min 85 400 30 230 515 85 60 120 150 
years 
iv. Max 100 435 35 275 620 
v. Passengers and Min 100 435 35 275 620 100 85 140 200 


vi. 


vii. 


accompanied children 
Max 120 550 50 310 725 


Ci, C2, Сз, and Са are minimum clearances (empty spaces) between the rigid parts of the bodywork 
(excluding rubber protections and the like which can cause no damage) in a static position. 


31 


IS 15475 (Part 3) : 2022 


галана М TCD 


Key 
1 — Zone 1 
2 — Zone 2 


C,-C4 — Minimum clearances (see Table 7) 


FIG. 16 DODGEM/BUMPER CARS 


32 


IS 15475 (Part 3) : 2022 


чохе 
y v 


Key 

1 — Zone 1 

2 — Zone 2 

X, Y,S,Ri,R2— Safety distances for dodgem cars (see Table 7) 


FIG. 17 DODGEM/BUMPER CARS 


33 


IS 15475 (Part 3) : 2022 


8.4.7.1 Area Separation System and Access and 
Egress Openings 


Area separation system for the general public to the 
driving area shall comply with J; requirements. 
Access and egress shall comply with Ki. The 
driving area shall be surrounded by a sill of 
sufficient height, so as to prevent mounting by the 
car. Spring supported sills are not permitted. The 
sill shall be strong enough to withstand the impact 
of the cars at maximum speed. 


8.4.7.2 Passenger Units 


Dodgem car vehicles shall be designed so that 
passengers cannot fall out. The vehicles are to be 
surrounded by buffers made of soft material or 
inflatable tyres, which shall project sufficiently to 
provide the clearances given in 8.5.1. The buffers 
fitted to vehicles that are used on the same ride 
shall be set at the same height for all vehicles and 
at the same height as the edge of the sill or barrier. 


All moving or other dangerous parts of the vehicles 
which could cause injury, shall either be 


a) Designed so as to remove the risk of 


injury; or 
b) So protected as to minimize injury by 
impact. 
8.4.7.3 Restraints 


Dodgem cars shall be fitted with safety belts or 
other equally effective devices which will prevent 
children from being injured on impact with other 
vehicles. Where belts are fitted they shall be at least 
25 mm in width. 


8.4.7.4 Miscellaneous 


The driving area shall be free from discontinuities, 
so as to prevent obstruction to the cars’ movement. 


Dodgem cars shall be designed in such a way as to 
minimize the risk of overturning. 


The speed of dodgem cars shall not exceed 12 
km/h. Cars to be used by unaccompanied children, 
aged 8 years or less, shall be limited to a maximum 
speed of 8 km/h if the risk assessment demonstrates 
safe to use. 


Where high-efficiency shock-absorbing systems are 
provided the speed may be increased to 14 km/h, if 
the impact forces do not exceed the forces attained 
in a conventional dodgem car travelling up to 12 
km/h. 


The maximum speed of vehicles operating on the 
same track shall not vary by more than 15 percent. 
The mass difference of loaded cars (see 5.3.1.2) 


34 


operating on the same track shall not exceed 30 
percent. 


Where high-efficiency shock-absorbing systems are 
provided the mass difference may be increased. 


The installation shall be fitted with an emergency 
stop device, which enables the operator to stop all 
vehicles from his control position. 


8.4.7.5  Electromechanical 
Dodgem Cars 


Requirements 


for 


Conducting parts of cars that are not protected from 
direct touching, shall be powered with a maximum 
of 25 V a.c. or 60 V ripple-free (max. 10 percent 
ripple d.c. supplied by а safety isolating 
transformer in accordance with IS 2026 (Part 1). 


For those conductors out of normal reach (heights 
at least 2.5 m above the floor pan of the vehicle), 
the maximum voltage shall not be more than 50 V 
a.c. or 120 V ripple-free d.c., i.e. a maximum of 10 
percent ripple supplied by a safety isolating 
transformer in accordance with IEC 61558-1 or an 
equivalent a.c. or d.c. generator. 


Exposed electrical conductors shall be at least 2.5 
m above the floor pan of the vehicle. 


The overhead current supply net or plate, the 
collectors on the vehicles, and the track shall be 
designed and built in such a manner that injury will 
be minimized paying particular attention to the 
eyes as a result of particles and sparks. 


For driving areas of up to 200 m? the current supply 
net or plate shall be securely attached to the power 
supply at a minimum of 2 points. For areas greater 
than 200 m? a minimum of 3 supply points shall be 
fitted. 


Any current supply net shall be of wire mesh 
(preferably hexagonal) with a diameter of wire 
between 1.2 mm and 1.4 mm. The square hole size 
of the mesh shall not exceed 40 mm x 40 mm. 


As well as steel other suitable materials (for 
example, copper, brass, aluminium) may be used. 


Nets shall be tensioned with plates fixed in such a 
manner that no significant deformation ог 
movement due to the pressure of the collectors will 
occur. 


Steel wires shall be galvanized before being joined 
by wire wrapping. The current supply net shall be 
fixed at a uniform distance of not less than 2.5 m 
above the floor pan of the vehicle. 


Any current supply net shall be of galvanized steel 
or be of a suitable alternative material (for 
example, copper, brass, aluminium). 


The vehicles shall be equipped with contact 
brushes made of steel or bronze, which are spring- 
loaded against the floor with a force F of at least 10 
N (Fig. 19). 


The current collector (see Fig.18) shall be made of 
steel and formed with the largest radius possible, so 


Key 

2 contact area 
2 net 

3 spring 

F contact force 


IS 15475 (Part 3) : 2022 


as to touch the current collector net at a minimum 
of three points. It should swivel easily and exert a 
constant force F on the supply network of at least 


10 N. Steel or other suitable alternative materials 
(for example, copper, brass, aluminium) may be 
used. 


The connections to the net shall be equally spaced 
around the perimeter of the net or plate. 


ЕС. 18 EXAMPLE OF A TYPICAL NET CURRENT 


The plates which form the track shall be smooth; 
panels shall have good electrical contact through 
the edges or by other means. They shall be 
connected to the negative pole of the energy source 


at two opposite points in order to avoid dangerous 
potential differences. The plates of the track shall 
be connected to all metallic surrounding structures. 


Key 
Е contact force 


ЕС. 19 CONTACT FORCE OF A FLOOR CONTACT BRUSH 


SPEEDWAYS/GO-KARTS 


9.1 These requirements are specific for amusement 
parks and fairground go-karts. 


9.1.1 Area separation system and access and egress 
openings In order to prevent the general public 


35 


from walking onto the track, the speedway tracks 
shall be guarded by a guard rail at least 0.5 m 
above the hill of the track but in any case at least 
1.1 m above the floor level accessible to the public 
(area separation system complying with J3 
requirements). Access and egress shall comply with 
K2 requirements. The driving area shall be 


IS 15475 (Part 3) : 2022 


surrounded by a barrier of sufficient height so as to 
prevent mounting by the car. Spring-supported 
barriers are not permitted. The sill shall be strong 
enough to withstand the impact of the cars at 
maximum speed. 


9.1.2 Passenger Units 


The speedway track and cars shall be designed in 
such a way as to minimize the risk of overturning. 
Factors such as speed, inclination, bend radii, and 
width of track shall be taken into consideration. 
Where overtaking is possible the track shall be at 
least three times the maximum width of the 
speedway car. Speedway cars shall be surrounded 
by fenders so as to prevent any contact between the 
respective wheels and/or the frames of the cars. 


9.1.3 Restraints 


Speedway cars shall be provided with adjustable 
diagonal shoulder belts on each passenger seat, of 
at least 25 mm in width, while respecting the 
following minimum requirements as defined in 
passenger restrain. 


9.1.4 Miscellaneous 


The speed of cars running on a speedway shall not 
exceed 30 km/h. 


Cars to be used by unaccompanied children aged 8 
years or less shall be limited to a maximum speed 
of 8 km/h if the risk assessment demonstrates safe 
to use. 


Cars driven by internal combustion engines shall be 
fitted with a tray beneath the engine and the fuel 
lines. 


The engine shall be positioned such that passengers 
are not endangered by an engine fire. ISO 1204 and 
ISO 3046 on fuel-driven engines shall be 
considered. 


The driving area shall be smooth and level and 
shall be constructed of material appropriate for that 
purpose. 


The installation shall be fitted with a device that 
enables the operator to stop all vehicles. 


10 MANUFACTURING PROCEDURE AND 
QUALITY CONTROL 


10.1 Approval of Design 


Before commencing manufacture, the 
manufacturer, if so desired shall submit for 
approval by the approved  agency/statutory 


authority a fully dimensioned drawing with all the 


36 


relevant information including calculation of loads, 
stresses and engineering specifications. 


10.2 Drawing Control Procedure 


A procedure shall be in effect so that appropriate 
manufacturing drawing, their engineering machine 
design calculation, specifications апа related 
documents are arranged in a proper manner and 
utilized for each project. 


10.3 Material and Component Control 
Procedure 


A procedure shall be in effect so that materials, 
processes, and components, including raw 
materials, are in accordance with the recommended 
engineering specifications. 


10.3.1 This procedure shall provide the purchase 
department/section with all the information 
required to order appropriate/specified material. 


10.3.2 A receiving procedure shall be in effect so 
that incoming material and components are 
checked against the desired specifications and non- 
conforming components shall be identified and 
disposed of to avoid accidental use. 


10.3.3 A procedure shall be in effect so that 
material in stock can be properly identified for use 
as and when required in the future. 


10.4 Inspection Procedure 


A procedure shall be in effect so that stage 
inspections are made on manufactured parts and 
subassemblies, for conformance with 
recommended engineering specifications prior to 
use in the next stage of construction. 


10.5 Welding 


Welded construction of the ride or device is 
subjected to the following general conditions: 


10.5.1 AII details of design and construction shall 
generally conform to the provisions of the relevant 
standards given in Annex B. 


10.5.2 The welders shall be qualified for the type 
of welding concerned in conformity with the 
welder's performance qualification such as 
confirming to Welder Performance Qualification 
(WPQ). This is a test certificate that shows whether 
a welder possesses the necessary experience and 
knowledge to perform the specifications of a 
particular weld procedure. 


10.5.3 The manufacturer of the ride or device shall 
be responsible for all the welding work done as per 


relevant standards given in Annex B or as 
recommended by the approving authority or buyer. 


10.5.4 The manufacturer shall conduct the tests 
required to qualify the welding procedure 
employed and to assess the performance of the 
welders who apply the recommended welding 
procedure. 


10.5.5 The manufacturer shall maintain a record of 
the results obtained in welding procedure 
qualification tests. These records giving an accurate 
description of all the particulars of the materials 
and procedure shall be certified by him and shall be 
accessible to the inspecting authority who should 
be permitted to witness the tests if he so desires. 


10.5.6 The materials shall be as per approved 
drawings conforming to relevant standards given in 
Annex B. 


10.6 Bolted and Rivets Joints 


All threaded fasteners and rivets used on an 
amusement ride or device in connecting 
components and parts shall meet the specified 
requirements of IS 1364 or IS 3757 for each 
application in the system, and grade shall be 
identified where appropriate. Lock nuts may be 
used in order to prevent the loosening of bolts 
during dynamic loading. IS 15475 (Part 1) may be 
referred for bolts, nuts, rivets, and fasteners. 


10.7 Forgings and Casting 


Forgings and castings used in ride systems shall 
meet the recommendations of IS 2004, IS 210, IS 
1030, IS 2644 for each application in the system, 
and grade/type shall be identified IS 15475 (Part 1) 
General information may be referred for forgings 
and castings. 


10.8 Chain and Wire Rope 


Chain and wire rope used in ride systems shall 
comply with the specified requirements of IS 3109, 
IS 2266. IS 15475 (Part 1) may be referred to 


considering existing industrial rating, load 
conditions, dynamics, and potential fatigue 
involved. 
10.9 Gears 


Gear, rack, and pinions used in ride systems shall 
comply with the specified requirements of IS 2535, 
IS 3734 and IS 5037 


10.10 Conveyor and Elevator Belts 


Conveyor and elevator belts used in ride systems 
shall comply with the specified requirements of IS 


37 


IS 15475 (Part 3) : 2022 


1891 (Part 1), IS 1891 (Part 2), IS 1891 (Part 3), IS 
1891 (Part 4), and IS 1891 (Part 5). 


10.11 Air Supported Structures 


Where applicable, air-supported structures shall be 
designed and manufactured with flame-resistant 
materials. 


10.11.1 Hold-down provisions shall be made for 
the structure to allow operation of the device within 
wind conditions. 


10.11.2 Provisions shall be made to ensure that 
patrons cannot conceal themselves from the 
operator's view in a normal ride position. 


10.11.3 Enclosed structures shall have within 30 m 
of the normal point of egress adequately lighted 
emergency exits. 


10.11.4 Power failure, of an inflation means, shall 
not increase the risk of injury to anyone on the 
device. 


10.12 Electrical System 


10.12.1 Unless otherwise specified, all electrical 
items such as equipment, appliances, switchgear, 
control relays, cables, conductors and accessories, 
etc, used in construction, operation, testing, and 
maintenance of amusement ride or amusement 
device shall comply with the specified 
requirements of SP 30 and relevant Indian 
Standards were available. A list of such Indian 
Standards for guidance is given in Annex C. The 
manufacturer shall declare standards used from 
Annex B for Electrical System. 


10.12.2 Electrical Wiring shall be According to IS 
732. 


10.12.3 Emergency stop circuits shall be energized 
systems that are fail-safe in case of power failure. 


10.12.4 The emergency stop switches shall be 
manually reset. The resetting of the stop switch 
shall not start the ride. 


10.13 Hydraulic Fluid Power Systems 


10.13.1 Hydraulic components used in hydraulic 
fluid power systems shall comply with specified 
requirements of appropriate Indian Standards. For 
guidance, a list of Indian Standards on hydraulic 
fluid power systems and components is given in 
Annex D. The manufacturer shall declare standards 
used from Annex C for Hydraulic Fluid Systems. 


10.13.2 Hydraulic components used in the ride 
system and device shall be suitable for higher 


IS 15475 (Part 3) : 2022 


temperature operation and adequate shielding shall 
be provided to prevent hot fluid from reaching any 
passenger or observer on or near the ride or device. 


10.13.3 Adjustments of control should not require 
access between, over, or in close proximity to 
moving parts. 


10.13.4 Emergency safety device or means shall be 
provided in the proportional or servo control circuit 
in order to prevent undesirable motion of the ride. 


10.13.5 Filters should be sized to provide a 
minimum of 800 h of operation under normal 
working conditions. 


10.13.6 Diagnostic pressure test points, when used 
should be accessibly installed in hydraulic circuits 
to verify system pressure and also where pressure 
can be adjusted from the main system pressure. 


10.13.7 Oil Sampling 


Sample test points shall be made available close to 
hydraulic pumps and other key positions for the 
purpose of checking fluid for contamination. Under 
full system pressure, safe access to sample test 
points shall be ensured. 


10.13.8 Position Limits 


Effective provisions shall be made to prevent a 
linear actuator beyond the desired limits where the 
piston and piston rod diameter are the same. 


10.13.9 System Failures 


The controlling mechanism shall be provided to 
control the forces acting on the passengers on 
account of change in velocity or acceleration in the 
event of hydraulic system failure ог 
malfunctioning. 


10.14 Pneumatic Fluid Power Systems 


10.14.1 Application and installation of a pneumatic 
fluid power system shall be in accordance with IS 
12725. 


10.14.2 Sizes for bores and port threads for 
pneumatic fluid power cylinders shall be as per 
recommendations of IS 8526. 


10.14.3 Mounting dimensions of pneumatic fluid 
power cylinders shall be in accordance with IS 
10143, IS 12723, IS 12738, IS 13086 and IS 13087 
based on bore size and type of mounting. 


10.14.4 Maximum pneumatic pressure shall not 
exceed the component rating. 


38 


10.14.5 Pneumatic fluid power accumulators shall 
conform to IS 11277 or ISO 5596. 


10.14.6 Pneumatic tubing hose and fittings shall 
conform to IS 7651. 


10.14.7 Provisions shall be made to cause the 
system to revert to the appropriate emergency 
mode in the event of pressure drops below the 
minimum design pressure in critical applications. 


10.14.8 The system shall include the components 
for lubrication and moisture extraction, where 
deemed appropriate by the designer/manufacturer. 


10.15 Brakes 


10.15.1 Sufficient braking capacity shall be 
provided to satisfy the designer's recommended 
operation parameters. 


10.15.2 Provision shall be made for a block system 
of braking for those rides or devices where it is 
necessary to prevent independent  passenger- 
carrying units from occupying the same block 
section of the ride. 


10.15.3 Where appropriate critical braking system 
shall remain energized and activated even when the 
regular power supply fails. 


10.15.4 Operator monitored braking system may be 
provided which normally activated in the absence 
of the operator. 


10.16 Operator Controls 


Operator controls shall be located within easy reach 
of the operator when the operator is in a position to 
observe the ride while the ride is in operation. 


10.16.1 Operator control system shall be capable to 
avoid unintentional activation. 


10.16.2 Operator control shall be identified in 
English along with Hindi or applicable local 
language with respect to their function. 


10.16.3 Control access system shall be incorporated 
in the operator control mechanism. 


10.17 Machine Guards 


Suitable machine guards shall be provided to 
protect employees, operators, and guests from 
hazards associated with but not limited to, belts, 
chains, and pulleys. 


11 FENCING 


11.1 Provisions shall be made to protect the 
spectators and riders. The fences and gates shall be 


constructed considering the following minimum 
requirements. 


11.1.1 Height of fences and gates shall be at least 
1.1 m above the surface on which spectators and 
riders stand. 


11.1.2 All openings provided shall be able to reject 
a ball of 100 mm size, fabricated with vertical bars 
only without any horizontal designs or bars, to 
inhibit any climbing over the fencing. 


11.1.3 These shall be designed, constructed, and 
erected to inhibit overturning by spectators and 
riders. 


11.1.4 Entrance, exit, and loading gates shall open 
away from the ride or device or shall be equipped 
with a positive latching device. In the case of a 
hinged door, clearance of 40 mm shall be 
maintained in all movements. 


11.1.5 The gates if opened during operation of ride 
or devices shall have sufficient clearance in order 
to avoid contact or hazard to riders/operator. 


11.1.6 The fences and gates shall be able to avoid 
contact with rides or devices and also with riders. 


11.1.7 Horizontal members may be used to 
improve construction or efficiency. However, these 
should be minimized to reduce the ease of 
climbing. 


12 GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS FOR 
ERECTION 


12.1 Suspended Gondola 


Cradles shall be suspended from rigid distributor 
bars to prevent entanglement of support chains. 
Redundancy/backup systems shall be provided for 
all single-point suspensions of vehicles, sways, 
arms, and other patron-carrying components. The 
backup system may consist of chains, ropes, pins, 
or other structural members of adequate size and 
strength. Pin or bolt holes of the suspension and 
backup system shall be staggered to avoid the 
wrong assembly. For amusement rides where there 
is a risk of fall from a height of 2.5 meters or more, 
the cradles shall be suspended by 4 wire ropes or 
chains unless another fall protection system such as 
a fall arresting device and safety gear, etc. is in 
place. The anchoring position shall be suitably 
designed such that when one of the wire ropes 
breaks, the cradle shall remain reasonably stable 
and the tilting of the cradle shall not cause patrons 
to fall out. 


39 


IS 15475 (Part 3) : 2022 


12.2 Wire Ropes, Shackles and Pulleys 


Suspension ropes shall be stranded steel wire ropes 
complying with IS 9282. Each rope shall be in one 
continuous length and free from joints or repairs. 
The minimum safety factor, the ratio between the 
minimum breaking load of the rope to the 
maximum rope tension, shall be at least 10 but a 
higher safety factor of up to 14 shall be considered 
where the circumstances warrant. Both ends of the 
wire rope shall be securely fastened and the 
strength of rope terminations shall be not less than 
80 percent of the minimum breaking load of the 
rope. The wire ropes shall be properly guided 
throughout the path of travel. Pulleys shall be 
provided for all bends. All pulleys shall be fitted 
with self-lubricated bearings. The diameter of each 
pulley shall be compatible with the wire rope use. 
A suitable guidance device shall be provided to 
prevent the wire rope from slipping off the pulley. 


12.3 Hydraulic System 
12.3.1 Installation and Safety Features 


Every component of the hydraulic system, which 
requires regular maintenance and adjustment, shall 
be accessible without risk from a safe working 
position. And the following safety features shall be 
incorporated into the design of the hydraulic 
circuit: 


a) Safety devices to protect against the 
effects of failure of a hose in any 
hydraulic circuit which otherwise could 
affect the operational stability of the ride; 

b) Overpressure protection on the discharge 
side of all pumps capable of handling the 
maximum flow of the pumps; 

с) Overpressure protection of all 
bearing hydraulic cylinders. 


load- 


12.4 Pneumatic System 
12.4.1 Installation and Safety Features 


Every component of the pneumatic system, which 
requires regular maintenance and adjustment, shall 
be accessible without risk from a safe working 
position. And the following safety features shall be 
incorporated into the design of the pneumatic 
circuit. 


a) Safety devices to protect against the 
effects of failure of a hose in any 
pneumatic circuit which otherwise could 
affect the operational stability of the ride; 

b) Pressure vessels shall be fitted with 
appropriate pressure relief valves. The 
discharge points shall be contained or 
directed so as to eliminate the risks of 


IS 15475 (Part 3) : 2022 


contamination of equipment or injury to 
persons; 


12.5 Electrical Requirements 


All electrical works associated with the amusement 
ride shall comply with IS 732. 


12.5.1 High Voltage Installation 


High voltage electrical works [greater than 415 V 
(a.c.)], with the exception of cold-cathode 
illumination systems (for example, neon lights), 
shall be prohibited for amusement ride installation. 


12.5.2 Low Voltage Installation 


Where the power supply to an amusement ride is at 
low voltage [50 V to 415 V (a.c.) supply], it shall 
pass through an over-current circuit breaker of a 
rating appropriate to the current consumption of the 
connected load which may be either: 


a) an isolating switch complying with and 
being type tested to IEC 947-3; or 

b) a residual current device (RCD)/ELCB 
type tested to IEC 755; or 

c) an air circuit breaker (ACB) or molded 
case circuit breaker (MCCB) complying 
with and being type tested to relevant 
industry standards or covered under Indian 
Electricity rules. 


12.5.3 Extra-low Voltage 


For extra-low voltage circuits [less than 50V (a.c. 
supply)] transformers shall either be inherently 
short-circuited proof or provided with overload and 
short-circuit protection. Bare conductors for extra- 
low voltage shall not be used. 


12.5.4 Equipotential Bonding Requirements 


All electrical installations, except at extra-low 
voltage, shall be earthed in accordance with the 
following requirements: 


a) Where the power supply is taken from a 
permanent and fixed sub-main distribution 
system connected with the grid of the 
power supply company, all metalwork 
associated with the electrical installation 
not forming part of a live conductor, shall 
be solidly and effectively bonded and 
earthed in accordance with IS 3043; 

b) Where power is obtained from a generator 
mounted on the frame of the amusement 
ride concerned, the electricity generating 
set shall comply with IS 10000, IS 10001 
and IS 4889; 

c) Where the power is generated on-site and 
the generator is positioned far from the 


40 


amusement ride, the start point of the 
generator and the generator frame shall be 
solidly bonded to an earthing electrode 
driven for the purpose. While the ride and 
the generator frame shall be connected 
together with an earthing conductor of 
ample size in accordance with IS 3043 as 
if the source of supply were a mains 


supply. 


12.5.5  Free-standing Motor Control Switchboard 


a) The motor control switchboard (hereafter 
called the *Switchboard") shall be a free- 
standing  floor-mounted low voltage 
switchboard to group centrally the motor 
starters, controls, and switchgear for 
various electrical equipment associated 
with the amusement rides; 

b) The  multi-cubicle type assembled 
“Switchboard” shall conform to an 
established type “Switchboard” which has 
been verified to be in accordance with IS 
3854 and IS 1293 by a recognized testing 
authority; 

c) “Switchboard” shall be constructed 
generally to be of the degree of protection 
of IP 31 for indoor application and IP 54 
for outdoor locations; 

d) The “Switchboard” shall be clearly 
marked and labelled with the safety signs, 
circuits controlled апа electrical 
characteristics of the “Switchboard”. 


12.5.6 Isolating Switch 


Every amusement ride that is connected to any 
power supply shall be provided with an isolating 
switch in a position readily accessible to the 
maintenance personnel who are supposed to work 
in the vicinity of the Main Motor Control 
Switchboard of the ride in question. 


12.5.7 Emergency Lighting 


Adequate emergency lighting and illuminated exit 
signs shall be installed for the safe operation of the 
amusement ride in accordance with the IS 1641, IS 
1642, IS 1643, IS 1644, and IS 1646. For rides that 
need a waiver of this statutory requirement because 
of safety reasons, the ride owner shall apply to Fire 
Services Department for exemption. 


12.5.8 Power Point below 2.5m 


Where the public is admitted, the electric power 
supply to motors, equipment, lighting, and socket- 
outlets installed on the moving parts of an 
amusement ride and to all other lighting outlets less 
than 2.5 m above the floor level or within the arms 
reach shall be protected by one of the following: 


a) А residual current device (RCD)/ELCB; 

b) An isolating switch complying with and 
being type-tested; 

c) An extra-low voltage system obtained 
from the non-earthed secondary of an 
isolating transformer. 


12.5.9 Other Requirements 


a) Any cable passing under an amusement 
ride or within 1 000 mm of any moving 
part there of shall be provided with 
mechanical protection; 

b) Exposed lamps, except where supplied by 
extra-low voltage, or protected by a 
residual current device, shall not be 
installed within an arm-reach distance of 
any position accessible to the public; 

c) All electrical terminations and connections 
shall be capable of withstanding the 
effects of any expected vibration and 
movement; 

d) Power supply to the control devices 
handled by patrons shall be an extra-low 
voltage supply only; 

e) Pendant, roving controls, or any control 
handled by operating staff shall be either 
double insulated or designed for 
connection to an extra-low voltage supply 
only. 


12.5.10 Flexible Cable and Plug 


a) The supply cord and other connecting 
cables shall be of the heavy-duty type and 
shall be mechanically protected where 
necessary; 

b) The removal of a single access cover to a 

coin container, coin mechanism, or other 

similar components shall not cause any 
live part or basic insulation to be exposed; 

Every drive motor and all exposed metal 

parts of the equipment shall be effectively 

earthed to the main earth via a circuit 
protective conductor. 


12.5.11 Electrified Metallic Grid 


с 


— 


Where an amusement ride involves an electrified 
metallic grid installed over an area accessible to the 
public, the electrified metallic grid shall be 
installed at a height of at least 2.5 m above floor 
level and the supply voltage shall not exceed 120V 
d.c. 


12.6 Ride Control Equipment 
The control panel and the associated control 


equipment for the amusement ride shall be 
designed with due regard to the following: 


41 


IS 15475 (Part 3) : 2022 


a) The location of the control station and the 
remote annunciation panels shall be 
carefully selected so as to minimize any 
interference by the patrons or the passers- 
by and to Standard Spec. Allow the Chief 
Operator at the control station to have an 
unobstructed view of the embarking and 
disembarking process; 

b) The Chief Operator shall be able to have 
direct or supervisory control of all 
functions for embarking, disembarking, 
interlocking and emergency from the 
supervisory panel at the control point; 

c) Visual indicators should be installed, 
where necessary, to show the operational 
status of the equipment. For abnormal 
status or signal of the safety-related 
devices, provisions of audible alarms shall 
be available; 

d) Where an amusement ride has remote 
areas or areas obscured from the view of 
the Chief Operator at the main control 
station, means of observing and 
communicating with patrons, such as 
CCTV system, intercom system or public 
address system, shall be provided, 
otherwise; a risk assessment has to be 
conducted if such provisions аге 
considered not practicable; 

e) The controls and indicators on the mimic 
panel shall be arranged in such a way that 
the natural directional movement of the 
signals ог physical control actions 
corresponds with the actual movement of 
the vehicles; 

f) Any emergency stop action shall bring the 
ride to a stop in a safe manner. The 
emergency stop system shall not rely on 
electronic equipment for its operation and 


shall only be reset manually. The 
emergency stop push-button shall be 
prominent and located for immediate 


access by the ride attendants. 


12.7 Lightning Protection 


For outdoor amusement rides involving tall and 
massive structures, an assessment of the risk of 
being struck shall be made. Weighting factors at 
the higher end shall be used for assessment on 
mobile rides or where the patrons would expose at 
the highest levels of the structure. If provisions of 
lightning protection are determined to be necessary, 
all the design works shall conform to IS 62305 
(Section 1). 


12.8 Steam and Gas Propelled Equipment 


a) All boilers and steam receivers associated 
with the amusement rides shall comply 


IS 15475 (Part 3) : 2022 


with the requirements of Boiler and 
Pressure Vessels Ordinance, Chapter 56 in 
respect of registration, maintenance, and 
examination of the pressure vessels; 

b) Only the low-pressure steam or hot water 
boilers are permitted to use in connection 
with the amusement ride installation; 

c) Hot water boilers and burners shall be 
constructed to IS 13980 respectively. All 
the exposed surfaces, including the 
associated pipeworks and accessories, 
shall be insulated such that the surface 
temperature at any location shall not 
exceed 40°C; 

d) Provisions of safety devices including 
double safety valves, automatic low water 
level cutout, over-temperature protection 
thermostat, automatic firing controls shall 
be provided; 

e) Where hot air is used in conjunction with 
an amusement ride other than hot air 
balloon, all the exposed ducting, diffusers, 
or other delivery systems shall be 
insulated with surface temperature not 
exceeding 40°C whereas the air heating 
equipment should be designed, controlled 
and operated to prevent the temperature of 
hot air from reaching beyond 60°C. 


12.9 Fire Protection 


If the passenger of an amusement ride is totally 
enclosed in a cabin, all the upholstered furniture 
inside the cabin shall be verified to comply with IS 
3809 or IS 1642). Subject to risk level, automatic 
fire fighting equipment (for example, sprinkler 
heads) shall be provided if deemed necessary. 


12.10 Propulsion System and Associated 


Protection Mechanism 


Propelling machinery of the amusement ride shall 
comply with the following requirements. 


12.10.1 Protection for Overspeed 


For the ride (for example, a vertical ride involving 
a traction drive in the course of descending), where 
there is a concern on the overspeed issue, the drive 
shall be fitted with sensors or devices, which 
should be able to trigger a mechanism to shut down 
the drive in a safe manner whenever the designed 
maximum speed is exceeded. Overspeed sensors 
and controls shall be fail-safe and able to be 
positively tested by a regular and simple method, 
which shall be detailed in the operation and 
maintenance manual. 


42 


12.10.2 Protection for Underspeed 


Where an underspeed condition may endanger the 
patrons (for example, a vehicle is maintained 
inverted by centrifugal forces), the drive shall be 
fitted with an underspeed sensor to trigger a 
mechanism, which shall prevent the vehicle from 
reaching a dangerous orientation until the correct 
speed is attained. The vehicle shall be able to 
restore to a safe orientation immediately upon loss 
of speed. Underspeed sensor and control shall be 
fail-safe and shall be able to be positively tested by 
a regular and simple method which shall be 
detailed in the operation and maintenance manual. 
Underspeed sensor and control shall not be able to 
be reset except by a full shut down and restart of 
the ride. An alarm signal shall be given when the 
propelling machinery is tripped. 


12.10.3 Manual Winding 


Retrieval of patrons may be stranded by the failure 
of the driving system (for example, loss of power), 
the ride shall incorporate either a means of 
manually winding the machinery back to a safe 
position or a means of emergency disembarkation 
in accordance with 12.14 regarding evacuation. If 
the ride is of a size/configuration that manual 
winding is not practical, an emergency power 
system shall be installed for patron retrieval. 


12.11 Vehicle Body 


All the vehicle surfaces with which the riders may 
come in contact shall be rounded and smooth, free 
from sharp, rough, or splintered edges and corners, 
and have no protruding studs, bolts, screws, or 
other projections. Adequate padding shall be 
provided where the patron may be thrown upon or 
against any part of the vehicle due to the ride 
motion. For amusement rides involving more than 
one vehicle, the body of every vehicle shall be 
provided with clear, unique, and identifiable 
markings. 


12.12 Safety Clearance and Envelope 


Any fixed or moving object, structure, or special 
effect, which the vehicles may pass during the 
operation of the ride, shall be beyond the reach of 
the rider. Apart from this general principle, some 
specific requirements on the safety envelope, as 
well as the key dimensions of the seating, are set 
out in the following as guidance. The approval 
shall be sought if an alternative design standard on 
the safety clearance is adopted. 


12.12.1 Fully Enclosed Vehicle 


For rides where the patrons are totally enclosed 
inside a cabinet whilst there are some openings on 


the casing, the minimum clearance from adjacent 
objects shall be: 


a) minimum safety clearance = 90 mm, 
where opening size < 9 mm; 
b) minimum safety clearance = 150 mm, 


where 9 mm < opening size < 50 mm. 


12.12.2 Restrained Patrons in Open Type Vehicle 


If patrons are not totally enclosed but are 
effectively restrained in the seat, the following 
requirements as to dimensions of the seat and the 
safety clearances in relation to the seat shall be 
observed. 


a) The upper safety space, 1 500mm 
extending upwards from the seating 
surface, shall not be obstructed by any 
external objects; 

b) The height of seat back (Hv), under the 
different angle of seat rest (0), shall be 
high enough such that 

1) minimum Aack required = 400 mm, 
where 0? < 0 < 15°; 
2) minimum Hy required = 550 mm, 
where 15? « 0 « 30°; 
3) minimum H^ required = 700 mm, 
where 30? « 0 « 45°; 
4) minimum Apack required = 800 mm, 
where 45? < 0 « 90°; 
5) minimum Hy required = 900 mm, 
where 90? < 0. 
(where @ is the inclination of the seat back 
measured from a vertical plane while Hpack 
is the height of the seat back measured 
from the seating surface to the top edge of 
the seat back) 

с) If 0 exceeds 45? in the course of motion, a 
rigid over-shoulder restraint system shall 
also be provided; 

d) The lateral safety space, which extends 
laterally outwards from the edges of the 
seating frame up to a distance Ria, the 
value of which shall be determined as a 
function of the Height of Seat Side (Hss), 
shall not be obstructed by any external 
objects: 


Height of Seat Side (Hss) Riateral 


Low seat sides: 200 mm < Н,;< 1 000 mm 
400 mm 


Standard seat sides: 400 mn < 750 mm 
Н»< 600 mm 


High seat sides: 600 mm < Hs 450 тт 


IS 15475 (Part 3) : 2022 


е) For vehicle speed exceeding 3 m/s, low 
seat sides shall be avoided; 

f) Where patrons are restrained but their legs 
are hanging free as in the suspension rides, 
a further bottom safety space, 900 mm 
extending downwards from the bottom of 
the seating and lateral safety space, shall 
be maintained. 


12.12.3 Unrestrained Patrons in Open Type 
Vehicle 


For open-type vehicles where patrons are not 
totally restrained in their seats, the following safety 
clearances shall be maintained. 


a) The vertical safety space, 2 100 mm 
extending upwards from the floor, shall 
not be obstructed by any external objects; 

b) The lateral safety space, 750 mm 
extending outwards from the outermost 
envelope of the vehicle, shall not be 
obstructed by any external objects. 
Vertical safety space is reduced from 2 
400 mm to 2 100 mm to tally with the 
requirements in ride involving electric 
grid. 


12.13 Maintenance Access 


The fixed platforms, walkways, stairways, and 
ladders, which are used by the crew for operation, 
inspection, maintenance, or servicing purposes, 
shall be designed and constructed. Provisions of 
guarding and restraint systems shall be provided for 
the prevention of falls from height. 


1214 Evacuation Facilities 


Appropriate means (hereunder called “assisted 
evacuation facilities”) shall be provided to facilitate 
the safe emergency disembarkation of patrons from 
the ride in cases of power failure, malfunction, fire 
or any unintended stoppage through: 


a) Facilities to bring the ride to the 
loading/unloading points or other 
position where patrons can disembark in 
a safe manner; 

b) Fixed walkways, stairs, platforms or 
hatchways that are readily accessible 
from all sections of the ride, with signs 
as appropriate; or 

с) Acombination of the above two means. 


IS 15475 (Part 3) : 2022 


13 DEGREES OF POTENTIAL 
BIOMECHANICAL RISKS FOR 
AMUSEMENT RIDES 


When people are being moved by an amusement 
ride, the respective potential risks of harm may be 
present depending on the potential fall height, 
values of velocity and accelerations, angle of the 
seat inclination, or turnover. Therefore, measures 
to reduce or eliminate risks shall be taken with 
regard to the types and degrees of biomechanical 
effects acting on passengers. In order to analyze 
the risks and possible consequences of failures, it 
is important to take into account how people are 
exposed to biomechanical effects and Ше 
frequency of such exposure. 


Biomechanical effects produced by amusement 
rides are not always suitable for people with health 
problems or who are simply not feeling well at the 
time, and therefore it is necessary to warn people 
of how extreme the amusement ride may be and of 
any use limitations. 


Types of injuries depending on the severity of harm 
to the human body can include but are not limited 
to: 


a) Traumatic brain injury (TBD; 

b) Vascular injury due to turning upside 
down; 

c) Cardiac arrhythmia due to stress and/or 
accelerations action; 

d) Severe injury of internal organs due to 
impact; 


e) Injury of а musculoskeletal system 
exposed to high accelerations; 

f) Loss of | consciousness due to 
accelerations. 


If the safety measures taken are not adequate, any 
mechanical effects of an RB-1value may cause 
catastrophic harm to the health or life of people. 
Effects may, for example, include following: 


44 


a) Falling from the height of over 8 m; 

b) Being hit against an obstacle at a speed 
higher than 20 m/s; 

c) Ejection of an unrestrained passenger; 

d) Falling of an unrestrained passenger 
headlong out of a turned over passenger 
unit or seat from a height of more than 3 
m. 


Similarly, any biomechanical effect RB-2 value 
may cause critical harm to health, including a 
severe injury or disability, and biomechanical 
effects of an RB-3 value may cause harm to health 
such as temporary disorder. It should be noted that, 
if safety measures are insufficient and any 
unfavourable events or situations occur in case 
biomechanical effects may result in high risk which 
will require risk analysis. 


RB-1 the potential of causing fatal harm to a 
passenger or passengers resulting from 


biomechanical effects 


the potential of causing severe harm to 
the health of a passenger or passengers 
resulting from biomechanical effects 


the potential of causing harm with 
temporary disability of a passenger or 
passengers resulting from 
biomechanical effects 


the potential of causing harm without 
any form of disability to a passenger or 
passengers resulting from 
biomechanical effects 


Identification of types and values of effects and 
degree of potential biomechanical risks shall be 
performed using Table 8. All figures a) ,b) and c) 
are given below to illustrate the inclination of types 
of passenger seats. 


IS 15475 (Part 3) : 2022 


Table 8 Types and values of effects to which passengers are exposed and degrees of potential 
biomechanical risks 
(Clause 13) 


SI. Type of Notation Degree of potential biomechanical risk 
No. biomechanical 
effect RB-1 RB-2 RB-3 RB-4 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 
i) Lift to or drop H,m H8 2<HS 8 0.4<Н< 2 H< 0.4 
from a relative 
height 
ii) Travel at a V, m/s ү>20 10<V< 20 3<V< 10 Vs 3 
relative velocity 
lii) Lift of drop in H,m Hz3 2<H< 3 0.4<Hs 2 H«0.4 
seat with 
inclination 
iv) -forward a, degrees 135» а «180 45<а < 135 10<а < 45 
inclination (Fig. 
a) 
v) -backward В, degrees 135<Bp=180 105<B < 135 95<B < 105 
inclination (Fig. 
b) 
vi) -sideward y, degrees 120< y < 180 60x y x 120 30«y x 60 
inclination (Fig. 
с) 
+2 135°0180° +2 15°0:135° 


081 


7 77 
Ом «Hs 2M 


a) Forward inclination 


45 


IS 15475 (Part 3) : 2022 


+Z +Z 


135°< B=180° 


105° 8.3135? 


УУУУУУУУ = 
2м<Н<3м 


РРР. 
02м = Н+ 2м 


b) Backward inclination 


+2 120° ys180° 


2м<Н<3м 


+2 


30°<ys60° 


c) Sideward inclination 


14 MEASURES FOR ELIMINATION OR 
REDUCTION OF HAZARDS DUE TO 
BIOMECHANICAL EFFECTS 


Biomechanical risk analysis and risk classification 
for amusement rides concentrate the attention of 
those who make and maintain amusement rides on 
the elements and parameters most important for 
the safety of amusement rides. 


Biomechanical risks arising from the types of 
effects listed below shall be eliminated or reduced 
by means of the following basic methods, and the 
necessity for redundancy depends on the risk 
analysis: 


a) When passengers are at a height of more 
than 2 m, reliable load-carrying structures 
and fences with due allowance for wind 


46 


b) 


с) 


effects shall be provided as well as 
appropriate lifts and hoists; 

When passengers are being moved at a 
high speed (more than 3 m/s), appropriate 
containment devices shall be provided to 
prevent falling or potential ejection of 
passengers taking into account effects of 
inertia — measures shall be taken to 
remove obstacles that may cause harm 
getting into the relevant motion 
envelopes of passengers; 

When passengers are moved with high 
accelerations comparable with allowable 
limits for each axis, the passenger’s body 
shall be secured with restraint in order to 
ensure that accelerations are safely 
tolerated and to eliminate the risk of 
passenger ejection due to acceleration 
(including under normal and emergency 
braking); 


d) When seats or passenger units are turned 
over and there is a probability of 
passengers falling out, appropriate 
passenger containment shall be provided. 


15 RECOMMENDED ACCELERATION 
LIMITS 


Unfavourable effects of accelerations on the 
human body may show themselves through the 
following: 

a) Displacement of the body or its parts 
under inertia forces, collision with 
surrounding objects and secondary 
injuries; 

Deformations of tissues and organs 
resulting in disorders of blood circulation 
and respiratory disturbance; 

The risk of injuries and adverse effects 
due to accelerations can be minimized by 
means of the following measures; 
Application of appropriate passenger 
containment and restraint; 


b) 


с) 


d) 


+a [g] (eyes back) 


bith iis in 

Se is a IU 
[j| 4,0 | 2.0 | зо | 40 | 50 | 6,0 | 
a Eee йй йй Ж йй 

EUN RE NUE 


ша: =й шаа 
ШШ ый иш ий аша аа 
0 


IS 15475 (Part 3) : 2022 


e) Use limitations for persons with physical 

restriction or health problems; 

f) Application of Cl. 15 for limiting the 
accelerations to which passengers are 


exposed on amusement rides. 


Accelerations acting on passengers when using 
amusement rides should be limited to a tolerable 
level. Recommended acceleration values are given 
below to ensure the safety of apparently healthy 
passengers but some values can cause discomfort, 
for example, motion sickness. Limiting values are 
given below. For the different directions of 
accelerations, the passenger coordinate system 
with orthogonal axes X, Y, and Z as shown in Fig. 
10 applies. 


The Z-axis direction is defined along the spine (+ 
5° tolerance). 


The time duration limit for allowable acceleration 
in the X, Y & Z sections are given below: 


rao] S80 100 T6 [29] 


1 base case 
2 over the shoulder restraint 
3 


prone restraint 


s 1 2 


Time duration limits for allowable accelerations in X-direction (perpendicular to 


spine) 


47 


IS 15475 (Part 3) : 2022 


+а [g] (eyes right) 


“ 
ite, “PR И И PP eee eee 


-8, [g] (eyes left) 


Time duration limits for allowable accelerations in Y-direction 


+a, [9] (eyes down) 


“КЕНЕЕН 


-а, [g] (eyes up) 


Key 
1  *Gzlimits if preceded by 3 s or more of - Gz 


Maximum duration of *az (eyes down) = 2,0 gis limited to 40 s. 


Time duration limits for accelerations in Z-direction (parallel to spine) 


48 


IS No. 

SP 30 : 2011 

IS 210 : 2009 
IS 399 : 1963 
IS 456 : 2000 
IS 732 : 2019 
IS 734 : 1975 
IS 755 :1984 
IS 800 : 2007 


IS 802 (Part 1/Sec 1) 
2015 


IS 802 (Part 1/Sec 2) 
2016 


IS 875 (Part 3) : 2015 


IS 883 : 2016 


IS 947 :1985 


IS 1030 : 1998 


ISO 1204 : 1990 


IS 1285 : 2002 


IS 1293 : 2019 


IS 1364 (Part 1) : 2018 


IS 1364 (Part 2) : 2018 


IS 15475 (Part 3) : 2022 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 2) 


LIST OF INDIAN STANDARDS REFERRED 
Title 


National electrical code 2011 (first revision) 

Grey iron castings — specification (first revision) 

Classification of commercial timbers and their zonal distribution 
Plain and reinforced concrete — code of practice (fourth revision) 
Code of practice for electrical wiring installations (fourth revision) 


Specification for wrought aluminium and aluminium alloy forging stock and 
forgings (for general engineering purposes) (second revision) 


Specification for handloom cotton MALMAL (first revision) 

General construction in steel — code of practice (third revision) 

Use of structural steel in overhead transmission line towers — code of practice — 
part 1 materials, loads and design strengths : Sec 1 materials and loads (fourth 
revision) 

Use of structural steel in overhead transmission line towers — code of practice — 
part 1 material, loads and permissible stresses : Sec 2 permissible stresses (fourth 


revision) 


Design loads (other than earthquake) for buildings and structures — code of 
practice — Part 3 Wind loads (third revision) 


Design of structural timber in buildings — code of practice (fifth revision) 


Specification for washers for water fittings for fire fighting purposes (second 
revision) 


Carbon steel castings for general engineering purposes — specification (fifth 
revision) 


Reciprocating internal combustion engines — Designation of the direction of 
rotation and of cylinders and valves in cylinder heads, and definition of right hand 


and left hand in — line engines and locations on an engine 


Wrought aluminium and aluminium alloys — extruded round tube and hollow 
sections for general engineering purposes — specification (third revision) 


Plugs and socket - outlets of rated voltage up to and including 250 volts and rated 
current up to and including 16 amperes — — specification (third revision) 


Hexagon head bolts, screws and nuts of product grades a and b — Part 1 Hexagon 
head bolts (size range m 1.6 to m 64) (fifth revision) 


Hexagon head bolts, screws and nuts of product grades a and b — Part 2 Hexagon 
head screws (size range m 1.6 to m 64) (fifth revision) 


49 


IS 15475 (Part 3) : 2022 


IS No. Title 


IS 1364 (Part 3) : 2018 Hexagon head bolts, screws and nuts of product grades a and b — Part 3 Hexagon 
nuts, style 1 ( size range m 1.6 to m 64) 


IS 1364 (Part 4) : 2003 Hexagon head bolts, screws and nuts of product grades a and b : part 4 hexagon thin 
nuts (chamfered) (size range m1.6 to m64) (fourth revision) 


IS 1364 (Part 5) : 2002 Hexagon head bolts, screws and nuts of product grades a and b : part 5 hexagon thin 
nuts — product grade b (unchamfered) (size range m1.6 to m10) (fourth revision) 


IS 1364 (Part 6) : 2018 Hexagon head bolts, screws and nuts of product grades a and b part 6 hexagon nuts, 
style 2 ( first revision ) 


IS 1368 : 2018 Dimensions for ends of parts with external iso metric threads (fourth revision) 


IS 1641 : 2013 Fire safety of buildings (general) : general principles of fire grading and 
classification — code of practice (second revision) 


IS 1642 : 2013 Fire safety of buildings (general) : details of construction — code of practice 
(second revision) 


IS 1643 : 2013 Fire safety of buildings (general) : exposure hazard â€” code of practice 


IS 1644 : 2013 Fire safety of buildings (general) : exit requirements and personal hazard — code of 
practice (second revision) 


IS 1646 : 2015 Fire safety of buildings (general) : electrical installations — code of practice (third 
revision) 
IS/ISO 1834 : 1999 Short link chain for lifting purposes — general conditions of acceptance. 


IS 1891 (Part 1) : 2021 Conveyor and elevator textile belting — specification part 1 general purpose belting 
(fifth revision) 


IS 1891 (Part 2) : 1993 Conveyor and elevator textile belting — specification : part 2 heat resistant belting 
(third revision) 


IS 1891 (Part 3) : 1988 Specification for rubber conveyor and elevator textile belting : part 3 oil resistant 
belting (second revision) 


IS 1891 (Part 4) : 1978 Specification for rubber conveyor and elevator belting : part 4 hygienic belting (first 
revision) 


IS 1891 (Part 5) : 1993 Conveyor and elevator textile belting — specification : part 5 fire resistant belting 
for surface application 


IS 1893 (Part 4) : 2015 Criteria for earthquake resistant design of structures part 4 industrial structures 
including stack — like structures (first revision) 


IS 2004 : 1991 Carbon steel forgings for general engineering purposes — specification (third 
revision) 

IS 2026 (Part 1) : 2011 Power transformers : part 1 general (second revision) 

IS 2062 : 2011 Hot rolled medium and high tensile structural steel — specification (seventh 
revision) 


50 


IS No. 
IS 2266 : 2019 
IS 2361 : 2002 
IS/ISO 2415 : 2004 


IS 2429 (Part 1) : 1987 


IS 2485 : 2022 


IS 2535 (Part 1) : 2004 


IS 2535 (Part 2) : 2004 


IS 2644 : 1994 


IS 2760 : 1980 
IS 2762 : 2009 
IS 2828 : 2019 
IS 3043 : 2018 


ISO 3046 (part 1) : 2002 


IS/ISO 3076 : 2012 


IS/ISO 3077 : 2001 


IS 3109 (Part 1) : 1982 


IS 3629 : 1986 
IS 3734 : 1983 
IS 3757 : 1985 
IS 3809 : 1979 
IS 3854 : 1997 
IS 3871 : 2013 
IS 4889 : 1968 


IS 15475 (Part 3) : 2022 


Title 
Steel wire ropes for general engineering purpose — specification (fifth revision) 
Bulldog grips — specification (third revision) 
Forged shackles for general lifting purposes — dee shackles and bow shackles 


Specification for round steel short link chains (electric butt welded), grade 1(3) : part 
1 non — calibrated load chain for lifting purposes (third revision) 


Specification for drop forged sockets for wire ropes for general engineering 
purposes (second revision) 


Cylindrical gears for general and heavy engineering : part 1 standard basic rack 
tooth profile (third revision) 


Cylindrical gears for general and heavy engineering : part 2 module (third revision) 


High strength steel castings for general engineering and structural purposes - 
specification (fourth revision) 


Specification for steel chain slings (first revision) 

Wire rope slings and sling legs — specification (second revision) 

Plastics — vocabulary (second revision) 

Code of practice for earthing (second revision) 

Reciprocating internal combustion engines — performance — part 1 : declarations 
of power, fuel and lubricating oil consumptions, and test methods — additional 


requirements for engines for general use 


Round steel short link chains for general lifting purposes — medium tolerance sling 
chains for chain slings — grade 8 (first revision) 


Short link chain for lifting purposes — grade T(types T, oat and Dt), fine — 
tolerance hoist chain 


Specification for short link chain, grade m (4) : part 1 non — calibrated load chain 
for lifting purposes (second revision) 


Structural timber in building — specification 

Dimensions of worm gearing (first revision) 

Specification for high strength structural bolts (second revision) 

Fire resistance test for structures 

Switches for domestic and similar purposes — specification (second revision) 
Fibre ropes and cordage — vocabulary (third revision) 


Methods of determination of efficiency of rotating electrical machines 


51 


IS 15475 (Part 3) : 2022 


IS No. Title 
IS 4912 : 1978 Safety requirements floor and wall openings, and toe boards (first revision) 


IS 5037 (Part 1) : 2004 Straight bevel gears for general engineering and heavy engineering : part 1 basic 
rack (first revision) 


IS 5037 (Part 2) : 2004 Straight bevel gears for general engineering and heavy engineering : part 2 module 
and diametral pitches (first revision) 


IS 5175 : 2014 Fibre ropes — polypropylene split film, monofilament and multifilament (pp2) and 
polypropylene high — tenacity multifilament (pp3) — 3 — ,4 — ,8 — and 12 — 
strand ropes (third revision) 


IS 5384 : 1985 Aluminium i — beam 

IS 7651 : 2021 Wire reinforced rubber covered hydraulic hose specification third revision of is 
7651 

IS 8147 : 1976 Code of practice for use of aluminium alloys in structures 

IS 8526 : 1994 Sizes for bores and port threads for pneumatic fluid power cylinders — 
recommendations (first revision) 

IS 9282 : 2021 Wire ropes and strands for suspension bridges 

IS 9833 :2018 List of colourants for use in plastics in contact with foodstuffs and pharmaceuticals 


(second revision) 


IS 9936 : 1992 Manila, nylon, polyester and polypropylene ropes for marine purpose — guide on 
equivalence (first revision) 


IS 10000 (Part 1 to 13) : Methods of tests for internal combustion engines 


1980 

IS 10143 : 1995 Pneumatic fluid power — single rod cylinders, 1 000 kpa (10 bar) series with 
detachable mountings, bores from 32 mm to 320 mm — mounting dimensions 
(first revision) 

IS 11277 : 2004 Hydraulic fluid power-gas-loaded accumulators with separator - ranges of pressures 
and volumes and characteristic quantities (first revision) 

IS 11066 :2014 Fibre ropes — polyester 3 — ,4 — ,8 — and 12 — strand ropes (second revision) 

IS 12723 : 2020 Pneumatic fluid power — single rod cylinders, 1 000 kpa (10 bar) series, bores from 
8 mm to 25 mm — basic and mounting dimensions (first revision) 

IS 12725 :2021 Pneumatic fluid power — general rules and safety requirements for systems and 
their components (second revision) 

IS 12738 : 1995 Pneumatic fluid power 7 single rod cylinders, 1 000 kpa (ib 10 bar) series, with 
integral mountings, bores from 32 mm to 250 mm — mounting dimensions (first 
revision) 

IS 13086 : 2021 Pneumatic fluid power — cylinders, 1 000 kpa (10 bar) series — mounting 
dimensions of rod — end spherical eyes (second revision) 

IS 13087 : 2021 Pneumatic fluid power — cylinders, 1 000 kpa (10 bar) series — mounting 


52 


IS No. 


IS 13980 : 1995 


IS 14534 : 2016 


IS 15475 (Part 1) : 2022 


ІЅЛЕС 61558-1 : 1997 


IS 62305 (Part 1) : 2010 


ІЅЛЕС 62305(Part 2) 
2010 


ІЅЛЕС 62305(Part 3) 
2010 


ІЅЛЕС 62305(Part 4) 
2010 


ISO 683 (Part 1) : 2016 


IS 15475 (Part 3) : 2022 


Title 


dimensions of rod — end clevises (second revision) 
Acceptance tests on industrial boilers - code of practice 


Plastics — guidelines for the recovery and recycling of plastics waste (first 
revision) 


Code of recommended practice for amusement rides safety 
information 


: part 1 general 


Safety of power transformers, power supply units and similar 
requirements and tests 


: part 1 general 


Protection against lightning : part 1 general principles 


Protection against lightning : part 2 risk management 


Protection against lightning : part 3 physical damage to structures and life hazard 


Protection against lightning : 
stuctures 


part 4 electrical and electronic systems within 


Heat-treatable steels, alloy steels and free-cutting steels — Part 1 : Non-alloy steels 
for quenching and tempering 


53 


IS 15475 (Part 3) : 2022 


ANNEX B 
(Clause 10.5.1, 10.5.3, 10.5.6, 10.12.1) 


LIST OF INDIAN STANDARDS ON WELDING 


The following listed standards, contain provisions which, through their reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision and parties to agreements based on this standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards: 


IS No. 


IS814 : 2004 


IS816 : 1969 


IS817 (Part 1) 


1992 


IS817 (Part 2) 


1996 

IS818 : 1968 
IS819 : 1957 
15822 : 1970 
IS1278 : 1972 
151395 : 1982 
154972 : 1968 
155856 : 2017 
155897 : 1985 
155898 : 1970 
156419 : 1996 
156560 : 2017 


IS 15977 : 2013 


Title 


Covered electrodes for manual metal arc welding of carbon and carbon manganese steel 
— specification (sixth revision) 


Code of practice for use of metal arc welding for general construction in mild steel (first 
revision) 


Training of welders — code of practice : part 1 manual arc welding (second revision) 
Training of welders — code of practice : part 2 oxyfuel welding (second revision) 

Code of practice for safety and health requirements in electric and gas welding and cutting 
operations (first revision) 

Code of practice for resistance spot welding for light assemblies in mild steel 

Code of procedure for inspection of welds 


Specification for filler rods and wires for gas welding (second revision) 


Specification for low and medium alloy steel covered electrodes for manual metal arc 
welding (third revision) 


Specification for resistance spot — welding electrodes 


Welding consumables — wire electrodes, strip electrodes, wires, and rods for arc welding 
of stainless and heat resisting steels — classification (second revision) 


Specification for aluminium and aluminium alloy welding rods and wires and magnesium 
alloy welding rods (first revision) 


Specification for copper and copper alloy bare solid welding rods and electrodes 


Welding rods and bare electrodes for gas shielded arc welding of structural steel (first 
revision) 


Welding consumables — wire electrodes, wires, rods and deposits for gas shielded arc 
welding of creep — resisting steels — classification (second revision) 


Classification and acceptance tests for bare solid wire electrodes and wire flux 
combination for submerged arc welding of structural steel — specification 


54 


IS 15475 (Part 3) : 2022 


ANNEX C 
(Clause 10.12.1, 10.13.1) 


LIST OF INDIAN STANDARDS ON ELECTRICAL SYSTEM 


The following listed standards, contain provisions which, through their reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision and parties to agreements based on this standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards: 


IS No./SP 
SP 31: 1986 
IS 900 : 2019 


IS 2551 : 1982 


IS 2705 (Part 1) : 1992 


IS 3043 : 2018 


IS 5216(Part 1) : 1982 


IS 5216(Part 2) : 1982 


IS 5578 : 1984 


IS 7098 (Part 1) : 1988 


IS 7098 (Part 2) : 2011 


IS 7098 (Part 3) : 1993 


IS 7689 : 1989 


IS 8061 : 1976 


IS 8884 : 1978 


IS 9409 : 1980 


IS 10028 (Part 1) : 1985 


IS 10028 (Part 2) : 1981 


Title 
Treatment for electric shock 


Code of practice for storage, installation and maintenance of induction motors 
(third revision) 


Danger notice plates (first revision) 


Current transformers — specification : part 1 general requirements (second 
revision) 


Code of practice for earthing (second revision) 


Recommendations on safety procedures and practices in electrical work : part 1 
general (first revision) 


Recommendations on safety procedures and practices in electrical work : part 2 
life saving techniques 


guide for marking of insulated conductors (first revision) 


Specification for cross — linked polyethylene insulated PVC sheathed cables : 
Part 1 for working voltages up to and including 1100 volts (first revision) 


Cross — linked polyethylene insulated thermoplastic sheathed cables — 
Specification : Part 2 for working voltages from 3.3 kV up to and including 33 kV 
(second revision) 

Cross — Linked polyethylene insulated thermoplastic sheathed cables — 
Specification : Part 3 for working voltages from 66 kV up to and including 220 
kV 


Guide for the control of undesirable static electricity (first revision) 


Code of practice for design, installation and maintenance of service lines upto and 
including 650V 


Code of practice for the installation of electric bells and call system 


Classification of electrical and electronic equipment with regard to 


protection against electric shock 


Code of practice for selection, installation, and maintenance of transformers : part 
1 selection 


Code of practice for selection, installation, and maintenance of transformers : Part 
2 installation 


55 


IS 15475 (Part 3) : 2022 


IS No./SP 


IS 10028 (Part 3) : 1981 


IS 11353 : 1985 
IS 12065 : 1987 


IS 12615 : 2018 


ТЕС 60099 (part 4) : 2014 


IS 3070 (part 3) : 1993 


IS 13772 : 2021 


IS 13773 : 2018 
IS 13774 : 2021 


IS 13961 (Part 1) : 2018 


IS 13961 (Part 2) : 2017 


IS 1851 : 1997 
IS 2635 : 1997 
IS 2641 : 1989 
IS 4804 (Part 1) : 1968 


IS 7931(Part 1) : 1975 


IS 7931 (Part 2) : 1975 


IS 7931 (Part 3) : 1975 


Title 


Code of practice for selection, installation, and maintenance of transformers : Part 
3 maintenance 


Guide for uniform system of marking and identification of conductors and 
apparatus terminals 


Permissible limits of noise level for rotating electrical machines 


Line operated three phase AC motors (IE code) "efficiency classes and 
performance specification" (third revision) 


Lightning Arrestor 


Surge arresters — Part 4 : Metal — oxide surge arresters without gaps for A.C. 
systems 


Lightning arresters for alternating current systems, part 3 : metal oxide lightning 
arresters without gaps 


Tools and Equipment for Live Working 


Live working hand tools for use up to 1 000 V AC and 1 500 V DC (second 
revision) 


Live working - electrical insulating sleeves (first revision) 


Live working gloves of insulating material (second revision) 


Live working — insulating sticks and attachable devices : part-1 : insulating 
sticks 
Live working — insulating sticks and attachable devices : part-2 attachable 


devices (first revision) 

Electrical Welding Equipment 
Single operator type arc welding transformers — specification 
DC electric welding generators — specification (third revision) 
Electric welding accessories — specification (first revision) 
Resistance welding equipment : Part 1 single — phase transformers 
Specification for automatic and semi — automatic welding equipment with self 
— adjusting arcs (MIG/MAG processes) : part 1 DC welding generator power 
source 
specification for automatic and semi — automatic welding equipment with self — 
adjusting arcs (MIG/MAG processes) : part 2 transformer — rectifier power 
source 
Specification for automatic and semi — automatic welding equipment with self 


— adjusting arcs (MIG/MAG processes) : part 3 welding gun and ancillary 
equipment 


56 


IS 15475 (Part 3) : 2022 


IS No./SP Title 


IS 8804 : 1993 Plugs, sockets, terminal arrangements and welding cable connectors for manual 
welding equipment - specification (first revision) 


IS 9604 : 1994 Tungsten — inertgas (TIG) welding equipment — specification (first revision) 


IS 9857 : 1990 Welding cables — specification (first revision) 


57 


IS 15475 (Part 3) : 2022 


ANNEX D 
(Clause 10.13.1) 


LIST OF INDIAN STANDARDS ON DIESEL ENGINE, COUPLING, BEARING, PNEUMATIC 
TYRES, WIRE ROPES, FLUID POWER SYSTEMS AND HYDRAULIC COMPONENTS 


The following listed standards, contain provisions which, through their reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision and parties to agreements based on this standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards: 


IS No. 


152693 : 1989 


IS 3090 : 1965 


IS 3823 : 2014 


IS 6455 : 2020 


IS 8383 : 2017 


IS 9269 : 2019 


1510000 (Part 1 to 13) : 


1980 


IS10001 : 1981 


IS 10069 : 2017 


IS 10187 : 2013 


IS 10481 : 2020 


IS 10891 (Part 


2001 


IS 10891 (Part 
2018 


IS 11003 (Part 
2017 


IS 11003 (Part 
2020 


1511559: 1995 


IS 11560 : 1995 


D 


2) 


D 


2) 


Title 
Power transmission bush type flexible coupling (second revision) 
Code of practice for installation and maintenance of rolling bearings 
Rolling bearings — Static load ratings (third revision) 
Single row deep groove ball bearings — specification (first revision) 


Hydraulic fluid power — filter elements — verification of fabrication integrity and 
determination of the first bubble point (second revision) 


Hydraulic fluid power-filters-evaluation of differential pressure versus flow 


characteristics (second revision) 

Methods of tests for internal combustion engines 

Performance requirements for constant speed compression ignition (diesel) engines 
for general purposes (up to 20 kW) 

Hydraulic fluid power-positive displacement pumps, motors and integral 
transmission-methods of testing and presenting basic steady state performance 


(second revision) 


Hydraulic fluid power — four — port directional control valves — mounting 
surfaces (second revision) 


Hydraulic fluid power — general rules and safety requirements for systems and their 
components (second revision) 


Steel wire ropes for aerial ropeways — specification : part 1 haulage ropes (first 
revision) 


Specification for steel wire ropes for aerial ropeways : part 2 track ropes 
Hydraulic fluid power — mounting dimensions for single rod cylinders, 16 MPa (160 
Bar) series : part 1 medium series (second revision) 


Hydraulic fluid power — mounting dimensions for single rod cylinders, 16 MPa (160 
Bar) series part 2 compact series (second revision) 


Hydraulic fluid power — cylinders — rod end spherical eyes — mounting 
dimensions (first revision) 


Hydraulic fluid power — cylinders — rod end plain eyes — mounting dimensions 


58 


IS No. 


IS12102 : 


1512593: 


1513053: 


1513085: 


IS 13103: 


IS 13251 


IS 13405: 


IS 13569: 


1513570: 


IS 13656: 


IS 14148: 


IS 14150: 


IS 14601 : 


IS 14604 : 


IS15627 : 


1515633: 


1515636: 


1987 


2000 


1991 


1991 


2005 


: 2019 


2018 


1993 


2000 


2019 


2021 


2005 


1998 


1998 


2005 


2005 


2012 


IS 15475 (Part 3): 2022 


Title 


(first revision) 
Specification for tapered roller bearings 


Hydraulic fluid power — single rod cylinder 16 MPa (160 Bar) compact series — 
tolerances (first revision) 


Hydraulic fluid power system commissioning and maintenance of complete hydraulic 
systems recommendations 


Hydraulic fluid power — single rod cylinders, 160 bar (16 MPa) medium series — 
port dimensions 


Hydraulic fluid power — single rod cylinders, 16 MPa (160 Bar) compact series — 
Port dimensions (first revision) 


Hydraulic fluid power — mounting dimensions for accessories for single rod 
cylinders, 16 MPa (160 Bar) medium and 25 MPa (250 Bar) series (first revision) 


Rolling bearings — cylindrical roller bearings, separate thrust collars — boundary 
dimensions (second revision) 


Hydraulic fluid power — fluid sample containers — qualifying and controlling 
cleaning methods 


Hydraulic fluid power — particulate contamination analysis — extraction of fluid 
samples from lines of an operating system (first revision) 


Internal combustion engine crankcase oils for automotive application (diesel and 
gasoline) — specification (third revision) 


Hydraulic fluid power — pressure — reducing valves, sequence valves, unloading 
valves, throttle valves and check valves — mounting surfaces ( second revision ) 


Hydraulic fluid power — pressure relief valves — mounting surfaces (first revision) 
Method for presenting performance data for hydraulic pumps 


Proforma for purchase specification for positive displacement pumps and motors 
used in oil hydraulic systems 


Automotive vehicles — pneumatic tyres — two and three — wheeled motor vehicles 
— specification 


Automotive vehicles — pneumatic tyres for passenger car vehicles diagonal and 
radial ply — specification 


Automotive vehicles — pneumatic tyres for commercial vehicles — diagonal and 
radial ply — specification (first revision) 


59 


IS 15475 (Part 3) : 2022 


ANNEX E 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Continuous Bulk Conveying, Elevating, Hoisting Aerial Ropeways and Related Equipment Sectional 
Committee, MED 06 


Organization 


RITES Limited, Gurugram 


CSIR — Central Institute for Mining and Fuel 
Research, Dhanbad 


Conveyor and Ropeway Services Private Limited, 
Kolkata 


Desein Private Limited, New Delhi 


Directorate General Factory Advice Service and 
Labour Institutes, Mumbai 


Directorate General of Mines Safety, Dhanba 


Durgapur Steel Plant, Sail Durgapur 


Elecon Engineering Company Limited, Gujarat 


Indian Association of Amusement Parks and 
Industries, Mumbai 


Lepton Projects Private Limited, Ghaziabad 


MECON Limited, Ranchi 


Mcnally Bharat Engineering Company Limited, 
Kolkata 


Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways, New 
Delhi 


NTPC Limited, New Delhi 


National Mineral Development Corporation, 
Hyderabad 


Phoenix Conveyor Belt India Private Limited, 
Kolkata 


Polo Amusement Park Lmited, Gurugram 


Representative(s) 


SHRI SANDEEP MEHRA (Chairman) 


SHRI DEBASHISH BASAK 
SHRI GIRENDRA M. PRASAD (Alternate) 


SHRI S. SHEKHAR CHKRAVARTY 
SHRIKAMAL KUMAR BOSE (Alternate) 


SHRIH. K. GUPTA 
SHRI ARVINDER SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI G. P. NUALINGAPPA 
SHRIH M BHANDARI (Alternate) 


SHRI D. B. NAYAK 
SHRI VIJAY Y ADAORAO BARAPATRE (Alternate) 


SHRISANJAY KUMAR 
SHRI DEEPAK BISWAL (Alternate) 


SHRIC. S. SHAH 
SHRI K.S. KODIA (Alternate) 


SHRI PRADEEP SHARMA 
SHRI ANIL PADWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJAY KUMAR 
SHRI PIYUSH RATHI (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJOY BHATTACHAR 
SHRI AMIT PAL (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJOY MAITI 
SHRI SANDIPAN DAW (Alternate) 


SHRI ANIL PRUTHI 
SHRI RAMJI SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI O. P. KALIA 


SHRI ALOK KUMAR MEHTA 
SHRI S. SURENDER (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJEEV SHARMA 
SHRI ASOKE KUM. GHOSH (Alternate) 


SHRI SANTOSH CHAWLA 


60 


Organization 


Project and Development India Limited, Noida 


RITES Limited, Gurugram 


Ropeway and Resorts Private Limited, Kolkata 


TRF Limited (A Tata Enterprise), Jamshedpur 
Tata Consulting Engineers Limited, Navi 
Mumbai 


Usha Breco Limited, Ghaziabad 


Usha Martin Limited, Ranchi 


In personal capacity (145/4A, South Sinthi Road, 
Kolkata — 700050) 


In personal capacity (BH/VI/SF, VIP Floors 
Sector 61, DPS Faridabad, Haryana - 121007) 


In personal capacity (F-7B DDA MIG Flats, Hari 
Nagar, New Delhi - 110006) 


In personal capacity (20 D, Dhakuria Station 
Road, Kolkata - 700031) 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 15475 (Part 3) : 2022 


Representative(s) 


SHRI NARENDRA SINGH 


SHRI DINESH KUMAR 


SHRI А. К. KINRA 


SHRIN. К. SINGH 
SHRI SUBHASH SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI SUJOY MATTI 
SHRI SHIREESH S. SWAMI (Alternate) 


SHRI MANOJ PANWAR 
SHRI SANJEEV DHARIWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI SUBRATA DUTTA 
SHRI SANDEEP JAISWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI C. K. KARMAKAR 


SHRI ASHUTOSH BHADRA 


SHRI S.C. GANDHI 


SHRI RANJAN MUKHERJEE 


SHRI RAJNEESH KHOSLA, SCIENTIST ‘E’ AND HEAD (MED) 


[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-Officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI AMAN DHANAWAT 
Scientist ‘B’ (MED), BIS 


61 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 06 (18481). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : 601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8% Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri | 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


