Waa HTA IS 1956 (Part 2) : 2018 
Indian Standard 


ae Wa gama at unà 
saraet 
qm 2 Sed i aior 
( ZAT gaio ) 


Glossary of Terms Relating to 
iron and Steel 
Part 2 Steel Making 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 01.040.77; 77.140.01 


© BIS 2018 


Rds AM SRT 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
AM TA, 9 Fee WAL Art, as feeeit-110002 
w MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


November 2018 Price Group 5 


Wrought Steel Products Sectional Committee, MTD 04 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 2) (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Wrought Steel Products Sectional Committee had been approved by the Metallurgical Engineering 
Division Council. 


This standard was published in 1962 and subsequently revised in 1976. While reviewing this standard, in the light 
of experience gained during these years, the Committee decided to revise it to bring in line with the present 
practices being followed by the Indian industry and corresponding International standards on terminology. 


In this revision the following terms have been added: 


AOD, Castrip, Continuous Casting, Desiliconization, ESR, Ladle, Ladle Metallurgy, Ladle Metallurgy Furnace 
(LMF), Lance, Periclase, Quartz, Reduction ratio, Scale, Sequence Casting, Sponge Iron, Tap-to-Tap Time, Thin 
Slab Casting, Torpedo Ladles, Tuyeres, Vacuum Degassing, Vacuum Oxygen Decarburization (VOD), VAR, 
Zirconia. 


A separate Section 3 covering the classifications of steel has also been added in this revision 
This standard is published in seven parts. The other parts in the series are: 

Part 1 General metallurgy, heat treatment and testing 

Part3 Long products (including bars, rods, sections and wires) 

Part4 Flat products 

Part6 Forging (including drop forging) 

Part7 Wrought iron 

Part8 Steel tubes and pipes 


In formulating this standard assistance has been derived from the following publications: 


ISO 6929 Steel products — Definitions and classifications 
BS EN 10079 Definitions of steel products 


IS 1956 (Part 2) : 2018 


Indian Standard 


GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO IRON AND STEEL 
PART 2 STEEL MAKING 


(Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard (Part 2) covers definitions of the terms 
commonly used in the field of steel making and 
classification of steel. 


2 REFERENCE 


The standards listed below contain provisions, which 
through reference in this text constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the edition 
indicated was valid. All standards are subject to revision 
and parties to agreement based on this standard are 
encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the 
most recent editions of the standard indicated below: 


IS No. Title 
7598 : 1990 Classification of steels 


3 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 


3.1 Acid Bottom — Furnace bottom (that is, hearth) 
of a melting furnace made of acid refractory such as 
silica bricks. 


3.2 Acid Process — A steel-making process in which 
steel is refined under an acid slag in an acid refractory 
lined furnace or converter. 


3.3 Acid Refractory — A refractory material, acidic 
in chemical composition and containing high proportion 
of silica, that is, silica sand and ganister. 


3.4 Acid Steel — Steel made by acid process. 


3.5 After Blow — The final stage of refining in the 
basic Bessemer process in which phosphorus is 
eliminated. 


3.6 Alloying Element — An element (a metal or non- 
metal) added deliberately to another metal to modify 
its mechanical and or physical properties. 


3.7 Alumina — Aluminium oxide (A1,0,), a common 
constituent of many refractory materials used in steel 
making. 


3.8 AOD (Argon-Oxygen Decarburization) — A 
secondary steelmaking process in which oxygen and 
argon are blown into the molten steel to enable carbon 
to be removed without oxidizing chromium. It is the 
main method of refining stainless steel (see also VOD). 


3.9 Arc Process — See ‘Electric Arc Process’. 


3.10 Basal Crack — A crack in the ingot base caused 
by restriction to free contraction during solidification. 


3.11 Basic Oxygen Furnace (BOF) — Basic oxygen 
furnace or furnaces is another name, used generally in 
USA, for LD converters. 


3.12 Basic Oxygen Process — Basic Oxygen Process 
is another name generally used for the LD process and 
sometimes used to denote basic oxygen processes which 
include the whole family of steel-making processes 
carried out in basic lined furnaces where oxygen is used 
for removing the impurities. 


3.13 Basic Process — A steel-making process in which 
steel is refined under a basic slag in a basic refractory 
lined furnace or converter. 


3.14 Basic Refractory — A refractory material basic 
in chemical composition, and containing high amounts 
of oxides such as lime and magnesia, for example, 
calcined dolomite or magnesite. 


3.15 Basic Steel — Steel made by the basic process. 


3.16 Bath Sample (Spoon Sample) — A sample taken 
from molten steel in the furnace, for estimation and 
analysis of constituents. 


3.17 Bessemer Process — A steel-making process in 
which pig iron is refined in an acid refractory lined 
converter by blowing air, or mixture of air, carbon 
dioxide and oxygen or steam through the molten metal. 
The basic process is known as Thomas process (see 
also ‘Thomas Process’). 


3.18 Bessemer Steel — Steel made by the Bessemer 
process. 


3.19 Bleeding — Escape of liquid steel through the 
bursting of the shell of a partly solidified ingot due to 
build up of pressure inside the solidifying mass, or 
escape of liquid from the core of an ingot, withdrawn 
from the mould before it has solidified sufficiently. 


3.20 Blow — In a Bessemer or other converter, one 
complete cycle of operations. 


NOTE — In Bessemer process, a product of a single charge, 
that is a cast, is also known as a blow. 


3.21 Blow Hole (Gas Cavity) — Cavities in solid steel 
formed by entrapped gas bubbles during solidification. 


IS 1956 (Part 2) : 2018 


3.22 Blown Ingot — An ingot with pronounced blow 
holes. 


3.23 Blown Metal — Liquid pig iron which has been 
subjected to blowing in the converter, as a result of 
which the iron is refined to the degree depending on 
requirement. Blown metal is made into steel by addition 
of elements as required. 


3.24 Boil — A particular stage of open-hearth steel- 
making or puddling of wrought iron corresponding to 
the evolution of carbon monoxide gas, as a result of 
which the molten steel bath appears like a boiling liquid. 


3.25 Bottom Casting (Trumpet Casting, Uphill 
Casting) — Simultaneous casting of a number of ingots 
by pouring the metal into a central refractory-lined tube 
or trumpet, whence it flows through refractory runners 
into the bottom of the moulds. 


3.26 Bottom Fash (Bottom Flash, Bottom Fin) — A 
layer of metal in the space between the base of the 
mould and the bottom plate which is attached to the 
ingot. Similarly a layer of metal may be formed at the 
top, in the space between the mould and the refractory 
lined hot top, the layer of metal formed being called 
top flash. 


3.27 Bottom Fin — See ‘Bottom Fash’. 
3.28 Bottom Flash — See ‘Bottom Fash’. 


3.29 Bottom Plate (Bottom Stool) — A cast iron plate 
of suitable size, on which the bottom of the mould 
(which is open at both ends) sits. This plate may be 
recessed or refractory lined. 


3.30 Bottom Shell — See ‘Bottom Splash’. 


3.31 Bottom Splash (Bottom Shell) — The splash of 
metal solidifying on the bottom portion of a mould, 
and later engulfed in the rising column of liquid steel, 
and arises from the impact of the liquid steel on the 
bottom plate in initial stages of teeming. 


3.32 Bottom Stool — See ‘Bottom Plate’. 


3.33 Cast (Heat or Melt) — Usually the product of a 
single furnace charge. Sometimes the contents of a 
furnace are tapped into two or more ladles when the 
product of each ladle may be called a separate cast. 


NOTE — In the Bessemer process, a cast is also known as a 
blow. 


3.34 Carbon Steel — An unalloyed steel (see IS 7598). 


3.35 Capped Steel — It is a rimming steel in which 
the depth of the rim is controlled by arresting the 
rimming action, at the appropriate time. The rimming 
action can be arrested mechanically by putting a heavy 
steel plate on the top of the surface of the ingot 
(mechanical capping ), or can be stopped by killing by 


the addition of deoxidizers on the ingot top (chemical 
capping). The rimming action can also be stopped by 
spraying water on the top of the ingot (see also 3.138). 


3.36 Casting — Pouring or teeming molten metal into 
moulds. This also refers to metal objects so produced 
(see also ‘Teeming’). 


3.37 Casting Ladle — A refractory lined receptacle in 
which liquid steel is received from the furnace for 
teeming purpose. 


3.38 Cast Steel — The term is used for steel castings. 


3.39 Casting Shrinkage — Contraction of a casting 
during solidification and subsequent cooling to ambient 
temperature. 


3.40 Castrip — Process to directly cast molten steel 
into a final shape and thickness without additional hot 
or cold rolling. This reduces capital investment, energy, 
and environmental cost. 


3.41 Cauliflower Top — Ingot top, characterized by 
numerous bulges (like a cauliflower) found in semi- 
killed/rimming steel ingots. This is caused by the 
bleeding of metal, when it has reached a mushy stage. 


3.42 Cementation — Impregnation of high grade 
wrought iron with carbon for producing blister bar, by 
heating in contact with charcoal. Cemented bar thus 
produced is also called blister bar as the surface is 
covered with blisters. These bars were once used for 
making crucible steel. 


3.43 Charge — The act of loading material into a 
vessel. For example, iron ore, coke, and limestone are 
charged into a Blast Furnace a Basic Oxygen Furnace 
is charged with scrap and hot metal. It is also used for 
materials charged in a furnace for producing steel. 


3.44 Charger — See ‘Charging Machine’. 
3.45 Charging basket — See ‘Charging Box’. 


3.46 Charging Box (Charging basket) — Cast or 
fabricated steel or cast iron box used for charging 
material in steel-making furnace. Charging basket is 
fabricated with a false bottom steel container for 
charging scrap in electric furnace. 


3.47 Charging Machine (Charger) — A ground or 
overhead travelling machine used for charging scrap 
in the steel-making furnace such as open hearth. 


3.48 Chromite — A neutral refractory which is a double 
oxide of chromium and iron. The term is also used for 
a mineral containing chromic oxide and iron oxide. 


3.49 Cinder Pot — See ‘Slag Pot’. 


3.50 Clink — A rupture (internal or external) in ingot, 
bloom, billets, slabs, etc, caused by thermal stresses. 


3.51 CLU Process — Creusot Loire (France) and 
Uddelholm (Sweden) have developed a process of 
stainless steel manufacture whereby oxygen is 
introduced through the converter bottom within a 
peripheral shield of a coolant like steam, carbon 
dioxide, etc. 


3.52 Cold Metal Process — A process of steel-making 
using wholly cold metal charge. 


3.53 Cold Shut (Teeming Arrest) — An ingot or 
casting defect resulting from interrupted flow or metal 
during pouring, causing a discontinuity in the skin. 


3.54 Continuous Casting — A process in which molten 
steel is poured into a water-cooled copper mould for 
gradual solidification as it is drawn down the caster, 
turning into a solid steel billet, bloom, or slab. 
Compared to ingot casting, continuous casting has 
evolved as the preferred method for making semi- 
finished steel because of much better yield, productivity 
and cost performance. 


3.55 Contraction Cavity — A cavity formed in an 
ingot as a result of contraction during solidification. 
Also referred to as shrinkage cavity or pipe usually 
located in the hot-top region of killed steel (see also 
‘Pipe’). 

3.56 Converter — The pear shaped refractory lined 
(acid or basic) vessel in which the pneumatic steel- 
making processes are carried out. The vessel is mounted 
suitably for tilting for introducing the liquid metal and 
taking out the blown metal. The air, oxygen, carbon 
dioxide, steam or mixture of these, is blown through a 
detachable bottom, side or top. 


3.57 Crack — A discontinuity in a material (see ‘Basal 
Crack’ and ‘Fin Crack’). 


3.58 Crazing (Surface Crazing) — Markings on ingot 
or ingot mould surface in the form of a network, in a 
mosaic pattern giving the appearance of crocodile skin. 


3.59 Crucible Process — A steel-making process in 
which the charge, generally small (roughly 20 to 25 kg), 
is melted in a crucible for the production of very high 
quality steel out of contact with fuel. The product, 
known as crucible steel, is used for making tool steels. 


3.60 Crucible Steel — Steel made by the crucible 
process. 


3.61 Dead Steel — Steel which is quiet in the mould 
after completion of teeming. This steel is fully 
deoxidized. 


3.62 Deoxidation — Reduction of oxygen content of 
the finished liquid steel by adding deoxidizers in molten 
steel bath, in ladles or in the mould. 


3.63 Deoxidizers — Substance having a high affinity 


IS 1956 (Part 2) : 2018 


for oxygen used for finishing steel (see also ‘Ferro- 
alloy’). 


3.64 Dephosphorisation — The process of reduction 
of phosphorus to the desired extent in steel-making 
processes. 


3.65 Deseaming (Scarfing) — The removal of surface 
defects from ingots or semi-finished products by an 
oxy-gas flame. 


3.66 Desiliconization — Operation that injects a 
chemical mixture into a ladle full of hot metal to remove 
silicon prior to its charging into the basic oxygen 
furnace. 


3.67 Desulphurization — The process of reduction 
of sulphur to the desired extent in steel-making 
processes. 


3.68 Direct Casting (Top Pouring) — Direct pouring 
of ingots or castings from ladle, that is, without using 
any refractory reservoir or tundish, in between. 


3.69 Discard — Those portions corresponding to the 
top and bottom of the ingot which are removed to ensure 
that the remainder of the material is of satisfactory 
quality. Also defective material produced in rolling or 
forging, to be cut from one or both ends of the semi- 
finished or finished product. 


3.70 Dolomite — Dolomite is a naturally occurring 
rock forming mineral with chemical composition of 
CaMg(CO,),. It is used in steelmaking as a slag 
conditioner, flux and also as a refractory material. 


3.71 Double Skin (Curtaining) — A secondary layer 
of steel on ingot surface, arising from overflow of 
molten metal from interior to the space between the 
solidified ingot face and mould wall. It is also formed 
by splashing. 


3.72 Dozzle — A hollow refractory brick preheated to 
high temperature and used for providing a feeder head 
for small ingots. 


3.73 Dressing — Preparation of mould surfaces to 
ensure maximum freedom from surface defects. Also 
refers to cleaning and/or operations such as chipping, 
deseaming, etc. 


3.74 Duplex Process — Steel-making by a combination 
of two processes, such as Bessemer and open hearth 
processes or open hearth and electric processes, the 
popular combination being one using acid Bessemer 
converter and basic open hearth furnace. 


3.75 Electric Arc Process — A process in which heat 
is generated by striking an arc between the electrodes 
(usually graphite) or between electrode and the metal 
for melting and refining of steel. When the arc is 
between the electrodes, the process is termed as the 


IS 1956 (Part 2) : 2018 


indirect arc process and when it is between the metal 
and the electrode, it is termed as the direct arc process. 


3.76 Electric Process — A process of steel-making 
wherein the source of fuel is electrical energy, that is, 
heat from electric arc or induced eddy currents and the 
process is termed accordingly as electric arc process 
or induction process. 


3.77 Electric Steel — Steel made by electric process. 


3.78 ESR — Electro-Slag Remelting (Also known as 
EFR, electro-flux remelting) method of producing 
refined ingots with fewer inclusions and reduced 
segregation. The process consists of melting a cast or 
wrought electrode through a molten slag and solidifying 
in a water cooled copper mould. An electrical current 
is passed through the electrode and the electrical 
resistance of the slag which provides the heat to melt 
the electrode. The resultant ESR ingot is then 
conventionally hot forged or rolled. 


3.79 Faggot — See ‘Single Shear Steel’. 


3.80 Fash ( Barr Flash, Top Fash, Top Flash ) — 
Sharp and ragged edges left after shearing or sawing. 


3.81 Feeder Head (Hot Top Sink Head) — A 
refractory lined receptacle placed on the mould top or 
built into the ingot mould to reduce the shrinkage cavity 
(pipe) by keeping the metal in liquid state longer at the 
top. This arrangement confines the shrinkage cavity to 
the feeder head. 


3.82 Ferro-alloy — An alloy of iron and another 
element or elements, such as, iron and silicon 
(ferrosilicon), iron and manganese (ferromanganese), 
iron and chromium (ferrochromium), iron, silicon and 
manganese (silicon manganese), etc, used for addition 
to liquid steel for the purpose of deoxidation, or 
introducing such alloying elements in steel or both. 


3.83 Fettling — Repairing the furnace banks and 
bottom immediately after a heat is tapped. 


3.84 Fin (Flash) — Solidified metallic strip projecting 
out at right angles from ingot surface and is caused by 
seepage of liquid metal through a longitudinal crack in 
the mould, or in the mould joint in case of split mould. 


3.85 Fin Crack (Longitudinal Crack) — Crack in 
the ingot associated with the formation of fin and the 
resulting obstruction during contraction while cooling. 


3.86 Finishings — Finishing additions of ferro-alloys, 
deoxidizers and/or carburizers (for example, coke) 
which are made to liquid steel, usually in ladle and at 
times partly in the furnace, so as to bring the liquid 
steel to the desired specification. 


3.87 Fireclay — A refractory material, essentially 
hydrated aluminium silicate in composition, having a 


high fusion point used in the manufacture of refractory 
bricks or mortar. 


3.88 Flakes — See ‘Hair Line Cracks’. 
3.89 Flash See ‘Fin’. 


3.90 Flush Slag — The slag which is deliberately taken 
out or comes out due to controlled boil from any steel- 
making furnace. 


3.91 Fluorspar — Naturally occurring calcium 
fluoride (CaF,) used as a flux in basic steel making. 


3.92 Flux — Materials, such as lime, limestone, 
fluorspar, etc, added to form a fusible slag and to adjust 
its fluidity. 


3.93 Ganister — A siliceous refractory material used 
in acid furnace. 


3.94 Gas Cavity — See ‘Blow Hole’. 


3.95 Grain Size Control — A control, exercised during 
steel making, deoxidation and processing for obtaining 
steel with the desired grain size. 


3.96 Graphite — The mineral graphite is one of the 
crystalline allotropes of carbon. It is used as a source 
of carbon, as electricity conducting electrode and as 
an ingredient in refractory material. 


3.97 Haematite (Hematite) — Iron oxide, having a 
composition Fe,O, occurring in nature associated with 
varying amounts of impurities. 


3.98 Hair Line Cracks (Flakes) — Internal ruptures 
in steel caused by stresses which probably arise from 
the combination of several factors such as volume 
changes due to transformation, brittleness due to the 
presence of hydrogen and the arrangement of the 
microstructure resulting from hot-working. The size of 
such ruptures may vary considerably, but they are 
usually comparatively short in length when viewed on 
a surface cut at right angles to the plane of defect and 
are generally so fine that they cannot be discerned other 
than after etching or by magnetic crack detection. When 
hairline cracks are exposed by fracturing, they appear 
as bright crystalline areas of almost circular form, 
sometimes known as snowflakes. 


3.99 Hanger Crack — A transverse ingot crack caused 
by obstruction to normal contraction of an ingot during 
cooling in mould and is associated with incorrect feeder 
head setting. Also occurs from overfilling. 


3.100 Heat — See ‘Cast’. 


3.101 Hot Metal Process — A steel-making process 
using molten metal from blast furnace mixer or cupola 
as a major portion of the charge. 


3.102 Hot Top Sink Head — See ‘Feeder Head’. 


3.103 Inclusions — Particles of oxides, sulphides, 
silicates, refractories, etc, embedded in the metal. 


3.104 Induction Process — A process in which the 
heating is done by eddy currents generated in the charge 
by the induction coil surrounding the charge. Depending 
upon the frequency used, the process is called low 
frequency, medium frequency and high frequency 
induction melting. 


3.105 Ingot — Castings of suitable shape and size 
intended for subsequent hot-working. 


3.106 Ingot Iron — Very low carbon steel generally 
made in the open hearth in which all the other 
elements are removed to the maximum extent 
possible. Some of the commercial products falling 
under this group have less than 0.1 percent of all 
elements put together. 


3.107 Ingot Mould (Mould) — The container, usually 
made of cast iron, into which molten steel is poured 
and allowed to solidify. 


3.108 Ingot Segregation — See ‘Segregation’. 


3.109 Inverse Segregation (Negative Segregation) — 
See ‘Segregation’. 


3.110 Kaldo Process — A process of steel-making 
where the impurities are oxidized by blowing high 
purity oxygen through an inclined lance (or lances) on 
the surface of high phosphorous molten pig iron held 
in a basic lined converter which is inclined at about 
20° to the horizontal and is rotated at rates up to 
35 rev/min. 


3.111 Ladle — A ‘bucket’ shaped container lined with 
refractory (heat resistant) bricks, used for transporting 
molten iron or steel from process to process in a steel 
plant. 


3.112 Ladle metallurgy — A process step typically 
applied in a ladle furnace for alloying, deoxidation, 
desulphurisation as well as for temperature adjustment 
prior to casting of quality steels. 


3.113 Ladle Metallurgy Furnace/Ladle Furnace 
(LMF/LF) — An intermediate steel processing unit 
that further refines the chemistry and controls the 
temperature of molten steel while it is still in the ladle. 
The ladle metallurgy step comes after the steel is melted 
and refined in the electric arc or basic oxygen furnace, 
but before the steel is sent for casting. 


3.114 Ladle Sample — See ‘Pit Sample’. 


3.115 Lance — A long ceramic lined metallic tube 
through which some gas under high pressure is blown 
from top into the liquid steel in BOF vessel or ladle. 
Lance can also be used to inject some Chemicals in 
powder form to treat the liquid steel. 


IS 1956 (Part 2) : 2018 


3.116 LD-A.C. (Arbed Cockerill) Process — This 
process is an extension of the LD process developed in 
Belgium wherein lime powder is introduced vertically 
into an LD converter along with the oxygen in order to 
make the LD process suitable for refining high 
phosphorus (up to 2 percent) bearing molten pig iron. 


3.117 LD Process (Linz Donawitz Process) — A 
process of steel-making where the impurities are 
oxidized by blowing high purity oxygen through a lance 
at supersonic speeds vertically on the surface of the 
molten pig iron held in a stationary basic lined converter 
which itself is kept vertical. 


3.118 Lime — A product (calcium oxide, CaO) 
obtained by burning limestone (calcium carbonate, 
CaCO,) and is used in basic steel-making practice as a 
flux and to a limited extent as mould wash. 


3.119 Limestone — Naturally occurring calcium 
carbonate (CaCO,) containing various impurities, 
chiefly silica and alumina. 


3.120 Longitudinal Crack — See ‘Fin Crack’. 


3.121 LWS Process — Developed in France by Creusot 
Loire, Wendel Sidelor and Establishment Sprunk, the 
LWS process is identical to the oxygen bottom blown 
(OBM) process, except that the hydrocarbon shielding 
agent used is liquid fuel oil instead of the gaseous 
hydrocarbons used in the OBM process. 


3.122 Magnesia — A product (magnesium oxide, 
MgO) obtained by burning magnesium carbonate 
(MgCO,) and is used where a high grade basic 
refractory is desired. 


3.123 Magnesite — Naturally occurring magnesium 
carbonate (MgCO,) containing small amounts of silica, 
alumina and iron oxide and is used in making banks and 
bottom of a basic furnace as well as during its fettling. 


3.124 Magnetite — The iron oxide, having the 
composition Fe,O, occurring in nature associated with 
varying amounts of impurities. 


3.125 Melt — A stage in the steel-making process when 
all the scrap charged has been melted. This term is also 
synonymous with cast, blow or heat. 


3.126 Mixer — A large refractory lined cylindrical or 
rectangular vessel, provided with tilting arrangement 
and is used for storage of molten iron and in some cases, 
for partly refining the stored metal (active mixer used 
in open hearth shops). Apart from storage, it offers 
considerable latitude towards the intake of ‘off standard’ 
hot iron, and aims in bringing about some uniformity 
in the supply of hot iron for steel making. 


3.127 Mixer Metal — Molten iron from the blast 
furnace which has been stored in a mixer preparatory 
to conversion to steel. 


IS 1956 (Part 2) : 2018 


3.128 Mould — See ‘Ingot Mould’. 


3.129 Mould Dressing — Materials (such as varnish, 
lacquer, tar, etc) applied to the inner faces of moulds 
for better ingot surface. 


3.130 Nailing — Slow heating to visible redness of 
refractory crucibles prior to use of crucibles for the 
melting of steel. 


3.131 Negative Segregation — See ‘Segregation’. 


3.132 Neutral Refractory — A refractory having 
neither strongly acidic nor basic properties, for 
example, Chromite. 


3.133 Nozzle — The refractory line outlet tube, 
generally between 25 to 50 mm in diameter, through 
which molten steel is released from the ladle to fill up 
moulds. 


3.134 Open Hearth Steel — Steel made by the open 
hearth process. 


3.135 Open Hearth Furnace — A furnace having a 
dish shaped hearth in which the bath is heated by 
convection from the flame over the surface of the metal 
and by radiation from the roof. Commonly used for 
steel making. 


3.136 Open Hearth Process — A steel-making process 
using the open hearth furnace. 


3.137 Open Steel — Steel partially killed prior to 
casting. 


3.138 Oxygen Bottom Blown Process (OBM) — 
Oxygen bottom blown ‘Maxhuette’ process developed 
in maxiamillianshuette (South Germany) is a process 
of steel-making whereby high purity oxygen is 
introduced through tuyeres at the bottom of a stationary, 
vertical converter (similar to a Bessemer vessel) which 
is basic refractory lined. In order to prevent tuyere 
burning as a result of the intense heat generated during 
oxidation of the metalloids, the oxygen is blown within 
peripheral shied of a hydrocarbon gas like propane 
butane or natural gas which undergoes endothermal 
cracking at steel-making temperatures. 


3.139 Oxygen Lime Powder Process (OLP) — 
Oxygen lime powder process developed in France is 
identical to the LD—A.C. process developed in Belgium. 


3.140 Plumbago — A material with graphite as the 
primary constituent, used for its refractoriness. 


3.141 Periclase — A natural mineral with the 
composition of MgO and mainly is used as a major 
component of most basic refractory bricks. 


3.142 Pig Iron — The primary product of smelting 
iron ore, containing usually about 3 to 4.5 percent 
carbon along with silicon, manganese, phosphorus and 


sulphur in varying amounts, depending on the quality 
of raw materials used. Pig iron is used in the foundry 
or for conversion into steel. 


3.143 Pigging Back — Introduction of carbon in the 
steel bath by the addition of pig iron. 


3.144 Pipe (Contraction Cavity, Shrinkage 
Cavity) — An axial cavity caused by contraction during 
solidification of an ingot. Also the defects arising from 
the axial cavity in the semi-finished or finished 
products. It may also refer to tubular sections. 


3.145 Pit Sample (Ladle Sample) — The sample taken 
from a cast during teeming into moulds, for determining 
the chemical composition of the cast. 


3.146 Pouring — See ‘Teeming’. 


3.147 Pull — An irregular transverse crack on the face 
of an ingot caused by restriction to free contraction 
during cooling in the mould. 


3.148 Pyrite — Pyrite has its formula of FeS, It is 
used in steelmaking as a source of sulphur. 


3.149 Quality Basic Oxygen Process (Q-BOP) — 
Modified basic oxygen furnace in which the oxygen 
and other gases are blown in from the bottom, rather 
than from the top. While the Q-BOP stirs the metal 
bath more vigorously, allowing for faster processing, 
the design produces essentially the same steel grades 
as the top-blowing basic oxygen furnace. Today’s 
state-of-the-art furnace design combines the previous 
technologies: 60 percent of the oxygen is blown from 
above, with the rest blown through the bottom of the 
vessel. This is known as combined blowing process. 


3.150 Quartz — A natural mineral having the 
composition of SiO, used in steelmaking to adjust slag 
basicity and fluidity. 


3.151 Rabbling — Stirring or raking the molten steel 
bath. 


3.152 Recarburization — The adjustment of carbon 
content of molten steel by addition of carbon containing 
materials. 


3.153 Reduction ratio — Typically refers to extent of 
area compression in the production of hot rolled bar. 
Reduction ratios of 15:1 used to be the norm for quality 
applications (for example engineering steels) some 
years ago, but even this expectation has fallen with the 
advent of modern continuous casting practices. Lower 
reduction ratios are currently acceptable for many high 
quality long product applications 


3.154 Reeking — Ingot mould dressing with soot 
deposition, derived from tar burning. 


3.155 Refining — The removal, by slag or other 


reactions, of undesirable elements and of metallic 
oxides and gases from molten steel. 


3.156 Refining Slag — The finishing slag employed 
for refining the heat. 


3.157 Refractories — Material used in the building 
and lining of furnaces and capable of withstanding high 
temperatures under operating conditions, for example, 
dolomite (double calcium and magnesium carbonate), 
magnesite (magnesium carbonate), silica (SiO,), 
silicates of aluminium, chromic oxides, etc. 


3.158 Rephosphorisation — Reversion of or addition 
of phosphorus into steel under basic steel-making 
practice. 


3.159 Ruhrstahl] Heraeus (RH) Processes — The 
inlet snorkel is equipped with a number of gas injection 
pipes arranged in the lower section in one or two levels 
and equally distributed around the circumference. The 
reaction vessel is designed such that the liquid steel is 
raised through the inlet snorkel and falls back into the 
steel ladle after degassing through the outlet snorkel. 
Top side of the reaction vessel is provided with exhaust, 
facilities for alloy additions along with observation and 
control windows. Extremely low final carbon contents 
of less than 20 ppm can be obtained, as needed for the 
production of automotive sheets. The addition of 
alloying elements during degassing has the advantages 
of achieving higher yields for ferro alloys and high 
accuracy of chemical analysis of steel due to the absence 
of air and the avoidance of metal slag reactions. 


3.160 Rippled Surface (Wash Marking) — Waviness 
on ingot surface arising from series of interruptions 
during casting which cause discontinuities in the rise 
of steel near the mould walls. 


3.161 Rising Steel (Rising Top, Spongy) — A steel, 
the surface of which continues to rise in the mould after 
completion of teeming, as a result of vigorous gas 
evolution during solidification, in view of insufficient 
deoxidation (that is killing). Solidified steel shows 
sponginess on the top and often marked internal blow 
holes. 


3.162 Rotor Process — A process of steel-making in 
which molten iron is refined by oxygen, being 
characterized by the rotation of the containing vessel 
or rotor. 


3.163 Runner — The refractory channel through which 
the molten steel enters the mould. 


3.164 Scab — The irregular shaped patches of metal 
or ingot surface arising from cavities in mould walls or 
caused by loosely adhering layers of metal. 


3.165 Scale — The oxide of iron that forms on the 
surface of steel when it is hot. 


IS 1956 (Part 2) : 2018 


3.166 Scarfing — See ‘Deseaming’. 
3.167 Scrap — Iron or steel used for remelting. 


3.168 Segregation — A non-uniform distribution, 
usually a concentration of certain constituents and/or 
impurities, in a cast product characterized by the mode 
of solidification of alloys. Segregation usually persists 
through frequent hot and cold working. Generally, the 
concentration tends to be higher in the centre than the 
surface. Sometimes, the reverse of this phenomenon 
takes place and is known as inverse segregation. 


3.169 Sequence casting — Process of casting two or 
more heats of the same grade of steel in succession 
through a continuous caster in order to reduce yield 
losses. 


3.170 Shell (Scab, Sliver, Spill) — A relatively thin 
film or tongue of metal imperfectly attached to the 
surface of steel. The defect on the sides of the ingot, 
caused by metal splashed during teeming, having 
solidified and stuck to mould wall is also called shell 
or splash. 


3.171 Shrinkage Cavity — See ‘Pipe’. 


3.172 Slag — The covering on the molten metal, of 
complex oxides formed with the aid of iron oxide (in 
the form of ore and/or scale) and flux. This non-metallic 
layer acts as a carrier of oxygen to the molten bath for 
the oxidation and removal of various elements (such 
as carbon, silicon, phosphorus, etc) from the molten 
charge. 


3.173 Slag Ladle — See ‘Slag Pot’. 


3.174 Side Blown Process (Tropenas Process) — A 
pneumatic process wherein the air or oxygen mixture 
is injected from the side of the vessel, instead of from 
the bottom. 


3.175 Siemens-Martin Process — It is named after 
the pioneer work done by Siemens in England and 
Martin in France, which paved the way for the open 
hearth steel-making process. 


3.176 Siemens-Martin Steel — The steel made by 
Siemens-Martin process, that is, by open hearth process. 


3.177 Silica — Silicon dioxide (Si0,) occurring in 
nature as sand and ganister, with varying amounts of 
other impurities. It is used as an acid refractory. 


3.178 Silicate — A compound of silica and a metallic 
oxide. 


3.179 Single Lap — A type of lap occurring due to 
interruption in teeming. 


3.180 Single Shear Steel (Faggot) — A cutlery steel 
obtained by forging (and welding) a pile of converted 
bars (termed as a faggot). At times, the forged product 


IS 1956 (Part 2) : 2018 


is piled by cutting it into pieces and reforged, the 
resulting product being termed as a double-shear steel. 


3.181 Skin Holes — Holes visible on ingot surface. 


3.182 Skull — Solidified metal with some amount of 
slag and refractories remaining in furnace or ladle after 
the molten metal is poured out. It may also refer to the 
film formed inside a mould after casting. If detached it 
may get entrapped and lead to skull patches. 


3.183 Skull Patch — A thin layer of solid metal 
deposited in the inner mould wall and trapped during 
teeming. 


3.184 Slag Inclusion — See ‘Slag Patch’. 
3.185 Slag Pan — See ‘Slag Pot’. 


3.186 Slag Patch (Slag Inclusion) — Slag trapped in 
the steel during solidification. 


3.187 Slag Pot (Slag Ladle, Cinder Pot, 
Slag Pan) — Cast or fabricated receptacles used for 
slag disposal. 


3.188 Slagging — Taking out molten slag from the 
furnace. 


3.189 Splash — A layer of steel with uneven and rough 
surface formed over the bottom portion of an ingot and 
arises from the solidification of the spray of liquid steel 
reaching the mould wall due to rebound after impact 
on the bottom plate during early stages of teeming. 


3.190 Sponge iron — A metallic product made by 
direct reduction of iron, via the removal of oxygen from 
iron ore. Sponge iron is also known as DRI, or direct 
reduced iron. 


3.191 Spoon Sample — See ‘Bath Sample’. 


3.192 Steeling — Charging the raw materials down a 
steel funnel into the pots used in the crucible process. 


3.193 Stock Process — A steel making process utilizing 
a converter in which pig iron is charged cold and is melted 
using oil burners introduced through the tuyeres. The 
charge is then refined by air blast which is side blown. 


3.194 Stopper — An arrangement in the ladle tundish 
which controls the flow of liquid steel to the mould 
through the nozzle, and consists of a steel rod protected 
by thick cylindrical refractory sheaths. 


3.195 Stripping (Stripper) — The removal of an ingot 
from a mould after the steel has solidified. The machine 
used for this purpose is called a stripper. 


3.196 Submerged Injection Process (SIP) — 
Submerged injection process uses the same principle 
as OBM converters for introducing oxygen in open 
hearth furnaces. Concentric tuyeres in which the inner 
tube carries oxygen and the outer tube carries the 


hydrocarbon shielding agent are inserted below the 
open hearth bath either through the sides or through 
the back wall to hasten the rate of refining in open hearth 
steel making. 


3.197 Sub-cutaneous Blow Holes (Sub-surface Blow 
Holes) — Blow holes just under the surface layer (that 
is, under the skin) of an ingot, as such they are 
unoxidized and well up during rolling. 


3.198 Talbot Process — A modified basic open hearth 
steel-making process adopted for phosphoric iron, and 
is claimed to give greater output and speed. It consists 
in tapping only a part of the refined steel, from a large 
tilting furnace, and then adding a fresh charge to fill up 
the furnace. The resulting charge gets refined quickly, 
when a portion is tapped out followed by refilling the 
furnace. 


3.199 Tapping — Taking out refined steel from the 
furnace into a ladle. 


3.200 Tap-to-Tap Time — The length of time between 
successive melting cycles or heats in any steelmaking 
process. 


3.201 Teeming (Casting, Pouring) — Filling of 
moulds with finished molten steel from the ladle. 


3.202 Teeming Arrest — See ‘Cold Shut’. 


3.203 Teeming Lap 


a) Single lap — A fold in an ingot skin due to 
the surface of rising steel freezing and forming 
a rim which adheres to the mould wall and is 
subsequently engulfed in the ingot surface. 
Such a fold is more extensive than that 
described as rippled surface. 

b) Recurrent lap (surging lap) — A series of 
single laps which occur mainly in effervescing 
steel and are caused by an intermittent falling 
back of the metal level in the mould. 


3.204 Temper — A term used to denote the 
approximate carbon content of carbon tool steels, for 
example, chisel temper, razor temper, etc. This should 
not be confused with ‘temper’ as applied to cold rolled 
products or to heat treatment. 


3.205 Thin Slab Casting — Production of a slab 
approximately 50 mm - 75 mm thick in a process that 
is integrated with hot strip casting. The thin slab casting 
process requires much less gauge reduction of the slab 
(otherwise undertaken in roughing mills starting with 
~250mm thick slab) and the integration with strip 
rolling means much reduced reheat needs (saving time 
and energy cost). 


3.206 Thomas Process — A basic steel-making process 
in which pig iron is refined in a basic refractory lined 


converter by blowing air or a mixture of air, carbon 
dioxide and oxygen or steam through the molten metal. 


3.207 Top Casting (Top Pouring) — Introducing 
molten steel from the ladle into the mould from top, 
either directly, or through suitable refractory 
arrangement (tundish) between the ladle and the mould. 


3.208 Top Hat — A deeply sunken top in a rimming 
steel ingot due to marked gas evolution causing the 
metal to fall excessively after filling the mould. 


3.209 Top Pouring — See ‘Direct Casting’ and ‘Top 
Casting’. 


3.210 Topping — Knocking off, by fracturing, the 
feeder head from a small but tall ingot for examining 
the fractured surface. 


3.211 Torpedo ladles — Huge oval-shaped vessels that 
transport molten iron to the steelmaking area. 


3.212 Tropenas Process — See ‘Side Blown Process’. 


3.213 Trough Castings (Tundish casting) — Casting 
or pouring effected through a refractory basin or trough, 
placed between the ladle and the mould, with the object 
of minimizing the force of impact of the liquid steel on 
the bottom plate and thus counteract violent splashing 
resulting from direct teeming from the ladle into the 
mould. 


3.214 Trumpet Casting — See ‘Bottom Casting’. 


3.215 Tundish — The shallow refractory-lined basin 
on top of the continuous caster. It receives the liquid 
steel from the ladle, prior to the cast, allowing the 
operator to precisely regulate the flow of metal into 
the mold. 


3.216 Tundish Casting — See ‘Trough Castings’. 


3.217 Tuyeres — Nozzles arranged in a ring at the 
bottom of the BOF, through which inert gases are blown 
into the vessel. 


3.218 Uphill Casting — See ‘Bottom Casting’. 


3.219 Vacuum Degassing — A secondary steelmaking 
operation in which the molten steel is exposed to a 
vacuum. It results in the removal of gases, particularly 
hydrogen and usually enables improved cleanness 
levels to be obtained. 


3.220 Vacuum Oxygen Decarburization (VOD) — 
A ladle steelmaking process for refining stainless steel 
in which oxygen is injected into molten steel under 
partial vacuum. This allows carbon to be removed from 
the steel without oxidising chromium (see also AOD). 


3.221 VAR -Vacuum Arc Remelting — A method of 
producing ingots with lower gas content, fewer 
inclusions and reduced segregation. The process 
consists of melting a cast or wrought electrode with a 


IS 1956 (Part 2) : 2018 


DC arc under high vacuum. Molten droplets exposed 
to the vacuum are collected and solidify to ingot in a 
water-cooled copper mould. 


3.222 Wash Marking—Scee ‘Rippled surface’. 


3.223 Wild Steel — Steel which reacts violently in the 
mould due to vigorous liberation of gases during freezing. 


3.224 Zirconia — An oxide mineral having formula 
ZrO,. Zirconia is used as refractory material. 


4 CLASSIFICATION OF STEEL 


4.1 Steel 


For the purpose of classification, steel is an iron base 
alloy generally suitable for working to the required 
shape in the solid state having a carbon content 
generally less than 1.5 percent and containing varying 
amounts of other elements. A limited number of high 
alloyed steels may have more than 2 percent carbon- 
the usual separator between steel and cast iron 
(see IS 7598). 


4.2 Rimming Steel 


A steel possessing a rim of purer material (with maximum 
freedom from surface blemishes), and is associated with 
evolution of carbon monoxide gas occurring due to the 
interaction of dissolved iron oxide and carbon during 
the solidification of low carbon and low manganese steel 
made under controlled deoxidation. The composition and 
extent of the rim can be varied and if required, the 
rimming action can be arrested after sometime (see also 
‘Capped Steel and Plugged Steel’). 


4.3 Semi-killed Steel 


See ‘Balanced Steel.’ 


4.4 Semi-rimmed Steel 


See ‘Balanced Steel’. 


4.5 Balanced Steel (Semi-killed and Semi-rimmed 
Steel) 


Steel to which controlled amounts of deoxidizers have 
been added in the liquid stage during tapping and 
teeming, the object being to reduce the severity of 
piping. This steel is intermediate between killed and 
rimming types. 


4.6 Capped Steel 


It is a rimming steel in which the depth of the rim is 
controlled by arresting the rimming action, at the 
appropriate time. The rimming action can be arrested 
mechanically by putting a heavy steel plate on the top 
of the surface of the ingot (mechanical capping), or 
can be stopped by killing by the addition of deoxidizers 
on the ingot top (chemical capping). The rimming 


IS 1956 (Part 2) : 2018 


action can also be stopped by spraying water on the 
top of the ingot. 


4.7 Killed Steel (Solid Steel) 


Steel which has been fully deoxidized to reduce the 
oxygen content of the steel to a minimum in order that 
no reaction takes place between carbon and oxygen 
during solidification. 


4.8 Carbon Steel (Unalloyed Steel) 


Unalloyed steels are those steels in which specified 
content of any element is less than that indicated in 
IS 7598. 


4.9 Low-carbon Steels 


Low-carbon steels are unalloyed steels containing up 
to 0.30 percent carbon. 


4.10 Medium-carbon Steels 


Medium-carbon steels are unalloyed steels containing 
carbon between 0.30 to 0.60 percent. 


4.11 High-carbon Steels 


High-carbon steels are unalloyed steels containing 
carbon more than 0.60 percent. 


4.12 Alloy Steel 


A steel containing one or more alloying elements as a 
result of which it develops specific characteristics (see 
IS 7598). 


4.13 Low Alloy Steels 


Low alloy steels are steels in which total alloying 
elements are up to and including 5 percent. 


4.14 Medium Alloy Steels 


Medium alloy steels are steels in which total alloying 


10 


elements are more than 5 but up to and including 10 
percent. 


4.15 High Alloy Steels 


High alloy steels are steels in which total alloying 
elements are more than 10 percent. 


4.16 Plugged Steel 


It is rimming steel poured in a bottle shaped mould 
with a central plug. The rimming action is arrested when 
the metal rises and comes in contact with the bottle 
portion of the mould and the central plug. 


4.17 Special Steel 


Steel in the production of which special care has to be 
taken so as to attain the desired cleanliness, surface 
quality mechanical properties. 


4.18 High-Strength Low-Alloy Steels 


High-strength low-alloy (HSLA) steels, or microalloyed 
steels, are designed to provide better mechanical 
properties and/or greater resistance to atmospheric 
corrosion than conventional carbon steels in the normal 
sense because they are designed to meet specific 
mechanical properties rather than a chemical 
composition. The HSLA steels have low carbon 
contents (0.05-0.25 percent C) in order to produce 
adequate formability and weldability, and they have 
manganese contents up to 2.0 percent. Small quantities 
of chromium, nickel, molybdenum, copper, nitrogen, 
vanadium, niobium, titanium and zirconium are used 
in various combinations to impart the desired 
properties. 


4.19 Electrical Steel 


A group of steels (silicon or aluminum alloyed) used 
for the construction of magnetic cores of electrical 
equipment, because of their low watt-loss properties. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MTD 04 (11308). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.1.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 26 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


