Waa Wah IS 15883 (Part 9) : 2018 
Indian Standard 


Frater ohtataat wae — 
feon-Frést 


mt 9 Fak Waa 


Construction Project 
Management — Guidelines 


Part 9 Communication Management 


ICS 03.100.30 


© BIS 2018 


aR AA ART 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
AM WH, 9 geigasg AHL AM, Ae fercit-110002 
Velie” MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


June 2018 Price Group 9 


Construction Management (Including Safety in Construction) Sectional Committee, CED 29 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 9) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the 
Construction Management (Including Safety in Construction) Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Civil Engineering Division Council. 


A construction project is an endeavour undertaken by a project team on behalf of owner/client to create a built 
facility suited to the defined functional objectives. From inception to commissioning, the project goes through 
various distinct stages leading to progressive achievement of project objectives. Each stage involves specific 
inputs, processes (both technical and managerial) and deliverables. Typically, the life cycle of a project from 
commencement to completion involves the following stages: 


a) Project appraisal — Inception, feasibility and strategic planning; 

b) Project development — Project brief development, planning and design, finalization of proposals, 
procurement strategy, construction documentation including tender drawings, construction drawings, 
specifications, cost estimates, bills of quantities, procurement documents; 

c) Planning for construction — Sequencing of project components, planning tools, resource planning and 
time cost trade off 

d) Tender action — Open competitive bidding/pre-qualification of agencies, issue of tender documents, 
evaluation of bids, negotiations, if required and award of work; 


e) Construction — Execution, monitoring, control, work acceptance; and 


f) Commissioning and handing over — Contractual closeout, financial closeout, defect liability 
commencement, facility handing over. 


The distinct features of a construction project include the temporary nature of the project team involved, the evolutionary 
process of project deliverables during project development stages and the unique output as the built facility. As a 
result of these features, unless there is efficient and effective project management, a construction project is faced with 
challenges of uncertainties leading to time over-runs, cost over-runs, changes in project parameters, loss of quality 
and inability to meet the functional objectives. While technical soundness of a proposal is an important aspect of a 
construction project, the management aspects, which involve techno-legal, financial and other issues, have also a 
significant role in the success of a project. Therefore, management functions and technical processes in a construction 
project need to be integrated towards achieving project objectives. Top management commitment plays an important 
role in harmoniously achieving these project objectives. In some of the public domain projects, it may be necessary to 
share relevant information with public at large through appropriate means. 


To provide necessary guidance on effective construction project management, a series of standards are being 
developed as parts of IS 15883 ‘Guidelines for construction project management’. Part 1 General, of the standard 
since published as IS 15883 (Part 1) : 2009, covers general aspects of overall construction project management. 
This has been followed by publication of other parts as follows: 

Part2 : 2013 on Time management 

Part3 : 2015 on Cost management 

Part4 : 2015 on Quality management 

Part5 : 2013 on Health and safety management 

Part6 : 2015 on Scope management 

Part8 : 2015 on Risk management 

Part 12 : 2016 on Integration management 


The other parts of the standard are under formulation which will cover functions such as procurement management, 
human resources management and sustainability management. 


(Continued on third cover) 


IS 15883 (Part 9) : 2018 


Indian Standard 


CONSTRUCTION PROJECT MANAGEMENT — 
GUIDELINES 
PART 9 COMMUNICATION MANAGEMENT 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard (Part 9) covers guidelines for 
communication management aspects of construction 
project management. 


1.2 The communication management aspects during the 
project formulation and appraisal stage of the project 
are not covered in this standard. The scope of this 
standard, therefore, covers the stages subsequent to the 
stage of approval (when a decision to implement the 
project including its financing is taken) till 
commissioning and handing over stage of a project. 


1.3 The provisions of this standard are to be read in 
conjunction with other parts of IS 15883. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to revision, 
and parties to agreements based on this standard are 
encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the 
most recent editions of the standards indicated below: 


IS No. Title 


7337 : 2010 Glossary of terms in project 
management (second revision) 
10400 : 2013 Glossary of terms in inventory 
management (second revision) 
15198 : 2014 Glossary of terms in human 
resource development (first 
revision) 
15883 Construction project management 
— Guidelines 
(Part 1): 2009 General 
(Part 2): 2013 Time management 
(Part 3): 2015 Cost management 
(Part 4): 2015 Quality management 
(Part 5): 2013 Health and safety management 
(Part 6): 2015 Scope management 
(Part 7) Procurement management (under 
formulation) 
(Part 8): 2015 Risk management 
(Part 10) Human resource management 
(under formulation) 
(Part 11) Sustainability management (under 
formulation) 


(Part 12): 2016 Integration management 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given 
in IS 7337, IS 10400 and IS 15198 shall apply. 


4 GENERAL 


4.1 Need for Communication Management 


4.1.1 Communication involves the transfer of 
information, a generic term that embraces knowledge, 
processed data, skills and technology. In any human 
endeavour, the quality of communication among the 
participants largely influences the success of 
relationships and outcome of endeavour. This is 
particularly true on a complex undertaking like a 
construction project where there are many project 
participants who collaborate for the project duration 
before disbanding to work on other endeavours. These 
specialist people and organizations prepare the scope, 
design, estimate, procure, contract, construct and 
commission a project. The level and length of 
participation of the participants varies depending on 
the stage of the project. These project participants 
usually work in teams and can be grouped as client team, 
consultant team and construction team. 


4.1.2 The client team or internal project team includes 
project participants who work for the client 
organization. The main function of this team is to meet 
the client project responsibilities and to act in the interest 
of the client’s business. The size and structure of the 
client team may change because of project type, project 
size and criticality, client organization’s size and 
business, client’s business, project participants’ skills. 


4.1.3 The consultant team provides expert skills and 
knowledge to define scope, develop and support the 
project. Consultant teams usually have members 
providing professional services in design and 
documentation, project management, cost management, 
legal services, town planning, building compliance, 
environmental management, safety management, 
sustainability practices, etc. Some of the roles would 
be executed by in-house teams. 


4.1.4 The collaborating participants or organizations 
may be located in dispersed geographic locations. In 
present scenario, collaborating organizations could also 
be located in different countries and working in different 


IS 15883 (Part 9) : 2018 


time zones. Each project participant has varying role, 
responsibilities, goals, work practices and culture. This 
creates special communication challenges, as 
collaborating organizations are required to efficiently 
exchange large number of technical and other 
documents during the life cycle of the project. 
Cooperation between participants with different 
backgrounds and working practices makes it important 
that effective communication processes and systems are 
established for sharing the most up-to-date information 
in order to carry out day-to-day tasks with least errors, 
reduced time delays and less time spent on redesign, 
rework and process management. It requires 
establishing clear channels of communication and 
documentation and defining adequate documentation 
system. This facilitates completion of construction 
projects as per estimated time, within budget, as per 
specifications and with minimum risk. 


4.2 Structure of Communication Management 
4.2.1 Construction Communication Categories 


4.2.1.1 Communication for construction projects can 
be divided into five following groups: 


a) Inter-office communication that is 
communication between head office team of 
participating organizations. 

b) Intra-office communication that is 
communication between branch offices of 
respective participating organizations or 
between their head office and branch offices. 

c) Site communication that is communication 
between project sites and head offices of 
participating organizations. 

d) Intra-site communication that is 
communication between project execution 
team at site. This is important for large sites 
where single site office does not suffice the 
requirement for effective site management. 
This also includes communication between 
project site offices of participating 
organizations. 


e) Communication with statutory bodies. 


4.2.1.2 Communication from offices is easier to plan 
and manage as these are permanent facilities with 
established infrastructure and systems. But 
communication from site and within site is difficult to 
manage as sites may be in remote locations, site offices 
are temporary structures and site is exposed to weather 
conditions. Till pre-construction stage of the project, 
only office communication happens, but from execution 
stage of projects site as well as office communication 
happens. 


4.2.1.3 Site communication includes the following: 


a) Communication with offices for administrative 
purposes and getting technical information. 

b) Communication between project site office and 
supervisors or executing staff at site location. 

c) Ifitisalarge project site with multiple project 
site offices, it would also include 
communication between multiple project site 
offices. 


4.2.2 Modes of Communication 


Conventionally, project team members, even those 
located internationally, meet in person at various stages 
of their respective projects. Although such structure 
helps build relationships, it rapidly becomes inefficient 
in terms of time and money. The result is that global 
networks face unique communication challenges 
different from those that are not geographically 
dispersed. Traditionally, team members use a 
combination of modes to communicate and store 
documentation, like: paper documents, E-mail, fax, 
couriers, drawing racks, folders, index cards, boxes, 
compactor storage, storerooms, desk, tool box, log 
books, in/out trays, offsite storage/archival, filing 
cabinets, fireproof safes, etc. 


These traditional methods rely on expensive and time 
consuming manual entry and are unstructured with the 
tendency to create information ‘silos’ among project 
organizations. Inefficient management and storage of 
information is an extremely high ongoing cost to a 
project. This cost is not always easily measured, as the 
ramifications are more extensive than just time and 
storage space. Traditional management and 
collaboration methods may lead to problems such as 
poor document management, retention and compliance 
issues. This scenario leads to risk of disputes and 
litigation. 


Projects have a combination of manual and electronic 
tools and systems to exchange documents; the suitability 
of a particular type being dependent on factors such as 
organizational requirements, contractual obligations, 
regulatory requirements, cost, capacity and ease of use. 
Present commonly used tools and systems include: E- 
mail, Hard drives (fixed and portable), local area 
networks, transmittals, fax, courier, traditional mail, 
collaboration systems, FTP sites, CD, DVD, wireless 
networks (Wi-Fi, bluetooth, infrared), cloud storage, 
etc. 


4.2.3 Online Collaboration System 


Since control and management of information is very 
crucial to the construction industry, online collaboration 
systems are increasingly being used to aid collaboration 
between geographically dispersed project team 
members. These web-based information management 
solutions store project information online so that 


documents and correspondence are available in a single, 
shared environment that is secure and accessible to all 
authorized team members. This enables participants to 
view, track, share, and archive their information from 
any location, at any time, using a standard web-browser. 
The difference between using the traditional project 
communication versus communication using 
collaboration technology is illustrated in Fig. 1. 


In practice, this means that all documents and drawings 
including feasibility studies, drawings, approvals, 
schedules, specifications, standards, procedures, etc, 
can be viewed online. Team members can add 
comments, issue notices, instructions and requests for 
information. Then documents can be published singly 
or in batches. When documents are superseded, revision 
numbers are updated meaning that everyone works on 
the most up-to-date, accurate and relevant information, 
with older revisions safely archived. 


4.3 Communication Methods 
4.3.1 Verbal Communication 


Verbal communication is most common form of 
communication and most difficult to capture on 
permanent records and creates greatest opportunity for 
misunderstanding. The documented record of verbal 
communication should be concise and clear statement 
of what was said and positions expressed, without any 
attempt to embellish the conversation or draw 
unwarranted conclusions. In case the verbal 
communication is contractual in nature, it should be 
followed by a confirmed verbal instruction later in writing. 


4.3.2 Written Communication 


General written correspondence constitutes a large part 


FACILITIES 
MANAGER 


SUB- 
CONTRACTOR 


MAIN 
CONTRACTOR 


TRADITIONAL PROJECT COMMUNICATION 


CONSTRUCTION 
COLLABORATION 
TECHNOLOGY 


IS 15883 (Part 9) : 2018 


of documentary record, handling of which requires great 
care. Incoming correspondence needs to be logged, 
read, distributed, acted upon and filed for retrieval as 
necessary. 


Technical aspects for the written communication are: 


a) Depending upon the criticality of the project, 
it must be planned and specified that replies 
or acknowledgement to incoming 
correspondence must be made within how 
many days. 

b) A suspense file must be maintained at all times 
to ensure timely follow up action and to flag 
correspondence that is still pending action or 
requires follow up. 


c) Ifthe authorized signatory is absent; the 
designated deputy shall sign his/ her name and 
insert the word ‘for’ in front of authorized 
signatory name. 

d) Every organization should have standards 
regarding using fonts including type, size, 
colour and the layout for all different types of 
documentation such as letters, minutes of 
meetings, internal memos, reports, etc. 


4.3.3 Electronic Communication 


There is an increasing use of E-mail and video 
communication for managing construction projects. In 
all organizations and for all projects, a project specific 
procedure is to be developed regarding use, handling of 
E-mail and printing ofhard copies. As a general rule, all 
E-mails which contain key decisions, important 
information which has bearing on time, cost, quality and 
safety parameters or the documents which are critical to 
construction like RFIs, Submittals and drawings along 


COMMUNICATION USING COLLABORATION TECHNOLOGY 


Fic. 1 TRADITIONAL PROJECT COMMUNICATION VERSUS COMMUNICATION USING COLLABORATION TECHNOLOGY 


IS 15883 (Part 9) : 2018 


with any test reports, design reports, etc, shall be printed 
and retained in records in hard copy version. 


Communication protocols need to be planned by the 
project management team and IT team at the start of 
the project. Every organization should have standards 
for E-mail communication regarding using fonts 
including type, size, colour, layout and e-mail signature. 


4.3.4 Online Collaboration 


4.3.4.1 Online collaboration systems in construction 
projects provide a uniform system of communication for 
multiple stakeholders and ensure that a common taxonomy 
is applied to documents and project processes. They help 
build effective work practices on projects by supporting 
each stakeholder to perform and be accountable for their 
contracted activities. They also encourage more effective 
project participation amongst all members of a project 
community. It can result in more effective data management 
with increased data integrity and better risk management 
by ensuring that projects run more securely, reliably and 
efficiently. In order to increase adoption, a platform should 
act as a neutral party where everyone on the project feels 
that the relevant project information is shared with the 
relevant project participants. An effective solution will 
support an entire project community and ensure that 
training is accessible, relevant and flexible to the needs of 
everyone on the project. 


4.3.4.2 Benefits of collaboration systems can be 
summarised as, 


a) reducing project costs; 

b) facilitating execution of parallel activities; 

c) reducing administration; 

d) improving control; 

e) reducing/deleting multiple entries; 

f) increasing profit margins through better 

tracking; and 

g) improving auditability. 
4.3.4.3 The decision to adopt a project collaboration 
system and the system selection depends on, 


a) the criticality of project; 

b) expected benefits from adoption of 
collaboration system; and 

c) IT capabilities in terms of skills and logistics 
availability of associating project participants. 


4.3.4.4 A number of factors can affect the adoption of 
collaboration systems. These factors often occur 
concurrently and have differing levels of impact 
depending on the project context. Some of the 
challenges when implementing collaborative systems 
include, 


a) unwillingness of some project participating 
organizations to adopt change; 


b) internet speed at project site and head office 
locations; 

c) internal network issues; 

d) low computer skills and knowledge; 

e) tight project timelines; 

f) lack of defined project processes; 

g) poorly defined accountabilities; 

h) poor coordination between project team 
organizations; 

j) lack of leadership; 

k) geographical boundaries; and 

m) external forces. 


4.3.4.5 A collaboration system should provide the 
following functionalities and these should be the basis 
of any cost-benefit analysis: 


a) A single point of access to real time 
information, for all project participants. 

b) An efficient and effective system should send 
only a small amount of data to an individual 
user to provide him or her with access to 
project documentation. This removes the 
uncertainty and delay of distributing large 
packages via E-mail. 

c) It should be an independent solution for all 
parties on the project, with defined access 
rights and automated control of documents 
and other information. Important document 
management functionalities are as follows: 


1) Security, update and access tracking 
features for electronic documents and 
records, with automatic version control. 

2) Protection of the integrity of documents 
through complete audit trails and the 
inability to remove documents or 
information from the system once 
distributed. 

3) Incorporation of workflow, linking and 
collaboration in web-based environments. 


d) Prompt and efficient transfer of documents and 
correspondence to archives. 


e) System should be resilient and scalable to meet 
the size of the project without degradation of 
speed or reliability. 

f) System should fully support accepted industry 
practices and provide access to accepted 
industry database. 

g) A system with broader user base in the 
industry. This enables a system to streamline 
functionality and offer a larger client base for 
enabling client feedback and incorporating 
enhancements to its features. 


h) System should have the capability for the 
average project user to be trained effectively. 


4.4 Drawings and Documents 


Documentation and communication between multiple 
parties are at the core of a construction or engineering 
project. Good management of written information can 
determine project cost, completion time, risk profile and 
financial success. It is important that the lead organizations 
(client / project-in-charge / project manager / architect) 
agree on basic communication protocols with the other 
participating organizations. These rules are sometimes 
known as a project hierarchy or communication matrix. 
Whatever the terminology used, each organization must 
understand its role and contractual obligations. 


4.4.1 Drawings 


Drawings can be categorised as conceptual design 
drawings, working drawings, good for construction 
drawings, shop drawings, as-built drawings, etc. Drawings 
play acrucial role in producing good quality construction. 
Therefore, careful attention must be paid as to how 
drawings are going to be created, checked and distributed. 
Some important points of consideration are: 


a) Providing drawings and revised drawings to 
all agencies as early and as complete as 
possible at all relevant stages. At all stages of 
project, all agencies should be working with 
latest version of drawings. 

b) Ensuring drawings are adequately detailed 
with adequate information and checked before 
site work starts. 


c) Drawings nomenclature, colour coding, 
drawing size. 


d) Storage of drawings at head office, site office. 
4.4.2 Documents 


a) Documents must have appropriate content and 
metadata. Metadata is the structured 
information that is used to identify a 
document’s contents, location, physical 
attributes, type, for example text or image, map 
or model, and form, for example print copy or 
electronic file. Key metadata elements include, 
1) the originator of a document; 

2) the document title; 
3) when the document was published; 
4) where the document was published; and 


5) the subject areas covered by the document. 


b) Appropriate content and metadata provide 
confidence that, 


1) the document structure, format and 
internal content will remain intact. 


IS 15883 (Part 9) : 2018 


2) the context in which the document was 
created, used, transmitted and received 
will be apparent. 


3) the links between items that make up a 
document are present. 


c) Processes that project participants should 
agree on will include the following: 


1) Document and mail types, attributes and 
disciplines, 

2) Communication flows and matrices for 
mail and document transmittals, 


3) Document registration metadata required, 


4) Document naming and numbering 
conventions, 


5) Document version and revision control, 
6) Document formats and status, 

7) Control of registration of documents, 
8) Distribution of documents, 


9) Workflows for submission of vendor 
documentation, 


10) Finalization of project administrators, and 


11) Other protocols (such as system 
requirements, training and support plans). 


Although some of the decisions made can be quite 
detailed, agreeing on what constitutes good practice 
for a particular project is an important step in ensuring 
consistency in communication and information 
management. 


4.4.3 Communication Documents Specific to 
Construction Projects 


Documents form an important component of 
information for management of construction projects. 
Some communication documents specific to 
construction projects are daily progress report, monthly 
progress report, request for information/inspection 
(RFI), Transmittals of submission of drawings and 
specifications, test reports, project monitoring reports, 
etc. 


Where included in the contract as part of scope of work, 
a diary must be maintained. However, even if it is not 
made mandatory by contract, it is the best practice to 
maintain this document, specifically at project site. The 
diary should record information on weather conditions, 
a broad factual summary of work, important issues or 
milestones, major events, meetings and major issues 
discussed and agreed or disagreed, visitors, client 
contacts, and observations on contractor’s efforts, 
people and attitudes. 


Diary should not include a record of discussions or 
actions concerning internal matters. The content of the 
diary should be limited to events of the project. 


IS 15883 (Part 9) : 2018 


Some other specific documents are hindrance register, 
risk register, field change note, incident report, site 
order book, incoming and materials issue register, 
records of progress photographs, etc. 


For all documents, specific formats should be 
developed with respect to project specific requirements 
and responsibility needs to be assigned to specific team 
members for maintaining each document. All these 
documents may become important in settling future 
claims of contractors/ vendors. In addition, these would 
provide important information at the time of writing 
the project closeout report. 


4.5 Benefits of Effective Communication 
Management at Different Stages of Construction 
Projects 


a) Pre-construction stage: 


1) The client can communicate in a 
structured way with key consultants such 
as the design team, project manager, 
quantity surveyor, etc. 

2) Large drawing files can be shared 
between participants in real time, leading 
to all consultants designing on latest 
version of drawings. 

3) Changes and clarification in the scope of 
work are streamlined, as, instructions of 
the design team, other instructions and 
approved changes are documented and 
can be viewed, responded to and tracked. 

4) This leads to uniformity of information in 
consolidated design drawings. 


b) Construction stage: 


1) Streamlining of the more frequent 
distribution of larger files. 

2) Effective compilation and management of 
contract documentation and agreements 
of all contractors and vendors. 

3) Effective management of contractor and 
vendor submissions, site and works 
inspections, approval of drawings, 
processing of claims and payments, 
defects management, and all other project 
documentation and correspondence. 

4) Increased productivity between 
geographically dispersed teams and use 
of different time zones to an advantage 
for shifting work when the project 
schedule becomes tighter. 

5) Effective cost management of project. 

6) Reduced risk of errors and rework. 


7) Off-site progress, quality and site security 


monitoring through site photographs 
clicked through web cameras and 
E-mailed or posted on collaboration 
platforms. 

8) On-line meetings and video conferencing 
for meetings between organizations in 
dispersed geographic locations. 


c) Commissioning and handing over stage: 


1) Accurate development of as-built 
drawings and manuals. 


2) Effective management of essential 
services certification. 

3) Handover of documentation to the client 
and retention for ongoing facility 
management. 


5 TEAM FOR CONSTRUCTION 
COMMUNICATION MANAGEMENT 


Team structure within an organization for 
communication management is defined by the size, 
characteristics and criticality of a project. For small to 
medium size projects, planning for communication 
management could be conducted by the project-in- 
charge or project manager as applicable, but for large 
and critical projects, planning would be conducted by 
specialised strategic in-house team or through 
consultant(s). After planning for communication 
management, all project team members are responsible 
for making sure that communication between all 
stakeholders is managed as per the plan. 


6 COMMUNICATION MANAGEMENT PLAN 


6.1 Communication Requirements Analysis 


6.1.1 The first step in communication management 
planning is ‘communication requirements analysis’ that 
generates the communication needs of all project 
stakeholders. For example, a communication 
requirement may specify the type of information and 
the format in which this information should be delivered. 
One of the purposes of communication requirements 
analysis is to optimize the use of resources in 
communication. 


There is an inherent tendency towards complexity of 
communication on a project as the number of 
stakeholders goes up, and it is important for the project 
manager to limit that complexity by introducing a 
communication plan that gives enough information to 
stakeholders, but not so much that they are inundated 
by information that they may not necessarily need. That 
is why the communication needs of project participants 
or stakeholders need to be analysed to determine who 
gets what information, when and in which format. 


6.1.2 Following types of information are needed to 
analyse the communication requirement for the project: 


a) Groups — Different groups, disciplines, 
departments, and specialties involved in the 
project; for example, marketing, sales, and 
engineering as departments and structural 
engineers and MEP team as groups in the 
engineering department. 

b) Relationships — Organizational charts can be 
helpful to assess some of the information 
related to organizational and stakeholder 
responsibility relationships. One of the human 
resource tools that can be adopted is a RACI 
chart, which stands for Responsible- 
Accountable-Consult-Inform, which answers 
the following questions with regards to 
different roles stakeholders play on various 
aspects of the project: 


1) Responsible — Who will do the project 
work? 


2) Accountable —Who will make the project 
decisions? 

3) Consult- In case a decision needs to be 
made, who will be consulted? 

4) Inform —In case a decision is made, who 
will be informed? 


c) Logistics — Where are all stakeholders 
located and how each stakeholder is required 
to be connected for communication. 


d) Information needs — To plan communication 
effectively, it’s important to know the 
following information needs: 


1) Internal information needs; for example, 
communication across the performing 
organization and communication within 
the project team. 

2) External information needs; for example, 
communicating with regulatory 
authorities, contractors, consultants, 
media, public, etc. 

3) Periodicity at which each information 
component is required. 


4) Format in which each information 
component is required. 


Based on communication needs, appropriate 
communication technology can be determined. 


After conducting ‘communication requirements 
analysis’ it must be analysed that all identified 
information needs are correct, not in conflict with each 
other, and that they are precisely understood by all 
stakeholders. During analysis, the requirements must 


IS 15883 (Part 9) : 2018 


be decomposed into sufficient detail so that the project 
team can accurately estimate effort for implementation 
and assure that the requirements are indeed feasible. 
Annex A shows indicative format for ‘communication 
requirements analysis’. 


6.2 Assessment of Communication Technology and 
Management Aspects 


Based on the communication needs established for all 
stakeholders, assessment needs to be conducted for 
adoption of following communication technology and 
management protocols. 


6.2.1 Interoperability Requirement 


It needs to be planned that software adopted by all 
specialised teams or consultants for preparation of 
drawings are interoperable, as the feature of automatic 
import / export of data is supported by interoperability 
of software. 


Thus, a detailed system-to-system flow diagram needs 
to be designed to detail all data migration aspects of 
the project. Accordingly collaboration systems would 
be setup and decision would be taken regarding 
adoption of software for different functions by all 
project participants. 


Interoperability can also encompass the ability for 
systems to be linked through identity and authentication 
protocols such as single sign on and two-step 
authentication. This enables organizations to control 
access through a corporate-level identity protocol such 
as integration through active directory. Promoting 
security at the corporate level enables trust in the project 
and project management system as well as ensures 
confidentiality of information. 


This analysis along with “communication requirements 
analysis’ would lead to preparation of ‘drawings/ 
documents information file’ (see Annex A). 


6.2.2 Connectivity 


Project sites may be at remote locations and may have 
restriction of physical connectivity as well as 
infrastructure connectivity in terms of online 
connectivity. Also, project participants may be 
geographically dispersed. Thus, assessing this logistic 
situation, it needs to be planned that how the information 
needs of project participants would be addressed. 


6.2.3 Confidentiality of Information 


Effective communication between all project 
participants can be achieved by ensuring that the entire 
project community is able to contribute and collaborate 
on a secure, trusted, neutral project management 
platform. Some of the key elements are discussed 
below. 


IS 15883 (Part 9) : 2018 


6.2.3.1 Security management 


A critical element to building trust on any project is 
the ability to demonstrate that information exchanged 
between project participants is confidential. The 
establishment, implementation and review of an 
information security management system (ISMS) 
framework helps to oversee best practice for 
establishing, implementing, operating, monitoring, 
reviewing, maintaining, and improving an information 
management system. An ISMS is a systematic approach 
to managing sensitive project information so that it 
remains secure. It includes people, processes, and IT 
systems by applying a risk management process. 


6.2.3.2 Collaboration and neutrality 


Successful collaboration and communication on 
engineering and construction projects starts with a 
secure and trusted collaboration system. The primary 
deliverable of this type of system is the ability for 
participants to share information and to see the work 
of others when appropriate to doing their jobs 
effectively. In order to accomplish this, project 
participants need to feel that it is safe to share and 
collaborate on the system and that the system has the 
appropriate levels of security to protect sensitive 
information being exchanged. 


In order to fulfil this type of function and to enable a 
truly trustworthy and effective platform for project 
collaboration, an online system can act as a neutral third 
party. Such neutral platforms can enable true 
collaboration by treating all organizations or agencies 
on the system equally. 


6.2.3.3 Security and access classification 


Security and access classification helps identify the rights 
of access and application of restrictions that apply to 
documents an organization creates or receives. It aims to 
protect information from unauthorized access, collection, 
use, disclosure, deletion, alteration and/or destruction. 


When developing a security and access classification 
scheme the following issues should be considered: 


a) Regulatory framework of the business. 
b) Business function and activity of the business. 


c) Risk assessment of impact ofa breach relative 
to the nature of the document. 


d) Any enforceable legal rights from corporate 
governance (external audits). 


e) Freedom of information obligations. 
f) Privacy protection. 
g) Archival and legal process laws. 


The scheme should include a defined user permissions 
register. This register lists the individuals from the 


organization and identifies the level of access 
permitted. It can be aligned with existing systems such 
as internal IT access levels, or created for a specific 
purpose. The level of user access can range from full 
access to read-only access. Five suggested access 
levels are: 


1) Project administrator access level — Persons 
with this role are responsible for managing 
the way the project information is managed. 
Project administrators can make changes to 
project-wide rules and roles. These rules apply 
to all organizations working on the project. 

2) Organization access level — Persons with this 
role are responsible for managing and 
assigning rules and user roles to people 
working in a particular associating 
organization. 

3) Document administrator access level — 
Persons with this role are appointed to manage 
documents on a particular project for their own 
organization. By default, they are users who 
are made responsible for particular document 
control functions. 


4) User-full access level— Persons with this role 
do not have administrator rights. They are 
those who create, edit, view, manage and 
search information and communicate with 
most persons in the project directory. 

5) User-read-only access level — Persons with 
this role do not have administrator rights. They 
are those who view, manage and search 
communication and have access to project 
directory. However, they can neither create nor 
edit information or communication. 


The scheme can be as simple or detailed as needed, 
depending on the size and complexity of the project 
and consideration of the likely impact on the business/ 
project, if it is not managed appropriately. It is the duty 
of all to, 


i) respect the nature of privileged or confidential 
information. 


ii) understand what information can be classified 
as confidential. 


iii) not use such information for personal gain. 

iv) not share details of client projects with other 
clients without prior consent. 

v) not discuss confidential information in public 
places or among colleagues. 

vi) ensure all confidential written communication 
is filed safely and not left lying around at head 
office or site office. 


vii) not make copies of confidential information 


without prior consent and only with the 
intention of benefiting the company. 

viii) password protect all online data at head office 
as well as at project sites. IT support for the 
same can be taken. 


ix) not share E-mail password and data protecting 
passwords with anyone. 

x) ensure all information pertaining to project is 
removed from project site office on completion 
of the project. 

xi) take proactive action if they feel someone is 
knowingly or unknowingly divulging 
confidential information. 


At communication management planning stage, systems 
need to be set for above aspects. This analysis would 
lead to preparation of ‘Team Authorization Plan’ as 
given in Annex A. 


6.2.4 System for Information/ Documents/ Drawings 
Retention and Archiving 


6.2.4.1 Each information component either drawing or 
document has a life cycle phase that covers its retention, 
destruction and transfer. When any information 
component is captured and registered, its disposition 
status and retention period needs to be decided. The 
removal of information from a system is a decision- 
making process and needs to be carefully managed to 
ensure required drawings and documents are not 
removed. 


‘Disposition process guides’ are part of effective 
drawing/document control systems. Disposition 
systems manage the removal of drawings/documents 
from the operational document control system, 
based on established and approved process and 
procedures. The application of best practice in the 
area of governance, risk and compliance is a 
necessary part of maintaining corporate memory 
which determines rules for retaining records in order 
to meet national and international standards for 
records management. 


Factors affecting decision for disposition include the 
following: 


a) Contractual obligations. 

b) Organizational requirements. 

c) Legal or regulatory obligations. 
d) Changes in work activity. 

e) Changes to resourcing. 

f) Life of the built assets. 


6.2.4.2 Three disposition actions are discussed below: 


a) Continuing retention — Continuing retention 
is the most common form of disposition action. 


b) 


IS 15883 (Part 9) : 2018 


It involves preserving drawings/documents for 
their retention period and ensuring they remain 
retrievable and accessible. This may mean 
moving drawings/documents from the current 
environment of manual or computerised storage 
and storing them in another environment that 
assists long-term preservation. It is important 
that the drawings/documents maintain 
authenticity, reliability, integrity and usability 
over the entire retention period. Continuing 
retention strategies should include, 


1) evaluating and selecting suitable 
technology especially for electronic 
documents. 

2) ensuring drawing/document metadata 
remains accessible and usable for entire 
retention period. 


3) including prompts to notify when 
drawings/documents need to be destroyed 
once the retention period has expired. 

4) meeting obligations in agreements where 
external agencies are authorized to ensure 
that drawings/documents are 
appropriately safeguarded. 

Web-based collaboration systems can fulfil 
requirements for retaining and archiving 
information in several ways including enabling 
triggers for review of documents for retention 
compliance and retaining information 
electronically. Their retention and archiving 
standards need to align with the specified 
standard for the project. 


Physical destruction — Physical destruction 
may be conducted internally or externally and 
can include reformatting, overwriting, 
rewriting, deleting, shredding, burning and 
disposing in rubbish. Physical destruction of 
drawings/documents should always be 
authorized. The following rules should be 
followed in relation to physical destruction: 


1) Drawings/documents relating to pending 
or actual litigation or investigation should 
not be destroyed. 


2) Drawing/document destruction should be 
carried out in a manner that protects the 
confidentiality of any information it 
contains. 

3) All copies of drawings/documents that are 
authorized for destruction, including 
security copies, preservation copies and 
backup copies, should be destroyed. 


4) Maintain an audit trail of destroyed 
drawings/documents, if required. 


IS 15883 (Part 9) : 2018 


5) For electronic drawings/documents to be 
destroyed there needs to be, 


i) a guarantee that the destruction 
actions cannot be reversed; and 
ii) a disposal schedule including 


destroying system pointers to the 
data using software, for example, 
links, especially when backups are 
reformatted or rewritten. 


c) Transfer of custody or ownership — Transfer 
of custody or ownership does not occur 
frequently. The process requires the creator 
of the drawings/documents to identify relevant 
drawings/documents, remove them from the 
system and physically transfer them to another 
organization or business unit. The transfer may 
be made to the following: 


1) Other organizations with responsibilities 
for the drawings/documents. 

2) 
3) 


4) 


Outsourced or contractor organizations. 
Storage facility. 
Archive. 


It is important to ensure that the necessary 
accountabilities for the drawings/documents 
are presented to any external parties. Specific 
considerations relating to the transfer of 
ownership of electronic drawings/documents 
include, 


hardware and software compatibility; 
metadata (control and contextual 
information); 

data documentation (technical information 
on data processing and data structure); 
patents and licensing agreements; and 
standards. 

6.2.4.3 A ‘Disposition Process Guide’ should be 
developed to assist decision-making about disposition. 
It should provide guidelines about, 


a) classes of drawings/documents; 

b) retention periods; 

c) which drawings/documents should be 
destroyed or captured; and 

d) appropriate forms of disposition actions. 


6.2.4.4 A ‘Disposition Process Guide’ can be of a more 
or less formal nature depending on the size and nature 
of the project and accountabilities of associating 
organizations. It can be developed in five stages: 


a) Stage I - Legal or administration 
requirements — Evaluate any minimum 
retention periods demanded by legal or 
administration requirements. This would differ 


10 


for different clients and projects. 
b) Stage 2 - Use of the drawings/documents — 
Evaluate drawings/documents in the system 
to distinguish which are core and transactional. 
Core drawings/documents are those that are 
repeatedly used while transactional drawings/ 
documents are for multiple individual 
transactions that refer to the core drawings/ 
documents. For example, transmittals 
(transactional) and drawings (core). 
Understanding the relationship between core 
business documents and transactional 
documents helps to determine how long each 
are needed within the system. 
c) Stage 3 - Links to other systems — Evaluate 
whether each drawing/document supports or 
is referenced by other drawings/documents or 
systems. 
d) Stage 4 - Broader range of uses — Evaluate 
the broader uses of the document by, 


1) 


identifying other stakeholders who have 
an interest in the drawings/documents. 
2) assessing the risks associated with 
destroying the drawings/documents once 
internal use has finished. 

3) considering which actions are needed to 
preserve them to ensure business 
continuity in the event of loss or damage 
to the drawings/documents. 

4) assessing the financial, political, social or 
other positive gains from maintaining the 
drawings/documents after use has been 
completed. 

5) analyzing the costs and non-financial gains 
associated with drawing/document 


retention. 


e) Stage 5 - Allocate retention periods — 
Evaluate the overall drawing/document 
control system and rationalize all drawings/ 
documents in the system. Group those with 
similar retention and disposition actions. 
Retention periods should be stated clearly and 
disposition triggers clearly identified against 
each drawing/document. Examples of these 
statements include ‘destroy after x years after 
audit’ or ‘transfer to the archives x years after 


last transaction completed’. 


The information from these five steps results in a 
‘Disposition Process Guide’ that outlines disposition 
status, drawings/documents classes, disposition actions, 
triggers and retention periods. 


6.2.5 Data Security 


Retaining all information in secure and auditable format 


is essential to a successful project. All information in a 
project collaboration system needs to be stamped with 
the date and time that cannot be deleted or altered. This 
information can then be filed in an ‘Event Log’ and 
should be able to be exported for archiving, reporting 
and retention purposes. 


6.2.6 Intellectual Property Rights Protection 


The system’s IP is fundamental to specialized services 
which are delivered on a one-to-many basis (that is the 
same services are delivered to all clients across the 
globe, not as individual services provided on a one-to- 
one basis). Cloud or SaaS (Software as a Service) 
platforms use one-to-many basis in order that provides 
these services in a cost-effective manner. IP rights 
should be covered extensively in any terms of service 
agreement. 


6.2.7 Legal Validity of Soft Copies 


Any drawing/document that contains valuable 
information should be retained, irrespective of it being 
soft copy or hard copy. Such document should comply 
with statutory requirements; if any. 


6.2.8 Communication Protocols and Storage 


Communication protocols (like who writes to whom, 
who signs on outgoing memos/ correspondence, who 
prepares/ reviews/ uploads reports, who drafts/ reviews/ 
approves minutes, etc) should be established at the 
beginning of the project and should be adhered to in 
all respects. A ‘Communication protocol format’ 
specifically addressing the documentation matters 
should be developed for head office as well as project 
site and distributed to all concerned. All project related 
communication shall be kept in project files under the 
relevant project file number. Annex B shows a generic 
format for maintaining communication protocol 
information of a construction project. It can be 
customized for specific requirements of individual 
projects. 


6.2.9 Depository and Repository 


6.2.9.1 The system should provide a searchable data 
repository that represents both the final construction 
and the process that was used to construct. It can work 
as a depository retaining a copy of all live data during 
the course of the construction project. The repository 
must be constructed from the information captured 
within the system and must minimize the user’s 
involvement in the creation of indices or other 
organizational tools (including keywords) needed to 
operate the archive. Following points should be 
considered while creating the repository: 


a) It should provide a means to improve control 
and compliance through QA and retention 


11 


IS 15883 (Part 9) : 2018 


standards as well as reducing the risk of loss 
of information. 
b) It should automatically generate archive 
documents quickly without much effort. 
System should have considerations relating to 


issues of security and confidentiality. 


Project records of each project need to be 
segregated from those for other projects and 
from general office documents. 

The project archiving solution should assist in 
avoiding laborious downloads and the time- 
consuming effort required to collate 
information and manage physical storage. 
The repository must provide retention, 
archiving, retrieval and transfer of all other 
records consistent with contractual, legal and 
registration requirements outlined in a format 
similar to Annex C. 


6.2.9.2 The repository should be able to support the 
various document types that are created and captured 
during a construction project. Annex B provides an 
indicative list of documents that can be expected to be 
generated for a construction project. This list should 
be updated as per project requirements. 


6.2.9.3 The repository must be able to handle the wide 
scope of items to be covered as well as it should be 
able to support the digital representation of those items 
(that is the various media formats). It is essential for 
any repository system to cover the breadth of these file 
types, given that each may contain information that is 
only referenced in that specific type of file. 


6.2.9.4 The repository must support all the formats and 
document types that would be a necessary requirement/ 
criteria for successful implementation of a digital 
library. 


6.2.9.5 The repository must have the ability to provide 
a copy of all live and archived data, a current copy of 
the applications, customizations, interfaces and system 
documentation either during or upon expiration of the 
project. Such data should be in a readable format. 


6.2.9.6 Project information must be able to be accessed 
through either an online or offline repository. An online 
project repository should provide access to project 
information and correspondence held on the 
collaboration platform securely in the cloud, with no 
restrictions on size limit. The project repository should 
provide, 


a) data security and redundancy. 
b) secure from anywhere at anytime. 
c) available for multiple projects, allowing 
multiple user access. 
6.2.9.7 An online repository should store data on 


servers located geographically far away. These servers 


IS 15883 (Part 9) : 2018 


would serve as a second location of data storage, 
ensuring a disaster recovery and backup plan is in place 
to protect against loss of information. 


6.2.9.8 Alternatively, the project information can be a 
built on-premise repository, during the course of the 
project or an offline, read only installation at the end of 
the project. The offline project repository should have 
the following functionality: 


a) Repository size suitable for storing project 
information, 

b) Browser interface, 

c) Fulland accurate metadata for every mail and 
document record, 

d) Captures the data available to an individual 
user (including confidential), 

e) Flexibility in running specific repository for just 
mail or documents and also by defined time 
period, 

f) Full thread capability for all mails, 


g) Can be installed on a local server to allow 
access to multiple users, 


h) Easily browse between multiple different 
repositories from the same interface, and 


j) Can be password protected to prevent 
unauthorized access to the repository. 


6.2.10 Evaluation for Adoption of an Online Project 
Collaboration System 


Assessing the project nature, size and criticality, it needs 
to be assessed whether web based or online project 
collaboration system needs to be adopted and what level 
of collaboration needs to be adopted. It can be assessed 
in following steps: 


a) Step 1 — Conduct project analysis for each of 
the defining parameters as shown in Table 1. 

b) Step 2 — Prepare ‘collaboration matrix’. 
Assess the potential level of collaboration for 
each identified issue, to help determine the 
overall level of collaboration required for a 


Table 1 Parameters for Conducting Analysis for Online Collaboration System 
(Clause 6.2.10) 


SI Class Objectives 
No. 
a) (2) OI 


Examples of Parameters 


(4) 


i) Attitude 


users and management teams 


collaboration solutions on the project 


ii) Competency 
project participants involved 


Determine the attitudes and sentiment of the a) 


Determine the competency levels 


User resistance/willingness towards collaboration 


towards on the project 

b) Management support to drive collaboration 

c) Type of management support - passive or active 
of the a) Level of end-user computer skills and knowledge 


b) Prior experience with collaboration 

c) Level of competency in use of the collaboration 
tool 

Contractual arrangements between participants 
Specific clauses in contracts that affect the use of 
collaboration among participants 


Centralized or decentralized document control 
function 

b) Fragmented document control system 

c) Cultural diversity in project team 


the a) Internet access and reliability of service 


infrastructure may have on the collaboration b) Quality of computer systems 


iii) Commercial Determine the nature of the commercial a) 
arrangements between project participants b) 
involved 

iv) Environment Determine the type of environment the project a) 
teams are operating in 

v) Infrastructure Determine the potential impact 
experience 

vi) Process and Determine the specific requirements 

procedural process or procedure require 

vii) Project Determine the scope and factors that influence 

complexity the overall complexity 


viii) Regulatory/ 


operating within 


Determine the nature of the legal 
legal regulatory framework that the project is 


c) Firewalls 
the a) Defined or undefined processes and procedures 
b) Level of standardization 
c) Communication 
d) Roles and responsibilities 
e) Types of documents, for example hard copy or 
electronic, manual handle or automated 
f) Reporting requirements 
g) Review and evaluation policies 
h) Delegation of authority 
Scope and factors that influence the overall complexity 


and a) Legal or electronic 


documents 
b) Document retention obligations 


regulatory position on 


project. Format for determining level of 
collaboration required for different project 
functions and different levels of collaboration 
are as shown in Annex D. 


6.2.11 Cost of Technology Adoption and Cost-Benefit 
Analysis 


Adoption of IT systems and structured management 
systems would add to the cost of the project, but would 
also provide benefits in terms of successful delivery of 
projects. Thus a cost-benefit analysis needs to be 
conducted to finalize upon the system adoption that 
would be sustainable with respect to benefits that would 
be accrued. This analysis would lead to preparation of 
‘cost-benefit analysis report / budget for adoption of 
communication management plan’ and ‘system 
description plan’ for the IT system to be adopted. 


6.2.12 Adherence to ‘The Information Technology Act’ 


For the transactions carried out by means of electronic 
data interchange and other means of electronic 
communication, commonly referred to as ‘Electronic 
Commerce’, which involves the use of alternatives to 
paper based methods of communication and storage of 
information, ‘The Information Technology Act, 2000’ 
and rules/regulations framed thereunder shall be 
complied with. 


6.3 System Finalization 


After preparation of “Communication Requirement 
Analysis’ and assessment of above parameters, the lead 
organization needs to finalize the technology and 
management system that would be adopted by all 
participating organizations for information creation, 
transfer, storage and future retrieval that is 
communication management. The lead organization 
may evaluate the feasibility of using a system on an 
individual critical project, on multiple projects as best 
practice or as a standard enterprise solution on all 
projects. Licensing models for technology need to 
consider the project requirements, numbers and types 
of users, need or desire for customization and 
integration, and ability to scale. Annex A lists all 
documents that may be prepared during ‘plan 
communication management’ stage. 


7 IMPLEMENTATION OF COMMUNICATION 
MANAGEMENT PLAN 


7.1 Establishing Systems 


Systems need to be setup for facilitating communication 
management as per the ‘communication management 
plan’ prepared. This requires, 


a) finalizing contractual clauses for all tenders 
and agreements that would define uniform 


13 


IS 15883 (Part 9) : 2018 


communication management systems 

adoption by all project team organizations. 
b) assessment of hardware, software, systems and 
processes of lead organization and identified 
associating organizations for adoption of 
planned system. 
planning for staff training and systems 
upgradation for adoption of planned system. 
This would include planning with respect to 
time required, associated cost, staff availability 
for trainings and training programs, conducted 
in-house or outsourced to specialist 
consultants. 


As far as internal communication within project team 
is concerned, project-in-charge or project manager 
should be the focal point for all information on the 
project and should be the single point of contact for 
consultant, contractor and client. All team members 
should endeavor to break any communication barriers 
within the team. Project manager may designate a few 
key individuals to manage specific tasks, who in turn 
will become nodal points for the information on that 
specific task. 


7.2 Managing Drawings, Documents and Meetings 


Best practices need to be established for storage of 
drawings/documents, record keeping and monitoring 
their receipt and conduct of meetings. 


7.2.1 Drawings and Documents 


Following actions should be taken for handling drawing 
and documents: 


a) A copy of the drawings and documents 
received shall be stored both at head office 
and project site office for records and 
reference. ‘Receipt register’ shall be 
maintained at both the locations as a record 
for the drawings received. 

b) Transcripts for the hard copy drawings 

received shall be maintained in the ‘Receipt 

register’. 

For the drawings received online, the sending 

agencies shall be required to E-mail a scanned 

copy of the signed transcripts which shall be 
maintained in the ‘Receipt register’. 

d) Drawings and documents shall be stored in the 

chronological order for later records and 

reference. A system needs to be planned to 
avoid inadvertent use of superseded drawings 
and documents by project team members. 

e) Changes in drawings or changes in 

specifications and other documents made by 

different agencies shall be accepted at site only 
in the written form. 


IS 15883 (Part 9) : 2018 
f) Project site office shall update the soft copy 
drawing records periodically for the 
preparation of ‘As built drawings’, which 
would be submitted at the stage of handing 
over. 
A copy of all the documents received at site 
shall be forwarded by the project site office to 
the head-office for records and reference. 


g) 


h) Ifdrawings or documents are not received on 
time, the project-in-charge or project manager 
shall pursue with the concerned agency and if 
required it shall be intimated to the Head-office 
and the matter shall be pursued by the project 
team at the head office. 

j) Ir here is delay in receiving the drawings or 
documents, the matter shall be included in the 


reports and agenda of forthcoming meetings. 


Annex E shows an indicative table for maintaining 
receipt records of drawings or documents. 


7.2.2 Meetings 


7.2.2.1 Meetings, physical or virtual, between project 
participating organizations would be required for 
project work coordination. Till pre-construction stage 
of the project, these meetings would be conducted at 
head office, but from construction stage of the project, 
these meetings may be conducted at project site. 
Meetings could be categorised as following types: 


a) 
b) 
c) 
7.2.2.2 


a) 


Pre-start or project ‘kick off’ meeting. 
Periodic meetings at specified intervals. 
Emergency meetings at short notice. 


Meeting administration 


Agenda for all the meetings should be 
circulated to the concerned agencies 
sufficiently in advance. It would include new 
issues and pending issues from the previous 
meeting. This will help in effective usage of 
time and would lead to increased participation 
by the agencies. 

b) Each participating organization should be 
informed about the time at which their 
presence is required. This would improve the 
attendance at meetings. 

c) Minutes of the meetings shall be promptly 
prepared and circulated to the concerned 
agencies. 

Annex A shows the documents that may be prepared at 
this stage. 


8 MONITORING OF COMMUNICATION 


The communication plan adoption should ideally be 
initiated from the pre-construction stage of the project. 


14 


All organizations, vendors who get associated with the 
project at different stages of the project, should be 
contractually bound to adopt the ‘communication 
management plan’ as applicable and protocols 
established for it. 


8.1 Communication Management Audit 


8.1.1 Periodically audit needs to be conducted to assess 
the efficacy of planned systems. Points to be considered 
are as follows: 


a) Depending upon the criticality and duration 
of the project, audit may be conducted on 
quarterly, half-yearly or annual basis. 

b) Audit may be conducted by the in-house team 
of the lead organization or by a third party 
specialist consultant. 

Audit would be conducted at head office as 


well as at project site. 


c) 


d) Audit would be conducted for all information 
components. 


It would audit, 


1) 


e) 
information generation, retention, transfer 
and archiving. 

2) 
3) 


timely actions for above components. 


issues that may have originated due to 
delayed, incomplete, inaccurate or missing 
information. For this ‘Issues Log’ would 
be audited. 

impact on project in terms of disputes and 
project parameters of time, cost and 
quality due to delayed, incomplete, 
inaccurate or missing information. 


4) 


5) points raised in previous audit and their 


associated preventive/rectification actions 


‘Communication management audit’ would be planned 
and structured earlier in ‘plan communication 
management’ stage and would be part of planning. 
Deliverable of this action would be ‘communication 
management audit report’. 


8.1.2 Audit results and reporting would lead to 
following action/status: 


a) Communication management plan updation. 

b) Interaction with team members regarding non- 
conformance of plan and understating reasons 
for it. 

c) Ifrequired, re-training of staffand systems and 


processes updation. 
8.2 Communication Management Plan Updation 


Communication management plan updation needs to 
be authorized by the project-in-charge or project 


manager and lead organization. It would follow the 
same steps as in ‘Plan communication management’. 
Updated plan should be within the contractual 
arrangement for the project and should be 
communicated to all project team agencies. They should 
be given sufficient time to update their respective 
systems for adoption of updated plan. 


Annex A shows the documents that may be prepared at 
‘Monitor and Control Communication’ stage. 


IS 15883 (Part 9) : 2018 


9 POST CONSTRUCTION REVIEW AND 
DOCUMENTATION 


At project close out stage following actions shall be taken: 


a) All project communication shall be collated 
and archived in repositories (as given in 6.2.9) 
for future reference. 

b) Post construction communication 
management audit shall be conducted. 

c) Project completion/closure report including 
lessons learnt shall be documented as part of 
knowledge management. 


ANNEX A 
(Clauses 6.1.2, 6.2.1, 6.2.3.3, 6.3, 7.2.2.2 and 8.2) 
DOCUMENTS TO BE PREPARED AT DIFFERENT STAGES 


A-1 AT ‘PLAN COMMUNICATION MANAGEMENT?’ STAGE 


a) Communication requirement analysis: 


Stage of Project Drawing/Document Name Agency 1 Agency 2 Agency n 
DE p-s p-s 
p-s p-s p-s 
ee EE pes p-s 
p-s p-s p-s 
p-s p-s p-s 
p-s p-s p-s 
pis p-s p-s 
p — For reference for further work. 
q — For information. 
r — For approval. 
s — Not required. 
b) Drawings/Documents information file: 
Drawing/ ID | Content | Created | Software to | Import/ Periodicity | Filing 
Document by be Used Export of Updation | Information 
Information 


to Drawing / 


poo Document} e ëE 


IS 15883 (Part 9) : 2018 


c) Team authorization information: 


1) Project administrator access — Designated person 


2) Organization level access 


Name 
with 


of Person| Organization 1 Organization 2 Organization 3 


‘Organization 


level access’ 


Authorized Authorized Authorized Authorized Team 
Document Team member 1 | Team member 2 | Team member 3 member n 
X-Z X-Z X-Z 
X-Z X-Z 
X-Z X-Z 
X-Z X-Z 
X-Z X-Z 
X-Z X-Z 


x - Document administrator access level 


y - User full-access level 
z - User read-only access level 


c) Disposition process guide 

d) Communication protocols 

e) Collaboration matrix 

f) Cost-Benefit analysis report / Budget for 

adoption of communication management plan 

g) System description plan 
A-2 AT ‘ORGANIZE AND MANAGE 
COMMUNICATION’ STAGE 

a) System evaluation report, 

b) System upgradation plan; 


16 


1) Skills upgradation plan for team 


members, 
2) Processes planning plan, 
3) IT systems upgradation plan, 
c) Best practices for managing drawings, 
d) Best practices for managing documents, and 
e) Best practices for organizing and managing 
meetings. 
A-3 AT ‘MONITOR AND CONTROL 
COMMUNICATION’ STAGE 
a) Communication management audit report, 
b) Updated communication management plan, 
and 
c) Updated system upgradation plan. 


IS 15883 (Part 9) : 2018 


ANNEX B 
(Clauses 6.2.8 and 6.2.9.2) 
GENERIC FORMAT FOR MAINTAINING COMMUNICATION PROTOCOL INFORMATION OFA 
CONSTRUCTION PROJECT 
Client PMC Consultant 
Project Stage To | Ce To Ce To | Ce 
A — DESIGN 


A1 — Design Development 


Layouts 


Services design layouts 


User requirements and 
utility inputs 


Overall design 
specifications 


Utility specifications 


Samples and finishes 


MOM — Design 
review 


A2 — Sign-off 


Layouts/ Details 


Samples and finishes 


Services design 


Final tender drawings 
and specifications 


B— TENDER 


Budget and cost 
estimates 


Procurement and 
purchase requests 


Tender documents 


Comparative 
statements 


LOL PO 
C — CONSTUCTION 
C1 — Reports 


Project weekly reports 


Project monthly report 


Project schedule 


Order control tracking 
sheets 


Cost reports 


Safety statistics report 


Reports on pending 
drawings/ RFIS and 
submittals 


C2 — Minutes of Meeti 


Developer review 
meeting 


(Continued) 


ng 


IS 15883 (Part 9) : 2018 


review meeting 


ANNEX B 
(Clauses 6.2.8 and 6.2.9.2) 
(Concluded) 
Client PMC Consultant 
Project Stage To Ce To Ce 
Weekly progress 


Schedule review 
meetings 
Coordination meetings 


Weekly safety meetings 


Developer review 
meeting 


RFI (Request for 
Information) 


C3 — Construction Documentation 


NCR (Non- 


conformance report) 


Submittals 

Revisions to GFC 
drawings 

Change authorization 
request 


Change order/ 
Contract amendment 


Quality reports/ 
Checklists 


D — CLOSEOUT 
Snag lists 


As-built drawings and 
handing over 
documents 


18 


4 
[e] 
bi 


IS 15883 (Part 9) : 2018 


ANNEX C 
(Clause 6.2.9.1) 
PROJECT DOCUMENTATION RETENTION PERIODS 


C-1 The retention period needs to be added as per followed by a secondary process to select records fora 
prevailing law and terms of contract. This may be historical archive. 


Document Type Retention Period 


All business organization documents partnership agreements, articles 
of incorporation, bye-laws, annual meeting minutes, etc 


Accounting/Financial records Statements, checks, time sheets, expense 
reports, payroll, SSR 


Accounts receivable/payable, income tax returns 
Project records, proposals, job selection correspondence 
Permits and approvals and sign-off 

Final bid and final construction documents 
Presentations, models, and renderings 

Construction contracts 

Drawing and specifications, preliminary design and sketches 
Job photos, slides, videos 

Reports on onsite observations that is health and safety 
Feasibility, schematic design, design development sets 
Records of change 

Testing and commissioning documents 

As-built or record drawings 

Project E-mail 


Correspondence, meeting minutes, letters/memos, progress reports 
between all contract parties 


IS 15883 (Part 9) : 2018 


D-1 Each organization or project may adopt a 


ANNEX D 


(Clause 6.2.10) 
LEVELS OF WEB —- BASED COLLABORATION BETWEEN PROJECT TEAM ORGANIZATIONS 


collaboration solution that provides an appropriate mix 


of system features and functionality as given below: 


Level Characteristics Suitability Profile 
OI (2) (3) 
Level 1 a) Uses the basic features and functionality to a) Limited experience among participants to 
manage project documents drive use of system 
b) Used mainly as an EDMS providing an b) Strong requirement for manual 
electronic register and distribution between information management 
organizations. c) Infrastructure and support is not reliable 
c) Internal handling of documents is manual 
Level 2 a) Uses basic and some advanced system a) Participants motivated and driven to use 
features and functionality system 
b) Used as the primary medium across whole b) Mix of advanced and basic system 
project to manage project information competency 
c) Main project processes are mapped into the c) Some requirement for manual information 
system providing increased automation and management exists 
electronic documents management for d) Desire to introduce innovation and 
project automation for key inter-organizational 
processes 
e) Infrastructure and support is reliable 
Level 3 a) Uses many advanced features and a) Majority of participants have advanced 


functionality of system to manage project 
information 

b) Used as the only medium across project to 
manage project information 

c) Majority of project processes are re- 
engineered into system to provide 
maximum automation and electronic 
documents management for project 


competency in system 

b) Strong requirement to manage information 
digitally over manual 

c) Infrastructure and support is reliable 


D-2 EVALUATION TOOL 


Evaluation tools that guide decisions about required 
levels of collaboration on a project or organization are 
available. Basic evaluation criteria will take into 
consideration the scope and desired outcomes of the 
project but most collaboration systems should include 
the following at a minimum: 


1) Access control functionality. 


2) Document management. 


3) Audit trail / permanent project record. 


4) Storage capability (unlimited file storage). 


5) User capacity (unlimited users). 


6) Compliance to standards. 
7) Solution availability. 


8) Cloud or SAAS provider. 

9) Archive capability. 

10) Security (encryption, disaster recovery, 
reliability). 


D-3 


20 


11) Intuitive user interface. 


12) Data retrieval capability (search, extract, 
discover information). 


13) Reporting capability. 

14) Correspondence management. 

15) Third party system integration. 

16) Collaboration (red-line/markup/comment). 

17) Workflows capability. 

18) File type capacity (ability to view, distribute, 
many types of files). 

19) BIM process capability. 

20) Mobile access. 

21) Field management. 

22) Handover/O&M capability. 


INDICATIVE FORMAT FOR 


DETERMINING LEVEL OF COLLABORATION 
REQUIRED FOR DIFFERENT PROJECT 
FUNCTIONS 


Issue Comments 


a) Management support 

b) Team members’ willingness to adopt change 

c) Team members’ experience with collaboration systems 
d) Requirement for manual information management 

e) Requirement for digital information management 

f) Reliability of infrastructure and support, for example 

internet speed 

g) Internal network capacity 

h) Computer skills and knowledge 

j) Project timelines 

k) Project processes 
m) Level of defined accountabilities 

n) Level of coordination between project teams 

p) Geographical/location issues 

q) Other issues 


ANNEX E 
(Clause 7.2.1) 


IS 15883 (Part 9) : 2018 


Potential Level of 
Collaboration — 1, 2 or 3 


FORMAT FOR MAINTAINING RECEIPT RECORDS FOR DRAWINGS AND DOCUMENTS 


Drawing/ Document Details Date of 


Receipt 
Drawing Document Version 
No. Name 


21 


IS 15883 (Part 9) : 2018 


ANNEX F 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Construction Management (Including Safety in Construction) Sectional Committee, CED 29 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity (102, Sraddha Temple Tree, Rustom Bagh, 
Old Airport Road, Bengaluru) 

Aecom India Private Limited, Noida 

Airports Authority of India, New Delhi 

Builders’ Association of India, Mumbai 

Building Materials and Technology Promotion Council, New Delhi 

CSIR — Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 

Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Construction Industry Development Council, New Delhi 


Construction Skill Development Council, New Delhi 

Creative Design Consultants and Engineers (P) Ltd, Ghaziabad 
Cushman & Wakefield India Pvt Ltd, Gurugram 

Delhi Development Authority, New Delhi 


Delhi Metro Rail Corporation, New Delhi 


Delhi Tourism and Transportation Development Corporation, 
New Delhi 

EH and S Cares, New Delhi 

Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


Hindustan Construction Company Limited, New Delhi 

Hindustan Prefab Limited, New Delhi 

Indian Buildings Congress, New Delhi 

Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi 

Kaleidoscope, New Delhi 

Larsen and Toubro Limited, Chennai 

MN. Dastur and Company (P) Limited, Kolkata 

Military Engineer Services, Engineer-in-Chief’s Branch, Army 
Headquarters, New Delhi 


Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation, New Delhi 


National Buildings Construction Corporation Limited, New Delhi 


22 


Representative(s) 


Suri P. KrisHNAN (Chairman) 


SHRI PAWAN JAIPURIYAR 
SHRI ARVIND AGARWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI PRADEEP KUMAR 
SHRI S. SREEKUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI H. S. PASRICHA 
Suri SANJAY Son (Alternate) 


Dr SHAILESH KUMAR AGRAWAL 
Suri Pankas Gupta (Alternate) 


Dr Acuna K. MITTAL 
Suri Asay Chaurasia (Alternate) 


Suri M. K. SHARMA 
Suri SANJEEV Rastoc! (Alternate) 


Suri P. R. Swarup 
Suri O. P. Gupta (Alternate) 


CoL (RETD) ANIL KUMAR POKHRIYAL 
SHRI AMAN DEEP 
SHRI HARLEEN OBEROI 


ENGINEER MEMBER 
Cut ENGINEER (Desicn) (Alternate) 


SHRI DALJEET SINGH 
SHRI PRAMIT KUMAR GARG (Alternate) 


SHRI SHISHIR BANSAL 


Suri A. K. TRIPATHI 


Suri T. K. SEN 
Suri S. N. BHATNAGAR (Alternate) 


SHRI AVINASH HARDE 
SHRI RAJENDRA SAHANI (Alternate) 


CHAIRMAN AND MANAGING DIRECTOR 
Suri S. K. Jain (Alternate) 


SHRI DEEPAK NARAYAN 


Dr K. C. IYER 
Dr K. N. Jua (Alternate D 
Dr J. UMA Mauesuwar! (Alternate ID) 


SHRI AMOR Kooi 


Suri M. P. Narpu 
SHRI R. SHANKAR NARAYANAN (Alternate) 


Suri S. K. GUHA 
Suri GosBinDa PaL Cuoupuury (Alternate) 


Bric Manos KUMAR 
CoL M. K. Prasan (Alternate) 


Dr DEVENDRA VERMA 
Dr D Sat Basa (Alternate) 


Suri Hem RA 
Suri H. K. Duawan (Alternate) 


Organization 
National Institute of Construction Management and Research, 
Mumbai 
NTPC Ltd, New Delhi 
NITI Aayog, New Delhi 


PMI Organization Centre Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


RITES Ltd, Gurugram 


School of Planning and Architecture, New Delhi 
Shelter Consulting Engineers, Noida 


The Institution of Engineers (India), Kolkata 


In personal capacity (204, Sector A, Pocket-C, Vasant Kunj, 
New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (4/1, Technology Apartments, Patparganj, 
Delhi) 


In personal capacity (7A, Autumn Hue, Seasons, PPD Apartments, 
Kuravankonam, Kowdiar, Thiruvanthapuram) 


In personal capacity (4/1, Sector A, Pocket-C, Vasant Kunj, 
New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (Flat No. 125, Ankur Apartments, Patparganj, 
Delhi) 


In personal capacity (Flat No. 220, Ankur Apartments, Patparganj, 
Delhi) 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 15883 (Part 9) : 2018 


Representative(s) 
Dr ANIL AGARWAL 
Dr ARUN CHANDRAMOHAN (Alternate) 
Suri ANIL Kapoor 


SHRI SHATRUGHAN LAL 
Suri SANJAY Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI LEENA GUPTE SAMANT 
Suri Tesas Sura (Alternate) 


Suri PAWAN CHOUDHARY 
Suri M. D Jos (Alternate) 


Dr V. K. PAUL 
SHRI Manos KUMAR MITTAL 


Suri S. A. REDDI 
Suri Bipin Chand (Alternate) 
DR VANITA AHUJA 
Suri R. P. LAHIRI 
Suri Jose KURIAN 
Suri KRISHNA KANT 
Suri A. K. SHARMA 


Dr V. THIRUVENGADAM 


Suri SANJAY Pant, Scientist ‘F’ and Head (Civil Engg) 
[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI ABHISHEK PAL 
Scientist ‘B’ (Civil Engg), BIS 


Panel for Construction Project Management, CED 29/P1 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity (102, Sraddha Temple Tree, Rustom Bagh, 
Old Airport Road, Bengaluru) 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Creative Design Consultants and Engineers (P) Ltd, Ghaziabad 


Delhi Tourism and Transportation Development Corporation, 
New Delhi 


EH and S Cares, New Delhi 
Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi 


Larsen and Toubro Ltd, Chennai 


NTPC Ltd, New Delhi 


School of Planning and Architecture, New Delhi 

Shelter Consulting Engineers, Noida 

In personal capacity (204, Sector A, Pocket-C, Vasant Kunj, 
New Delhi) 


23 


Representative(s) 


Suri P. KRISHNAN (Convener) 


Suri M. K. SHARMA 
Suri SANJEEV Rastoc! (Alternate) 


SHRI AMAN DEEP 


SHRI SHISHIR BANSAL 


Suri A. K. TRIPATHI 


Suri A. K. MISHRA 
Suri D. Jana (Alternate) 


Dr K. C. IYER 


Suri M. P. Narpu 
SHRI R. SHANKAR NARAYANAN (Alternate) 


SHRI SATISH UPADHYAY 
Suri Amir TRIVEDI (Alternate) 


Dr V. K. PAUL 
Suri Manos KUMAR MITTAL 


DR VANITA AHUJA 


IS 15883 (Part 9) : 2018 


Organization Representative(s) 

In personal capacity (E-9, Gaur Green Avenue, Abhay Khand-II, SHRI ĪFTIKHAR A. DRABU 
Indirapuram, Ghaziabad) 

In personal capacity (C-2/2324, Vasant Kunj, New Delhi) SHRI CHANDRA PAL 

In personal capacity (4/1, Sector A, Pocket-C, Vasant Kunj, Suri KrisHNA KANT 
New Delhi) 

In personal capacity (608, Technology Apartment, I.P. Extension, Dr S. N. MANDAL 
Delhi) 

In personal capacity (Flat No. 125, Ankur Apartments, Patparganj, Suri A. K. SHARMA 
Delhi) 

In personal capacity (Flat No. 220, Ankur Apartments, Patparganj, Dr V. THIRUVENGADAM 
Delhi) 

In personal capacity (7A, Autumn Hue, Seasons, PPD Apartments, Suri Jose KURIAN 


Kuravankonam, Kowdiar, Thiruvanthpuram) 


Working Group on Communication Management, CED 29/P1/WG 9 


Organization Representative(s) 
In personal capacity (204, Sector A, Pocket-C, Vasant Kunj, Dr Vanita Anusa (Convener) 
New Delhi) 
Aconex India, Noida Suri Ronrr NIGAM 
Cushman & Wakefield India Pvt Ltd, Gurugram SHRI HARLEEN OBEROI! 
IRCON International Ltd, New Delhi Suri HITESH KHANNA 
Technovate Solutions, New Delhi Suri H. L. CHAWLA 


24 


(Continued from second cover) 


This standard (Part 9), communication management has been formulated with the aim to provide guidelines for 
communication management of construction projects in all stages. Successful planning and execution of a project 
is dependent on effective communication management planning and its implementation. This standard is intended 
to cover aspects on communication management as part of construction project management and information 
regarding the applicable tools and techniques. It gives guidelines on planning the communication management, 
organizing and managing communication and monitoring and controlling communication as part of the 
communication management process. Users of this standard are encouraged to employ suitable communication 
management techniques and technologies as an aid to implement provisions of this standard. 


The guidelines may be applicable in general to all construction projects. However, for smaller projects, the 
applicability of various provisions may be decided appropriately by the parties concerned. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for formulation of this standard is given in Annex F. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 29 (10729). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.1.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 26 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : CUT Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


