IS 13371 : 1992

( Reaffirmed 2004 )

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR CALIBRATION (RATING)OF ROTATING ELEMENT CURRENT METERS IN OPEN TANK

UDC

681-121-8 : 532.57 : 006.76

@J BlS 1992

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG * Price Group 4

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

March 1992

Fluid Flow Measurement

Sectional

Committee,

RVD 1

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Fluid Flow Measurement Sectional Committee had been approved by the River Valley Division Council. Water current meters are most widely used for several years for measurement of discharge in stream. Reliability, acceptability and accuracy of such discharge measurements are directly influenced by the accuracy with which the velocity measuring instruments are calibrated. Therefore, before a new current Velocity measurement by current meter is indirect method. meter is taken for field use it is required to be rated so as to establish relationship between its rotational speed and velocity of water. It is also necessary to rerate the current meter after it is used in the field for a certain period to account for possible wear and tear of its certain parts. The provisions in this Indian Standards are based on IS0 3455 : 1976 Liquid flow measurement in open channels .- Calibrating of rotating-element current-meters in straight open tanks. For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 ` Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )`. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

IS 13371 : 1992

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR CALIBRATION ( RATING) OF ROTATING ELEMENT CURRENT METERS IN OPEN TANK
1 SCOPE 1.1 This standard specifies the procedure of calibration ( rating ) of the rotating e!ement current meters. This involves experimental determination of the relationship between water flow velocity and rate of revolution of the rotating element, details of rating tank and equipment to be used. The procedure does not take into account any possible difference existing between the behaviour of a current meter moving in motionless water during rating and that of a fixed current meter in turbulent flow during field observations. 2 TERMINOLOGY 2.1 For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given in IS 1191 : 1971 $Glossary of terms and symbols used in connection with the measurement of liquid flow with a free surface ( jirst revision )' shall apply. 3 PRINCIPLE OF CALIBRATION 3.1 The rate of revolution of rotating element of a current meter is proportional to the velocity of flow. To determine this relationship, the current meter is mounted on a towing carriage and drawn through still water contained in a straight tank of uniform cross-section at a number of steady speeds of the carriage. Simultaneous measurements of the speed of the towing carriage and the rate of revolution of the rotating element are made. The two sets of values are related by one or more equations of which the limits of validity are stated. 4 CALIBRATION FACILITIES 4.1 Rating Tank The cross-section of the rating tank depends on the number of the instruments that can be calibrated simultaneously and has an effect on the stilling time ( i. e. time taken for the watei to become reasonably still after each run of the instrument mounted on the carriage ). The following criteria should be considered in deciding the dimensions of the rating tank. 1 4.1.1 Length The total length of the tank is determined considering the sectional lengths required for acceleration, stabilization and braking of the carriage and for measurements. The lengths of the accelerating, stabilizing and braking sections depend on the design of the carriage and on the maximum speed at which it is to be towed along the tank. Safety requirement of the carriage need to be taken into account while working out the length of the braking section. The length of the measuring section should be such that the calibration error, which is composed of inaccuracies in the measurement of time, distance covered and rate of revolution does not exceed the desired tolerance at any velocity. The required length will, therefore, depend on the type of current meter being calibrated, the way the signals are produced and transmitted and the method of calibration. For example, if measured times both for distance covered by the carriage and for the revolutions of current-meter counted are accurate to 0.01 set, the duration of test period should be at least 10 seconds at maximum speed and in order to achieve the accuracy of t,ime measurement to within 0.1 percent at the 95 percent confidence level. If the maximum speed of the carriage is 6 m/s, the measuring section of the tank would be 60 m long. Taking 20 m for acceleration and stabilizing and 20 m for braking, the total length of the tank would be about 100 m. 4.1.2 Depth The depth of the tank should be chosen taking into account the calibration error that may be caused due to the Epper effect. ( The wave crest produced by the current meter and its means of suspension which moves forward with the instrument, causes an increase in the height of the wetted cross-section and thus a reduction of the relative velocity. This phenomenon is known as Epper effect ). The error in calibration is caused particularly at the critical speed t

IS 13371 : 1992 i. e. the towing speed which coincides with the velocity of propagation of the surface wave. The critical velocity depends on the depth of the tank and the relationship is given by the equation V, = I/ 3 where g = acceleration due to gravity
d = depth of water in the tank

Following two types of carriages are in common use: a) Carriage moved along the rails by a cable driven from a constant speed motor installed at one end of the tank. This type of carriage may be lighter in construction due to which high acceleration and quick braking can be achieved but the elasticity of the towing cable can cause irregularities in the running of the carriage, thereby affecting the accuracy of the current meter rating. carriage which is moved b) Self-propelled along the rails by internally mounted electric motor(s). The drive system and the speed control system of this carriage may be installed on the carriage or kept stationary at one end of the tank.. The speed control of the drive system of the carriage may comprise a thyrister controlled variable speed unit of adequate power fitted with tachnometer for feed back control to achieve closed loop servo system for precise speed control. The power to the carriage may be fed by a trailing wire track system running alongside the rail or by a conductor system with sliding contacts. The self-propelled carriage will be heavier in construction. This increases the inertia of the carriage and assists in smoothing out the running irregularities of the carriage. 4.3 Measuring Equipment During rating of a current meter, the following parameters are to be measured simultaneously and precisely: a) Distance travelled by the carriage, delivered by the

The magnitude of the error due to Epper effect depends on the size of the current meter(s) and the current meter suspension device, relative to the cross-sectional area of the tank. It may be more pronounced in the velocity range from 0.5 V, to 1.5 Vc. When a very small currentmeter is calibrated the magnitude of the error may be negligible. Therefore in chasing the depth of the tank it is necessary to ensure that either the highest calibration velocities are attained before the interference or that these exceed it sufficiently for the critical zone to be bridged without extra'polation. 4.1.3 Width The width of the tank limits the number of current meters that can be calibrated simultaneously. It has also an affect on the time taken for the water to become reasonably still after each run of the instrument. Moreover, the error in calibration due to Epper effect is more pronounced in a narrower tank. For example, when a field type current meter on rod suspension is calibrated in a tank I.85 m wide in which the depth of water is l-85 m, the Epper effect is greatest at a speed of about 4 m/s and amounts to about 0.3 percent. The size of the effect dies away on either side of the critical velocity, but is detectable at velocities between 3 and 5 m/s. 4.2 Rating Carriage During rating, the current meters are suspended from a carriage which runs along the tank on parallel rails of adequate rigidity. These rails should be accurately aligned with respect to the length of the tank and also to the surface of the water in the tank. It should be ensured that the carriage runs without any vibrations since due to vibrations transmitted to the current meters, the rating would be disturbed. For this purpose it is essential that the rails are rigid and straight and that the rails and the wheels of the carriage are free of irregularities.
2

b) Number of pulses current meter, and c) Time. 4.3.1 Distance Measurement

The distance travelled by the carriage can be measured by different methods. The following are the two most common methods in use: a) Establishment to markers at regular intervals along the length of the calibration tank which actuate mechanical or

IS 13371 : 1992

optical pulse carriage.

transmitters

fitted

to the

b) Use of measuring wheels with mechanical or photoelecrric pulse transmitters which are drawn along the track by the carriage. The measurement of distance should be accurate to within 0.1 percent at the 95 percent confidence level. 4.3.2 Measurement
of Current Meter Pulses

and distance wheel pulses. Proper functioning of overall measuring system and knowing the performance of each current meter mounted on carriage for rating can thus be monitored while the data is being collected and stored by the system. 4.5 Ancillary
Equipment

In addition to the equipment mentioned in 4.4, the following equipment/devices should be provided in order to increase the efficiency of the Rating Tank: Equipment a> removing for filtering, dosing and scumfor the cleansing of the water and for keeping it free from algal growth. stilling devices or other similar devices to reduce the reflection in the water by the end walls of the tank. the alignment of a cable-suspended meter at the start of a run and for checking that the meter is swinging when measurements are started ( These should be available when the carriage is operated from a control room ).

For each revolution of the current meter one or more pulses are delivered depending on the number of contacts. These pulses may be counted in a given time or recorded. In measuring the number of current meter pulses in a given time, it is important to measure between identical points on the current meter pulse. The measurement of current meter revolutions should be accurate to within 0.1 percent at the 95 percent confidence level.
4.3.3 Time Measurement

b) Wave absorber,

cl Means for checking

A mechanical clock correct up to one millrsecond giving contact pulse after one or several seconds or an electronic clock capable of measuring fractions of a second should be used for time measurement. A variety of other methods is available by which the desired accuracy of measurement can be achieved. The measurement of time should be accurate to within 0.1 percent at the 95 percent confidence level. 4.4 Recording
4.4.1 Recorder Equipment

Means for observing the behaviour of current meter at speeds close to their threshold speed.

e) Means for checking the depth of immersion of the meters. rails periodically. the carriage.

f > Means for checking

the alignment

of

g) An instrument for checking vibrations of 4 A thermometer
for measuring the temperature of the water in the tank.

Ihe signals received for the distance, current meter revolutions and the time are recorded simultaneously as events on the graph of drum recorder or strip chart recorder. The speed of the recording media should be adjustable so that the separation of the current meter pulse may be compatible with the speed of the and the required accuracy of the carriage measurement. 4.4.2 Personal Based System
Computer ( PC )/Microprocessor

0 Current meter test rig for carrying

out spin test, balancing of propeller type current meters, their adjustment, repairs etc.
PROCEDURE for Calibration

5 CALIBRATION
5.1 Instructions

The user of the current meter should give the following instructions at the time of sending his current meter for rating: a) The limits when fixing be taken to points are zone where calibration ( speeds of a minimum limit, care should ensure that the last measuring situated clearly outside the the Epper effect is felt ).

A personal computer ( PC )/Microprocessor Based System can be used to sense and store the data of distance and current meter revolutions for a time interval that can be programmed into the system. This systems can also help to display on a graphic monitor the current meter

IS 13371 : 1992

b) The details of the means of suspension as used in the actual measurements i.e. rod profile and dimensions, type of suspension cable, type and mass of lish weight, fixing method of electric cable, position of current meter with respect to support, etc. c) The specifications of the oil used during actual measurement in case the meters are with oil filled contact system. d) Information regarding calibration results. 5.2 Suspension Attention points.
of the Current

interference, same during ment.

between current meters are the calibration and during measure-

5.2.4 A rod-supported meter should be rigidly attached to the rod so that it is aligned parallel to the direction of travel. A cable-suspended meter should be aligned with the direction of travel at the start of each run. 5.2.5 If the meter is of capable of swievelling in a balance should be checked adjusted before calibration the type which is vertical plane, its and, if necessary, tests are started.

presentation

of

Meter

should

be paid

to

the

following

5.2.1 The suspension of the meter should be as specified. This will usually be the same as used during field measurement. For example, during flow measurement in a closed conduit, if the current meter is mounted on the arm of an elliptical cross-section, it should be mounted on the rod of same elliptical cross-section during calibration. Where it is not possible to use the same type of suspension, a correction should be made based on actual calibration. If the signal cable is laid outside the rod during field measurements, a similar cable, attached in the same way, should be used for calibration. Care should be taken that the signal cable is not kept loose since the loose cables can influence the calibration result. 5.2.2 The meter should be placed at such a depth below the surface of the liquid that the surface influence is negligible. For an axial flow meter, a depth ( liquid level to rotary axis ) twice the diameter of the rotary element is generally su%cient. A cup type meter should be immersed to a depth of at least 0.3 m or one and half times the height of the rotor, whichever is greater. At higher, towing speeds there may be separation of flow behind certain rod profiles, causing a decrease in the angular velocity as if a thicker rod were used. This disturbance can often be eliminated by increasing the immersion depth, or by providing the rod with a flairing at the water surface. 5.2.3 If several current meters are calibrated at the same time, care should be taken to ensure that there is no mutul interference, or that the mounting is exactly reproduced in order that 4

5.2.6 Care should be taken to ensure that the carriage vibrations ( especially noticeable at lower speeds ) and the rod vibration especially noticeable at higher speeds ) are low enough not to influence the speed of revolution of the current meter. 5.3 Calibration
5.3.1 Tests

Minimum Velocity )

Response

Speed

( Threshold

The minimum response speed, also called as threshold velocity, is determined by gradually increasing the carriage velocity from zero until the rotating element revolves at a constant angular velocity. 5.3.2 Number of Observation Points Measurements should be carried out from the minimum response speed at a sufficient number of towing velocities to enable the calibration of the current meter to be defined accurately. It will generally be necessary to carry out tests at closer velocity intervals at the lower end of the range because the largest errors expressed as percentages usually occur in this range. For example 0.10 m/s intervals should be provided at the lower end of the range, 0.25 m/s intervals in the middle of the range and 0.5 m/s at the upper end of the range. In accordance with current practice in a number of calibration laboratory the total number of measuring points would be about: 10 to 12 for caIibration 12 to 16 for calibration 16 to 20 for calibration 5.3.3 Stilling Time The water still before should be negligible and the tank should be relatively each test run and the waiting period chosen so that residual velocities are compared with the following test t up to 2 m/s up to 5 m/s up to 8 m/s

IS 13371 : 1992

velocity. The time needed for the water to be still depends on the dimensions of the tank, the use of damping devices, the previous test velocity, the size and shape of the meters and of the suspension equipment immersed in the water. The following guidance:
Velocity m/s

R

--- ' x "1 t x PI
_

( rev/set

)

V = Average velocity
t = Number

of the carriage.

of seconds represented on the chart by a trace of length ( mm ).

mean

values

are

given

for

Stilling Time

min 10 15 25 30
Results

S = The distance between an integral number of distance markers at the side of the tank ( or the distance transmitted by the measuring wheel ), represented by a trace of length ( mm ).
R = Number

0.5 2.0 5.0 8.0
5.4 Evaluation

of revolutions per second of the rotating element of the current meter. integral number of revolutions represented by a trace of length (mm).

P = An

b)

The towing speed (V) is calculated from the simultaneous measurements of distance and the rate of revolutions ( R ) is obtained by simultaneous measurement of the number of pulses ,delivered by the current meter and time. 5.4.1 Determination
of Towing Speed Rate of Revolution (R) ( V) and

If a graph recording system as mentioned in 4.4.1 is used, V and R can be determined in following two ways: a) Lengths corresponding to a certain number of pulses relating the current meter to the distance and time are measured along the recording strip in millimetres as shown in Fig. 1. The values of V and R are obtained following equations:
v_

The beginning and the end of the recording segments corresponding to a given number of pulses relating to the current meter on the one hand and to the distance on the other hand are projected into the time recording line as shown in Fig. 2. The interpolation between two time-signals allows the exact duration corresponding to the number of rotor turns and to the distance chosen to be determined. This method is particularly suitable with long recording-strips. obtained from the

The values of V and R are following equations:
V= $

(m/s)
( rev/s )

R = $

from

the where
t,=

-

txl,

sx4

(m/s)

and

the time ( number of complete intervals and fractional intervals of time multiplied by the duration of one interval ) corresponding to a travel of distance S.

ti

TIME(tl

1 * -I rLJ `3 12 LJ Ll 4 _j-

DISTANCE

(s.1

CURRENT

METER

PULSES

(p)

FIG. 1

LENGTHS CORRESPONDING TO A CERTAINNUMBEROF PULSES
1

5

IS 13371 : 1992
2
cmd `2 DISTANCE(s) TIME (ti

CURREN

METER

PULSES(p)

FIG. 2

SEGMENTS CORRESPONDING TO A GIVEN NUMBEROF PULSES

f,=

the time ( number of complete interval and fractional intervals of time multiplied by the duration of one interval ) corresponding to N revoluttons of the rotating element of the current meter.

where V = the velocity ( m/s ) of the rotating determined for element each R = the revolution per second A&B = constants equation

If an electronic counter is used for recording, the values of V and R can be calculated by dividing the distance and the number of revolutions by the time respectively. In the Personal Computer (PC)/Microprocessor Based System the values of V and R are computed by the programme residing in the system. The programme should be interactive. The tabular printout of the rating is obtained on the printer of the system and/or the curve on a graphic plotter. 5.42 Calibration ( Rating ) Curve

5.5 Presentation of Results 5.5.1 Calibration ( Rating ) Tables The calibration tables can best be prepared on computer. On one hand it can be prepared by feeding the constants A & B to the computer which is programmed to produce a rating table giving equations of the straight lines with which the calibration curve coincides specifying the limit of application of each equation.

A curve should be plo,ted from the observation data, taking velocity ( V ) as the ordinate ( R ) as the abscissa. For the cup type field current meter, which is largely in use in our country, a straight line relationship of rating is obtained. In case of propeller type current meter also a straight line relationship exists. In order to check the accuracy of the results a large scale for V and R need to be chosen on a big size graph sheet. If some of the observation points, particularly from the high velocity zone, are found to be deviated from the established mean curve i.e. the deviation of these points not within the permissible limit, it may be concluded either that the mistake in computing the result has occurred or that the current meter is faulty. Such rating should not be accepted.

The computer programme can be arranged to produce the tables in the forms suitable to the gauging techniques used. The velocity can be given for every 0.01 rev/s or for integral number of revolutions in a predetermined time interval or corresponding to a predetermined number of revolutions. Calibration tables can also be prepared on the other hand by feeding the V and R data to the computer. It may so happen that spurious experimental value of V and R for one observation is passed to the computer unSuch spurious values may be identinoticed. fied and eliminated by inserting in the computer programme the limiting values for the deviations of individual points from the rating curve. Provision should also be made in the Rating Table to print the values of V and along with the value of percentage deviation of each observa5.43 Calibration ( Rating ) Equation tion point from the established mean rating curve. As a check for goodness of fit of the One or two equations of the straight lines with calibration curve standard error of the data which the calibration curve roughly coincides should also be stated as a percentage of mean can be computed by least square method. velocity class and should be related to the These straight line equations are generally given 95 percent confidence limits. in the following form: address of the Rating i) Name and laboratory. V=A+BR t 6

IS 13371 : 1992 ii) Date of calibration. iii) Make and type of the meter. iv) Manufacturer's serial number meter and of each rotor. v) Serial number Iaboratory. given by the iii) Epper effect ( as described of the c) Accuracy meter. of manufacture in 4.1.2 ) of
CUrrerlt

Rating

vi) Spinning time of a cup type currentmeter or the pitch of a propeller of the propeller type current meter. vii) Threshold velocity ( i.e. the minimum speed of response ). viii) Details of the suspension used. ix) Limits of calibration. deviation and x) The values of standard percentage deviation for each equation of the straight line. xi) Viscosity of the bearing oil in case of a propeller type current meter. xii) Special instruction, if any. xiii) Signature of a responsible member of the staff at the calibration station. 6 FACTOR AFFECTING ACCURACIES CURRENT METER CALIBRATION 0%

Basic design of a current meter as Well as the accuracy with which it is manufactaccuracy of the affect ured also The overall precision of calibration. calibration of a cup type water currentmeter is taken as 1.5 percent. This can be improved by increasing the standard of manufacture by using material of high quality. 7 CALIBRATION TANK FOR CURRENT METERS MINIATURE

7.1 Miniature propeller current meters are used for velocity measurements in hydraulic models in the speed range of 2.5 cm/s to 100 cm/s. These current meters should be calibrated in a specially designed small circular tank. The tank should be in the form of an open annular trough of stationary water through which the current meter supported at the end of an arm rotating at a constant speed, is propelled. Baffle pIates should be positioned in the tank at equal intervals to inhibit water currents induced by the motion of the current meter. A crystal co&rolled clock preferably with a five digit readout for measuring the time and a three digit counter for counting the current meter pulses should be fitted in a control console. The clock and the counter may be started and stopped automatically by suitable means at angular positions around the trough of 0 degree, 90 degree, 180 degree and 360 degree to permit the selection of calibration distances of a quarter, half or a fulI revolution of the arm. All the necessary current meter signal conditioning equipment should also be fitted in the control console. The tank should be of dimensions of about 300 mm width, 350 mm depth and mean radius o 1 000 mm. The coaxial drive system should be a geared motor mounted on the central structure of the tank, driving the central shaft such that its speed range permits the current meter velocities in the range 2.5 cm/s to 100 cm/s. The driver system and the towing arm should be so designed that the vibrations in the system are minimised,

Overall accuracy of a current meter calibration depends on the following factors: Accuracy of measurement of parameters a> of time distance and current meter pulses. Considering the accuracy of each measuring equipment of measurement of time distance and current meter pulses of the order of 0.1 percent, the maximum error on account of these parameters could be expected to be 0.2 percent.

b) Tank disturbances.
Though it is presumed that a current meter is towed in calm water, disturbances exist in tank water on account of following features:

0 Slow circulation
thermal effect.

of tank water due to

from previous ii) Residual disturbance runs at the time when a fresh run is started.

7

I Standard Mark
The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau 91 Indian Act, 2986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and Standard marked products are also continuously checked by operated by the producer. Details of conditions under BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.
Standards

Bureau of Indian Standard

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of lndian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.
Copvrigbt

BIS has the copyright

of all its publications.

No part of these publications

may

be

reproduced

in any form without the prior permission in writing of 81s. `Jhis does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type Director Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the or grade designations.

( Publications

), BIS.

Revision of Indian Standards when necessary and amendments, it lndian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may bf sent to BIS giving the following reference:

Doc:No.RVD1(6)

Amendments

Issued Since Publicatioo

Amend No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN Headquarters
:

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, Telephones r 331 01 31, 331 13 75

New Delhi 110002 Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone I 331 01 31 331 13 75 37 86 62 53 38 43 235 02 16

Regional Offices f Central : Manak Bhavan, Y Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. 1. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern Southern Western Branches f SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS
: Manakalaya,

160036 600113

E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) 6 32 92 95 BOMBAY 400093 : AHMADABAD, BANGALORE, BHOPAL, BHUBANESHWAR, COIMBATORE, FARIDABAD, GHAZIABAD, GUWAHATI, HYDERABAD, JAIPUR, KANPUR, . LUCKNOW, PATNA, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. t

Printed at Printwell Printers, Aligarh, India

