RAT AAF IS 1448 (Part 142) : 2021 
Indian Standard 


Teter va Sees seara 
chy uttaror uga 
UT 142 Naa Halex ere LAUTA Salsa Ser AT 
HT TAHT STATA ATT SHAT 


( TET TÖTT ) 


Methods of Test for Petroleum 
and its Products 


Part 142 Determination of Water Separation 
Characteristics of Aviation Turbine Fuels by 
Portable Separometer 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 75.080 


© BIS 2021 


anda AM Sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Te TH AMT, ay freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


April 2021 Price Group 8 


Methods of Sampling and Test for Petroleum, its Products, Gaseous Fuels and Lubricants Sectional Committee, 
PCD 01 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft finalized by 
the Methods of Sampling and Test for Petroleum, its Products, Gaseous Fuels and Lubricants Sectional Committee 
had been approved by the Petroleum, Coal and Related Products Division Council. 


This standard was first published in 1993 covering two different modes of test equipment to provide a 
measure of the presence of surfactants in various types of aviation turbine fuels, namely, Jet A-1, Jet A, Jet B, 
MIL JP 4, MIL JP 5, MIL JP 7 and MIL JP 8, based on ASTM D3948-87. Like test methods 
IS 1448 (Part 137) : 1991 ‘Water separation characteristics of aviation turbine fuels’ and ‘Field test methods — 
the Minisonic-Separometer Surfactants (MSS)’, these test methods can detect carry over traces of refinery treating 
residues in fuel as produced. They can also detect surface-active substances added to or picked up by the fuel 
during handling from point of production to point of use. Certain additives may also have an adverse effect on 
the rating. Some of these substances affect the ability of filter separators to separate free water from the fuel. The 
effects of fuels containing static dissipator additives have, however, not been included. 


Since enormous changes have taken place in the test instruments technology and as ASTM D3948 was revised 
in 2014, the committee has now decided to revise this standard. 


This first revision includes single test method with two different modes of test equipment operation and the 
scope was upgraded accordingly. The primary difference between the modes of operation is the rate of fuel 
flow through the fiberglass coalescing material and the mode selection is dependent on the particular fuel to be 
tested. With the passage of time, various earlier models of Micro-Separometers have been rendered obsolete and 
Micro-Separometer Type-1 and Type-2 are in use now. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex E. 


In reporting the results of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or 
calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical 
values ( revised )’. 


IS 1448 (Part 142) : 2021 


Indian Standard 


METHODS OF TEST FOR PETROLEUM 
AND ITS PRODUCTS 


PART 142 DETERMINATION OF WATER SEPARATION CHARACTERISTICS OF 
AVIATION TURBINE FUELS BY PORTABLE SEPAROMETER 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard (Part 142) describes a test method 
by rapid portable equipment, that can be used in field 
and laboratory use to rate the ability of aviation turbine 
fuels to release entrained or emulsified water when 
passed through fiberglass coalescing material. 


1.2 This test method contains two different modes of 
operating test equipment based on rate of fuel flow 
through the fiberglass coalescing material. The test 
methods are dependent on the particular fuel to be 
tested. 
WARNING — The use of this document can involve 
hazardous materials, operations and equipment. This Standard 
does not purport to address all of the safety problems associated 
with its use. It is the responsibility of users of this standard 
to take appropriate measures to ensure the safety and health 
of personnel prior to the application of the standard, and to 
determine the applicability of regulatory limitations and any 
other restrictions for this purpose. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards given below contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions 
of this standard. At the time of publication, the 
editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of these 
standards. 


IS No. 
1070 : 1992 


Title 


Reagent grade water — 
Specification (third revision) 


1448 (Part 137) Methods of test for petroleum 


: 1991 and its products: Part 137 Water 
separation characteristics of 
aviation turbine fuels 

3 TERMINOLOGY 


3.1 Micro-separometer Rating (MSEP Rating) — It 
is a numerical value indicating the ease of separating 


emulsified water from aviation jet fuel by coalescence 

as affected by the presence of surface active agents. 
NOTE — MSEP rating obtained using Test Mode A and Test 
Mode B are termed MSEP-A and MSEP-B, respectively. 
MSEP ratings are only valid within the range of 50 to 100, 
with ratings at the upper end of the range indicating a clean 
fuel with little or no contamination by surfactants. This rating 
is expected to show good water-separating properties when 
passed through a filter-separator (coalescing-type filter) in 
actual service. 


3.2 Reference Fluids, in MSEP and DSEP (Diesel 
Separability and Water Separability Test) — 
A reference fluid is a base to which a prescribed 
quantity of a known surface-active agent has been 
added. The known surface-active agent is typically 
bis-2-ethylhexyl sodium sulfosuccinate, commonly 
referred to as AOT, dissolved in toluene. 


3.3 Surfactant — In petroleum fuels, surface active 
agent that could deactivate filter separator or coalescing 
elements so that free water is not removed from the 
fuel. 

NOTE — Surfactants affect the interfacial tension between 


water and fuel, as water has a tendency to coalesce into 
droplets. 


3.4 Reference Fluid Base — In aviation MSEP 
water separability tests, a clean jet fuel that has no 
surface-active agents, and having a minimum MSEP 
rating of 97. 


4 SUMMARY OF TEST METHOD 


This test method uses a Micro-Separometer to 
perform test. A water/fuel sample emulsion is created 
in syringe using a high-speed mixer. The emulsion 
is then expelled from the syringe at a programmed 
rate through standard fiberglass coalescer and the 
effluent is analyzed for uncoalesced water by a light 
transmission measurement. The results are reported on a 
0 to 100 scale to the nearest whole number. High 
ratings indicate the water is easily coalesced implying 
that the fuel is relatively free of surfactants. A test can 
be performed in 5 to 10 min. 


IS 1448 (Part 142) : 2021 


5 SIGNIFICANCE 


5.1 These test methods provide a measure of the 
presence of surfactants in aviation turbine fuels. Like 
field test methods, these test methods can detect carry 
over traces of refinery, treating residues in fuel, as 
produced. They can also detect surfactants added to 
or picked up by the fuel during handling from point 
of production to point of use. Certain additives can 
also have an adverse effect on the rating. Some of 
these substances affect the ability of filter separators to 
separate free water from the fuel. 

NOTE — The effects of fuels containing static dissipater 

additives have not been investigated but test programs using 

these additives are under review. 


5.2 The Micro-Separometer has a measurement range 
from 50 to 100. Values obtained outside of those 
limits are undefined and invalid. In the event a value 
greater than 100 is obtained, there is a good probability 
that the light transmittance was reduced by material 
contained in the fuel used to set the 100 reference level. 
The material was subsequently removed during the 
coalescing portion of the test, thus, the processed fuel 
had a higher light transmittance than the fuel sample 
used to obtain the 100 reference level resulting in the 
final rating measuring in excess of 100. 


5.3 The test Mode B option is used to determine water 
separation ratings for MIL JP-4 fuels containing fuel 
system corrosion and icing inhibitors. 


5.4 Selection of Mode A or Mode B depends on the 
specific fuel and specification requirement. Table 1 
identifies the recommended test mode for various fuels. 


5.5 The basic difference between Modes A and B is the 
flow rate at which the water/fuel emulsion is forced 
through the standard fiberglass coalescer cell. The 
lapsed time required to force the emulsion through the 
coalescer cell in Mode A is 45 + 2 s, whereas, Mode B 
requires 25+ 1s. 


Table 1 Applicable Test Mode for Various Fuels 
( Clauses 5.4 and 10.1 ) 


SI No. Fuel Applicable Test Mode 

(1) (2) 6) 

i) Jet A A 

ii) Jet A-1 A 

iii) Jet B A 

iv) MIL JP-5 A 

v) MIL JP-7 A 

vi) MIL JP-8 A 
vii) MIL JP-4 B 


6 APPARATUS 


6.1 Micro-Separometer 


Used to perform the test is completely portable and 
self-contained, capable of operating on either internal 
rechargeable battery pack or being connected to 
an a.c. power source using power cords at various 
voltages. Connection to an a.c. power source will also 
affect battery recharge. The accessories as well as the 
expendable materials for six tests can be packed in 
the cover of the lockable case. Detailed description 
of Micro-Separometers and their operation is given in 
Annex A. 


7 REAGENTS 


7.1 Aerosol OT — Solid (100 percent dry) 
bis-2 ethylhexyl sodium sulfosuccinate. 


7.2 Dispersing Agent —Toluene solution containing 1 
mg of Aerosol OT per milliliter of toluene. 


7.3 Reference Fluid 


7.3.1 Consist of increasing concentrations 
(0 to 1.2 ml/l) of dispersing agent added to the reference 
fluid base. 


NOTE — Reference fluid base is a surfactant-free clean 
hydrocarbon material which is used to verify proper operation 
and is prepared in the manner described in Annex B. 


7.3.2 The MSEP-A ratings for this range of 
concentration appear in Table 2 for Jet A, Jet A-1, MIL 
JP5, MIL JP7 and MIL JP8 fuels and in Table 3 for Jet 
B fuels using Mode A. The MSEP-B ratings for MIL 
JP-4 fuels using Mode B are shown in Table 4. The 
reference fluids shall be tested as described in 10 using 
the applicable mode of operation. If the results do not 
fall within the range of limits shown in Tables 2, 3 and 
4, the reference fluid shall be discarded, a fresh quantity 
of reference fluid prepared and the check repeated. 
Repeated out of tolerance test results are cause for 
returning the instrument to the factory for adjustment 
and calibration. 


NOTES 


1 The reference fluid base should have standard MSEP rating 
of 99 + without any dispersion agent; otherwise, the results 
may not be indicative of the accuracy of the instrument. Values 
obtained outside the measurement range from 50 to 100 are 
undefined and invalid. 

2 A Micro-Separometer manual is furnished with each 
instrument. 


Table 2 Expected Performance with Jet A, Jet A-1, 
MIL JP-5, MIL JP-7 or MIL JP-8 Reference Fluid 
Containing a Dispersing Agent using 
Mode A Operation 


( Clause 7.3.2 ) 


SI Concentration of Standard Limits for Acceptable 


No. Dispersing Agent Rating Performance* 
ml/l 
Min Max 
a) (2) G3) (4) 5) 
i) 0 99 97 100 
ii) 0.2 89 82 94 
iii) 0.4 80 69 88 
iv) 0.6 72 59 83 
v) 0.8 65 51 77 


*Expected range of value obtained by using increasing amounts of 
dispersing agent used to verify instrument calibration. 


7.4 Reference fluid shall be prepared by adding 
dispersing agent (see 7.2) to a suitable quantity of 
reference fuel base. 


NOTES 


1 If a new or non-equilibrated container is used, the additive 
may adsorb on the walls and the MSEP ratings may improve 
significantly. To equilibrate the container surface, an additive 
blend should be held for a minimum of 24 h, discarded, and 
replaced with a fresh blend. 

2 For field use, instrument calibration can be verified by 
performing MSEP tests using a dilution of the dispersing 
agent (see 7.2), a reference fluid base (see Annex B), and 
distilled water. A 10:1 dilution is prepared by diluting 10 ml 
of dispersing agent with 90 ml of toluene (see 7.5). Since 
1 ml of dilution is equal to 0.1 ml of dispersing agent, 50 ul of 
dilution is equal to 0.1 ml/l when added to 50 ml of reference 
fluid base. 0.1 ml/l of dispersing agent corresponds to even 
multiples of the concentration levels listed in Tables 2, 3 
and 4. This facilitates using the 50 ul pipet (see A-7.3.5) to 
add increments of 0.1 ml/l of dispersing agent, as well as the 
distilled water required for the MSEP test. Depending on the 
type of reference fluid base, the MSEP ratings are compared 
to the values listed in the applicable table for the particular 
concentration of dispersing agent used. 


7.5 Toluene — ACS reagent grade. 


7.6 Water — Clean, distilled and surfactant free 
(see IS 1070). 


NOTE — Tap water will render test results invalid. 


IS 1448 (Part 142) : 2021 


Table 3 Expected Performance with Jet B 
Reference Fluid Containing a Dispersing Agent 
using Mode A Operation 


( Clause 7.3.2 ) 


SI Concentration of Standard Limits for Acceptable 


No. Dispersing Agent Rating Performance 
ml/l 
Min Max 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) 0 99 96 100 
ii) 0.3 92 86 97 
iii) 0.6 88 81 95 
iv) 0.9 86 78 94 
v) 1.2 79 69 90 


*Expected range of value obtained by using increasing amounts of 
dispersing agent used to verify instrument calibration. 


NOTE — Standard ratings are based on actual averages and 
the limits are based on 1⁄2 calculated reproducibility value 
from the average. A standard rating of 99 was used for the base 
reference fuel instead of the actual average since this value is 
preferred. 
Table 4 Expected Performance with MIL JP-4 
Reference Fluid Containing a Dispersing Agent 
using Mode B Operation 


( Clause 7.3.2 ) 


Sl Concentration of Standard Limits for Acceptable 


No. Dispersing Agent Rating Performance* 
ml/l 
Min Max 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) 0 99 93 100 
ii) 0.2 88 83 93 
iii) 0.4 81 76 86 
iv) 0.6 74 69 79 
v) 0.8 69 64 74 
vi) 1.0 64 59 69 
vil) 1.2 60 55 65 


*Expected range of value obtained by using increasing amounts of 
dispersing agent used to verify instrument calibration. 


IS 1448 (Part 142) : 2021 


8 PREPARATION OF APPARATUS 


8.1 Maintain the room temperature between 18 to 29 °C, 
with a variation up to + 3 °C and locate the instrument 
on a clean workbench. 


8.2 Open the case and remove the six-pack box from 
the lid. Raise the right panel until completely vertical 
and locked in place. If a.c. power is available, connect 
the power cord and turn the instrument on. If the 
internal battery power is used, assure that the batteries 
are charged sufficiently to perform the desired number 
of test. Low battery power is indicated when the power 
lamp does not illuminate. Connect the instrument to an 
a.c. power source for at least 16 h (full charge) prior 
to use. Approximately 25 tests can then be performed. 
NOTE — If the battery in MS type 1 is not charged sufficiently 
to run a test, an ERR-06 will be displayed indicating that the 
battery must be recharged. 


8.2.1 Turn on the Type-1 or Type-2 instrument 
for starting the testing (for operational details 
see Annex A). 


8.3 Syringes, vials, coalescers, syringe plugs, pipette 
and pipette tips and clean container with distilled water 
are to be kept ready. 


8.4 Syringe drive travel times during the coalescing test 
period were initially calibrated at the factory for each 
mode of operation and have a significant bearing on the 
final test results. Type-1 and Type-2 these instruments 
have self-check circuitry to detect out of tolerance 
syringe drive travel times. 
NOTE — Syringe drive travel times exceeding the upper limit 
will cause the final results to measure high; conversely, travel 
times below the lower limit cause the final results to measure 
low. 


9 SAMPLE PREPARATION 


9.1 Do not pre-filter the sample as filter media can 
remove the surfactants. If the test fuel is contaminated 
with particulate matter, allow such materials to settle 
down before testing. 


9.2 Special precautions concerning sample containers 
and sampling technique are given in Annex C. Extreme 
care and cleanliness are required while handling 
samples. Before pouring the test sample from the 
container, wipe the container outlet thoroughly with a 
clean, lintless wiper. Pour the test sample into a clean 
beaker or directly into the barrel of the test syringe. 


NOTE — Test method results are sensitive to trace 
contamination from sampling containers. 


10 PROCEDURE 


10.1 Select the mode of operation. (Refer to Table 1 for 
applicable mode for a specific fuel). 


10.2 Remove a plunger from a new 50 ml syringe and 
wipe the tip using a clean, lintless wipe to remove any 
sheen caused by excess lubricant. Insert a plug into the 
tapered bottom of the syringe barrel, add 50 + 1 ml 
of fuel and place the syringe barrel on the emulsifier 
mount turning to lock in place. Ensure that the syringe 
barrel is properly aligned concentrically with the mixer 
shaft and is not touching the propeller. 


NOTE — Only nitrile gloves are recommended for use while 
handling the syringe barrel, as static charge may buildup 
during the test. 


10.2.1 Proper alignment can be verified by grasping the 
syringe barrel and moving the same until the propeller 
on the end of the mixer shaft is free and not touching. 
Misalignment can cause plastic shavings to form and 
collect on the coalescer filter material resulting in 
erroneous test results. 


10.3 Initiate the first CLEAN cycle by pressing the 
START (Type-1) or CLEAN 1 (Type-2) pushbutton as 
designated by the annunciator light. 


NOTES 

1 The Type-2 will illuminate ERROR ALERT and display an 
ERR-05 when the emulsifier speed is outside of acceptable 
limits. 

2 Do not operate the mixer without having a syringe with fuel 
in place. The mixer bearings depend on the fuel for lubrication. 


10.4 Remove the syringe barrel from the emulsifier, at 
the end of the first clean cycle, when the mixer motor 
stops. Discard the fuel and drain the syringe thoroughly. 
Add 50 + 1 ml of fresh fuel into the syringe. Keep the 
syringe barrel on the emulsifier mount and turn to lock 
in place. Visually inspect the syringe barrel so that it 
is properly aligned concentrically with the mixer shaft 
and is not touching the propeller. 


10.5 Second Clean Cycle 


10.5.1 Zype-1 — Initiate the second CLEAN cycle 
by sequentially pressing the RESET, A or B, and the 
START pushbuttons, as designated by the annunciator 
light. 


10.5.2 Type-2 — Initiate the second CLEAN cycle by 
pressing the CLEAN 2 pushbutton. 


10.6 Add about 15 to 20 ml of the fuel sample into new 
vial. Wipe the outside of the vial with a clean, lintless 
wiper. Insert the vial into the turbidimeter well. Align 
the black mark on the vial at 90° from the white line on 
the front of the turbidimeter well. Rotate the vial until 
the black mark on the vial aligns with the white line on 
the front of the turbidimeter well. 


10.7 Remove the syringe barrel from the emulsifier, at 
the end of the first clean cycle, when the mixer motor 
stops. Discard the fuel and drain the syringe thoroughly. 
Add 50+ 1 ml of fresh fuel into the syringe. 


NOTE — Handle the syringe in such a manner as to minimize 
warming of the fuel sample by body heat. 


10.8 Using a fresh plastic tip on the hand pipette, add 
50 ul of distilled water to the fuel sample as given in 
10.8.1. 


10.8.1 Ensure a tight seal with a slight twist to the plastic 
tip, push in the plunger, immerse the tip just below 
the water surface, release the plunger, and withdraw 
from the water slowly to avoid water drops adhering 
to the outside of the tip. Immerse the tip of the pipet 
just below the fuel surface in the centre of the syringe 
(see Fig. 1) so that the water drops break away clearly 
and fall down. Push and hold in the plunger, withdraw 
the pipet, and release the plunger. 


10.9 Place the syringe barrel on the emulsifier mount 
turning to lock in place. 


10.10 Initiate Type-1 automatic portion of the 
applicable test mode program as given in Table 5 by 
placing the syringe in place and pressing the START 
pushbutton (Fig. 7). For interrupting sequence and start 
over, press the RESET pushbutton that will cancel the 
test in progress and reset the program to the beginning 
of the CLEAN segment of the test cycle. 


Fic. 2 METER ADJUST 


IS 1448 (Part 142) : 2021 


10.10.1 The automatic program starts with a read meter 
indication (four short tones) followed by adjustment 
period of 10 s full-scale. Adjust the meter to read 
100 (see Fig. 2). If the adjustment cannot be completed 
at this time, final adjustment can be accomplished 
during the second meter adjust period occurring later 
in the test sequence. 


10.10.2 After the full-scale adjustment period, the mixer 
motor activates and initiates the emulsion process. 
NOTE — During the mixing operations, a few drops of fuel 


may seep from the hole in the emulsifier head. This may affect 
the test results. 


10.11 Initiate the Type-2 automatic portion of the 
applicable test mode program as given in Table 5 by 
placing the syringe in place and pressing the RUN 
pushbutton. 


10.11.1 The automatic program starts with a read meter 
indication (four short tones) followed by adjustment 
period of 2 to 30 s. The turbidimeter will automatically 
adjust to 100. If not adjusted at this time, the ERROR 
ALERT will illuminate and an ERR-04 will be 
displayed. 


10.12 After the full-scale adjustment period, the mixer 
motor (on both the Type-1 and Type-2) activates and 
initiates the emulsion process. 


10.13 Remove the syringe barrel from the emulsifier 
after emulsification and the mixer stops. Partially insert 
the plunger to seal the open end of the syringe. Invert 
the syringe and remove the plug. Exhaust the entrapped 
air in the syringe barrel. Carefully inserting plunger 
to the 50 ml mark immediately avoiding fuel loss. 
(Use a clean wipe over the exit hole to capture the small 
amounts of fuel, which may be extruded as foam). At 
the end of the syringe barrel, affix a new coalescer. 


10.13.1 Place the entire syringe assembly into the 
syringe drive mechanism (Fig. 3). For minimizing the 
effect of plunger resistance (drag) in the syringe barrel, 
align the syringe assembly vertically in the syringe 
drive mechanism with the end of the syringe plunger 
parallel with pushbar of the syringe drive mechanism. 
Place a waste container beneath the coalescer for 
collecting the unwanted portion of the processed fuel 
sample during the coalescing period. 


10.13.2 Connect coalescers to the Micro-Separometer 
electrically to prevent buildup of an electrostatic charge 
that may result in ignition of flammable test fluids. Both 
the Type-1 and Type-2 instruments are equipped with a 
ground lead that has an alligator clip on one end and a 
banana plug on the other. Fasten the alligator clip to the 
coalescer and insert the plug in the chassis ground jack 
(see Fig. 3). Other suitable grounding methods may be 
used for previous models. 


IS 1448 (Part 142) : 2021 


Fic. 4 TAKING SAMPLE 


10.14 Four short tones indicate the second meter adjust 
period. For Type-1, if required, the operator should 
adjust the meter reading to 100. After that, syringe 
drive mechanism will start, forcing the water/fuel 
emulsion through the coalescer (see Fig. 3). During this 
operation remove the vial from the turbidimeter well 
and discard the fuel sample. 


10.15 When the collect sample annunciator lamp 
(marked C/S) illuminates and a pulsed tone of short 
duration sounds, collect the last 15 ml of fuel sample 
from the coalescer (see Fig. 4). Position the vial at a 
slight angle and allow the fuel to flow down. Remove 
the vial just prior to completion of sample collection. 


10.16 Wipe the outside of the vial with a clean, lintless 
wiper to remove any fingerprints and fuel. Place the 
sample vial into the turbidimeter well aligning the 
marks on the vial and on the control panel in front of 
the well. At the end of the settling time (1 min), a steady 
(4 s duration) tone will alert the operator that meter is 
about to activate. 


10.17 At the end of the tone, the METER will 
automatically activate for approximately 10 s. 


10.17.1 MSEP ratings are read at the midpoint of 10 s 
meter read cycle indicated by a short | s tone. 
NOTES 


1 Numerical values obtained outsidethemeasurementrange from 
50 to 100 are undefined and invalid (see 5.2). 


2 The Type-2 stores the reading until another test is performed. 


11 REPORT 


Report the results obtained in 10.17.1 as the MSEP-A 
rating for Mode A operation or MSEP-B rating for 
Mode B operation. 


12 PRECISION AND BIAS 


12.1 MSEP-A Ratings 


Obtained using Mode A operation have precision as 
determined by the ten operation/instrument pairs on 
identical fuel samples at a common site is as follows. 


12.1.1 Repeatability 


The difference between successive measured MSEP-A 
rating obtained by the same operator with the 
same Micro-Separometer under constant operating 
conditions on identical test material would, in the long 
run and in the normal and correct operation of the test 
method, exceed the following values for only one case 
in twenty (see Note 1). 


12.1.1.1 Reference fuels 


The repeatability of MSEP-A ratings for Jet A, Jet A-1, 
MIL JP 5, MIL JP 7, and MIL JP 8 reference fuels will 
have the repeatability as shown in Fig. 5 (see Note 2). 


12.1.1.2 Field samples 


The repeatability of MSEP-A rating for Jet A, Jet A-1, 
MIL JP 5, MIL JP 7 and MIL JP 8 field sample obtained 
by using test mode A of the Type-1 instrument will 
have the repeatability as shown in Fig. 6 (see Note 3). 


12.1.2 Reproducibility 


The difference between two single and independent 
measurements of MSEP-A rating obtained by different 
operator/instrument pairs at the same location on 
identical test material would, in the long run, in the 
normal and correct operation of the test method, 
exceed the following values for only one case in twenty 
(see Note 1). 


12.1.2.1 Reference fuels 


The reproducibility of MSEP-A ratings for Jet A, 
Jet A-1, MIL JP 5, MIL JP 7 and MIL JP 8 reference 
fuel will have reproducibility as shown in Fig. 5 
(see Note 2). 


12.1.2.2 Field samples 


The reproducibility of MSEP-A rating for Jet A, Jet 
A-1, MIL JP 5, MIL JP 7 and MIL JP 8 field sample 
using test Mode A of the Type-1 instruments will have 
the reproducibility as shown in Fig. 6 (see Note 3). 


12.2 MSEP-B Ratings 


Obtained using Mode B operation have precision as 
determined by the ten operator/instrument pairs on 
identical fuel samples at a common site, as follows. 


Maximum Acceptable Difference Between Two Results 


Fic. 5 REFERENCE FULES — Msep-A 
(MODE A OPERATION) VARIATION OF REPEATABILITY 
AND REPRODUCIBILITY OF Msep-A RATINGS OBTAINED 
FOR REFERENCE FUELS (JET A, JET A-1, Mit Jp-5, 
Mit Jp-7, AND MIL Jp-8) CONTAINING A DISPERSING 
AGENT 


12.2.1 Repeatability 


The difference between successive measured MSEP-B 
ratings obtained by the same operator with the 
same Micro-Separometer under constant operating 
conditions on identical MIL JP-4 test material would, 
in the long run, and in the normal and correct operation 
of the test method, exceed the following values for only 
one case in twenty (see Note 1). 


12.2.1.1 Reference fuels 


The repeatability of MSEP-B ratings for MIL JP-4 
reference fuels is nine (maximum difference between 
two consecutive measurements obtained by the same 
operator using the same instrument) (see Note 2). 


12.2.1.2 Field samples 


The repeatability of MSEP-B ratings for MIL JP-4 
field samples is 16 (maximum difference between 
two consecutive measurements obtained by the same 
operator using the same instrument) (see Note 3). 


12.2.2 Reproducibility 


The difference between two single and independent 
measurements of MSEP-B ratings obtained by different 


IS 1448 (Part 142) : 2021 


m 


E 


Maxmum Acceptable Difference Between Two Results 


100 g] so 7 to 2 
Average of Twe Results 


Fic. 6 FIELD SAMPLES — MsEP-A 
(MODE A OPERATION) VARIATION OF REPEATABILITY 
AND REPRODUCIBILITY OF Msep-A RATINGS OBTAINED 
FOR FIELD SAMPLES 
(JET A, Jet A-1, Mi Jp-5, Mi Jp-7, AND Mi Jp-8) 


operator/instrument pairs at the same location on 
identical MIL JP-4 test material would, in the long run, 
in the normal and correct operation of the test methods, 
exceed the following values for only one case in twenty 
(see Note 1). 


12.2.2.1 Reference fuels 


The reproducibility of MSEP-B ratings for MIL JP-4 
reference fuels is ten (maximum difference between 
two measurements obtained by two different operators 
on the identical test sample using two different 
instruments at the same test site) (see Note 2). 


12.2.2.2 Field samples 


The reproducibility of MSEP-B ratings for MIL JP-4 
field samples is 19 (maximum difference between two 
measurements obtained by two different operators on 
the identical test sample using two different instruments 
at the same test site) (see Note 3). 


NOTES 

1 These results are based on a 1983 ten laboratory cooperative 
test program using reference fuels and field samples. The 
repeatability and reproducibility values were estimated from 
results obtained at the same location and on several consecutive 


IS 1448 (Part 142) : 2021 


days, by different operator/instrument pairs testing identical 
samples. Results particularly for reproducibility obtained at 
different times and locations may, therefore, not be comparable 
according to these estimates, since they may contain errors 
due to sampling and environmental factors. In practice, two 
results obtained at different laboratories (location) would be 
acceptable if their difference did not exceed the published 
reproducibility. In the event that the difference did exceed the 
reproducibility there would be no means of testing whether 
the results were acceptable or not. The need for additional 
cooperative testing to establish reproducibility when samples 
are shipped between laboratories (and therefore may not be 
identical at the time of testing) is being studied. 


2 This result is based on a laboratory cooperative test program 
using reference fluids prepared in accordance with Annex B. 


3 These results are based on a laboratory cooperative test 
program using TYPE A (field samples of MIL JP 5) fuels 
containing fuel system corrosion and icing inhibitors. Due to 
large number of additive combinations and concentrations, 
there may be field samples other than those used to develop the 
precision of this test method, that may not respond within the 
expected limit. 

4 The results of precision program with the Micro-Separometer 
and its correlation with correlation with other rating methods 
are discussed in Annex D. 


12.3 Bias 


The procedure in this test method has no bias, because 
the value of MSEP is defined only in terms of this 
method. 


IS 1448 (Part 142) : 2021 


ANNEX A 
( Clauses 6.1 and 8.2.1 ) 


DESCRIPTION AND OPERATION OF TYPE-1 AND 
TYPE-2 MICRO SEPARAOMETR 


A-1 GENERAL 


There are two types of Micro-Separometer available. 
The Micro-Separometer Type-1 and Type-2 and 
associated control panel are shown in Fig. 7 and 
Fig. 8 respectively. The emulsifier is on the right side 
of the raised panel and the syringe drive mechanism 
is on the left side. The control panel containing the 
operating controls is mounted on the fixed panel in the 
left side of the case. Table 5 lists the manual and audio 
operating characteristics of the instruments. The Type-2 
Micro-Separometer has a universal power supply 
and requires only one power cord as compared to the 
Type-1 that requires individual power cords for 
different voltages. 


A-2 All the controls are located in a pushbutton array 
on the control panel and these push buttons illuminate 
when depressed thus indicating operational status. A 


circuit breaker located on the control panel provides 
protection for the a.c. power circuit. 


A-3 The Micro-Separometer Type-2 has an LCD 
display on the control panel that provides information 
to the operator during the test. The information includes 
test status and an error code that defines a malfunction 
in the Micro-Separometer. 


A-4 The turbidimeter is located under the main control 
panel and consists of a well in which the sample vial is 
placed, a light source, and a photocell. 


A-5 By depressing the ON pushbutton, the electronic 
circuits are energized. The ON pushbutton pulses on 
and off when the instruments are being operated by an 
a.c. source and constantly remains on when the battery 
(d.c.) pack is used. The lettered pushbuttons will 
sequentially illuminate on and off indicating READY 
operational status. 


` 
kal 


Turbidimeter Well 


Jonne 
BE HO esk] 


Fic. 8 MICRO SEPAROMETER TYPE 2 AND ASSOCIATED CONTROL PANEL 


9 


IS 1448 (Part 142) : 2021 


NOTE — Of the lettered (A-G) pushbuttons on the control 
panel of Type-1 Micro-Separometer only the A and B 
pushbuttons are applicable to this test method. Of the lettered 
(Jet A — Diesel) pushbuttons on the control panel of Type-2 
Micro-Separometer, only the Jet A and Jet B pushbuttons are 
applicable to this test method. 


A-6 The RESET pushbutton can be depressed at 
any time to cancel the test in progress and restore 
the program to the initial start mode. The lettered 
pushbuttons commence to sequentially illuminate, thus 
indicating a READY operational status enabling test 
mode selection. 


A-7 OPERATION 


A-7.1 Type—1 Operation 


A-7.1.1 Selection of test Mode A or test Mode B 
programs is accomplished by depressing either the 
A or B lettered pushbutton. The depressed pushbutton 
illuminates and the sequential illumination of the other 
lettered pushbuttons ceases. The START pushbutton 
also illuminates. 


A-7.1.2 The START pushbutton, when depressed 
initially, initiates the CLEAN cycle causing the syringe 
drive mechanism to travel to the UP position and the 
emulsifier motor to operate for the cleaning operation. 


A-7.1.3 The START pushbutton, when depressed after 
the CLEAN cycle, initiates the automatic program 
sequence causing the read indicator and the two 
ARROWED pushbuttons to illuminate, indicating that 
a full-scale adjustment period is in effect. A numerical 
value also appears on the meter. 


A-7.1.4 By depressing the appropriate ARROWED 
pushbutton, the displayed value on the meter can 
be increased or decreased, as required, to attain the 
100 reference level for the vial of fuel sample in the 
turbidimeter. 


Table 5 Manual and Audio Operating 
Characteristics of the Micro-Separometer 
Instruments Type-1 and Type-2 


( Clauses 10.10, 10.11 and A-1 ) 


Available Test Type-1 Type-2 
Mode(s) 
Function 
Test mode select Pushbutton Pushbutton 
Mode A Depress A Depress Jet A 
Mode B Depress B Depress Jet B 
Syringe Drive Not required Not required 
Speed selection 
Clean Cycle START Depress Clean 1 
Depress Depress Clean 2 
Pushbutton 


10 


Available Test Type-1 Type-2 
Mode(s) 
Automatic Sequence 
Initiate START Depress Run 
Cancel RESET 
lst Meter Read 
Ist Meter Depress No Action Required 
Adjust ARROWED 
Pushbuttons 
2nd Meter Read 
2nd Meter Depress No Action Required 
Adjust ARROWED 
Pushbuttons 
Collect Sample Short Tone Short Tone and C/S 
and C/S 
Annunciator Annunciator Lamp 
Lamp 
Illuminates Illuminates 
3rd Meter Read 
Record Measurement Pulsed Tone Steady Tone 
Sounds 5s 
into 3rd 
Meter Read 


A-7.2 Type—2 Operation 


A-7.2.1 Selection of test Mode A or test Mode B 
program is accomplished by depressing either the Jet A 
or Jet B lettered pushbutton. The depressed pushbutton 
illuminates and the sequential illumination of the other 
lettered pushbuttons ceases. The CLEAN 1 pushbutton 
also illuminates. 


A-7.2.2 The first and second clean cycles are initiated by 
depressing the CLEAN 1 and CLEAN 2 pushbuttons. 
The RUN pushbutton will illuminate at the end of the 
second clean cycle. 


A-7.2.3 The automatic portion of the test sequence is 
initiated by depressing the RUN pushbutton. 


A-7.2.4 The 100 reference level for the vial of fuel 
in the turbidimeter is set automatically and does not 
require any adjustment. If the turbidimeter could not 
auto adjust to 100, the error alert indicator illuminates 
and an ERR-04 is displayed. 


A-7.3 Accessory equipment and expendable material 
needed to perform the test are shown in Fig. 9 and 
consist of the following: 


A-7.3.1 Syringe Plug (A) — A Plastic plug used to 
stopper the syringe during the CLEAN and EMULSION 
cycles. 


A-7.3.2 Syringe, Barrel (B) and Plunger (C) — A 


IS 1448 (Part 142) : 2021 


Fic. 9 TEST SUPPLIES AND SMALL PARTS 


disposable plastic syringe. 


NOTE — Use of syringes other than those demonstrated to be 
free of surfactant contamination in a precision program such as 
described in 12 will render test results invalid. 


A-7.3.3 Vials (D) — 25 mm outside diameter vial 
pre-marked for proper alignment in the turbidimeter 
well. 


A-7.3.4 Coalescer — Coalescer (E) labeled for use 
with jet fuel, and expendable, pre-calibrated aluminum 
coalescer cell with a tapered end to fit the syringe. 


A-7.3.5 Pipet (G) with Plastic Tip (F) — An automatic 
hand pipet with a disposable plastic tip. A pipet is 
supplied with each Micro-Separometer. 


A-7.3.6 Water Container (H) — A clean container of 
distilled water (supplied with each six pack). 


A-7.3.7 Beaker, Catch Pan or Plastic Container — 
Supplied with each Micro-Separometer may be used to 
receive the waste fuel during the coalescence period of 
the test (not shown). 


A-7.4 A new syringe, pipet tip test sample vials, 
syringe plug and coalescer are used in each test. 
These expendable materials are available in a kit 
containing supplies for air tests. This kit termed 
Micro-Separometer Six Pack is designed to fit inside 
the top lid of the Micro-Separometer (Fig. 10). 


11 


Fic. 10 Sıx PACK AND TEST ITEMS 


A-7.5 Type-1 


The alert indicator lamp (marked SYR) illuminates 
and depending on the degree (more than 3 s) of the 
out of tolerance condition, three short (1 s) tones will 
also sound. An occasional out of tolerance alert may be 
experienced due to some intermittent condition which, 
probably, will not be indicative of instrument failure. 
However, repeated alerts are cause for returning the 
instrument to the factory for adjustment. 


A-7.6 Type-2 


During a test, the error alert indicator will illuminate 
and ERR-03 will be displayed indicating an out of 
tolerance syringe travel time. Error alerts ERR-01 and 
ERR-02 will be displayed if the syringe stalls while 
traveling up or down, respectively. 


IS 1448 (Part 142) : 2021 


ANNEX B 
( Clauses 7.3.1, 7.4 Note 2 and 12.2.2.2 Note 2 ) 
PREPARATION OF REFERENCE FLUID BASE 


B-1 GENERAL 


This procedure describes the preparation within an 
8 h day of a 20 litre lot of reference fluid base. This 
procedure has been found to give a filtrate having 
100 MSEP rating. 


B-2 SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE 


A fuel sample is flowed at a constant rate through a 
fresh column of granular clay and collected in a clean 
storage receiver. The fuel should conform to relevant 
specifications of Jet A, Jet A-1 or Jet B and the aromatic 
content should be between 10 and 20 volume percent. 
Reference fluids may also be of MIL JP 4, MIL JP 
5, MIL JP 7 and MIL JP 8 fuel origin. Additional 
processing such as water washing followed by flowing 
the fuel through a salt bed prior to clay treating may be 
required to attain a standard 99+ rating and, the AOT 
Standard Ratings shown in Tables 2, 3 and 4. 


B-3 APPARATUS 


B-3.1 Glass Column — Containing a sealed-in coarse 
fritted glass disk near the bottom and with a 4-mm 
metering type TFE-fluorocarbon stopcock outlet at 
the bottom. The inside diameter of the column is 
55 to 65 mm, and the length above the fritted disk shall 
be at least 1 m. 


B-3.2 Siphon — Glass tubing having an outside 
diameter of 5 to 10 mm with the legs 100 to 150 mm 
apart. The suction leg shall be 380 to 400 mm long to 
reach the bottom of the feed container. The other leg 
shall be 50 to 100 mm longer. 


B-3.3 Feed Container — A standard square or round 
20 litre epoxy — lined can in which the sample is 
obtained. 


B-3.4 Receiver Can — A new 20 litre epoxy — lined 
can or one which has been used only with clay — filtered 
fuel. Plastic containers shall not be used. 


B-3.5 Funnel — With a 10 to 20 mm outlet. 


B-3.6 Graduated Cylinder — 0.5 to | litre and 50 to 
100 ml capacities. 


B-3.7 Beaker — 2 litre capacity. 
B-4 MATERIALS 


B-4.1 Attapulgus Clay — 30/60 mesh, LVM 
(calcined) grade or equal. Store the clay protected from 
atmospheric moisture and avoid handling that will 
cause particle size segregation. 


12 


B-4.2 Fine Glass Wool 
B-4.3 Isopropyl Alcohol — 90 percent. 


B-4.4 Toluene — in a squeeze bottle. 
WARNING — Flammable. Vapour harmful. 


B-4.5 Water — Preferably distilled. 
B-4.6 Salt — Rock salt or equivalent. 
B-5 PREPARATION OF APPARATUS 


B-5.1 Mount the column vertically. Measure 
approximately 500 ml of clay in the graduated cylinder, 
tapping gently to settle. 


B-5.2 Place the funnel on top, the column with its 
outlet centered. Quickly pour the clay into the funnel, 
aiming the funnel so that the clay falls in the centre 
of the column. Remove the funnel and tap the column 
gently all around to settle and level the clay bed. Tamp 
a fist-sized wad of glass wool carefully down on top of 
the bed. 


B-5.3 When water washing of the fuel is required, place 
approximately 12.5 to 15.0 mm of salt on top of the 
wad of glass wool and then another wad of glass wool 
on top of the salt. 


B-6 FILTRATION PROCEDURE 


B-6.1 Position a full 20 litre feed container with its 
opening level with the top of the column. Remove the 
cap and insert the siphon, short leg in the can, longer 
leg in the column. 


B-6.2 Place the 2 litre beaker under the column. 


B-6.3 Make sure the column stopcock is wide open. Put 
slight air pressure in the feed can to start the siphon. 
The glass wool packing should prevent the clay bed 
from being disturbed at startup. 
NOTE — In a well-prepared column, the fuel may be seen 
to advance down the column in a nearly horizontal plane; no 
bubbles will rise through the clay. If the advancing front is 
tilted more than 45° or there is much bubbling, the quality of 
the percolation may be impaired. 


B-6.4 As soon as the fuel is flowing through the column 
outlet, adjust the metering screw to attain a rate of 
50 to 60 ml/min. Check by measuring with the small 
graduated cylinder for 1 or 2 min intervals. 


B-6.5 When at least 1 litre has been collected, turn 
off the stopcock without disturbing the metering 
screw setting. Remove the beaker and support the 


20 litre receiver can under the column so that the outlet 
tube extends about 10 mm into the opening. Open the 
stopcock. Protect the opening from dirt. 
WARNING — When percolating flammable fuel, seal between 
the outlet and receiver opening with aluminum foil, ground the 
receiver, and purge it with dry nitrogen before starting flow 
into it. A similar purge of the column before the step in B-6.3 is 
desirable. 


B-6.6 Recycle the beaker of filtrate to the feed can or 
discard it. 


B-6.7 When the level of fuel has dropped nearly to the 
top of the clay bed, turn off the stopcock, remove, and 
cap the receiver can. 


B-6.8 For lengthy storage, purge the receiver can with 
dry nitrogen. 


NOTE — At the specified flow rate, the 20 litre percolation 
will be in 6 to 6% h running time. 


B-7 CLEAN THE COLUMN 


B-7.1 Drain the column. 


B-7.2 Dismount the column, open it over a solid waste 
can, and with the stopcock wide open, below out the 
clay. 


B-7.3 With the column inverted over a liquid waste 
receiver, run alcohol from the squeeze bottle into the 
outlet. Tilt the column to rinse the entire disk area and 
the entire inside of the column. When the clay residue 
has been entirely rinsed out, disassemble and rinse the 
stopcock parts, dry and reassemble them and blow the 
entire assembly dry. 


B-7.4 If the column still appears dirty, rinse it 
thoroughly with hot water, then with distilled water, 


IS 1448 (Part 142) : 2021 


invert it and rinse as in B-7.3 with alcohol, then with 
acetone and blow dry. This should seldom be necessary. 


B-8 WATER WASHING THE BASE FUEL 


B-8.1 General 


Occasionally it may become necessary to further process 
the base fuel to prevent interaction between AOT and 
fuel additives not removed by the clay treatment. Base 
fuels containing icing inhibitors typically require this 
type of processing. 


B-8.2 Summary of Procedure 


A given amount of water is mixed with the base fuel and 
is then allowed to stand for a period of time to let the 
fluids separate into layers. The water is then removed 
and the fuel is processed as described in B-6. 


B-8.3 Procedure 


B-8.3.1 Mix 0.95 litre of water (see B-4.5) thoroughly 
with 19 litre of base fuel by agitating by any convenient 
means. 


B-8.3.2 Allow the container to stand for sufficient time 
to allow the water to completely settle out of the bottom 
of the container. 


B-8.3.3 Remove the water from the bottom of the 
container using a pump, pipette, or any other means 
available. 


B-8.3.4 Repeat B-8.3.1, B-8.3.2 and B-8.3.3 as required, 
to assure removal of all water soluble substances and 
then proceed to the filtration process. 


B-8.3.5 Initiate the filtration process of B-6 using a 
filtration media prepared as described in B-5.3. 


ANNEX C 
( Clause 9.2 ) 
SAMPLING TECHNIQUE 


C-1 For any test that seeks the presence of trace 
constituents, steps must be taken to ensure testing of 
a representative sample. The round-robin precision 
study for these test methods showed that flushing of 
the sampling container was most important. This 
indicates that trace amounts of surfactants in aviation 
turbine fuels can be absorbed on, or desorbed from, 
metal surface. A suggested technique for taking 
separometer samples follows; it has been found to give 
representative samples. Any similar approach should 
be satisfactory. The technique is shown here only as a 
guide to good practice. 


13 


C-2 SAMPLE CONTAINER 


This should be a scrupulously clean metal can, 
preferably epoxy-lined. The size will be governed by 
the number of replicate tests to be run. 


NOTE — New cans, not epoxy-lined, are sometimes coated 
with surfactant type roll oils or solder flux residues which 
can affect MSEP test results. Epoxy cans also may have mold 
release or similar residues which can also affect the MSEP test 
results. Such cans can usually be cleaned by three consecutive 
rinses with the fuel to be sampled prior to taking the sample 
for test. Preferably the sample container should be filled with 
the same grade of fuel to be sampled (filtered through at least 
an 0.8 um membrane filter) and allowed to stand for at least 


IS 1448 (Part 142) : 2021 


24 h. The fuel should be disposed of and the sample container 
flushed with the fuel to be tested prior to taking the sample. 


C-2.1 Sample Source 


Draw the sample from a moving stream of fuel whose 
source is removed from tank water bottoms by as great 
a distance as feasible. 


C-2.2 Sample Line 


The line may consist of a short 6.4 to 12.7 mm diameter 
tube with its open end facing the moving stream. The 
other end (outside the pipe) should be equipped with 


a suitable shutoff valve and spout. In turbulent fuel 
streams, it has been determined that sampling taps flush 
with the pipe wall are satisfactory. 


C-2.3 Taking the Sample 


Flush the sample line with at least 0.95 litre of the 
fuel to be sampled. Open and close the sample valve 
several times. Rinse the sample can with three separate 
0.95 litre amounts of the fuel to be sampled. Include 
the cap and inner seal, if used, in the rinsing. Draw the 
sample and put the cap in place. 


ANNEX D 
( Clause 12.2.2.2 Note 4) 
CORRELATION OF MICRO-SEPAROMETER MSEP-A RATINGS 


D-1 INTRODUCTION 


The program to establish the precision of the 
Micro-Separometer involved cooperative testing by the 
ten laboratories using seven Jet A blends and seven Jet 
B blends and parallel testing with Field Test Method. 
The correlation MSEP-A Ratings is shown below. 


D-1.1 Earlier programs with Field Test Method 
involved cooperative testing in conjunction with Test 
Method IS 1448 (Part 137). Correlation of MSS Ratings 
with WSIM Ratings established at that time have been 
extended to MSEP-A Ratings using the MSS rating as 
the common reference. 


D-2 PRECISION OF MSEP-A RATINGS 


D-2.1 Using fuels that simulated field experience 
by addition of corrosion inhibitors, etc. as well as 
reference blends prepared in accordance with 7.4, 
the precision of the Micro-Separometer was shown 
to be equivalent to the precision of field test method 
Minisonic-Separometer. 


D-2.2 Analysis revealed that precision of MSEP-A 
Ratings varies with rating levels as shown in Fig. 5 
and Fig. 6, which was developed for Test Method 
IS 1448 (Part 137) and confirmed with Field Test 
Method. 


14 


D-3 CORRELATION 
RATINGS 


OF MSEP-A AND MSS 


D-3.1 The relationship between the MSEP-A and MSS 
Ratings is a function of fuel type as described in the 
following equations: 


MSEP-A (Jet A) 
MSEP-A (Jet B) 
MSEP-A (both fuels) 


= 1.276 (MSS) — 23.805 
= 1,338 (MSS) — 32.366 
= 1.247 (MSS) — 22.952 


D-4 MSEP-A RATINGS LEVEL VERSUS FUEL 
TYPE 


D-4.1 The Micro-Separometer rating level for Jet B 
fuel is higher than Jet A fuel using either the standard 
dispersing agent (see 7.3) or other additives typical of 
fuels in the field. 


Using field test method MSS Ratings as the common 
reference, the MSEP-A relationship for Jet B fuel 
containing standard dispersing agents is as follows: 


MSEP-A (JET B) = 0.60 WSIM + 40 


D-5 CORRELATION OF MSEP-A RATINGS 
WITH FIELD EXPERIENCE 


Fuel blends that simulate field samples reveal that fuels 
containing corrosion inhibitors exhibit higher MSEP-A 
Ratings than blends with other additives including 
standard dispersing agents. 


IS 1448 (Part 142) : 2021 


ANNEX E 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Methods of Sampling and Test for Petroleum, its Products, Gaseous 
Fuels and Lubricants Sectional Committee, PCD 01 


Organization 


Indian Institute of Petroleum, Dehradun 


Air Headquarters, Ministry of Defence, New Delhi 


All India Instrument Manufacturers and Dealers 
Association, Mumbai 


Bharat Oman Refineries Limited, Bina 
Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


Castrol India Limited, Mumbai 


Central Institute of Plastics Engineering and 
Technology, Bhuwaneshwar 


Central Revenue Control Laboratory, New Delhi 


Chennai Petroleum Corporation Limited, Chennai 


CSIR-Central Institute for Mining and Fuel 
Research, Dhanbad 


Directorate General of Aeronautical Quality 


Assurance, New Delhi 


Directorate General of Quality Assurance, Ministry 
of Defence, New Delhi 

Elico Limited, Hyderabad 

GAIL (India) Limited, Noida 

Gulf Oil Lubricants India Limited, Silvasa 

Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited, Mumbai 

HPCL Mittal Energy Limited, Noida 

Indian Oil Corporation (R and D Centre), Faridabad 

Indian Oil Corporation Limited-Refineries and 
Pipelines Division, New Delhi 


Indian Oil Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


Lubrizol India Limited, Mumbai 


Representative(s) 


Dr ANJAN Ray (Chairman) 


We Cwpr S. A. TAWAB 
We Cwpr D. ANANpRAJ Roy (Alternate) 


Pror G. M. Rao 


SHRI ANAND PRATAP RAGHAV 
Sur! B. SRIDHAR (Alternate) 


SHRI C. SHANMUGANATHAN 
SHRI R. SUBRAMANIAN (Alternate) 


SHRI RAMAN RAI 


Dr Smita MOHANTY 


Dr T. A. SREENIVASA RAO 


SHRI H. RAMAKRISHNAN 
Dr V. SELvavatH! (Alternate) 


Suri P. K. SINGH 
Suri S. R. K. Rao (Alternate I) 
Suri S. DuTTA (Alternate II) 


SHRI SANTOSH NAMDEO [NGOLE 
Suri C. B. PANDEY 


Suri N. RaJu 
Suri T. V. Surv K. Rao (Alternate) 


SHRI R. K. KASHYAP 
Dr Susanta Mananty (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJAY KUMAR 


SHRI MADHUSUDAN 
SHRI ELECHERAN Kumar (Alternate I) 
SHRI SHITANSHU Pati (Alternate II) 


SHRI NARENDRA KUMAR GUPTA 
SHRI SATYABRATA BANDYOPADHYAY (Alternate) 


SHRI V. KAGDIYAL 
Dr S. K. Masumpar (Alternate) 


DR ASHUTOSH MISHRA 
SHRI SHASHI PAL SINGH (Alternate) 


Suri P. D. DUSANE 
Suri G. K. SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI SHARAD TARSODE 


15 


IS 1448 (Part 142) : 2021 


Organization 


Mangalore Refinery and Petro Chemical Limited, 
Mangalore 


Ministry of Railways, Lucknow 
National Test House, Kolkata 


Nayara Energy Limited, Mumbai 


Numaligarh Refinery Limited, Golaghat 


Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Limited, 
New Delhi 


Oil India Limited, Duliajan 


Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board, 
New Delhi 


Petroleum Conservation Research Association, 
New Delhi 


Reliance India Limited, Mumbai 

Shriram Institute for Industrial Research, Delhi 
Indraprastha Gas Limited, New Delhi 

BIS Director General 


Representative(s) 


SHRI SHALINA KUMAR 
SHRI YOGEESHA (Alternate I) 
Suri R. M. Prakasu (Alternate II) 


SHRI RAJESH SRIVASTAVA 
SHRI SONAM Gupta (Alternate) 


Suri K. C. NASKAR 
SHRI P. K. CHAKRABORTY (Alternate) 


Suri Duras M. GONDALIA 
SHRI MRIGANKA TARAFDAR (Alternate I) 
Sarı HarsaL Moni (Alternate II) 


SHRI ANJAN KALITA 
SHRI SOBHAN Konwar (Alternate) 


SHRI AJAY KUMAR JAIN 
SHRIMATI LEENA Jonn (Alternate I) 
Suri DinesH S. R. Reppy KAKUTURI (Alternate II) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI ANIL MEGHANI 
SHRI Noor Kuan (Alternate) 


Suri M. P. BANGWAL 


SHRI PRAMOD MALL 
SHRI SHAMBHU THAKUR 
REPRESENTATIVE 


Suri N. K. BANSAL, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (PCD) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


SHRIMATI NAGAMANI T. 
Scientist ‘E’, PCD, BIS 


Physico-Chemical Test Methods for Petroleum and Related Products of Natural or Synthetic Origin (Excluding 


Bitumen, Lubricants, Greases and Gaseous Fuels), PCD 1:3 


Organization 
Indian Oil Corporation Limited, Mumbai 
Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited, Mumbai 
Central Pollution Control Board, New Delhi 


Chennai Petroleum Corporation Limited, Chennai 


Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi 


Representative(s) 


Suri P. D. DUSANE (Convener) 


SHRI C. SHANMUGANATHAN 
SHRI SUNIT VINAYAK PARKAR (Alternate I) 
SHRI AVULURI SRINIVASA Reppy (Alternate II) 


SHRI DINABANDHU GOUDA 
Suri B. K. JAKHMOLA (Alternate) 


SHRI H. RAMAKRISHNAN 


SHRI AMIT GUPTA 
SHRI DHARMENDRA SINGH Yapay (Alternate I) 
SHRI RAKESH Kumar (Alternate II) 


16 


Organization 


IS 1448 (Part 142) : 2021 


Representative(s) 


Directorate General of Quality Assurance, Ministry of Suri C. B. PANDEY 


Defence, New Delhi 
Gulf Oil Lubricants India Limited, Mumbai 


Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


HP Green Research and Development Centre, 
Bengaluru 


HPCL Mittal Energy Limited, Noida 


Indian Additives Limited, Chennai 


Indian Institute of Petroleum, Dehradun 


Indian Oil Corporation (R and D Centre), Faridabad 


Indian Oil Corporation Limited-Refineries and 
Pipelines Division, New Delhi 


Intertek Laboratories, Mumbai 


Lubrizol India Limited, Mumbai 


Mangalore Refinery and Petro Chemical Limited, 
Mangalore 


Nayara Energy Limited, Mumbai 
Numaligarh Refinery Limited, Golaghat 


Petroleum Conservation Research Association, 
New Delhi 


Reliance India Limited, Mumbai 


Research Design and Standards Organisation, 
Lucknow 


SGS India Private Limited, Mumbai 
Indian Oil Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


Society For Petroleum Laboratory-Fuel Testing 
Laboratory, Noida 


Suri A. K. KANAusIA (Alternate) 


Ms Inpu M. Gupta 
SHRI SANJAY Kumar (Alternate) 


Suri B. SARNATHAN 
Suri K. M. M. Rao (Alternate) 


Suri B. Ravi 
SHRI SANDIP BHOWMIK (Alternate) 


SHRI SATYABRATA BANDYOPADHYAY 
SHRI NARENDRA Kumar Gupta (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


DRR. K. SINGH 
Dr Pankaj Kumar KANAuJIA (Alternate) 


DR A. K. ARORA 


Dr Ram JANAM SINGH 
Dr Amit Misnra (Alternate) 


SHRI PRAVIN S. POOJARY 
Suri DATTATRAY Guan! (Alternate) 


SHRI ANAND REDKAR 


SHRI SALINA KUMAR 
Suri G. V. SuryaM (Alternate I) 
Suri R. M. PraAkAsH (Alternate ID 


SHRI MRIGANKA TARAFDAR 
Suri Dural M. Gonpauia (Alternate) 


SHRI SOBHAN KONWAR 
Suri ANJAN Katita (Alternate) 


Suri M. P. BANGWAL 


SHRI KISHOR MAHAJAN 
SHRI RAVISHANKAR V. Desai (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJESH SRIVASTAVA 
SHRI SONAM Gupta (Alternate) 


SHRI SUBASINI SARASWAT SHARMA 
Suri MANISH MALHAN (Alternate) 


Dr Asay KUMAR GUPTA 


17 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: PCD 01 (11382). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


