**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 12105 (1987) : Methods of test for valves of automotive 
air brake systems [TED 4: Automotive Braking Systems] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC <21M6 2: 620-1 : 82SH9-N2-92 I3 . IJIQS - 1987 



Indian Standard 

METHODS OF TEST FOR 
VALVES OF AUTOMOTIVE AIR BRAKE SYSTEMS 



u 
o 



o 
o 

© 

E 
E 

o 

U 

« 
c 
o 

z 

0> 

(0 

M 

E 

o> 

4^ 

M 

>t 

01 
G 

s 

•o 
c 
« 

-s 

00 



t. Scope — Specifies the methods of test for valves used in air brake systems of automotive vehicles 
designed to operate up to 8*5 bar nominal pressure. 

2. General Requirements 

2.1 Temperature — Unless otherwise specified, all tests shall be conducted at room temperature 
varying between 15 to 45'^C. 

2.2 Mounting — All tests shall be conducted with the unit mounted essentially as in service. 

2.3 Leakage Measurement — All leakage rates shall be expressed in standard cubic centimetres per 
minute ( cc/min ) of free (atmospheric ) air. Various methods may be utilized, such as pressure drop 
in a specific volume or by soap bubbles or by flow meters. 

2 A Pressure Units— AW pressure units shall be expressed as gauge pressure (that is, above 
atmospheric pressure ), unless otherwise specified. 

2.5 Cycle Rate for Endurance Test— All endurance tests shall be carried out at a rate agreed upon by 
the valve manufacturer and the purchaser and shall be decided to ensure that no abnormal effects are 
introduced. 

2.6 Air Supply — Unless otherwise specified, the air supply shall be filtered and shall be free from 
condensate. 

2.7 Test Sequence— Unless otherwise specified, the same valve need not be used for more than one 
test. 

2.8 Multiple Function Valves — Valves with multiple function shall be tested for all applicable tests as 
agreed upon by the valve manufacturer and the purchaser. 

2.9 Delivery Reservoir Volume for Endurance Test — The reservoir capacity on the delivery side of 
valve for all endurance tests shall be agreed upon by the valve manufacturer and the purchaser. 

3. Test Procedures 

3.1 Performance Test —The test and test procedure for the performance of input-output characteristics 
shall be determined by the intended design and functions as agreed upon by the valve manufacturer 
and the purchaser. A typical characteristic is comparison of input pressure, effort or travel versus 
output pressure ( application and release ). 

3.2 Leak Test 

3.2.1 Pilot operated or manually operated valves — Graduating type. 

3.2.1.1 Leak test in zero delivery pressure condition 

a) With low supply pressure ( 1 bar ) at the inlet port(s) and delivery open to atmosphere, 
leakage shall be measured and recorded. 

b) With full supply pressure at the inlet port(s) and delivery open to atmosphere, leakage shall 
be measured and recorded. 

3.2.1.2 Leak test in balanced condition — With full supply pressure at the inlet port, the valve shall 
be actuated to increasing delivery pressures of 1 bar and 4 bar. Leakage shall be measured and 
recorded. 

3.2.1.3 Leak test In full delivery condition —Wwhivxll supply pressure at the inlet port, the valve 
shall be actuated to attain full delivery pressure. Leakage shall be measured and recorded. 



Adopted 26 May 1987 



O April 1988, BIS 



Gr 2 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
MANAK BHAVAN. 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MAR6 
NEW DELHI llOOOt 



18 : 12105 - 1987 

3.2.t Pilot operated or manually operated valves — Non-graduating type ( ON-OFF type }. 

3.2.2.1 Leak test In zero delivery pressure condition 

a) With low supply pressure ( 1 bar ) at the inlet port(s) and delivery open to atmosphere, 
leakage shall be measured and recorded* and 

b) Leakage shall be measured and recorded with full supply pressure at the inlet port and 
delivery open to atmosphere. 

3.2.2.2 Leak test In full delivery condition — With full supply pressure at the inlet port, the valve 
shall be actuated to attain full delivery pressure. Leakage shall be measured and recorded. 

3.2.3 Direction control valves 

3.2.3.1 Low pressure leak test — With 1 bar pressure at the inlet, leakage shall be measured and 
recorded. 

3.2.3.2 Intermediate pressure leak test — With 4 bar pressure at the inlet, leakage shall be measured 
and recorded. 

3.2.3.3 Full pressure leak test — With full air pressure at the inlet, leakage shall be measured and 
recorded. 

Note — Valves with two independent Inlet ports shall be tested with one Inlet port pressurized and the second 
open to atmospheric pressure. These valves shall then be retested with the second inlet port pressurized and 
the first port open to atmospheric pressure. 

3.2.4 Automatic pressure regulating valves 

3.2.4.1 With an air pressure level to the inlet port maintained at 1 bar ascending and descending 
prior to the automatic actuation point, leakage shall be measured and recorded. 

3.2.4.2 With full air pressure at the inlet port, leakage shall be measured and recorded. 

3.3 Endurance Test 

3.3.1 Endurance of graduating type of valves — VJWh an air pressure of 8*5 bar at the Inlet port(s), 
the valve shall be cycled to partial/full application. The distribution shall be agreed upon by the valve 
manufacturer and the purchaser. 

3.3.2 Endurance of non^graduatlng type of valves — With an air pressure of 8*5 bar at the inlet port, 
the valve shall be cycled to full delivery pressure. 

3.3.3 Post endurance test — The valve shall be tested as per 3.1 and 3.2. 

3.4 Low Temperature test 

3.4.1 The valve shall be kept in a chamber maintained at a temperature of-«40*C for 24 hours and 
shall be tested for leakage as per 3.1 and 3.2. 

3.4.2 Low temperature functional test — As agreed between the valve manufacturer and the 
purchaser. 

3.4.3 The valve shall then be allowed to return to room temperature and tested in accordance 
with 3.1 and 3.2. 

3.5 High Temperature Test 

3.5.1 The valve shall be kept in a chamber maintained at a temperature of 70*C at 24 hours. The 
valve at TO^'C shall be tested for leakage as per 3.2. 

3.5.2 High temperature functional test — As agreed to between the valve manufacturer and the 
purchaser. 

3.5.3 High temperature endurance — With the surrounding temperature and supply air maintained 
at TO^'C and with full supply pressure, the valve shall be cycled from bar to full delivery pressure. 

3.5.4 The valve shall then be allowed to return to room temperature and tested as per 3.1 and 3.2. 

2 



AMENDMENT NO. 2 FEBRUARY 2009 

TO 

IS 12105 : 1987 METHODS OF TEST FOR VALVES OF 

AUTOMOTIVE AIR BRAKE SYSTEMS 



{Page 2, clause 3.3A, first sentence) — Substitute 'With an air pressure 
equal to Max system pressure of the vehicle at the inlet port(s),'ybr 'With an air 
pressure of 8.5 bar at the inlet port(s)\ 

(Page 2, clause 3.3.2, first sentence) — Substitute 'With an air pressure 
equal to Max system pressure of the vehicle at the inlet port* for 'With an air 
pressure of 8.5 bar at the inlet port*. 



(TED 4) 



Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 



AHENDHENT NO. 1 NOVEMBHl 1990 

TO 

IS 12105:1987 MEIHODS OF TEST FOR 

VALVES OF AOTQHOTIVB AIR BKAKE STSTEI6 

(Page 3, clause 3.9) - Insert the following 
after 3.9: 

'3.9.1 The duration of the test shall be at least 
for 72 h. 

3.10 The fasteners shall be robust in construction 

capable of irithstanding any vibrations and shall be 

tightened to a torque value specified by the valve 
■aauf acturer . ' 

(TED 4) 

Reprography Unit.. BIS, New Delhi, India 



IS : 12105 - 1187 

3.6 Pressure Test 

3.6.1 Over pressure test 

3.6.1.1 Pilot operated or manually operated valves 

a) Zero delivery pressure condition- An air pressure of 11 5 bar shall be applied and 
maintained for ten seconds at tiie inlet port with no pressure in delivery. 

b) Full delivery pressure condition — An air pressure of 115 bar shall be applied and 
maintained for ten seconds at the inlet port with full pressure in delivery and control port 
( if applicable). 

c) The valve shall then be tested as per 3.1 and 3.2. 

3.6.1.2 Direction control valves and automatic pressure regulating valves 

a) An air pressure of 11*5 bar shall be applied and maintained for ten seconds at the inlet port. 

b) The valve shall then be tested as per 3.1 and 3.2. 

Note — Valves with two independent Iniet ports shall be tested with one inlet port pressurized and the 
second open to atmospheric pressure. These valves shall than be retested with the second inlet port pressurized 
and the first port open to atmospheric pressure. 

3.6.2 High pressure test 

3.6.2.1 Pilot operated or manually operated valves 

a) Zero delivery pressure condition — An hydrostatic pressure of 20 bar shall be applied at a 
uniform rate of 65 bar/min at the inlet port with no pressure in delivery port. The valve 
shall be checked for leakage and any permanent damage. 

b) Full delivery pressure condition— An hydrostatic pressure of 20 bar shall be applied at a 
uniform rate of 65 bar/min at the inlet port with full pressure in delivery and control port 
( if applicable ). The valve shall be checked for leakage and any permanent damage. 

3.6.2.2 Direction control valves and automatic pressure regulating valves — An hydrostatic pressure 
of 20 bar shall be applied at a uniform rate of 65 bar/min at the inlet port. The valve shall then be 
checked for leakage and any permanent damage. 

Note — Valves with two Independent Inlet ports shall be tested with one Inlet port pressurized and the second 
open to atmospheric pressure. These valves shall then be retested with second Iniet port pressurized and the 
first port open to atmospheric pressure. 

3.7 Installation load test — The procedure for this test shall be determined by the intended design and 
function as agreed upon by the valve manufacturer and the purchaser, taking into consideration 
operating and vibration loads. 

3.8 Dust test — The procedure for this test shall be determined by the intended design and function as 
agreed upon by the valve manufacturer and the purchaser. 

3.9 Salt spray test ^ The valve shall be disassembled and the component parts subjected to salt spray 
test in accordance with 18:9844-1984 'Methods of testing corrosion resistance of electroplated and 
anodized aluminium coatings by neutral salt spray test*. Parts shall be visually inspected and 
extent of any corrosion shall be noted down after each 24 hours increment of exposure until the test 
is completed. 



EXPLANATORY NOTE 

In the preparation of this standard, considerable assistance has been derived from SAE J 1409 
Mar 1983 'Air brake valves test procedure', issued by the Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE)« 
USA. 

This standard forms an important adjunct to the following Indian Standards: 

IS : 11852 ( Part 4)-1987 Recommendations for brakes and braking systems for automotive 
vehicles: Part 4 Compressed air and air assisted brakes — Special requirements. 

IS : 11852 (Part S)-1987 Recommendations for brakes and braking systems for automotive 
vehicles: Part 5 Compressed air and air assisted brakes — Pressure test connections. 

3 



Printed at Arcee Prttt, New Delhi, India 



