IS 1387 : 1993
( Reaffirmed 2003 )

IndiaizStandard

GENERALREQUTREMENTSFOR THESUPPLYOFMETALLURGICALMATEKIALS
( Second Revision )
Third Reprint JANUARY 1998

UDC 669.015:381.717

0 BIS 1993

BUREAU
MANAK

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS
MARC3

BHAVAM,

9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR NEW DELHI 110002

February 1993

Price Gronp 2

General Metallurgical

Standards

Sectional

Committee,

MTD 1

FOREWORD This Indian Standard ( Second Revision ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the General Metallurgical Standards Sectional Committee had been approved by the Metallurgical Engineering Division Council. This standard was first published in 1959 and revised in 1967 in order to unify certain clauses covering the general requirements for the supply of m,etallurgical material as given in Indian Standard specificaSince the publication of this standard, it has been a general practice to make reference to this tions. standard in the material specifications where the provision of this standard would be applicable. This practice has considerably simplified the presentation of specifications for metals and metal products. It has also been possible for individual purchasers and inspecting authorities to establish such provisions as may suit their special needs and to use them instead of, or as supplement to, this standard. It was felt that the and as such doubts raw materials, such Therefore, it was materials including original title of the specification made reference only to metals and metal products were expressed while making reference to this standard in specifications relating to as refractory materials, ferro-alloys, metallurgical coke and foundry raw materials. decided to change the title and scope of this standard to cover metallurgical raw materials and finished products.

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised)`. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

Indian Standard

GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR THE SUPPLY OF METALLURGICAL MATERIALS
( Second Revision )
1 SCOPE 1.1 This standard covers the general requirements For the supply of metallurgical materials metallurgical including for raw materials industries and finished metal products conforming to Indian Standard specifications. If considered acceptable by the parties concerned, this standard may be used in part or full for the supply of other materials or produdts. 1.2 This standard does not cover all the other provisions relating to a contract which should be separately agreed between the contracting' parties. 2 TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose of this following definitions shall apply. standard, the 2.6 Statement of Compliance with the Order Document in which the supplier states that the material supplied is in compliance with the requirements of the order, without mention of any test result. 2.7 Test Certificate, TC - Certificate containing the results of all the tests specified. By agreement when ordering, the inspection and testing procedures may be carried out: at the discretion of the purchaser: a) by the qualified department (see Note ) of the manufacturer's works ( TC ); b) in the presence body designated of the purchaser by him ( TCP ). or a

2.1 Supplier-The party supplying the material. The supplier may or may not be the actual manufacturer of the material. The term supplier shall also cover any party with whom the supplier places order for partial compliance. purchasing the 2.2 Purchaser - The party material. The term purchaser shall also cover person expressly authorised in writing by the purchaser to act on his behalf for inspection of the material. 2.3 Material Specification - Unless otherwise stated, this term shall have reference to the Indian Standard Specification which forms the basis of the contract for the supply of material. 2.4 Inprocess Inspection and Testing - Inspection and testing carried out by the manufacturer in accordance with his own procedures, on representative test samples of the batch actually supplied to the purchaser. 2.5 Inspection and Testing for Certification Inspection and testing carried out on the test batch ( test lot ) to be supplied, in order to verify whether the material complies with the requirements of the order. 1

The test certificate is signed in case (a) by the representative of the qualified department, and in case (b) by the purchaser or the representative of the designated body as well as by the representatfve of qualified department of manufacturer. In certain special cases, by agreement when ordering, the inspection and testing procedures may be carried out outside the ptoduction works by a body independent of the purchaser and the manufacturer. In that case, the test certificate shall be signed by the representative of that body.
NOTE - Qualified resting department department. department independent

: An inspection

and of the production

In certain cases, this department to approval by the purchaser.

may be subject

2.8 Material Sample -- A sample is a material submitted to the purchaser for testing before approval is given for production. 3 TECHNICAL BE SPECIFIED DELIVERY CONDITION BY THE PURCHASER include TO the

3.1 The enquiry and order shall particulars given in 3.1.1 to 3.1.4. 3.1.1 The details of material 3.1.2 The materials standard

to be supplied. and gride.

I@1387:1993 3.1.3 The type of document required for inspection and testing ( see Table 1 and 5 ).
3.1.4 Size of a test batch ( test lot ) ( see 5.2 ). 5 INSPECTION 5.1 General The procedures shall be examined in accordance with the requirements of suitable quality assurance system, arranged by the manufacturer, and drawn up to ensure compliance with the specified requirements. Various types bf inspection and testing may be carried out and these, together with the type of document required, are given in Table 1. Inspection procedures shall conform to Annex A. 5.2 Formation of Test Batches ( Test Lots ) AND SAMPLING

3.2Where appr'opriate,

the enquiry and order for information, shall include additional example, that listed in 3.2.1 to 3.2.6. 3.2.1 Where a material sample is required.

3.2.2 Procedures for marking, in accordance with 9 and machixiing, protection, packaging, loading, dispatching and the destination. 3.2.3 Methods of statistical ( if any ). 3.2.4 The welding operation control to be used

to be used.

3.2.5 Other options in the standard. 3.2.6 Any supplementary requirements not covered by the standard including past history of the material. 3.2.7 Contents of test certificate. 3.2.8 Any deviation in above as mutualy between the purchaser and supplier. 3.2.9 Document containing is ter.med as TDC document. 4 MANUFACTURING agreed

The method of forming test batches ( test lots ) shall be stated in the TDC and shall be determined by the type and production procedures ( see relevant material standard ). 5.3 Test Samples Test samples appropriate for the type of material shall have the dimensions specified in the material standard and test pieces shall conform to the requirements of the material standard. 6 TEST METHODS When required by the specification or at the time of order determination of chemical composition, microscopic examination or mechanical tests shall be carried out in accordance with the material standard. The relevant Indian Staudard test method shall be used. Other test method may be agreed upon at the time of order, where no appropriate Indian Standard exists.

above information

PROCESS

Unless otherwise specified the choice of the manufacturing processes are left to the discretion of the manufacturer.

Table 1 Type of Document Required for Various Types of Inspection and Testing (Chses
Type of Inspection and Testing IO process inspection and testing

3.1.3 and 5.1 )
Type of Docomeot Symbol of compliance TC

NO document or statement or Test Report Test certificate signed tative of the qualified works

Inspection and testing for certification carried out by the qualified departmerit') of the manufacturer's factory Inspection and testing for certification carried out in the presence of the purchaser or of a body named by him Inspection and testing certification carried out by an independent body, the tests being carried out outside the production works Continuous inspection

by the represendepartment of the

Test certificate signed by the purchaser or the representative of the body named by him, as well as by qualified department of manufacturer Test certificate body signed by the independent

TCP

TCI

By agreement parties

between

the

interested

-

`ISee Note under 2.7.

2

IS 1387: 1993 7 RETESTS Retests shall be carried out as specified in the material standard and as agreed at the time of order. 8. CHEMICAL ANALYSIS 8.2 Check Analysis A check analysis may be made by the purchaser on test samples or test uieces which represent each cast, batch or casting. The number of samples shall be agreed between the purchaser and manufacturer. 9 MARKING Marking on the supply shall contain the complete informatlon as per the relevant material standard and as agreed between the supplier and purchaser.

8.1 Samples for chemical analysis, if specified in the material standard, shall be obtained either from the test sample or, more generally from the cast. The sample shall be sufficient to allow three determinations.

ANNEX

A

( Clause 5.1 )
GENERAL CONDITIONS A-l INSPECTION CONDITIONS A-l.1 Places of Inspection Inspection should be carried out as per the mutual agreement between the supplier and purchaser either at manufacturer's works or at purchaser's premises or both. The selection of samples, the preparation of test pieces and the tests themselves shall be carried out, in the manufacturer's works and/or at purchaser's premises as per the mutual agreement between purchaser and supplier. The word sample covers, according to the type of test carried out, jhe test sample or a material representative of the material delivered. Where the works of the manufacturer does not have the necessary means, the inspection shall be carried out at any other place agreed to between the supplier and purchaser preferably in the country of the manufacturer. A-l.2 Submission for Inspection The manufacturer shall arrange with the purchaser, by mutual agreement the date of submission for inspection. If the representative does not present himself at the agreed date, the manufacturer, in order to avoid interruption of the manufacturing cycle, may himself carry out the inspection and deliver the test certificate to the purchaser, unless expressly prohibited. A-l.3 Rights and Duties of the Inspection Represeotative The inspection representative shall have access during normal production hours to the places in which the materials to be inspected are 3 FOR SPECIFIC INSPECTIONS AND TESTS

manufactured and stored. He may indicate the samples to be selected in accordance with the TDC. He shall have the option of attending the selection of samples, the preparation ( machining and treatment ) of the test pieces and carrying out the tests. The representative who visits the workshops for inspection shall respect all the safety regulations in force in the works and shall be accompanied, wherever possible, by a representative of the manufacturer. A-1.4 Conditions of Acceptance If all the requirements of the order, and this Indian Standard, are fulfilled, the test batch is considered to conform and is accepted- by .the purchaser.
NOTE -This does not invalidate the purchaser's right to question within an agreed time limit, the conformity of the batch to the specification.

A-2 ROUNDING

OFF OF TEST RESULTS

The results of the physical, mechanical, chemical tests and measurements shall be rounded off using either the rules specified in the standards on methods of tests or, when the value obtained contains a greater number of significant figures than the guaranteed value, the generally accepted rules for rounding off shall apply. A-3 RECORDS Unless otherwise specified in the order, the manufacturer shall maintain records of results of all the tests required by the specification for a minimum period of 3 years. A-4 VALIDITY PIECES OF THE DEFECTIVE TEST

In all cases, a new test piece may be taken from the same test sample or from another test

19 1387: 1993

sample belonging to the same test batch and the results obtained can be substituted for those corresponding to the defective test piece.
A-5 VALSIMTY OF TESTS

b) defective casting or machining

of the

rest

piece beyond the gauge marlcs; d) casting defects in the test piece, evident

piece : c) fracture of the test after fracture.

The results of a test may be discarded due to any of the following reasons: a) faulty mounting of the test piece or defective operation of the test machine;

It should be emphasized that every test should be conducted with due care in regard to sample selection, preparation and test procedures.

4

Bureau

of Indian

Standards

`institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.
Copyright

BIS is a statutory

No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form BIS has the copyright of all its publications. without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publication), BIS.
Review of Indian Standards

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of"BIS Handbook' and `Standards Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot: No. MTD 1 ( 3790 )
Issued Since Publication

Amendments

Amend No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters:

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS Telegrams: Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone 3237617,3233X41 337 84 99,337 x5 61 337 86 26,337 91 20 60 3X 43 { 60 20 25 235 02 16,235 04 42 1 2351519,2352315 832 92 95, X32 7X 58 { 832 `7X91, X32 7X 92

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones: 323 0131,323 33 75,323 94 02 Regional Offices: Central Eastern Northern Southern Western Branches
: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg

NEW DELHI 110002
: l/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola

CALCUTTA

700054 160022 600113

: SC0 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH

: C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI

: Manakalaya,

E9 MIDC, Marol, Andhcri (East) MUMBAI 400093

: AHMADABAD.

BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

