(Reaffirmed 2004)

IS : 10099- 1982

Indian Standard
METHODS FOR PREPARATION, MARKING AND MEASURING OF FABRIC SPECIMENS AND GARMENTS IN TESTS FOR DETERMINATION OF DIMENSIONAL CHANGE
Chemical Methods of Test Sectional Committee,
Chairman DR ( KUMARI ) M. D. BHAVSAR Members The Tata Mills Limited, Bombay JAPSHED D. ADRIANVALA National Peroxide Limited, Bombay DR V. G. AQNIHOTRI SHRI A. K. BANDOPADHYAY Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) KUMARI L. C. PATEL ( Alternate ) Punjab State Hosiery & Knitwear Development SHRI P. T. BANERJI Corporation Limited, Chandigarh Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals ( InspecSHRI P. K. BASU tion Wing ), New Delhi SHRI A. K. SAIQAL ( Alternate ) Ministry of Defence ( R&D ) SHRI M. L. BEHRANI SHRI A. K. SIN~H ( Alternate ) Ahmedabad Manufacturing & Calico Printing Co SHRI B. V. BHATT Ltd, Ahmadabad
SHRI

TDC 5
Association,

Representing The Silk & Art Bombay Silk Mills' Research

Limited, Indian Petrochemicals Corporation Vadodara SHRI D. K. CHATTOPADWAY ( Alternate ) National Test House, Calcutta DR D. K. DAS The Bombay Textile Research Association, Bombay SHRI M. D. DIXIT Association, Indian Jute Industries' Research DR A. S. DUTT Calcutta Wool Research Association, Bombay &RI S. B. HARDAS Textiles Committee, Bombay Da B. R. MANJUNATRA DR ( SHRIMATI ) G. R. PHALGIJMANI( Alternate ) SiLk&Art Silk Mills' Association, Bombay SHRI SUNIL S. MEHTA Laboratory Technological Research DR S. N. PANDEY ( ICAR ), Bombay KUMARI I. G. BRATT ( Alternate ) ( Continued on pqe @ INDIAN Coprright 1982 INSTITUTION 2 )

SHRI K. G. SHAE ( AZtermtc ) SHRI C. BHATTACHARYA

STANDARDS

This publication is protected under the Indian Coprright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS :

10099- 1982
page 1 ) Representing Office of the Textile Commissioner, Bombay ) All India Handloom Board, Bombay The Bombay Textile Research Association, Bombay Binny Limited, Madras

( Continuedfrom

Members SHRI C. K. PHADKE SHRI K. S. DESIKAN ( Alternate SERI R. S. PRAYAQ Salty N. S. SARAIYA SHRI S. R. ANANTRAKRISHNA SETTY DR M. G. MODAK ( Alternate) SHRI JAMNADAS K. SHAH SHRI KANUBHAI M. SHAH SHRI R. C. S1i.4~

The Arvind Mills Limited, Ahmadabad The Bombay Millowners' Association, Bombay Ahmedabad Textile Industry's Research Association, Ahmadabad Crescent Dyes & Chemicals Limited, Calcutta SHRI K. S. SRINIV~SAN SHRX R. S. BAJEKAL ( Alternate ) Ahmedabad Textile Industry's Research Association, SH~I S. S. TRIVEDI Ahmadabad Director General, IS1 ( Ex-ojkio Member ) SURJ S. M. CHAKRAB~RTY, Director ( Tex ) SHRI G. S. ABHYANKAR Deputy Director ( Tex ), IS1

Physico-Chemical Convener
SHRI M. D. DIXIT Members
DR V. G. A~XIEOTRI

Test

Methods

Subcommittee,

TDC

5 : 15
Bombay

The Bombay Textile Research Association,

National Peroxide Limited, Bombay Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) SHRI S. P. CHAKRABORTY SHRI G. C. SHVKLA ( Alternate ) The Bombay Dyeing & Manufacturing Co Ltd, SHRI A. V. CHINIWALLA Bombay Kamla Mills Limited, Bombay SHRI C. A. DESAI Textiles Committee, Bombay DIRECTOR ( LABORATORY ) DR ( SHRIMATI ) G. R. PHAL~UMANI ( Altrrnate ) Wool Research Association, Bombay SRRI S. B. H IRDBS The Silk & Art Silk Mills Research Association, SERI M. R. PARANJAPE Bombay Shri Dinesh Mills Ltd, Vadodara DR N. D. RAY The Bombay Millowners' Association, Bombay SHRI KANUBHAI M. SHAH The Century Spg 8s Mfg Co Ltd, Bombay SHRI D. R. SRARMA SHRI M~HESH SHARMA ( Alternats ) Indian Jute Industries' Research Association, SHRI N. C. Sord Calcutta Crescent Dyes & Chemicals Limited, CaTcutta SHFU K. S. SRINIVASAN SHRI R. S. BAJEKAL ( Alternate ) SHRI A. SUBRAMANIAN Madura Coats Ltd, Madurai SHRI A. CEELLARAJ ( Alternote )

2

IS :

10099- 1982

Indian Standard
METHODS FOR PREPARATION, MARKING AND MEASURING OF FABRIC SPECIMENS AND GARMENTS IN TESTS FOR DETERMINATION OF `DIMENSIONAL CHANGE
0. FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution an 30 April 1'82, after the draft finalized by the Chemical Methods of Test Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textile Division Council. 0.2 Dimensional stability of fabrics and garments is an important Therefore, the measurement of dimensional change due characteristic. to various treatments like washing, dry cleaning, soaking in water, Preparation, marking and measuring steaming, etc, is very necessary. of fabric specimers and garments before and after treatment is as important as the testing procedures for accurate and reliable results; this standard has been prepared to avoid discrepancies in this area. 0.3 This paration, tests for additions standard is mainly based on IS0 3759-1976 Texiles--`premarking and measuring of fabric specimens and garments in determination of dimensional change `, and the compatible have been made in this standard.

0.4 Standards of Weights and Measures Act, 1976 stipulates the use of International System of Units in the country; in order to familiarize the industry with this system, the recommended SI Units for use in the textile industry are given in Appendix A. 0.5 In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960".

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard prescribes methods for the preparation, marking and measuring of fabric specimens ( except textile floor coverings )
*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( m&d ).

3

IS : 19999

- 1982 determining on washing, dimensional dry cleaning, change soaking

and garments for use in tests for dimensional change ( for example, in water, or steaming ). 2. PRINCIPLE

2.1 Specimens are selected so as to be as representative as possible of the Pairs of reference marks are placed on the fabric specimen or sample. garment and the distance between the two marks of each pair of reference marks is measured before and after specified treatment. 3. TERMINOLOGY 3.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definition shall apply.

3.1 Dimensional Change Percent - The decrease or increase in dimensions ( that is, in length or width or both ) after subjecting the fabric to the prescribed test, expressed as a percentage of the corresponding dimensions before such test. 4. APPARATUS 4.1 Rule - not less than 750 mm length, preferably bevelled edge, marked in millimetres, for measuring 4.2 Flexible Steel Rule or Fibre-Glass metres, for measuring garments. 4.3 Suitable Means ink; contrasting with the fabric; may be made ( for thermoholes of Marking Reference Tape with an engraved, fabric specimens. marked in milli-

Points

such as:

a) Indelible

b) Fine threads, of colour

c) Heated wire, with which small plastic fabrics only ); and

d) Stafiles, with the measurements made from the point of entry of Indicate on the cloth which end of the the staple into the cloth. staple is used for measurement. 4.4 Flat Table of dimensions such tested can be laid flat for measurement. 5. ATMOSPHERIC TESTING CONDITIONS that FOR the complete article being AND

CONDITIONING

5.1 The test specimens shall be conditioned ( after pre-conditioning ) to moisture equilibrium in standard atmosphere at 65 f 2 percent RH and 27 * 2�C temperature as given in IS : 6359-1971*, before making measurements.
*Method for conditioning of textiles.

4

IS:100996. FABRIC 6.1 Selection SPECIMENS and Number

1982

6.1.1 Selected specimens should be as representative as possibIe of the sample. Take sufficient specimens to cover the width of the fabric, but do not cut specimens from within 1 m ( preferably not within 3 m ) of either end of a piece or where possible, within 75 mm of either selvedge. 6.2 Dimensions Cut uncreased specimens, each measuring not less than 500 x with edges parallel to the length and width of the fabric. In of fabrics less than 650 mm in width, full-width specimens may and measurements made by agreement between the interested

6.2.1 500 mm the case be used parties.

NOTE- If there is a possibility of the fabric unravelling during the test procedure, overlock the edges of the specimen with dimensionally stable thread. Specimens treated in this way shall be cut slightly larger than the specified dimensions. Specimens of weftknitted fabrics shall be of double-thickness and the edges shall be overstitched loosely using dimensionally stable thread.

6.3 MARKING 6.4.1 Place the specimen on the measuring table and make not fewer than three pairs of marks on it in both the length and width directions, using a suitable means ( see 4.3 ). The distance between the two marks in each pair shall be not less than 350 mm and no mark shaIl be less The pairs of marks than 50 mm from the edges of the specimen. shall be displaced from each other in such a manner as to yield a representative measure of the whole specimen ( see Fig. 1 ). 6.4 Pre-conditioning and Conditioning

6.4.1 Expose the specimen to the pre-conditioning atmosphere specified in IS : 6359-1971* and then expose the specimen to the standard atmosphere for testing textiles, as specified ( see 5 ) until it reaches equilibrium and until it is brought to approximately constant mass. 6.5 Method of Measuring Before Treatment ( see 5 >

6.5.1 Conduct all measurements in the standard atmosphere proceeding as follows for the measurement of each specimen.

6.5.2 Lay the specimen flat on the measuring table and remove Lower the wrinkles gently by hand without stretching the specimen. measuring rule vertically on to the specimen to ensure that it is flat. Measure the distance, to the nearest 1 mm, between the two marks of each pair of reference marks.
*Method for conditioning of textiles.

5

I!3 : 10099 - 1982

MARKING OF SPECIMEN ?OR FADRIC OF WlOtH @SO mm OR GREATER

MARKING OF SPECIMEN fOR FABRIC WlOTtl LESS TMAN SbOmm

OF

Dimensions given are minimal, expressed in millimetres. FIG. 1 6.6 Treatment MARKING OF FABRIC SPECIMENS

of Specimen

6.6.1 Subject the specimen to the required test method ( according to the conditions specified in the appropriate Indian Standards or by agreement between the interested parties ). 6.7 Method of Measuring 6.7.1 Proceed as indicated After Treatment in 6.4 and 6.5. 6

IS:10099 7. GARMENTS 7.1 General

-1982

7.1.1 The measurements listed are comprehensive. Not all may be necessary as their selection will c`epend on the type and style of garment. In all cazes the exact sites measured when testing garlr.ents shall be specified in the test report.
7.1.2 Unless otherwise arranged by agreement, make measurements as If, for example, it is required to relate specified in the relevant clause. changes in dimensions to changes in the malked sizes of a garment, it may be necessary to make more measurements than those specified in this standard. Such additional measurerrents shall Ee n ade, by agreerrent, at the specific parts of the garment which customarily denote the size of the garment. Examples of this application are: a) the sizing of shirts by the collar size, that is, the length between the outer edge of the button hole and the centre of the button; b) the sizing of brassieres by the circumference of the boc'y of the level of the diaphragm plus various tolerances dependent on cup size, which are of the order of 125 mm. Any results. modification of this type shall be noted when reporting the

7.1.3 When it is required to determine the dimensional change of the cloth of a garment as distinct from the dimensional change at seams and hems which may change more or less than the cloth, additional measurements shall be taken in the direction of the warp ( wales ) and of weft ( courses ) between ma1 ks located as far as is practicable from seams and hems [ see Fig. 2 (a) to 2 (c) 1. 7.2 Instructions Relating to all Garments 7.2.1 Make length and width measurements between specific points, preferably at seams or between points where seams meet. The positions on the garment at which the measurements are to be made shall be marked by one of the methods described in 4.3. It the garment design is complicated, it may be helpful to provide a diagram showing the measuring points. 7.2.2 Where linings are present which are considered to be of importance to the function of the garment, measure these in positions corresponding to those at which the garment was measured. 7.2.3 &4. First-precondition and then condition the garment as given in

7

IS : 18899- 1982

FIG. 2(a)

MARKING OF GARMENTWHEN MEASURINGDIMENSIONAL CHANGE OF THE CLOTH

-

FIG. 2(b)

MARKING OF VEST WHEN MEASURINGDIMENSIONAL CHANGES OF mm CL0-m
8

IS : 10099 - 1982

BACK SIOE FIG. 2(c)
MARKING OF BIUEP WHEN MEASURINGDIMENSIONAL CHANGEOF THE CLOTH

7.2.4 Place the garment flat on the table for measuring 7.2.5 Measure marked positions using the flexible an accuracy of of 1 mm.

( see 4.4 ).

the distance between the two marks of each pair of without stretching or tensioning the garment in any way, steel rule or fibre-glass type ( see 4.2 ) and measuring to at least 5 mm, and where practicable, to an accuracy

7.2.6 Measure the width or circumference with the garment closed and ensure that the buttons of buttoned garments are fully home in the buttonholes. 7.2.7 Measure relaxed state. elasticated garments or portions of garments in the

7.3 Specific Positions for Measurements - The following measuring positions are recommended but not all positions are necessarily releCorresponding measurements vant to all garments of a particular type. shall be made on both halves of the garment under examination, for example, both sleeves. 7.3.1 Jacket-Like Garments (for Example, Dresses, Coats, Pullovers, Pyjamas, Shirts, Vests ) - The measuring positions are the following: 7.3.1.1 7.3.1.2 garment. Length of neck-band. Vertical length from lowest point of armhole to bottom of 9

IS : 10099- 1982 7.3.1.3 Vertical length of front frcm junction neck seam to bottom of garment. 7.3.1.4 garment. Vertical length of centre back from of shoulder seam and neck to bottom to bottom UpFer of of' and

7.3.1.5 Length sleeve.

of underarm

seam(s)

from

armhole

There may be two such seams if the sleeve is made frcm lower sleeve sections: both shall be measured. 7.3.1.6 Length of shoulder seam from sleeve seam to neck.

7.3.1.7 Where applicable, the garment shall be folded as shown in Fig. 3 with the widest part of the bust section, along the fold. `Measure the fold between side seams, or between sleeve seams, or between panels, depending on the construction of the garment.

FIG. 3

METHOD OF FOLDING GARMENT

7.3.1.8 Width across back between sleeve seams measured at a distance halfway between centre-back neck and lowest point of armhole, or width of yoke from sleeve seam to sleeve seam. 7.3.1.9 Width or circumference of garment at not more than three places at stated distances from the centre-back neck. 7.3.1.10 Width or circumference of sleeve from junction sleeve seams at right angles to sleeve length. of side and

7.3.1.11 Width from front sleeve seam junction with the body to the back sleeve seam junction with the body, as shown in Fig. 4. 7.3.1.12 Width or circumference point of armhole and bottom of sleeve. 7.3.1.U Width or circumference 10 or sleeve halfway between lowest at cuff or bottom of sleeve.

IS : 10099 - 1982

FOG. 4 7.3.2 Trousers (for

MEASUREMENT DESCRIBED IN 7.3.1.11 example, Briefs, Pants,

measuring positions are the following. 7.3.2.1

Swim,

Trunks ) -

The

Length from top to junction

of leg seams at front.

7.3.2.2 Length from top to junction of leg seams at back. If seams If there is more than one seam are curved, measure round the curves. measure all seams. 7.3.2.3 Inside leg from crotch to bottom of legs. If leg length is short, measure from the bottom of one leg to the bottom of the other leg via the crotch. 7.3.24 7.3.2.5 7.3.2.6 Width at, or circumference Maximum of, waist. between top and crotch.

width or circumference

Width or circumference

of bottom of leg. of leg halfway between crotch and of top of leg. Coveralls, Bib-and-Brace
Overalls,

7.3.27 Width or circumference bottom ( omit if leg length is short ). 7.3.28 Width or circumference

7.3.3 Boiler Suits ( Jump Suits ), Combinations, One-Piece Swim Suits. jacket-like
7.3.3.1

These can be accommodated by combining the categories garments ( 7.3.1 ) and trousers ( 7.3.2 ) but where applicable: neck to crotch neck to

a) replacing 7.3.1.3 with "by length from centre-front seam or end of opening", and b) replacing 7.3.1.4 crotch seam". with "by length
11

from

centre-back

IS :18899- 1982
7.3.4 Girdles Length Width Width Width The measuring positions of three at top. at bottom. halfway down garment. are the following: places.

7.3.4.1 7.3.4.2 7.3.4.3 7.3.4.4 7.3.5

at a minimum or circumference or circumference or circumference

Pantie-girdle Categories by combining the categories,

7.3.5.1 These can be accommodated trousers ( 7.3.2 ) and girdles ( 7.3.4 ).

7.3.6 Brassiers - These include the appropriate portions of foundation garments, dresses, nightgowns, vests or slips, swim suits, with or without If adjustable shoulder straps are padded or pre-shaped bra sections. fitted, preferably adjust the sliders to give the longest possible strap or The measuring positions are the mark the position of the sliders. following. 7.3.6.1 Circumference of bottom of bra or `bra section'.

It may be 7.3.6.2 Total length of top edge of bra or bra section. necessary to include the strap length in this measurement for certain types Examples of types which require measurement round the of garment. top to include the strap length on the side nearer the neck occur when the straps are: a) not adjustable, 5 and 6. but incorporate elastic sections as shown in Fig.

FIG. 5

ERA WITH NON-ADJUSTABLE STRAP

FIG. 6

BRA WITH NON-ADJUSTABLE STRAP 12

IS : 10099- 1982 b) adjustable but made from a continuous piece of fabric which may or may not be elastic, as shown in Fig. 7.

FIG. 7

BRA WITH ADJUSTABLE STRAP MADEFROMA CONTINUOUS FABRIC

With garments of these types of construction, the circumference of the armhole, including the strap length on the side nearer the arm, should also be measured. 7.3.6.3 Length at centre back. 7.3.6.4 Length at centre front. 7.3.6.5 Depth at armhole seam or at seams adjacent to the armhole. 7.3.6.6 Distance between the tops of cups while the garment lies on the table. This is suitable for padded or pre-shaped types. 7.3.6.7 Length of each cup seam. 7.3.6.0 Length round curve of cup when folded garment is flat on table. This is suitable for garments without padding or pre-shaped sections. 7.3.6.9 Length of shoulder straps. 7.3.7 Skirts The measuring positions are the following.

7.3.7.1 Length from waist to bottom, including waistband if one is -present, taken at seams and midway between seams. 7.3.7.2 Width at or circumference of waistband.

IS : 10099- 1982 7.3.7.3 Width or circumference at not less than three places at stated distances from top edge or from bottom edge ofwaiatband if present. For flared and bias-cut skirts ( see Fig. 8 ), four additional measurements are required, preferably on each panel. 7.3.7.4 Length from waist to bottom, including present, taken at seams and midway between seams. waistband if one is

7.3.7.5 Length from waist to bottom, including waistband if one is present, taken at seams and midway between seams, marked length parallel to the warp direction. 7.3.7.6 Length from waist to bottom, including waistband if one is present, taken at seams and midway between seams, marked length parallel to the weft direction. 7.3.7.7 Length from waist to bottom, including waistband if one is present, taken at seams and midway between seams, marked length at 45" to the warp direction ( MANDATORY MEASUREMENT ).

FIG, 8

FLARED AND BIAS-CUT SKIRTS

7.3.8 Hosiery ( Socks Stockings ) - The measurement of hosiery and especially of tights is difficult and the procedure should be agreed between the interested parties. It is suggested that for socks and stockings the following measurements should be made as indicated in pig. 9.

14

IS:10099-1982

FIG. 9

MEASUREMENT OF SOCKS

7.3.8.1 Length of leg from top of heel. 7.3.8.2 Length of foot from heel to toe. 7.3.8.3 Width of leg midway between top and heel. 7.3.8.4 Width of foot midway between heel and toe. 7.3.9 Hats and Caps The measuring positions are the following.

7.3.9.1 Length of band. 7.3.9.2 Length of seams. 7.3.9.3 Width of band. 7.3.9.4 Overall diameter ( inside dimension ). 7.3.10 Gloves 7.3.10.1 Overall length. 7.3.10.2 Length of thumb seam(s). 7.3.10.3 Length along centre line of middle finger. 7.3.10.4 Width of palm, above the thumb joint. 7.3.10.5 Width across wrist at hem. It may be found helpful to use a template. 7.4 Treatment of Garment

7.4.1 Subject the garment to the required test method, repeat the procedure describe-t in 7.2.3 to 7.2.8 making the same series of measurement as conducted un-fer 7.3. 8. EXPRESSION OF RESULTS

.8.1 The changes in dimension-, shall be recorded separately as percentages of the original value. The changes in the recorded measurements may A plus be reported as well as, or instead of, the changes in dimensions. sign ( + ) shall be used to indicate elongation and a minus ( - ) to indicate shrinkage. 15

IS :

18899 - 1982 APPENDIX
( czausc 0.4 )
RECOMMENDED SI UNITS FOR TEXTILES
APPLICATION

A

SL NO.

CHARACTERISTIC

SI UNIT(S) ,_~--__----5 Abbreviation(s) Unit(s) (3) Millimetre Millimetre, centimetre Metre Millimetre Centimetre Millimetre, centimetre Centimetre, metre Micrometre ( micron ) Millimetre Tex Millitex Decitex Kilotex Micrometre ( micron ) Millimetre Millimetre (4) mm mm, cm m mm cm mm, cm cm, m

(1)
1) Length

(2)

(5) Fibres test specimens Samples, ( as appropriate ) cordage, Yarns,. ropes, fabrics Narrow fabrics Other fabrics test specimens Samples, ( as appropriate ) Carpets, druggets, DURRI.. ( as appropriate ) Delicate fabrics Other fabrics, carpets, felts.

2)

Width

3)

Thickness

m
mm tex mtex dtex ktex urn mm mm

4)

Linear density

Yarns Fibres Filaments,' filament yarns. Slivers, ropes, cordage Fibres Yarns, ropes, cordage ( as.

5)

Diameter

6) 7)

Circumference Threads in fabric: a) Lengthwise

Ropes, cordage fabrics Woven appropriate )

Number per centimetre Number per decimetre Number per centimetre Number per decimetre in Number per centimetre

ends/cm ends/dm picks/cm picks/dm ends/cm Reeds fabrics Knitted appropriate ) ( as.

b) Widthwise

8) 9)

Warp threads loom Stpbt;;

in knitted Courses per centimetre Courses per decimetre Wales per centimetre Wales per decimetre courses/cm courses/dm wales/cm wales/dm

a) Lengthwise

b) Widthwise

16

IS : 10099 - 1982
lz. (1) 10) 11) 12) 13) CHARACTERISTIC --* Unit(s) (2) Stitch length Mass per unit area Mass per unit length Twist (3) Millimetre Grams per square metre Grams per metre Turns per centimetre Turns per metre MiIlimetre, metre Millinewton Newton centiSI UNIT(S) Abbreviation<? (4) mm g/m2 g/m turns/cm turns/m mm, cm Knitted items Fabrics Fabrics Yarns, ropes, cordage appropriate ) ( as (5) fabrics, made-up APPLICATION

14)

Test or gauge length

Fibres, yarns and fabric specimens ( as appropriate ) delicate Fibres, yarns ( individual or skeins ) Strong yarns ( individual or skeins ), ropes, cordage, fabrics Yarns Fibres yarn or skeins ) 7 ( individual

15)

Breaking

load

mN N

16) 17) 18)

Breaking length Tenacity Twist factor multiplier or twist

Kilometre Millinewton tex per

km mN/tex turns/cm x c/&X turns/m x 4/tex N/cm2

Turns per centimetre X square root of tex Turns per metre x square root of tex Newton square metre Millinewton, Newton Millimetre Mass of pile yarn in grams per metre square per millimetre pile height Millinewton tex per deformation per unit per centi-

I ZYarns ( as appropriate

)

19)

Bursting strength

Fabrics

20) 21) 22)

Tear strength Pile height Pile density

mN N mm g/ms/mm pi1 e height

Fabrics ( as appropriate Carpets Pile carpets

)

23)

Elastic

modulus

mN/tex/ unit deformation

Fibres,

yarns,

strands

17

