**************** 



*■ fe^K 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



^^Eti^^tt^n f im^NS ^g^isskgai ra^%^uiKa a «&^^ 



IS 3596 (1967) 
10: Hosiery] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



Glossary of terms relating to hosiery [TXD 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS : 3596 - 1967 
REAFFIRMED 



Indian Standard ;j 1^ 



GLOSSARY OF TERMS 
RELATING TO HOSIERY 



Third Reprint AUGUST 1984 
( Incorporating Aratndment No. 1 ) 



UDC 687*3 : 001-4 



J5T 



© Copyright 1975 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARO 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Gr 10 May 1968 



IS 1 3596 - 1967 



Indian Standard 

GLOSSARY OF TERMS 
RELATING TO HOSIERY 



Chawfutn 
Shri B. D. Naithani 

Members 

Shri N. C. Jain ( Alternate to 
Shri B. D. Naithani ) } 

Shri K. L. Ahuja 
Shri Ram Rattan Bhanot 
Shri R. C. N. Bhowmik 

Shri P. K. Mitra ( Alternate ) 
Shri I. P. Dhir 

Shri H. D. Dumra 

Shri G. M. Gadre 

Shri P. L. Sharma ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. B. Ghosh 

Shri G. G. Ghosh 

Shri K. M.Jain 

Shri Surrndra Jain 
Shri L. S. Jalihal 

Shri G. Karthikeyan 

Shri Kirpal Sinoh 

Shri Y. K. Kusumoar 

Shri Lalit Mohan Muxherjee 
Shri G. V. Patil 
Shri R. R. Prasad 

Shri R. Rajpal 
Shri N. S. Sidhu 



Hosiery Sectional Committee, TDC 1 5 

Representing 
Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 



Directorate of Industries, Government of Haryana 
The Hotiery Industry Federation, Ludhiana 
Textiles Committee, Bombay 

The Northern India Hosiery Manufacturers* Corpo- 
ration, Ludhiana 

Wool & Woollens Export Promotion Council, 
Bombay 

Inspection Wing, Directorate General of Supplies & 
Disposals ( Ministry of Works, Housing & 
Supply ) 

The Cotton Textiles Export Promotion Council, 
Bombay 

The Ahmedabad Textile Industry's Research Associa- 
tion, Ahmedabad 

Delhi State Nylon Hosiery Manufacturers' Associa- 
tion, Delhi > 

Stre^ftlon Private Ltd, Bombay 

Belgaum District Hosiery Manufacturers' Association, 
Shahapur ( Belgaum ) 

South India Hosiery Manufacturers' Association, 
Tirupur 

Directorate of Industries &, Industrial Training, 
Government of Punjab 

The Silk & Art Silk Mills' Research Association, 
Bombay 

Bengal Hosiery Manufacturers' Association, Calcutta 

Dawn Mills Co Ltd, Bombay 

Office of the Development Commissioner, Small Scale 
Industries, New Delhi 

Yogendra Knitting Mills, New Delhi 

Directorate of Industries, Government of Punjab 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 



IS : 3596 - 1967 
REAFFIRMED 



Indian Standard ;j 1^ 



GLOSSARY OF TERMS 
RELATING TO HOSIERY 



Third Reprint AUGUST 1984 
( Incorporating Aratndment No. 1 ) 



UDC 687*3 : 001-4 



J5T 



© Copyright 1975 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARO 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Gr 10 May 1968 



IS 1 3596 - 1967 



Indian Standard 

GLOSSARY OF TERMS 
RELATING TO HOSIERY 



Chawfutn 
Shri B. D. Naithani 

Members 

Shri N. C. Jain ( Alternate to 
Shri B. D. Naithani ) } 

Shri K. L. Ahuja 
Shri Ram Rattan Bhanot 
Shri R. C. N. Bhowmik 

Shri P. K. Mitra ( Alternate ) 
Shri I. P. Dhir 

Shri H. D. Dumra 

Shri G. M. Gadre 

Shri P. L. Sharma ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. B. Ghosh 

Shri G. G. Ghosh 

Shri K. M.Jain 

Shri Surrndra Jain 
Shri L. S. Jalihal 

Shri G. Karthikeyan 

Shri Kirpal Sinoh 

Shri Y. K. Kusumoar 

Shri Lalit Mohan Muxherjee 
Shri G. V. Patil 
Shri R. R. Prasad 

Shri R. Rajpal 
Shri N. S. Sidhu 



Hosiery Sectional Committee, TDC 1 5 

Representing 
Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 



Directorate of Industries, Government of Haryana 
The Hotiery Industry Federation, Ludhiana 
Textiles Committee, Bombay 

The Northern India Hosiery Manufacturers* Corpo- 
ration, Ludhiana 

Wool & Woollens Export Promotion Council, 
Bombay 

Inspection Wing, Directorate General of Supplies & 
Disposals ( Ministry of Works, Housing & 
Supply ) 

The Cotton Textiles Export Promotion Council, 
Bombay 

The Ahmedabad Textile Industry's Research Associa- 
tion, Ahmedabad 

Delhi State Nylon Hosiery Manufacturers' Associa- 
tion, Delhi > 

Stre^ftlon Private Ltd, Bombay 

Belgaum District Hosiery Manufacturers' Association, 
Shahapur ( Belgaum ) 

South India Hosiery Manufacturers' Association, 
Tirupur 

Directorate of Industries &, Industrial Training, 
Government of Punjab 

The Silk & Art Silk Mills' Research Association, 
Bombay 

Bengal Hosiery Manufacturers' Association, Calcutta 

Dawn Mills Co Ltd, Bombay 

Office of the Development Commissioner, Small Scale 
Industries, New Delhi 

Yogendra Knitting Mills, New Delhi 

Directorate of Industries, Government of Punjab 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 



ISt 3596- 1967 
2. DEFINITIONS 



* Accordian Fabric — A weft-knitted fabric, showing a figure design in two 
or more colours, which is produced on one set of needles by knitting, tucking 
and missing; and in which tuck loops are introduced to eliminate long 
lengths of floating thread at the back ( see Fig. 1 ). 




Fig. 1 Accordian Fabric 

f 

After-Welt — A band on a stocking, following the welt, in which there is 
a variation of quality, stitch or yarn or both. Also known as ' Anti-ladder 
Band ', * Anti-Run-Down Courses ', * Garter Band ', ' Ladder Stop ', and 
< Shadow Welt ' ( see Fig. 20 on P 23 ). 

Angel Lmce — A warp-knitted fabric made with separating threads, usually 
of secondary cellulose acetate, which are dissolved out to leave narrow 
strips for trimmings. 

* Angora Yarn — An extremely soft yarn made from the hair of the Angora 
rabbit. In most cases, it also contains a proportion of other fibre, the 
amount of which is limited to that which is necessary to facilitate spinning. 

Ankle Socks — See (a) under ' Anklet \ 

Anklet 

a) A knitted footwear where the length of the leg portion just covers 
the ankle. It has either a turn-over top, elastic top or rib top. 
Also known as * Ankle Socks ' and * Tennis Socks \ 

b) A tubular band knitted on round machines with elastic threads 
laid-in; used by sportsmen for support and protection to the ankle 
(see Fig. 2). 

Anti-ladder Band — See ' After- Welt \ 

Anti-Rnn-Down Courses — See * After- Welt \ 



IS i 3596 -1967 



Fio. 2 Anklet 



Argyle — A term describing a style of hosiery which features diagonal 
effects in different colours. 

Astrakhan ( Knitted ) — A soft thick weft-knitted fabric with curled or 
crimped yarn in-laid on a tuck-miss basis. 



Atlas 



a) * Atlas ( Single ) — A warp-knitted fabric characterized by having 
one set of threads progressively traversing in a diagonal direction 
for a number of courses and returning ultimately in similar manner 
to the original wale. Also known as * Single Atlas * and ' Single 
Vandyke' (we Fig. 3). 




Fio. 3 Atlai ( Sinoli ) 
5 



IS 13596-1967 

b) Atlas ( Double ) — A warp-knitted fabric characterized by having 
two sets of threads making single-atlas traverses, course by course, 
in opposite direction. Also known as * Double Atlas ' and ' Double 
Vandyke \ 

Atmospheric Conditions for Testing, Standard — The atmosphere in 
which physical tests on textile materials are performed. It has a relative 
humidity of 65 ± 2 percent and a temperature of 27° ± 2°C ( see also IS : 196- 
1966f). 

B 

Baby Hood — A round headwear for babies with or without sun shade 
(M»Fig.4). 




Fio. 4 Baby HoOi ( Without Sun Shade ) 

Baby Suit — A set of knitted outerwear for babies consisting of coat or frock 
and two or more of the following: 

Headwear, Trousers or nickers, Bootees or socks, Gloves or mittens. 

Backing Yarn — Yarn used on the back of fabric for plated hosiery. 

Backwinding — A term describing the process of unravelling a knitted 
fabric and winding the yarn for re-using. 

Balaclave Cap — A long knitted headwear made or tailored out of plain 
or rib-knitted tubular fabric. Also known as ' TO PA ' ( see Fig. 5 ). 




Fio. 5 Balaclave Cap 

Balanced Twist — The twist in a plied yarn ( or cord ) is said to be 
balanced if the yarn ( or cord ) does not twist on itself when held in the form 
of an open-loop. 

t Atmospheric conditions For testing ( reviud). 

6 



18:3596-1967 

Balbriggan — A light weight plain-knitted cotton fabric generally used 
for underwear. This name originates from the town Balbriggan in Ireland. 

Ball ( Yarn ) — A package of hand-knitted yarn wound in the shape of 
a ball without support. 

BANIAN — An Indian term denoting all types of vests ( see * Vest * ). 

♦Bar ( Knitting ) — A fault in a knitted fabric appearing as a light or dark 
stripe and arising from differences in (a) lustre, (b) dyeing affinity (or 
unlevel dyeing ), (c) yarn spacing or loop length, or (d) yarn count; or from 
defective plating. 

Bathing Costume — A tight-fitting tailored knitwear used in bathing or 
swimming. Also known as ' Swimming Costume \ 

Bathing Trunk — See ' Trunk \ 

Beret ( Knitted ) — A round, soft-felted, knitted headwear with flat loose 
top and tight-fitting at the forehead ( see Fig. 6 ). 




Fio. 6 Beret 



Bight — Distance between the stitching line and the cut edge of a fabric. 
The term is generally applied to ovcrlock stitching. 

Bikini Suit — A two piece, bathing or swimming suit for ladies. 

Binding-Off — A term applied to locking or seaming of the last row of 
loops of a knitted fabric to prevent ravelling. 

Bird's Eye Back — The back side of a rib-knitted jacquard fabric obtained 
by knitting even number of needles of one set at one feeder and odd number 
of needles of the same set at the other. The bird's eye back is produced to 
eliminate the elongation of face stitches. When three colours are used, 
the back side of the fabric will have very small and uniform spots which 
look like bird's eye. 

Bleaching — A series of operations of improving ( other than by scouring 
only ) the whiteness by decolourizing the natural colouring matter of the 
textile materials from their grey state with or without removing the added 
colouring matter. 

Blending — A process aimed at mixing fibres of different lots, types and 
varieties to produce yarns having desired characteristics. 

Blister Fabric — S* ' Relief Fabric \ 



18:3596-1967 

Blouse — A waist length, tight-fitting outergarment worn by ladies. Also 
knownas'JC/M/^/r. 

Boarding — A process of putting the knitted garments on boards of suitable 
size and shape and then pressing and heating under moist or dry conditions 
to set the garments to the desired shape and size. 

Bonnet ( Knitted ) — A knitted headwear covering the entire head and 
ears and with strings for tying under the chin. Generally worn by children 
and ladies ( see Fig. 7 ). 




STRINGS 



Fig. 7 Bonnet 

Bootee — A knitted footwear with or without seam usually with fancy rib 
or purl stitches for infants too young to walk. Also known as * InJantce ' 
and * Infant Socks \ 

Border ( Sweater ) — Bottom portion of knitted outergarment usually 
made in 1 x 1, 2 x 2 rib or of the same fabric as used for the body of the 
garment. 

Bonrrelet Fabric — See ' Relief Fabric \ 

Bowing — A defect in knitted fabric caused due to curvature of the courses 
imposed during knitting or calendering or other operations. 

Breaking Load — The maximum load ( or force ) supported by a specimen 
in a tensile test carried to rupture. It is commonly expressed in grams or 

kilograms. 

Briefs — A tight-fitting underwear without leg portions. Also known as 
* CHADDI ' and ' JANGH1A ' ( see Fi# 8 ). 

Broad Rib — A fabric with multiple adjoining ribs which give longitudinal 
effects in face and back of the fabric. 

Example: 

6x3 rib 

8 



IS : 3596- 1967 




Fig. 8 Briefs 

Bruihing — Raising of the fibres on the surface of the cloth. Also known 
as ' Napping * and ' Raising \ 

BUMBLES — An Indian term for tassels ( see * Tassels ' ). 

Bnrson Knit ( Stocking ) — Knitted stocking shaped to the leg contour 
and tubular in construction without seam. 



Cable Stitch — A knitting stitch, which imparts raised effect to the fabric, 
formed by two or more groups of adjacent wales passing under and over one 
another and appearing like a twisted ribbon ( see Fig. 9 ). 




Fio. 9 Cable Stitch 

Calendering — One of the various processes used in finishing cloth by 
passing it between heated rollers or bowls held under pressure. 



ISt 3596- 1967 

Calf*— Fashioned or shaped part of the leg of socks or stocking covering 
calf portion of the leg ( see Fig. 20 ). 

Cap — A headwear tailored or knitted to shape. 

Cap Comforter — A knitted tubular garment without tassels; used for 
protecting head against cold. ( see also * Comforter ' ). 

Cardigan — A knitted outergarment with long sleeves and front-opening 
with a closing device generally buttons and with border. 

CHADDI — An Indian term for briefs ( see ' Briefs ' ). 

Chain Stitch 

a) Single Chain Stitch — A sewing stitch made from single thread as 
shown in Fig. 10. 

DIRECTION OF SUCCESSIVE STITCH FORMATION 



Fio. 10 Single Chain Stitch 

b) Double Chain Stitch — A sewing stitch made from two threads as 
shown in Fig. 1 1. 

Fio. 1 1 Double Chain Stitch 

Children's Socks — Seamless socks for children. 

Cloque Fabric — See ' Relief Fabric \ 

* Cloudiness — A defect in a wcft-laiitted fabric consisting of ill-defined 
areas of varying density attributable to the use of yarns of irregular 

thickness. 

Coat ( Knitted ) — A loose-fitting outergarment with long sleeves, pockets 
and front-opening with a closing device generally buttons but without 
border. 

Coatee — A short length tight-fitting coat generally worn by ladies. Also 
known as • KOTl\ 

10 



18 13596-1967 

Cockling — An irregular surface effect in knitted fabrics caused by loop 
distortion due to variation in stitch length and yarn twist. 

Combination Suit — An underwear worn by ladies in which vest and 
drawers /briefs are knitted in one piece. ATso known as ' Union Suit \ 

Combing — A process of separating or fractionating, in a comber, relatively 
short fibres from the long and removing the short along with neps and other 
impurities which have not been removed in the previous processes and 
simultaneously straightening and parallelizing the long fibres to improve 
the uniformity of the staple. 

Comforter — A knitted tubular garment without tassels; used for 
protecting neck and chest /head against cold ( see also * Cap Comforter ' ). 

Note — It is longer than cap comforter. 
Commercial Moisture Regain — An arbitrary value formally adopted 
as the regain to be used with the oven-dry weight when calculating 

a) the linear density, 

b) the commercial or legal weight of a shipment or delivery of any 
specific textile material, or 

c) the weight of specific component in the analysis of fibre blends 
( see also ' Moisture Content'* and ' Moisture Regain ' ). 

Conditioned Weight — Tne weight of a textile material conditioned in 
the standard atmosphere for testing. 

* Cordon Yarn — A two-ply union yarn made from a single cotton yarn 
and a single, worsted or woollen yarn. 

Corduroy ( Knitted ) — See ' Rib Fabric ( Knitted ) (2 X 2 ) '. 

Correct Invoice Weight — The weight of a textile material in a consign- 
ment calculated from its oven-dry weight by adding to it the proportionate 
commercial moisture regain. 

Corset — A stiff tight-fitting undergarment worn by ladies to support body 
or mould the figure. It extends cither from the bust or waist to just below 
the hips. 

Cotton Count — The linear density of cotton yarn expressed as number of 
640-yd hanks /lb. 

Cotton Lap ( Warp Knitting y — A traversing motion in the form of open 
laps in which warp threads progress by one needle space at each course. 

Count — An expression of linear density. The following two gr- * of 
systems are in current use: 

a) Direct yarn counts, based on mass per unit length, arc propor- 
tional to linear density. 

^. , mast of yarn specimen 

Direct yarn number » -? — --*- — / — *- — j 

1 length of yarn specimen 

11 



IS: 35% -1967 

Example: 

When the mass U expressed in grams and the length in 
kilometres, the resulting value is in tex units. 

b) Indirect yarn counts, based on length per unit mass, are inversely 
proportional to the linear density. 

T ,. , length of yarn specimen 

Indirect yarn number ** 5 — / — £—, 

mass of yarn specimen 

Example: 

See ( Cotton Count \ 

Coarse — A transverse row of loops in a knitted fabric or garment. 

Courses 5 cm — The number of courses in 5 cm measured along a wale of 
a knitted fabric or garment. 

Crepe Fabric ( Knitted ) 

a) Any warp or weft-knitted fabric made wholly or partly from crepe 
yarn. 

b) *A double-faced warp-knitted fabric with more rows of cleared 
stitches per unit of length on one side than on the other. 

c) *A weft-knitted fabric of irregular surface structure made by ran- 
dom tucking on one set of needles. 

Notb — A crepe yarn may or may not be used to produce fabric* referred to 
in (b) and (c) above. 

Crepe Yarn — Highly-twisted yarn generally with 1 200 to 4 000 tpm, 
used for producing crepe effect in woven or knitted fabrics. 

Crew Neck — A term applied to neck-ppening designed, cut or finished in 
slightly curved form (see FigC 12). 



Fio. 12 Crew Neck 

Crocheting — An operation of producing fabric with the help of crochet 
hooks. 

"Cross Plating — In rib-plated fabrics, a reversal of the yarn positions 
within all the stitches contained in certain courses. 

Note — A plated rib fabric shows one colour on the plain wales and the other colour 
on the rib wales, and reversal of the yarn position* for a number of courses, as in * Gross 
Plating ' produces a check effect in two colours. 

12 



IS ; 3596 - 1967 

Crowfoot Narrowing s — A term used to denote two-needle narrowings, 

"Crows' Feet — A puckering effect, usually in the heel or toe of circular- 
knitted hosiery and generally associated with the suture line. 

Crutch Piece — A piece of fabric used at the bottom of the seat of drawers 
to join the two-leg portions. 

♦Cap Seaming — The joining together of two edges, usually selvedges, by 
through-and-through seaming or overseaming, by means of single, double or 
treble chain stitch. The edges to be joined are positively fed by two cup- 
like wheels. Also known as ' Selvedge Seaming \ 

Cushion Sole — The reinforced sole with terry loop surface in knitted 
footwear. 

Cut Glove — See ' Cut Hosiery \ 

Cut Hose — See ' Cut Hosiery \ 

Cut Hosiery — Hosiery made to shape by cutting out and seaming flat or 
tubular knitted fabric. 

Cut Stocking — See ' Cut Hosiery \ 

Cut Underwear — See ' Cut Hosiery \ 

D 

Darning — Correction of defects, imperfections and damages in fabrics and 
garments by thread and needle. Also known as ' Mending \ 

D AST AN A — An Indian term for glove ( see € Glove * ). 

♦Derby Rib — A term applied to 6 x 3 rib. 

Diamond Hose — Hose with solid diamond designs. 

Dimensional Change — The decrease or increase in dimensions ( that is 
in length or width or both ) after subjecting the fabric or garment to the 

Crescnbed test, expressed as a percentage of the corresponding dimensions 
efore such test. 

Double Atlas — See {b) under * Adas \ 

Double Chain Stitch — See (b) under ' Chain Stitch \ 

Double-Faced Fabric — Also known as * Double Tricot Fabric \ 

a) ^Simplex Fabric — A double-faced fabric usually made on two 
needle-ban of a bearded-needle warp knitting machine, the two sets 
pf warp threads are meshed together successively on each needle 
bar to produce a fabric that normally has the same appearance 
on both sides. 

13 



ISi3»6-l§67 

b) * Duplex Fabric — A double-faced fabric composed of two fabrics 
pasted together, face tides outward, each having been produced on 
one needle bar of a warp knitting machine. These fabrics are 
often identical, in which case the duplex fabric resembles simplex 
fabric in appearance. 

Double Jersey Fabric — A thick fabric made on a rib knitting machine 
intended for outerwear. Also known as ' Double-Knit Fabric \ 

Double Jersey Jacquard Fabric — A thick fabric made on a rib knitting 
machine' with jacquard design intended for outerwear. _ 

Double-Knit Fabric — See ' Double Jersey Fabric \ 

Double Pique Fabric — See (b) under ' Pique ( Weft Knitting ) \ 

Double Sole — The sole of a knitted footwear reinforced with an extra 
yarn. 

Double Top Stocking — A stocking with a welt ( at the top ) formed by 
turning over the upper portion of the stocking and knitting or sewing it down. 

Double Tricot Fabric — Set ' Double-Faced Fabric \ 

Double Vandyke — See (b) under ' Atlas \ 

Drawers — Knitted underwear with leg portions made to cover from the 
waist to the knees or ankles as under: 

a) Short Drawers — with short legs reaching well above the knees, 

b) Half Drawers — with legs reaching up to the knees, and 

c) Full Drawers y Long Drawers or Under Pants — with legs reaching 
up to the ankles. 

♦Draw Thread — A thread introduced in the form of one row of loops 
during knitting which, on removal, permits the separation of articles that 
are knitted in a succession of units connected together. 

Drop Stitch, Dropped Stitch — A defect in a knitted fabric which may 
result from a defective needle, improper feeder setting, or other causes. 
It occurs when a needle ( or needles ) misses to receive the yam but casts 
off its old loop at the sarn^ course. Also known as ' Missed Stitch \ 

Duplex Fabric — See\h) under ' Double-Faced Fabric \ 

E 

*Edpi*g — A narrow strip of knitted fabric or lace attached to another' 
fabric or made-up article by one edge, usually for decorative purposes. 

'Eight Loch — A double faced J2 x 2 or broad-rib fabric with crossed 
sinker wales. 

14 



IS: 3596- 1967 

Elasticity — That property of a material by virtue of which it tends to 
recover its original size ana shape immediately after removal of the stress 
causing deformation. 

Elastic Top — Top ( of socks or stockings ) in which elastic or rubber 
threads have been iaid-in during knitting. 

Elbow Cap — A tubular band knitted on round machines with elastic 
threads laid-in; used by sportsmen for support and protection to the elbow 
(utFig. 13). 



J 



Fio. 13 Elbow Cap 

Embroidered Hosiery — Hosiery with ornamental motifs or patterns 
produced by hand or machine with the help of threads after the article has 
been knitted. This i$ distinguished from the hosiery where patterns are 
produced during the process of knitting itself 

English Welt — See ' Roll Welt \ 

Epaulette — Ornamental shoulder-piece of uniforms) such as badges. 

*Eyelet — An openwork effect produced by transferring sinker loops to 
two adjacent needles. Usually two consecutive sinker loops are collected 
and transferred. 



Fabric — A term which cover* all types of cloth or cloth-like textile 
materials independent of construction, method of manufacture or nature of 
the material used. 

Fabric Glove — Same as * Cut Glove \ 

Fabric Hom — Same as ' Cut Hose \ 

Fadag Yara — Yarn used on the face of fabric for plated hosiery, 

♦Fall Plate Fabric — A fabric of a tuck-like structure which is made on one 
needle bar on a Raschel warp knitting machine, involving the use of a solid 

15 



IS 1 339* -1967 

metal plate ( fall plate or chopper bar ) to push down the newly formed laps 
below the spoons of the open latches to be cast off with the ground laps of 
the previous course. 

Not* — Often a yarn is used which could not otherwise be incorporated in the 
particular fabric. 

Fascinator — Decorative headwear worn by ladies. 

Fashioned Hosiery — See ' Fully-Fashioned Hosiery '. 

Fasliion Marks — Stitch marks, arising during narrowing and widening - 
through transference of loops to adjacent needles during the course of shaping 
in fully-fashioned hosiery. 

Fastness ( Colour ) — The resistance of the colour of textile materials to 
different processes and agencies to which they may be subjected during 
manufacture and subsequent use. 

* Felling — The flattening of an overseam by stitching it down, usually with 
a single chain stitch. 

Felting Shrinkage — The decrease in dimensions of a fabric or garment 
after milling, expressed as a percentage of the corresponding original 
relaxed dimension. 

Finishing ( Hosiery ) — The term * finishing * usually includes in addition 
to bleaching and dyeing processes, the cutting out, sewing together, shaping 
of the garment and pressing etc. 

'Fisheye — See ' Pin Holes \ 

Fishnet — A float plated structure wherein the missed yarn is usually thicker 
than the ground yarn. The missed thread will occur in odd wales for 1 
to 4 courses and then in even wales for the same number of 
courses. 

Not* — The term ' fishnet 1 if now loosely applied to many other open-knitted 
structure!. 

Flat Knit — A term used to describe fabrics knitted on a flat machine in 
contrast to those knitted on a circular machine. 

Flatlock Stitch — A sewing stitch which makes the sewn portion lie flat 
and not raise above the surface of the fabric. These stitches are more 
often used in underwear. 

Fleecy Fabric — In a generic sense, it denotes all types of knitted fabrics 
which are brushed or raised on the surface to give smoothness and possibly 
warmth. 

16 



IS : 3596 - 1967 

Float Plating — An effect in a plain-knitted plated fabric which is produced 
when the face yarn is missed by certain needles to allow the other yarn to 
appear on the face. 

Float Stitch — A stitch in a plain-knitted fabric where a length of yarn 
is not received by the needle ( or needles ) and the yarn connects two loops 
of the same course that are not in adjacent wales. This portion of yarn 
floats at the back of the fabric. Also known as * Missed Stitch * or * Press-Off 
Stitch' (see Fig. 14). 




Fio, 14 Float Stitch ( Back Side of Fabric ) 

Fly Front — A flap of material attached by one edge to underwear for extra 
coverage. 

Footless Stocking — A turn-over top seamless stocking without foot 
portion; generally worn by sportsmen. 

Footwear ( Knitted ) — Knitwear used as covering for the leg or foot or 
both, for example, socks, stockings, hose tops, anklets, etc. 

French Foot — The foot of a fully-fashioned stocking with a continuation 
of the seam down the centre of the sole and with fashion marks near heel 
and toe. 

French Welt — See « Tubular Welt \ 

Full Cardigan Stitch — A stitch produced by tucking on 1 X 1 rib basis 
as under: 

First Course — Tuck all rib needles, and 
knit all plain needles; and 

Second Course — Knit all rib needles, and 
tuck all plain needles 

Also known as ■ Polka Rib ' ( see Fig. 15 ). 

17 



IS 1 3596- 1967 




Fio, 15 Full Cardioan Stitch 

Foil Drawers — See (c) under f Drawers \ 

Full-Fashioned Hosiery — See ' Fully-Fashioned Hosiery \ 

Fully-Fashioned Hosiery — Hosiery which is shaped wholly or in part by 
widening or narrowing or by both by loop transference to increase or de- 
crease the number of wales knitted on a flat bed weft-knitting machine 
without alteration of the character of the stitch. Also known as ' Fashioned 
Hosiery ', ' Full-Fashioned Hosiery ' and ' Selvedged Hosiery \ 

G 

GANJI — An Indian term denoting all types of vests ( see ' Vest ' ). 

Garment — An individual piece of clothing. 

Garter Band — See ' After-Welt \ 

Gas Mantle — A dome-shaped knitted article made of ramie, rayon or 
cotton and treated with suitable chemicals; used for heating to incande- 
scence in pressure lanterns to give the rated luminosity. 

Gassed Yarn — A yarn that has been passed through a gas flame to remove 
protruding fibres and improve the yarn by making it smoother and brighter 
in appearance. Also known as * Singed Yarn \ 

Gassing — A process of burning off protruding fibres from the surface of 
yarn or cloth to obtain a smooth surface. Also known as ' Singeing \ 

* Gauge 

a) A term specifying the spacing of the loop-forming elements in 
knitting and ancillary machines and expressed as the number of 
elements per unit of length. 

b) A term specifying the physical dimensions, usually, thickness, of 
loop- forming elements. 

Note — The gauging systems in common use are given in Appendix A. 

18 



ISi 3596- 1967 

Glove — A covering for the hand and wrist with a ahcath each for the four 
fingers and the thumb. Also known as ' DASTANA \ 

Golf Hose — Heavy wool stockings for sportsmen, made in fancy designs 
and turn-over tops. 

Gore Line ( Heel ) — The line on either side of the heel of socks or stock- 
ings made on circular machine, formed while shaping the heel ( see Fig. 43 
onP41 ). 

Gore Line ( Toe ) — The line on either side of the toe of socks or stockings 
made on circular machine, formed while shaping the toe ( see Fig. 43). 

Grey Hosiery — Hosiery which is not scoured, bleached or dyed. 

GULUBAND — An Indian term lor muffler (see ' Muffler' ). 

Gusset — An extra piece of material sewn to a garment for reinforcement. 

Gymnasium Hose — Hose extending beyond the knees; generally worn 
by gymnasts. 



H 

Hair Net — A net-covering to retain the hair in order. 

Half Cardigan Stitch — A stitch produced by tucking on 1 X 1 rib basis 
as under: 

First Course -r- Tuck all rib needles, and 
knit all plain needles; and 

Second Course — Knit all rib needles, and 
knit all plain needles 

Also known as ' Royal Rib ' ( see Fig. 16 ). 




Fio. 16 Half Cardio an Stitch 
19 



IS: 3596- 1967 

Half Drawers — See (b) under ' Drawers \ 

Half Hoie — See ' Socks \ 

Hand-Knitting — A term applied to knitting done by hands with the 
help of knitting pins. 

Hand-Knitting Yarn — Yarn intended for hand-knitting. 

Handwear ( Knitted ) — Knitwear used as covering for hand or wrist or 
both, for example, gloves, mittens, wristlets, etc. 

Headgear ( Knitted ), Headwear ( Knitted ) — Knitwear used as cover- 
ing for head, for example, balaclava cap, beret, TOPA> etc. 

Heel Gore Line — See * Gore Line ( Heel ) \ 

Held Loop — A loop which, having been pulled through the loop of the 
previous course, is retained by the needle during the knitting of one or 
more additional courses ( see Fig. 14 and Fig. 49 on P 46 ). 

*Held-Loop Fabric — See ' Relief Fabric \ 

Hem — The edge of a fabric garment doubled over and sewn to strengthen 
or prevent it from fraying. It may also be used as a finish or a 
decoration on a garment. Also known as * Seamed Welt * ( see also ' Welt ' ). 

High Neck — A term applied to neck of a knitted outerwear, designed or 
finished in tubular high shape to cover the neck fully or partly. It may be 
single or turn-over type ( see Fig. 17 ). 

Fio. 17 High Neck 

High-Spliced Heel — A heel where splicing is introduced high above the 
shoe line. 

Honeycomb Design — A design characterized by cell-shaped cavities on 
the face of a weft-knitted fabric made on tuck stitch basis. A typical honey- 
comb design fabric is produced as follows: 

Courses Rib Needles Plain Needles 

1 and 2 Tuck on odd and non-knit on even Knit all 

3 Knit all Knit all 

4 and 5 Tuck on even and non-knit on odd Knit all 
6 Knit all Knit all 

20 



IS: 3596- 1967 

Hose — Knitted footwear where the leg length extends beyond the knee. 

Hose Top — A tube-like seamless rib fabric used for covering the leg portion 
from ankle to knee. It is worn over the socks. 

Hosiery — A term applied to all types of knitted goods made from yarns; 
may be made cither by hand-knitting or machine-knitting. 

Hosiery Yarn ( Cotton or Wool ) — Yarn with low twist but strong 
enough for machine-knitting. 



Imitation Rib — An effect resembling ribbed texture produced on a plain- 
knitted fabric either by systematically removing the needles or closing the 
beard of needles during knitting. Also known as * Mock Rib \ 

Infantee, Infant Socks — See ' Bootee '. 

Infant Suit — A baby suit for infants ( see ' Baby Suit ' ). 

Ingrain Yarn — See ' Top-Dyed Yarn \ 

In-Laid Fabric — See ' Laid-in Fabric \ 

Instep — Upper part of the foot of socks or stockings. 

Intarsia Design — A design in weft-knitted fabrics in two or more colours 
which are solid from front to back. Each area of colour is knitted from 
a separate yarn which is contained within that area. Generally a detached 
motif is made in colour on different coloured ground. Also known as ' Solid 
Design \ 

Interlock Fabric — A double 1 x 1 rib-knitted fabric with crossed sinker 
wales. The wales on one side of the fabric are immediately behind the 
wales of the other side of the fabric. The appearance of the fabric is same 
on both sides. 

Intnrned Top Stockings — A stocking with inturned welt at the top* 

Inturned Welt — A welt made by folding a plain fabric backward and 
then joining the starting end with the main body of the fabric during the 
process of knitting. Also known as ' Turned Welt \ 



Jacket ( Knitted \ — A short outergarment generally of hip length, with 
full sleeves and tight-fitting border. 

Jacqoard Fabric ( Knitted ) — A knitted fabric with designs generally 
m colour made on the basis of needle selection. 

21 



ISt35tt-ltt? 

JANGHIA — An Indian term for briefi ( see ' Briefi * ). 

Jersey — Pullover with a hem at the bottom. 

Jersey Fabric — Set ' Plain Fabric ( Knitted ) \ 

JUMPER — An Indian term for blouse ( see 'Blouse' ). 

JURAB — An Indian term for socks and stockings ( see * Socks ' and ' Stock- 
ings » ). 



Knee Gap — A tubular band knitted on round machines with elastic threads 
laid-in; used by sportsmen for support and protection to the knee / see 
Fig. 18). 



Flo. 18 Knee Cap 

Knitted Fabric — Fabric produced by the process of knitting. 

Knitted Garment* — Garments made by knitting or out of knitted fabrics. 

Knitted Goods — Goods made by knitting or out of knitted fabrics. 

Knitting — A process of producing a texture by intermeshing series of loops. 

Knitwear or Knitted- Wear — Knitted goods used as apparel. 

Knep Desisp — Designs produced by consecutive tucking ami. knitting 
basis on plain fabrics and consecutive tucking, knitting and missing basis 
on rib fabrics. This gives an effect of raised spots ( see Fig. 19 ). 

KOTI — An Indian term for coatee ( see *Coatee' ). 

L 

Lace Stitch ( Knitting ) — A stitch produced on one set of needles in weft- 
knitted fabrics by transferring either partially or wholly a loop from one 
needle to another. 

22 



18:3596-1967 





Flf. I9A Flf. I9B 

Fio. 19 Knop Design 

Ladder — A sequence of drop stitches in a single wale. It appears like a 
ladder. 

Ladder Stop — See ' After- Welt \ 

Ladies' Hose, Ladies' Stocking — A fine-knitted ladies' footwear where 
the length of the leg portion extends well above the knee. It has generally 
a broad welt at the top. ( see Fig. 20 ). 



WELT 



AFTER-WELT 



CALF 




Fio. 20 Ladies' Stocking 

LaidUin Fabric — A knitted fabric containing non-knitted yarns, which 
are held in position by the knitted yarns. Also known as * In-Laid Fabric* 
(see Fig. 21). 

Lea ( Cotton ) — A continuous length of yarn measuring 120 yd in the fori** 
of coil made on 1'5-yd girth reel. 



23 



IS s3396-1967 




NON-KNITTED 
YARNS 



Fio. 21 Laid-in Fabric 

Lingerie — Ladies' underwear, slumberwear and similar garments of fine 
texture and aesthetic appeal. 

Lininess — Longitudinal defect (s) caused by structural distortion in knitted 
fabric. 

Linking — A method of joining the loops of the edges of a piece of knitted 
fabric or fabrics together by a single or double chain stitch passing through 
opposite loops in the same course. Also known as ' Point Seaming ' or 
4 Point-to-Point Seaming \ 

Links-Links Fabric — See ' Purl Fabric '. 

Lisle Yarn — A highly-twisted, plied (usually two-ply), good quality 
cotton hosiery yarn, spun generally in fine counts. All lisle yarns are 
gassed and some may be even mercerized. 

♦Locknit Fabric — A fabric ( see Fig. 22 ) made on warp knitting machine 
with one needle bar and two full-set guide bars, where the guide-bar move- 
ments are controlled as follows: 

Front Guide Bar 2-3, 1-0, and repeat; and 

Back Guide Bar 1-0, 1-2, and repeat 

Lock Stitch — A two-thread sewing stitch by which the lower thread is 
interlocked with the upper thread and held fast ( see Fig. 23). 

Long Drawers — See (c) under * Drawers \ 

Loop ( Knitting ) — The fundamental unit formed by bending of the yarn. 
In a knitted structure this is "supported by and intermeshed with other units 
{see Fig. 24). 

a) Needle Loop — The upper curved portion of the loop. 

b) Sinker Loop — The lower curved portion of the loop, 

24 



IS: 35% -1967 




Fro. 22 Locknit Fabric 

DC 



Fio. 23 Lock Stitch 
LOOP ^NEEDLE LOOP 




SINKER tOOP 
Fig. 24 Loops ( Knitting ) 

Loose Course — A course where the loops are kept looser or longer than 
the loops of the other courses of the fabric or garment. 

M 

Making-Up — A term applied to the conversion of fabrics into garments. 

Matinee Coat ( Knitted ) — Ladies' light-weight coat with open front and 
without any closing device. 

25 



18:3996-1967 

Mending — See ' Darning \ 

Mercerixation — A process of treating cellulosic textiles (generally cotton ) 
in the form of yarn or fabric with a solution of caustic alkali of a certain 
concentration under specified conditions which increases their lustre and 
dye affinity. 

Merino Wool — Wool from Merino sheep, normally having a mean fibrt 
diameter of 25 microns or less. 

Merino Yarn — Yarn made from Merino quality wool. 

Merit Fabric _ See ' Net ( Knitted *) \ 

* Milanese Fabric ( Circular Warp-Knitting ) — A tubular warp-knitted 
fabric made with two full sets of warp threads traversing continuously in 
opposite directions ( see Fig. 25 ). 

Note — The manner of traversing the threads is always cotton lap. 




Fio. 25 Milanese Fabric ( Circular Warp-Kotttiko ) 

'Milanese Fabric ( Warp*Kn* ttng ) — A warp-knitted fabric normally 
made with a ?ull set o r warp threads ( that is, containing twice as many 
threads a* there are wales in the fkbric). The threads are continuously 

26 



IS: 3596- 1967 

divided into two equal warp sheets, one set of which traverses to the right 
continuously and the other set to the left, such that any particular thread 
traverses the full width of the fabric, and on reaching the selvedge is 
transferred to the other set ( see Fig. 26 ). 

Note — The manner of traversing the threads may be cither silk lap or cotton lap. 




Fio. 26 Milanese Fabric ( Warp-Knitting ) with Silk Lap 

Milan! Rib — A three course weft-knitted rib structure, knitted as follows: 
Course 1 — 1 x 1 rib knitting; 

Course 2 — Plain needles knitting, rib needles non-knitting; and 
/ Course 3 — Rib needles knitting, plain needles non-knitting. 

Milling — A process of consolidating or compacting fabric, which usually, 
though not exclusively, contains wool to obtain the required cover and firm- 
ness of texture. 

Missed Stitch — Ste ' Drop Stitch * and ' Float Stitch \ 

Mitten — A covering for the hand and wrist. The difference between a 
glove and a mitten is that the former has a sheath for each of the four fingers 
and the thumb, while the mitten has either one sheath for the entire four 
fingers and one for the thumb or it has no sheath for the fingers and thumb 
at all. 

Mock Rib — Sa' Imitation Rib '. 

Moisture Content — ^The weight of moisture in a textile material, expressed 
as a percentage of the total weight* 

27 



IS s 3596- 1967 

Note — - If 100 parti by weight of material contains 20 parti, by weight of moisture, 
the moisture content is 

100X20 9n 

— nso — 20pcrccnt 

Moisture Regain — The weight of moisture present in a textile material 
expressed as a percentage of the oven-dry weight. 

Note — If 100 parts by weight of material contains 20 parts, by weight of moisture, 

the moisture regain is 

100 X 20 . 

— gg = 25 percent 

Monkey Cap — A knitted cone shaped cap that covers the head; usually, 
has a pompon at the apex. Also known as ' TO PA ' ( see Fig. 27 ). 




Fio. 27 Monkey Cap 



Muffler — A long, narrow-width flat or tubular-knitted fabric with tassels 
at both ends; generally worn around the neck. Also known as 
c GULUBAND ' ( see Fig. 28 ). 




Fio. 28 Muffler 

Mango — The fibrous material made in the woollen trade by pulling down 
new or old hard-woven or milled cloth or felt in rag form ( see also i Shoddy ' ) . 

Mutton Cloth — See ' Stockinette \ 

N 
Napping — See ' Brushing \ 

Narrowing - - The act of reducing the width of the fabric or garment by 
decreasing the number of wales by stitch transferring during knitting to 
get the desired shape. 

as 



IS : 3596 - 1967 

Neckwear ( Knitted ) — Knitwear used as covering for neck, for example, 
mufflers, scarves, ties, etc. 

Needle Lines — Longitudinal lines in fabric or garment produced due to 
defective functioning of the needle (s). 

Needle Loop — See (a) under * Loop ( Knitting ) '. 

Net ( Knitted ) — A knitted fabric of an open texture. Also known as 
' Mesh Fabric \ 

*Niantic Foot — A fully-fashioned hose foot, made in two parts with the 
seams on either side of the foot and with seamless heel and toe pouches. 
The complete h6se with niantic foot is made on two machines known as 
* legger ' and ' footer \ 



One-Piece Beret — Beret knitted in one-piece [ set ' Beret ( Knitted ) ' ]. 

One-Piece Garment — A knitted garment made from one piece of material 
without any joining at the shoulders and of the sleeves to the body ( see 
Fig. 29). 



Fio. 29 One-Piece Pullover 

Opera Hof e — - A hose extending up to the hip, generally used by opera 
artists. 

Ottoman Rib Fabric — See ' Relief Fabric \ 

Outerwear ( Knitted ) — Knitwear worn as outergarment; for example, 
cardigan, pullover, shirt, slipover, etc. 

Oven-Dry Weight — The weight of a sample of textile material dried to 
substantially constant weight in an oven maintained at 105±3°C temp and 
supplied with air at the standard atmospheric conditions ( 65 ± 2 percent 
RHand27±2°Ctemp). 

29 



IS 1 3596- 1967 

Overboarding — An undesirable practice of boarding the garments to 
oversize, 

Overknlt Fabric — See (b) under * Pique ( Weft Knitting ) \ 

Overedging, Overlooking, Overseaming — Sewing by overlock stitches. 

Overlook Stitch 

a) Two- Thread Overlook Stitch — A sewing stitch made from two threads 
used for hemming purposes. The edge of the fabric is first cut by 
knives incorporated in the machine and then the stitch is made over 
the cut edge of the fabric to join it with the main fabric ( see 
Fig. 30). 

0IRECTION OF SUCCESSIVE STITCH FORMATION 




Fig. 30 Two-Thread Overlook Stitch 



b) Three-Thread Overlock Stitch — A sewing stitch made from three 
threads used for joining two or more pieces of fabric. The edges 
of the fabrics are first cut by knives incorporated in the machine 
and then the stitch is made over the cut edges of the fabrics to join 
them together ( see Fig. 31 ). 

OIRECTION OF SUCCESSIVE STITCH FORMATION 




Fio. 31 Three-Thriad Overlook Stitch 



Pairing — Putting together two complementary units of footwear or glovei 
of the same type, size and ihapc. 

Pearl Fabric — See ' Purl Fabric \ 



30 



IS: 3596 -1967 



Pelerine — A cellular effect produced on knitted fabric by transferring 
formed sinker loops ( see Fig. 32 ). 



Fio. 32 Pelerine 
Perching — A process of examining fabrics and garments for defects, 

pH Value — The logarithm to the base 10 of the reciprocal of the con- 
centration of hydrogen ions in an aqueous solution. It is a convenient 
method of expressing small differences in the acidity or alkalinity of nearly 
neutral solutions. For solutions on acid side the pH value is less than 
7 and on the alkaline side it is more than 7. 

Pile Fabric ( Knitted ) — A fabric having elongated loops of yarn project- 
ing on its surface which are cut. 

Pilling — A term applied to accumulation of fibres in the form of pills on 
the surface of a fabric developed during wear and which are held to the 
fabric by an entanglement with the surface fibres of the material. 

Pin Holes — Very small holes caused by loop distortion. Also known as 
' Fisheye \ 

Pique ( Warp-Knitting^) — A fabric, normally made with two guide bars, 
showing pronounced cord effects in the wales direction. The portions bet- 
ween the cords are made by omitting one* or more threads from the guide 
bar that is making the smaller underlap. 

Pique (>Veft.Knitting) 

a) *SingU Piqu* Fabric — A six-course interlock fabric which differs 
from ordinary interlock at the third and sixth courses by tucking 
•mi one bed, 

3i 



IS : 3396 - 1967 



For circular knitting machines, the repeat sequence is as follows: 

Feeder No. Dial Cylinder 

1 Knit odd needles Knit even needles 

2 Knit even needles Knit odd needles 

3 Tuck odd needles Knit even needled 

4 Knit even needles Knit odd needles 

5 Knit odd needles Knit even needles 

6 Tuck even needles Knit odd needles 

b) Double Pique Fabric — A special type of knitted fabric made on 
circular rib machines by knitting successively with odd number oi ) 
dial needles at Feeder No. 1 and 2 and even number of dial neediest 
at Feeder No. 3 and 4 and on cylinder needles knitting and missing 
on a u ^rnate feeders. 

For circular knitting machines, the repeat sequence is as follows: 



rr No. 


Dial 


Cylinder 


1 


Knit odd needles 


Knit all 


2 


Knit odd needles 


None knit 


3 


Knit even needles 


Knit all 


4 


Knit even needles 


None knit 



Also known as * Overknit Fabric \ 

c) * Texipique Fabric — A six-course interlock fabric which differs from 
ordinary interlock at the third and sixth courses by tucking on both 
beds. 

For circular knitting machines, the repeat sequence is as follows: 
Feeder No. Dial Cylinder 

1 Knit even needles Knit odd needles 

2 Knit odd needles Knit even needles 

3 Tuck even needles Tuck odd needles 

4 Knit odd needles Knit even needles 

5 Knit even needles Knit odd needles 

6 Tuck odd needles Tuck even needles 

Placket Shirt — A full sleeved shirt with two or three buttons underneath 
the collar. Very often, the colour of the placket and collar contrast with 
the colour of the body of the shirt. 

Plain Fabric ( Knitted ) — The simplest weft-knitted fabric made on one 
set of needles in which' all the. loops are intermeshed in one direction, Also 
known as 'Jersey Fabric ' ( see Fig. 33 ). 

32 



IS: 3596 -1967 




Fio. 33 Plain Fabric (Knitted) 

Plain Stitch ( Knitting ) — A primary weft-knitting stitch made on one 
set of needles ( see Fig. 45 on P 43 ) . 

Plating ( Knitting ) — The controlled knitting of two different yarns in the 
same stitch such that each yarn takes up a definite position within the stitch. 
Plating usually involves the knitting of two yarns of different colour, lustre 
or composition, so that only one of these yarns is visible on the face of the 
stitch. 

Plash Fabric ( Knitted ) — A fabric made with uncut elongated loops of 
yarn projecting on the reverse side of some or all stitches. Also known as 
• Terry Fabric ( Knitted ) \ 

Point Seaming — See - linking \ 

Point Splicing — High splicing above heel diverging from a point. Also 
known as * Taper Splicing \ 

Point-to-Point Seaming — See ' Linking '. 

Polka Rib — See * Full Cardigan Stitch \ 

Polo Shirt — A type of sports shirt with crew neck and short sleeves, usually 
of solid colour with rib trimmings of contrasting colour around the neckline 
and at the sleeve ends; generally worn by polo players. 

*Pre-boarding, Pre-Setting — The operation of boarding carried out on 
garments or stockings usually before they are scoured and dyed. 

Note — Woven or warp-knitted articles are usually made from fabric that has been 
pre-iet by either moist steam or dry heat according to established methods for stabilizing 
the fabric, and finished goods made from set fabric do not need to be pre- boarded. On 
the other hand, hosiery made from knitted fabric which has not been stabilised or 
fashioned depends to great extent on the pre-boarding operation for conferring on them 
their final shape and ability to resist peimanent creasing in such treatments as dyeing. 

Pre-boarding is confined mainly to fabrics or articles made from synthetic-polymer 
yarns ( for example, nylon ) and is done by submitting them to the action of steam 
under pressure or dry heat so that they acquire the desired shape. 

In addition to removing the stretch imposed on the yarns during manufacture, the 
treatment stabilises the dimensions of the articles so that they undergo no further change 

33 



IS s 3596* 1967 

of anape during subsequent scouring and dyeing, provided that these processes are 
carried out under conditions less severe than those used during the pre-boarding. In 
genera] practice, stockings are drawn over stainless-steel formers and subjected to wet 
steam at 1*75 kg/cm f ( or 25 lb/in* ) pressure for a pre-determined time. The lengthwise 
shrinkage of the stocking thereby produced is usually about 50 mm ( or 2 in ). 

♦Press-Off ( Knitting ) — The casting-off of the fabric from the needles by 
virtue of the fact that the supply of yarn has failed. 

Press-Off Stitch — See * Float Stitch \ 

Pullover — A knitted outergannent with full sleeves, tight-fitting border 
at the bottom and without front-opening ( see Fig. 29). 

Purl Fabric — A weft-knitted fabric in which some loops contained within 
the same wale are intermeshed in one direction and the other loops in the 
opposite direction. Also known as ' Pearl Fabric ' or ' Links-Links Fabric * 
(see Fig. 34). 




Fig. 34 Purl Fapric (lxl) 

Puttee ( Knitted ) — A thick knitted woollen felted cloth strip used as a 
kind of gaiter or legging for wrapping round the ankle and the leg; generally 
used by soldiers, riders, etc. 

a 

Queen's Cord ( Knitting ) — A two-bar warp-knitted construction made 
with full-set threading in toth guide bars. The lapping movement of the 
back guide bar involves underlapping of 2, 3 or 4 needle spaces while the 
front guide bar chains continuously on the same needle. 

R 
Rack (Racking ) — See ' Shog ( Shogging ) \ 

Raised-Design Fabric — See ' Relief Fabric \ 

Raising — See ' Brushing '. 

34 



IS:3596-1%7 

Reduced Heel — A defective heel made by reducing the number of active 
needles forming tlie heel. 

Reinforcement — Strengthening of any portion of the knitted garment 
which is subjected to harsher wear either by splicing or by sewing or affixing 
other material. 

Relative Humidity — The ratio of the actual pressure of the water vapour 
in the atmosphere to the saturation vapour pressure at the same temperature. 
The ratio is usually expressed as a percentage. 

Relief Fabric — A compound or double fabric with a figured blister raised 
effect; usually produced on a rib jacquard machine. The ground yarn is 
knitted on all or alternate needles in one set and on selected needles in the 
other set. This takes place not more frequendy tlian every third course. 
The patterning yarn ( or yarns ) is knitted on selected needles of the second 
set to give a preponderance of loops of the patterning yarn on the face side 
of the fabric. Also known as * Blister Fabric ', * Bourrelet Fabric ', ' Cloque 
Fabric ', ' Held-Loop Fabric ', * Ottoman Rib Fabric \ f Raised-Design 
Fabric ', c Ripple Fabric ' and ' Roll- Welt Fabric \ 

♦Reverse Plating — In plain-plated fabrics, reversal of the yarn positions 
within certain stitches so that the opposite yarn appears on the fece of the 
fabric. 

Reversible* — Such garments which can be worn either side. 

Rib Fabric ( Knitted ) ( 1 x 1 ) — A weft-knitted fabric made on two sets 
of needles in which all the loops of alternate wales are intermeshed in one 
direction and all the loops of the other wales knitted at the same courses 
are intermeshed in the other direction ( see Fig. 35 ). 




Fio. 35 Rib Fabric ( Knitted ) ( 1 x 1 ) 

Rib Fabric ( Knitted ) ( 2 X 2 ) — A weft-knitted fabric made on two set* 
of needles in which all the loops of alternate pairs of wales are intermeshed 

35 



IS 1 3596 -1967 

in one direction and all the loops of the other pairs of wales knitted at the 
same courses are intermeshed in the other direction ( see Fig. 36). Also 
known as * Corduroy ( Knitted ) ' and * Swiss Rib \ 




Fio. 36 Rib Fabric ( Knitted ) ( 2 x 2 ) 

Rib Stitch — A primary weft-knitting stitch made on two sets of needles 
[ see also * Rib Fabric ( Knitted ) ( 1 x 1 ) ' and * Rib Fabric ( Knitted ) 
(2 X 2)']. 

Rib Top ( Ribbed Top ) — Top ( of socks or stockings ) made in 1 x 1 
rib. 

Rigolette — A light-weight knitted scarf worn by ladies as head-covering. 

Ring ( Knitting ) — A fault in a circular-knitted fabric appearing as a 
light or dark stripe and arising from differences in (a) lustre, (b) dyeing 
affinity ( or unlevel dyeing), (c) yarn spacing or loop length, or (d) yarn 
count; or from defective plating. 

Ripple Fabric — See * Relief Fabric \ 

RNS Vest — Vest with round neck and with short sleeves ( see Fig. 37 ). 




Fio. 37 RNS Vest 
36 



IS : 3596 - 1967 

KN Veit — Vest with round neck and without sleeves. Also known as 
'Sandow' (see Fig. 38). 

Note — These vesti are made either with narrow shoulder straps ( cross-cut ) or wi^h 
broad shoulder straps ( shape-cut ). 




Fig. 38 RN Vest 

Roll Welt — A welt produced on rib machine by knitting on one set of 
needles for a few courses ( generally not exceeding 4 ) and non-knitting on the 
other set of the needles while they retain their old loops. This is followed 
by knitting on both sets of needles together on rib basis. This gives a roll 
effect on one side of the fabric. Also known as * English Welt \ 

Roll Welt Fabric — See € Relief Fabric \ 

Round Neck — A term applied to neck-opening designed, cut or finihsed in 
round shape. 

♦Roving Courses — Additional courses used either as protective courses or 
to facilitate handling in subsequent operations in the manufacture of knitted 
articles. These courses are afterwards removed. 

Royal Rib — See ' Half Cardigan Stitch \ 

*Running-On — The operation of placing a series of loops into points or 
needles preparatory to further knitting or to joining fabrics together by 
linking. 

S 
Sandow — See ' RN Vest \ 

Satin (Knitted) — A two-guide bar warp-knitted fabric in which 
the front-bar underlaps are arranged with a view to produce a smooth 
surface. Typical front-bar laps are/l-0/3-4/or/l-0/4-5/ and back-bar laps 
*re /1-0/1-2/. 

Scarf ( Knitted ) — A piece of knitted fabric used as covering for head 
or neck, or both. 

Scouring — A process of cleansing fibre, yarn or fabric of impurities. 

37 



ISs3596-1967 

Seam — A seam is a joint consisting of a sequence of sewing stitches uniting 
two or more pieces of material and is used for assembling parts in production 
of sewn items. 

Seamcovering — A process where the seams already produced are rein- 
forced by sewing to give them a good cover, flatten them, and provide a 
good appearance. There are two rows of needle stitches parallel to the seam 
on the outside of the garment and on the inside there is a soft heavy looper 
thread which crosses the seam connecting the two lines of needle stitches 
(see Fig. 39). 




Fio. 39 Seamcovering 



Seamed Welt — See ' Hem '. 

Seamless Hosiery — Hosiery-knitted in tubular form on a circular 
machine. 

Seconds ( Hosiery ) — Hosiery, which owing to some fault or imperfec- 
tion, does not meet an agreed standard of quality. 

Selvedged Hosiery — See ' Fully-Fashincd Hosiery \ 

Selvedge ( Knitted ) m — A longitudinal secured edge of a flat-knitted fabric 
formed during knitting. 

Selvedge Seaming — See * Cup Seaming \ 

Separating Course — A slack course of knitted loops separating one 
garment or garment part from another which on removal permits the 
separation of articles that are knitted in a succession of units connected 
together. Separating courses may be cut, ravelled, or dissolved, and several 
such courses may be made consecutively. 

Sewed Toe — The toe of a knitted footwear closed by overlocking rather 
than by linking. 

38 



13: 35%- 1967 

Shadow Welt — See ' After-Welt \ 

Shaped Hosiery — Hosiery which is shaped wholly or in part by varying 
the type or length of stitch on weft knitting machines without increasing or 
decreasing the number of wales. 

Sharkskin Fabric (Knitted) — A warp-knitted fabric, the characteris- 
tic of which is a firm construction and a rather stiffy handle. The usual 
warp-knitted sharkskin is a two-bar construction made with full-set thread- 
ing in both guide barC The lapping movement of the back guide bkr 
involves underlapping of 3 or 4 needle spaces, and thaf of the front gui(jfc 
bar of one needle space in the opposite direction. 

Shawl ( Knitted ) — A rectangular flat piece of knitted fabric generally 
with tassels used by ladies for wrapping round the upper part of the body. 

* Shell-Stitch Fabric — A warp-knitted fabric, having a raised shell-like 
surface produced by holding loops on certain needles while knitting on 
others at each course. The arrangement of the held-loops in pattern forma- 
tion gives the shell-like effect. 

Shirt ( Gents ) — An outergarment with buttoned front-opening, designed 
to cover the trunk of the body, having half or full sleeves and with collared 
neck (see Fig. 40). 




i 



Fio. 40 Shirt (Gbnts) 

*Shoddy — The fibrous material made in the woollen trade by pulling down 
new or old knitted or loosely woven fabrics in rag form ( see also ' Mungo ' ). 

• 
Shof ( Shoggin* ),— Lateral movement of needlebed on a flat-knitting 
machine or angular displacement of dial relative to cylinder on a circular- 
knitting machine dr a lateral movement of yarn guide bars on a warp- 
knitting machine. Also known as ' Rack ( Racking ) \ 

Short Drawers — See (a) under € Drawers \ 

Short Rib Fabric — Full cardigan fabric made by using one colour at the 
first feeder and the second colour at the second feeder ( successively ), so 



39 



18:3596-1967 

that one colour appears on the face and the other on the back of the fabric 
when contracted. 

Silk Lap ( Warp Knitting ) — A traversing motion in the form of open 
l*ps in which the warp threads progress by two needle spaces, making an 
overlap and an underlap at each course. 

Simplex Fabric — See (a) under ' Double-Faced Fabric \ 

Singed Yarn — See * Gassed Yarn \ 

Singeing — See ' Gassing '. 

Single Atlas — See (a) under ' Atlas \ 

Single Chain Stitch — See (a) under * Chain Stitch \ 

Single Pique Fabric — See (a) under * Pique ( Weft Knitting ) \ 

Singlet — A sleeveless vest with round neck and wide shoulders; with 
wcltmg around the neck^opening and armholes ( see Fig. 41 ). 




Fio. 41 Singlet 

Single Vandyke — See (a) under ' Atlas \ 

Sinker Loop — See (b) under ' Loop ( Knitting ) \ 

Skein — A definite length of yarn in the form of a coil made on a reel of 
specified girth. 

Skiers' Sweater — High-necked heavy-weight sweater with full sleeves; 
generally used by skiers. 

Skirt — A ladies* garment which is fitted around the waist and hangs down* 

* Slack Coarse — A course of knitting made with loops longer than normal 
for a special purpose, for example, linking, running-on, separating garments, 
etc. 

Slipon — A ladies' knitted outergarment without front-opening with 
three-quarters, half, short or batwing sleeves and tight-fitting border at the 
bottom. 



40 



IS: 3596- 1967 

Slipover — A knitted outergarment without sleeves, with tight-fitting border 
at the bottom and without front-opening ( see Fig. 42 ). 




Fio. 42 Slipover 

Slumberwear — An underwear used by ladies while sleeping. 

Slurgalling — A term applied to variation in loop length along a single 
course or between courses. 

Snag — A defect in a knitted fabric caused by thread or threads which have 
been accidentally caught and pulled out of position. 

Snow Cap — A type of balaclava cap made of two folds of knitted fabrics 
one of which is white and the other dyed; used at high altitudes ( see * Bala- 
clava Cap ' ). 

Sock, Socks — Knitted footwear where the length of the leg portion ex- 
tends to about mid-way between the ankle and the kne . It has either a 
rib top or elastic top. Also known as * Half Hose ', ' JURAB \ and ' Sox ' 
(jw Fig. 43). 




18:3596-1967 

Solid Design — See ' In tarsia Design '. 

Sox — See ' Socks \ 

* Spiral! ty — Distortion of a circular-knitted fabric in which wales follow 
a spiral path around the axis of the tube. It is caused by using yarn that is 
twist-lively, the direction and degree of spirality being influenced by the 
direction and degree of twist-liveliness. 

Note — Fabrics made on circular knitting machines have an inherent inclination of 
the courses to the wales. This should not be confused with spirality. 

Splicing — A term applied to reinforcement of any portion of hosiery by 
knitting extra yarn(s) along with the main yarn. 

Split Foot — The foot of a knitted footwear where the sole is knitted from 
a different yarn than that used in knitting the instep. 

Split Sole — The sole of the split foot. 

Sports Pullover — A V-necked pullover with coloured stripes at the neck, 
cuffs and the border; generally used by sportsmen. 

Sports Shirt ( Knitted ) — A half or short-sleeved shirt of short length and 
with collar; generally used by sportsmen ( see Fig. 44 ). 




Fig. 44 Sports Shirt 



*Spread Loop — A needle loop expanded over two or more wales. 

Note — Applied to stockings, the terra refers to expansion over two wales and the 
stockings arc described as ' mesh ' or ( technically ) ' half-point transfer \ The stitch 
has ladder-resistant properties. 

Standard Condition — The condition of a textile material when it reaches 
moisture and temperature equilibrium with standard atmosphere for 
testing. 

Standard Moisture Regain — Commercial moisture regain accepted as 
standard (see also 'Commercial Moisture Regain'). 

42 



IS: 3596- 1967 

Stitch Density — The number of stitches per unit area of a knitted fabric. 
"Stitch ( Knitting ) — An intermeshed loop or loops ( see Fig. 45 ). 




Fio. 45 Stitch ( Knitting ) ( Plain ) 

Stitch ( Sewing ) — Stitch made by sewing. 

Stockinette — A plain-knitted tubular cotton fabric of loose texture; 
generally used for cleaning machinery and for wrapping meat. Also known 
as ' Mutton Cloth \ 

Stockings — Knitted footwear where the length of the leg portion extends 
to just below the knee. It has either a * rib top ' or * turn-over top \ Abo 
known as ' JURAB ' and ' Three-Quarters Hose * ( see Fig. 46 ). 




Fio. 46 Stocking 

String Vest — A coarse net-type cotton vest made from fabric knitted on 
Raschel warp knitting machines; used as undershirt at high altitudes. 

Stump Sock — A tubular knitted fabric shaped on the machine according 
to the requirement and closed at one end; used as a covering for the stump of 
the amputated portion of the body. 

43 



IS: 3596 -1967 

S-Twist — The twist in yarn due to which its spirals arc in line with central 
portion of letter C S', when the yarn is held in a vertical position ( see Fig. 47 ). 




Fio. 47 S-Twist 

♦Sweater - — A generic term for tight-fitting knitted outergarment such as 
cardigan, pullover and slipover. 

Swimming Costume — See * Bathing Costume \ 

Swimming Trunk — See * Trunk \ 

Swiss Rib — See ' Rib Fabric ( Knitted ) ( 2 x 2 ) '. 



Tape ( Knitted ) — A knitted fabric strip of narrow width with or without 
selvedges. 

Taper Splicing — See ' Point Splicing \ 

Tassels — An ornamentation, consisting of tufts of loosely hanging pieces 
of yarn, tied at equal intervals on both ends ( widths ) of the mufflers or 
shawls. Also known as ' B UMBLES \ 

Tennis Shirt ( Knitted ) — A white sports shirt; generally used by tennis 
players [see ' Sports Shirt ( Knitted ) ' ]. 

Tennis Socks —See (a) under * Anklet \ 

Terry Fabric ( Knitted ) — See* Plush Fabric ( Knitted ) '. 

tex — The primary unit in a system of units for expressing the universal 
count of yarn ( see Note ); the weight in grams of one kilometre of yarn. 

Not* — This system is also intended to be used for expressing the weight per unit 
length of fibres and other tactile products like ropes and rovings. The following 
multiple and sub-multiple units may be used to avoid large numbers and small (Tactions, 
respectively. 

1 k tex { kilo-tex ) ■» 1 000 tex 
1 m tea ( milli-tex ) « 0*001 tex 

44 



IS: 3596- 1967 

Texipique Fabric — See (c) under ' Pique ( Weft KnittiW ) \ 

Three-quarters Hose — See ' Stockings \ 

Three-Thread Overlock Stitch — See (b) under ' Overlock Sktitch \ 

Tie* — A narrow width neckwear passing underneath the collar and tied 
with an elegant knot in the front. 

Tinting — Colouring of fibres and yarns with fugitive colours to permit of 
easy distinction. 

Toe Gore Line — See ' Gore Line ( Toe ) \ 

TOPA — An Indian term for * Balaclava Cap ' and * Monkey Cap * ( see 
* Balaclava Cap ' and * Monkey Cap ' ). 

Top-Dyed Yarn — Yarn made from dyed tops. Also known as * Ingrain 
Yarn \ 

Tricot Fabric — Originally, a warp-knitted fabric with two full sets of warp 
threads each set making a 1 and 1 lapping movement but in opposite direc- 
tions. The term is now used in a generic sense to cover many types of warp- 
knitted fabrics. 

Trimmings ( Knitted ) — Strips of knitted fabric of fancy character used 
generally for the purpose of decorating or adorning clothing but often 
fulfilling a utilitarian purpose. 

Trunk — A knitwear having the shape of briefs but stronger in quality used 
for bathing or swimming. Also known as * Bathing Trunk ' and * Swimming 
Trunk '. 

T-Shirt ( Knitted ) — A half-sleeved or short-sleeved outerwear with round 
neck and with folded rib tape attached to the neck and spmetimes to sleeves 
and bottom also ( see Fig. 48 ). 




Fio. 48 T-Shirt 
45 



IS: 3596 -1967 

Tubular Fabric — Fabric made on circular knitting machines. 

Tubular Welt — A welt produced on a rib machine by knitting on plain 
needles and rib needles, alternately, to form a tubular section of plain fabric. 
This is followed by knitting both the sets of needles together on a rib basis. 
Also known as Trench Welt'. 

Tucking — A defect caused by a tuck loop or loops inadvertently produced 
in a knitted fabric. 

Tuck Ripple — Relief fabric produced on the basis of tuck stitches ( see 
' Relief Fabric'). 

Tuck Stitch — The stitch made when a needle retains one loop and takes 
on one or more additional loops before casting them off ( see Fig. 49 ). 




Fio. 49 Tuck Stitch ( Shown from Back of Fabric ) 

Turned Top — See ' Turn-Over Top \ 

Turned Welt — See ' Inturned Welt '. 

Turn-Over Top — Top ( of socks or stockings ) which is made sufficiently 
longer than usual to be turned outside during use. Also known as ' Turned 
Top' (wFig. 50). 



Fig. 50 Turn-Over Top 

Twin Set, Twin Suit — A set of ladies' outerwear consisting of JUMPER 
and cardigan ( worn together ); generally of the same shade and quality. 
Also known as * Twin Suit '. 



Twist 



a) The spiral disposition of the components of a yarn which is usually 
the result of relative rotation of the two ends. 

46 



IS : 3596 - 1967 

b) The number of turns per unit length of a yarn expressed as turns 
per metre ( tpm ). 

Twist Multiplier — A factor which when multiplied or divided by the 
square root of the yarn number gives the number of turns per unit length 
as under: 



Indirect System — Turns per unit length as factor x V yarn number 

factor 

Direct System — Turns per unit length - ^/ yam number 

Two-Thread Ovcrlock Stitch — &«"(a) under ' Over lock Stitch \ 



U 

Under Pants — See (c) under * Drawers '. 

Underwear ( Knitted ) — Knitwear worn next to the skin and under 
other garments, for example, drawers, vest, etc. 

Union Suit — See ' Combination Suit \ 

Union Yarn — Yarn made by mixing and spinning two or more different 
kinds of fibres, for example, cotton and wool, wool and terene, etc. 



Vest — A knitted undershirt. Also known as ' BANIAN' and ' GANJP. 

V-Neck — A term applied to neck-opening designed, cut or finished in the 
shape of letter 'V ( see Fig. 51 and 52 ). 

VNS Vest — Vest with V-neck and with short sleeves ( see Fig. 51). 




Fio. 51 VNS Virr 
47 



IS: 3596 -1967 

VN Vest — Vest with V-ncck and without sleeves ( see Fig. 52 ). 




Fio. 52 VN Vest 



W 



Waist Coat ( Knitted ) — A V-necked sleeveless garment with- full front- 
opening with a closure device and extending just below the waisdine. 

Wale — A longitudinal chain ofloops in a knitted fabric or garment formed 
by one needle. 

Wales/5 cm — The number of wales in 5 cm measured along a course of a 
knitted fabric or garment. 

Warp Knitting — A method of knitting in which the loops made from each 
warp thread are formed substantially along the length of the fabric, charac- 
terized by the fact that each warp thread is fed more or less in line with the 
direction in which the fabric is produced. 

♦Web Fabric ( Knitted ) — A plain, circular knitted fabric. 

Weft Knitting — A method of knitting in which the loops made by each 
weft thread are formed substantially across the width of the fabric, charac- 
terized by the fact that each weft thread is fed more or less at right angles to 
the direction in which the fabric is produced. 

*WeIt — A secure edge of a knitted fabric or garment made during, or 
subsequent to, the knitting process. Welts made during the knitting process 
usually occur at the starting end of the fabric and are formed parallel to the 
course. Seamed welts, which are made after the knitting process, may 
occur in any position in the fabric ( see also ' Hem ' ). 

Widening — The act of increasing the width of the fabric or garment by 
increasing the number of wales during knitting to get the desired shape. 

Winding — An operation of transferring yarn from one form of package to 
another. 



48 



IS : 3596 - 1967 

Woollen Yarn — Yarn produced by carding, condensing and spinning 
wool fibres, new or otherwise, in which the fibres cross each other in every 
direction presenting a rough surface. 

Worsted Yarn — Yarn produced by carding, combing and spinning wool 
fibres, in which the fibres are reasonably parallel to the axis of the yarn. 

Wristlet — A tubular band knitted on round machines with elastic threads 
laid-in, used by sportsmen for support and protection to the wrist ( see Fig. , 

53). 



Fio. 53 Wristlet 



Yarn — A continuous strand of textile fibres or filaments suitable for knitt- 
ing, weaving, or otherwise intertwining to form a textile fabric. It generally 
occurs in the following forms: 

a) Spun Tarn — A yarn composed of fibres ( short length or staple ) 
twisted together. 

b) Filament Tarn — A yarn composed of ( continuous ) filaments 
assembled, with or without twist. 

c) Monofilament — with or without twist. 

d) Narrow Strip — of material, such as paper, cellophane or metal 
foil, with or without twist. 

Note— Varieties include single yarn, plied yarn, cabled yarn, cord, thread, fancy 
yarn, etc. 

Yarn Count — See \Count '. 

Y-Neck — A term applied to neck-opening designed cut or finished in the 
shape of letter 'Y' ( see Fig. 54 ). 




IS 1 3596 - 1967 



Z-Twist — The twist in yarn due to which its spirals arc in line with central 
portion of letter 'Z', when the yarn is held in a vertical position ( see Fig. 55 ). 




APPENDIX A 

( Note Under 'Gauge' ) 

COMMON GAUGING SYSTEMS 



Machine 
Straight-bar plain 
Straight-bar rib 



Bearded-needle 
knitting 



Simplex 



Bearded-needle 
( challenger type 

Loop*wheel 



Gauge 

Number of needles in 38*1 mm ( 1*5 in ) 

Number of needles in 38*1 mm (1*5 in) of 
either set 

warp English — Number of needles in 25*4 mi^i 
(lin) 

Saxon — Number of needles in 1 Saxon in^h 
( Saxon inch = 23*6 mm ) 

Number of needles in 25*4 mm ( 1 in) 
or 23*6 mm ( 1 in Saxon ) of one neecjle 
bar only 

circular Number of needles in 25*4 mm ( 1 in ) 
) of circumference 

Number of needles in 38*1 mm (1-5 in ) 
of circumference ( theoretically ) 



50 



IS: 3596- 1967 



Machine 
Sinker-wheel 



F.N.F. warp knitting 
Latch-needle circular 

Circular rib and interlock 



Circular purl 
Flat knitting 

Flat purl 

Seamless hose and half-hose 
Latch-needle warp knitting 



Gauge 

Fein — Number of needles in 1 zoll 

Grob — Number of needles in \\ zoll 
( the gauge is measured along the arc 
of the holes drilled in the needle ring to 
receive the cranked ends of the needles ) 

Note — 1 Zoll « -£ € of 1 m ( 109 in 
approx). 

Number of needles in 25*4 mm ( 1 in ) 

Number of needles in 25*4 mm ( 1 in ) 
of circumference 

Number of tricks in 25'4 mm (1 in ) of 
circumference of cylinder or dial or both, 
for example, a machine with 10 tricks per 
25*4 mm ( 1 in ) in both cylinders and dial 
may be defined as a 1 0-gauge machine, or 
as a 10 x 10 gauge machine 

Number of needles ,in 25*4 mm ( 1 in ) 
of circumference 

English — Number of tricks in 25*4 mm 
( 1 in ) of one needle bed 

Swiss — Needle spacing in millimetres 
multiplied by 10 

English — Number of needles in 25*4 mm 
(lin) 

Swiss — Needle spacing in millimetres 
multipled by 10 

Number of needles in machine and 
diameter of needle cylinder in inches, 
for example, 370 x 4$ 370 needles in a 
cylinder of 114*3 mm ( 4$ in ) diameter 

English — Number of needles in 50*8 mm 
( 2 in ) of one needle bed 

Saxon — Number of needles in 472 mm 
( 2 Saxon inches ) of one needle bed 



51 



15:3596-1967 

Machine 
Linking and point-seaming 



Gauge 

English — Points in an arc of 38' 1 mm 
( 1-5 in ) 

American — Points in an arc of 25*4 mm 
(lin) 

Note — The term* ' gauge ' and ' point * 
respectively, are used to define the two* systems, 
for example, a 36-gauge linking machine has 
24 points per 25*4 mm ( 1 in ) and a 24-point 
linking machine has 24 points per 25*4 mm 
(lin). 

Note 1 — When the term ' gauge ' is used with reference to a knitted fabric or 
garment, it usually denotes the gauge of the knitting machine on which it was made. 

Note 2 — It is recommended that as India has adopted the metric system, the gauge 
for all types of knitting machines be expressed as the number of needles or other loop 
forming elemens per 5 cm. 



52 



INTERNATIONAL SYSTEM OF UNITS ( SI UNITS ) 



Base Units 








Quantity 


Unit 


^ Symbol 




Length 


metre 


* m 




Mast 


kilogram 


kg 




Time 


second 


r 




Flectrlc current 


ampere 


A 




Thermodynamic 


kelvin 


K 




temperature 








Luminous intensity 


candelt 


cd 




Amount of substance 


mole 


mo! 




Supplementary Units 








Quantity 


Unit 


Symbol 




Plane angle 


radian 


rad 




Solid angle 


steradian 


sr 




Derived Units 








Quantity 


Unit 


Symbol 


Definition 


Force 


newtoo 


N 


IN - 1 kg,m/8»- 


Energy 


joule 


J 


1 J - 1 N.m 


Power 


watt 


W 


1 W - U/i 


Flux 


weber. 


Wb 


I Wb - 1 V.s 


Flux density 


tesla 


T 


IT - 1 Wb/m 2 


Frequency 


hertx 


Hz 


1 Hz - 1 c/s(s- ! ) 


Electric conductance 


Siemens 


S 


IS - 1 A/V 


Electromotive force 


voh 


V 


1 V - 1 W/A 


Pressure, stress 


pascal 


Pa 


1 Pa « 1 N/m 1 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 



Telephones : 26 60 21, 27 01 31 

Regional Offices t 

Western : Novelty Chambers, Grant Road 

Eastern : 5 Chowrlnghee Approach 

Southern : C.l.T. Campus 

Northern : B69, Phase VII 



80 65 28 

27 50 00 

41 24 42 

8 78 26 



Telegrams : Manaksanetha 

Telephone 
BOMBAY 400007 
CALCUTTA 700072 
MADRAS 600118 
S.A.S, NAGAR 
(MOHAL!) 160051 
Branch Offlc** : 

'Pushpak', Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur AHMADABAO 380001 2 03 91 
'P Block, Unity Bldg, Naraslmharaja Square BANGALORE 560002 22 48 OS 

Oangotrl Complex, Bhadbhada Road, T.T. Nagar BHOPAL 482003 6 27 18 

*2E Kalpana Area BHUBANESHWAR 751014 5 36 27 

0-8-58C L, N. Gupta Marg HYDERABAD 500001 22 10 88 

R 14 Yudhlsfer Marg, C Scheme JAIPUR 302005 

117/418 B Saryodaya Nagar KANPUR 208005 

Patllputra Industrial Estate PATNA 800013 

Hantex Bldg (2nd Floor), Rly Station Road TRtVANDRUM 695001 



jri»3a 

4 7*9* 
6 26 08 
32 27 



Printed- at Shnee frkrtlna ^rese, AekM, 1 India 



