**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 7146-2 (1974) : Methods of measurement on photosensitive 
devices, Part 2: Photo tubes [LITD 4: Electron Tubes and 
Display Devices] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS: 7144 (Pare II) -1974 

( Reaffirmed 2003 ) 

Indian Standard 

METHODS OF MEASUREMENTS ON 
PHOTOSENSITIVE DEVICES 

PART II PHOTOTUBES 



UDC 62l<3&3'2: 535-247*4 




® Copyright 1975 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
MANAK BHAVAN. 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARO 

NEW DELHI 11000J 

£* * Aflr((l975 



IS: 7146 (Part II) -1974 

Indian Standard 

METHODS OF MEASUREMENTS ON 
PHOTOSENSITIVE DEVICES 

PART II PHOTOTUBES 

Electron Tubes Sectional Committee, ETDC 39 

Chairman 

Prof S. Sampath 

Indian Institute of Technology 

Madras 

Members Representing 

Dr S. S. S. Agarwala Central Electronics Engineering Research Institute 

( CSIR ), Pilani 
Dr N. C. Vaidya ( Alternate ) 
Shri H. K. L. Arora All India Radio and Electronics Association, Bombay 

Shri R. G. Keswani ( Alternate ) 

( Bombay ) 
Shri A. K. Ghosh ( Alternate ) * 

( Calcutta ) 
Shri S. Singaravel ( Alternate ) 
( Madras ) 
Shri B. P. Chaturvedi Directorate General of Civil Aviation ( Ministry of 

Tourism & Civil Aviation ), New Delhi 
Shri P. Seth ( Alternate ) 
Director, Electrical Engi- Naval Headquarters 

NEERING 

Director Electrical Engi- 
neering ( Material ) ( Alternate ) 
Director, Electronics & Radar Ministry of Defence (R&D) 

Development Establishment 
Shri B. P. Ghosh National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri P. K. Jain Electronic Components Standardization Organization 

( Ministry of Defence ) 
Shri R. K. Jain Radio Electronics & Television Manufacturers* Asso- 

ciation (RETMA), Calcutta 
Shri E. G. Nagarajan Directorate of Technical Development & Production 

( Air ) ( Ministry of Defence ), New Delhi 
Shri R. C. Pandey ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. N. Ramaswamy Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 
Shri Balraj Bhanot ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1975 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act (XIV of 1957) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS: 7146 ( Part II )- 1974 



( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members 
Shri P. K. Rao 

Shri E. V. R. Rao 
Research Engineer 
Shri P. S.Saran 

Shri G. H. Vaze 
Dr R. P. Wadhwa 
Shri N. Sriniwasan, 
Director ( Elec Tech ) 
( Secretary ) 



Representing 

Directorate General of Inspection-* '^(/Ministry of 

Defence ), New Delhi 
Electronics Corporation of India Ltd, Hyderabad 
All India Radio, New Delhi 
Posts & Telegraphs Board ( Telecommunication 

Research Centre ), New Delhi 
Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay 
Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore 
Director General. ISI ( Ex-ofjicio Member) 



Convener 
Shri G. H. Vaze 

Members 

Shri P. K. Patwardhan 
Shri E. V. R. Rao 

Shri K. S. Sree Prakash 



Panel for Special Purpose Tubes, ETDC 39 : P6 

Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay 



Atomic Energy Establishment, Bombay 

Electronics Corporation of India Ltd ( Department of 

Atomic Energy ), Hyderabad 
Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore 



IS : 7146 ( Part H )-1974 

Indian Standard 

METHODS OF MEASUREMENTS ON 
PHOTOSENSITIVE DEVICES 

PART II PHOTOTUBES 
0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 11 December 1974, after the draft finalized by the Electron Tubes 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division 
Council. 

0.2 In preparing this standard, assistance has been derived from IEC Pub 
306-2 ( 1969 ) 'Measurement of photosensitive devices, Part 2 Methods of 
measurement of phototubes', issued by the International Electrotechnical 
Commission. 

0.3 This is one among a series of Indian Standards on photosensitive devices. 
Other standards so far published are given on P 6. 

0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing 
the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. 
The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be 
the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard ( Part II ) deals with the methods of measurements of the 
following types of phototubes: 

a) Vacuum phototubes, and 

b) Gas-filled phototubes. 

Note — Photomultipliers are not included in this standard but covered in 
IS: 7146 (Part IV )-1974f. 



♦Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). 

f Methods of measurements on photosensitive devices: Part IV Photomultipliers. 



IS: 7146 ( Part H)-1974 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.1 For the purposes of this standard, the term and definition covered in 
IS : 1885 ( Part IV/Sec 8 )-1973* shall apply. 

3. MEASURING METHODS 

3.0 The measurements should be made under the general conditions 
described in 3.1 of IS : 7146 ( Part I )-1973f. 

3.1 Sensitivity — The anode and other -electrodes shall be connected as 
stated and a specified voltage shall be applied between the anode and the 
cathode. It shall be ensured that the incident radiation covers the specified 
area of the photocathode. 

3.1.1 Radiant Sensitivity — The radiant sensitivity is calculated from the 
measurement of the photocurrent for the specified radiant flux ( or irradiance) 
incident on the photocathode and shall be presented in amperes per watt 
( or per watt /square metre ). 

3.1.2 Luminous Sensitivity — The luminous sensitivity is calculated from the 
measurement of the photocurrent for the specified luminous flux ( or 
illuminance ) incident on the photocathode and shall be presented in amperes 
per lumen ( or per lux ) . 

3.1.3 Dynamic Sensitivity 

3.1.3.1 Tor this measurement, the specified radiation shall be ampli- 
tude modulated. For gasfilled phototubes sinusoidal modulation is generally 
used. For vacuum phototubes, square wave modulation is generally 
used ( to ensure a wide band spectrum ) . 

3.1.3.2 The peak-to-peak modulation amplitude should be approach- 
ing 100 percent. The phototube shall be operated under the specified 
conditions. The dynamic sensitivity is obtained from the measurement of 
the peak-to-peak photocurrent at the specified modulation frequency and 
should be presented in amperes per watt. 

3.1.3.3 The frequency response of any amplifier used in the measure- 
ment shall be flat over the required frequency range. 

3.1.4 Relative Spectral Sensitivity — For this measurement, a monochromator 
or other equivalent instrument shall be used as a radiation source. The 
sensitivity of the phototube to incident monochromatic light of the different 
wavelengths over the specified range is measured using the apparatus 
described in 4.5 of IS : 7146 ( Part J )-1973f . If the resulting absolute sensiti- 
vities are referred to the sensitivity at a certain wavelength, the relative 
spectral sensitivity is obtained. The relative spectral sensitivity characteristic 

♦Electrotechnical vocabulary : Part IV Electron tubes; Section 8 Photosensitive devices. 
^Measurements of photosensitive devices : Part I Basic considerations. 



IS:7146(PartII)-1974 

shall be presented as a curve giving the sensitivity for each wavelength as a 
percentage of the maximum value. 

Note — Values of the relative spectral sensitivity can be taken without restrictions 
only if the photocurrent is proportional to the incident radiation. 

3.2 Gas Amplification Factor of Gasfilled Phototubes — The photo- 
current of the gasfilled phototube shall be measured at the specified high and 
low anode voltages, with the specified load resistance and with the specified 
luminous flux incident on the photocathode. 

Note — It is essential that the lower of the two voltages represents the sensitivity 
without gas amplification, that is, it shall be a voltage close to, but slightly below, the 
ionization potential of the gas. 

3.2.1 The gas amplification factor is the ratio between the larger current 
and the smaller current. 

3.3 Saturation Factor of Vacuum Phototubes — The photocurrent of 
the vacuum phototube shall be measured at the specified high and low anode 
voltages, with the specified load resistance and with the specified luminous 
flux incident on the photocathode. 

The saturation factor is the ratio between the smaller current and the 
larger current. 

3.4 Dark Current — The specified voltage shall be applied to each 
electrode of the phototube, at the specified ambient temperature, in the 
absence of such radiant energy as is normally used to excite the tube. The 
anode current is then measured. 

Note — The socket leakage current shall be substantially lower than the specified 
dark current. 

3.5 Audio Frequency Noise — Under consideration. 

3.6 Breakdown — With the tube operating under stated conditions ( of 
supply voltage, limiting resistance, rate of increase of supply voltage and 
luminous flux ) for a stated time it shall be checked whether breakdown 
occurs. 

3.7 Direct Inter electrode Capacitance — This measurement shall be 
done in accordance with 7 of IS : 4147-1967*. 

3.8 Frequency Response — Dynamic sensitivity shall be measured, 
according to 3.1.3, as a function of modulating frequency. The result may 
be presented either as a graph or as the ratio, expressed in decibels, of the 
dynamic sensitivities at two frequencies. 



♦Method of measurements on conventional receiving electron tubes. 

5 



INDIAN STANDARDS 

ON 

PHOTOSENSITIVE DEVICES 

IS: 

1885 ( Part IV/Sec 8 )-1973 Electrotechnical vocabulary : Part IV Electron tubes; Section 
8 Photosensitive devices 

7146 ( Part I )-1973 Methods of measurements on photosensitive devices: Part I Basic 
considerations 

7146 ( Part II )-1974 Methods of measurements on photosensitive devices : Part II Photo- 
tubes 

7146 ( Part III )-1974 Methods of measurements of photosensitive devices: Part III Photo- 
conductive cells for use in the visible spectrum 

7146 ( Part IV )-1974 Methods of measurements on photosensitive devices: Part IV 
Photomultipliers 



