IS ; 5182 ( Part HIT) - 1970 


Indian Standard 


METHOD FOR MEASUREMENT OF 
AIR POLLUTION 
PART IH! RADIOACTIVITY (PARTICULATE) IN AIR 


Chemical Hazards Sectional Committee, CDC 18 


Chairman Representing 


SuratS, R, Buse Directorate General, Factory Advice Service & 
Labour Institutes ( Ministry of Labour, Employ- 
ment & Rehabilitation ), Bombay 


. Members 


Suri D. R. CHATTERJI Hindustan Steel Ltd, Ranchi 
Suet T. R. ANANTHARAMAN ( Alternate ) 
Cuemisr & Meratiurcisr—II, Railway Board (Ministry of Railways ) 
RESEARCH, DESIGNS & STANDARDS 
ORGANIZATION, Lucknow 


Dr D. CHOUDHURY Indian Chemical Manufacturers’ Association, 

Calcutta 
Suri D. K. SIRKAR ( Alternate ) 

Suri J. M. Dave Central Public Health Engineering Research Institute 
( CSIR ), Nagpur 

Suri J. M. GUHA Ministry of Petroleum & Chemicals 

Dr JacpisH SHANKAR Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bomba 

SHRI JOGINDER SINGH Directorate General of Technical Development 


( Ministry of Industrial Development & Com- 
pany Affairs ), New Delhi 
Surat S. N. LAHIRI ' Department of Explosives ( Ministry of Industrial 
Development & Company Affairs ), Nagpur 
Suri S. C. Roy ( Alternate ) 


Dr C. N. K. Murray Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 
Suri R, S. AGARWAL ( Alternate ) 

Suri NARENDRA SINGH Ministry of Defence (DGI) 
Dr K. J. BALAKRISHANA ( Alternate ) 

Suri T. S. NAYAR Indian Institute of Petroleum (CSIR ), Dehra Dun 
Surimati LALITHA B. Sincu ( Alternate ) 

Suri P. S. RAMACHANDRAN Directorate General of Health Services ( Ministry of 


Health, Family Planning & Urban Develop- 
ment ), New Delhi 
Suri R. BALASUBRAMANYAN ( Alternate ) 
SHRI SANTOKH SINGH National Chemical Industries, New Delhi 
Suri Parrarpar Sinon ( Alternate ) . 


( Continued on page 2) 


INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 


IS : 5182 ( Part HT) - 1970 


( Continued from page 1 ) 


Members 
Surat D, S. Sastry 
Surat B. Sincu ( Alternate) 


Sur D. Das Gupta, 
Director ( Chem ) 


Representing 


Hindustan Organic Chemicals Ltd, Rasayani 
( Maharashtra ) . 


Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member } 


Secretary 


Dr A. K. BHATTACHARYA 
Deputy Director (Chem ), ISI 


Air Pollution Subcommittee, CDC 18:5 


Convener 


Suri J. M. Dave 


Members 


Dr G. C. Das 
Suri D. U. Hatrixupur 
Suri V. K. RANADE 
Dr R. K. Durra ( Alternate ) 
Dr M., N. Rao 


Dr V. Sapastvan 

Suri P. R. Bure ( Alternate ) 
Suri K. S. Somayan 
Suri S. A. SUBRAMANIAM 


Dr D. G. Vyas 


Central Public Health Engineering Research Institute 
(CSIR ), Nagpur 


Calcutta Municipal Corporation, Calcutta 
Cement Manufacturers’ Association, Bombay 
Hindustan Steel Ltd, Ranchi 


All India Institute of Hygiene and Public Health, 
Calcutta 
Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay, Bombay 


Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay 

Central Water & Power Commission ( Power Wing ), 
New Delhi 

Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation, Ahmedabad 


IS; 5182 ( Part III ) - 1970 


Indian Standard 


METHOD FOR MEASUREMENT OF 
AIR POLLUTION 


PART ill RADIOACTIVITY (PARTICULATE) IN AIR 


02 FOREWORD 


0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part ITI ) was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 12 March 1970, after the draft finalized by the Chemical 
Hazards Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division 
Council. 


0.2 Radioactivity in air arises out of natural processes and man’s activities 
in the field of nuclear energy. It can be present either as particulates or 
in the form of gases and vapours. 


0.2.1 Natural radioactivity in the atmosphere is due principally to radon 
and thoron, which are inert gases, and their daughter products which are 
particulate and hence get attached readily to minute dust particles present 
in the atmosphere. As radon-222 and thoron (radon-220 ) diffuse into 
the atmosphere from the earth’s crust where they are formed by decay from 
the naturally occurring radioactive ores, the concentrations of these gases 
and their daughter products vary quite widely with place, time and meteo- 
rological conditions, Certain radionuclides (such as C-14 and H-3) are 
produced in small quantities in the upper layers of the atmosphere by the 
action of cosmic rays. 


0.2.2 Among the contributions from man’s activities to the radioactivity 
in air, fallout from nuclear weapon tests and releases from mining and 
processing of radioactive minerals, radiochemical laboratories and from 
operation of nuclear facilities, may be mentioned, 


0.3 Measurement of airborne radioactivity in the. environment is required 
when it is necessary to obtain its value at a given place, to know how it 
changes from time to time or to determine how it is affected by different 
known parameters, 


0.4 In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with 
this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded 
off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960* 


*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised). 


3 


IS : 5182 ( Part III ) - 1970 


1. SCOPE 


1.1 This standard prescribes the method for the collection and measure- 
ment of particulate radioactivity in air. It describes methods of calculation 


to obtain the gross and the long-lived beta radioactivity in the atmosphere, 
2. TERMINOLOGY 


2.1 For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given in IS : 4167-1966* 
shal! apply. 


3. SAMPLING 


3.0 General — The most easily available and convenient method for 
sampling of particulates from air is the filtration technique. It consists of 
collecting the radioactive material from a measured volume of air on a 
filter paper or mat. 


3.1 Filtration Assembly — The assembly illustrated in Fig. 1 consists 
essentially of a sampling head, flowmeter for reading the rate of flow of air 
through the system and a suction device, A means of regulating the flow 
may also be incorporated. 


“FLOWMETER 


SUCTION PUMP 


Fic. 1 ASSEMBLY OF FILTRATION APPARATUS 


3.1.1 Sempling Head — The sampling head or a filter holder should be so 
designed as to provide uniform air velocity ( known as face velocity ) across 
the entire face of the sampling area of the filter. A typical sampling head 
is shown in Fig, 2, 


*Glossary of terms relating to air pollution. 


4 


IS : 5182 ( Part IH ) - 1970 


FILTER PAPER 


> 


D 
25 $ 
; se 


INN 


ANN 


WIRE GAUZE 


l COLELLO 
O 
4 L D 
IIIZ IZII IZI IREL 


All dimensions in millimetres. 
Fic. 2 SamrpuNG HEAD 


It provides an effective filter area of 25 mm diameter. When the 
size of the filter to be accommodated is smaller than that represented in the 
ute, a smaller filter head has to be used. A mechanical support such as — 
4 wire gauze, sometimes with a ‘OQ’ ring, is provided to hold: the filter paper 
air-tight at the edges and to prevent displacement or rupture of the filter 
during sampling. The back-up screen or the support used is normally 
firmly fixed on the main piece when required to hold brittle filters (such 
as the membrane type ) or soft filters such as of the glass fibre type. 


3.1.2 Filter — The filter paper for any specific sampling work is selected 
after considering many factors: cost, availability, resistance to flow that 
may be permitted, efficiency of collection desired, etc. It may be noted 
here that papers of high filter efficiency are usually those of high resistance 
also, 


3.1.2.1 The all-cellulose filter papers such as Whatman-4] offer 
high mechanical strength and are widely used for air sampling mainly 
because of low cost. However, being not very uniform, the resistance to 
air flow and consequently the collection efficiency vary from sample to 
sample. 


3.1.2.2 Where almost 100 percent efficiency is required, mixed filter 
papers such as of the cellulose-asbestos type are much in use, Glass fibre 
filters also offer very high efficiency. 


3.1.2.3 Membrane filters ( millipore filters) which combine high 
collection efficiency even for submicron particles with relatively low resist- 
ance are among the most efficient filter media available. Millipore filters 


5 


IS : 5182 ( Part TI ) - 1970 


consist of thin membranes of cellulose esters perforated with tiny uniform 
conical holes. Being fragile they require special sampling heads for use. 


3.1.3 Flow-Measuring Device — Dry or wet gas metres may be employed 
to record the total volume of air passed directly. Rotameters or float-type 
gauges may be used to give rates of flow of air. 


3.1.4 Suction Device ( or a Source of Vacuum) — This may be a pump or an 
ejector which uses stearn or compressed air, having the capacity for sampl- 
ing rate varying between 20 to 200 litres per minute. 


3.2 Period of Sampling — When the long-lived radioactivity in air is 
required, it is sometimes necessary to choose a high rate of sampling and the 
sampling may be performed for a long time such asa few hours, whereas 
if the gross activity is required, the sample need be taken from a relatively 
small volume of air and hence a low flow rate would be adequate. 


4. MEASUREMENT OF RADIOACTIVITY 


4.1 General — After the sampling is over, the radioactivity of the filter 
paper with the collected material on it is measured. Knowing the total 
volume of air sampled, the specific radioactivity of the atmosphere may be 
calculated. 


4.2 Counting 


4.2.1 A typical arrangement used for counting the beta radioactivity of 
filter paper air samples is shown in Fig, 3. It consists of an end-window 
Geiger-Muller counter. A lead housing for the counter is used in practice 
(not shown in figure ) in order to keep the background count rate low. 
The filter paper sample is kept below the counter soon after the sampling is 
over. When the location of sampling is not near the counting laboratory, 
however, some delay is involved between the end of sampling and the start 
of counting, and this should be reported. 


4.2.1.1 Instead of a Geiger-Muller counter as th deetector, beto sensi- 
tive thin plastic scintillator may also be used. 


4.2.1.2 By using electronic counting set-up the total counts registered 
in any given time may be obtained and hence the count rate in counts per 
minute, 


4.2.2 When the count rate is high, as in the initial stages, the counting 
time may be 6 to 10 minutes. But when the activity falls down, larger 
counting periods ( say 20 to 60 minutes ) may have to be employed. 


4.2.3 By subtracting the background count rate of the counter obtained 
without using any sample, the net count rates due to the sample may be 
calculated. 


IS : 5182 ( Part III )- 1970 


~— METAL CYLINDER 
(CATHODE ) 


THIN WIRE 
( ANODE} 


_- GLASS BEAD 


MICA WINDOW 


FILTER PAPER SAMPLE 
Fic 3. EnD Winvow GEIGER-MULLER Counter For COUNTING 
FILTER PAPER SAMPLE 


7 


IS: 5182 ( Part IH ) - 1970 


4.3 Counter Efficiency — The efficiency factor of the counting set-up 
(the fraction of the total disintegrations in the sample that is actually 
counted ) should be first obtained by using a standard source of beta 
radiation, This factor, f, should be used to convert the net counts per 
minute (cpm ) into disintegrations per minute (dpm ). 


4.4 Caicuiation — Let the period of collection of sample be equal to é 
min and the average rate of sampling be v litres per minute, Then total 
volume of air sampled V = vt litres, 


4.4.1 Gross Activity — Let the net activity of the filter sample ( after sub- 
tracting the background of the counter) be C counts per minute at a delay 
time of about 10 to 15 minutes after the sample collection is over. The 
air activity may then be expressed as 10° C/Vf disintegrations per minute 
per cubic metre, 


4.4.2 Long-Lived Activity 


4.4.2.1 By counting the filter paper sometime after the collection of the 
sample is over, thus allowing the natural activity to decay out, it is possible 
to evaluate the long-lived component of the activity in air, 


4.4.2.2 The natural activity of the air is largely a mixture of radium-B 
and thorium-B. The former has a half-life of 26°8 min and accounts 
usually for about 90 percent of the natural air activity. Thorium-B has a 
half-life of 10:6 hours. 


4.4.2.3 A period of about 4 hours which is more than 8 half-lives of 
radium-B is permitted to elapse before the sample is counted for the first 
time. This ensures that more than 99:5 percent of the radium-B com- 
ponent will have decayed. Ifone has to wait till almost all thorium-B 
disintegrates it would delay obtaining the results for three days. Instead, 
a calculation based upon two counts separated by approximately 24 hours 
is applied as follows to remove the fraction of the total count due to 
thorium-B: 


Let c be the net count rate obtained at a delay time of ¢, hours and 
c, the net count rate at a delay time, ¢ hours after the end of sampling, 
the second counting being done after 24 hours of the first counting. 


The count rate due to the long-lived beta activity is then given by 


where ¢ is the time interval between the counts, ( f — f) and à the 
decay constant of thorium-B ( 0'065 4 hour~? }). 


8 


IS : 5182 ( Part IH ) - 1970 


Then the long-lived beta activity 


— Vf _ y -10 . . onan 
= Too 45 x 10- x c| Vf microcuries per millilitre 


4.5 Correction for Efficiency of Filter Paper 


4.5.1 The calculations in 4.4 assume that the efficiency of the filter paper 
is 100 percent for retention of particulates carrying the radioactivity, 
When this assumption is not correct, the values are to be corrected after 
evaluating efficiency of the filter paper. 


4.5.2 Efficiency for retention of the particles on the filter paper used 
may be experimentally obtained if an absolute filter paper (such as the 
millipore filter ) is kept behind the routine filter while collecting the sample. 
By obtaining the gross count rates for the two filter papers for the same 
delay time ( time elapsed after the end of sampling ), the efficiency of the 
routine filter paper may be calculated. 


5. REPORTING THE RESULTS 


5.1 The results of measurement of the radioactivity in air may be reported 
in a suitable form, such as the proforma given below: 


MEASUREMENT OF RADIOACTIVITY IN AIR 


a) Location: 


b) Date of collection :............ 

c) Period of collection :.........h to......... h = ¢ minutes 
d) Average rate of sampling, 0 = ......... litres/minute 

e) Total volume of air sampled V = v.i = ............ litres 


f) Background of the counting set-up = ..,...counts per minute, cpm 
g) Efficiency factor of the counter, f = 


observed count rate with the standard source 
theoretical count rate of the standard source 


h) Count rate of the filter paper sample between...... min and... 
min after collection = ......... cpm 
j) Net count rate, C = (h) — (f) = ......cpm 
k) Gross beta activity in air = 10° C/V f 
= prre dpm/m* 


9 


IS : 5182 ( Part III ) - 1970 


m) Count rate of the filter paper sample after a delay of ¢, hours = 


n) Net count rate at delay of t, hours, ¢ =.......4. cpm 


p) Count rate of the filter paper sample after a delay of t, hours = 


q) Net count rate at delay of t, hours, c, = 


«Cpm 
: soe Cg — 6e— Ay 
r) Count rate due to long-lived activity, c= yom e a 
—e 


where à = 0'065 4 h^}, t = t — h 
s) Long-lived beta activity in air = 45 x 10-9 c/ Vf 
Saen uCi/cm? 


INTERNATIONAL SYSTEM OF UNITS (SI UNITS ) 


Base Units 

Quantity Uxir Symon 
Length metre m 
Mass kilogram kg 
Time second s 
Electric Current ampere A 
Thermodynamic kelvin K 

temperature 

Luminous intensity candela cd 
Amount of substance mole mol 
Supplementary Units 

Quantiry Unir SYMBOL 
Plane angle radian rad 
Solid angie steradian sr 
Derived Units 

Quantirr Unit Sympon DrriniTion 
Porce newtop N IN = 1 kg.m/s* 
Energy joule J 1} mIiNm 
Power ` watt 1W w= 1 jis 
Flux weber Wb 1 Wb æ |] Vis 
Flux density tesla T IT = 1 Wbm’ 
Prequeucy hertz Hz 1 Hz mm 1 c/s (s+) 
Electric conductance siemens S IS m= 1A/V 
Electromotive force volt IV =i WA 
Pressure, stress pascal Pa l Pa æ ] Nim? 
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zatar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 
Telephones: 26 60 21, 27 01 31 Telegrams: Manaksanstha 
Reglonal Offices: Telephone 
Western : Novelty Chambers, Grant Road BOMBAY 400007 6 32 92 95 
Eastern :5 Chowringhes Approach CALCUTTA 700072 27 59 90 
Southern: C. 1. T, Campus MADRAS 600113 4124 42 
Northern : B69, Phase Vil S.A.S. NAGAR 8 78 26 


(MOHALI) 160054 

Branch Offices: 

*Pushpak’, Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur AHMADABAD 380001 203 91 
‘F Block, Unity 8idg, Narasimharaja Square BANGALORE 560002 22 48 05 
Gangotri Complex. Bhadbhada Road, T. T. Nagar BHOPAL 462003 6 27 16 
22E Kalpana Area BHUBANESHWAR 751014 5 36 27 
5-8-56C L. N. Gupta Marg HYDERABAD 500001 22 10 83 
R14 Yudhister Marg, C Scheme JAIPUR 302005 6 08 32 
117/418 B Sarvodaya Nagar KANPUR 208005 47292 
Patliputra Industrial Estate PATNA 800013 6 28 08 
Hen‘ex Bldg { 2nd Floor), Riy Station Road TRIVANDRUM 695001 32 27 


Reproduced by Reprography Unit. ISI New Delhi 


