NAT ЯТ» IS 16695 (Part 2) : 2022 
Indian Standard 


THIET : FATS cere Brora Raven 
eta ЗП 
Пт 2 Ч/бегев- ІІ 779 


SCOSTA : Smart Card Operating 
System Template Architecture 


Part 2 Public Key Infrastructure 


ICS 35.240.15 


© BIS 2022 


anda HIS Sm 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 serere TH AMT, 4% {И – 110002 


Vee МАМАК BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


January 2022 Price Group 12 


Computer Hardware, Peripherals and Identification Cards Sectional Committee, LITD 16 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 2) was adopted by Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the 
Computer Hardware, Peripherals and Identification Cards Sectional Committee, had been approved by the 
Electronics and Information Technology Division Council. 


This Indian Standard is published in several parts. The other part in this series is: 
Part 1 Basic command set 


The SCOSTA-Part 2 specification (PKI) was initially prepared jointly by Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur, 
Indian Institute of Technology, Bhilai, and Centre for Development of Advanced Computing. 


This standard inherits all features of IS 16695 (Part 1). In addition to the features from the Part 1 of the standard, 
it provides specifications for public key cryptography and public key infrastructure (PKI) in operating system 
for smart cards. PKI is a concept built using public key cryptography. This standard specifies data structures for 
storing and using cryptographic information including cryptographic keys in a card and provides support for 
multi-applications. 


The standard provides support for various PKI operations, including key generation, digital signatures, public key 
cryptography, authentication and trust building using X.509 Certificates and similar other operations. 


The standard was developed under the sub-committee, LITD 16 : 1 ‘Cards and personal Identification’. The 
composition of the sub-committee, LITD 16 : 1 responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at 
Annex E. 


CONTENTS 


1 SCOPE 
2 REFERENCES 


3 TERMINOLOGY AND SYMBOLS 


3.1 Terminology 
3.2 Symbols 
3.3  Abbreviated Terms 


4 GENERAL REQUIREMENT 
5 APDU 


6 OPERATIONS 


61 Authentication 

6.2 Session Key Establishment 

6.3 Authentication and Session Key Establishment 
6.4 Computation of Digital Signature 

6.5 Encryption and Decryption 

6.6 Certificate Verification 

6.7 Generate Asymmetric Key Pair 


7 BASIC DATA STRUCTURE 


7.1 Overview 
7.2 Ері 
7.3 Df.Cia 
7.31 | Overview 
7.3.2 CIAInfo 
7.3.3 EFOD 
7.3.4 | CIO Directory files 


8 APPLICATION IDENTIFICATION AND SELECTION 


8.1 Application Identification 
8.2 Application Selection 


8.3 Common Scenarios 


9  KEY/PASSWORD STORAGE AND RETRIEVAL 


9.] Passwords and Symmetric Keys 
9.2 Private Keys 
9.3 Public Keys 


9.4 Соттоп Scenarios 


10 PUBLIC KEY RELATED OPERATIONS IN SCOSTA-PKI 


10.1 Authentication 
10.1.1 External Authentication 
10.1.2 Internal Authentication 
10.1.3 Mutual Authentication 


IS 16695 (Part 2) : 2022 


Page No. 


NY N Ne 


о N N N QV л л ta CA d A A A LULU LULULUN N N 


O c0 oc 


= 
— 


11 


IS 16695 (Part 2) : 2022 


10.2 Session Key Establishment 
10.3 Authentication and Session Key Establishment 
10.4 Generation of Asymmetric Key Pair 


11 CRYPTOGRAPHIC ALGORITHMS IN SCOSTA-PKI 


11.1 Algorithms for Confidentiality 
11.2 Algorithms for Authentication 
11.3 Algorithms for Digital Signature 


12 MODIFIED COMMAND SETS FOR IMPLEMENTING ADDED 
FUNCTIONALITY FOR PKI 
12.1 Envelope 
122 Get Challenge 
12.3  External/ Internal/ Mutual Authenticate 
124 MSE SET for Key Derivation 
12.5 PSO Decipher 
12.6 PSO Encipher 
12.7 | PSO Compute Digital Signature 
12.8 PSO Verify Certificate 
12.9 Generate Asymmetric Key Pair 


13 ASN.1 MODULE 


131 Common Data Types 
13.1.1 Path Data Type 
13.1.2 Object Value Data Type 
13.11.3 RSA Public Key Data Type (reference: КЕС 3447) 
13.1.4 RSA Private Key Data Type (reference: КЕС 3447) 
13.1.5 Algorithm Identifier Data Type (reference: КЕС 5280) 
13.1.6 Name Data Type (reference: КЕС 5280) 
13.1.7 Certificates (reference: RFC 5280) 
13.1.8 Certification Request (reference: RFC 2986) 
13.2 The CIO Type 
13.3 Keys 
13.3.1 Private Keys 
13.3.2 Public Keys 
13.3.3 Secret Keys 
13.4 Authentication Objects 


ANNEX A LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 
ANNEX B LIST OF REFERRED INTERNATIONAL STANDARDS/PUBLICATIONS 
ANNEX C ROLE-BASED ACCESS CONTROL 

C-1 CODING OF THE CORRESPONDING SECURITY ENVIRONMENT 


C-2 CERTIFICATE HOLDER AUTHORIZATION (CHA) 


IS 16695 (Part 2) : 2022 


Page No. 
C-3 MECHANISMS FOR ROLE-BASED ACCESS CONTROL wy 32 
C-4 RULES FOR ROLE-BASED ACCESS CONTROL ss 22 
C-4.1 Rules for Role-matching w 32 
C-4.2 Rules for Access Control $e 92 
C-5 EXAMPLES OF SPECIFYING ROLES ле 39 
ANNEX D SAMPLE FOR ‘GENERATE ASYMMETRIC KEY PAIR’ ua 239 
D-1 GENERATE ASYMMETRIC KEY PAIR ыс 99 
D-2 SAMPLE COMMAND APDU AND RESPONSE DATA FIELD us. 239 
ANNEX E COMMITTEE COMPOSITION we 37 
LIST OF FIGURES 
Fig.1 Certificate Chain " 3 
Fig.2  Ber-Tlv Encoded Structure of a Ddo B 
Fig.3 Sample File Structure = 8 
Fig.4 Authentication and Key Establishment Protocol = 15 
LIST OF TABLES 
Table 1 Tags in Application Template 4 
Table 2 Elementary files in DF.CIA 5 
Table 3 Tags contained in a Key Template (tag “А0”) E 6 
Table4 Keys and Passwords 8 
Table 5 | Mechanism to obtain key reference for a private key a 9 
Table 6 Mechanism to Obtain Key Reference for a Public Key ne 10 
Table 7 Algorithm Reference for Confidentiality Algorithms ss 16 
Table 8 Algorithm Reference for Authentication Algorithms is 16 
Table 9 Algorithm Reference for Digital Signature Computation Algorithms X 16 
Table 10 Get Challenge Command Parameters ds 17 
Table 11 Description of P1 (algorithm reference) is 17 
Table 12 Interpretation of P1 for Various AUTH Commands ws 18 
Table 13 Decipher Command Parameters we 19 
Table 14 Encipher Command Parameters a. 20 
Table 15 Parameters for Compute Digital Signature as 24 
Table 16 Parameters for Verify Certificate Command us A 


Table 17 Parameters for Generate Asymmetric Key Pair Command s 22 


iii 


IS 16695 (Part 2) : 2022 


Indian Standard 


SCOSTA : SMART CARD OPERATING SYSTEM 
TEMPLATE ARCHITECTURE 


PART 2 PUBLIC KEY INFRASTRUCTURE 


1SCOPE 


This Indian standard (Part 2) describes specifications 
for public key infrastructure support in an operating 
system for smart cards. This standard (Part 2) also 
specifies the data structures for storing and retrieving 
cryptographic information in a card. It also provides 
details of various cryptographic mechanisms like 
authentication, | encryption/decryption, certificate 
verification and digital signature that need to be 
supported using public key cryptography. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A and Annex B contains 
provisions which, through reference in this text, 
constitute provisions of this standard. At the time 
of publication, the editions indicated were valid. 
АП standards are subject to revision and parties to 
agreement based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most recent 
editions of the standards indicated in Annex A and 
Annex B. 


3 TERMINOLOGY AND SYMBOLS 


3.1 Terminology 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 


3.1.1 Application — An application is defined by an 
application identifier and its associated DF. 


3.1.2 Application Identifier — Data element that 
identifies an application in a card as defined in IS 14202 
(Part 4) and ISO/IEC 7816-15. 


3.1.3 Authentication Information Object  — 
Cryptographic information object that provides 
information about authentication related data, for 
example, a password. 


3.1.4 Authentication Object Directory File — 
Elementary file containing authentication information 
objects. 


3.1.5 Cryptographic Information Application (CIA 
Application) — Optional application in the card that 


contains information on cryptographic information 
objects, other security data and their intended use. 


3.1.6 Cryptographic Information Object — Structured 
information contained in a CIA, which describes a 
cryptographic data element, for example, a public key 
or a certificate. 


3.1.7 Decryption — Reversal of а corresponding 
encryption. 


3.1.8 Directory File (ЕЕ DIR) — Optional elementary 
file containing a list of applications supported by the 
card and related data elements. 


3.1.9 Encryption — Reversible operation by a 
cryptographic algorithm converting data into ciphertext 
so as to hide the information content of the data. 


3.1.10 Non-CIA Application — Any application which 
is not a CIA application is a non-CIA application. 


3.1.11 Object Directory File — Mandatory elementary 
file in a CIA containing reference to other CIA directory 
files. 


3.1.12 Private Key Directory File — Elementary file 
containing private key information objects. 


3.1.13 Private Key Information Object — Cryptographic 
information object that provides information about a 
private key. 


3.1.14 Public Key Directory File — Elementary file 
containing public key information objects. 


3.1.15 Public Key Information Object — Cryptographic 
information object that provides information about a 
public key. 


3.1.16 Secret Key Directory File — Elementary file 
containing secret key information objects. 


3.1.17 Secret Key Information Object — Cryptographic 
information object that provides information about a 
secret key. 


3.1.18 Trusted Public Key — Public key of an external 
entity that 1s trusted by the card. 


IS 16695 (Part 2) : 2022 


3.2 Symbols 


Abbreviation Definition 
3.2.1 хіу Either x or y 
. Lc Length of command data in a 
3.3 Abbreviated Terms command APDU 
Abbreviation Definition Le Maximum length of data expected in 
APDU from the ICC as a response to 
AID Application Identifier command APDU 
APDU Application Protocol Data Unit MF Master File 
ASN.1 Abstract Syntax Notation One OD Object Directory 
AT Authentication Template P1 First parameter byte for the APDU 
CA Certifying Authority P2 Second parameter byte for the 
= : APDU 
CCA Central Certifying Authority (Root- я — 
CA) PDN Partial Distinguished Name 
CCT Control reference template for PKCS Public Key Cryptography Standard 
Cryptographic Checksum PKI Public Key Infrastructure 
CDE Cryptographic Data Element RDN Relative Distinguished Name 
CIA Cryptographic Information RFC Request for comments 
Application RSA Rivest-Shamir-Adleman algorithms 
CIO Cryptographic Information Object for Public-Key Cryptography 
CRL Certificate Revocation List SE Security Environment 
CRT Control Reference Template SHA1 Message Digest Algorithm (Secure 
CT Control reference template for Hash Algorithm variant 1) 
confidentiality SW1 First byte of the status word in the 
DDO Discretionary Data Object response APDU 
DER Distinguished Encoding Rules SW2 Second byte of the status word in the 
А І response APDU 
DF Dedicated File 
DF.CIA Dedicated file containing CIA 4 GENERAL REQUIREMENT 
application The OS shall comply with the requirements of IS 16695 
DH Diffie-Hellman Key Exchange (Part 1). 
Protocol 
DSA Digital Signature Algorithm SAEDE 
DST Control reference template for The OS shall support both short and extended 
digital signature length formats for Lc and Le in the command 
EF El tary Fil APDU as specified in IS 14202 (Part 4). In any 
Aaa di command-response pair containing both Le and Le 
EF.AOD Authentication Object Directory fields, short and extended length fields shall not be 
EFPrKD Private Key Directory combined, either both of them are extended or both of 
F : them are short. The OS shall support at least 1024-byte 
ЕРО Public Key Directory long data in the command APDU. 
EF.SKD Secret Key Directory 
EFI Internal record EF with SFID = 1 сзи 
EF2 Internal record EF with SFID = 2 The OS shall support the following operations 
ne a f i lic k t hy i ition t 
ICC Integrated Circuit Card (that is, E. Ced 5. Г y Meo 2. Pu ао 
smart card) what 1s specified іп Part ] of this standard. 
IFD Interface Device 6.1 Authentication 
KAT Control reference template for Key Authentication is the process of establishing an 
Agreement identity of an entity. This is achieved by using 


challenge-response mechanism. The SCOSTA-PKI 
supports PKI based authentication mechanism in 


addition to the symmetric-key based authentication 
mechanisms as described in Part 1 of this standard. 


6.2 Session Key Establishment 


The algorithms for asymmetric key cryptography 
are computationally more expensive than those for 
symmetric key cryptography. Thus, the asymmetric 
key cryptography may be used for establishing 
symmetric session keys. А session key is valid only for 
a particular session and needs to be re-established for 
every new session. The session keys can be used for 
performing other symmetric key based operations (like 
encryption/decryption, cryptographic checksum 
calculation/verification). For session key establishment, 
two sides exchange their key material which is used to 
create the session keys. 


6.3 Authentication and Session Key Establishment 


This operation combines the authentication procedure 
with session key establishment. The key material from 
either side is passed on along with the challenge and 
response. A unified process requires fewer number 
of message exchanges as compared to when these 
operations are performed separately. 


6.4 Computation of Digital Signature 


A digital signature is an additional data item related to 
a message and the signer. It can be used to establish the 
identity of the signer and to determine whether or not 
the data has been altered since it was signed. A digital 
signature is obtained by signing the hash of a message 
with the signer’s private key and verified using its 
public key. 


IS 16695 (Part 2) : 2022 


6.5 Encryption and Decryption 


The process of encryption/decryption is used for 
enforcing confidentiality. 


6.6 Certificate Verification 


A certificate is a data structure containing the public 
key of an entity, together with associated information, 
all of which is digitally signed by a certifying authority. 
Certificate verification is the process of verifying the 
digital signature using the certifying authority's public 
key and can be used to verify the origin and integrity 
of the certificate. The public key obtained from the 
certificate after verification process is trusted by the 
ICC and can be used for further PKI-based operations 
such as authentication, digital signature verification or 
encryption. This public key is known as the certified 
public key. 


The certificate verification can be performed by either 
using the root CA's (CCA) key or by chain verification 
process. Any public key operation can be carried out 
only after the chain verification of that public key's 
certificate. The public keys of CCAs are kept in the 
ICC as trusted public keys. Each such key shall carry 
a unique key reference. A chain is identified by the key 
reference of the root CA's public key and is defined as 
a hierarchy of certificates starting from the root CA. To 
verify a certificate in this chain, all the certificates in 
this chain starting from the root CA need to be verified 
first. The ICC maintains the information of the latest 
certified public key along with the key reference of 
the CCA's public key and this key may be used for 
verifying the next certificate in the chain. The process 
of chain verification is described in Fig. 1. 


To verify any certificate in a chain, the CCA's public key must be 
available in the ICC as a trusted key. 


Consider the scenario as described in the figure on left. To verify a 
user's public key, first the certificate of CA1 needs to be verified using 
the CCA's key. After a successful verification, the certified public key 


of CA1 is maintained by the ICC and is used to verify the certificate of 
CA2 (provided the key usage in CAT's certificate permits so). After 
successful certificate verification of CA2, its key shall be maintained as 
the certified public key and the public key of CA1 shall no longer be 
maintained. The public key of CA2 shall be used to verify the 
certificate of user provided the key usage in CA2s certificate permits 


SO. 


Fic. 1 CERTIFICATE CHAIN 


3 


IS 16695 (Part 2) : 2022 


6.7 Generate Asymmetric Key Pair 


This operation is used to generate an asymmetric key 
pair (public and private key) within the ICC. Generating 
key pair within the ICC would provide greater security 
of the private key since it is not brought out of the ICC. 


7 BASIC DATA STRUCTURE 


7.1 Overview 


The cryptographic information in an ICC may be stored 
either as given in Part 1 of this standard or as a separate 
application, in a directory called DF.CIA (see 7.3). 
Each application may have its own DF.CIA which will 
store its cryptographic information. 


If the mapping between an application and its 
corresponding CIA is present in the EF.DIR file (Refer 
Section 7.2), then the cryptographic information of 
this application will be present in its corresponding 
DF.CIA. The following cases may be applicable: 


a) Case 1 — EF DIR (Refer section 7.2) file is absent 


Since EF.DIR is absent, none of the applications 
in the ICC could be linked to its corresponding 
DF.CIA. Thus, no application present on the ICC 
can have a PKI support. In such cases, only the 
mechanisms described in Part 1 of this standard 
are used to obtain symmetric keys and passwords 
using EF2 and ЕГІ respectively. 

b) Case 2 — EF.DIR is present and (a) Application is 
not listed in EF.DIR, or (b) DF.CIA entry is absent 
for the listed application 
The corresponding application will not support 
PKI mechanisms and will use mechanisms 
described in Part 1 of this standard to obtain 
symmetric keys and passwords using EF2 and 
ЕГІ respectively. 

c) Case 3 — EFDIR is present; РЕСІА entry 
corresponding to an application is present 
This application will have PKI support and DF.CIA 
will be used to obtain cryptographic information 


corresponding to the PKI mechanisms. If 
DF.CIA does not exist, it will be deemed as if the 
corresponding keys and passwords do not exist. 
In such cases the behavior will be similar to the 
one described in Part 1 of this standard when the 
referred keys and passwords are not found. 


If applicable, the cryptographic information? of 
keys and passwords will be stored as Cryptographic 
Information Objects (CIO) within the corresponding 
DF.CIA. Two or more applications may use the same 
DF.CIA. 


7.2 Ef.Dir 


EF.DIR is an internal transparent elementary file which 
is present under MF and has a special file identifier 
‘2F00’. It indicates a list of applications supported by 
the ICC. It shall contain a list of application templates 
which will be used to locate the corresponding 
DF.CIA for an application. Additionally, EF.DIR may 
also contain the application template for CIAs. The 
information for an application is encapsulated under 
the tag “617 as defined in IS 14202 (Part 6). Refer 
ISO/IEC 7816-15, IS 14202 (Part 4). 


For a non-CIA application, the application template 
(tag *61^) shall contain the DOs with tags as defined 
in Table 1. 


Table 1 Tags in Application Template 
( Clause 7.2) 


Tag Value Occurrence 
'AF' Application identifier Mandatory 
‘50° — Application label Optional 
‘51? Path relative to MF including *3F00' with Mandatory 

even number of bytes in length 
‘52’ Command to perform to select application Optional 
‘73° Discretionary Data Objects(DDO) Optional 


If present, a DDO shall contain AID of the 
corresponding CIA. A DDO shall have the BER-TLV 
encoded structure as given in Fig. 2. 


BER-TLV encoded structure of a DDO 


ЕП 1....Lai bytes ЕР 


1...Lain bytes provide the AID for the corresponding CIA. 
L shall always be more than or equal to Laip + 2 


Ес. 2 BER-TLV ENCODED STRUCTURE OF A рро 


? Cryptographic information is a generic term used for the information attached to the keys, passwords and certificates which are used by the 
OS to perform cryptographic operation involving these keys, passwords or certificates. 


For a CIA application, the application template 
(tag *61^) shall contain the tags as defined in Table 1. 
For a non-CIA application, DDO will not be used in 
OS. 


7.3 Df.Cia 


7.3.1 Overview 


This directory shall contain the  cryptographic 
information pertaining to an application in various 
elementary files as defined in Table 2. For elementary 
files in DF.CIA, the file identifier ‘5033’ is reserved as 
defined in ISO/IEC 7816-15 and will not be used in a 
DF.CIA for РКІ. 


Table 2 Elementary files in DF.CIA 
( Clause 7.3.1) 


IS 16695 (Part 2) : 2022 


File Mandatory File Short EF File Type 

Identifier Identifier 

EF.PuKD Optional As Transparent, 
defined in Internal 
OD file 

EF.SKD Optional As Transparent, 
defined in Internal 
OD file 


7.3.2 CIAInfo 


The CIAInfo file is a transparent working EF and 
shall contain information about the ICC and its 
capabilities. It shall contain information as specified in 
ISO/IEC 7816-15. The contents of this file shall not be 
used by the OS internally. 


7.3.3 EF OD 


File Mandatory File Short ЕЕ File Type This elementary file may contain references to other 

Identifier Identifier CIO Directory Files (see 7.3.4) which contain the 

CIAInfo Yes 5032 427 Transparent, cryptographic information in form of CIOs. The CIOs 
Working present in these directory files shall contain references 
EF.OD Yes ‘5031’ ‘11’ Transparent, to other EFs which will store the actual cryptographic 
Internal items such as keys and passwords. 
EFAOD Optional As Transparent, — EF.OD shall contain the concatenation of 0, 1 or 
defined in Internal : : 
тоге DER-encoded CIO Choice values which shall 
OD file : 
be a path reference to a separate CIO directory file 
БЕРДЕН: “pions BS ui Transparent, (ке EE PuKD, EF.AOD etc.) which shall contain the 
defined in Internal ENS Р $ А : 

OD file cryptographic information objects (like public keys 
information object etc.). Each entry in the EF.OD file 
will be a CIO Choice value and shall have the following 
ASN.1 syntax (Refer ISO/IEC 7816-15). 

CIOChoice ::= CHOICE { 
privateKeys [0] PrivateKeys -- (Tag САО”Н), 
trustedPublicKeys [2] PublicKeys -- (Tag ‘A2’H), 
secretKeys [3] SecretKeys -- (Tag ‘A3’H), 
authObjects [8] AuthObjects -- (Tag ‘A8’H) 
} 
PrivateKeys :: = Path -- Refers to a file containing CIOs of type 
-- PrivateKeyChoice as described in section 13.3.1 
PublicKeys :: = Path -- Refers to a file containing CIOs of type 
-- PublicKeyChoice as described in section 13.3.2 
SecretKeys :: = Path -- Refers to a file containing CIOs of type 
-- SecretKeyChoice as described in section 13.3.3 
AuthObjects :: - Path -- Refers to a file containing CIOs of type 
-- AuthenticationObjectChoice as described in 


section 13.4 


IS 16695 (Part 2) : 2022 


Each EF.OD entry shall refer to a separate file containing 
CIOs ofthe indicated type. Further details on these ASN.1 
types can be found in ISO/IEC 7816-15 and clause 13 of 
this document. АП CIOs in the OS shall be stored in 
an EF under the DF.CIA. Only a 2-byte file identifier 
shall be used to define the Path of a CIO directory file 
containing the CIOs ofa certain type. This file identifier 
shall refer to the file under the DF.CIA. The only valid 
DER encoding of Path shall be 


‘307 gar 
We 024 
X Y 


where X and Y define the 2 bytes file identifier of the 
CIO directory file under the DF.CIA. 


An example of an EF.OD contents is shown below. In 
this example, CIOs for private keys are stored in an 
ЕЕ “44017 under DF.CIA and CIOs for authentication 
objects are stored in an EF “44027 under DF.CIA. The 
EF.OD file shall have the following bytes. 


‘AO’ 706” == 'AO' tag for 
private keys 
“30” 704” -- УЗО tag for 
SEQUENCE 
“04” 502! == “04” tag for 
OCTET STRING to 
store path 
‘44’ 5017 -- file identifier 
for EF.PrKD 
‘A8’ 706” == 'A8 tag for 
authentication 
objects 
'30' 704” == ‘30! tag for 
SEQUENCE 
“04” 502! a= “04” tag for 
OCTET STRING to 
store path 
'44' 5027 -- file identifier 
for EF.AOD 


7.3.4 CIO Directory files 


Each CIO directory file (1e. EF.AOD, EF.PrKD, 
EF.PuKD and EF.SKD) is an internal transparent EF 
and shall contain a directory of CIOs of a certain kind. 
For example, a private key directory file (EF.PrKD) 
contains a directory (list) of private key information 
objects. 


A CIO stored in a CIO directory file shall contain a 
reference to actual cryptographic item (for example, 
key or password) along with other information as 
specified in section 13. Cryptographic items like 
keys and passwords are stored in elementary files, 
the reference to which is given in the corresponding 


CIO. When CIOs refer to cryptographic items that are 
logically linked (for example, a private key and the 
corresponding public key) they shall have the same 
CIO identifier. 


Passwords will be stored in a separate EF which will 
be referred to by a password CIO listed in the ЕЕ AOD 
file. This EF shall be an internal record file containing 
passwords in exactly the same format as defined in Part 
1 of this standard for the password file. 


Keys will be stored in one or more separate EFs which 
will be referred to by the corresponding key information 
objects. This EF shall be an internal transparent file 
containing one or more key templates. Each key 
template (tag *A0") is a constructed data object and 
shall contain the DOs with tags as specified in Table 3. 


Table 3 Tags contained in a Key Template 
(tag “А0”) 
( Clause 7.3.4 ) 


Tag Length Value 

*80" 1 byte Key identifier (as defined inPart 1 of this 
standard) 

“817 1 byte Key type 


‘АЗ’ Variable Key specific information with following 


tags and in order as specified by the key 


type. 

Tag Length Value 

‘90° 2 bytes Key usage counter 

917 1 byte Key retry counter 
(4 bits for retry 
counter and 4 bits 
for maximum retry 
counter) 

“047 Variable Key value 


The values in Table 3 shall have the following 
interpretation: 


a) Key Identifier — The key identifier shall have the 
same structure and meaning as defined in Part 1 of 
this standard. It is not related to the key identifier 
field in the information present in the CIO. 


b) Key Type — The key type 1s used to define the 
associated counters for various operations. These 
counters are stored within a key template as a DO 
embedded in a template with tag “АЗ” tag. The 
structure of the key type is specified in section 
9.2 of the Part 1 of this standard. It shall indicate 
which key counters are present in the key specific 
information for various operations. The key type 
shall not be used for operations based on public 
key cryptography and shall be ignored by the OS. 
The KD bit as specified in Section 9.2 of the Part 
1 shall stand deprecated for symmetric key based 
operation when DF.CIA and EF. SKD are used as 
the same functionality is obtained through CIOs in 
EF.SKD. 


c) Key Specific Information (counters) — The key 
counters are stored in the constructed DO in an 
order as specified by the key type. If a key counter 
indicated by key type as present is not contained 
by “АЗ” tag, then the behavior is undefined. The 
operating system must make the best effort to 
consider such counters to have infinite value. The 
key specific information such as counters shall not 
be used for Public Key Cryptography operation 
and shall be ignored by the OS. 


1) Key usage counter — The key usage counter 
shall have the same interpretation as defined 
in Part 1 of this standard. This 2-byte counter 
shall be present if the key type indicates the 
presence of key counters for encryption and/or 
internal authentication. These two operations 
shall have their own separate key usage 
counters. If the value of key usage counter is 
‘FFFF’, it shall be an infinite counter. 


2) Key retry counter — This shall have the 
same interpretation as defined in Part 1 of 
this standard. This is a 1 byte counter and is 
applicable for external authenticate operation. 
The upper 4 bits code the retry counter value 
while the lower 4 bits code the maximum 
number of retries. 


d) Key value — This shall store the actual value of 
the key according to the ASN.1 syntax as given in 
section 13.1. 


The operation for which the key is permitted to be 
used is indicated by the information contained by the 
corresponding CIO. If the key is not permitted to be 
used for the current operation, an error with status bytes 
SW1-SW2=‘6985’ (“Conditions of use not satisfied") 
will be returned wherever appropriate. 


The following types of CIO directory files may be 
present in DF.CIA. If yes, the OS shall use these files. 
Other files 1f present shall be ignored by the OS. 


7.3.4.1 Private key directory file (EF.PrKD) 


This EF will store the private key information objects 
for the private keys of the application. It shall store 
private key information objects for keys which may be 
used for decryption and digital signature computation. 
Multiple private key information objects may be present 
in this file and are identified by a key reference. The 
structure of private key CIOs are discussed in detail in 
section 13.3.1. 


7.3.4.2 Public key directory file (EF.PuKD) 


This EF shall store the CIOs corresponding to 
ClOChoice value being equal to trusted PublicKeys. 
The trusted Public Key CIOs refer to the public key 
information objects for public keys of the central 


IS 16695 (Part 2) : 2022 


certifying authority (CCA) that are trusted by the ICC. 
A trusted Public Key CIO shall contain the Name 
of the owner of the public key as specified in the 
corresponding certificate's subject component. This 
key can only be used for certificate verification. These 
trusted public key CIOs have the ASN.1 syntax for 
public key information object as described in section 
13.3.2. 


7.3.4.3 Secret key directory file (EF.SKD) 


This EF shall store the secret key information 
objects of secret keys for symmetric key algorithms. 
The CIOs present in EF.SKD may refer to the keys 
for confidentiality, integrity and/or authentication 
operations. It shall contain secret key information 
objects in form of SecretKeyChoice type as described 
in section 13.3.3. 


7.3.4.4 Authentication object directory file (EF.AOD) 


This EF shall contain cryptographic information objects 
corresponding to passwords. An authentication object 
CIO is stored as an Authentication Object Choice type 
as described in section 13.4. 


8 APPLICATION IDENTIFICATION AND 
SELECTION 


This section describes how to identify and select an 
application supported by the ICC. 


8.1 Application Identification 


An application is identified by an AID which is specified 
as the name of the DF corresponding to the application. 
All EFs and DFs without DF name under this DF 
belong to the same application. Any DF that carries a 
DF name (AID) defines a new application under that 
tree. An application may or may not be listed in the 
EF.DIR file. An application which is listed in EF.DIR 
file and has an entry for its corresponding DF.CIA shall 
have the PKI support (Refer section 7.1). 


8.2 Application Selection 


When a DF/EF is selected (using relative or using 
absolute path or by file identifier or by DF name (that 
is, AID) or implicitly) an application is also selected as 
per the following rules: 

a) If the DF being selected has a DF name, that 
application 15 selected; 

b) If the DF being selected has no DF name but one 
ofthe ancestors of the DF has a DF name, then the 
application is selected by finding the name of the 
closest ancestor of this DF; and 


с 


wm 


If the DF being selected has none of its ancestors, 
including the MF, have a DF name, no application 
is selected. 


IS 16695 (Part 2) : 2022 


8.3 Common Scenarios 


EF1 EF2 


Fic. 3 SAMPLE FILE STRUCTURE 


In the Fig. 3, Al, A2 and A3 are the applications (that 
is, DF with names); MF, DF1, DF2, БЕЗ and DF4 are 
DFs without DF name; and ЕГІ, EF2 are elementary 
files. Some common scenarios are described below. 


Scenario A: The current DF is DF3 (that is, application 
A2 is selected). If DF4 is now selected, then application 
A3 will automatically get selected. 


Scenario B: If the current DF 15 A3 (that is, the current 
application is also АЗ) and a SELECT command is 
used to select the parent DF, then application A1 shall 
get selected. The current DF will also be A1. 


Scenario C: The currently selected DF is DF2 and 
hence the current application is Al. If DF1 is now 
selected, it results in no application being selected. 


9 KEY/PASSWORD 
RETRIEVAL 


STORAGE AND 


9.1 Passwords and Symmetric Keys 


The rules in Table 4 are used to resolve the references 
for passwords and symmetric keys. The elementary file 
EF2 (key file, refer section 9 of Part 1 of this standard), 
wherever applicable, shall contain keys for symmetric 
key operations only. It shall not be used to store private 
or public keys. 


Table 4 Keys and Passwords 
( Clause 9.1 ) 


Case Condition 


Local Key/Password Lookup 
Method 


Global Key/Password 
Lookup Method 


1 EF.DIR is not present 


Keys/Passwords obtained from 
EF2/EFI under the current DF as 
described in Part 1 ofthis standard 
. PKI support not available. 


Keys/Passwords obtained 
from EF2/EF1 under MF 
as described in Part 1 of 
this standard . PKI support 
not available. 


2 EF.DIR is present and 


2.a Current DF is not an application or does not belong to an 
application, or 


2.b 


Current DF is an application which is not listed in EF.DIR 
or does not have an entry for its corresponding DF.CIA in 
EF.DIR, or 


Current DF belongs to an application which is not listed 
in EF.DIR or does not have an entry for its corresponding 
DF.CIA in EF.DIR. 


Keys/Passwords obtained from 
EF2/EFI under the current DF as 
described in Part 1 ofthis standard 
. PKI support not available. 


Keys/Passwords obtained 
from EF2/EF1 under MF 
as described in Part 1 of 
this standard . РКІ support 
not available. 


3 EF.DIR is present and 


3.a Current DF is an application with a corresponding DF.CIA 
entry in EF.DIR 


3.b Current DF belongs to an application, and this application 
has a DF.CIA entry in EF.DIR 


Keys or Passwords are obtained 
from EFs referred to from the 
CIOs present іп EF.SKD ог 
EF.AOD respectively in the 
corresponding DF.CIA of the 
application. 


Keys ог Passwords 
are obtained from EFs 
referred to from the CIOs 
present in EF.SKD or 
EF.AOD respectively in 
the corresponding DF.CIA 
of the application. 


9.2 Private Keys 


When a command to be executed requires a private key 
(for example, COMPUTE DIGITAL SIGNATURE), 
the key shall be retrieved according to the rules 
described below; 


a) The key reference for a private key is obtained as 
specified in Table 5. 


b) EF.PrKD file in the corresponding DF.CIA 
directory of the application in use is located 
through EF.OD. If EF.PrKD is not found, then the 
condition is treated as key not found. 


c) EF.PrKD is searched for a CIO which has the 
same key reference as the key to be searched. If 
no such CIO is found, then the condition is treated 
as key not found. 


d) Ifa matching CIO is found, then from this CIO the 
path to a key file is obtained which contains the 
actual keys and it corresponding counters. If the 
path to this key file is absent or invalid, then the 
condition is treated as key not found. 


e) This key file (section 7.3.4) is then searched for 
a key template with same key reference and the 
key is retrieved from this template. If no key is 
found or the key is invalid, then the behavior will 
be similar to the one described in Part 1 of this 
standard when keys are not found. 


9.3 Public Keys 


9.3.1 When a command to be executed requires a 
public key, the key reference for the public key shall be 
obtained as specified in Table 6. 


IS 16695 (Part 2) : 2022 


9.3.2 The key shall be retrieved according to the rules 
described below. 


For VERIFY CERTIFICATE command: 


A certificate verification operation requires the public 
key of the certifying authority (CA) that has signed the 
certificate. This can either be a CCA's key (root-CA) 
or a key obtained by a process of chain verification of 
certificates starting from the CCA. 


a) Verification of certificates issued by a CCA 


The public key for CCA shall be searched in the 
trusted EF.PuKD according to following steps. 


1) The trusted EF.PuKD file in the corresponding 
DF.CIA directory of the application in use is 
located using the EF.OD file. If EF.PuKD is 
not found, then the condition is treated as “Кеу 
not found". 


2) This trusted EF.PuKD file is searched for a CIO 
which has the same key reference as the key to 
be searched. If no such CIO is found, then the 
condition is treated as “key not found”. 


3) If a matching CIO is found and it refers to a 
key file with a valid trusted public key, then 
one of the following cases shall hold. 


(i) If the subject name associated with this 
trusted public key is same as the issuer’s 
Name іп the certificate, this CCA's 
key shall be used to perform certificate 
verification. 


(ii) If the subject name associated with this 
trusted public key does not match the 
issuer's Name in the certificate, then the 
process of chain verification of certificates 
(as described later) is followed. 


Table 5 Mechanism to obtain key reference for a private key 


( Clause 9.2 ) 


Command 


Mechanism to obtain key reference 


SIGNATURE 


PSO: COMPUTE DIGITAL | Key reference and algorithm reference are taken from the DST (in current SE) for which the usage qualifier 


byte permits signature computation operation. The key reference and algorithm reference shall be taken 
from ‘84’ and ‘80’ tag respectively. If no such DST template is present or the key reference is not defined 
or if key reference is 0, it is treated as "key not defined". If the algorithm reference is absent, the algorithm 
shall have a default value 0 as specified in section 11.3. 


PSO: DECIPHER 


Key reference and algorithm reference are taken from the CT (in current SE) for which the usage qualifier 
byte permits decryption operation. If the algorithm reference refers to a symmetric key algorithm, the 
decipher command is carried out as described in Part 1 of this standard. If the algorithm reference refers to 
an asymmetric key algorithm, the private key reference and algorithm reference shall be taken from ‘84’ 
and ‘80’ tag respectively. If the algorithm reference is absent, the algorithm shall have a default value 0 as 
described in Part 1 of this standard. If no such CT template is present or the key reference is not defined or 
if key reference is 0, it is treated as "key not defined". 


MSE SET 


MSE SET can be used for key derivation and setting of other SE parameters as defined in Part 1 of this 
standard and in section 12.4 of this document. The usage of key reference, algorithm reference and other 
parameters is given in the description of MSE SET command (section 12.4). 


INTERNAL/MUTUAL 
AUTHENTICATE 


These authentication commands may use private key for decryption or digital signature computation when 
asymmetric key algorithms are used. Depending on the algorithm for authentication (as per the algorithm 
reference in the P1 byte or from the AT template (if P1 is 0)), the key reference will be taken from other 
templates as described in section 12.3. 


IS 16695 (Part 2) : 2022 


Table 6 Mechanism to Obtain Key Reference for a Public Key 


( Clause 9.3.1) 


Command 


Mechanism to obtain key reference 


PSO: VERIFY CERTIFICATE 


Key reference is taken from the “83” tag in the DST (in current SE) for which the usage qualifier byte 
permits certificate verification. If no such DST template is present or the key reference is not defined or 
if key reference is 0, it is treated as “key not defined". If found, the key reference shall be treated as the 
chain-id and shall refer to the key of the CA. The key of the CA must be the certified key of CA in the 
chain of a CCA if the key reference is same as of the certified key's chain-id. Otherwise it shall be treated 
as the key reference of the CCA from the EF.PuKD referred key. 


PSO: ENCIPHER 


Key reference and algorithm reference are taken from the CT (in current SE) for which the usage qualifier 
byte permits encryption operation. If the algorithm reference refers to a symmetric key algorithm, the 
encipher command is carried out as describedin Part 1 of this standard. If the algorithm reference refers 
to an asymmetric key algorithm, the public key reference and algorithm reference shall be taken from 
483” and “80” tag respectively. If this key reference is non-zero, then it must match with the chain-id of 
the certified public key. If the key reference is not defined or if key reference is 0, the chain matching 
is ignored and the certified public key is used provided that it permits the encipher operation. If the 
algorithm reference is absent, the algorithm shall have a default value 0 as specified in Part 1 of this 
standard. If no such CT template is present, it is treated as “key not defined". 


GET CHALLENGE 


The GET CHALLENGE command is described in section 12.2. The following cases may hold for this 
command. 


a) РІ-0 


The challenge shall be issued in plain text. Hence, the key reference and the algorithm reference are not 
needed. 
b) PI Z0 

The challenge is given out in encrypted form. For the encryption, the key reference (*83’ tag) and algorithm 
reference (‘80’ tag) shall be taken from the CT (in current SE) for which the usage qualifier byte permits 
encryption. If no such CT template is present or the algorithm reference (for encryption) is absent or not 
supported, it shall result in an error. If the key reference obtained from this CT is non-zero, then it must 
match with the chain-id of the certified public key. If the key reference is not defined or if key reference is 
0, the chain matching is ignored and the certified public key is used provided that it permits encipher and/ 
or key encipher operation as described in section 12.2. 


EXTERNAL/MUTUAL 
AUTHENTICATE 


These authentication commands may use public key for encryption or digital signature verification when 
asymmetric key algorithms are used. Depending on the algorithm for authentication (as per the algorithm 
reference in the P1 byte or AT template (if P1 is 0)), the key reference will be taken from other templates 
as described in section 12.3. 


If the key file referred to by the matching CIO is absent 
or it does not have the referred key or the key is invalid, 
then the certificate verification shall fail. 


b) Chain verification of certificates 


as a certified public key. This certified public key 
is stored in the memory along with its chain-id, 
key usage, supported algorithm and the Name of 
the subject to whom the key was issued. At any 
point in time, the ICC shall maintain information 


Chain verification is required when the certificate 
to be verified is not signed by the CCA's key but 
by a CA whose certificate belongs to a chain of 
certificates starting from the CCA. For verifying a 
certificate, the entire chain of certificates starting 
from the CCA to this certificate needs to be 
verified. 


A chain is uniquely identified by its CCA and has 
a chain-id associated with it. Chain-id 15 same 
as the key reference of the CCA. A public key 
obtained by verifying any certificate in a chain 
of certificates shall have the chain-id as that of 
CCA’s key reference. 


Inthe OS, there can be only one public key 
maintained other than the CCA keys. This key 
is obtained from a certificate after a successful 
VERIFY CERTIFICATE operation and is known 


10 


of only one certified public key. This key shall 
become invalid if another application is selected 
or if a VERIFY CERTIFICATE command is 
carried out. Also, when a certificate is successfully 
verified, the previous certified public key 18 
replaced by the public key obtained from the new 
verified certificate. 


To verify a certificate by chain verification 

process, the certified public key maintained by the 

ICC shall be used. This certified public key shall 

be used only if: 

a) the chain-id of the certified public key is the 
same as the key reference present in the *83* 
tag in the DST template of current SE, 


b) the subject name associated with this certified 
public key is same as the issuer's Name in the 
certificate, and 


c) The key usage obtained from the certificate 
after verification indicates that this key can be 
used for certificate verification. 


If any of these conditions are not met or if no certified 
public key exists, then certificate verification process 
fails. 


For commands other than the VERIFY CERTIFICATE 
command: 


For public key operations other than certificate 
verification, the certified public key obtained from the 
last successful VERIFY CERTIFICATE shall be used. 
If the key reference (obtained as per Table 6) is non 
zero, it must match with the chain-id of the certified 
public key. If no valid certified public key exists, then 
it 1s treated as “Кеу not defined" and the behavior shall 
be similar to the one described in Part 1 of this standard 
when keys are not found. 


The CCA keys shall not be used for any command other 
than the VERIFY CERTIFICATE command. Therefore, 
for operations involving the CCA's public key, first the 
self-signed CCA certificate must be certified using 
VERIFY CERTIFICATE command. 


9.4 Common Scenarios 


Some common scenarios while retrieving the key 
are discussed below. The file organization is same as 
described in section 8.3 and Fig. 2. 


Scenario A: DF1 is the currently selected DF. Since 
MF and DF1 are not applications, they don't have an 
associated DF.CIA. Hence, keys and passwords shall 
be obtained described in Part 1 of this standard (that is, 
global keys and passwords from EF2/EF1 under MF 
and local keys and passwords from EF2/EF 1 under the 
current DF). 


Scenario B: DF3 is the currently selected DF. 
Application A2 has a DF.CIA associated with it and 
has a corresponding entry in EF.DIR file. Symmetric 
keys and passwords shall be obtained from the DF.CIA 
directory as specified in section 9.1. 


Scenario C: Al is an application with a valid entry in 
EF.DIR for its corresponding DF.CIA. АЗ does not have 
an entry in EF.DIR for its corresponding DF.CIA. The 
current DF is DF4 which belongs to application A3. 
If a symmetric key or password needs to be retrieved, 
then they will be obtained from EF2/EF1 under DF4 
(or under MF for global keys/passwords) and not from 
DF.CIA of Al. 


10 PUBLIC KEY RELATED OPERATIONS IN 
SCOSTA-PKI 


10.1. Authentication 


In addition to the authentication methods, involving 
symmetric keys mentioned in part | of this standard, 
the OS shall also require the asymmetric key based 


11 


IS 16695 (Part 2) : 2022 


authentication as described here. Specific details of 
authentication commands are described later in 12.3. 


The authentication algorithms described here may 
require the ICC to have the public key of the external 
entity (IFD). Hence, the external entity must issue 
VERIFY CERTIFICATE command(s) prior to starting 
the authentication process so that ICC can have IFD’s 
public key as certified public key. The certified public 
key obtained by this certificate verification will be 
used for the authentication process only if its chain- 
id is the same as the key reference present in the 
corresponding CRT (that is, CT or DST in current SE) 
which permits the required operation (encryption or 
signature verification).If no valid certified public key 
meeting the condition mentioned above is present, then 
the condition will be treated as “key not found”. 


10.1.1 External Authentication 


External authentication is a process where an external 
entity authenticates itself to the ICC. In asymmetric 
key based external authentication, one of the processes 
(depending on the algorithm reference) described here 
shall be followed. The external authentication is subject 
to the key retry counter as described in Part 1 of this 
standard. 


10.1.1.1 Digital 
mechanism 


The IFD gets a challenge R from the ICC. The IFD 
computes a digital signature on R using its private key 
and sends it as response to the ICC. The ICC verifies the 
response by doing a signature verification using IFD’s 
public key. For performing this signature verification, 
the ICC needs to have the public key of IFD which 
shall be available as a certified public key with its usage 
permitting signature verification. If this verification is 
successful, the external entity is authenticated. 


signature based authentication 


Sequence of commands: 


1. IFD issues GET CHALLENGE with P1 = *00* 
and Le > 8. The ICC responds with a random 
number (R) of length Le as challenge. 


. IFD computes the digital signature on R using 
its private key. It then issues EXTERNAL 
AUTHENTICATE command with this 
digital signature on К as command data. The 
algorithm reference in this command must 
refer to a PKI-based algorithm and will have 
value *04 as specified in section 11.2. 


. The ICC verifies the digital signature by using 
IFD's public key. The IFD's public key must 
be present in the ICC as a certified public key 
and its usage must permit digital signature 
verification. If the verification succeeds, the 
external entity 1s authenticated in the CCA's 
chain. A VERIFY CERTIFICATE operation 
shall invalidate an authenticated session. 


IS 16695 (Part 2) : 2022 


10.1.1.2 Encrypted challenge based authentication 
mechanism 


The IFD takes an encrypted challenge (random number 
R encrypted with IFD's public key) from the ICC. For 
sending this encrypted challenge, the ICC needs to 
have the public key of IFD which must be available 
as a certified public key with its usage permitting 
data encipher operation. On receiving the encrypted 
challenge, IFD decrypts it using its private key. It then 
sends the decrypted challenge as response to the ICC. 
The ICC verifies this response by matching it against 
R. If this verification is successful, the external entity 
(IFD) is authenticated. 


Sequence of commands: 


a) IFD issues GET CHALLENGE with algorithm 
reference ‘01’. The ICC responds with an 8-byte 
challenge (R) encrypted with IFD’s public key. 
The IFD’s public key must be present in the ICC 
as a certified public key and its usage must permit 
data encipher operation. 


b 


— 


IFD decrypts the response using its private 
key to get the 8-byte challenge R. It then issues 
EXTERNAL AUTHENTICATE command with 
this 8-byte challenge as data for the command. 
The algorithm reference in this command must 
have value “03” as specified in section 11.2. 


с 


ме 


The ІСС verifies the response by matching it with 
the challenge (R) issued by itself in the previous 
GET CHALLENGE command. If the verification 
succeeds, the external entity is authenticated in 
the CCA's chain. А VERIFY CERTIFICATE 
operation shall invalidate an authenticated session. 


10.1.2 Internal Authentication 


Internal authentication is a process where the ICC 
authenticates itself to the external entity. In asymmetric 
key based internal authentication, one of the processes 
(depending on the algorithm reference) described here 
shall be followed. 


10.1.2.1 Digital signature based authentication 
mechanism 


IFD generates a random number R, and sends this 
challenge to the ICC. ICC computes a digital signature 
on R using its private key, provided the operation is 
permitted and sends it back as response. IFD verifies 
the digital signature on R using ICC’s public key, 
provided its usage permits signature verification. If this 
verification succeeds, the ICC is authenticated to IFD. 
No status information is maintained by the ICC after 
an internal authentication. The internal authentication 
is subject to the corresponding key usage counters as 
described in Part 1 of this standard. 


12 


Sequence of commands: 


a) IFD generates an 8-byte challenge (R) and issues 
an INTERNAL AUTHENTICATE command with 
R as command data. The algorithm reference must 
have value ‘04’ as specified in section 11.2. 


b) ICC computes a digital signature on R and sends 
this as response to IFD. 


с) Тһе digital signature 15 then verified by the IFD 
for R. If the verification succeeds, the ICC 1s 
authenticated to the external entity (IFD). 


10.1.2.2 Encrypted-challenge based authentication 
mechanism 


IFD generates a random number R, encrypts it with 
the public key of ICC, provided its usage permits data 
encipher and sends this encrypted challenge to the ICC. 
ICC decrypts the challenge to get R and sends it back 
as response. The IFD matches the response against R. 
If this verification succeeds, the ICC is authenticated to 
IFD. No status information is maintained by the ICC 
after an internal authentication. 


Sequence of commands: 


a) IFD generates an 8-byte challenge (R) and 
encrypts it with ICC’s public key. It then issues 
an INTERNAL AUTHENTICATE command 
with this encrypted challenge as command data. 
The algorithm reference must have value ‘03’ as 
specified in section 11.2. 


b 


— 


ICC decrypts this command data (that is, 
encrypted challenge) to get R. The ICC then sends 
this decrypted challenge as response to IFD. 


с 


— 


This response is then verified by IFD against the 
generated R in step 1. If the verification succeeds, 
the ICC is authenticated to the external entity 
(IFD). 


10.1.3 Mutual Authentication 


Mutual authentication is the process where the IFD 
and ICC authenticate each other. In asymmetric key 
based mutual authentication, one of the processes 
(depending on the algorithm reference) described here 
shall be followed. For mutual authentication, the key 
retry counter and the key usage counter both shall be 
applicable. 


10.1.3.1 Digital signature based authentication 
mechanism 


The IFD takes a challenge R1 from the ICC and 
computes a digital signature on R1 using its private key. 
IFD then generates a random number R2 as challenge 
and sends ((Signature of R1) || R2) inside the command 
data of MUTUAL AUTHENTICATE command to 
the ICC. The ICC verifies the signature on R1 using 


IFD's public key. For performing this signature 
verification, the ICC needs to have the public key of 
IFD as certified public key with its usage permitting 
signature verification. If this verification succeeds, IFD 
is considered to be authenticated by the ICC. The ICC 
will compute a signature on R2 using its private key and 
sends this as response. IFD shall verify this response 
using ICC’s public key, provided its usage permits 
signature verification. If this verification succeeds, the 
ICC is considered authenticated by the IFD. 


Sequence of commands: 


a) IFD issues GET CHALLENGE with algorithm 
reference ‘00’ and Le = 8. The ICC responds with 
an 8-byte random number R1 as challenge. 

b) IFD computes a digital signature on КІ 

using its private key. IFD generates an 8-byte 

random number R2. It then issues MUTUAL 

AUTHENTICATE command with input data as 

((signature of R1) || R2). The algorithm will have 

a value ‘04’ as specified in section 11.2. 


с 


wa 


The ICC will verify the signature on R1 using 
IFD's public key which must be present in the ICC 
as a certified public key and its usage must permit 
signature verification. If the verification succeeds, 
the external entity is authenticated in the CCA's 
chain. 


d 


М7 


The ICC will then compute digital signature of 
the received challenge R2 using its private key. 
This digital signature is then sent as response by 
the ICC and verified by IFD. If the verification 
succeeds, the ICC is authenticated to the external 
entity (IFD). A VERIFY CERTIFICATE operation 
shall invalidate the authenticated session. 


10.1.3.2 Encrypted-challenge based authentication 
mechanism 


In asymmetric key based authentication, the external 
entity (IFD) takes an encrypted challenge (random 
number КІ encrypted with IFD's public key) from 
the ICC. For sending this encrypted challenge, the 
ICC needs to have the public key of IFD as certified 
public key with its usage permitting data encipher. 
On receiving the encrypted challenge, IFD decrypts 
it using its private key to get КІ. IFD generates а 
random number R2 as challenge. It then encrypts 
(КІ || R2) with ICC's public key, provided its usage 
permits data encipher and sends it in the command data 
of MUTUAL AUTHENTICATE command to the ICC. 
The ICC decrypts the response with its private key to 
get КІ and R2. If R1 is the same as the random number 
issued by it in the previous GET CHALLENGE, the 
IFD is considered to be authenticated by the ICC. The 
ICC shall then send R2 as response. IFD shall verify 
this response against R2 issued by it earlier. If the 
verification is successful, the ICC is considered to be 
authenticated by the IFD. 


13 


IS 16695 (Part 2) : 2022 


Sequence of commands: 


a) IFD issues GET CHALLENGE with algorithm 
reference “017. The ICC responds with an 8-byte 
challenge R1 encrypted with IFD's public key. 
The IFD's public key must be present in the ICC 
as a certified public key and its usage must permit 
encryption. 


b 


— 


IFD decrypts the response to get the challenge 
КІ. IFD generates an 8-byte random number 
R2. It then issues MUTUAL AUTHENTICATE 
command with (R1 || R2) encrypted with the 
public key of ICC provided its usage permits data 
encipher. The algorithm will have a value “03” as 
specified in section 11.2. 


The ICC decrypts the response to get R1 and R2. 
It verifies response by matching R1 obtained after 
decryption with the challenge issued by it in the 
previous GET CHALLENGE command. If the 
verification succeeds, the IFD is considered to be 
authenticated by the ICC in the chain of CCA. 


The ICC will then send the received challenge 
R2 as response to the IFD. This response is then 
verified by the IFD. If the verification succeeds, 
the ICC is considered to be authenticated by the 
IFD. A VERIFY CERTIFICATE operation shall 
invalidate the authenticated session. 


wm 


с 


а 


— 


10.2 Session Key Establishment 


In addition to the session key establishment mechanisms 
using symmetric keys described in part 1 of this 
standard, the OS shall also require the asymmetric 
key based session key establishment mechanism as 
described here. The session keys shall be symmetric 
keys and will be used for confidentiality, integrity or 
authentication mechanisms based on TDES symmetric 
key cryptography as the case may be. Specific details of 
the commands used for key establishment are described 
in 12.4. 


In order to establish a session key, the IFD and ICC each 
relay a 16-byte random key material to the other side. 
The session keys are then computed by taking an XOR 
of the two key materials. One or more session keys may 
coexist at any point in time provided they have been 
derived for different purposes (that is, confidentiality, 
integrity or authentication). At any instant, at most three 
session keys can coexist- one each for confidentiality, 
integrity and authentication purpose. When a session 
key is derived for certain purpose, it shall replace 
the earlier session key, if present, which had been 
established for the same purpose. For example, if a 
session key is derived for confidentiality, it shall replace 
the existing session key for confidentiality (if present), 
but the existing session keys for other purposes will not 
be affected by this. 


IS 16695 (Part 2) : 2022 


Sequence of Commands: 


а) IFD issues a GET CHALLENGE command with 
algorithm reference 02. ICC generates a 16 byte 
random number K. , encrypts it with IFD's public 
key and sends it to IFD. The IFD's public key 
must be present in the ICC as a certified public 
key and its usage must permit key encipher. 
b) IFD generates 16 bytes random number K,,, and 
encrypts it using public key of ICC, provided its 
usage permits key encipher. It then issues an MSE 
SET command (refer section 12.4) and provides 
encrypted К, with “94° tag in the command 
field. The purpose for which the key is to be 
derived is determined by P2 parameter of MSE 
SET command (Refer IS 14202 (Part 4)). The 
key reference of the ICC's private key shall be 
obtained from the ‘84’ tag in the KAT template of 


current SE. 
с 


ме 


Both sides shall compute the session key by taking 
an XOR of K,, and K,,,. The session key so derived 


shall be used for operations as described in the 
description of MSE SET command (see 12.4). 


10.3 Authentication and Session Key Establishment 


The Part 1 of this standard defines the authentication 
with session key establishment using symmetric 
keys which shall be applicable to SCOSTA-PKI as 
well. In addition, SCOSTA-PKI shall also require the 
asymmetric key based mechanism for the same as 
described here. The session keys that are established for 
a session shall be symmetric keys and will be used for 
confidentiality or integrity based on TDES symmetric 
key cryptography as the case may be. Specific details of 
the commands used are described in 12.3. 


The authentication process 1s carried out using 
the encrypted challenge mechanism. The session 
keys are established for symmetric encryption 
(TDES algorithm) and shall be 16 bytes long. Two 
separate keys for confidentiality and integrity are 
established simultaneously using this mechanism. 
The confidentiality key shall be usable for encryption, 
decryption and secure messaging (this can be restricted 
further by the CRT usage tag ‘95’ in the CT template 
in the current SE). The integrity key shall be usable 
for the computation and verification of cryptographic 
checksum and for secure messaging (this can be 
restricted further by the CRT usage tag “957 in the 
CCT template). Algorithm reference for the MUTUAL 
AUTH command shall be “05” as defined in Table 8. 


IFD gets a random number R, from the ICC which 
the ICC sends encrypted using IFD's public key. The 
IFD's public key must be present in the ICC as a 
certified public key with its usage permitting both key 
encipher and data encipher. IFD decrypts the challenge 


using its private key to get R,,. IFD generates a 


14 


random number R pp, key material K pp. (for integrity 
key) and key material K,,, (for confidentiality 
key). It then computes a cipher text by encrypting 
КАК КК , using ICC's public key, provided 
its usage permits both key encipher and data encipher. 
The ICC then decrypts it, verifies Rcc to authenticate 
the external entity and generates key material K 
(for integrity key) and K ec (for confidentiality key). 
It then sends back R,j[K...,|K,.., encrypted with 
IFD's public key which must be available to the ICC 
as a certified public key and its usage must permit both 
key encipher and data encipher. IFD shall verify Rpp 
to authenticate the ICC. Both sides will then establish 
session keys as a function of K ec Kirp. for integrity 
and Kec» Krp for confidentiality as indicated 
in Fig. 4. 


ICC-1 


10.4 Generation of Asymmetric Key Pair 


This functionality shall be used to generate a key pair 
in the ICC for public-key cryptographic operations. 
Corresponding private key is not brought out ofthe ICC 
and may be used for cryptographic operations involving 
private key such as decipher, digital signature, key 
decryption etc. 


This functionality shall be used only when following 
prerequisites are met. 


a) There must be a valid current application; 


b) The selected application has an associated CIA 
application represented by DF.CIA; 


c) EF.PrKD entry is there in the corresponding 
DF.CIA; 


d) CIO corresponding to the reference to the key to 
be generated is present; and 


е) The key store referred by the EF.PrKD must be 
present. 


The key can only be generated in one of the following 
scenarios. 


1) There is no key present in the key store 
corresponding to the key reference of the key 
to be generated. In such a case the key store 
must permit write operation on the basis of 
current security status otherwise an error shall 
be returned. 


If the key is present in the key store 
corresponding to the key reference of the key 
to be generated, whether valid or invalid. In 
such a case the key store must permit update 
operation on the basis of current security status 
otherwise an error shall be returned. 


2) 


After a key pair is successfully generated, a certification 
request is created which includes elements such 
as public key, subject name etc. and is returned as 
response. The certification request may be acted upon 
by the IFD. 


IS 16695 (Part 2) : 2022 


Issues GET CHALLENGE command (with Р1-01) 


Responds with challenge as Ricc (8 bytes) encrypted with IFD's public 
key 


IFD decrypts the challenge using its private key to get Ricc. It then 
generates 8-byte long random Rip, 16-byte long random Kirp-1 (key 
material for integrity key) and 16-byte long random Кр. (key 
material for confidentiality key) 

IFD encrypts Ricc | | Riro | | Kiro-1 | | Kiep-2 with the public key of the ICC 
and issues a MUTUAL AUTHENTICATE command with this cipher 
text as command data. 


ICC decrypts this cipher text and verifies Ricc. It then extracts Riep, 
Кірр-і and Kigp-2 from the command data. ICC generates 16-byte long 
random Kicci (key material for integrity key) and 16-byte long 
random Кісс-2 (key material for confidentiality key). 

ICC creates а cipher-text by encrypting Riro || Kicca | | Kicc-2 with 
public key of IFD. This data is sent as a response. 


IFD decrypts the response and verifies Rip. 

Both IFD and ICC compute the session keys. The integrity key is 
computed as (Kirp-1 XOR Kicc-1). The confidentiality key is computed 
as (Kirp-2 ХОК Кісс-2). 

Both IFD and ICC set the IV for confidentiality as O and IV for integrity 


Fic. 4 AUTHENTICATION AND KEY ESTABLISHMENT PROTOCOL 


15 


IS 16695 (Part 2) : 2022 


11 CRYPTOGRAPHIC ALGORITHMS IN 
SCOSTA-PKI 


The OS shall support all algorithms specified in Part 
1 of this standard. In addition, it shall support RSA 
based algorithms for confidentiality, digital signature, 
authentication and session key derivation as described 
in this clause. 


The OS shall use TDES algorithm (as given in Part 1 
of this standard) for symmetric key based usage and 
RSA algorithm for asymmetric key based usage with 
appropriate description given in this standard. 


11.1 Algorithms for Confidentiality 


For asymmetric key cryptography, the OS must provide 
algorithms for encryption/decryption using asymmetric 
key cryptography. The OS shall support RSA based 
encryption/decryption schemes as given in Table 7. The 
algorithm reference in the CT template will refer to the 
encryption/decryption schemes as described in Table 7. 


Table 7 Algorithm Reference for Confidentiality 
Algorithms 


( Clause 11.1) 


Algorithm Reference Method 


“00”, “01° As per Part 1 of this standard 
“02° RSAES-OAEP-Encrypt/Decrypt 
*03* RSAES-PKCSI-v15-Encrypt/Decrypt 


Description of these encryption schemes can be found 
in RFC 3447. The RSA encryption can be performed 
using either 1024 bits or 2048 bits key. Algorithm 
identifier 0 and 1 shall refer to symmetric key encryption 
techniques as described in Part 1 of this standard. 


11.2 Algorithms for Authentication 


There shall be at least two algorithms for cryptographic 
authentication based on public key cryptography. 
These algorithms will use authenticate commands 
(INTERNAL, EXTERNAL and MUTUAL 
AUTHENTICATION). The algorithm reference for 
authenticate commands shall refer to algorithms as 
described in Table 8. 


Table 8 Algorithm Reference for Authentication 
Algorithms 


( Clause 11.2 ) 


Algorithm Reference Method 


“007, ‘01’, “02° As per Part 1 of this standard 

‘03? Encrypted challenge-response based 
method using PKI. 

*04* Digital signature based authentication 
mechanism using PKI. 

*05* Authentication + Session Key 
establishment as described in Figure 3 
using PKI. 


16 


When the algorithm reference (as in Table 8) is ‘03’ 
or ‘05’, the algorithms to be used for the encryption 
or decryption of challenge shall be indicated in the CT 
template which permits encryption or decryption or 
both. The algorithm reference in this CT template shall 
have the value as defined in Table 7 and must have a 
value ‘02’ or “03” only. 

When the algorithm reference (as in Table 8) is ‘04’, 
the algorithm to be used for signature computation or 
verification on the challenge shall be indicated in the 
DST template which permits signature computation 
or verification or both. The algorithm reference in this 
DST template shall have the value as defined in Table . 
If there is no algorithm reference in the DST template 
or when the DST template is not found, the default 
algorithm reference of “00” shall be used. 


11.3 Algorithms for Digital Signature 


The algorithm for digital signature computation shall 
take the hash of message as input and return the digital 
signature as output. The OS shall support RSA for 
computing digital signature (Table 9). 


Algorithm reference for computation of digital signature 
shall be obtained from the DST template of the current 
SE. This algorithm reference will refer to algorithms as 
described in Table . If there is no DST template present 
in the current SE which permits signature computation 
or if the algorithm reference is absent, the algorithm 
reference shall be taken as 0. Algorithm reference 
0 shall refer to the default algorithm which will be 
the same as algorithm referred to by the algorithm 
reference 1. 


Table 9 Algorithm Reference for Digital Signature 
Computation Algorithms 


(Clause 11.3) 


Algorithm Method 
Reference 
“00”, 01° RSASSA-PSS-Signature scheme with EMSA-PSS 


message encoding as described in PKCS#1. 


“02° RSASSA-PKCSI-vl 5 Signature scheme with 
EMSA-PKCS]- vl 5 message encoding and 
ӚНДІ as underlying hash function as described 
in PKCS#1 

037 RSASSA-PKCSI-vl 5 Signature scheme with 


EMSAPKCSI-vl 5 message encoding апа 
SHA256 as underlying hash function as described 
in PKCS#1 


12 MODIFIED COMMAND SETS FOR 
IMPLEMENTING ADDED FUNCTIONALITY 
FOR PKI 


The commands given in this clause shall be 
implemented to ensure added functionality for PKI 
support in SCOSTA-PKI. 


12.1 Envelope 


The OS shall support the ENVELOPE command 
for Т-0 protocol. This command shall be used for 
transmitting a command APDU with extended Lc or 
Le using T=0 protocol. Refer IS 14202 (Part 4) for 
INS = ‘C2’. 


12.2 Get Challenge 


The GET CHALLENGE command shall issue a 
challenge in either plain text or encrypted using IFD’s 
public key depending on the algorithm reference 
specified in P1. IFD’s public key shall be present in the 
ICC as certified public key with its usage permitting 
encipher operations. The GET CHALLENGE 
command will be issued with parameters as specified 
in Table 10. Refer IS 14202 (Part 4) for INS = ‘84’. 


Table 10 Get Challenge Command Parameters 
( Clause 12.2 ) 
P1 Algorithm reference as defined in Table 10 
P2 *00" 
Data Field Absent 


Table 11 Description of P1 (algorithm reference) 
( Clause 12.2 ) 


Algorithm L, Challenge Response 
Reference returned 

(P1) 

*00" Length ofplain Le bytes Challenge in 
text challenge long random plain text. 
expected number 

‘OL’ Length of 8-byte long 8-byte random 
cryptogram random number 
expected number encrypted. The 

cryptogram 
length is 
determined by 
the PKI. 

“02” Length of 16-byte long 16-byte key 
cryptogram random material 
expected number(tobe encrypted. The 

used as key cryptogram 

material) length is 
determined by 
the PKI. 


When РІ has value ‘00’, the challenge will be 
returned as plain text according to part | of this 
standard. When РІ (that is, algorithm reference) is 
‘Ol’ or “02” (as indicated in Table 11), the challenge 
is encrypted using asymmetric key cryptography and 
this encrypted challenge is returned as response. An 
algorithm reference with value ‘01’ (as defined in Table 
10) indicates that the response is an encrypted 8-byte 
challenge, while a value ‘02’ indicates that the response 
is an encrypted 16 byte key material. 


When an encrypted challenge is to be sent (that is, P1 
= “017 or ‘02’), the encryption is performed using the 


17 


IS 16695 (Part 2) : 2022 


public key of the external entity present in the ICC as 
certified public key with its usage permitting encipher 
operations. The key and algorithm to be used for this 
encryption are obtained as described below. 


a) Algorithm — The algorithm to be used for doing 
this encryption is indicated by the algorithm 
reference (80° tag) present in the CT (in current 
SE) for which the usage qualifier byte permits 
encryption. If no such CT template is present or if 
the algorithm reference is absent, it shall result in 
an error (‘6A88’: reference data not found). The 
algorithm reference for this encryption algorithm 
must refer to PKI algorithm and have a value 
*02" or *03' as defined in Table 7. 


Key — The public key of external entity will be 
used to encrypt the challenge. The key reference of 
the public key to be used for encryption is treated 
as the chain-id. The key reference (‘83’ tag) shall 
be taken from the CT (in current SE) for which 
the usage qualifier byte permits encryption. If no 
such CT template is present then it shall return an 
error (*6A88": reference data not found). If the key 
reference obtained from this CT is non-zero, then 
it must match with the chain-id of the certified 
public key. If the key reference in this CT is absent 
or has a value 0, the chain matching is ignored and 
the certified public key is used. 


b 


wm 


c) Key Usage — The key usage of the certified public 
key obtained from the certificate must allow data 
encipher operation when the P1 byte is ‘01’, or 
key-encipher operation when the РІ byte is ‘02’. 


The challenge issued by GET CHALLENGE command 
shall be valid only for the immediately following 
command. Also, the ICC shall remember only the 
challenge generated and not the cipher-text sent as a 
response in case of encrypted challenge (algorithm 
reference = ‘01’ or ‘02’). 


An error (*6A88': reference data not found) shall be 
returned when any of the following conditions are true: 


1) If Pl is 017 or ‘02’ and there is no CRT with 
CT template in the current SE which permits 
encryption. 


2 


МУ 


ІРІ is ‘OL’ or ‘02’ and no algorithm reference 
is present in the CT for encryption. 

If Pl is ‘Ol’ or ‘02’ and the encryption 
algorithm indicated in the CT template of the 
current SE is not ‘02’ or ‘03’. 

The key reference obtained from the CT does 
not match the chain-id of the certified public 
key. 


3) 


4) 


5) 
6) 


No valid certified key is present. 

While obtaining the public key as described 
in 9.3, the condition “key not defined” occurs 
(that is, the key is not found). 


IS 16695 (Part 2) : 2022 


12.3 External/ Internal/ Mutual Authenticate 


Refer IS 14202 (Part 4) for INS = ‘88’ 
(INTERNAL AUTHENTICATE) and INS = ‘82’ 
(EXTERNAL/MUTUAL AUTHENTICATE). 


The authentication algorithm to be used 
in the INTERNAL/EXTERNAL/MUTUAL 
AUTHENTICATE command is indicated by the 
algorithm reference which will be obtained as described 
in Table 12. When the algorithm reference (80° tag) 
is taken from the current SE, the AT template shall be 
used for which the usage qualifier permits the selected 
operation. 


This algorithm reference shall refer to an authentication 
algorithm as defined in Table 8. If this algorithm 
reference is ‘00’, “017 or “02” (that is, it refers to a 
non-PKI algorithm), the authentication process shall 
be carried out as perPart 1 of this standard. If the 
algorithm reference is ‘03’, ‘04’ or ‘05’ (that is, it refers 
to PKI algorithm), the authentication process shall use 
asymmetric key cryptography and shall proceed as 
described in this clause. 


Table 12 Interpretation of P1 for Various AUTH 
Commands 


( Clause 12.3 ) 


P1 Value of Algorithm Reference 


0 From current SE 


#0 P1 


For asymmetric key based authentication, the P2 byte 
shall always be equal to zero. 


The various authentication algorithms (as defined in 
Table 8) using asymmetric key cryptography may 
require keys and algorithms as described below. 


a) Encrypted Challenge-response Based 
Authentication — When the algorithm reference 
is ‘03’ or ‘05’, the encrypted-challenge based 
authentication mechanism is used and the 
authentication commands may require encryption 
(using public key) and decryption (using private 
key) operations. The key and algorithm reference 
for these operations shall be obtained as described 
below: 


1) Decryption using private key — The key 
reference (584? tag) and the algorithm reference 
(“80° tag) for decryption will be taken from 
the CT (in current SE) for which the usage 
qualifier byte permits decryption operation 
(refer section 9.2). If no such CT template 
exists or key reference is absent/zero or the 
algorithm reference is absent/not supported/ 
zero or the key is not found, it will be an error 
condition (*6A88'": reference data not found). 

2) Encryption using public key — Тһе key 
reference (5837 tag) and the algorithm 
reference (‘80’ tag) for encryption will be 


taken from the CT (in current SE) for which 
the usage qualifier byte permits encryption 
operation (refer section 9.3). If no such CT 
template exists or the algorithm reference is 
absent/not supported/zero, it will be an error 
condition (*6A88': reference data not found). 
If the key reference obtained from this CT is 
non-zero, then it must match with the chain-id 
of the certified public key. If this non-zero key 
reference does not match the chain-id of the 
certified key, it is an error condition. If the key 
reference is not defined or if key reference is 0, 
the chain matching is ignored and the certified 
public key is used, provided its usage permits 
data encipher. If no valid certified key is 
present, it will be an error (‘6A88’: reference 
data not found). 


b) Digital Signature Based Authentication 
Mechanism — When the algorithm reference is 
“047, the digital signature based authentication 
mechanism is used and the authentication 
commands may require digital signature 
computation and verification operations. The key 
and algorithm reference for these operations shall 
be obtained as described below: 


1) Digital signature computation — The private 
key reference and the algorithm reference 
will be taken from the DST (in current SE) 
for which the usage qualifier byte permits 
computation operation (refer section 9.2). If 
no such DST template exists or key reference 
is absent/zero or the algorithm reference is 
absent/not supported/zero or the key is not 
found, it will be an error condition (“6A88’: 
reference data not found). 


2) Digital signature verification — The key 
reference and the algorithm reference will be 
taken from the DST (in current SE) for which 
the usage qualifier byte permits verification 
operation (refer section 9.3). If no such DST 
template exists or the algorithm reference is 
absent/not supported/zero, it will be an error 
condition (‘6A88’: reference data not found). 
If the key reference obtained from this DST is 
non-zero, then it shall match with the chain-id 
of the certified public key. If this non-zero key 
reference does not match the chain-id of the 
certified key, it is an error condition. If the key 
reference is not defined or if key reference is 0, 
the chain matching is ignored and the certified 
public key is used, provided its usage permits 
signature verification. If no valid certified key 
is present, it will be an error (‘6A88’: reference 
data not found). 

When the value of algorithm reference is ‘05’(as 
defined in Table 11), the INTERNAL and EXTERNAL 
AUTHENTICATE commands will fail and only 


MUTUAL AUTHENTICATE command shall be 
allowed to proceed to establish session key along with 
the authentication as described in 11.2. Also in this 
case, the key usage for private key must permit both 
data decipher and key decipher operations while the 
key usage for certified public key must permit both data 
encipher and key encipher operations. An error “6985” 
(“Conditions of use not satisfied") will occur if these 
key usage conditions are not satisfied. 


The remaining specifications will remain same as given 
in part 1 of this standard. 


12.4 MSE SET for Key Derivation 


MSE SET can be used for key derivation and setting 
of other SE parameters as defined in part 1 of this 
standard. MSE SET operation can be used to establish 
symmetric session keys using asymmetric session keys 
as described in clause 10.2. Refer IS 14202 (Part 4) for 
INS = ‘22’. 


A MANAGE SECURITY ENVIRONMENT command 
shall be issued for key derivation with parameters as 
described below. 


Pl “ХІ? (for MSE SET) 

P2 CRT tag of the template for which key is 
to be derived. 

Data field 45947 L - Data for deriving 
key(mandatory)} 


When a MSE SET command is issued for key derivation 
(that is, command data contains DO with ‘94’ tag), one 
of the following cases shall occur. 


a) Casel: The CRT indicated by P2 byte contains a 
DO with '84'tag 


The session key shall be derived using symmetric 
key algorithms as described in part 1 of this 
standard. 


b) Case 2: The CRT indicated by P2 byte does not 
contain any DO with ‘84’ tag 


The session key shall be derived using the algorithm as 
described in clause 10.2. The data to derive the key is 
taken from the ‘94’ tag in the command data field. 


In the current SE, a КАТ template is searched in which 
the usage qualifier indicates the key derivation for the 
required operation. The key reference of the private key 
of the ICC is obtained from the ‘84’ tag in this KAT 
template. The key usage of this private key must permit 
key decipher operation. The algorithm reference is 
taken from the ‘80’ tag in this KAT template and shall 
refer to the algorithm (refer Table 7) used for encrypting 
the key material. This algorithm reference must have a 
value ‘02’ or ‘03’ (i.e. it should refer to PKI). 


19 


IS 16695 (Part 2) : 2022 


An error condition (‘6A88’: reference data not found) 
will occur if any one of the conditions below is true. 


1) If no KAT with usage qualifier byte permitting 
the required operation is found. 


2) If the KAT does not contain algorithm or key 
reference (for private key) for key derivation. 


3) If while retrieving private key (as in section 
9.2), the condition “key not found" is 
encountered. 


4) The private key referred to is invalid. 


An error condition (‘6985’: Conditions of use not 
satisfied) will occur if the key usage for the private key 
does not permit key decipher operation. 


The key usage of the derived key shall be restricted only 
for the operations given as an argument to the MSE SET 
command (in P1 byte) provided that the usage qualifier 
in the CRT indicated by P2 byte includes that usage. 
For example, if the session key has been derived for 
confidentiality (that is, P2 = ‘B8’) and the usage qualifier 
byte in CT indicates key is valid for both encipherment 
and decipherment and the P1 parameter in the MSE SET 
command indicates only encipherment then the derived 
key can only be used for encipherment. Similarly, if 
the РІ byte indicates only SECURE MESSAGING 
IN COMMAND and the usage qualifier for the CRT 
indicates SECURE MESSAGING IN COMMAND as 
well as IN RESPONSE then the derived key can only 
be used for SECURE MESSAGING IN COMMAND. 


12.5 PSO Decipher 
Ref: As in ISO/IEC 7816-8 for INS = ‘2A’. 


This operation deciphers the data transmitted in 
the command data field and returns the plain text as 
response. The DECIPHER operation is issued as a PSO 
command with parameters as in 13. 


Table 13 Decipher Command Parameters 
( Clause 12.5 ) 


P1 “80” (plain value) 
P2 “86° (padding indicator byte followed Бу 
cryptogram) 
Data Field Data to be deciphered 


The algorithm reference (‘80° tag) for performing 
decryption will be taken from CT template (in 
current SE) for which the usage qualifier byte permits 
decryption. If no such CT template is present or the 
algorithm reference is absent, then the default algorithm 
reference with value 0 is used. An algorithm reference 
with value ‘00’ ог “017 refers to symmetric key 
decryption and shall proceed according to part 1 of this 
standard. If the algorithm reference has a value ‘02’ or 


IS 16695 (Part 2) : 2022 


‘03’ (that is, it refers to asymmetric key cryptography), 
a private key shall be used for decryption and shall be 
obtained as described below. 


For asymmetric key algorithms, the key reference 
for the private key (‘84’ tag) is obtained from the CT 
template (in current SE) for which the usage qualifier 
byte permits decryption operation. This key shall be 
valid for decryption and shall be obtained as described 
in 9.2. 


An error (‘6A88’: reference data not found) will occur 
if any one of the following conditions is satisfied. 


a) No CT template is present in current SE for 
which the usage qualifier byte permits decryption 
operation 


b) The key reference for private key 1s either absent 
or 0. 


c) While retrieving the private key (according to 
section 9.2), the condition “key not defined" 
occurs. 


d) The referred private key is invalid. 


e) The algorithm referred to by the algorithm 
reference is not supported. 


For asymmetric-key decryption, the encrypted data 
is first decrypted (using RSAES-OAEP-DECRYPT 
ог RSAES-PKCSI-vl_5-DECRYPT) and then the 
padding bytes are removed (using EME-OAEP or 
ЕМЕ-РКСӨ61-у1 5 decoding respectively) according 
to the algorithm used as defined in Table 7. 


The other specifications of the command remain similar 
to part 1 of this standard. 


12.6 PSO Encipher 
This operation enciphers the data transmitted in the 
command data field and returns the cipher text as 
response. The ENCIPHER operation is issued as a 
PSO command with parameters as in Table 14. Refer 
IS 14202 (Part 8) for INS = ‘2A’. 

Table 14 Encipher Command Parameters 


( Clause 12.6 ) 


РІ “86° (padding indicator byte followed by 
cryptogram) 

P2 “80” (plain value) 

Data Field Data to be enciphered 


The algorithm reference (80° tag) for performing 
encryption. will be taken from CT template (in 
current SE) for which the usage qualifier byte permits 
encryption. If no such CT template is present or the 
algorithm reference is absent, then the default algorithm 
reference with value 0 is used. An algorithm reference 
with value “007 or “017 refers to symmetric key 


20 


encryption and shall proceedas given in part 1 of this 
standard. If the algorithm reference has a value “02” or 
“03” (that is, it refers to asymmetric key cryptography), 
the certified public key shall be used for encryption and 
shall be obtained as described below. 


For asymmetric key algorithms, the key reference (*83° 
tag) shall refer to the key reference ofthe CCA (chain-id 
of the certified public key) and is obtained from the CT 
template (in current SE) for which the usage qualifier 
byte permits encryption operation. If this key reference 
is non-zero, then it must match with the chain-id of the 
certified public key. If no CT template is present or the 
key reference is not defined or if key reference is 0, the 
chain matching is ignored and the certified public key 
is used provided that its usage permits the data encipher 
operation. This public key will be obtained as described 
in 9.3. 


An error (‘6A88’: reference data not found) will occur 
if any one of the following conditions is satisfied. 


a) The key reference for public key is non-zero and 
does not match the chain-id of the certified public 
key. 

b) No valid certified public key exists. 


c) While retrieving the public key (according to 
section 9.3), the condition “key not defined" 
occurs. 


d) The algorithm referred to by the algorithm 
reference is not supported. 


For asymmetric-key encryption, the data is first encoded 
(using EME-OAEP or EME-PKCS1-v1_5 encoding) 
and then encrypted (using RSAES-OAEP-ENCRYPT 
ог RSAES-PKCS1-vl_5-ENCRYPT respectively) 
according to the algorithm used as defined in Table 7. 


The other specifications of the command remain similar 
to the specifications given in Part 1 of this standard. 


12.7 PSO Compute Digital Signature 


A Digital Signature is computed by performing a PSO 
command with the parameters as defined in Table 15. 
The algorithm shall take the hash of the message as 
input and compute the digital signature on it. Refer IS 
14202 (Part 8) for INS = ‘2A’. 


The algorithm reference (80° tag) shall be taken from 
the DST template of the current SE for which the usage 
qualifier byte permits signature computation. The 
algorithm reference shall refer to a signature algorithm 
as specified inTable. If no such DST is present or the 
algorithm reference is absent or 0, the default algorithm 
reference 0 shall be used. The data on which digital 
signature is to be computed is first encoded according 
to the message encoding scheme corresponding to the 
referred algorithm. 


Table 15 Parameters for Compute Digital 
Signature 


( Clause 12.7 ) 


РІ “Е” (specifies that the value to be returned is а 
digital signature) 
P2 “9А” (specifies that the data field is the data to be 


signed or integrated in the signature process) 


Data field If P2— '9A', hash ofthe message on which signature 


is to be computed 


Computation of digital signature is performed using a 
private key. The key reference (*84 tag) for this private 
key is taken from the DST template of the current 
SE (refer section 9.2) and this key must be valid for 
computation of signature. If no such DST is present in 
the current SE or the key reference is absent or 0, it will 
be an error. 


If the command is successfully executed, the value 
returned by the ICC shall be the digital signature. The 
command shall fail and an error (‘6A88’: reference 
data not found) shall be returned when any one of the 
following conditions are true: 


a) No DST exists in the current SE with its usage 
qualifier byte permitting signature computation; 


b) The key reference in the DST is absent or 0; 


c) While obtaining the private key as described in 
9.2, the condition “Кеу not defined" occurs (that 
is, the key is not found); 


d) The private key referred to is invalid; and 
e) The indicated algorithm is not supported. 


12.8 PSO Verify Certificate 


The VERIFY CERTIFICATE command requires a 
certificate to be passed as a DO in the command data. 
This certificate should be an X.509 version 3 certificate. 
An X.509 certificate consists of three parts: certificate 
information, a signature algorithm identifier and a 
digital signature on the certificate information. The 
length of the certificate should not exceed 800 bytes. 
The certificate shall be encoded as per ASN.1 syntax 
for X.509 certificates as specified in 13.1.7. Refer IS 
14202 (Part 8) for INS = ‘2A’. 


Certificate verification is carried out by doing a PSO 
command with parameters as specified in Table 16. 


Table 16 Parameters for Verify Certificate 
Command 


( Clause 12.8) 


РІ “00: 
P2 ‘BE’ 
Data Field BER encoded certificate 


The reference of the public key (that is, chain-id) to be 
used in the verification process shall be taken from the 
DST template in the current SE. The public key to be 


IS 16695 (Part 2) : 2022 


used for verification must be valid for verify certificate 
operation and is obtained as described in section 9.3. 
If no DST template is present or the key reference is 
absent or 0, an error (“6А88°: reference data not found) 
shall occur. 


The algorithm to be applied for signature verification is 
obtained from the certificate information. 


After successful certificate verification, following 
information is retrieved from the certificate and stored 
by the ICC. 


a) Subject Public Key Info — Public Key of the 
entity to which the certificate was issued is taken 
from subject public key provided algorithm for 
the public key is supported by the OS. This key is 
stored as certified public key with a key reference 
which is same as the key reference (chain-id) of 
the CA's key used for verification and should be 
referred to in the subsequent commands with this 
reference. 


b) Key Usage Extension — This filed if present 
specifies the operations for which the extracted 
public key can be used. This field is optional in the 
certificate and if not present, the corresponding 
public key can be used for all operations. The 
possible operations are the following. 


1) Digital Signature — The subject public key can 
be used to verify the digital signatures (other 
than the signatures on certificates and CRLs). 


2) Non Repudiation — The subject public key 
can be used to verify the digital signatures for 
the purpose of non-repudiation (other than the 
signatures on certificates and CRLs). 


3) Key Encipherment — The subject public key 
can be used to encipher the keys for transport 
purposes. 


4) Data Encipherment — The subject public key 
can be used to encipher data. 


5) Key Agreement — The subject public key can 
be used for key agreement. 


6) Key CertSign — The subject public key can 
be used to verify the signatures on the X509 
certificates. 


7) cRL Sign — The subject public key can be used 
to verify signatures on certificate revocation 
lists. This usage of the public key is not 
envisaged in this standard. 


8) Encipher Only — When present along with 
key agreement, the public key can be used 
for enciphering data while performing key 
agreement. The usage is not defined in this 
standard when this is set without key agreement 
usage. 


c) Algorithm — Тһе algorithm field is extracted 
from the subject public key info field and is used 


IS 16695 (Part 2) : 2022 


to identify the cryptographic algorithm which 
supports the certified public key. The algorithm 
must be supported by the OS, that is, RSA 
algorithm. 

Subject — This standard supports role based 
access control using data object ‘7F4C’ in the 
AT template for the access control SE. In this 
mechanism, access conditions may be defined so 
that certain operations can only be carried out by 
entities that have well defined role. The subject 
field defines the owner of the public key and 18 
used to permit role-based operations as per the 
access control mechanisms. The guidelines for 
using the role based access control are given in 
Annex C. 


This information is invalidated if some other application 
is selected or another verify certificate operation is 
executed. 


d 


М7 


12.8.1 The response data field is empty and the status 
bytes indicate whether the certificate was successfully 
verified or not. The certificate verification shall fail and 
an error (‘6A88’: reference data not found) shall be 
returned when any of the following conditions are true: 


а) Ifthere is no CRT with DST in the current SE. 


b) The key reference is not specified in the DST 
template of the current SE or the key reference 18 
0. 


c) While obtaining the public key as described in 
section 9.3, the condition “key not defined” occurs 
(that is, the key is not found). 


d) The key reference does not match with the 
chain-id of any CCA. 


е) The indicated algorithm 15 not supported. 


12.9 Generate Asymmetric Key Pair 


The generate asymmetric key pair command is used 
to generate asymmetric key pair, store the private key 
securely and create a certification request which 1s 
returned as a response of the command. 


The data field of the command shall contain an AT 
template (tag ‘A4’). Within the AT template there will 
be an instance of DO with tag ‘7F4C’. The DO ‘7F4C’ 
will have Name of the subject, in X.500 format, as its 
value. The Name encoded in BER format shall be used 
in creation of the certification request. Refer IS 14202 
(Part 8) for INS = “46? 


The certification request is returned as per ASN.1 
syntax in BER encoding as specified in 13.1.8. The 
parameters to this command are shown in Table 17, and 
details are given in Annex D. 


22 


Table 17 Parameters for Generate Asymmetric Key 
Pair Command 


( Clause 12.9) 


РІ *82' 
P2 Key reference (should be non-zero) 
Data Field AT template (tag ‘A4’) containing a DO 


“7ЕАС” having as value the subject 


name (Name encoded in BER format as 
defined in RFC5280). 


The CIO corresponding to key reference provided in P2 
must exist in the EF.PrKD for the DF.CIA of currently 
selected application. The cryptographic algorithm for 
the use of generated asymmetric key pair shall be taken 
from the CIO corresponding to private key choice 
(refer ISO/IEC 7816-15 : 2004 Section 8.4). 


The creation of certification request requires digital 
signature using the generated private key. The signature 
algorithm for this purpose shall be automatically chosen 
based on the cryptographic algorithm taken from the 
CIO as mentioned above. 


Usually this algorithm will be the best one corresponding 
to cryptographic algorithm taken from the CIO as above 
and as available in the operating system. 


The creation of certification request also requires Name 
of the subject as specified in section 13.1.6. This Name 
as an octet string is encoded as a value of DO with 
‘7F4C’ tag and embedded in Authentication template 
(‘A4’) and is provided as data field to the command. 


The private key corresponding to the generated key 
pair is stored in key store referred to by EF.PrKD in 
a format as specified in Table 3. This shall be possible 
only under the following cases: 


a) The key does not exist in the key store. In such a 
case the security status must permit write into the 
key store. 

b) The key exist in the key store, whether valid or 
invalid. In such a case the security status must 
permit update of the key store. 

When multiple keys are stored in the key store, inclusion 
of generated private key shall not alter/modify any 
other key, status, metadata or value. 


An error (‘6A88’: Reference Data not found) shall be 
returned in one or more of the following conditions: 


1) If valid current application is not present; 
2) If DF.CIA is not present; 
3) If EF.PrKD is not present; 


4) If the CIO corresponding to the key reference 
(P2) is not present in the EF.PrKD; 


5) Ifthe path of the key store is not present in the 
CIO; and 


6) The key store is not present. 


An error (‘6A84’: Not enough memory space in file) 
shall be sent if there is not enough space in the key 
store. 


An error (569857: Conditions of use not satisfied) shall 
be in one or more of the following conditions: 


(1) The command data is inconsistent; 
(ii) The key store is not internal file; 


(11) If the key is not present corresponding to 
the key reference and the key store does 
not permit write operation; and 


13.1.1 Path Data Type 


IS 16695 (Part 2) : 2022 


(iv) If the key (valid or invalid) is present for 
the corresponding key reference and the 
key store does not permit update operation. 


Further errors may also be returned wherever 
applicable. If the command is successful then the 
response data field shall return certification request data 
object containing public key and other data elements as 
per section 13.1.8. 


13 ASN.1 MODULE 


13.1 Common Data Types 


This clause specifies the ASN.1 syntax of some 
common data types that shall be used for defining the 
data types in subsequent sections. 


Path ::- SEQUENCE ( -- Definition derived from ISO/IEC 7816-15 
efidOrPath OCTET STRING 
j 
13.1.2 Object Value Data Type 
ObjectValue(Type) ::- CHOICE(-- Definition derived from ISO/IEC 7816-15 
indirect Path, --The syntax of object is 
--determined by the context 
direct [0] Type 
3 
13.1.3 RSA Public Key Data Type (reference: RFC 3447) 
RSAPublicKey ::= SEQUENCE { 
modulus INTEGER, -- n 
publicExponent INTEGER -- e 
Н 
13.1.4 RSA Private Key Data Type (reference: КЕС 3447) 
RSAPrivateKey ::- SEQUENCE ( 
version Version, 
modulus INTEGER, -- n 
publicExponent INTEGER, -- e 
privateExponent INTEGER, -- d 
primel INTEGER, -- p 
prime2 INTEGER, -- q 
ехропепі1 INTEGER, -- d mod (p-1) 
exponent2 INTEGER, -- d mod (q-1) 
coefficient INTEGER, - (inverse of q) mod p 
otherPrimeInfos OtherPrimeInfos OPTIONAL 
) 


23 


IS 16695 (Part 2) : 2022 


Version ::- INTEGER ( two-prime(0), multi(1) ) 

(CONSTRAINED BY 

{-- version must be multi if otherPrimeInfos present --)) 
OtherPrimeInfos ::= SEQUENCE SIZE(1..MAX) OF OtherPrimeInfo 
OtherPrimeInfo ::= SEQUENCE { 

prime INTEGER, -- r, 

exponent INTEGER, -- d, 

coeficient INTEGER -- t, 

j 


13.1.5 Algorithm Identifier Data Type (reference: RFC 5280) 
AlgorithmIdentifier ::= SEQUENCE { 
algorithm OBJECT IDENTIFER, 
parameters ANY DEFINED BY algorithm OPTIONAL 
} 


13.1.6 Name Data Type (reference: RFC 5280) 
Name ::= CHOICE { RDNSequence } 


RDNSequence ::= SEQUENCE OF RelativeDistinguishedName 
RelativeDistinguishedName ::= SET OF AttributeTypeAndValue 
AttributeTypeAndValue ::= SEQUENCE { 


type AttributeType, 

value AttributeValue } 
AttributeType ::= OBJECT IDENTIFIER 
AttributeValue ::= ANY DEFINED BY AttributeType 


13.1.7 Certificates (reference: RFC 5280) 


The VERIFY CERTIFICATE command requires a certificate to be passed as a DO in the command data. This 
certificate should be a X.509 version 3 certificate. A X.509 certificate consists of three parts: certificate information, 
a signature algorithm identifier and a digital signature on the certificate information. 


An X.509 version 3 certificate shall have the following ASN.1 syntax as derived from RFC 5280. 


Certificate ::= SEQUENCE { 
tbsCertificate TBSCertificate, 
signatureAlgorithm AlgorithmIdentifier, 
signature BIT STRING -- computed on tbsCertificate 
) 
TBSCertificate ::= SEQUENCE { 
version [0] Version DEFAULT v1, 
serialNumber CertificateSerialNumber, 
signature AlgorithmIdentifier, 
issuer Name, 
validity Validity, 
subject Name, 
subjectPublicKeyInfo SubjectPublicKeyInfo, 
issuerUniqueID [1] IMPLICIT UniqueIdentifier OPTIONAL, 


-- If present, version MUST be v2 or v3 
24 


IS 16695 (Part 2) : 2022 


subjectUniqueID [2] IMPLICIT UniqueIdentifier OPTIONAL, 
-- If present, version MUST be v2 or v3 
extensions [3] Extensions OPTIONAL 
) 
Version ::= INTEGER (v1(0), v2(1), v3(2)) 
-- for this document, Version shall always have value 2 i.e. v3. 
CertificateSerialNumber ::- INTEGER 
Validity ::- SEQUENCE ( 
notBefore Time, 
notAfter Time ) 
Time ::- CHOICE ( 
utcTime UTCTime, 


generalTime GeneralizedTime ) 


SubjectPublicKeyInfo ::- SEQUENCE ( 
algorithm AlgorithmIdentifier, 
subjectPublicKey BIT STRING} 
UniqueIndentifier ::= BIT STRING 
Extensions ::= SEQUENCE SIZE (1..MAX) OF Extension 
Extension :: SEQUENCE { 
extnID OBJECT IDENTIFIER, 


critical BOOLEAN DEFAULT FALSE, 
extnValue OCTET STRING } 
The issuer and subject name shall be a maximum of 128 bytes when DER encoded. 


The following AttributeType, ifpresent in the certificate, shall be recognized with the corresponding ASN.1 
type of Attribute Value 


AttributeType AttributeValue 

id-at-name X520name 
OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::- {2 5 4 41} 

id-at-surname X520name 
OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::- (2 5 4 4) 

id-at-givenName X520name 
OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::- (2 5 4 42) 

id-at-initials X520name 
OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::- (25 4 43) 

id-at-generationQualifier X520name 
OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::- (25 4 44) 

id-at-commonName X520CommonName 
OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::- (254 3) 

id-at-localityName X520LocalityName 
OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::- {2 5 4 7} 


25 


IS 16695 (Part 2) : 2022 


id-at-stateOrProvinceName X520StateOrProvinceName 

OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::- (254 8) 
id-at-organizationName X5200rganizationName 

OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::- (25 4 10) 
id-at-organizationalUnitName X5200rganizationUnitName 

OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::- {2 5 4 11) 
id-at-title X520Title 

OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::- (25 4 12) 
-- Above AttributeValue more specifically are PrintableString or UTF8String 
id-at-dnQualifier X520dnQualifier 

OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::= {2 5 4 46} -- PrintableString 
id-at-countryName X520countryName 

OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::- (25 4 6) -- PrintableString 
id-at-serialNumber X520SerialNumber 

OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::- {2 5 4 5} -- PrintableString 
id-at-psuedonym X520Psuedonym 

OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::- (2 5 4 65) -- more specifically 

-- PrintableString or UTF8String 

id-domainComponent DomainComponent 

OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::- (0 9 2342 19200300 100 1 25) -- IA5String 
id-emailAddress EmailAddress 


OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::- (1 2 840 113549 1 9 1) -- IA5String 


The Extensions type is used for specifying additional attributes. In the OS, the key usage attribute shall be used 
if defined in the certificate. The key usage extension will specify the possible usage of the key contained in the 
certificate. If this extension is not specified, the corresponding public key shall be usable for all operations including 
data encipher, key encipher, signature verification and certificate verification operations. The Extension type 
for key usage shall have the following values: 


KeyUsageExtension ::= SEQUENCE{ 
extnID id-ce-keyUsage, 
critical TRUE, 


extnValue KeyUsage } 


id-ce OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::= {2 5 29} 

id-ce-keyUsage OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::= { id-ce 15 } 

KeyUsage ::= BIT STRING { 
digitalSignature (0), 
nonRepudiation (1), 
keyEncipherment (2), 
dataEncipherment (3), 
keyAgreement (4), 
keyCertSign (5), 
cRLSign (6), 
encipherOnly (7), 
decipherOnly (8) ) 


26 


The digital Signature bit is asserted when 
the subject public key is used with a digital signature 
mechanism to support security services other than 
certificate signing (bit 5), or CRL signing (bit 6). The 
non Repudiation bit is asserted when the subject 
public key is used to verify digital signatures used 
to provide a non-repudiation service which protects 
against the signing entity falsely denying some action, 
excluding certificate or CRL signing. 


The key Encipherment bit is asserted when the 
subject public key is used for exchange of encrypted 
key material for key establishment. 


13.1.8 Certification Request (reference: RFC 2986) 


IS 16695 (Part 2) : 2022 


The data Encipherment bit is asserted when the 
subject public key is used for enciphering user data, 
other than cryptographic keys. 


The key CertSign bit is asserted when the subject 
public key 1s used for verifying a signature on public 
key certificates. 


The rest of the bits are ignored by the ICC and are 
included only for compatibility reasons. 


A certification request shall have the following ASN.1 syntax. 


CertificationRequest ::- 


SEQUENCE ( 


certificationRequestInfo CertificationRequestInfo, 


signatureAlgorithm AlgorithmIdentifier {{ SignatureAlgorithms }}, 
-- As defined in RFC 2986 


signature BIT STRING 


CertificationRequestInfo 


-- computed on CertificationRequestInfo 


гіш SEQUENCE { 


version INTEGER ( v1(0) ) (v1,...), 


subject Name, 


-- specifies the Name of entity 


(Refer section 12.9 and 13.1.6) 


subjectPKInfo SubjectPublicKeyInfo(( PKInfoAlgorithms }}, 
-- As defined in RFC 2986 


attributes [0] Attributes( } 


j 


13.2 The CIO Type 
Reference: ISO/IEC 7816-15 


-- empty 


A cryptographic information object of any kind is stored as DER encoded CIO type. A CIO type is parameterized 


with object class attributes and object type attributes. 
CIO (ClassAttributes, 
commonObjectAttributes 


SubClassAttributes, TypeAttributes} ::= 


SEQUENCE { 


CommonObjectAttributes, 


classAttributes ClassAttributes, 
subClassAttributes [0] SubClassAttributes OPTIONAL, 
typeAttributes [1] TypeAttribtues 

} 


CommonObjectAttributes ::= 


SEQUENCE { } == 


Empty sequence. Definition 


-- derived from ISO/IEC 7816-15 


27 


IS 16695 (Part 2) : 2022 


13.3 Keys 


CIOs for all kinds of keys (i.e. private keys, public keys etc.) shall have CommonKeyAttributes type as the 
ClassAttributes parameter for CIO type. 


CommonKeyAttributes ::= SEQUENCE ( -- Derived from ISO/IEC 7816-15 
iD OCTET STRING, -- Max size 256 Bytes 
usage KeyUsageFlags, 
native BOOLEAN DEFAULT TRUE, 
keyReference INTEGER -- value as defined in part 1 of this standard 


-- for P2 byte for various 


-- AUTHENTICATE commands 


) 

KeyUsageFlags ::- BIT STRING ( 
encipher (0), 
decipher (1), 
sign (2), 
signRecover (3), 
keyEncipher (4), 
keyDecipher (5), 
verify (6), 
verifyRecover (7), 
derive (8), 
nonRepudiation (9) 
j 


The iD component shall uniquely identify a key information object except when a private key information object 
and its corresponding public key information object are stored on the same ICC. In that case, the private key 
information object and the public key information object shall have the same i D. 


The usage component shall indicate the possible usage of the keys. In this component, the bits 3, 7 and 9 will 
always be set to 0 as these operations are not required by this standard. 


The native component shall indicate whether the cryptographic algorithms associated with the key are implemented 
in the ICC hardware. 


The keyReference component shall be the key reference as defined in part 1 of this standard.. 


13.3.1 Private Keys 


A Private Key information object will be oftype Private Key Choice and shall have the ASN.1 syntax as 
described below. Private RSA Key Attributes. Path shall refer to an EF which contains the private 
RSA key. 


PrivateKeyChoice ::- CIO ( -- Derived from ISO/IEC 7816-15 definition 


-- of privateRSAKey 


CommonKeyAttributes, CommonPrivateKeyAttributes, 
PrivateRSAKeyAttributes ) 


CommonPrivateKeyAttributes ::- SEQUENCE { } -- Empty sequence 
-- Derived from ISO/IEC 7816-15 
PrivateRSAKeyAttributes ::- SEQUENCE ( 
value Path, 
modulusLength INTEGER, -- modulus length in bits, e.g. 1024 
) 


28 


IS 16695 (Part 2) : 2022 


A private key can be used for decipher, key decipher and signature computation operations. 
13.3.2 Public Keys 


A Public Key information object will be of type PublicKeyChoice and shall have the ASN.1 syntax as 


described below. PublicRSAKeyAttributes.value shall specify path to an EF which shall contain the 
public RSA key. 


PublicKeyChoice ::- CIO ( -- Derived from ISO/IEC 7816-15 definition 


-- of publicRSAKey 


CommonKeyAttributes, CommonPublicKeyAttributes, 
PublicRSAKeyAttributes ) 


CommonPublicKeyAttributes ::- SEQUENCE ( 
name Name OPTIONAL specifies the Name of entity (refer section 
-- 13.1.6) to whom this public key was issued] 
} 
PublicRSAKeyAttributes ::= SEQUENCE { 
value ObjectValue {RSAPublicKey}, 
modulusLength INTEGER 


-- Modulus length in bits, e.g. 1024 
} 
A public key can be used for encipher, key encipher, signature verification and certificate verification operations. 


13.3.3 Secret Keys 


A Secret Key information object will be of type Secret Key Choice and shall have the ASN.1 syntax as described 
below. 


SecretKeyChoice ::= CIO { -- Definition derived from ISO/IEC 7816-15 


CommonKeyAttributes, CommonSecretKeyAttributes, 
SecretKeyAttributes ) 


CommonSecretKeyAttributes ::= SEQUENCE { } -- Empty Sequence 
-- derived from ISO/IEC 7816-15 
SecretKeyAttributes ::- SEQUENCE ( 
value Path } 


A secret key can be used for encryption, decryption and derive operations. 
13.4 Authentication Objects 


Authentication object directory file shall contain CIOs for passwords only. An authentication object CIO is stored 
as an AuthenticationObjectChoice type with ASN.1 syntax as described below. 


AuthenticationObjectChoice ::- CIO ( -- Definition derived from 


-- ISO/IEC 7816-15 
CommonAuthenticationObjectAttributes, NULL, PasswordAttributes} 


CommonAuthenticationObjectAttributes ::- SEQUENCE ( ) -- Empty sequence 
-- derived from ISO/IEC 7816-15 
PasswordAttributes ::- SEQUENCE ( 
pwdFlags PasswordFlags 
pwdType PasswordType, 


29 


IS 16695 (Part 2) : 2022 


minLength INTEGER (cia-lb-minPasswordLength.. 

cia-ub-minPasswordLength), 
storedLength INTEGER (0..cia-ub-storedPasswordLength), 
pwdReference [0] INTEGER DEFAULT 0, 


-- as defined in part 1 of this standard for P2 byte 
-- for the VERIFY command 
path Path -- This stores the path to EF in 


-- which password resides 


PasswordFlags ::- BIT STRING ( 
case-sensitive (0), 
local (1), 
change-disabled (2), 
unblock-disabled (3), 
initialized (4), 
needs-padding (5), 
unblockingPassword (6), 
soPassword (7), 
disable-allowed (8), 
integrity-protected (9), 
confidentiality-protected (10), 
exchangeRefData (11) 
) 

PasswordType ::- ENUMERATED (bcd, ascii-numeric, utf8, ...} 


PasswordAttribtues.pwdType indicates the type of password which shall be ut£8. 


PasswordAttributes.minLength and PasswordAttributes.storedLength have been included 
only for compatibility with ISO/IEC 7816-15 standard and shall be ignored by the ICC. . 


30 


IS No. 


14202 (Part 4) : 
2014 


14202 (Part 6) : 
2013 


ISO No/Other 
Publication 


ISO/IEC 7816-15: 
2004 


PKCS £1 v2.1 
RFC 5280 


АММЕХА 
( Clause 2) 
LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 


Title 


Identification cards — Integrated 
circuit cards: Part 4 Organization, 
security and commands for 
interchange 


Identification cards — Integrated 
circuit cards: Part 6 Inter-industry 
data elements for interchange 


IS No. 


14202 (Part 8) : 
2013 


16695 (Part 1) : 
2021 


ANNEX B 
( Clause 2) 
LIST OF REFERRED INTERNATIONAL STANDARDS/PUBLICATIONS 


Title 


Identification | cards — 
Integrated circuit cards — 
Part 15: Cryptographic 
Information Application 

RSA Cryptography Standard 
Internet X.509 Public Key 
Infrastructure Certificate and 


Certificate Revocation List 
(CRL) Profile, May 2008. 


31 


ISO No/Other 
Publication 


RFC 3447 


RFC 2986 


IS 16695 (Part 2) : 2022 


Title 


Identification cards — Integrated 
circuit cards: Part 8 Commands 
for security operations 


Smart-card operating system 
template architecture: Part 1 
Basic command sets 


(first revision) 


Title 


PKCS #1: RSA Cryptography 
Specifications, February 
2003 


PKCS #10: Certification 
Request Syntax Specification 
Version 1.7 


IS 16695 (Part 2) : 2022 


ANNEX C 
( Clause 12.8 ) 
ROLE-BASED ACCESS CONTROL 


C-1 CODING OF THE CORRESPONDING 
SECURITY ENVIRONMENT 


The data object ‘7F4C’ is used as Certificate Holder 
Authorization (CHA) template and may be included 
inside the AT template. The data object shall hold the 
role identifier against which the subject name of the 
verified certificate shall be matched for role-based 
access control. The following example indicates the 
definition of an SE with inclusion of CHA in the AT 
template for role-based access condition. 

{80° - L- SEID} - {AF -L- {*95’- 01-80} - {*7F4C’ 
- L- Certificate holder authorization} | 


C-2 CERTIFICATE 
AUTHORIZATION (CHA) 


Certificate holder authorization (CHA) indicates the 
role that an external entity should possess in order 
to satisfy the access condition to perform various 
operations on resources like files, commands, etc. CHA 
shall be represented using the ASN.1 syntax as follows. 


HOLDER 


CHA ::= CHOICE { PDNSequence } 
PDNSequence = SEQUENCE OF 
PartialDistinguishedName 
PartialDistinguishedName = SET OF 


AttributeTypeAndValue 


AttributeTypeAndValue shall be represented as 
given in section 13.1.6. 


C-3 MECHANISMS FOR ROLE-BASED 
ACCESS CONTROL 


The role based access control shall be implemented 
using the roles specified in CHA and the subject name 
of the certified public key. For this purpose the specified 
operation on the resource (file/command/DO etc.) shall 
be permitted only if the role specified through the 
CHA in the corresponding AT template matches with 
the subject name of the certified public key. For such 
a matching to occur, each element of the Partial 
Distinguished Name in the CHA shall match 
with the corresponding element of the Relative 
Distinguished Name in the subject name of the 
certified public key. 


C-4 RULES FOR ROLE-BASED ACCESS 
CONTROL 


C-4.1 Rules for Role-matching 


Rule 1: Every Partial Distinguished 
Name element present inside the CHA as 
identified by Attribute Type, shall be 


32 


present in the set of elements of Relative 
Distinguished Name, with the same value 
ofAttribute Type, inside the subject name 
of the certified public key. Number of elements in 
Relative Distinguished Name may be 
more than the number of elements in Partial 
Distinguished Name. A role specified 
through CHA is said to match with the subject name 
if each Partial Distinguished Name 
element in CHA matches with an element in the set 
of elements in Relative Distinguished 
Name in subject name of the certified public key. 


Rule 2: Ап element of Partial 
Distinguished Name shall be matched based 
on the following rules. 


Rule 2.1: If the length of value in an 
Attribute Type Апа Value ofa 
Partial Distinguished Name is zero, 
then an element must be present with the same 
value of Attribute Type, in the set of 
elements of Relative Distinguished 
Name inside the subject name. 


Rule 2.2: When the length of the value in 
the Attribute Type And Value of 
a Partial Distinguished Name is 
non-zero, then the value field of the DO for 
value in Partial Distinguished 
Name is matched with the corresponding 
value field in Relative Distinguished 
Name as described here. The value 
is a character string (PrintableString, 
or  UTFS8Strng ог  lAS5String) in 
PartialDistinguishedName as defined 
by AttributeType with an exception that 
the last character can be ‘00’. АП non-zero 
characters in the corresponding elements 


of RelativeDistinguishedName 
and PartialDistinguishedName 
must match exactly In case the last 


character in the value field in the element of 
PartialDistinguishedName is ‘00’, 
it will match zero or more characters in the 
value field of the corresponding element of 
RelativeDistinguishedName. 


C-4.2 Rules for Access Control 


When the role is matched successfully, the access to 
the operation shall be permitted based on the DO for 
usage qualifier in AT template of the SE definition and 
the access control specified in the FCP of the file or the 
resource. 


C-5 EXAMPLES OF SPECIFYING ROLES 


Consider a scenario where a particular file or resource 
can only be accessed by users having a specific role. 
The DER-TLV representation of the CHA for the role 


VIFAC' 738” -- 
“307 735” == 
‘31’ ‘OB’ =z 
“30” 709” -- 
‘06’ 703” -- 

‘55’ ‘04’ 706” = 

‘13’ ‘02’ -- 

'49' "AE" ns 

Y31^ 0D == 
`30' ‘OB’ == 
‘06’ 703” -- 

“55” *04' ‘0A’ -- 

713” 704” a 

'49' 49” *54' ‘4B’ -- 

YXST* "0c" x 
“30” ‘OA’ im 
‘06’ 703” me 

“55” ‘04’ ‘0B’ -- 

*13* 703! = 

‘43’ ‘53’ ‘00’ == 

`31” 709” -- 
“30” 707” == 
‘06’ 703” -- 

‘55’ ‘04’ ‘03’ == 

137101 -- 


“00” - 


33 


IS 16695 (Part 2) : 2022 


identifier in the AT template of SE is as follows. This 
CHA represents “апу one" from an organization unit 
with names starting with *CS" (such as CSE, CSA, 
CSIT etc.) of an organization “ПТК” in country “IN” 
can access the resource. 


CHAT 
SEQUENCE 
SET 
SEQUENCE 
OID 
Country OID 
Printable String 
"IN" - Exact 
SET 
SEQUENCE 
OID 
Organization OID 
Printable String 
“ІІТК” - Exact 
SET 
SEQUENCE 
OID 
Organization Unit OID 
Printable String 
Starting with "CS" 
SET 
SEQUENCE 


OID 
Common Name OID 
Printable String 
Any String 


IS 16695 (Part 2) : 2022 


A value of ‘00’ in the CHA above represents zero or 
more characters may be matched. The following subject 
names as example will have access to the resource if 
other conditions, if any, are met. 


country — *IN", organization- *IITK", organization 
unit = “CSE” and common name = “Ankit”. 


country = “IN”, organization= *IITK", organization 


unit = “CSE” and common name = “Alpana”, 
location= “Kanpur”. 
However, the subject name (country= “IN”, 


organization = “ІШ, organization unit = “CSE”) will 
not have access for two reasons — (1) organization 
name is not matching, and (2) subject name does not 
include commonName. 


Observations: 


a) AsperRulel,every Partial Distinguished 
Name element present inside the CHA as 
identified by Attribute Type, is present in 
the set of elements of Relative Distinguished 


34 


Name, with the same value of Attribute 
Type, inside the subject name of the certified 
public key certificate. This is true for the given 
example where country, organization, 
organization Unit and common Name are 
the only elements present in the CHA and they all 
appear in the subject name of the certified public 
key. 

b) As per Rule 2.1, the element for Attribute 
Type common Name is present in the set of 
elements of Relative Distinguished 
Name inside the subject name, even though, 
the length of Attribute Value in the 
Attribute Type And Value of the 
corresponding Partial Distinguished 
Name in CHA is zero. 


As per Rule 2.2, all non-zero characters in 
the corresponding elements of Relative 
Distinguished Name and Partial 


Distinguished Name match exactly. 


IS 16695 (Part 2) : 2022 


ANNEX D 


( Clause 


12.9) 


SAMPLE FOR “СЕМЕКАТЕ ASYMMETRIC KEY PAIR? 


D-1 GENERATE ASYMMETRIC KEY PAIR 


The generate Asymmetric Key Pair command is used 
to generate asymmetric key pair, store the private key 
securely and create a certification request which 18 
returned as a response to the command. 


The data field ofthe command shall contain AT template 
(tag ‘A4’) containing a DO ‘7F4C’ having as value the 
subject name (Name encoded in BER format as defined 
in RFC5280). 


ХА4” ^35' 
VIFAC' ‘32’ 
“30” 30” 
Y31' "0B" 
“30” 709” 
‘06’ 03” 
‘55’ ‘04’ 706” 
v3. *02* 
'49' "AE! 
‘31’ ‘OD’ 
‘30’ ‘OB’ 
‘06’ 703” 
‘55’ ‘04’ ‘06’ 
713” 704” 
“49” 49” “547 ‘4B’ 
Y31* 712” 
“30” 710” 
‘06’ 703” 
‘55’ ‘04’ ‘03’ 
713” 709” 


D-2 SAMPLE COMMAND APDU AND 
RESPONSE DATA FIELD 


The generate asymmetric key pair command APDU 
and response data field samples for key reference “87” 
15 shown below. 


a) Command APDU and Data Field for Generate 
Key Pair 
CLA= ‘00’, INS= ‘46’, РІ- ‘82’, P2= ‘87’, Lc= 
‘37°, LcData = Name of the Subject Le=OxFFFF 


-- AT 

-- CHAT 

-- SEQUENCE 

== ЅЕТ 

-- SEQUENCE 

== OID 

zx Country OID 

== Printable String 
zx "IN" 

== SET 

== SEQUENCE 

ss OID 

=s Organisation OID 
== Printable String 
m “ЕТТЕ” 

== ЅЕТ 

== SEQUENCE 

s= OID 

== Common Name OID 
== Printable String 


573! ‘75! 764” *68" *61' *6E! *73' 7687 775! 


== "sudhanshu" 


b) Response APDU that is Certification Request as per the Section 13.1.8 


730" *82' *01^ 770” 
‘30’ ‘81’ ‘DA’ 
‘02’ ‘01’ 
“00” 
“30” 30” 
‘31’ ‘OB’ 
“30” 709” 
‘06’ 703” 
‘55’ ‘04’ 706” 


35 


-- SEQUENCE 

== SEQUENCE 

== INTEGER 

== (0) version 1 

== SEQUENCE 

== SET 

=< SEQUENCE 

== OID 

zi Country OID 


IS 16695 (Part 2) : 2022 


“3” "02" ss Printable String 
`49' ‘AR’ == "IN" 
“31” “0р” == SET 
“30” ‘0B’ ін SEQUENCE 
‘06’ 703” == OID 
“55” 704” ‘06’ m Organisation OID 
713” 704” == Printable String 
“49” “49” *54' ‘АВ’ i "IITK" 
3317 *12* == SET 
130" 510” == SEQUENCE 
‘06’ 703” == OID 
“55” ‘04’ ‘03’ m Common Name OID 
713” 709” -- Printable String 
“73” “75” *64' ‘68’ ‘61’ ^6E' 7737 7687 ‘75’ 
m "sudhanshu" 
'30' ‘81’ ‘А0’ == SEQUENCE 
“30” “Ор” m SEQUENCE 
‘06’ ‘09’ == OID 
'2A' 786” “48” 786” ‘F7’ ‘OD’ ‘01’ ‘01’ ‘01’ 
== RSA 
“05” 700” -- parameters (NULL) 
‘03’ ‘81’ ‘8E’ == ВІТ STRING 
‘00’ 730” 781” ‘8A’ 702” 781” 781” 700” ‘8D’ ‘06’ ‘FF’ САС?” ^30" ‘04’ 
‘OB’ ‘FEF’ ‘1C’ СЕ1” СЕ9” 728” ‘C4’ 787” С2П” ‘65’ ‘6D’ ^7F' ^3A' ‘6B’ 
“37! 754” 787” ‘DD’ СЕ8” "2C' ^3F' СЗЕ” ‘51’ ‘OA’ ‘C7’ ‘AB’ 7297 784” 
MAC! 7E! СБА! “PD! *AS' 7597 “СВ” “EC? 'P3^ 7907 7427 *15' “TET 569! 
‘3A’ ‘EO’ СЗЕ” 764” ‘35’ СВ5” ‘53’ ^D5' СБ5” 7727 731! 781! ‘FT’ 795” 
‘9B’ 787” 726” 779” ‘FO’ ‘DD’ САЗ?” ‘47’ 65” ^5A' 747” ^E2' "6F' 772” 
‘78’ ‘DD’ ‘1A’ 7117 ‘8B’ "F8' ‘C5’ СЕ6” ‘Al’ 7257 ^B3' ‘OB’ ‘74’ 7197 
‘4B’ ‘FB’ ‘5A’ ‘26’ ‘BO’ ‘OA’ ‘FF’ ‘66’ ‘4C’ ‘F9’ ‘04’ ‘AD’ ‘87’ ‘ED’ 
'F2' ‘55’ 780” 738” ‘35’ 728” ‘86’ 711” 725” ‘87’ ‘1B’ ‘A8’ ‘DB’ ‘CA’ 
‘C9’ 702” 704” 700” 701” 700” 701” 
‘AO’ 700” == Attributes (Empty) 
“30” ‘OD’ -- SEQUENCE 
‘06’ ‘09’ == OID 
‘2A’ 786” ‘48’ ‘86’ ‘F7’ ‘OD’ ‘01’ ‘01’ ‘0B’ 
== sha256RSA 
“05” 700” -- parameters (NULL) 
037-7817 761” -- ВІТ STRING 
‘00’ ‘OA’ ‘AD’ 749” 791” 7С0” СОВ” ‘EO’ ‘51’ 715” СБЕ” СВЕ” "F7' 
‘OA’ ‘9D’ 766” ^57' 789” 767” 707” "8B' 749” 738” 779” СЕП” ‘83’ 
‘3D’ ‘35’ 723” ‘9A’ ‘6A’ ‘DA’ СОВ” ‘25’ ‘7EF’ СБА” 7327 ‘F6’ ‘16’ 
‘86’ СІП” ‘FE’ ‘BC’ ‘3B’ 770” ‘69’ ‘4B’ ‘24’ 720” 756” ‘63’ ‘FE’ 
‘Al’ ‘09’ 716” ‘3B’ 740” 723” ‘4B’ ‘2D’ ‘82’ ‘5C’ ‘4B’ ‘8E’ ‘58’ 
‘23’ ‘E6’ ‘66’ ‘BA’ ‘FB’ 734” 777” 787” 706” 722” 702” ‘EA’ ‘71’ 
‘21’ ‘08’ 710” 735” ‘08’ ^5F' ‘8E’ ‘DE’ ‘D6’ ^E5' 707” ‘8F’ ‘B8’ 
‘1D’ ‘3A’ ‘D3’ ^2F' ^3C' 722” ‘01’ ‘BC’ ‘4F’ ‘14’ ‘OE’ "OC' ‘94’ 
‘2F’ ‘2D’ 787” ‘24’ ХА8” 743” СЕЗ” СЕ7” САС” СЕС” *2C’ "9C' ‘CO’ 
“ЗЕ” 785” ‘ВЕ’ ‘C2’ ‘55’ ^8F' ‘8B’ ‘92’ ‘32’ САС” ‘AF’ "4A' 


36 


“Е5” 
“Сс” 
“74! 
“ТЕ” 
“5” 
“43” 
‘D6’ 
‘AT’ 
“ЕЗ” 


IS 16695 (Part 2) : 2022 


ANNEX E 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Computer Hardware, Peripherals & Identification Cards Sectional Committee, LITD 16 


Organization 


In personal capacity 
All India Radio, New Delhi 


Canon India Private Limited, Gurugram 


Central Institute of Plastics Engineering and 
Technology, Murthal 


Centre for Development of Advanced Computing, 
Noida 


Centre for Railway Information Systems, New Delhi 


Computer Society of India, New Delhi 


Delhi Integrated Multi-Modal Transit System Ltd, 
New Delhi 


Delhi Metro Rail Corporation Limited, Delhi 


Electronics Regional and Test Laboratory (North), 
New Delhi 


e-Smart Systems Limited, New Delhi 


Fime India, Bengaluru 
HP India Sales Private Limited, Bengaluru 


In personal capacity 
Indian Institute of Technology Bhilai, Bhilai 


Infineon Technologies India Private Limited, Noida 


Manufacturers Association for Information 
Technology, New Delhi 


Ministry of Electronics and Information 
Technology-Standardization Testing and Quality 
Certification (STQC), New Delhi 


Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology, 
New Delhi 


Narnix Technolabs Private Limited, New Delhi 
National Informatics Centre, New Delhi 


National Payments Corporation of India, Mumbai 


NXP Semiconductors India Private Limited, 
Bengaluru 


Representative(s) 


DR MAHESH CHANDRA (Chairman) 


MR S. К. SRIVASTAVA 
Ме PRADEEP MEHRA (Alternate) 


MR AsHISH KHAANA 
MR SATOSHI HIRABAYASHI (Alternate) 


DR SMITA MOHANTY 
Dn M. К. Biswar (Alternate) 


Ms SAVITA KASHYAP 
Mn КАЈЕЅН KUSHWAHA (Alternate) 


Mr С. К. MaisHI 
Mn Visay К. DEVNATH (Alternate) 


ProF M. М. Норд 


MR ALOK SETHI 
MR ABHISHEK SRIVASTAVA (Alternate) 


MR V. P. SINGH 
MR M. P. SHARMA 


MR ANURAG ASHOK 


MR HARDIK MIRANI 
MR ANGAJ BHANDARI (Alternate) 


Ms ANUBHUTI 
Ms UPASANA CHOUDHRY (Alternate) 


MR ViNAY BHUSHAN TANEJA 
PROF RAJAT MOONA 


MR MADHUSUDHANAN SAMPATH 
MR Azay HANYALU (Alternate) 


MR GEORGE PAUL 


MR MANISH SELAL 


MR MUKUL KUMAR YADAV 
MR U. K. NANDWANI (Alternate I) 
SHRIMATI ASHA NANGIA (Alternate II) 


MR N. KISHOR NARANG 
MR RAJDEEP CHOUDHURY 


MR NALIN BANSAL 
MR SANJAY CHANDAK (Alternate) 


MR AJESH KAPOOR 
MR ACHIN JAIN (Alternate) 


37 


IS 16695 (Part 2) : 2022 


Organization Representative(s) 
Samsung India Electronics Private Limited, Mr DEEPAK BHARADWAJ 
New Delhi Mn SANJAY KUMAR BANSAL (Alternate) 


ST Microelectronics Private Limited, Greater Noida Mr PRASHANT PANDEY 


Telecommunication Engineering Center, New Delhi Мк К. SAJI KUMAR 
Mr UTTAM CHAND (Alternate) 


The Institution of Electronics and Pror WG CD P. PRABHAKAR 
Telecommunication Engineers, New Delhi Dr JYOTSNA KUMAR MANDAL (Alternate) 
UL India Private Limited, Bengaluru Mr AsHIsH MATHUR 


MR V. MANJUNATH (Alternate) 


BIS Director General Ms REENA GARG, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (ELECTRONICS AND IT) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


SHRI MANIKANDAN K. 
SCIENTIST ‘D’ (ELECTRONICS AND IT), BIS 


Panel involved in the Finalization — LITD 16 : 1 Cards and personal Identification 


Organization Representative(s) 

Indian Institute of Technology Bhilai, Bhilai ProF КАЈАТ Moona (Convener) 
Centre for Development of Advanced Computing, Ms SAVITA KASHYAP 

NOIDA 
Centre for Development of Advanced Computing, MR ADARSH PILLAI 

NOIDA 
Centre for Development of Advanced Computing, MR MANISH KUMAR VERMA 

NOIDA 
e-Smart Systems Limited, New Delhi Mr ANURAG ASHOK 
Infineon Technologies India Private Limited, Noida Mr MADHUSUDHANAN SAMPATH 
Manufacturers Association for Information Mr GEORGE PAUL 

Technology, New Delhi 
NXP Semiconductors India Private Limited, MR AJESH KAPOOR 

Bengaluru 
National Informatics Centre, New Delhi MR RAJDEEP CHOUDHURY 


ST Microelectronics Private Limited, Greater Noida МА DEEPAK AGARWAL 


ST Microelectronics Private Limited, Greater Noida МА PRASHANT PANDEY 


38 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: LITD 16 (12452). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : С.І.Т. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


