Indian Standard

IS : 36th - 1981 (Reaffirmed 2003)

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR ULTRASONIC PULSE ECHO TESTING BY CONTACT AND IMMERSION METHODS f

First Revision )

Second Reprint MARCH 1993

UDC 620.179.16:669:006.76

Copyright 1981 BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR 110002 MARC

NEW DELHI Cr5

August 1981

IS : 3664- 1981

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR ULTRASONIC PULSE ECHO TESTING BY CONTACT AND IMMERSION METHODS

( First Revision )
Non-destructive
Chairman SHRIN. V. PANDIT Members. SHRIE. B. ARDHANARI

Testing Sectional Committee, SMDC 25
Representing M. M. Suri & Associates ( P ) Ltd. Bombay

Walchandnagar Industries Ltd, Walchandnagar, District Pune SHRI D. R. KOLHATKAR ( A/ternatt+) National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi DR V. N. BINDAL DR ASH~KKUMAR ( Alternote ) National Test House, Calcutta SHRI S. C. BHAWAL SHRIA. K. KALRA( Alternate ) SHRIT. K. Bose Min~inr~~urAllied Machinery Corporation Ltd.
SHRZ S. KUMAR ( Al/ernute ) SHIUS. K. BURMAN Indian Oxygen Ltd, Calcutta SHRIS. MALLIK( Alternate ) Indian TubeCo Ltd. Jamshedpur SHRIG. CHATIZRJEE Ministry of Railways CHWHIST & METALLURGIST, RDSO. LUCKNOW DEPUTY DIRECTOR ( NDT ), RDSO, LUCKNOW ( Alternate ) ACC Vickers Babcock Ltd. Durgapur SHRIR. N. DU Central Boilers Board,_,New Delhi Stmr S. C. DEY SteelRyuyer$y of India Ltd. Rourkela Steel Plant. Srim V. EASWAUN

SHRI P. K. MOHAPATRA( Alternote ) Central Mechanical Engineering Research Institute DR S. JANA ( CSIR ). Durgapur SHRI N. Kosm Ministry of Shipping and Transport SHRI M. KUMARWWAMY Hindustan Steel Works Construction Ltd, Calcutta SHIUN. K. M.UUUMDAR ( Alternate ) ( Continued on page 2 ) @I Copyright 1981 BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS This pubiication is protected under the Zndiun Cepvright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shah be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act

1

4

IS:3664-1981 (Contirwed from page
Members SHRI S. K. PANDALA
1)

Representing

Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Tiruchirapalli SHRI U. MOHAN RAO I Alternate I ) SHRI P. V. SASTRY( Ahernate II ) Heavy Engineering Corporation Ltd, Ranchi SHRI R. C. PRASAD SHRI P. K. BANERJEE ( Alternate ) Steel Authority of India Ltd ( R & D Centre for DR G. RAI Iron and Steel ), Ranchi SHRI SU~HAKAR JHA ( Alternate ) Bharat Heavy Plates & Vessels Ltd, VishakhaSHRI D. S. P. RAO patnam Air India, Bombay SHRI P. L. R. RAO SHRI M. N. RAI ( Alternate ) Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) SHRI B. N. RAY SHRI S. R. MAZUMDAR ( Alternate ) Tata Iron and Steel Co Ltc!, Jamshedpur REPRESENTATIVE The K. C. P. Ltd, Tiruvotnur, Madras SHRI K. V. NARASIMHARAO SHRI P. R. ROY SHKI N. L. SAO ( Alternote ) SHRr S. R. SAH~ SHar G. C. PRASAD ( Aletrnate ) DR B. K. SARKAR SHRI C. R. SATYA ( Alternate ) SHRI T. K. SEN SHRI P. D.4s GZPTA ( Alternate ) SHRI R. K. SINHA Cent;~an~~ing Research Station ( CSIR ), Steel Ltd ),

Steel Authority of India Ltd ( Bokaro Bokaro Steel City

Vikram Sarabhai Space Centre, Trivandrum Burn &Co Tata Ltd. Howrah & Locomotive CO Ltd,

SHRI `M. K. BANERJEE ( Alternate ) Mukand Iron & Steel Works Ltd, Bombay SHRI R. K. SRIVASTAVA SHRI S. G. N. SWAMY ( Alternate) Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi SHRI N. M. WALECHA Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay SHRI R. R. WAMORKAR SHRI K. BALARAMAHOORTHY ( Alternate ) Director General, BIS ( Ex-officio Member ) SHRI C. R. RAMA R,zo Director (Strut & Met )

Engineering Jamshedpur

Sefzretary
SHRI B. MUKHERJI Deputy Director ( Metals ), BIS

IS : 3664- 1981

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR ULTRASONIC PULSE ECHO TESTING BY CONTACT AND IMMERSION METHODS (

First Revision )
0. FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 25 May 1981, after the draft finalized by the Non-Destructive Testing Sectional Committee had been approved by the Structural and Metals Division Council. 0.2 This standard was first issued in 1966. This has now been revised in the light of experience gained since its first publication and more details about the equipment, calibration and test procedures have been incorporated in this revision. The scope of the standard has been enlarged to include angle beam contact testing as well as immersion testing. The requirements of IS : 728 l-1974* have been incorporated in this standard, and as such IS : 7281-1974* will be withdrawn with the publication of this standard. 0.3 Industrial application of ultrasonic testing for quality control purpose has now been well recognized, since it offers specific advantages with regard to the test sensitivity, applicability to thicker sections and accuracy in locating flaws. The!iecommendations made in this code are based on the accepted current practices. It is hoped that the use of this standard will ensure a unified practice to achieve the best result in ultrasonic testing. 0.4 This standard should standards : be used in conjunction with the following

i) IS : 2417-1977 Glossary of terms relating to ultrasonic testing ( First revision) ii) IS : 4904-1972 Specification for reference blocks for calibration of ultrasonic flaw detectors (first revision) iii) IS : 93461979 Code of practice for qualification and certification of NDT personnel for ultrasonic examination *Codeof practice for immersedultrasonic testing by the reflection method using pulsed longitudinarwaves. 3

IS : 3664 - 1981
SECTION

1

GENERAL

REQUIREMENTS

1.1 Scope 1.1.1 This standard covers guidelines and methods for ultrasonic testing of metallic materials for discontinuities or inhomogeneities by the pulse echo method using A-scan presentation. Section, 1 deals with the requirements common to the various techniques of pulse echo ultrasonic flaw detection, while Sections 2, 3 and 4 deal with the specific requirements concerning straight beam, angle beam and immersion techniques respectively. 1.1.2 The guidelines specified in this standard do not cover B- and Cscan presentation. They also do not cover ultrasonic methods used for measurement of wall thickness, grain size, attenuation velocity, etc, nor do they cover ultrasonic testing using Lamb waves and surface waves. 1.2 Principlc:6f Test and Applicability 1.2.1 Principle of Test - A series of electrical pulses is applied to a piezoelectric transducer, suitably mounted in a holder, which converts these pulses into mechanical energy (vibrations) in the form of pulsed waves at a nominal frequency. These waves are transmitted into the material through a thin film of a liquid or semi-solid called couplant. The waves travel into the material and get reflected by the backwall ( back surface), corners or any inter-mediate defect. These reflections (echpes) return to the transducer where they are converted from mechanical to electrical energy .and are amplified by a receiver. The amplified echoes are suitably displayed on acathode ray tube (CRT ) screen as a visible trace or could even suitably be recorded. 1.2.1.1 In the A-scan presentation, the horizontal axis of the CRT trace represents the time difference ,between the transmitted and reflected pulses and hence is proportional to the distance travelled by the beam from the search unit to the reflecting point. The vertical axis represents the reflected pulse amplitude. 1.2.2 Applicability - Ultrasonic testing is a versatile testing method applicable to metallic materials and various product forms like castings, forgings, bars, plates, pipes, etc. It has a very high sensitivity for detecting flaws. can penetrate extremely thick sections and can give accurate informaIt needs tion regarding flaw location, depending upon material under test. access to only one surface of the test materials. However, it has limitations in the following cases: a) Unfavourable geometry of the test object ( contour, complex shape, defect orientation with respect to scanning direction, etc ) ; b) Undesirable internal structure of the material (for example large grain size, porosity and inclusions) ; and 4

IS:366491981
c) acoustically anisotropic materials

1.2.2.1 Meaningful ultrasonic testing may not be possible in the case of castings with very large grain size and in the case of austenitic stainless steel welds and castings. 13 Equipment . 1.3.0 The complete ultrasonic equipment consists of the basic. electronic
equipment, auxiliary equipment and the search units. 1.3.1 Basic Electronic Equipment - The basic ultrasonic equipment shall be capable of generating, receiving, amplifying and displaying high frequency electrical pulses at required frequencies and energy levels with a high degree of accuracy, sharpness, resolution and stability so as to perform a meaningful test and to provide a suitable read out. The equipment shall have an attenuator/amplifier control calibrated at least in steps of 2 dB. Since variations in the power supply voltage affect calibration, the equipment shall be electrically stabilised internally or with the help of external apparatus against possible fluctuations in the power supply voltage. When these fluctuations in the power supply voltage are so large that they cannot be taken care of by the stabiliser system, the use of battery operated equipment is recommended. 1.3.2 Auxiliary Equipment - Other accessories like a monitor (giving visible and/or audible alarm when the defect echo amplitude exceeds a threshold), recorder, DGS scales, etc, may be used along wtth the main equipment. 1.3.3 Search Units - The ultrasonic search units shall be capable of reversibly transforming electrical pulses into mechanical vibrations within themselves as well as transmitting and receiving ultrasonic vibrations in the material to be tested at the required frequencies and. energy levels. Double crystal probes containing separate transmitter crystal and receiver crystal. can be utilised to obtain improved near-surface resolution. Search units shall have uniform characteristics for a reasonable length of time to ensure uniformity and reproducibility of test results. The probes They shall not be, exposed to shall be operated at their rated frequencies. hostile environments or to temperatures beyond the range of temperature for which they are designed. 1.4 Calibration of Equipment 1.4.1 Checking the Performance of the Equiipment - Prior to testing of the actual job, the performance characteristics of the ultrasonic equipment and the search units shall be assessed by using the calibration block as per IS : 4904-1972*. *Speeiticationfor referee
revisioil ).

blocks for calibration of ultrasonic flaw detectors (fipsr 5

IS : 3664- 1981
1.42 Reference Standards - Before commencing actual testing, the equipment shall be adjusted and calibrated by using the reference standards required by the applicable specifications.

1.4.2.1 For more quantitative information, reference standard blocks having artificial reflectors or discontinuities may be used for calibration. These artificial reflectors may be in the form of flat bottomed holes, side drilled holes, notches or slots. These artificial reflectors can be made on the production item itself if they do not impair the service of the item or if they can be removed later. 1.4.2.2 When separate block is used as reference standard, the surface finish of the reference standard shall bdsimilar to the surface finish of the production item. The reference standard material and the production material shall be acoustically similar in velocity and in attenuation. It shall have undergone the same heat treatment and fabrication history as the production item. 1.4.2.3 Transfer correction - If the reference block is not made of acoustically similar material, to compensate for any variation, transfer correction shall be applied. Transfer correction shall be made by adding or reducing the difference in dB between the production item and the reference standard, noticed by using a straight beam probe. 1.4.2.4 Where maximum accuracy is desired, the calibration shall be made on a test specimen essentially identical with the material to be tested. This procedure compensates for possible differences in calibration due to surface condition, density and elasticity of material or unusual geometry of the piece tobe tested. The material selected to be used as the reference standard shall be initially checked with a high frequency probe (at high sensitivity level ) to detect defects in the material which may interfere with the artificial reflectors (or discontinuities) which have to be subsequently introduced. The reference standard ( block ) geometry and artificial defects shall be approved by the purchaser. 1.4.2.5 The artificial defects in the reference standard shall be separated from each other and from the ends so as to avoid mutual interferences. When the thickness of reference standard is different from the product thickness, appropriate corrections for attenuation shall be considered for the actual job. 1.5 Essential Test Requirements 1.5.1 Personnel - The personnel who carry out the ultrasonic testing shall have adequate knowledge about the test method and the influence of the test parameters on the test results. They shall be thoroughly familiar 6

IS : 3664- 1981 with the scope and limitations of the method. They should also be able to set up and calibrate equipment and to interpret, evaluate, document and report test results with respect to applicable codes, standards and specifications. 1.5.1.1The personnel shall suitably be qualified as per relevant codes or practices for qualification andcertification of NDT personnel for ultrasonic examination (see IS : 9346-1979* ).

1.5.2 Test Environment - Testing shall be done in an area reasonably free from mechanical vibrations or eletrical disturbances that may interfere with the proper functioning of the equipment. The equipment should not be unduly exposed to hostile environments like hot and dusty atmosphere. 1.5.3 Stage of Examination -Ultrasonic testing shall be carried out after heat treatment (excluding stress relief heat treatment ) but before cutting keyways, drilling holes, making tapers, grooves, etc. However, if the configuration required for the heat treatment prohibits a subsequent complefe examination, testing shall then be permissible prior to heat treatment. In such cases re-examination of the material shall be done as completely as possible after heat-treatment. 1.5.4 Surface Condition - The surface of the test object shall be adequately even and smooth enough for easy probe movement and to permit ultrasonic inspection to achieve the sensitivity specified. Surface shall be uniform, smooth, even and free of loose scale and paint, discontinuities such as pits, weld spatter, dirt, rust or other foreign matter which affect test results. Tightly adhering paint, scale or uniform coatings need not necessarily be removed for testing if they do not interfere with the examination requirement or achieving the test sensitivity. Prepared surface should be as flat as possible. If needed, surfaces may be ground, wire-brushed, sand-blasted or otherwise prepared for testing purposes. Any specified identification marks which may be removed when grinding to achieve proper surface shall be restored after testing. Surface cleaning methods should not be injurious to material. When machined, a surface finish of approximately inch ) is satisfactory. 6.3 pm ( 250 micro-

1.5.5 Surface Curvature- Where the surface is curved and the ctuvature is of a regular nature, as in a round pipe, the part may be tested with a flat crystal provided the curved surface has a minimum radius of 225 mm. If the surface is extremely smooth, standard flat crystals may be used on convex surfaces with a minimum radius of 50 mm; where the surface is concave with a radius of at least 300 mm, flat crystals may normally be used.
examination.

*Code of Pm&e for qualification and certification of NDT personnel for ultrasonic 7

IS:3664-1981 1.5.6 Couplant

1.5.6.1 A couplant, usually a liquid or semi-solid, is required betwe& the face of the search unit and the test surface to perrhit or improve the transmission of ultrasound from the search unit into the material under test. The couplant shall wet both the test surface and search unit. More viscous coupling medium is required for more rough surfaces and higher temperatures of test surfaces. 1.5.6.2 The couplant shall not run 05 too. fast and should not be corrosive or toxic. It should be homogeneous, free from air bubbles and solid particles. The couplant should not be detrimental to the surface finish or to the material itself. Special applications as in nuclear industry may require halogen and sulphur free couplants. In performing the test, the same couplant at a similar temperature should be used for comparing the responses between the calibration or reference standards and the production material. 1.5.6.3 Some of the suitable couplants are oil, water, glycerine, greases, silicones, white lead paste, etc. 1.5.7 Search Unit Frequency 1.5.7.1 A suitable search unit ( size and frequency ) should be selected after consideration of the acoustic characteristics of material to be tested, the geometry of the production item and the minimum size and type of discontinuity to be detected. 1.5.7.2 For normal range of materials ( such as wrought steel products ) a frequency of 2 MHz will suffice; higher frequencies may be chosen if better resolution is needed or very small defects are to detected. However, at higher frequencies absorption and scattering may become prominent. Material with large grain structure ( for example, castings, austenitic welds, etc ) and acoustically anisotropic inaterials give large scattering and may need lower frequencies. The test frequency shall be so chosen as to get a clear and easily interpretable pattern on the CRT or on recorder. Because of variations in the structure of materials, it js generally not possible to select the optimum frequency without experience or trials. To cover the wide range of test situations for which pulsed contact testing is applicable test frequencies range from 0.5 MHz to 15 MHz. 1.6 Test Procedure 1.6.1 Scanning and Coverake
1.6.1.1 Scanning may be either continuous or intermittent depending upon the design, application and requirement of the part being tested. For

8

IS:3664-1981 manual scanning the transducer surface of the piece under test. is held in the hand and moved over the

For continuous scanning the search unit indexing must be adequate to provide 100 percent coverage, at uniform test sensitivity, of the area being tested. Each pass across a surface shall slightly overlap the previous pass so as to ensure complete coverage. A minimum of 15 percent overlap shall be given. For intermittent scanning (manual method ) scanning may be performed either along special paths or areas selected at critical locations. 1.6.1.2 Wherever possible scanning shall be done by sending beam in two perpendicular directions. 1.6.2 Speed of Scanning - Scanning should be done at such a rate that the operator can clearly see and identify the signals. The speed of scanning shall be such as to permit detection of any, rejectable inhomogeneity or discontinuity. The scanning speed shall be selected so as to permit detection of defects in the pertinent reference standard and slow enough to allow any recording or signalling device to function with reproducible test results. Speed at which standardization is carried out must be same as the proposed speed of scanning on the actual job. 1.6.3 Checking of Calibration - Proper functioning of the equipment and accessories shall be checked using the reference standard : ( a ) at the beginning of test ; ( b ) every half an hour during testing ; ( c ) whenever there is any change in the search unit, couplant, instrument setting or scanning speed ; ( d ) after finishing the test ; and (e ) whenever malfunctioning is suspected. If there is any significant variation in the equipment calibration, recalibration shall be carried out and the entire material tested subsequent to the previous satisfactory calibration check, shall be retested. 1.6.4 Post-examination Cleaning - The couplant used, which may be deleterious to the materials tested or may interfere with its subsequent processing, shall be completely removed after the testing is over. Any specified identification mark which might have been removed when grinding to achieve proper surface smoothness, shah be restored after testing. 1.7 Interpretation of RerMs 1.7.1 Prior agreement should be made between the supplier, the testing agency and the purchaser, as applicable, regarding the interpretation of the results of the tests and how they shall be recorded. All discontinuities. havmg signals that exceed the rejection level as defined by the material specification, shall be rejected or reworked as per approved procedure unless it is 9

IS:3664-1981 determined from the machine part drawing that the discontinuities will not remain in the finished part. If any defective area is repaired, that area shall be retested. 1.7.2 Distance amplitude correction curves, DGS scales and transfer correction may be made use of, wherever accurate estimation of defect size is required. 1.73 The following factors should be considered while interpreting the indications: a) Metallurgical and mechanical history of the object under test ( whether it is cast or wrought, coarse or fine grained, austenitic or ferritic, etc) ; b) Size, type and frequency of the search unit ; stage at which test is done ; d) Size, location and distribution of indications ; e) Where loss of back-echo is used as the reject level, it should be ensured that the loss of back-echo is not due to poor coupling or non-parallel surfaces or local attenuation variations ; `and f) During interpretation of test results, spurious indications shall be identified and eliminated. Spurious indications may occur due to poor couplant, improper probe mounting, material structure or geometry, mode conversion, etc. In some cases like austenitic stainless steel, the material itself can give spurious indications. 1.7.4 In case of doubts, cross checking alternative tests may be necessary. 1.8 Test Records 1.8.1 The following data shall be recorded as a minimum for future reference at the time of each test: a) Name of component, drawing or reference number of drawing ; b) Material specification and size ; c) Condition of the material such as cast, forged, rolled, heat treated, etc ; d) Surface condition ; e) Applicable specifications ; f) Date of test ; g) Name of the operator ; h) Instrument description : make, model, serial number, etc ; 10 of ultrasonic indications by
c) Manufacturing

IS:3664-1981 J) Search unit description : type, size, frequency, special shoes, if any along with cable type and length ; k) Description of other accessories like recorder, monitor, etc ; m) Details regarding DGS scales, DAC curves (electronic or otherwise ), if used ;

n) Couplant used

;

P) Reference standards and degree of attenuation correction ;

correction/transfer

s) Information regarding defect indications as required by the applicable specification or results of the test ( number, classification and location of discontinuities ). Defect level in dB shall be so quoted that smaller defect compared to the reference standard has a minus sign. For bond/unbend ( fusi @ack of fusion ) testing, the extent of unbond ( lack of fusion) or bond ( fusion ) should be reported ; r) Pertinent instrument settings necessary to duplicate the test ; and s) Any other relevant data. 1.9 Test Reports 1.9.1 All the essential details of the test data recorded including test results and the test set up required for duplicating the test shall be included in the report. The information to be contained in the report shall be agreed upon by the purchaser, the manufacturer and the testing agency.
SECTION 2 NORMAL BEAM SCANNING

2.1 scope 2.1.1 This section supplements Section 1 regarding general requirements and covers information and requirements which are specific for normal beam contact scanning. In addition to these requirements, all the relevant general requirements shall also apply.
2.2 Principle of Test and Applicability

2.2.1 In the case of normal beam testing longitudinal waves generated by the search unit are introduced into the material under test in such a way that the ultrasonic beam travels into the material in a direction perpendicular to the surface. 11

IS : 3664 - 1981 2.3 Equipment 2.3.1 In the case of contact straight beam scanning protective covers may be used along with search units to avoid wear and tear and search units may be fitted with special curved shoes for scanning on curved surfaces. 2.4 Calibration of Equipment 2.4.1 The production item itself may be adopted back wall echo is used as the reference echo. 2.5 Essential Test Requirements 2.5.1 Where the surface of the test object is curved, and the radius of curvature is small, flat or curved crystals with appropriate shoes, suitable shaped and made of suitable material like perspex, may be used. 2.5.2 If shoe is to be attached to probe during testing, calibration also be done with the shoe attached to the probe. 2.6 Test Procedure 2.6.1 It must be recognised that the geometry of the component under test may prevent examination of 100 percent volume ( shadow zone .effect ). 2.6.2 In case of critical use, when specified, normal beam scanning may be done from both sides of the test piece ( if accessible ) to overcome the dead zone problem. Alteratively, double crystal normal probes may be used to overcome the dead zone problem. 2.6.3 A scanning speed of 150 mm/s is usually adequate unless otherwise specified. 2.7 Interpretation of Results 2.7.1 For further exploration and evaluation it may be necessary to cross check the ultrasonic indications obtained by normal beam scanning by other ultrasonic techniques or by other alternate tests. shall as a standard when the

SECTION 3 ANGLE BEAM CONTACT

SCANNING

3.1 scope 3.1.1 This section supplements Section 1 regarding general requirements and covers information and requirements which are specific for angle beam contact scanning. In addition, to these requirements, all relevant general requirements shall also apply. 12

IS : 3644 - 1981 3.2 Priuciples of Test and Applicability 3.2.1 In the case of angle beam scanning ultrasonic waves are introduced at an angle into the material under test by fixing the transducer on to a wedge of suitable material such as perspex ( Fig. 1 ). Usually this wedge material is different from the material under test and hence the incident longitudinal wave beam gets refracted and mode converted into a longitudinal and a transverse wave beam. To avoid &fusing echoes received due to the two different beams propagating into the material with different angles and with different velocities, the incident angle is so chosen that the longitudinal wave component is totally internally reflected and only transverse wave component exists in the material under test.
NOTE- For some specific applications such as testing of austenilic Stainless steel welds, it' may be advantageous to make use of the refracted longitudinal wa.ves. In stih cases the indications arising due to theunavoidable transverse wave component should be carefully identified and ignored.

$R = REFRACTED SHEAR WAVE L,#= REFRACTED ~AO~TUDINAL

FIG. 1 ANGLE 3.3 Equipment

BEAM

3.3.1 In the case of contact angle beam scanning, search units may be fitted with special curved shoes for scanning on curved surfaces. The point at which the beam leaves the search unit ( beam-index point ) shall be clearly marked on the side of the probe. A linear scale may be provided on the probe housing so that actual- beam index can be determined and noted in case the beam index has changed due to wear and tear. The design of the perspex wedge shall be such that no spurious signals result from the wedge itself. Double crystal search units may be used for improved near surface resolution. .13

IS:3664-

1981
see 1.4.

3.4 Calibration of Equipment -

3.5Essential Test Requirements
3.5.1 Beam Angle - The anticipated location and orientation of defects as well as the geometry of the material under test shall be taken-into consideration while selecting the beam angle. Steeper ( smaller ) angles give better sensitivity. IIigher angles may be used for thinner sections. Confusing echoes due to longitudinal wave component may result in the case of very low angles and surface waves may be generated at higher angles. In the case of circumferential scanning of tubular products, the angle chosen should be less than the limiting angle ( Fig. 2 ) to ensure that the entire volume of material is covered by the ultrasonic beam. Angles between 30" and 80" may be employed, subject to the above considerations. If shoe is to be attached to probe during testing, calibration shall also be done with the shoe attached to the probe.

FIG. 2

THE LIMITINGANGLE Sin a = i

. 0
P
oc

_-"k -!

P = Probe r = Inner radius R = outer radius

3.6 Test Procedure

3.6.1 ,Swivelling movement should be given to the angle beam probe while scanning to avoid possibility of missing defects oriented unfavourably with respect to the scanning direction.
3.6.2 A scanning speed of 150 mm/s is usually adequate unless otherwise specified. 14

IS:3664 SECTION 4.1 scope 4 IMMERSION TESTING

-

1981

4.1.1 This section supplements Section 1, 2 and 3 and covers information and requirements which are specific for immersion testing and liquid column coupling method. In addition to these requirements, all the relevant requirements of Sections 1, 2 and 3 shall also apply.

4.2 Principles of Test and Applicability
4.2.1 In the case of immersion and liquid column coupling method a column of suitable liquid is used as couplant instead of a thin layer of a liquid or semi-solid. In the case of liquid column coupling method ( Fig. 3 ) the column of couplant is retained between the probe and the test object by means of a suitable guide attached to the probe; loss of couplant material due to leakage can be replenished continuously by a feeder system. .In the case of immersion scanning, the part under examination is completely immersed iri the liquid acting as couplant ( Fig. 4 ). Immersion technique is highly amenable for automation or semi-automation. Immersion and liquid column coupling methods can be used for both straight beam and angle beam test methods ( Fig. 3 and 4 ). These techniques are usually restricted to regular shaped products like tubes, bars, plates, etc.

4.2.2 Immersion technique is not recommended for very large components such as heavy plates and rotor forgings, for which liquid column technique is recommended, when service conditions hinder the contact scanning methods. 4.3 Equipment 4.3.1 Auxiliary Equipment - The essential auxiliary equipment for immersion testivg consists of the immersion tank and the search unit manipulator. The mampulator shall provide sufficient distance and angular manipulation of the search unit to obtain optimum response from defects. Tolerance and play in manipulator shall be minimum to ensure uniform sensitivity during inspection. The motion of the search unit and/or material under test can be manual or automated. The tank assembly shall be free from vibrations that will interfere with proper testing. The speed of rotation and translation shall be maintained within f 10 percent of their nominal values. Other auxiliary equipments like monitor, recorder, defect marker, and automatic sorter ( which sorts good and defective pieces on the basis of defect indications obtained ) can be used. 4.3.2 Search Units - The search units used for immersion test shall be watertight. They can be line or point focussed probes, in which case the distance between probe and object shall be so adjusted that the area of interest within the material lies near the focal point or focal line. 15

IS : 3664 - 1981 4.4 Calibration of Equipment - see 1.4. 4.5 Essential Test Requirements 4.5.1 Couplant - Couplant used for immersion or water column methods should be a liquid such as water, oil, glycerine, etc. capable of conducting ultrasonic vibrations from the probe into the material under test. Rust inhiIt may bitors, softeners and wetting agents may be added to the couplant. If needed it may be heated to a convenient working be suitably deaerated. temperature. 4.5.2 Search Unit and Frequency - Search units used in immersion testing shall be sealed water tight, so that water or the liquid couplant does not seep into the housing which will interfere with electrical circuitry. 4.6 Test Procedure 4.6.1 The swivelling motion mentioned in 3.6.1 for contact angle beam scanning will not be possible for immersion angle beam scanning. 4.6.2 In case of hollow components, it is advisable to plug both ends of the component to prevent the presence- of water on the inner wall.

16

IS : 3664- 1981

-COUPLANT LIQUID INLET

JOB UNRER

TEST

3A

Normal

Beam

36 FIG. 3

Angle Beam

LIQUID COLUMN COUPLING METHOD 17

18:3664-1981

--A_--

__-I---

__----

----_-_---_ ~_-__---e--v-

___

NW-

--

---------

_

_-----__

~~-------_ --_-* --c------------_---_----__-

----

--A-

------

-

--_

-we

m-v---

---

4A

Normal

Beam

= --------=-f-i$i
rCRYSTAl
----

-z=
---

-------

-

__w_

-

----

----

--

--

_-_.-_-----

--v

---

-

-

p

--

--

-

--

-

_----

---

c--wm

-L-

--e--w--

,---

-

-

--

-----

---_

---

_I---e-

---

--v

-

--

LJOB

urmR TEST
4B FKS. 4

'
Angle Beam
IMMERSION

TESTING

18

BUREAU
Headquarters

OF :

INDIAN

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan. 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg. NEW DELHI 110002 . Telephones : 331 01 31 Telegrams 331 13 75'
Regional Offices

: Manaksansthe
to all Offices)
Telephone 331 01 31 I 331 13 75

(Common

:

Central
l

: Manak Bhavan. 9. Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg.
NEW DELHI 110002 * l/l4 C.I.T. Scheme VII M. ' V.I.P. Road, Maniktola, CALCUTTA 700054 : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 : Manakalava, E9 MIDC. Marol, Andheri (East), BOMBAY `400093
Offices :

Eastern Northern Southern Western
Branch

37 86 62 21843 41 29 16 6 32 92 95

t

t

`Pushpak', Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, AHMADABAD 380001 Peenya Industrial Area, 1st Stage, Bangalore-Tumkur Road, BANGALORE 560058 Gangotri Complex, 5th Floor, Bhadbhada Road, T.T. Nagar. B HOPAL 462003 Plot No. 82/83, Lewis Road, BHUBANESHWAR 751002 Kalai Kathir Building, 6/48-A Avanasi Road, COIMBATORE 641037 Quality Marking Centre, N.H. IV, N.I.T,, FARIDABAD 121001 Savitri Complex, 116 G. T. Road, GHAZIABAD 201001 53/5 Ward No. 29, R.G. Barua Road. 5th By-lane. GUWAHATI 781003 5-8-56C L. N. Gupta Marg, ( Nampallv Station Road ) HYDERABAD 500001 R14 Yudhister Marg, C Scheme, JAlPUR 302005 ' 117/418 B Sarvodaya Nagar, KANPUR 208005 Kanpur Roao. Plot No. A-9, House No. 561/63. Sindhu Nagar. LUCKNOW 226005 Patlipurra Industrial Estate, PATNA 800013 Distnct lndustnes Centre Complex. SRINAGAR 190011 T. C. No. 14/1421, University THIRUVANANTHAPURAM
/nspection Offices

2 63 48 39 49 55 55 40 21 5 36 27 2 67 05 8-71 19 96 3 31 77 23 10 83 6 34 71 21 68 76 5 55 07 6 23 05 621 04

Bagh-e-Ali

Maidan.

P. 0.. Palayam. 695034

(With

Sale Point)

:
52 51 71 5 24 35

Pushpanjalr. First Floor, 205-A West High Court Road. Shankar Nagar Square, NAGPUR 440blO Institution of Engineers (India) Building, 1332 Shivaji Nagar. PUNE 411005 `Sales Office Calcutta is at 5 Chowringhee P. 0. Princep Street, CALCUTTA t Sales Office isat Novelty Chambers, Building, $ Sales. Office BANGALORE is at Unitv Approach, Grant Road, BOMBAY Square,

27 68 00 89 65 28 22 39 71

Narasimharaja

Reprography

Unit,

BIS, New Diihi, Jndia

