NAT HIAF IS 15912 : 2018 
Indian Standard 


ate tah Haaah Sga — 
Utter агат 


( Teel FRAT ) 


Structural Design Using 
Bamboo — Code of Practice 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 91.080.20 


© BIS 2018 


anda AM эъ 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR Чач, 9 serere TH AMT, +ç Reef — 110002 


Vee МАМАК BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


November 2018 Price Group 11 


Building Construction Practices Sectional Committee, CED 13 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Building Construction Practices Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division 
Council. 


Bamboo is a versatile resource possessing high strength-to-weight ratio and cost ratio and offers considerable ease 
in working with simpler tools. It has a long and well established tradition as a building material. The application 
of bamboo as a constructional material is largely based on established traditions and intuitions of forefathers 
throughout the tropical and sub-tropical regions. 


Resilience coupled with light weight makes bamboo an ideal material for housing in disaster prone/earthquake 
prone areas. It has the capacity to withstand repetitive loadings and absorb more energy and show larger 
deflections before collapse and as such is safer under earth tremors. As the design guidelines were inadequate, 
the application of bamboo as an engineering material was largely based on practical and engineering experience. 
A need was therefore felt to develop a design and construction code for bamboo to cater to a number of social and 
trade advantages, engineering recognition and the improved status of bamboo as an engineering material. Forest 
Research Institute, Dehradun and some other organizations have been engaged in bamboo research in the country 
to establish its silviculture, botanical, entomological and pathological aspects besides creating a utilization base. 


Some of the suitable species grown in India and neighbouring countries are listed in Annex B along with their 
local names and source, for general information. 


The bamboo culm has a tubular structure consisting of nodes and inter-nodes. In the inter-nodes the cells are 
axially oriented while the nodes provide the transverse inter-connections. This disposition of the nodes and the 
wall thickness are significant in imparting mechanical strength to bamboo against bending and crushing. In a 
circular cross-section, bamboo is generally hollow and for structural purposes this form is quite effective and 
advantageous. Each of the species of bamboo has widely different characteristics affecting its usefulness as 
constructional material. The strength of bamboo culms, their straightness, lightness combined with hardness, 
range and size of hollowness make them potentially suitable for a variety of applications both structural and 
non-structural. With good physical and mechanical properties, low shrinkage and good average density, bamboo 
is well suited to replace wood in several applications, especially in slats and panel form. Mass production of 
bamboo components, if required, may be integrated with treatment facilities near to the site of plantation or site of 
construction, for speed and economy in construction. 


This standard was first published in 2012 which was based on the information contained in the SP 7 : 2005 
‘National Building Code of India 2005’, for structural designing with bamboo. This revision of the standard is 
aimed at bringing the provisions at par with the provisions of the SP 7 (Part 6/Sec 3B) : 2016 ‘National Building 
Code of India 2016: Part 6 Structural Design, Section 3B Bamboo’. Also, other necessary changes have been 
incorporated. 


In this revision, the following major changes have been made: 
a) Construction practices using bamboo have been included. 


b) Definitions of some existing terms have been modified as per the prevailing engineering practice and new 
terms relating to bamboo based panel products have been added. 


c) Provisions on bamboo trusses have been further updated. 
d) Some details about bamboo foundations have been included. 
e) Use of bamboo as reinforcement in concrete for appropriate construction has been included. 


f) Provisions for use of bamboo based materials/panel products as walling, flooring roofing, and, in in-fill 
panels for wall and common roof covering/cladding materials, have been included. Some provisions for 
reconstituted wood from destructured bamboo have also been included. 


wa 


g) Provisions related to storage and stacking of bamboo at site have been included. 


h 


— 


References to all the concerned Indian Standards have been updated. 


(Continued on third cover) 


IS 15912 : 2018 


Indian Standard 


SIRUCTURAL DESIGN USING 
BAMBOO — CODE OF PRACTICE 


( First Revision ) 


1SCOPE 


1.1 This standard covers the general principles involved 
in the design of structural bamboo in buildings with 
regard to mechanical resistance and durability of 
structures. Design of both bamboo (round bamboo, split 
bamboo, glued laminated bamboo) and bamboo-based 
panels joined together with adhesives or mechanical 
fasteners are covered in this standard. It also covers 
minimum strength data, dimensional stability, grading 
requirements and traditional bamboo joints for quality 
assurance. Constructional aspects using bamboo, 
such as, work on site, fabrication of components off- 
site and their erection on site are also covered to the 
extent necessary to indicate and ensure the quality of 
material and standard of workmanship to comply with 
the assumptions of the design rules and the limitations. 


1.2 This standard also covers precautions and design 
limitations on bamboo. 


1.3 The following aspects are not covered in this 
standard: 


a) Limit state design and performance of structures; 
and 


b) Scientific designing of bamboo joints and their 
fastenings. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A contain provisions 
which, through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards indicated in Annex A. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 


3.1 Anatomical Purpose Definitions 


3.1.4. Bamboo — Tall perennial grasses found in 
tropical and sub-tropical regions. They belong to the 
family Poaceae and sub-family Bambusoideae. 


3.1.2 Bamboo Culm — A single shoot of bamboo 
usually hollow except at nodes which are often swollen. 


3.1.3 Bamboo Clump — A cluster of bamboo culms 
emanating from two or more rhizomes in the same 
place. 


3.1.4 Cellulose — A carbohydrate, forming the 
fundamental material of all plants and a main source of 
the mechanical properties of biological materials. 


3.1.5 Cell — A fundamental structural unit of plant 
and animal life, consisting of cytoplasm and usually 
enclosing a central nucleus and being surrounded by a 
membrane (animal) or a rigid cell wall (plant). 


3.1.6 Cross Wall — A wall at the node closing the whole 
inside circumference and completely separating the 
hollow cavity below from that above (Syn. Diaphragm, 
that is, horizontal partition in a standing culm) 
(see also 3.2.17 and 3.2.30). 


3.1.7 Moisture Content 


3.1.7.1 Equilibrium moisture content — Moisture 
content at which bamboo is neither gaining moisture 
from, nor loosing moisture to the environment. 


3.1.7.2 Fibre saturation point — Moisture content 
below which only water bound in the cell walls remains, 
that is, condition in which there is no free water in the 
cell cavity. 


3.1.8 Hemi Cellulose — The polysaccharides consisting 
of only 150 to 200 sugar molecules, also much less than 
the 10 000 of cellulose. 


3.1.9 Lignin — A polymer of phenyl propane units, in 
its simple form (C,H.CH,CH,CH,). 


3.1.10 Sliver — Thin strips of bamboo processed from 
bamboo culm. 


3.1.11 Tissue — Group of cells, which in higher plants 
consist of (a) Parenchyma — a soft cell of higher plants 
as found in stem pith or fruit pulp, and (b) Epidermis 
— the outermost layer of cells covering the surface of a 
plant, when there are several layers of tissue. 


3.2 Structural Purpose Definitions 


3.2.1 Bamboo Mat Board — A board made of two or 
more bamboo mats bonded with an adhesive. 


3.2.2 Bamboo Mat Corrugated Sheet — A sheet made 
up of adhesive soaked and coated mats assembled and 


IS 15912 : 2018 


pressed under specified temperature and pressure to 
obtain sinusoidal or other suitable corrugations. 


3.2.3 Bamboo Mat Veneer Composite — Panel 
manufactured with a combination of bamboo mat and 
veneer. Bamboo mat can be either as outer skins or as 
core/cross-bands. However, the composite panel shall 
be balanced construction on either side of central ply. 


3.2.4 Beam — A structural member which supports 
load primarily by its internal resistance to bending. 


3.2.5 Breaking Strength — A term loosely applied to 
a given structural member with respect to the ultimate 
load it can sustain under a given set of conditions. 


3.2.6 Bundle-Column — A column consisting of three 
or more number of culms bound as integrated unit with 
wire or strap type of fastenings. 
NOTE — During bunching of beams/columns, binders (5 mm 
tie bar/wire and 15 mm bamboo dowel pins) may be carefully 


inserted after proper pre-drilling the holes throughout the 
assembly as per the requirements of structural design. 


3.2.7 Centre Internode — A test specimen having its 
centre between two nodes. 


3.2.8 Characteristic Load — The value of load which 
has a 95 percent probability of not exceeding during the 
life of the structure. 


3.2.9 Characteristic Strength — The strength of the 
material below which not more than 5 percent of the 
test results are expected to fall. 


3.2.10 Cleavability — The ease with which bamboo 
can be split along the longitudinal axis. The action of 
splitting is known as cleavage. 


3.2.11 Column — A structural member which supports 
axial load primarily by inducing compressive stress 
along the fibres. 


3.2.12 Common Rafter — A roof member which 
supports roof battens and roof coverings, such as 
boarding and sheeting. 


3.2.13 Curvature — The deviation from the straightness 
of the culm. 


3.2.14 Delamination — Separation of mats through 
failure of glue. 


3.2.15 De-structured Bamboo — Raw material (green 
bamboo) reduced partially to a condition, as far 
as practicable, in which the element fibres remain 
interlocked and in their highly aligned state and which 
with the help of binder can be reconstituted into a 
valuable product of a desirable size. 


3.2.16 End Distance — The distance measured parallel 
to the fibres of the bamboo from the centre of the 
fastener to the closest end of the member. 


3.2.17 Flattened Bamboo — Bamboo consisting of 
culms that have been cut and unfolded till it is flat. The 
culm thus is finally spread open, the diaphragms (cross 
walls) at nodes removed and pressed flat. 


3.2.18 Full Culm — The naturally available circular 
section/shape. 


3.2.19 Fundamental or Ultimate Stress — The 
stress which is determined on a specified type/size 
of culms of bamboo, in accordance with standard 
practice and does not take into account the effects 
of naturally occurring characteristics and other 
factors. 


3.2.20 Inner Diameter — Diameter of internal cavity of 
a hollow piece of bamboo. 


3.2.21 Inside Location — Position in buildings in 
which bamboo remains continuously dry or protected 
from weather. 


3.2.22 Joint — A connection between two or more 
bamboo structural elements. 


3.2.23 Joist — A small beam directly supporting floor, 
ceiling or roof of a structure. 


3.2.24 Length of Internode — Distance between 
adjacent nodes. 


3.2.25 Loaded End or Compression End Distance — 
The distance measured from the centre of the fastener 
to the end towards which the load induced by the 
fastener acts. 


3.2.26 Machete — A light cutting and slashing tool in 
the form of a large knife. 


3.2.27 Mat — A woven sheet made using thin slivers. 


3.2.28 Mortise and Tenon — A joint in which the 
reduced end (tenon) of one member fits into the 
corresponding slot (mortise) of the other. 


3.2.29 Net Section — Section obtained by deducting 
from the gross cross-section (A), the projected areas 
of all materials removed by boring, grooving or other 
means. 


3.2.30 Node — The place in a bamboo culm where 
branches sprout and a diaphragm is inside the culm and 
the walls on both sides of node are thicker. 


3.2.31 Outer Diameter — Diameter of a cross-section 
of a piece of bamboo measured from two opposite 
points on the outer surface. 


3.2.31.1 Mean outer diameter — The diameter taken 
twice on the outer surface, in direction perpendicular 
to each other at each cross-section on both the ends. 
Thus resulting in mean of four readings for the middle 
of culm. 


3.2.32 Outside Location — Position in building in 
which bamboos are occasionally subjected to wetting 
and drying as in case of open sheds; and outdoor 
exposed structures. 


3.2.33 Permissible Stress — Stress obtained after 
applying factor of safety to the ultimate stress. This is 
also the working stress unless adjusted to the particular 
structural form in design. 


3.2.34 Principal Rafter — A roof member which 
supports purlins. 


3.2.35 Purlins — A roof member directly supporting 
roof covering or common rafter and roof battens. 


3.2.36 Roof Battens — A roof member directly 
supporting tiles, corrugated sheets, slates or other 
roofing materials. 


3.2.37 Roof Skeleton — The skeleton consisting of 
bamboo truss or rafter over which solid bamboo purlins 
are laid and lashed to the rafter or top chord of a truss 
by means of galvanized iron wire, cane, or steel straps 
with nut bolts and covering may be in the form of grass, 
bamboo leaves, or galvanized iron sheets, etc. 


3.2.38 Slenderness Ratio — The ratio of the length 
of member to the least radius of gyration is known as 
slenderness ratio of member (the length of the member 
is the equivalent length due to end conditions). 


3.2.39 Splints (Splits) — The pieces made from 
quarters by dividing the quarters radially and cutting 
longitudinally. 


3.2.40 Taper — The ratio of difference between 
minimum and maximum mean outer diameter to length. 


3.2.41 Unloaded End Distance — The end distance 
opposite to the loaded end. 


3.2.42 Bamboo Wall Thickness — Half the difference 
between outer diameter and inner diameter of the piece 
at any cross-section. 


3.2.42.1 Bamboo Mean wall thickness — The wall 
thickness taken four times in the same points as the 
outer diameter has been measured (on both the ends). 
Thus resulting in mean of eight values for the middle 
of culm. 


3.2.43 Wet Location — Position in buildings in which 
the bamboos are almost continuously damp, wet or in 
contact with earth or water, such as piles. 


3.3 Definitions Relating to Defects 


3.3.1 Bamboo Bore/Ghoon Hole — The defect caused 
by bamboo ghoon beetle (Dinoderus spp. Bostrichidae), 
which attacks felled culms. 


IS 15912 : 2018 


3.3.2 Crookedness — A localized deviation from the 
straightness in a piece of bamboo. 


3.3.3 Discolouration — A change from the normal 
colour of the bamboo which does not impair the 
strength of bamboo or bamboo composite products. 


3.4 Definitions Relating to Drying Degrades 


3.4.1 Collapse — The defect occurring on account 
of excessive shrinkage, particularly in thick walled 
immature bamboo. When the bamboo wall shrinks, the 
outer layers containing a larger concentration of strong 
fibro-vascular bundles set the weaker interior portion 
embedded in parenchyma in tension, causing the latter 
to develop cracks. The interior crack develops into a 
wide split resulting in a depression on the outer surface. 
This defect also reduces the structural strength of round 
bamboo. 


3.4.2 End Splitting — A split at the end of a bamboo. 
This is not so common a defect as drying occurs both 
from outer and interior wall surfaces of bamboo as well 
as the end at the open ends. 


3.4.3 Surface Cracking — Fine surface cracks not 
detrimental to strength. However, the cracking which 
occurs at the nodes reduces the structural strength. 


3.4.4 Wrinkled and Deformed Surface — Deformation 
in cross-section, during drying, which occurs in 
immature round bamboos of most species; in thick 
walled pieces, besides this deformation the outer 
surface becomes uneven and wrinkled. Very often the 
interior wall develops a crack below these wrinkles, 
running parallel to the axis. 


4 SYMBOLS 


For the purpose of this standard, the following letter 
symbols shall have the meaning indicated against each, 
unless otherwise stated: 


A = cross-sectional area of bamboo 
(perpendicular to the direction of the 
principal fibres and vessels), mm? 
= py -(p-2wy 
4 
A, = areaofreinforcement in bamboo reinforced 
cement concrete, mm?; 
D = mean outer diameter of bamboo culm, mm; 
d = inner diameter, mm 
= (D-2w); 
E = modulus of elasticity (MOE) in bending, 
N/mm’; 
f, = permissible bending stress on the extreme 


fibre, N/mm’; 


IS 15912 : 2018 


J, = Safe practical estimate of tensile strength 
in bending tension in the extreme fibre, 
N/mm’; 
J = calculated stress in axial compression, 
N/mm’; 
/, p = permissible stress in compression along 
the fibres, N/mm’; 
A = permissible stress in tension parallel to the 
fibres, N/mm?; 
I = moment of inertia (the second moment of 
area) of culm section, mm 
= Z| (n. 4]. 
LD (D-2w |; 
£ = unsupported length of column, mm; 
m = moisture content, percent; 
r = radius of gyration, mm 
I, 
= A 5 
R = modulus of rupture (MOR), N/mm?; 
w = mean of wall thickness of bamboo culm, 
mm; 
Z = section modulus, mm? 
4 ú 4 
_ z|D'-(D-2w) ond 
32 D 
Ó = deflection or deformation, mm. 
5 MATERIALS 


The requirements shall be met by the choice of suitable 
materials, by appropriate design and detailing and 
by specifying control procedures for production, 
construction and use. 


5.1 Species of Bamboo 


More than 100 species of bamboo are native to 
India and a few of them are solid but most of them 
are hollow in structure. In all 20 species have been 
systematically tested so far. Sixteen species of bamboo 
are recommended for structural usages in round form. 
Some physical and mechanical properties of the same 
are given in Table 1 both for air dry conditions and 
green conditions. 


5.1.1 Matured bamboo of at least 4 years of age shall be 
used. The bamboo shall be used after at least six weeks 
of felling period. 


5.1.2 Bamboo shall be treated in accordance with 
IS 9096. 


5.1.3 Solid bamboos or bamboos whose wall thickness 
is comparatively more and which are generally having 
nodes very closer are often considered good for 
structural purposes. 


5.1.4 Broken, damaged or collapsed bamboo shall be 
rejected. Dead and immature bamboos, bore/ghoon 
holes, decay, collapse, checks more than 3 mm in 
depth, shall be avoided. 


5.2 Grouping 


5.2.1 Sixteen species of bamboo recommended for 
structural applications are classified in three groups 
on the basis of their strength properties, namely, 
modulus of elasticity (£) in bending in green condition 
and modulus of rupture (R) (extreme fibre stress 
in bending). For structural use in piles and mines’ 
components, an additional criterion of compressive 
strength is considered in classification. The limits in 
ultimate strength values of these groups shall be as 
given in Table 2 (these are corresponding to the spread 
of properties in structural timber). 


5.2.2 Bamboo species may be identified using suitable 
methods. 
NOTE — Methods of identification of bamboo through 
anatomical characters have not been perfected so far. 


Identification through morphological characters could be done 
only on full standing culm by experienced sorters. 


5.2.3 Species of bamboo other than those listed in 
the Table 3 may be used, provided their strength 
characteristics are determined and found more than the 
limits specified in Table 2. 


5.3 Moisture Content in Bamboo 


Green bamboo poles should not be used in construction. 
Since green bamboos are subject to shrinkage, joints and 
terminals may loosen after just a few weeks. Green 
bamboo is also more attractive to insects and micro- 
organisms, than dry bamboo. 


With decrease of moisture content, the strength of 
bamboo increases exponentially and bamboo has an 
intersection point (fibre saturation point) at around 
25 percent moisture content depending upon the species. 
A typical moisture strength relationship is given at 
Fig. 1. The moisture content of bamboo shall be 
determined in accordance with method given in 
IS 6874. Matured culms shall be seasoned to about 
20 percent moisture content before use. 


Freshly felled bamboo with shoots and leaves intact, dry 
fairly well in the open sun with lesser surface cracking, 
etc and reduced starch contents. The following factors 
shall be considered when drying bamboo: 


a) Keep the culms away from direct soil contact to 
prevent fungal or insect-attacks and to avoid the 
humidity of the soil affecting the drying process; 


IS 15912 : 2018 


Table 1 Physical and Mechanical Properties of Indian Bamboos 
(in Round Form) 


( Clause 5.1) 


SI Species Properties 
No. ati ia 
In Green Condition In Air Dry Condition 
Pm = — — хе — 
Density Modulus Modulus of Maximum Density Modulus Modulus of Maximum 
kg/m? of Rupture Elasticity x 10° Compressive kg/m’ of Rupture Elasticity x 10° Compressive 
N/mm? N/mm? Strength N/mm? N/mm? Strength 
N/mm? N/mm? 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) 
1) Bambusa auriculata 594 65.1 15.01 36.7 670 89.1 21.41 54.3 
ii) B. balcooa 783 65.4 7.31 46.7 _ _ _ 60.6 
iii) B. bambos 559 58.3 5.95 35.3 663 80.1 8.96 53.4 
(Syn. B. arundinacea) 
iv) B. burmanica 570 59.7 11.01 39.9 672 105.0 17.81 65.2 
v) B. glancescens 691 82.8 14.77 53.9 = = = = 
(Syn. B. nana) 

vi) B. nutans 603 52.9 6.62 45.6 673 52.4 10.72 47.9 
vii) B. pallida 731 552 12.90 54.0 = - — _ 
viii) B. tulda 658 51.1 7.98 40.7 722 66.7 10.07 68.0 

ix) B. ventricosa 626 34.1 3.38 36.1 - - — _ 

x) B. vulgaris 626 41.5 2.87 38.6 — — — _ 

xi) Cephalostachyum 601 52.6 11.16 36.7 640 71.3 19.22 49.4 

pergracile 

xi) Dendrocalamus 711 33.1 5.51 42.1 684 47.8 6.06 61.1 

longispathus 
xii) D. strictus 631 73.4 11.98 35.9 728 119.1 15.00 69.1 
xiv) Melocanna baccifera 817 53.2 11.39 53.8 751 57.6 12.93 69.9 
xv) Oxytenanthera 688 83.6 14.96 46.6 _ — — _ 
abyssinicia 
xvi) Thyrsostachys oliveri 733 61.9 9.72 46.9 758 90.0 12.15 58.0 
NOTES 


1 The values of stress, in N/mm? have been obtained by converting the values, in kgf/cm? by dividing the same by 10. 
2 Moisture content in green condition (30 percent to 90 percent). 

3 Moisture content in green condition (7.8 percent to 17.8 percent). 

4 Tests for compressive strength are parallel to the fibre. 


5 For more updates, users may like to check with the Forest Research Institute, Dehradun. 


IS 15912 : 2018 


Table 2 Properties of Structural Bamboo 
( Clause 5.2.1 ) 


SI No. Group Modulus of Rupture (R) Modulus of Elasticity in Maximum Compressive 
N/mm? Bending (E) x 10° Strength ( f. ...) 
N/mm° (See Note) 
N/mm? 

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 

i) A R>70 E>9 MCS > 35 

ii) B 70>К> 50 9>Е>6 35 > MCS > 30 

iii) C 50> R>30 6>E>3 30 > MCS > 25 


NOTE — The values are based on tests conducted along the fibres. 


Table 3 Safe Permissible Stresses of Bamboos for Structural Designing” 


( Clauses 5.2.3, 6.2 and 6.3 ) 


SI Species Extreme Fibre Stress in Modulus of Allowable Compressive 
No. Bending Tension Elasticity x 10° Stress 
N/mm? N/mm? (See Note 2) 
N/mm? 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) Group A: 
a) Bambusa glancescens 20.7 3.28 15.4 
(Syn. B. nana) 
b) Dendrocalamus strictus 18.4 2.66 10.3 
c) Oxytenanthera abyssinicia 20.9 3.31 13.3 
ii) Group B: 
a) Bambusa balcooa 16.4 1.62 13.3 
b) B. pallida 13.8 2.87 15.4 
c) B. nutans 13.2 1.47 13.0 
d) B. tulda 12.8 1.77 11.6 
e) B. auriculata 16.3 3.34 10.5 
f) B. burmanica 14.9 2.45 11.4 
g) Cephalostachyum pergracile 13.2 2.48 10.5 
h) Melocanna baccifera 13.3 2.53 15.4 
(Syn. M. bambusoides) 
j Thyrsotachys oliveri 15.5 2.16 13.4 
iii) Group C: 
a) Bambusa arundinacea 14.6 1.32 10.1 
(Syn. B. bambos) 
b) B. ventricosa 8.5 0:75 10.3 
c) B. vulgaris 10.4 0.64 11.0 
d) Dendrocalamus longispathus 8.3 1.22 12.0 
NOTES 


1 The values of stress, in N/mm? have been obtained by converting the values, in kgf/cm? by dividing the same by 10. 


2 The values are based on tests conducted along the fibres. 


The values given pertain to testing of bamboo in green condition. 


b) Only mature bamboo culms (over 3 years) shall 
be used to avoid collapsing of the bamboo poles, 
due to excessive and non-uniform shrinkage of the 
culm; 


c) Remove infected culms from the storage area; 


d) Avoid rapid changes in moisture content, for 
example by drying round bamboo in direct 
sunlight for a prolonged time. This can cause 
cracks in the bamboo poles. Split bamboos do not 
pose any problems and can be dried in the open 
sun; 


e 


wm 


Provide good ventilation (air circulation); 


f) Vertical stacking gives faster drying and less 
chances of fungal attack. However, a good support 
system should be in place to avoid the poles from 
bending. 


x 10° 
1.54 


1.40 


0.56 


0.42 


MAXIMUM CRUSHING STRESS, kg/cm? 


0.28 


IS 15912 : 2018 


g) Horizontal stacking is generally preferred for 


large stacks. Stacking should be done on raised 
platforms, or placed on a thick plastic sheet to 
avoid soil contact. Use separators between each 
row of bamboo for better air circulation. The 
culms at the bottom ofthe stack may crack or bend 
due to the weight of the stack, therefore do not pile 
them up too high. 


5.4 Grading of Structural Bamboo 


5.4.1 Bamboo shall be graded to ensure that the properties 
of bamboo are satisfactory for use particularly the 
strength and stiffness properties. Grading of bamboo is 
sorting out on the basis of characteristics important for 
structural utilization as under: 


a) Diameter and length of culm; 


b) Taper of culm; 


60 70 80 90 100 110 


MOISTURE CONTENT, % — He 


Fic. | MOISTURE STRENGTH RELATIONSHIP BAMBUSA NUTANS (BAMBOO) 


IS 15912 : 2018 


c) Straightness of culm; 

d) Inter nodal length and distribution of nodes; 
e) Wall thickness; 

f) Density and strength; and 

g) Durability and seasoning. 


One of the above characteristics or sometimes 
combination of two or three characteristics forms 
the basis of grading. The culms shall be segregated 
species-wise. 


5.4.2 Diameter and Length 


5.4.2.1 Gradation according to the mean outer diameter 


For structural Group A and Group B species, culms 
shall be segregated in steps of 10 mm of mean outer 
diameter as follows: 
a) Special grade : Diameter > 70 mm 
b) Grade I 
c) Grade II 
d) Grade III 


For structural Group C species, culms shall be 
segregated in steps of 20 mm of mean outer diameter 
as follows: 
1) GradeI 
2) Grade II 
3) Grade III 


NOTE — For bamboo species of diameter above 100 mm, 
suitable testing may be carried out to ensure their load carrying 
capacity. 


5.4.2.2 The minimum length of culms shall be 
preferably 6 m for facilitating close fittings at joints, 
etc. 


50 mm « Diameter € 70 mm 
30 mm « Diameter < 50 mm 


: Diameter < 30 mm 


Diameter > 80 mm 
60 mm « Diameter « 80 mm 


Diameter « 60 mm 


5.4.3 Taper 


The taper shall not be more than 5.8 mm/m length (or 
0.58 percent) (1 in 170) of bamboo in any grade of 
bamboo. 


5.4.4 Curvature 


The maximum curvature should not be more than 

75 mm in a length of 6 m of any grade of bamboo. 
NOTE — Due to the constraint of preferential selection of 
straighter material out of a lot, more bent material may be 
accommodated to avoid high cost. Following remedial options 
may be helpful: 

a) Adopt component assembly method to take care of 
some degree of curvature (bunching done after holding 
components straight). 

b) Cut longer bamboo components with less curvature 
out of taller bamboo and use cambered ones for shorter 
length components. 


5.4.5 Wall Thickness 


Preferably minimum wall thickness of 8 mm shall be 
used for load bearing members unless calculations and 


the availability dictate otherwise. 
5.5 Durability and Treatability 
5.5.1 Durability 


The natural durability of bamboo is low and varies 
between 12 months and 36 months depending on the 
species and climatic conditions. In tropical countries 
the bio-deterioration is very severe. Bamboos are 
generally destroyed in about one to two years time 
when used in the open and in contact with ground; 
while a service life of two to five years can be expected 
from bamboo when used under cover and out of contact 
with ground. The mechanical strength of bamboo 
deteriorates rapidly with the onset of fungal decay in the 
sclerenchymatous fibres. Split bamboo is more rapidly 
destroyed than round bamboo. For making bamboo 
durable, suitable treatment for preserving bamboo shall 
be given. However, special attention shall be given 
to environmental impact and to the health aspects of 
labour and the users. 


5.5.2 Treatability 


To ensure an adequately durable structure, bamboo 
shall be treated in accordance with IS 9096 and the 
following inter-related factors shall be considered: 


a) Expected service life of the bamboo; 


b) Use of the structure and expected environmental 
conditions; 


c) Required performance criteria; and 
d) Quality of workmanship. 


5.5.3 Fire safety of bamboo structures shall be ensured, 
for which the treatment prescribed in 8.3.4 may be 
followed. 


5.6 Storage and Stacking of Bamboo 
5.6.1 Bamboo 


5.6.1.1 The site shall be properly inspected and termite 
colonies or mounds, if detected, shall be destroyed. 


All refuse and useless cellulosic materials shall be 
removed from the site. The ground may then be 
disinfected by suitable insecticides. The area should 
have good drainage. 


5.6.1.2 Bamboo may preferably be stacked on high 
skids or raised platform at least 300 mm above ground. 
Storage under cover reduces the liability to fungal 
attack. Good ventilation and frequent inspection are 
important. 


5.6.1.3 Bamboo dries by air-seasoning under cover in 
the storage yards from '6 to 12 weeks' time. 


5.6.1.4 Prophylactic treatment of bamboo during 
storage prevents losses due to fungi and insects 
even under open storage. Following chemicals have 


been found suitable at a coverage rate of 24 litre per 
tonne: 


a) Sodium pentachlorophenate : 
b) Boric acid + borax (1:1) 


c) Sodium pentachlorophenate : 
solution + boric acid + 
borax (5:1:1) 


A mixture of these compounds yields the best results. 


1 percent solution 
: 2 percent solution 
2.5 percent 


NOTE — For better protection of structural bamboo (if stored 
outside), repetition of the treatment after four to six months is 
desirable. 


6 PERMISSIBLE STRESSES 


6.1 Ultimate stress values of different species and 
groups of bamboo shall be determined according to 
IS 6874. These values shall then be divided by 
appropriate factors of safety to obtain permissible 
stresses to cover the effects of variability, long term 
loading, grade, location of use and expected dynamic 
loading. 

NOTE — As an information, it may be noted that the method 

of test for split bamboos is covered in IS 8242. 


The strength factors for deriving safe working stresses 
of bamboo shall be as under: 
a) Extreme fibre stress in beams 4 
b) Modulus of elasticity : 4.5 
c) Maximum compressive stress parallel to : 3.5 
grain/fibres 


6.2 The available data for the safe working stresses for 
16 species of bamboos are given in Table 3. 


6.3 For change in duration of load other than continuous 

(long-term), the permissible stresses given in Table 3 shall 

be multiplied by the modification factors given below: 

: 1.0 

b) For imposed or medium term loading : 1.25 
(Permanent 4 Temporary load) 


a) For permanent loads 


с) For short term loading (Permanent + : 1.50 


temporary load 4 Wind load) 


7 DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS 


7.1 Basic Requirements 


A structure shall be designed and constructed by 
personnel having the appropriate skill and experience 
in such a way that, 


a) with acceptable probability, it will remain fit for 
the use for which it is required, having due regard 
to its intended life and costs; 


b) with appropriate degree of reliability, it will 
sustain all forces and effects likely to occur during 
execution and use and have adequate durability in 
relation to maintenance costs; 


IS 15912 : 2018 


c) the structure will be adequately maintained; 


d) the structure will be used in accordance with 
design limit briefs; 


€) all structural members, assemblies or framework 
in a building shall be capable of sustaining, 
without exceeding the limits of relevant stress 
specified, the worst combination of all loadings; 


f) afundamental aspect of design will be to determine 
the forces to which the structure/structural element 
might be subjected to, starting from the roof and 
working down to the soil by transferring the forces 
through various components and connections; 


g) accepted principles of mechanics for analysis 
and specified design procedures shall be applied 
(or) the design requirements may be satisfied by 
prototype testing; 


h) loads shall be in accordance with IS 875 (Parts 1 
to 5), keeping into consideration that permeability 
of walls, floors and roof made from bamboo cause 
internal pressure and can therefore affect the wind 
load factor; and 


j) the worst combination and location of loads 
shall be considered for design. Also, wind and 
seismic forces shall not be considered to act 
simultaneously. 


7.2 Unlike timber, bamboo properties do not relate well 
to species, being dependent among other factors, on 
position of the culm, geographic location and age. 


NOTES 


1 The practice in timber engineering is to base designs on safe 
working stresses (and the same may be adopted to bamboo 
with the limitation that traditional experience rather than 
precise calculations generally govern the detailing. 


2 Limit states are states beyond which the structure no longer 
satisfies the design performance requirements. Limit states are 
classified into ultimate limit state relating to collapse mode 
and serviceability limit states associated with deformations, 
vibrations, etc. Design is usually based on ultimate stages with 
partial factors of safety. 


7.3 Age old traditional experience of construction with 
bamboo is to be well preserved as non-standard practices 
for similar situations considered as an informal based 
on general social pattern and wisdom. Confirmation 
of such structures be based on reports after they have 
sustained the severity of earthquakes, hurricanes, etc. 
as criteria for recommendations by the evaluation by 
competent engineer/builder with adequate experience 
in the field. 


7.4 Net Section 


It is determined by passing a plane or a series of 
connected planes transversely through the members. 
Least net sectional area is used for calculating load 
carrying capacity of a member. In the design of an 
intermediate or a long column, gross section shall be 
used in calculating load carrying capacity of column. 


IS 15912 : 2018 


7.5 Structural Components 


7.5.1 Main structural applications in bamboo may 
include roofing and flooring, shear walls, wall paneling, 
beams, piles, columns, arches, etc. Both from the point 
of view of capacity and deformation, trusses and framed 
skeletons are much better options in bamboo. 


7.5.2 Peculiarity of Bamboo as a Design Material 


This shall be based on the principles of applied 
mechanics involving the following assumptions: 


a) Elastic behaviour of bamboo, until failure (plastic 

behaviour being considered to be not significant); 
b) Bamboo culms are analyzed as hollow-tube 
structures (not perfectly straight) member on 
mean diameter and mean wall thickness basis. 
Designing as a variable thickness hollow-tube 
structure is a bit complex; 


Nodes do not occur at constant intervals; 


Structural elements of bamboo shall be 
appropriately supported near the nodes of culm 
as and where the structural system demands. The 
joints in the design shall be located near nodes; 

e) Bamboo structures are designed like any other 
conventional structural analysis taking care of 
details with regard to supports and joints; and the 
diameter, wall thickness and initial curvature; and 


Joints shall be considered to generally act as a 
hinge or as pinned, unless substantiating data 
justify a fixed joint. 


7.6 Flexural Members 


7.6.1 All flexural members may be designed using the 
principles of beam theory. 
NOTE — The tendency of bamboo beams to acquire larger 
deflections under long continual loading (including creep) has 
to be taken care of either by giving a factor of safety to E or by 
considering double the design dead loading in calculation of 
deflections. 


7.6.2 The moment of inertia, 7 shall be determined as 
follows: 


a) Outside diameter and the wall thickness shall 
be measured at both ends, correct up to 1 mm 
for diameter of culm and 0.1 mm for the wall 
thickness. 


b) With these values the mean diameter and the 
mean thickness for the middle of the beam shall 
be calculated and moment of inertia determined. 


7.6.3 The maximum bending stress shall be calculated 
and should be within the allowable stress. 


7.6.4 The deflection shall be within the prescribed 
limits. The initial curvature shall also be considered in 
the calculation of the deflection. See 7.5.9.6 of IS 883 
for details. 


10 


7.6.5 The shear stress in the neutral layer at the small 
end shall be checked, if the length of the beam is less 
than 25 times the average diameter at that end. Care 
should be taken to strengthen the joint. 


7.6.6 Forces acting on a beam, being loads or reaction 
forces at supports, shall act in nodes or as near to nodes 
as by any means possible. To avoid local crushing, 
care should be taken to distribute load on larger length 
(minimum 3 times diameter of bamboo) or through 
sleeve or the supported length of bamboo shall be 
strengthened by winding wire to prevent splitting. 


7.7 Columns (Predominantly Loaded in Axial 
Direction) 


7.7.1 Columns and struts are essential components 
sustaining compressive forces in a structure. They 
transfer load to the supporting media. 


7.7.2 Design of columns shall be based on one of the 
following two criteria: 


a) Full scale buckling tests on the same species, size 
and other relevant variables. 


b) Calculations, based on the following: 


1) Moment of inertia shall be determined as 
per 7.6.2. 


2) For bamboo columns, the best available 
straight bamboo culms shall be selected. 


3) Bending stresses due to initial curvature, 
eccentricities and induced deflection shall be 
taken into account, in addition to those due to 
any lateral load. 

NOTE — Unlike timber, modulus of elasticity (MOE) has 

already been provided a factor of safety in case of bamboo. This 

is on the basis of studies on variability of modulus of rupture 

(MOR) and MOE. In the case of timber, no factor of safety for 

MOE was used because there has been an understanding that 

there is no variability in MOE. Subsequently it was confirmed 

that MOE varies as the MOR and there is very strong, highly 
significant correlation between the two. In fact this correlation 
has formed the basis of development of machine grading of 
timber world-over. However, somehow the practice of not 
giving factor of safety to MOE continued in Indian Standards. 


7.7.3 Buckling calculation shall be according to Euler, 
with a reduction to 90 percent of moment of inertia, to 
take into account the effect of the taper which shall be 
less than 1:170. 


7.7.4 For strength and stability, larger diameter thick 
walled sections of bamboo with closely spaced nodes 
shall be used. Alternatively, smaller sections may be 
tied together as a bundle-column. 


7.8 Asingle bamboo culm is notan optimum component 
to structurally design different load bearing members. 
Bunching of bamboo is inevitable to fabricate beams, 
columns, etc. There is no end to the number of culms 
in bunching. However, different components pose 


manufacturing problems during assembly, which 
should be appropriately taken care of (see also Fig. 9D 
and Fig. 9E). 


The spacing of spacer in bundle column (wooden piece 
or a piece of bamboo) between culms in case of bundle 
column or beam should not be less than 600 mm in 
opposite faces in case of four culms integrated together. 
In case of two culms member, spacing of spacer bar 
should not be less than 450 mm. If length of bamboo 
spacer is less than 300 mm, it should contain at least 
one node. 
NOTE — During bunching of beams/columns, binders (5 mm 
tie bar/wire and 10 to 15 mm bamboo dowel pins, depending 
upon diameter of bamboo) may be carefully inserted after 
proper pre-drilling the holes throughout the assembly as per 
the requirements of structural design. Nut bolts with washers 
of appropriate dimensions may be used. 


7.8.1 The following precautions shall be taken to avoid 
possible split/crack in walling of bamboo: 


a) Maintaining a minimum 100 mm distance of the 
drills from the end of the main bamboo culms 
drilled. 


b) Choosing drilling points preferably within 30 mm 
from node. 


c) Maintaining the interference fit between bamboo 
body and binders as under given below: 


1) For wall thickness > 8 mm : 0.25 - 0.30 mm 
2) For wall thickness « 8 mm : 0.20 - 0.25 mm 


d) The inserting ends of the dowel pins may be 
dressed as tapered (conical). 


7.9 Assemblies and Roof Trusses 


7.9.1 Elements in structure are generally built-up in 
the form of assembled members for which a triangle 
is a simple figure of stability. Besides sloped chords, 
parallel chord construction is also appropriate as 
external profile. 


7.9.2 A truss is essentially a plane structure which is 
very stiff in the plane of the members, that is the plane 
in which it is expected to carry load, but very flexible 
in every other direction. Roof truss generally consists 
of a number of triangulated frames, the members of 
which are fastened at ends and the nature of stresses 
at joints is either tensile or compressive and designed 
as pin-ended joints (see Fig. 2A). Bamboo trusses 
may also be formed using bamboo mat board or 
bamboo mat-veneer composite or plywood gusset 
(see Fig. 2B). 


7.9.3 Trusses shall be analyzed for the determination of 
axial forces in members and the deformation of joints. 
For the influence of eccentricities, due allowance shall 
be made in design. 


11 


IS 15912:2018 


AAN 
У, 


2А PIN ENDED JOINT TRUSSES 


2B GUSSET JOINT TRUSSES 


NOTE — The above figure is only for representative purpose. 
Actual jointing details may vary depending on span, loading, 
adequacy of strength, etc. 


Fic 2. SOME TvPICAL CONFIGURATIONS FOR SMALL AND 
LARGE TRUSSES IN BAMBOO 


7.9.4 The truss height shall exceed 0.15 times the 
span in case of a triangular truss (pitched roofing) and 
0.10 times the span in case of a rectangular (parallel) 
truss. 


7.9.5 For members in compression, the effective length 
for in-plane strength verification shall be taken as the 
distance between two adjacent points of contraflexure. 
For fully triangulated trusses, effective length for 
simple span members without especially rigid end- 
connection shall be taken as the span length. 


7.9.6 The spacing of trusses shall be consistent with use 
of bamboo purlins. 


IS 15912 : 2018 


7.9.7 The ends in open beams, joists, rafters, purlins 
shall be suitably plugged. Bamboo roof coverings shall 
be considered as non-structural in function. 


7.9.8 Bamboo trusses with wire bound joints using 
bamboo pins and/or wooden splice plates fastened with 
bamboo pins when tested at load for factor of safety of 
at least 5, result in deflection within permissible range 
at design load; good recovery but abnormal deflection 
beyond ultimate load without collapse was observed. 


This is based on the work done on prototypes of a few 
bamboo trusses, span 4 m. 


7.9.9 A roof truss may consist of twin trusses closely 
spaced connected together by suitable gusset plate made 
from good quality plywood (or steel plate). Purlin can 
be connected directly to the gusset plate with suitable 
arrangement (see also 8.2.7). 


8 DESIGN, TECHNIQUES OF JOINTS AND 
CONSTRUCTION PRACTICES 


8.1 Connecting the load-bearing elements together for 
effective transfer of stress and to achieve continuity 
between elements with controlled displacements is 
one of the serious problem. As joints are a source of 
weakness in any bamboo structure, they have to be 
made as strong and rigid as possible. Joints are quite 
critical in assemblies, and these should be stable in 
relation to time. For general information, the diagrams 
of typical joints given in Figs. 3 to 7 may be used based 
on tests for adequacy of strength. 


8.2 Bamboo Joints 


Susceptibility to crushing at the open ends, splitting 
tendency, variation in diameter, wall thickness and 
straightness are some of the associated issues which 
have to be taken care of while designing and detailing 
the connections with bamboo. 


Joints shall be designed to include force transmissions 
in a required manner, predictable deformations to be 
within prescribed limits and specific geometry/load 
direction. 


Tests on full scale joints or on components shall be 
carried out in accordance with IS 2366 and IS 4924 
(Parts 1 and 2) for nailed jointed timber structures. 


8.2.1 Traditional Practices 


Such joining methods revolve around lashing or tying 
by rope or string with or without pegs or dowels. Such 
joints lack stiffness and have low efficiency but have 
served the mankind for long in traditional bamboo 
construction. 


8.2.1.1 Lengthening joints (end jointing) (see Fig. 3) 


a) Lap joints — End of one piece of bamboo is made 
to lap over that of the other in line and the whole 


12 


is suitably fastened. It may be full lapping or half 
lapping. Full section culms are overlapped by at 
least one internode and tied together in two or 
three places. Efficiency could be improved by 
using bamboo or hardwood dowels. 


b 


wm 


Butt joints — Culms of similar diameter are 
butted end to end, inter-connected by means 
of side plates made of quarter-round culm of 
slightly large diameter bamboo, for two or more 
internode lengths. Assembly shall be fixed and 
tied preferably with dowel pins. 

Sleeves and inserts — Short length of bamboo of 
appropriate diameter may be used either externally 
or internally to join two culms together. 


c 


— 


d 


— 


Scarf joints — A scarf joint is formed by cutting a 
sloping plane 1 in 4 to 6 on opposite sides from the 
ends of two similar diameter bamboo culms to be 
joined. They shall be lapped to form a continuous 
piece and the assembly suitably fastened by means 
of lashings or glued. 


8.2.1.2 Bearing joints (see Fig. 4) 


For members which either bear against the other or 
cross each other, and transfer the loads at an angle other 
than parallel to the axis, bearing joints are formed. 


a) Saddle joints — The simplest form consists of a 
horizontal member supported directly on top of a 
vertical member. The top of the post may be cut to 
form a saddle to ensure proper seating of beam for 
good load transfer. The saddle should be close to a 
node to reduce risk of splitting. 


b) Angled joints — When two or more members meet 
or cross other than at right angles, angled joints 
are formed. 


8.2.2 Improved Practices in Bamboo Jointing 


a) Plywood or solid timber gusset plates may be used 
at joint assemblies of web and chord connection 
in a truss and fixed with bamboo pins or mild 
steel (MS) bolts. Hollow cavities of bamboo need 
to be stuffed with wooden plugs or otherwise by 
suitable means (see Figs. 6A to 6D). 


b) Use of wooden inserts to reinforce the ends of the 
bamboo before forming the joints. Alternatively, 
steel band clamps with integral bolt/eye may 
be fitted around bamboo sections for jointing 


(see Fig. 3C). 


wm 


8.2.3 Fixing Methods and Fastening Devices 


In case of butt joints the tie-wire may be passed through 
a pre-drilled hole or around hardwood or bamboo pegs 
or dowels inserted into preformed holes to act as horns. 
Pegs are driven from one side, usually at an angle to 
increase strength and dowels pass right through the 
member, usually at right angles. Normally 1.60 mm 


IS 15912 : 2018 


BAMBOO OR 
HARDWOOD DOWEL 


3A FULL LAPPED JOINT 


o | ==" | 


3B HALF LAPPED JOINT 
(REBATED/SPLAYED) 


C HERE 


WITH SIDE PLATES OF BAMBOO 


WITH SLEEVE 


3C BUTT JOINT 
NOTE — The above figure is only for representative purpose only. Actual jointing details may vary depending on span, loading, 


adequacy of strength, etc. 
Fic. 3 SPLCED JOINTS 


13 


IS 15912 : 2018 


| 
PIN HOLE | | 


4A SADDLE JOINT WITH LASHING AND SIDE PLATES (or Seated Joints) 4B BEAM SUPPORTED ON INDEPENDENT 
SHORT CULM TIED TO THE POST 


4C TIES PASSING THROUGHA = 4D PEGGED AND TIED 4E DOWELLED AND TIED 4F PURLIN TIED TO RAFTER 
PRE-DRILLED HOLE OR SYSTEM SYSTEM 
AROUND PEG 


NOTE — The above figure is only for representative purpose only. Actual jointing details may vary depending on span, loading, 
adequacy of strength, etc. 


Fic. 4 BEARUBG JOINTS 


M. S. BOLT M. S. BOLT 


WITH NUT 


HORIZONTAL 
CULM (BEAM) 


TAPERED STEEL 
OR ALUMINIUM 
RING 


2 
5 


5 


Oxy 


QO 2] 


VERTICAL 
CULM 


BAMBOO 


CULM WOODEN PLUG 


У БЯ 
a | 


V X 
eus E 


5A SYSTEM WITH NARROWED END 5B ARRANGEMENT FOR BEARING 
WITH USE OF NUT AND BOLT 


NOTE — The above figure is only for representative purpose only. Actual jointing details may vary depending on span, loading, 
adequacy of strength, etc. 


Fic. 5 Some Nut Bott JOINERY DETAILS 


14 


6A LASHED JOINT 


IS 15912 : 2018 


6C SOLID TIMBER OR SHUTTERING GRADE 
PLYWOOD PLATES FIXED WITH EITHER MS 
BOLTS OR BAMBOO PEGS 


NOTE — The above figure is only for representative purpose only. Actual jointing details may vary depending on span, loading, 


adequacy of strength, etc. 


Fic. 6 GUSSET PLATED JOINTS 


(16 SWG) diameter galvanized iron wire may be used 
for tight lashing. 


NOTE — Drill size needs to be specified in order to avoid 
possible split/crack in walling of bamboo. 


8.2.3.1 Wire bound joints with or without pins 


Usually 2.00 mm (14 SWG) diameter galvanized iron 
wire is tightened around the joints by binding the 
respective pieces together. At least two holes are drilled 
in each piece and wire is passed through them for good 
results. Generally 10-12 mm diameter bamboo pins are 
driven and fastened to culms. 


8.2.3.2 Fish plates/gusset plated joints (see Fig. 6) 


At least 25 mm thick hardwood splice plate or 12 mm 
thick structural grade plywood are used. Solid bamboo 
pins help in fastening the assembly. 


8.2.4 For any complete joint alternative for a given load 
and geometry, description of all fastening-elements, 
their sizes and location shall be indicated. Data shall be 
based on full scale tests. 


8.2.5 Tests on full scale joints or on components shall 
be carried out in a recognized laboratory. 


15 


8.2.6 In case of high wind and seismic areas, good 
construction practices shall be followed taking care of 
joints, their damping and possible ductility. Bracings in 
walls shall be taken care of in bamboo structures. 


8.2.7 Metal fasteners and other structural joints shall 
be made inherently corrosion resistant or be protected 
against corrosion, thereby making the joints more 
durable. 


8.3 Construction Practices 


8.3.1 Bamboo being a versatile resource characterized 
by high strength, low mass and ease of working with 
simple tools, it is desirable to increasingly make 
appropriate use of this material. Design of structures 
using bamboo shall be done in accordance with 7. It 
shall be ensured that the elements of structure satisfy 
the appropriate fire resistance requirements as specified 
in SP 7 (Part 4) : 2016 ‘National Building Code of 
India 2016: Part 4 Fire and Life Safety’, and the quality 
of building materials/components used shall be in 
accordance with SP 7 (Part 5) : 2016 ‘National Building 
Code of India 2016: Part 5 Building Materials’. For 
construction using bamboo, some of the important 
constructional provisions given in 8.3.2 to 8.3.7 shall 
be followed. 


IS 15912 : 2018 


7A SIMPLY BOLTED CONNECTION WITH MS ARC WASHERS 


7B HORNED JOINT WITH PIN AND ROPE LASHING 


2 


7C STEEL BAND TO BE FITTED AROUND BAMBOO SECTION 7D HARDWOOD DOWEL (SQUARE OR CIRCULAR) 


O 


7E SOLID BAMBOO OR SPLIT BAMBOO PINS (WITH SKIN ON) 


NOTE — The above figure is only for representative purpose only. Actual jointing details may vary depending on span, loading, 
adequacy of strength, etc. 


Fic. 7 OTHER JOINTS AND SECTIONS 


16 


8.3.2 The following sound construction practices shall 
be taken into account: 


a) Use air-dry bamboo; and ensure that bamboo in 
building remains air dry; and in case the bamboo 
has become wet, provide it the opportunity to dry 
again before it deteriorates due to moisture. 


b 


wm 


Permeability of walls, floors and roofs made from 
bamboo, cause internal pressure and can therefore 
change the net wind-load acting on the roof, wall 
and floor. 

Check whether the workmanship of the labour 
force is according to the assumptions. 


8.3.3 Working Finishing 


c 


ме 


8.3.3.1 Bamboo сар be cut апа split easily with very 
simple hand tools. Immature bamboos are soft, pliable 
and can be moulded to desired shape. It takes polish 
and paint well. 


8.3.3.2 While itis possible to work with bamboo simply 
using a machete, a few basic tools such as, hack saw, 
aze, hatchet, sharpening tools, adze, chisel (20 mm), 
drill, wood rasps, steel rod, and pliers, will greatly 
increase the efficiency of construction process. 


8A BAMBOO ON PREFORMED 
CONCRETE FOOTINGS 


IS 15912 : 2018 


8.3.4 For providing safety to the structure against fire, 
bamboo may be given fire retardant-cum-antiseptic 
treatment using following chemicals; a few drops 
of concentrated hydrocholoric acid (НСІ) shall be 
added to the solution to dissolve the precipitated 
salts: 


a) Ammonium phosphate 3 Parts 
b) Boric acid 3 Parts 
c) Copper sulphate ] Part 

d) Zinc chloride 5 Parts 
e) Sodium dichromate 3 Parts 

f) Water 100 Parts 


8.3.5 Foundations 


Bamboo in direct contact with ground shall not be 
allowed (except in case of bamboo piles). Bamboo in 
direct contact with rock or preformed concrete footing, 
or bamboo incorporated into concrete, may form the 
foundation structure (see Fig. 8). Also, arrangements 
with use of metallic strap, C-clamp and bunched 
bamboo columns embedded in concrete may be used 
for foundation of bamboo structures (see Fig. 9). 


8B BAMBOO INCORPORATED INTO CONCRETE 


FOOTINGS (SINGLE POST FOOTING) 


8C BAMBOO OUT OF GROUND CONTACT ON STRIP FOOTINGS OF CONCRETE (LARGE 
DIAMETER THICK WALLED BAMBOO WITH CLOSELY SPACED NODES TO BE USED) 


Fic. 8 BAMBOO FOUNDATIONS 


IS 15912: 


2018 


BAMBOO CUL 
M.S. BOLT WITH 
NUT 
METALLIC 
STRAP 
CONCRETE 
C- CLAMP 
(NO HOLES 
IN CULM) 
C-CLAMP 
PREFER STAGGERED BOLT 
HOLES; LOWER PORTION OF 
BAMBOO-CULM HOT BITUMEN 9B USING C-CLAMP 
COATED FOR EMBEDMENT IN 
CONCRETE 
9A USING METALLIC STRAP BAMBOO COLUMN 
ONCRETE 
STEEL TUBE 
(of 2 to 3 mm THICK 
SHEET) 
BAMBOO SINGLE 
CULM CULM THREE CULM 
а ANCHORING OF 
PL | j VERTICAL MEMBERS 
GL ww у 
DEPTH ОЕ 
FOUNDATION 
LEAN CONCRETE FIVECULM SEVEN CULM 


9E INTEGRATED BAMBOO FOR 
FORMING BUNDLE COLUMNS 
AND THEIR FASTENING 


9D BUNCHED BAMBOO COLUMNS 
EMBEDDED WITHIN CONCRETE 


Fic. 9 BAMBOO COLUMN IN CONCRETE 


18 


8.3.6 Floors 


The floor of bamboo may be at ground level with 
covering of bamboo matting, etc. In elevated 
floors, bamboo members become an integral part 
of structural framework of building. The floor will 
comprise structural bamboo elements and bamboo 
decking. In-plane shear strength shall be ensured or 
else supplementary horizontally stiffening devices 
such as bracing in the horizontal plane shall be 
designed. 


8.3.7 Jointing Techniques 


The jointing techniques in construction using bamboo 
shall be in accordance with 8.2. 


IS 15912 : 2018 


9 BAMBOO AS REINFORCEMENT IN 
CONCRETE 


9.1 Due to its fibrous texture, bamboo possesses high 
tensile strength. This can act as an alternate material 
for reinforcement in concrete within the limitations in 
design and construction. The ultimate tensile strength of 
some ofthe species of bamboo in direct tension is nearly 
the same as that of steel at its yield point. On an average 
it varies from 1 400 to 2 000 kg/cm’. The principles 
adopted for design of concrete structure with steel is 
also applicable for the concrete member with bamboo. 
Strength characteristics of steel, concrete and bamboo 
are indicated in Table 4 and the design data for balanced 
section in beam/slab reinforcement is given in Table 5. 


Table 4 Strength Characteristics of Mild Steel, Bamboo and Concrete 
(For Reinforcement Purposes) 


( Clause 9.1 ) 


SI No. Related Strength Characteristics 
N/mm (kgf/cm?) 
Stress Mild Steel Bamboo (Green) Concrete 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) Modulus of elasticity 2.06 x 105(2.1x 10°) 17235 to 19283.8 — 
(175 750 to 196 640) 
[for inside locations] 
ii) Tensile stress 124 (1265.5) to 137 (1400) 15.5 (158), — 
Bending-tension 
[all locations] 
iii) Compressive stress — 10.3 (105) 4.9 (50) 


iv) Bond stress — 


v) Shear stress = 


(D. strictus) 
0.343 (3.5)[green] to 
0.55 (5.6)[dry]” 
[likely to increase up to 0.98 (10)? ] 
11.39-17.7 (115-180) 


Based on work of embedding round bamboo with slots cut at suitable places in cement concrete. 


0.39-0.98 (4-10) 


0.49(5) 


? Based on limited tests on bamboo splits with lugs intact, treated with hot bitumen and surface roughened with coarse sand. 


Table 5 Design Data for Bamboo and Mild Steel Reinforced Cement Concrete for Balanced Section 


(Clause 9.1) 


SI No. Design Parameters M 15 (1:2:4) M 20 (1:1.5:3) 
Mild Steel Bamboo Mild Steel Bamboo 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
i) Modular ratio 18 1 to 1.4 15 1 to 1.4 
ii) Position of neutral azis from the top 0.4d 0.25d to 0.254d 0.4d 0.274d to 0.278d 
iii) Lever arm of the resisting moment (MOR) 0.87d 0.917d to 0.9154 0.87d 0.909d to 0.907d 
iv) Constant for MOR (Q) 137 86 126 106 


where 

О = Bending moment/bd? , 
d = depth or thickness, and 
b = width. 


19 


IS 15912 : 2018 


9.2 The whole bamboo culms are halved longitudinally 
and again split into four and strips of the size of 
20 to 25 mm width and 9 mm thickness are prepared 
for use as reinforcement. Bamboo strips with triangular 
lugs (formed at nodes) due to conversion of bamboo 
into strips improves the bond strength because of the 
protruding lugs beings gripped firmly in concrete. 
Strength properties of split bamboo out of a few species 
are given in Table 6. 


9.3 Bamboo has a tendency to absorb water from 
concrete which results in initial swelling and subsequent 
shrinkage leading to cracks in concrete. Following 
processes shall therefore, be followed: 


a) Chemical treatment with preference for pressure 
impregnation (full cell treatment with warm coal 
tar creosote is likely to preserve and at the same 
time act as water repellent). 


b 


— 


Treated strips be further given a water repellent 
treatment with a coating of very hot bitumen 
80/100 grade, followed by a liberal coating of 
coarse sand (sand grains passing through 4.75 mm 
IS sieve and retained on 2.36 mm IS sieve may 
be used). Water inhibitor will also help maintain 
dimensional stability of strips. 


9.4 Techniques in Placing the Reinforcement (see 
also Fig.10) 


9.4.1 Reinforcement shall be placed in the following 
manner: 


a) Laid edge wise in sets of twin strips for main 
reinforcement. 


b) Laid flatwise with smooth surface and rough 
surface alternating as distribution or subsidiary 
reinforcement (wedge effects increased bond). 


c) For negative moments, bamboo strips of length 
equivalent to ®® laid flatwise in alternate rows of 
slab reinforcement. 


d) For beams and lintels, twin strips are arranged in 
tiers, placed one above the other depending upon 
requirement and held in position with the help of 
vertical strips. 


e 


МУ 


Split bamboo strip or preferably steel rod be used 
for diagonal tension to resist shear in beams, 
etc. 


f) Bind the reinforcement with the help of galvanized 
iron binding wire (or nylon thread/bamboo-cane 
string). 


10 WALLING, FLOORING, ROOFING, AND 
IN-FILL PANELS FOR WALL, AND COMMON 
ROOF COVERING/CLADDING 


10.1 Materials 
10.1.1 Bamboo Based Panel Products 


The common roof covering and in-fill materials shall 
include bamboo mat board, bamboo mat veneer 
composite, bamboo mat corrugated sheet, bamboo 
tiles, plastered bamboo reeds, thatch, corrugated 
galvanized iron sheeting, asphaltic sheets, plain clay 
tiles, etc. The respective materials shall conform to the 
following: 


a) Bamboo mat board — These shall conform to 
IS 13958. 


b) Bamboo mat veneer composite — These shall 
conform to IS 14588. 

c) Bamboo mat corrugated sheet and bamboo mat 
ridge cap — These shall conform to IS 15476. 

d) Bamboo-jute composite corrugated and semi- 


corrugated sheets — These shall conform to 
IS 15972. 


10.1.2 Reconstituted Wood from Destructured Bamboo 


After lopping, bamboos are cross-cut into small lengths 
in the round and then split along the axis. The small 


Table 6 Strength Properties of Split Bamboo in Green Condition” 
( Clause 9.2 ) 


SI Species Static Bending Compression Parallel Shear Parallel 
No. (Without Node) 
Fibre Stress at Modulus of Modulus of Maximum Crushing Maximum 
Elastic Limit Rupture Elasticity Stress Shearing Stress 
N/mm? (kg/cm?) N/mm’ (kg/cm?) х10° N/mm? N/mm? (kg/cm?) N/mm’ (kg/cm?) 
(kg/cm?) 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 
i) Bambusa pallida” 37 (378) 59.3 (605) 3.2 (32.5) 58.3 (595) 9.6 (97.7) 
ii) B. vulgaris 45.5 (464) 86.8 (885) 5.1 (52.3) 39.5 (403) 9.3 (94.4) 
iii) Dendrocalamus hamiltonii 29.5 (301) 51.4 (524) 3.7 (37.7) 40.6 (414) 7.6 (77.7) 
iv) D. giganteus 46.3 (472) 83.2 (848) 5 (50.7) 35.3 (360) 8.7 (88.5) 
v) Oxytenanthera abyssinica” 44.1 (450) 81.5 (831) 3. 3 (33.6) 37 (377) 11 (112.0) 


D Average of bottom, middle and top portions of culms. 


2 Average of bottom and middle portions only. 


20 


120 C/C 


MAIN REINFORCEMENT 
(EDGE WISE) BAMBOO 
STRIPS 25 x 9 THICK 


ENLARGED DETAILS 


MAIN REINFORCEMENT 


IS 15912 : 2018 


SUBSIDIARY REINFORCEMENT 
(FLAT WISE) BAMBOO STRIPS 
25 x 9 THICK 


SUBSIDIARY REINFORCEMENT 


NODAL LUG 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


Fic. 10 GENERAL DETAILS OF BAMBOO REINFORCEMENT 


cross-section strips are then passed between the counter 
revolving rollers till the material is fully destructured. 
This is then air dried and resin treated and suitably 
pressed without much disturbing the natural alignment 
of fibres thus retaining the directional properties of 
bamboo. 


Some typical strength properties of reconstituted wood 
from destructured bamboo are given in Table 7. The 
reconstituted product from bamboo can be sawn, nailed, 
moulded, bored, screwed, polished and painted. Thus 
it offers a good substitute of solid wood for structural 
uses. 
NOTE — Reconstituted boards/wood from destructured 
bamboo when tested for physical and mechanical properties in 
accordance with IS 1734 (Parts 1 to 20) and IS 1708 (Parts 1 
to 18) yielded encouraging results. Gist of mechanical 
properties of these boards are excellent when compared with 
Dendrocalamus strictus (bamboo), teak and sal. 


10.1.3 Other Panel Products/Infill Materials 


Other panel products/infill materials shall be in 
accordance with relevant Indian standards. These shall 
be such that they maintain their integrity and strength in 
the assigned service class throughout the expected life 
of the structure. 


21 


10.1.4 Adhesives 


Adhesive shall maintain their integrity in accordance 
with IS 848. 


10.2 Structural Usage of Bamboo Based Products 
10.2.1 General 


Bamboo mat board (BMB) and bamboo mat veneer 
composite (BMVC) have high in-plane rigidity and 
hence high racking strength and are more flexible than 
equivalent plywood. This property of BMB and BMVC 
can be advantageously used in many engineering 
applications such as wall paneling, composite beams, 
composite floor deck and stress skinned panels. 
Bamboo mat corrugated sheet (BMCS) is water 
proof and resistant to decay, termites/insects and fire. 
These sheets may be used as roofing material. Precast 
bamboo reinforced cement concrete and reconstituted 
wood from destructured bamboo can also be used in 
structural applications. 


10.2.2 Bamboo Composites 


Along with bamboo, bamboo composites such as 
bamboo mat board, bamboo mat veneer composite, 


2018 


IS 15912 


(є`081) (#09) (OTE D 
== ГАГА — — TIO — $971 LSL'O snjons snum]poo4puaqq (л 
(079) (9'611) (c0D (89) (ces) (656) (1uojuoo sinjstow Arp ‘uord ZI 18) 
[43 Lil 01 L9 TTS = #6 9650 sipupa8 puojay (M 
(69€) (8`©51) (01D (689) (бус D) Guojuos əmistotu fap “uaosed ZI e) 
79'E SI 801 (ст) 9121 TL9 — S71 6bL'0 pIsngos vasoys (WI 
—V =< 
ooquie g/pooA, 
(985 01 T0€) (cec o1 SST) (LvT 01 8D (coc оз 981) (0£0 Т 01 69) (OTZ 1 01 66 9) (S19 101 290 D (8c 09110 
LLY O tS £ 8700 9С] СҮ 950] 861 01 781 10101 799 L811 01689 881 01 #01 €6'0 01 790 Lco rz 6 H Œ 
ә8әјиәоләа urso1 JO 19pio SUISBOIOUL oq UJ 
(805 01 86€) (80€ 01 8/7) (poc 01 000) (180 01 Єр) (96S 101160 D (PTO co 6#0 1) — (Sec c 6941) (95) 
coc TOE €Zc LSE 0) 8'61 9LC 01 9£c €'96[ 01 //£0I €'861 01 01 ITZ O SELI STI 01660 S'S 6c 019 I а 
(ст) (D (01) (6) (8) (D (9) (5) (Р) (e) О (p 
1luəoo1od 
(93) NA (;u19/J8x) autu/N (auo/J83) Uun siuojuo? 
J9A0q Ure) 0j (uo NEAN. (оода әлпѕ8әл шә 19 
230/384) umu/N OT x ua) .umu/N — (truog93)uru/N 9 шәуш8 ы ids Š 
SuipIoH (019,984) z и & "e Peed 8093$ UBA 0) Peed aanjdny B —r on 
MIIIS &yronse[4 Jo sn[npo]A Ч80913$ IBIS pedu pozi 9AISS2.1du10;) u)Suə.nS әјіѕиәјЈ, Jo sam poja AyIsuad IELIƏJETAI рлеоя IS 


(TTOT 2570/0 ) 
(snjoujs smurvjpoo4puoaq) 
ooquieg шолу pooA, poynynsuooos Jo son.rodoaq [eorueu29]A| JO IST / әде, 


22 


may also be successfully used in combination with 
timber for making efficient structural components like 
web because where high shear strength of bamboo mat 
board and bamboo mat veneer composite can be utilized 
as web and timber flanges for transmitting tensile and 
compressive stress. Phenol formaldehyde, phenol 
resorcinol formaldehyde adhesives are commonly 
used for gluing web and flanges as shown in Fig. 11. 


BAMBOO 
uen. n ZZ WEBS 
| Wi 
| | 
| 1 
—= ZI 
LSECTION DOUBLE-I 


IS 15912 : 2018 


Beams can be straight, single tapered, double tapered, 
haunched, as shown. 


Bamboo mat board and bamboo mat veneer composite 
can also be used for roof and wall sheathing (shear 
walls) and diaphragms, gussets, arch panels, barrel 
vaults, etc. It can also be used as skin material in 
sandwich construction. 


WOODEN 
FLANGE (TYPICAL) 


2 


TYPICAL CROSS SECTION OF WEB BEAMS 


WOODEN 
FLANGE 


STIFFNER 


J MS 
E hr NA 
X 
—| 
SPAN 6000 TO 9000 


STRAIGHT 


SPAN UP TO 9000 


BAMBOO 
BOX 
x 
| BAMBOO 
SECTION X-X 


NINIAN 


DOUBLE TAPERED 


SPAN UP TO 9000 


HAUNCHED 


WEB BEAM CONFIGURATIONS 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


Fic. 11 Bamboo Mat Board WEB BEAMS 


23 


IS 15912 : 2018 


Permissible safe working stresses are given in 
Table 8. 


Table 8 Permissible Safe Working Stresses for 
Bamboo Mat Board and Bamboo Mat Veneer 
Composite 


( Clause 10.2.2 ) 


SI Properties Bamboo Bamboo Mat 
No. Mat Board Veneer Composite 
N/mm? 
Along Across 
N/mm? N/mm? 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) Tensile strength 8.5 10 10 
ii) Compressive strength 10.80 13 6.5 
iii) Modulus of rupture 19.00 19 10.5 
iv) Modulus of elasticity 3 200 4 600 — 
v) Modulus of rigidity 4970 1 930 — 


10.2.3 Precast Bamboo Reinforced Cement Concrete 


Precast bamboo reinforced cement concrete panels of 
dimensions 600 mm x 300 mm x 40 mm can serve 
for walling, when laid one above the other in a stably 
located wall in low cost construction, etc. Bamboo 
strips 20 mm x 8 mm splits duly processed should be 
placed at 90 mm centre-to-centre both ways in form 
work and concreted. 


10.2.4 Wall Infill Panel 


The wall is considered non-load bearing although 
connected to the framing elements. It comprises a grid 
of split bamboo (19 mm x 9 mm) tied together with MS 
binding wire to form a 150 mm x 150 mm grid. The 
grid is tied to steel dowels passing through the columns. 
Chicken wire mesh is fixed on the outside face of the 
grid. Cement mortar (in the proportion 1:3) is applied 
to both sides of the grid to a finished thickness of about 
50 mm. Fly ash can be utilized as part replacement 
of cement up to 35 percent by mass (in case OPC is 
used). This is similar to conventional ferrocement-type 
construction. The same principle is extended to the 
construction of gable walls. Alternatively, gable walls 
may be formed with bamboo mat board. Figure 12 
shows the typical cross-section of the infill wall panel. 


10.2.4.1 Foundation detail 


The columns pierced by steel dowels at 150 mm 
centre-to-centre provide connection to the bamboo 
grid infill. Fix 8mm diameter MS rod of 400 mm 
length at 100 mm from one end of the column which 
has undergone treatment. For anchoring, fix two more 
MS rods of same diameter at 100 mm centre-to-centre 
starting from the first hole (see Fig. 13). Pour the 
concrete by giving temporary support. Foundation is 
limited to individual footings of size 400 mm x 400 
mm x 600 mm deep for each bamboo column placed 
at 1 200 mm apart and two coarse concrete blocks or 
stone or other locally available material for infill wall 
foundation. 


TIMBER 
WALL PLATE 


BAMBOO GRID 


150 x150 


BAMBOO 


COLUMN 


CHICKEN MESH 


CEMENT RENDER 


DOWEL OF SIZE @8 x 150 
@150 C/C 


All dimensions in millimeteres. 


Fic. 12 BAMBOO STRUCTURAL WALLING SYSTEM 


24 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


Fic. 13 DETAILS or BoTTOM OF BAMBOO COLUMN 
FOR ANCHORING IN CONCRETE FOR FOUNDATION 


10.2.5 Bamboo Concrete Flooring Using Round 
Bamboo 


Technology of such a flooring (for situations needing 
raised flooring) is based on the method of rigidly 
fixing round bamboo, where 30 mm thick M20 grade 
PCC (with 6 mm down coarse aggregate) is placed 
over 6 to 8 mm thick culm, that are arranged side by 
side to form bamboo flooring. 


The rigid fixing is achieved by using shear connectors 
in the form of 1.5 mm dia. 20 mm long MS nails 
partially inserted into the bamboo flooring and 
balance length with the heads of the nails embedded 
in the PCC layer, holding the two components 
together. The sectional properties of the combination 
are calculated based on the concept of flitched beams 
for design (see Fig. 14). 


10.2.6 Bamboo Concrete Walling Using Flat Bamboo 


Loads on walls and roof do not generally justify use 
of round bamboo as such. So, flat or split bamboo is 
preferred for use in these cases. The flat bamboo works 
like a wire-net used conventionally to hold cement 
plaster in critical applications. Partial plastering is done 
during the first day ensuring entry of plastering material 
in the gaps of flat bamboo. This provides the base 
for cement plastering or PCC laying next day. About 
5 mm gap is essential for entry of plastering material 
of sufficient sectional area to sustain shear force. The 
gaps are generated by inserting a small wedge of 
bamboo strip and pulling it out after a part of the gap 
is filled by plaster. Such gaps have to be discontinuous, 


IS 15912 : 2018 


to retain the character of a wire-net. About 25 percent 
width of the flat bamboo is assumed to be gaps, part 
of it is the organized gap of 5 mm width as described, 
at an interval of about 50 mm width, to sustain shear 
force and the balance gap remains to be natural to flat 
bamboo. Minimum thickness of the flat bamboo is 
assumed to be 6 mm. Bamboo with thicker wall would 
be stronger. 


21.5 x 20 LONG NAIL 
(20250 C/C, 
10 mm IN PCC, 


PCC OVER 
BAMBOO 
FLOORING 


21.5 x 20 LONG NAIL PLAN 
(10 mm IN PCC, 
REST INSERTED 


IN BAMBOO) 


30 THICK M20 PCC 
(WITH 6MM DOWN 
COARSE AGGREGATE) 


45-50 mm @ BAMBOO 
(6-8 mm THICK CULM) 


SECTION 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


Fic. 14 DETAIL OF A TYPICAL BAMBOO CONCRETE 
FLOORING 


Expected strength (using Bambusa balcooa) may be 
considered as follows: 


a) Walling of 6 mm bamboo with 18 mm thick 
cement sand plaster in 1:3 would be able to 
withstand wind pressure of 1.12 kPa (112 kgf/m?) 
if used as wall, either supported continuously 
1.5 m apart, or supported simply 1.25 m apart. 


b) As a roof, the wind suction load would be partly 
compensated by the dead load of the roof. The 
imposed load of a mason sitting at the centre of 
span needs to be considered. This load can be 
accommodated by use of 18 mm M20 PCC with 
6 mm flat bamboo, supported 1.0 m apart; neatly 
finished. 


The engineered houses for application of the above 
bamboo concrete walling are designed with stiffeners 
and diagonals in all the three planes, keeping the 
deformation of walls along plane of walls almost nil 
and deflection of columns across the plane of wall at a 
minimum. 


25 


IS 15912 : 2018 


IS No. 


848 : 2006 


875 


(Part 1) : 1987 


(Part 2) : 1987 
(Part 3) : 2015 
(Part 4) : 1987 
(Part 5) : 1987 
883 : 2016 


1708 (Parts 1 to 18) : 1986 
1734 (Parts 1 to 20) : 1983 


1902 : 2006 


2366: 
4924 


1983 


(Part 1) : 1968 
(Part 2) : 1968 
6874 : 2008 


8242 : 


1976 


9096 : 2006 


13958 
14588 
15476 
15972 


: 1994 
: 1999 
: 2004 
: 2012 


SP 7 : 2016 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 2) 


LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 


Title 


Specification for synthetic resin adhesives for plywood (phenolic and 
aminoplastic) (second revision) 


Code of practice for design loads (Other than earthquake) for buildings and 
structures: 


Dead loads — Unit weights of building materials and stored materials (second 
revision) 


Imposed loads (second revision) 

Wind loads (third revision) 

Snow loads (second revision) 

Special loads and combinations (second revision) 

Code of practice for design of structural timber in buildings (fifth revision) 
Methods of testing of small clear specimens of timber (second revision) 
Methods of test for plywood (second revision) 


Code of practice for preservation of bamboo and cane for non-structural 
purposes (second revision) 


Code of practice for nail-jointed timber construction ( first revision) 
Method of test for nail-jointed timber trusses: 

Destructive test 

Proof test 

Method of tests for bamboo ( first revision) 

Method of tests for split bamboos 

Code of practice for preservation of bamboo for structural purposes ( first 
revision) 

Specification for bamboo mat board for general purposes 
Specification for bamboo mat veneer composite for general purposes 
Specification for bamboo mat corrugated sheets 


Specification for bamboo-jute composite corrugated and semi-corrugated 
sheets 


National Building Code of India 2016 


26 


IS 15912 : 2018 


ANNEX B 
( Foreword ) 


SOURCE AND LOCAL NAMES OF SOME OF THE SPECIES OF BAMBOO 


Species 


Q) 


Source/Local Names 


(3) 


iii) 


iv) 


v) 


vi) 


Bambusa auriculata 


B. balcooa 


B. bambos (Syn.B. arundinacea) 


B. burmanica 
B. multiplex 
Syn. B. glancescens (Syn. B. nana) 


B. nutans 


Assam, Bangladesh, Myanmar; introduced in Calcutta 
Botanical Garden (now Acharya Jagdish Chandra Bose 
Botanical Garden) 


Asm — Baluka; 

Ben — Balku bans; 

Duars — Bora bans; 

Garo — Wamnah, beru; 

Tripura — Barak. 

Asm — Kotoba; 

Ben — Baroowa, behor, ketuas, ketwa; 
Manip — Saneibi; 

Mah – Katang bamboo, oowga; 
Oriya — Daba, katuig; 

Tel — Mulkasveduru, Mulluvedurn; 
English — Spiny bamboo. 

Asm — Thaikawa. 

Sans — keu-fa; 

Burmese — Pa-lau-pinan-wa; 
Malay — Bamboo tjeenah; 

China — Bamboohowertjeenah. 
Asm — Deobans, jotia-makal; 

Asm — Bidhuli, mukial; 

Ben — Makia; 

Bhutia — Jiu; 

Hin — Malabans; 

Kangra — Nal; 

Khasi — Seringjai; 

Kuki - Wamalang; 

Lepcha — Malubans, mahlu, mallo; 
Oriya — Badiabansa; 

Sylhet (Bangladesh) — Peechli; 
Tripura — Kali. 


27 


IS 15912 : 2018 


SI 
No. 


(1) 


vii) 


viii) 


ix) 


x) 


xi) 


xii) 


xiii) 


xiv) 


xv) 


xvi) 


Species 


Q) 
B. pallida 


B. polymorpha 


B. tulda 


B. vulgaris 


B. wamin Syn. B. ventricosa 
(Syn. B. vulgaris var. wamin) 


Cephalostachyum pergracile 


Dendrocalamus giganteous 


D. hamiltonii 


D. longispathus 


D. membranaceus 


Source/Local Names 


(3) 
Asm — Bijli, jowa, makal, walkthai; 
Cachar — Bakhal, burwal; 
Khasi — Seskien, skhen, ineng, usker; 
Lepcha – Pashipo, pshi, pushee; 
Mikir — Loto; 
Naga — Tesero, watoi; 
Tripura — Makal. 
Asm — Jamabetwa, betwa; 
Ben — Batua, jaibarouwa, jama; 
Burma — Kyathaung-wa; 
MP-Korku — Narangibhas; 
Tripura — Basi. 
Asm — Wamunna, wagi, nal-bans; 
Ben — Tulda, jowa; 
Duars — Karanti, matela; 
Garo — Watti; 
Hin — Peka; 
Kamrup — Bijuli, Jati, joo, ghora; 
Tripura — Mirtinga. 
Ben and Manip — Bakal; 
Oriya — Sunarkania bans. 


Common name — Pitcher bamboo. 


MP - Bhalan bans; 
Manip — Wootang; 
Naga — Latang; 
Oriya — Darrgi. 
English — Giant Bamboo; 
Asm — Worra; 
Manip — Maroobeb. 
Nep — Tamo; 

Asm — Kokwa; 
Tripura — Pecha. 
Tripura — Rupai. 


Native of Myanmar; introduced in Kerala. 


28 


IS 15912 : 2018 


SI Species Source/Local Names 
No. 
(1) (2) (3) 
xvii) D. strictus English — Male bamboo; 
Ben — Karail; 


Guj — Nakur bans; 

Kan — Kiribidiru; 

Mah — Male bamboo, nanvel; 

Oriya — Salia; 

Tam — Kalmungil; 

Tel — Sadanapavedur; 

Tripura — Lathi bans; 

Hin — Bans kaban, Nav bans. 
xviii) Melocanna baccifera Asm — Tarai; 

Ben — Muli; 

Cachar — Wati; 

Garo — Watrai; 

Manip — Moubi; 

Mikir — Artem; 

Naga – Turiah. 


xix) Oxytenanthera abyssinicia Native of tropical Africa; cultivated at FRI, Dehradun. 
xx)  Thyrsostachys oliveri Native of Myanmar; 
Planted in Haldwani (Uttaranchal), Arunachal Pradesh, 
Kerala and Tamil Nadu. 
NOTES 


1 The following abbreviations have been used in the above table: 
Asm Assam 
Ben Bengali 
Guj Gujarati 
Hin Hindi 
Kan Kannada 
Mah Maharashtra 
Manip Manipur 
M.P. Madhya Pradesh 
Nep Nepali 
Sans Sanskrit 
Tam Tamil 
Tel Telugu 


2 The above table does not provide an exhaustive list. It only attempts to enlist some of the information readily available in regard to 
species of bamboo from India and some of the neighbouring countries, and some connected information. 


29 


IS 15912 : 2018 


C-1 


ANNEX C 


( Foreword ) 


RECOMMENDATIONS FOR BAMBOO STRUCTURES IN 
HIGH WIND/CYCLONE PRONE AREAS 


Given below are some recommendations for 


bamboo structures in high wind/cyclone prone areas, 
which are based on Rapid Visual Screening (RVS) of 
the damages of past events: 


a) 


b 


— 


c) 


d 


М7 


е 


— 


Prefer a square plan of the building symmetrical 
to the arrangement of partitions and openings 
for balanced distribution of forces within the 
structure. Window positioning be planned in such 
a way that wind entering through window could 
pass through similar opening on opposite wall in 
order to reduce built-up pressure, and incorporate 
ridge vents. 


A hip-shaped, pyramidal or a conical roofing be 
preferred to gable end or mono-pitch ones for least 
wind resistance. 


Wide mono-pitched Verandas abutting the 
entrance to residence should be structurally 
separated from the main building. 


Roof overhangs be limited to 450 mm as they 
contribute to higher negative suction. Large 
overhangs should be properly tied back to wall 
frame-work. 


Roof structure shall be properly secured with 
vertical load-bearing members (wooden ог 
bamboo columns, brick piers or walling) for 


30 


g 


h 


j 


— 


— 


— 


eliminating the chances of being blown away from 
the building. A continuous beam connecting all 
the columns would increase the framing action. 


Roof cladding (G.I. sheets, clay tiles or thatch) be 
properly connected with holding down U-bolts, or 
sturdy anchorages to ensure safety. Thatch roof be 
tied by nylon ropes in diagonal pattern. 


Sufficient depth for anchorage be provided; 
columns be embedded in pits within the foundation 
and secured by poured concrete. Wetting of 
column base be checked by raising it from the 
floor level. 


Highest importance be given to strengthening the 
junctions between structural elements at different 
levels, that is, foundation, eaves and roof. Walls 
be linked together suitably by a continued collar 
beam at floor, sill, lintel and roof level. 


Fastening any two mutually perpendicular load 
bearing members should be done in accordance 
with good practice of spacing the connecting bolts 
with reference to load’s direction and the centre of 
stiffness. This will increase the moment-resisting 
capacity of the joint and prevent hinge formation. 
A minimum of two bolts be provided to prevent 
rotation of members at a joint. 


IS 15912 : 2018 


ANNEX D 


( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Building Construction Practices Sectional Committee, CED 13 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity (Flat No. 2061, Engineers 
Apartments, Plot 11, Sector - 18А, Dwarka, New 
Delhi 110078) 


Ahluwalia Contracts (India) Limited, New Delhi 


Association of Consulting Civil Engineers (India), 
Bengaluru 


Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 
Builders Association of India, New Delhi 


Building Materials & Technology Promotion Council, 
New Delhi 


Central Insecticides Board, Faridabad 
Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Confederation of Construction Products and Services, 
New Delhi 


CSIR-Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


CSIR-North East Institute of Science and Technology, 
Jorhat 


CSIR-Structural Engineering Research Centre, 
Chennai 


Delhi Development Authority, New Delhi 


Delhi Urban Shelter Improvement Board, New Delhi 
Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


Forest Research Institute, Dehradun 


Housing & Urban Development Corporation Limited, 
New Delhi 


Indian Buildings Congress, New Delhi 
Indian Pest Control Association, New Delhi 
Indian Plywood Industries Research & Training 


Institute, Bengaluru 
Larsen & Toubro Limited, ECC Division, Chennai 


Representative(s) 


Suri D. S. SACHDEV (Chairman) 


SHRI SHOBHIT UPPAL 
SHRI PRADEEP Kumar (Alternate) 


Suri A. N. PRAKASH 
SHRI SATISH V. SALPEKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI K. SRINIVAS 
SHRI H. E. Iver (Alternate) 


SHRI SUROJIT SAMANTA 
SHRI RAM Avtar (Alternate) 


SHRI CHANDI NATH JHA 


ADDITIONAL PPA cum Secretary (СІВ & RC) 
Joint DIRECTOR (ENTOMOLOGY) (Alternate) 


CHIEF ENGINEER (CSO) 
SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER (TAS) (Alternate) 


SHRI DEEPAK GAHLOWT 
SHRI SHASHI Kant (Alternate) 


SHRI S. К. МЕС! 
DR AJAY CHOURASIA (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


DIRECTOR 
Dr P. Srinivasan (Alternate) 


CHIEF ENGINEER (SZ) 
SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER (P)-1 (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI RAJANJI SRIVASTAVA 
SHRI RAVINDRA Kumar (Alternate) 


Dr KisHAN Kumar V. S 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI S. C. BHATIA 
Suri P. S. CHADHA (Alternate) 


VICE PRESIDENT 
GENERAL SECRETARY (Alternate) 


SHRI AMITAVA SIL 
SHRI ANAND NANDANWAR (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJAN VENKATESWARAN 
SHRI V. SUKUMAR HEBBAR (Alternate) 


31 


IS 15912 : 2018 


Organization 


Military Engineer Services, Engineer-in-Chief’s 
Branch, Integrated HQ of MoD, (Army), 
New Delhi 


NBCC (India) Limited, New Delhi 
NTPC Ltd, New Delhi 
Pest Control (India) Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


Public Works Department, Govt of Gujarat, 
Gujarat 


Public Works Department, Govt of NCT of Delhi, 
New Delhi 


Research, Designs and Standards Organization, 
Ministry of Railways, Lucknow 


School of Planning & Architecture, New Delhi 

The All India Glass Manufacturers’ Federation, 
New Delhi 

The Energy and Resources Institute, New Delhi 

The Indian Institute of Architects, Mumbai 

The Institution of Engineers (India), Kolkata 

In personal capacity (Pratap Nursery Lane 


Near Gurudwara, Panditwari, Dehradun) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


Jr DG (ARCHITECTURE) 


EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR (ENGG) 
GENERAL MANAGER (ENGG) (Alternate) 


Suri R. L. Das 
SHRI ANIL Kapoor (Alternate) 


SHRI SHANKAR M. GHUGE 
SHRI NITIN В. JAGTAP (Alternate) 


SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER, DESIGN (R&D) 
REPRESENTATIVE 


Director (Works) 
ADE (Works) (Alternate) 


PROF ANIL DEWAN 
Pnor JAYA Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI SOURABH KANKAR 
SHRI RUPINDER SHELLY (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJAY SETH 
Ms МЕСНА BEHAL (Alternate) 


SHRI VIJAY GARG 
SHRI SHAMIT MANCHANDA (Alternate) 


SHRI P. K. ADLAKHA 
SHRI DEVENDRA GILL (Alternate) 


SHRI K. S. PRUTHI 


SHRI SANJAY PANT, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (CIVIL ENGINEERING) 


[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 


SHRI S ARUN KUMAR 
ScIENTIST “D” (CIVIL ENGINEERING), BIS 


32 


(Continued from second cover) 


With the standardization on design and construction aspects of bamboo, it is expected to ensure durable structures, 
however, some specific guidelines are required in the event of tropical cyclones in the sub-continent and the 
traditional non-engineered structures generally constructed. Keeping this in view, some recommendations are 
given in Annex C which may be followed in addition to provisions given in the main text of this standard. 
Similar to kiln dried timber, kiln drying of bamboo may be considered to ensure complete drying in a controlled 
condition. 


In the formulation of this standard, due weightage has been given to international coordination among the standards 
and practices prevailing in different countries in addition to relating it to the practices in the field in this country. 
This has been ensured by considering the provisions of ISO 22156 : 2004 ‘Bamboo — Structural design’. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex D. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 13 (11987). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


