IAT Ah IS 13039 : 2014 
Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2019) 


Tet teste RTqEH— waar 
an Va -ara — teat faa 
(Teer GRIT ) 


External Hydrant 
Systems — Provision and 
Maintenance — Code of Practice 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 13.220 


O BIS 2014 


ads res em 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
"IW To, 9 ETE wei Art, ae feeeit-110002 
a MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in  www.standardsbis.in 


June 2014 Price Group 9 


Fire Fighting Sectional Committee, CED 22 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Fire Fighting Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 


One of the methods for extinguishing fire in towns, cities and industrial buildings is by providing external hydrant 
systems. Fire hydrant systems consist of suitable capacity reservoirs, arrangements to impart pressure to the 
water, means to convey the water to various locations and suitable water outlets at the required locations. In order 
that such system could function efficiently, it is necessary to give guidance for the provision, installation, inspection 
and maintenance of this system. 


Table 23 of SP 7 : 2005 ‘National Building Code of India’, governs requirements for various types of individual 
buildings and small scale industries only. For other industries, requirements are to be worked out based on 
relevant Indian standards namely ‘IS 9668 Code of Practice for provision and maintenance of water supplies and 
fire fighting, IS 13039 Code of Practice for external hydrant systems provision and maintenance and IS 3844 
Code of Practice for installation and maintenance of internal fire hydrants and hose reels on premises’ in consultation 
with local fire authorities. 


IS 9668 covers provisions and maintenance of water supplies for extinguishing fires in towns, cities and industrial 
buildings and IS 13039 covers provision and maintenance of external hydrant systems. 


Purpose of this revision of IS 13039 is to delete water supply requirements for industries from IS 9668 and bring 
out an up-to-date comprehensive standard, for external hydrant systems in medium and large scale industries 
(other than petroleum refining and petrochemical plants which are governed by OISD standards), which would 
include water supply requirements also. IS 9668 would now cover provisions for water supplies for towns and 
cities only. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values revised’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 13039 : 2014 


Indian Standard 


EXTERNAL HYDRANT SYSTEMS — PROVISION AND 
MAINTENANCE — CODE OF PRACTICE 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard covers provision of installation 
Inspection and maintenance of hydrant systems in 
medium and large scale industrial risks (other than 
petroleum refining and petrochemical plants which are 
governed by OISD standards). 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed at Annex A contain provisions 
which through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based on 
this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards indicated at Annex A. 


3 CLASSIFICATIONS OF OCCUPANCIES 


Water supply, pumping capacity and other features of 
the hydrant system depend not only on the size of the 
risk but also on its fire growth and spread potentialities. 
For the purpose of hydrant systems design the risks 
are to be categorized under the classes as given in 
Annex B. 


4 HYDRANTS/FIXED MONITORS 


4.1 Before commissioning, the hydrant system shall 
be flushed thoroughly. 


Fire hydrants shall be of stand post type conforming 
to IS 908. 


If site conditions demand, they can also be of 
underground type conforming to IS 909, however only 
where the hydrants are properly enclosed in a surface 
box of cast iron or masonry, 750 mm square and 80 
mm above ground level, the top of the hydrant outlet 
being not more than 80 mm below the top of the box. 
Such surface boxes shall be protected by hinged cast 
iron covers as specified in IS 3950. 


4.2 Water shall be available immediately to all 
hydrants/fixed monitors at all times, with all cut-off 
valves being kept open. 


4.3 Connections for any purpose other than fire 
fighting are not permitted from the hydrant/fixed 


monitor/stand post or from any portion of the hydrant 
service. Hose reels can however be tapped from hydrant 
stand posts. 


4.4 All hydrant outlets shall be situated 1 m above 
ground level. 


4.5 The stand posts shall be 80 mm in diameter for 
single headed hydrants, 100 mm for double-headed 
hydrants and monitors of 63 mm or 75 mm size and 
150 mm for monitor of 100 mm size. 


It is recommended that stand posts be painted ‘fire red’ 
(shade No. 536 as per IS 5). 


4.6 Only oblique hydrants conforming to IS 5290 with 
outlets angled towards ground shall be used. The 
hydrant couplings shall be of the instantaneous spring- 
lock (female) type of 63 mm diameter and valves shall 
be of the screw down type. 


Suitable pressure reducing devices may be provided 
for hydrants where the pressure exceeds 7 kg/cm?. 


4.7 Double-headed hydrants shall consist of two 
separate landing valves. 


4.8 Hydrants shall be easily accessible, storage of any 
kind on or around the hydrant being prohibited. 


Where hydrants are situated in remote locations, they 
shall be approachable by means of paved pathways. 


4.9 Hydrants located in situations where they are likely 
to be damaged by vehicular traffic shall be protected 
by guard rails on all sides. 


4.10 Hydrants shall be located bearing in mind the 
attendant fire hazards, at the different sections of the 
premises to be protected and so as to give most effective 
service. They shall be so distributed as to provide 
protection for the buildings on all sides and need not 
necessarily be equidistant from each other (see 4.11). 


4.11 Advantage shall be taken of convenient door and/ 
or window openings to place hydrants so that only a 
minimum length of hose is required to reach the 
openings through which fire may be attacked. 


In case of continuous blank walls, suitable provision 
shall be made on the walls near hydrant posts for easy 
access inside the premises. 


IS 13039 : 2014 


4.12 At least one hydrant post shall be provided for 
every 60 m of external wall measurement in case of 
light hazard occupancy, for every 45 m in case of 
ordinary hazard occupancy and every 30 m of external 
wall measurement or perimeter of building/unit battery 
limit in case of high hazard occupancy. 


Measurements shall be calculated on the total length 
of walls of all buildings/perimeter of all battery limits 
to be protected except in the case of opposite buildings 
(other than those of high hazard category) within 22.5 
m of each other, where the measurement of the shorter 
opposing wall may be omitted. 


Notwithstanding the above, hydrants protecting utilities 
and miscellaneous buildings in high hazard risks may 
be spaced at 45 m. 


4.13 Where any part of a building is normally used 
for storage purpose or where hazardous processes are 
carried out, there shall be two single or one double 
headed hydrant within 15 m of the building, the layout 
being such that two jets of water can be played 
simultaneously on the highest point of the roof. 


4.14 All hydrants and monitors should be serially 
numbered. 


4.15 For light and moderate hazard risks, hydrant heads 
shall be positioned at distances not less than 2 m from 
the face of the building or edge of the storage plot to 
be protected. Such buildings shall not be deemed to be 
protected by a hydrant unless such hydrant is within 
15 m of the building. 


4.16 In case of buildings/plants occupied for high 
hazard process or storage areas, the hydrants shall be 
located at a minimum distance of 15 m from the 
periphery of storage tank or hazardous equipment 
under protection. 


In the case of buildings, this distance shall be not less 
than 5 m and more than 15 m from the face of building. 


Hydrants/Monitors shall be located along road side for 
easy accessibility as far as possible. 


4.17 In case where, owing to the size or layout of the 
building, or building being divided by internal walls, 
if any point within the building is at a distance of more 
than 45 m from an external fire hydrant, an internal 
hydrant system shall be provided so that no portion of 
the floor is more than 45 m from an external hydrant 
or 30 m from an internal hydrant. 


Distance of 45 m indicated above shall be increased to 
60 m for light hazard occupancies and reduced to 30 
m for high hazard occupancies. 


In case of large open areas like switchyards, where it 
is not feasible to lay internal hydrants, alternate 
hydrants may be replaced by monitors of suitable size. 


4.18 High hazard industrial occupancies, hazardous 
buildings and basements exceeding 200 m? in area shall 
be protected by automatic sprinklers or such other 
appropriate systems 


4.19 Fire Escape/Fire Access Staircases 


4.19.1 In case of storied buildings, satisfactory access 
shall be provided to all parts of each floor by means of 
incombustible internal or external staircases. 


4.19.2 All buildings having area more than 500 m? on 
each floor shall have a minimum of two staircases. 


At least one of them shall be on external wall of the 
building and shall open directly to the exterior, interior 
open space or to an open space of safety 


4.19.3 Exact numbers, width, location, etc, of such 
staircases and ramps for basements shall depend on 
travel distance requirements given under 4.5.1, 4.5.2 
and 4.5.3 and Table 22 of National Building Code of 
India depending on type of occupancy. 


4.19.4 Internal staircases shall conform to 4.9, 
external staircases shall conform to 4.11 and ramps 
shall conform to 4.14 of National Building Code of 
India. 


4.19.5 All staircases (protected escape routes) shall 
be pressurized as per 4.10 of National Building Code 
of India. 


4.19.6 Internal fire hydrants and hose reels shall be 
provided on internal/external fire escape staircases as 
per provisions given under 5.8, 5.10, 5.13, 5.14, 5.15 
and 6 of IS 3844. 


4.19.7 A hydrant shall be provided on every floor 
landing which shall be not less than 1.25 m. 


4.19.8 Exits to the access staircases shall always be 
kept open during working hours. During non-working 
hours, the exits may be locked from the staircase side 
only. 


Locks of all exits shall have one master key, which 
shall be available either at the main gate, or any other 
prominent and easily accessible location known to the 
fire fighting personnel. Alternatively, the key shall be 
kept in a glass-fronted box or in the hose box on the 
staircase landing. 


4.19.9 Adequate smoke venting facilities shall be 
provided for safe use of exits. 


4.20 Monitors 


4.20.1 Monitors conforming to IS 8442 shall be located 
at strategic locations for protection of cluster of 
columns, heaters, gassifiers, etc, and where it may not 
be possible to approach the higher levels. 


The requirement of monitors shall be established based 
on hazard involved and layout considerations. Monitors 
shall be located to direct water on the object as well as 
to provide water shield to firemen approaching a fire. 
The monitors should not be installed less than 15 m 
from hazardous equipment. Also, the location of water 
monitors shall not exceed 45 m from the hazard to be 
protected. Variable flow monitors may be installed at 
critical locations. 


4.20.2 A minimum of 2 monitors shall be provided 
for the protection of each such area. Water monitors 
for protection of heaters shall be installed so that the 
heater can be isolated from the remainder of the plant 
in an emergency. 


4.20.3 Tank wagon and tank lorry loading/unloading 
bays and gantry area should be provided with alternate 
fire hydrants and water cum foam monitors having 
multipurpose combination nozzles for jet spray and 
fog arrangement located at spacing of 30 m on either 
sides of the gantry. 


4.20.4 Monitors should be painted with luminous 
colour for ease of identification during emergency. 


4.21 Storage of material in the open shall be protected 
as under: 


Material Protection 


Non-hazardous One single hydrant for every 60 m 


storage of storage periphery located beyond 
2 m but within 15 m of storage area 
Coal or Coke One single hydrant for every 45 m 


of storage periphery located beyond 
2 m but within 15 m of storage area 


Other storages One double hydrant for every 45 m 


of the storage periphery located be- 
yond 2 m, but within 22.5 m of stor- 
age area 


NOTES 


1 In the case of open storage areas of bamboo, bagasse, grass/ 
hay and timber, at least 50 percent of hydrant shall be replaced 
by fixed monitors having nozzle bore of 38 mm diameter, if 
the individual stack height is more than 6 m and total storage 
exceeds 5 000 tonne. 

2 Where hydrant/monitors located along one longer side of a 
storage area are more than 90 m from those along the other 
longer side, monitors having jets of longer reach may be 
accepted. 


4.22 Protection for Storage Tanks/Vessels 


4.22.1 In case tanks are located more than 22.5 m from 
the dyke walls, one double hydrant shall be replaced 
by a 38 mm monitor (Every alternate monitor should 
be a foam monitor and a minimum of one such foam 
monitor should be provided). 


IS 13039 : 2014 


4.22.2 Additional requirement for water spray 
protection for storage tanks/vessels. 


4.22.2.1 Class A petroleum storage in above ground 
tanks shall have fixed water spray system, whether 
floating roof or fixed roof. 


4.22.2.2 Adequate provision shall be made to promptly 
and effectively dispose of all liquids from the fire areas 
during operation of fire protection systems in such 
areas. 


4.22.3 Fixed/semi-fixed foam system shall be provided 
for the following tanks: 


*Floating roof tanks storing Class 'A' petroleum 
products." 


5 PUMPS 


5.1 General 


5.1.1 Pumps conforming to IS 12469 shall be 
exclusively used for fire fighting purposes and shall 
be either, 


a) electric motor driven centrifugal pumps; or 

b) compression ignition engine driven 
centrifugal pumps; or 

c) vertical turbine submersible pumps. 


5.1.2 Pumps shall be direct-coupled, except in the case 
of engine-driven vertical turbine pumps wherein gear 
drives shall be permitted. Belt-driven pumps shall not 
be accepted. 


5.1.3 Parts of pumps like impeller, shaft sleeve, 
wearing ring, etc, shall be of non-corrosive metal, 
preferably of brass or bronze or stainless steel. Where 
seawater is used or where the quality of water 
necessitates the use of special metals/alloys, the use of 
such metals or alloys shall be insisted. 


5.1.4 The capacity of the pump(s) would depend on 
whether or not tapping(s) for water spray and/or foam 
protection for tanks/spheres/bullets/plants/other 
facilities is (are) taken from the hydrant service. 


In case there is no tapping from the hydrant service, the 
capacity of the pump shall be as per hereunder. However, 
where the water demand for water sprays and/or foam 
protection as per 5.1.4.2, 5.1.4.3, 5.1.4.4, 5.1.4.5 
and 5.1.4.6 is more than that required for the hydrant 
system, the pumping capacity shall be based on the 
higher water demand. 


5.1.4.1 The capacity of pumps for hydrant service shall 
be determined by the class of occupancy and size of 
installation as per Tables 1, 2 and 3. 


5.1.4.2. Where transformers are protected by high 
velocity water spray system tapped from hydrant 


IS 13039 : 2014 


system, water requirements of the spray system shall 
be determined as per rules for water spray system under 
IS 15325. Water requirement of the spray system 
worked out as above shall then be loaded by 1 750 
litre/min for supplementary hose stream protection. 


5.1.4.3 Where plants and other facilities are protected 
by sprinkler system tapped from the pressurized 
hydrant service, water requirement of the sprinkler 
system shall be determined as per the rules for sprinkler 
system under IS 15105. If the total water requirement 
for sprinkler system exceeds the requirement of the 
hydrant service as per Tables 1, 2 and 3 the pumping 
capacity shall be equivalent to the former. 


5.1.4.4 Where spheres/bullets are protected by a medium 
velocity water spray system tapped from pressurized 
hydrant service, water requirements of the spray system 
shall be determined as mentioned under IS 15325. Water 
application may be reduced to 5 litre/min where the 
bullets/Spheres coated with approved passive materials 


providing fire resistance of at least 2 h. 


The water requirement of the spray system worked out 
as above shall then be loaded for supplementary hose 
stream protection as under: 


Water capacity of Bullets/ Supplementary hose 
Spheres stream protection 
n? litre/min 
Up to and including 50 m° 1 750 
Above 50 m? and up to 150 n? 2 250 
Above 150 m? 4 500 


If the total water requirement for spray protection and 
hose steam protection for spheres/bullets worked out 
as above exceeds the requirements of the hydrant 
service as per Tables 1, 2 and 3 the pumping capacity 
shall be equivalent to the former. 


NOTE — For design criteria of medium velocity water spray 
system reference shall be made to IS 15325. 


Table 1 Pump Capacity — Light Hazard Risk 
(Clause 5.1.4.1) 


Nature of Risk Number of Hydrants 


a) (2) 


Pump Capacity 
litre/min (m?/h) 


(3) 


Not exceeding 20 

Exceeding 20 but not exceeding 55 
Exceeding 55 but not exceeding 100 
Exceeding 100^ 


Light hazard 


1 620 (96) 

2 280 (137) 

2 850 (171) 

2 850 (171) plus 2 850 (171) for every additional 125 
hydrants or part thereof. 


D The total pumping capacity need not be greater than 11 400 litre/min (683 m?/h) irrespective of the number of hydrant points. 


NOTE — Delivery pressure at pump discharge at rated capacity shall be hydraulically designed. 


Table 2 Pump Capacity — Ordinary Hazard Risk 
(Clause 5.1.4.1) 


Nature of Risk Number of Hydrants 


(1) (2) 


Pump Capacity 
litre/min (m?/h) 


(3) 


Not exceeding 20 

Exceeding 20 but not exceeding 55 
Exceeding 55 but not exceeding 100 
Exceeding 100^ 


Ordinary hazard 


2 280 (137) 

2 850 (171) 

4 550 (273) 

4 550 (273) plus 4 550 (273) for every additional 125 
hydrants or part thereof. 


D Total pumping capacity need not be greater than 18 200 litre/min (1 092 m?/h) irrespective of the number of hydrant points. 


NOTES 


1 Where situation warrants, higher capacity pumps not exceeding 410 m?/h may be accepted. 


2 In case of new systems where the number of hydrants is expected to be between 100 and 150; and where further extension of the 
system beyond 150 hydrants is not anticipated, a single pump of 410 m?/h capacity may be permitted. 


3 Likewise in case of old installations where the system is extended beyond 100 hydrants but not exceeding 150 hydrants; and where 
further extension beyond 150 hydrants is not anticipated, an additional pump of 171 m?/h may be permitted. 


4 In order to achieve the minimum pressure at higher elevation, booster pump(s) with a capacity of 137 m*/h, having requisite rated 
head may be acceptable. The booster pump shall be regarded as a pressure-compensating device only. 


5 A higher capacity booster pump may be stipulated where considered necessary. Booster pump shall be located at ground level only. 


6 Electrically driven booster pump(s) shall in addition to the normal supply be connected to the emergency power supply also and 


satisfy all requirements applicable to main pumps. 


7 Delivery pressure at pump discharge at rated capacity shall be hydraulically designed. 


IS 13039 : 2014 


Table 3 Pump Capacity — High Hazard Risks 
(other than those Governed by OISD Standards) 
(Clause 5.1.4.1) 


SI Nature of Risk 
No. litre/min (m?/h) 
(1) Q) Q) 


Number of Hydrants 


Pump Capacity 


(4) 


Not exceeding 20 


i) Sub Category (A) 
Exceeding 100 


Not exceeding 20 
ii) Sub Category (B ) 


Exceeding 100 


NOTES 


Exceeding 20 but not exceeding 55 
Exceeding 55 but not exceeding 100 


Exceeding 20 but not exceeding 55 
Exceeding 55 but not exceeding 100 


2 850 (171) 

4 550 (273) 

6 825 (410) 

6 825 (410) plus 6 825 (410) for every additional 125 
hydrants or part thereof. 


Two of 2 850 (171) 

Two of 4 550 (273) 

Two of 6 825 (410) 

Two of 6 825 (410) plus one of 6 825 (410) for every 
additional 200 hydrants or part thereof. 


1 In calculating the number of hydrants in the system, a double headed hydrant shall be counted as two, a fixed monitor of 63 mm size 
having nozzle bore of 32 mm shall be counted as three, a fixed monitor of 75 mm size having nozzle bore of 38 mm shall be counted 
as four and a fixed monitor of 100 mm size having nozzle bore of 45 mm as six hydrant points. 


In case of risks, where double headed hydrants are used throughout the system (Except light/ordinary hazard areas protected by 
separate ring mains), a double headed hydrant may be regarded as a single hydrant only 


2 In case of high hazard (Sub-category B) risks where the aggregate pumping capacity required in terms of the above Table or 
of 5.1.4.2, 5.1.4.3, 5.1.4.4, 5.1.4.5 and 5.1.4.6 hereunder exceeds 1 640 m*/h, larger capacity pumps are acceptable provided the 
capacity of the largest pump does not exceed 25 percent of the aggregate installed pumping capacity. 


3 Delivery pressure at pump discharge at rated capacity shall be hydraulically designed. 


5.1.4.5 Where the plants and other facilities are 
protected by medium velocity water spray systems, 
tapped from hydrant service, water requirement of the 
spray system shall be determined as per rules for water 
spray systems under IS 15325. Water requirements of 
the spray systems worked out as above shall then be 
loaded by requirements for supplementary hose 
stream protection which shall be limited to capacity 
of individual hydrant pump required had there been 
no spray protection with a maximum of 4 500 litre/ 
min. 


If the total water requirement for spray protection and 
hose stream protection worked out as above exceeds 
the requirements of the hydrant service as per Tables 
1, 2and3, the pumping capacity shall be equivalent to 
the former. 


5.1.4.6 Where storage tanks containing flammable 
liquids are protected by a medium velocity water spray 
system tapped from the hydrant service, the water 
requirements of the spray system shall be calculated 
as per IS 15325. The water requirement of the spray 
system worked out as above shall then be loaded for 
supplementary hose stream protection as under: 


Sl. Where the Largest Tank ina Water Requirement 
No. Dyke has a Diameter litre/min 
i) Up to 10 m 1 150 


2 250 
3 400 


ii) More than 10 m and up to 20 m 
iii) Over 20 m 


If the total water requirement for spray protection and 
hose stream protection for storage tanks worked out 
as above exceeds the requirements of the hydrant 
service as per Tables 1, 2 and 3, the pumping capacity 
shall be equivalent to the former. 


5.1.5 Pumps shall be capable of furnishing not less 
than 150 percent of rated capacity at a head not less 
than 65 percent of the rated head. 


The shut-off head shall not exceed 120 percent of rated 
head in the case of horizontal pumps and 140 percent 
in the case of vertical turbine type pumps. 


5.1.6 Each pump shall be provided with a name-plate 
giving, the delivery head, capacity and the number of 
rev/min. 


5.1.7 Incase of electrically driven pumps it is necessary 
that a compression ignition engine driven pump of 
similar capacity be installed as a standby. Where the 
hydrant service consists of two or more pumps, number 
of standby pumps shall be equal to half the number of 
main pumps. 


5.1.8 The diameter of the suction pipe shall be such 
that the rate of flow of water through it does not exceed 
120 litre/min. 


5.1.9 Fire pumps shall be provided with positive 
suction and automatic starting devices capable of 
sequential starting of the pumps. The pumps shall be 
connected to audible alarm such as hooter or a siren 


IS 13039 : 2014 


located in a prominent place outside the pump house. 
Where there is a central fire station in the premises, 
additional alarm point shall also be provided in the 
fire station. 


The pumping arrangement shall incorporate jockey 
pumps to take care of system losses. Also, Installation 
of jockey pumps helps to prevent hydraulic surges. The 
capacity of the jockey pumps shall neither be more 
than 5 percent of the installed pumping capacity nor 
less than 3 percent thereof (with a minimum of 10.8 
m?/h) unless the aggregate installed pumping capacity 
is in excess of 820 m?/h, in which case the capacity of 
the jockey pump (s) shall be not less than 25 m?/h plus 
] percent of the installed pumping capacity in excess 
of 820 m?/h. 


5.1.10 Each pump shall be provided with a non-return 
valve and a sluice valve on the delivery side, the sluice 
valve being installed on the upstream side of the non- 
return valve. A pressure gauge shall also be provided 
between the pump and the non-return valve. The size 
of the non-return valve and cut off (sluice) valve shall 
not be less than the size of the initial delivery pipe 
and, in no case, less than the delivery outlet of the 
pump. No butterfly valves shall be installed inside the 
pump room. 


5.1.11 When the premises are also protected by 
sprinkler installation having elevated tank(s) as one of 
the main sources of water supply, and where the 
arrangement for filling the tank(s) is taken from the 
hydrant service, the connection shall be taken directly 
from the pump to the top of the tank (through a stop 
valve) and not through the hydrant mains. 


5.1.12 In no case shall the pump from be sited within 
a building occupied for any other purpose. 


Pumps shall not be installed in open. The pump rooms 
shall normally have brick/concrete walls and non- 
combustible roof, with adequate lighting, ventilation 
and drainage arrangements. 


The pump room shall be so located as to be both easily 
accessible and where any falling masonry and the like 
from other buildings occasioned by fire or otherwise, 
cannot damage the pump room. 


For high hazard (Sub-category B) occupancies, in 
addition to the above provisions, the pump room shall 
be located 30 m clear of all equipment where 
flammable fluids having flash point below 65?C are 
handled and/or stored and 15 m clear of pipes/pipe 
racks (carrying fluids other than water). 


In case of light and ordinary hazard risks, pump rooms 
shall be located 6 m away from all surrounding 
buildings and overhead structures. Where this is not 
feasible the sides of the pump room falling within 6 m 


of the surrounding buildings shall be masonry walls 
of 355 mm thickness with door and window openings 
if any therein, protected by 2 h fire resisting doors and 
6 mm thick wired glasses in steel framework 
respectively and the roof of the pump room shall be of 
reinforced cement concrete (RCC). 


Likewise, when the pump room is attached to a 
building, a fire separating wall of 4 h fire resistance 
shall be constructed between the pump room and the 
attached building with wall openings therein protected 
by 2 h fire resisting doors on either sides. The roof of 
the pump room shall be of RCC construction at least 
100 mm thick and access to the pump room shall be 
from the outside. 


5.22 ELECTRICALLY DRIVEN PUMPS 


5.2.1 The sub-station(s) and/or D.G. house(s)- 
supplying power to the fire pump(s) shall be of 
incombustible construction and shall be located at least 
6 m away from all surrounding buildings. 


Where this is not feasible, all door and window 
openings of the surrounding buildings within 6 m of 
the sub-station(s) and/or D.G. house(s) shall be 
protected by single fireproof doors and 6 mm thick 
wired glasses in steel framework respectively. Like- 
wise, roof eaves, if any, of the surrounding buildings 
falling within 6 m of the sub-station(s) and/or D.G. 
house(s) shall be cut off and wall raised as a parapet. 


The above provisions shall also apply when the sub- 
station(s) and D.G. house(s) are within 6 m of each 
other. 


Where the sub-station(s) and/or D.G. house(s) are 
attached to buildings, fire resisting wall of 4 h fire 
resistance with door openings therein protected by 2h 
fire resisting doors on either sides shall be constructed 
to segregate the sub-station(s) and/or D.G. house(s) 
from the attached buildings and where the attached 
building is storied, the roof of the sub-station(s) and/ 
or D.G. house(s) shall be of R.C.C. construction of at 
least 100 mm thickness. 


Transformer cubicles inside these sub-stations shall be 
separated from H.T. and L.T. cubicles and from each 
other by blank walls of bricks/stone/concrete blocks 
of 355 mm thickness or of R.C.C of 200 mm with door 
openings, if any therein, protected by 2 h fire resisting 
doors. 


The sub-station(s) and D.G. house(s) shall also be 
separated from each other as above. 


Transformers installed outdoors, which are supplying 
power to fire pump(s), shall be located at least 6 m 
away from all surrounding buildings (including sub- 
station(s) and/or D.G. house(s). 


Where this is not feasible all door and window openings 
of the building(s) within 6 m of the transformer shall 
be protected by 2 h fire resisting doors and 6 mm thick 
wired glasses in steel framework respectively. 
Likewise, roof eaves of the building(s) falling within 
6 m of the transformer shall be cut and wall raised as a 
parapet. 


Baffle walls of bricks/stone/concrete blocks of 355 mm 
thickness or of R.C.C. of 200 mm thickness shall be 
constructed between two transformers and these walls 
shall be extended horizontally 600 mm beyond the 
extremities of the transformers and vertically 600 mm 
above the highest point of the transformers. 


NOTE — Where oil capacity of the individual transformer is 
larger than 5 000 litres separating walls must be provided in 
between the transformers and a clear distance as per the 
following table shall be maintained between the transformers 
and the substation: 


Oil Capacity of Individual Clear Separating 


Transformer Distance 
litre m 
5 000 to 10 000 8.0 
Above 10 000 up to 20 000 10.0 
Above 20 000 up to 30 000 12.5 
Over 30 000 15 


Notwithstanding above, For high hazard (sub-category B) 
occupancies, sub-station(s) supplying power to the fire 
pump(s) shall, in addition to complying with the above 
provisions, be located 30 m clear of all equipment where 
flammable fluids having flash point below 65?C are 
handled and/or stored 


5.2.2 Electric supply feeder(s) to sub-station(s) 
supplying power to fire pump shall, consist of armoured 
cables buried underground which shall not pass under 
any building or permanent structures. 


If the feeders are laid inside an underground cable duct/ 
gallery, they shall be placed in a corner of the duct/ 
gallery and shall be isolated from other cables in the 
duct/gallery by means of fire bricks/sand packing/other 
suitable passive protection of at least 30 min fire rating. 


Under extenuating circumstances, where it is not 
feasible to lay the feeders underground, overhead 
feeders may be laid provided they do not fall within a 
horizontal distance of, 


a) 15 m ofany process buildings/plant or tanks 
containing flammable liquids; or 


b) 6mofany other building or tanks containing 
non-flammable liquids or of storage in open. 


5.2.3 in case of high hazard (sub-category B) 
occupancies, all sub-stations (except main receiving 
station in the route of the electrical supply to the fire 
pump(s) which receive power by overhead feeders shall 
be provided with two sets of feeders which, apart from 


IS 13039 : 2014 


conforming with the above distance provisions, shall 
be run along two different routes in such a way that 
failure of more than one route due to a single mishap 
would be a remote possibility. 


5.2.4 A direct feeder without any tapping shall be laid 
from the sub-station to the pump house. The feeder 
shall consist of an armoured cable buried underground 
and shall not pass under any building or permanent 
structure. 


The cable run inside the substation from the breaker 
up to its point of burial or entry into cable duct/gallery 
shall be provided with suitable passive protection of at 
least 30 min fire rating. 


If the feeder is laid inside an underground cable duct/ 
gallery, it shall be placed in a corner of the duct/gallery 
and shall be isolated from other cables in the duct/ 
gallery by means of fire bricks/sand packing/other 
suitable passive protection of at least 30 min fire rating. 


Under extenuating circumstances, overhead feeders 
may be laid provided they do not fall within a horizontal 
distance of, 


a) 15 m ofany process buildings/plant or tanks 
containing flammable liquids; or 


b) 6mofany other building or tanks containing 
non-flammable liquids or of storage in open. 


NOTE — In case of High Hazard ‘B’ occupancies, if the feeder 
to the fire pump(s) is not buried underground, two sets of feeder 
shall be provided which shall, 


a) conform to the above distance provisions; 
b) berun along two different routes in such a way that failure 
of more than one route due to a single mishap would be a 
remote possibility. 
5.2.5 Sufficient spare power shall always be available 
to drive pumping set(s) at all times throughout the year. 


5.2.6 The electric supply to the pumping set(s) shall 
be entirely independent of all other equipment in the 
premises that is even when the power throughout the 
entire premises is switched off, the supply to the pump 
shall continue to be available un-interrupted. This can 
be achieved by taking the connection for the pump(s) 
from the incoming side of the main L.T. breaker. 
However, in cases where two or more transformers and/ 
or sources of supply are connected to a common bus 
bar the connection may be taken through the bus bars. 


5.2.7 The fire pump circuit shall be protected at the 
origin by an automatic circuit breaker so set as to permit 
the motor to be overloaded during an emergency to 
the maximum limit permissible by the manufacturers. 
Further, the under voltage release/no volt coil of that 
circuit breaker shall be removed. 


Where cable lengths are long enough to warrant back- 
up protection, such a protection may be provided. 


IS 13039 : 2014 


5.2.8 It is recommended that telltale lamps, which 
would continuously glow when power is available to 
the fire pump(s) circuit, be provided and fixed in a 
prominent position, both in the substation and in the 
pump room. 


5.2.9 Where there is more than one source of power 
for the operation of pumping set(s) every electrical 
circuit shall be so designed as to ensure that when 
necessary, the set(s) will continue to operate without 
the manual operation of an emergency switch. 


5.2.10 The pumping set(s) shall be securely mounted 
on a robust bedplate, if of the horizontal type, and shall 
be free from vibration at all variations of load. 


5.2.11 The motor shall be of continuous rating type 
and its rating shall be at least equivalent to the 
horsepower required to drive the pump at 150 percent 
of its rated discharge (see 7.4.1.5). 


5.2.12 The motor shall be of totally enclosed type or 
drip proof type, the latter having their air inlets and 
outlets protected with meshed wire panels to exclude 
rodents, reptiles and insects. 


5.2.13 The motor windings shall be vacuum 
impregnated with heat and moisture resisting varnish 
(preferably glass fibre insulated) to withstand tropical 
conditions. 


5.2.14 Motors wound for high tension supplies shall 
have a suitable fixed warming resistance to maintain 
the motor windings in a dry condition at all times. The 
resistance shall be connected to the lighting or other 
equivalent circuit. 


Heating apparatus shall also be provided, for medium 
tension motors where they are located below ground 
level, in order to maintain the motor windings in a dry 
condition. Adequate drainage arrangements shall also 
be provided in the pump house in such cases. 


5.2.15 Wiring in the pump room shall be in accordance 
with IS 1646. The incoming cable to the fire pump 
room shall terminate in an isolating switch fuse unit 
incorporating HRC fuses and provided with a 
distribution system, where necessary. 


5.2.16 It is preferable to have direct on line starters 
for the fire pump motors. However, star delta starters 
are also acceptable. Any other arrangement would 
require prior approval of authority having jurisdiction. 


5.2.17 The starting switchgear for the fire pumps shall 
incorporate an ammeter with a clear indication of the 
motor full load current. Remote controlled starting 
arrangements are also acceptable. 


5.2.18 Cables for motors and switchgear shall be 
armoured type. 


5.2.19 It is recommended that equipment throughout 
be painted fire red and suitably marked for 
identification. 


5.2.20 Necessary spare parts including a set of fuses 
shall be kept in readiness in a glass-fronted box in the 
pump house. 


5.3 Compression Ignition Engine Driven Pumps 
5.3.1 Pump Room 


In sub-zero conditions, the pump room shall be 
artificially heated to maintain the temperature of the 
room above 10?C. 


Adequate ventilation shall be provided for the air 
required for aspiration and to limit the temperature rise 
in the room to 10?C above the ambient temperature 
when the engine is on full load. 


5.3.2. Engine 
5.3.2.1 The engine shall be, 


a) able to accept full load within 15 s from the 
receipt of the signal to start; 


b) naturally aspirated, supercharged or turbo- 
charged and either air or water-cooled. In the 
case of charge air cooling by means of a belt- 
driven fan or of a belt driven auxiliary water 
pump there shall be multiple belts such that 
should half the belts break, the remaining belts 
would be capable of driving the fan or pump; 

c) Capable of operating continuously on full 
load at the site elevation for a period of 6 h; 

d) Provided with an adjustable governor to 
control the engine speed within 10 percent of 
its rated speed under any condition of load 
up to the full load rating. The governor shall 
be set to maintain rated pump speed at 
maximum pump load; and 


e) Provided with an in-built tachometer to 
indicate r.p.m. of the engine. 


5.3.2.2 Engines, after correction for altitude and 
ambient temperature, shall have bare engine 
horsepower rating equivalent to the higher of the 
following two values: 


a) 20 percent in excess of the maximum brake 
horsepower required to drive the pump at its 
duty point; and 

b) Thebrake horsepower required for driving the 
pump at 150 percent of its rated discharge. 


5.3.3 The coupling between the engine and the pump 
shall allow each unit to be removed without disturbing 
the other. 


5.3.4 Air Filtration 


The air intake shall be fitted with a filter of adequate 
size to prevent foreign matter entering the engine. 


5.3.5 Exhaust System 


The exhaust shall be fitted with a suitable silencer and 
the total backpressure shall not exceed the engine 
maker's recommendation. When the exhaust system 
rises above the engine, means shall be provided to 
prevent any condensate flowing into the engine. 


5.3.6 Engine Shut-Down Mechanism 


This shall be manually operated and return 
automatically to the starting position after use. 


5.3.7 Fuel System 
5.3.7.1 Fuel 


There shall be kept on hand at all times sufficient fuel 
to run the engine on full load for 6 h, in addition to 
that in the engine fuel tank. 


5.3.7.2. Fuel tank 


5.3.7.2.1 The fuel tank shall be of welded steel, 
constructed to relevant Indian or Foreign Standard for 
mild steel drums. The tank shall be mounted above the 
engine fuel pump to give gravity feed unless otherwise 
recommended by the manufacturer. The tank shall be 
fitted with an indicator showing the level of the fuel in 
the tank. 


5.3.7.2.2 The capacity of the tank shall be sufficient 
to allow the engine to run on full load for: 


Class of Hazard Capacity 
h 
Light hazard 2 
Ordinary hazard 4 
High hazard (A) 6 
High hazard (B) 8 


NOTE — where there is more than one compression ignition 
engine driven pump set there shall be a separate fuel tank and 
fuel feed pipe for each engine. 


5.3.7.3 Fuel feed pipes 


Any valve in the fuel feed pipe between the fuel tank 
and the engine shall be placed adjacent to the tank and 
it shall be locked in the open position. Pipe joints shall 
not be soldered and plastic tubing shall not be used. 


5.3.7.4 Auxiliary equipment 
The following shall be provided: 


a) A sludge and sediment trap; 
b) Afuellevel gauge; 
c) An inspection and cleaning hole; 


IS 13039 : 2014 


d) A filter between the fuel tank and fuel pump 
mounted in an accessible position for 
cleaning; and 

e) Means to enable the entire fuel system to be 
bled of air (Air relief cocks are not allowed; 
screwed plugs are permitted). 


5.3.8 Starting Mechanism 


Provision shall be made for two separate methods of 
engine starting namely: 


a) Automatic starting by means of a battery 
powered electric starter motor. The battery 
capacity shall be adequate for ten consecutive 
starts without recharging with a cold engine 
under full compression. 


b) Manual starting 


NOTE — The starter motor used for automatic starting 
may also be used for manual starting provided there 
are separate batteries for manual starting. 


5.3.9 Battery Charging 


The means of charging the batteries shall be by a 
2-rate trickle charger with manual selection of boost 
charge and the batteries shall be charged in position. 
Where separate batteries are provided for automatic 
and manual starting, the charging equipment shall be 
capable of trickle charging both the batteries 
simultaneously. Equipment shall be provided to 
enable the state of charge of the batteries to be 
determined. 


5.3.10 Engine Exercizing 


The test shall be for a period of at least 5 min each day. 
Where closed circuit cooling systems are used, the 
water levelin the primary system shall be checked and 
if necessary, water shall be added during the course of 
procedure. 


5.3.11 Tools 


A standard kit of tools shall be provided with the engine 
and kept on hand at all times. 


5.3.12 Spare Parts 
The following spare parts shall be supplied with the 


engine and kept on hand: 
a) Two sets of fuel filters, elements and seals; 


b) Two sets of lubricating oil filters, elements 
and seals; 


c) Two sets of belts (where used); 


d) Onecomplete set of engine-joints, gaskets and 
hoses; 


e) Two injector nozzles; 


f) One complete set of piston rings for each 
cylinder; and 


IS 13039 : 2014 


g) One inlet valve and one exhaust valve. 


6 WATER SUPPLIES 


6.1 Water for the hydrant services shall be stored in 
an easily accessible surface/underground lined 
reservoir or above ground tanks of steel concrete or 
masonry. The effective capacity of the reservoir above 
the low water level (defined hereunder), or above the 
top of the pump casing in case it is higher than the low 
water level for the various classes of occupancies and 
size of hydrant installations shall be as indicated in the 
Table 4. 


The low water level is a point at least three times the 
diameter of the suction pipe above the draw-off point. 


6.2 Large natural reservoirs with water capacity 
exceeding 10 times the aggregate water requirements 
of all fire pumps there from may be left un-lined. 


6.3 The fore bay supplying water to the thermal power 
station fed by canals from perennial water sources like 
rivers, rivulets, dams, etc, may be accepted as firewater 
reservoirs provided the availability of 2 h pumping 
capacity is ensured. The cooling water pond(s) may 
also be accepted as firewater reservoirs provided the 
availability of 2 h pumping capacity is ensured. 


Cooling water basins shall not be acceptable as 
equivalent to cooling water ponds. 


6.4 Reservoirs of and over 225 000 litre capacity shall 
be in two interconnected equal compartments to 
facilitates cleaning and repairs. 


6.5 Fire pump(s) tapping shall be taken from both the 
compartments and shall be connected through sluice 
valves to a common suction header. The pumps, in turn, 
shall draw their suction from the common header 
through sluice valves. In case of dual purpose reservoirs 
catering to fire water and general water requirements, 
the tapping for the general water pumps shall be taken 
at a higher level such that the capacity of the reservoir 
between the low water level as defined heretofore (or 


the top of the fire pump casing in case it is higher than 
the low water level) and the general water tapping is at 
least equivalent to the requirements indicated in 
Table 4. 


7 MAINS 


7.1 The hydrants mains shall normally be laid 
underground or in masonry culverts with removable 
covers of incombustible construction according to the 
provisions given in IS 5822 and shall be of any one of 
the following types: 


a) Cast iron double flanged pipes conforming 
to the following standards: 


Type of Pipes Class of Ref to, 

Pipes Indian 
Standard 

Horizontally cast iron pipes B IS 7181 
Vertically cast iron pipes A IS 1537 
Centrifugally Cast (Spun) A IS 1536 

Iron Pipes 

Centrifugally cast (Spun) A IS 8329 


ductile iron pipes 


NOTE — In case of vertically cast pipes, where the 
nominal diameter of the pipes exceeds 300 mm or where 
the pump delivery pressure exceeds 7 kg/cm’, Class B 
pipes would be necessary. 


b) Centrifugally cast (Spun) iron class A pipes 


with tyton joints — (Rubber gasketed). 
c) Wrought or mild steel pipes (un-galvanized) 
of Medium grade conforming to IS 1239 
(Part 1 and Part 2) or IS 3589 having welded 
joints and coated and wrapped as per IS 
10221. Galvanized pipes with flanged joints 
and fittings can also be used. MS pipes may 
be allowed for extension of existing systems 
which are laid with CI pipes 


Holiday testing for wrapping and coating is 
essential. Holiday testing may preferably be 
carried by flexible and detachable ring probe, 


Table 4 Size of Hydrant Installations 
(Clauses 6.1 and 6.5) 


SI No. Nature of Risk Capacity of Static Storage Exclusively Reserved for Hydrant Service 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Light hazard Not less than | h aggregate pumping capacity with a minimum of 135 000 litre 
ii) Ordinary hazard Not less than 2 h aggregate pumping capacity. 
iii) High hazard (A) Not less than 3 h aggregate pumping capacity 
iv) High hazard (B) Not less than 4 h aggregate pumping capacity 


NOTE — The capacity of the reservoir for ordinary and high hazard class occupancies may be reduced by the quantum of inflow of 
1 h in case of ordinary hazard, 90 min in case of high hazard (A) and 2 h in case of high hazard (B) occupancies, from a reliable 
sources (other than town's main), but in no case shall the reservoir capacity be less than 70 percent of that mentioned above. 


In case of light hazard class occupancies the minimum capacity of the reservoir shall be increased to 225 000 litre, if the highest floor 
of the building is more than 15 m above the surrounding ground level. 


10 


which will enable the entire 360°of the surface 
of the pipe to be scanned. 


At least 10 percent of all the welded joints 
shall be radio graphically tested and half of 
the joints radio graphed shall be the ‘field 
joints’. 

CPVC pipes conforming to IS 16088, un- 
plasticized PVC Class 4 pipes conforming to 
IS 4985 and HDPE pipes conforming to 
IS 4984 are permitted for use in light hazard 
occupancies for underground mains only. 
Depth at which such pipes shall be laid shall 
conform to relevant standards 


d) 


7.2, Underground mains shall be laid such that the top 
of the pipe is not less than 1 m below the ground level 
and masonry or equivalent supports shall be provided 
at regular intervals which shall be suitable for soil 
conditions. In case of poor soil conditions, it may be 
necessary to provide continuous masonry or equivalent 
supports. 


7.3 Mains above ground shall be medium grade 
wrought or mild steel (galvanized or un-galvanised) 
conforming to IS 1239 (Part 1 and Part 2) or IS 3589 
with welded, threaded or flanged joints, adequately 
supported at regular intervals on masonry or RCC 
stools or pedestals and not on pipe racks. The mains 
shall be supported at regular intervals not exceeding 6 
m. It should be supported at every 3 m for pipes less 
than 150 mm diameter. 


Such pipes shall be run at least 6 m away from the face 
of the buildings and open storage areas in case of light 
and ordinary hazard occupancies and 15 m in case of 
high hazard occupancies 


In case of practical difficulties in maintaining the 
stipulated distance from the face of the building, for 
example between boiler house and T. G. building and 
between transformer and T. G. building in thermal 
power plants, the same may be permitted to be laid 
overhead provided the mains installed in such areas 
form part of sub-ring only. 


7.4 Except for internal mains, mains shall not be laid 
under buildings. Where, however, circumstances 
necessitate laying of mains under buildings, the portion 
of mains falling under the buildings shall be laid in 
masonry trenches with removable covers and cut-off 
valves shall be provided at points of entry and exit. 


As far as possible, mains shall not be laid under large 
open storages, railroads and roads carrying heavy traffic. 


7.5 The mains shall not traverse ground that is not 
under the control of the owner of the installation nor 
under a public roadway. 


11 


IS 13039 : 2014 


7.6 The system shall be capable of withstanding for 
2 h a pressure equivalent to 150 percent of the 
maximum working pressure. While hydro-testing. 
Inclusion of cut-off valves in the mains to be tested 
can be avoided. 


7.7 All boltholes in flanges shall be drilled. The drilling 
of each flange shall be in accordance with the relevant 
Indian Standards. 


7.8 Flanges shall be faced and have jointing of rubber 
insertion or asbestos compound. 


7.9 Fittings installed underground shall be of cast iron 
‘heavy’ grade conforming to IS 1538 whereas those 
installed above ground shall normally be of medium 
grade wrought steel or mild steel conforming to IS 1239 
(Part 2) or malleable iron fittings conforming to 
IS 1879. 


7.10 Mild steel stand post may be accepted even in 
cases where underground mains are of cast iron. 


7.11 Itis recommended to provide semi-circular RCC 
pipes fore cast iron pipes at road crossings. 


7.12 Mains shall be laid in rings (except as specified 
in 7.13) and the size of the initial pipe shall not, in any 
case, be less than the internal diameter of the delivery 
outlet of the pump. 


Flushing connections with isolation valves should be 
provided at suitable locations in the firewater ring main. 


7.13 In the case of riser mains in storied buildings and 
in locations where it is not feasible to lay a ring main, a 
terminal main may be provided, but in no case shall the 
number of hydrants on such terminal mains exceed 5. 
A terminal main of 80 mm diameter shall not feed more 
than one hydrant that having a diameter of 100 mm shall 
not feed more than two hydrants that having a diameter 
of 125 mm shall not feed more than three hydrants and 
amain of 150 mm shall not feed more than five hydrants. 
Where number of hydrants on a riser exceeds 5, 200 
mm terminals can be used subject to satisfactory pressure 
being available at the topmost point. 


7.14 The hydrant system shall be hydraulically so 
designed that when half of the aggregate pumping 
capacity is being discharged at the farthest/ 
hydraulically most remote point and the other half in 
the most vulnerable area enroute, a minimum running 
pressure of 5.25 kg/cm? is available at the former point 
and the rate of flow of water does not exceed 5 m/s 
anywhere in the system (flow through one hydrant can 
be taken as 600 litre/min for this purpose). 


In case the hydraulically most remote point is the area 
fed by other systems tapped from hydrant system, the 
entire aggregate pumping capacity shall be considered 
as being discharged at this point at a minimum running 


IS 13039 : 2014 


pressure of 5.25 kg/cm? and the hydrant system shall 
be so designed that the rate of flow of water does not 
exceed 5 m/s anywhere in the system. 


7.15 Isolation Valves 


7.15.1 Isolation valves shall be provided in the network 
to enable isolation of any section of the network without 
affecting the flow in the rest. These valves are 
distributed according to the general layout of the 
installation. The isolation valves shall be normally 
located near the loop junctions. Additional valves shall 
be provided in the segments where the length of the 
segment exceeds 300 m. 


7.15.2 Cut-off valves shall conform to IS 780/ 
IS 14846, Class 2. 


7.15.3 In case of system having working pressure in 
excess of 7 kg/cm? PN-1.6 rating would be necessary 
for valves conforming to IS 780 and Class 3 for those 
conforming to IS 14846. Cast steel valves of class 150 
are, however, acceptable irrespective of the working 
pressure of the system. 


7.15.4 Other types of valves like rising spindle valves 
may also be used. 


7.15.5 Butterfly valves can be accepted subject to the 
condition that the valves of diameter exceeding 150 
mm shall necessary be of gear operated. 


7.16 All cut-off valves shall be of the right-hand type 
and enclosed in properly constructed surface boxes, at 
least 1 m? in area so as to allow for broken joints being 
easily remade. The top of the surface box shall be 80 
mm above ground level, except where it is located on a 
road. Valve wheels shall have an arrowhead engraved or 
cast thereon showing direction for turning open and close. 


It is recommended that the position of the surface box 
be indicated by an iron plate painted fire red with 
distinct lettering. Such plates shall also show the open 
and close direction as cast or indicated on the valves 
and the serial number of the sluice valve. 


7.17 In case of installations in earthquake prone zones, 
flexible couplings shall be used for jointing purposes. 


8 HOSE PIPES 


8.1 In the case of yard hydrants, hose pipes and nozzles 
shall be installed either in central hose stations which 
shall be of the type which enables the condition and 
quantity of hose, nozzles, etc. to be checked over at a 
glance and ensures that other useful equipment is ready 
at hand in the event of a fire or near each hydrant in 
glass fronted hose boxes of suitable design. In case of 
hydrants on upper floors or internal hydrants, hosepipes 
and nozzles shall necessarily be installed near each 
hydrant in glass fronted hose boxes of suitable design. 


12 


NOTE — Locations and number of hose stations will depend 
upon several factors such as fire loads, accessibility and 
positions of watch posts. Such locations shall be finalised in 
consultation with authority having jurisdiction. 


8.2 Requirements of Hose Pipes 


8.2.1 If hose is kept in central hose stations, for each 
of the first ten hydrants in the compound of the 
premises (a double headed hydrant counting as two 
except where they are provided as a standard practice 
throughout the system), two lengths of hose 15 m each 
and an additional 15 m length for each hydrant in 
excess of ten, shall be provided. 


In case of system having more than 55 hydrant outlets, 
the total number of hose lengths required may be 
limited to 55 plus 20 percent of the number of hydrant 
outlets in excess of 55. 


Where a fire engine is maintained on the premises 
manned by a whole time fire brigade, the number of 
hose pipes required (including those on the engine) 
would be 55 plus 10 percent of the number of outlets 
in excess of 55. 


8.2.2 If hose is kept in hose boxes alongside hydrants, 
each box shall contain two lengths of 15 m each. 


8.3 All hoses shall be of 63 mm diameter of either of 
the following types: 


a) Unlined flax canvas complying with IS 4927; 

b) Rubber lined woven-jacketed as per IS 636; 
and 

c) Controlled percolation type complying with 


IS 8423. 


8.4 AII couplings shall be of the instantaneous spring- 
lock type and the nozzles shall be of not less than 16 
mm in diameter, or more than 25 mm in diameter 
except in case of high hazard occupancies where the 
maximum nozzle diameter may be 32 mm. 


All couplings, branch pipes and nozzles shall otherwise 
comply with IS 903. 


8.5 Hose shall be attached to the coupling in such a 
way that each half of the coupling shall have two 5 
mm diameter holes drilled in the tail. The hose shall 
be first fixed to the tail of the coupling with copper 
rivets then served or bound with 1.5 mm galvanized 
mild steel or copper wire for a length of 50 mm which 
shall extend to the outer ends of the grooving on the 
coupling tail. Over the galvanized mild steel or copper 
wire a leather or equally protective band shall be 
bound with four strands of 1.12 mm galvanized mild 
steel or copper wire at each end of the band. The 
protective band shall be carried beyond the tail of the 
coupling to prevent leaking. Copper wire, if used, 
shall be softened before being used. Couplings 


attached to the hose otherwise than by copper rivets 
shall not be accepted. 


8.6 Spare hose to the extent of 10 percent of the above 
requirements, with a minimum quantity of 30 m shall 
always be kept readily available. Such spare hose shall 
be in 15 m lengths, readily attached to couplings. 


8.7 It is recommended that a system of marking and 
numbering hose be arranged so that the various lengths 
are easily recognisable. 


8.8 In central hose stations and hose boxes a tin 
containing a set of spare rubber rings packed in french 
chalk shall be kept. 


8.9 Central hose stations and hose boxes shall be so 
arranged that hose is not exposed to the sunrays. 


8.10 All central hose stations or hose boxes, when 
provided with locks shall have one master key which 
shall be available either at the main gate or any other 
prominent and easily accessible location known to the 
fire fighting personnel. 


9 REQUIREMENTS OF NOZZLES 


9.1 The number of nozzles to be provided shall be 
equivalent to half the number of hose pipes installed 
on the premises. 


9.2 In locations where a jet of water directed from a 
normal type nozzle is likely to cause more harm than 
good or where a gentle spray of water is essential for 
the extinguishment of a fire, a fog type or a spray type 
of nozzle complying with IS 2871 shall be used. 


9.3 Spare nozzles to the extent of 10 percent of the 
above requirements, with a minimum of two, shall 
always be kept readily available. 


10 FOAM COMPOUND 


10.1 Foam used should be compatible with hazard 
involved. Foam systems shall conform to IS 12835. 


10.2 Stock of Foam Compound 


10.2.1 Quantity of foam compound to be stored shall 
be equal to 100 percent of requirement of largest fixed 
roof or floating roof tank, plus that required for one 
portable foam monitor of 4 500 litre/min foam solution 
capacity and two hose streams of foam each with a 
capacity of 1 140 litre/min of foam solution. 


10.2.2 Foam compound should be tested periodically 
for ensuring its quality and the deteriorated quantity 
replaced. 


11 FIRE FIGHTING PERSONNEL 


11.1 A squad consisting of watch and ward personnel, 
fire pump men and departmental supervisors and/or 


13 


IS 13039 : 2014 


operatives trained in the operation of the fire service 
shall be maintained on the premises round the clock. 
The number of personnel constituting the squad shall 
necessarily depend upon the size of the risk, but in no 
case shall less than eight trained persons be available 
at any time during the day or night. 


Minimum number of trained persons required may be 
further reduced to six in case of automatic pressurised 
hydrant systems. 


11.2 Squad leaders shall be trained by government 
recognized institution and their usefulness would be 
considerably enhanced, if they reside on the premises. 


11.3 Squad personnel shall be provided with clothing 
and equipment including helmets confirming to 
IS 2745 or IS 2925, belts and boots preferably fire 
fighter's boots. 


11.4 A muster roll showing the duties allocated to each 
member of the brigade shall be prepared and copies 
supplied to each squad leader as well as pasted in 
convenient places throughout the premises, so as to be 
quickly available for reference in case of emergency. 


11.5 Practice drills shall take place weekly and wet 
drills shall be carried out at intervals of not more than 
a fort-night 


11.6 During wet drills, hydrants (including those of 
upper floors), hose pipes and nozzles, shall be taken 
into use in rotation, so that the efficacy of these 
appliances would be automatically checked and any 
defects observed, set right. 


11.7 A register signed by fire marshal and works 
manager shall be kept showing Information such as 
names and designations of the persons attending the 
drill, type of drill dry or wet, serial number of hydrants 
operated, duration of operation of pumps, defects 
observed, if any is useful. 


11.8 The services of the pump man could be profitably 
utilized for the maintenance of all fire fighting 
appliances including hand appliances. He shall also 
be thoroughly conversant with the locations of all 
appliances, particularly of hydrant cut-off valves so 
that in an eventuality he can be of assistance to the 
factory's fire brigade or the town's fire brigade. 


11.9 Keys of all doors in the factory premises shall 
always be available at the main gate. 


11.10 It is recommended that fire pump room(s) and 
the main gate(s) of all factory premises be connected 
to all manufacturing sections through the internal 
telephone system. 


Telephones interlinked to this system may also be put 
up in proper cubicles at convenient locations near 


IS 13039 : 2014 


godown ranges and other strategic points. This would 
affect saving of valuable time in an emergency to alert 
the fire fighting personnel and the pump man. 


11.11 Pump repeater panel should be provided in guard 
house. 


12 MAINTENANCE 


12.1 Pumps 
12.1.1 General 


12.1.1.1 A trained pump man shall be available on all 
shifts and at all hours of the day and night to operate 
the pumps as and when required. 


12.1.1.2 Pump sets shall be run for at least 5 min every 
day. 


12.1.1.3 All pump glands shall be maintained in 
efficient working condition and the packing renewed 
as required to maintain efficiency. 


12.1.1.4 Suction and delivery valves shall be examined 
once every six months, particularly where sand or other 
objectionable matter is liable to be drawn through the 
pump suction. 


12.1.1.5 All working parts shall be kept clean and 
lightly oiled. Any necessary repairs shall be put in hand 
and carried out immediately. 


12.1.2 Electrically Driven Pumps 


12.1.2.1 The bearing grease cup shall be checked once 
every week and refilled with fresh grease, if necessary. 


12.1.2.2 Starter contacts shall be cleaned once every 
week. 


12.1.2.3 Insulation resistance of pump motor circuit 
shall be examined once every six months and record 
of results shall be maintained. 


12.2 Mains 


12.2.1 Hydrant mains shall be tested once a fortnight 
with a pump delivering at its maximum pressure. 
A running test with two or more hose lines each 30 m 
long operating shall be carried out. 


12.2.2 All cut-off valves shall be operated and oiled, 
if necessary, once a month. 


12.2.3 Cut-off valves shall be thoroughly overhauled 
annually to remove sludge and other foreign matter 
collected in the valve seating. 


12.3 Hydrants 


12.3.1 All hydrants shall be examined systematically 
once a week to ensure that valves and spring catches 
are maintained in good condition. 


14 


12.3.2. Spare washers shall be kept for hydrant valve 
seats. 


12.4 Hose Pipes and Nozzles 


12.4.1 All hose boxes/hose stations shall be inspected 
externally once every week to ensure that the 
equipment installed therein is intact. Further, the hose 
boxes/hose stations shall be cleaned internally and 
externally once a month. 


12.4.2 When the hose gets worn out at the tail end of 
the coupling(s), it is permissible to cut the end(s) of 
the hose. However should the lengths of the hose after 
cutting(s) fall below 90 percent of its original, the hose 
shall be discarded. 


12.4.3 A hose register shall be kept showing 
Information such as date purchased, date brought into 
use, date cut (if reduced in length), is useful. 


12.4.4 Any hose becoming inefficient through use, 
neglect or from any other cause, shall be discarded. 


12.4.5 Fire protection hose shall not be used for 
purposes other than fire protection and drill. 


13 MEASURES TO BE TAKEN WHERE THE 
INSTALLATION IS FOR ANY REASON 
TEMPORARILY INOPERATIVE 


13.1 If any component of the hydrant system is to be 
replaced for any reason whatsoever, the entire system 
shall not be rendered inoperative but the particular 
section shall only be isolated by closing the necessary 
cut-off valves. If, however, it is not possible to complete 
the replacement before nightfall, the cut-off valves shall 
not be left closed overnight. Instead, blank flanges shall 
be provided at the point where the component has been 
removed so that the entire system, other than the 
component, which has been removed, would remain 
operative through the night. 


13.2 Only one compartment of the reservoir shall be 
emptied out at a time of cleaning or repair work. 


13.3 If the pump is expected to be inoperative for more 
than 72 h, every effort shall be made to connect the 
service water supply to the hydrant system for the 
duration the pump is inoperative. 


13.4 If the hydrant service is to be extended, the 
extended portion shall be first laid and, thereafter, the 
connection between the existing system and the 
extension shall be carried out expeditiously, so that the 
entire system is not left inoperative overnight. 


14 ACCEPTANCE TEST 


Fire flow tests are conducted on water distribution 
systems to determine the rate of flow available at 


various locations for fire-fighting purposes. A certain 
residual pressure in the mains is specified at which the 
rate of flow should be available. Following definitions 
shall apply for acceptance test: 


a) Rated capacity — The flow available from a 
hydrant at the designated residual pressure 
(rated pressure) either measured or calculated. 


b) Residual pressure — The pressure that exists 
in the distribution system, measured at the 
residual hydrant at the time the flow readings 
are taken at the flow hydrants. 

c) Static pressure — The pressure that exists at 


a given point under normal distribution system 
conditions measured at the residual hydrant 
with no hydrants flowing. 


14.1 Flow Testing 


For the purpose of uniform marking of fire hydrants, 
the ratings should be based on a residual pressure of 
1.4 bar for all hydrants having a static pressure in excess 
of 2.8 bar. The procedure consists of discharging water 
at a measured rate of flow from the system at a given 
location and observing the corresponding pressure drop 
in the mains. 


14.2 Test Layout 


After the location where the test is to be run has been 
determined, a group of test hydrants in the vicinity is 
selected. One hydrant, designated the residual hydrant, 
is chosen to be the hydrant where the normal static 
pressure shall be observed with the other hydrants in 
the group closed, and where the residual pressure shall 
be observed with the other hydrants flowing. 


This hydrant is chosen so it will be located between 
the hydrant to be flowed and the large mains that 
constitute the immediate sources of water supply in 
the area. The number of hydrants to be used in any test 
depends upon the strength of the distribution system 
in the vicinity of the test location. Sufficient discharge 
should be achieved to flow the total demand necessary 
for fire-fighting purposes. 


The equipment necessary for field work consists of 
the following: 


a) A single 14 bar bourdon pressure gauge with 
0.068 9 bar graduations; 

b) A number of pitot tubes; 

c) Hydrant wrenches; 

d) 3.5 or 4.0 bar bourdon pressure gauges with 


0.068 9 bar graduations, and scales with 1.6 
mm graduations (One pitot tube, 3.5 or 4.0 
bar gauge, a hydrant wrench, a scale for each 
hydrant to be flowed); and 


15 


IS 13039 : 2014 


e) Aspecial hydrant cap tapped with a hole into 
which a short length of 6.35 mm brass pipe is 
fitted; this pipe is provided with a 
T connection for the 14 bar gauge and a cock 
at the end for relieving air pressure. 


14.3 Test Procedure 


In a typical test, the 14 bar gauge is attached to one of 
the 64 mm outlets of the residual hydrant using the 
special cap. The cock on the gauge piping is opened, 
and the hydrant valve is opened full. As soon as the air 
is exhausted from the barrel, the cock is closed. A 
reading (static pressure) is taken when the needle comes 
to rest. 


At a given signal, each of the other hydrants is opened 
in succession, with discharge taking place directly from 
the open hydrant butts. Hydrants should be opened one 
at a time. With all hydrants flowing, water should be 
allowed to flow for a sufficient time to clear all debris 
and foreign substances from the stream(s). At that time, 
a signal is given to the people at the hydrants to read 
the pitot pressure of the streams simultaneously while 
the residual pressure is being read. After the readings 
have been taken, hydrants should be shut down slowly, 
one at a time, to prevent undue surges in the system. 


14.4 Pitot Readings 


When measuring the pitot pressure of a stream of 
practically uniform velocity, the orifice in the pitot tube 
is held downstream approximately one-half the 
diameter of the hydrant outlet or nozzle opening, and 
in the centre of the stream. The centre line of the orifice 
should be at right angles to the plane of the face of the 
hydrant outlet. The air chamber on the pitot tube should 
be kept elevated. The valve for the flowing outlet should 
be wide open to give a more streamlined flow and a 
more accurate pitot reading. 


14.5 Determination of Discharge 


At the hydrants used for flow during the test, the 
discharges from the open butts are determined from 
measurements of the diameter of the outlets flowed, the 
pitot pressure (velocity head) of the streams as indicated 
by the pitot gauge readings, and the coefficient of the 
outlet being flowed If flow tubes (stream straighteners) 
are being utilized, a coefficient of 0.95 is suggested 
unless the coefficient of the tube is known. 


The formula used to compute the discharge, Q, in US 
gpm from these measurements is as follows: 


Q] cd’ Jp 
where 


coefficient of discharge (see Fig. 1); 


IS 13039 : 2014 


d = diameter of the outlet in inches; and 


p = pitot pressure (velocity head), in psi. 


14.6 Determination of Discharge Without a Pitot 


If a pitot tube is not available for use to measure the 
hydrant discharge, a 3.5 or 4.0 bar gauge tapped into a 
hydrant cap can be used. The hydrant cap with gauge 
attached is placed on one outlet, and the flow is allowed 
to take place through the other outlet at the same 
elevation. 


14.7 Calculation Results 


The discharge in US gpm for each outlet flowed is 
obtained by the formulae given below: 


Q] 29.84cd? fp 


If more than one outlet is used, the discharges from all 
are added to obtain the total discharge. 


The formula that is generally used to compute the 
discharge at the specified residual pressure or for any 


Outlet smooth and nounded 
(coef. 0.90) 


Outlet square and sharp 
(coef. 0.80) 


desired pressure drop is 


H054 
Or | Qr a 
RI VERUS 


Qpr = flow predicted at desired residual pressure; 
Qr = total flow measured during test; 


Hy, = pressure drop to desired residual pressure; 
and 


H, = pressure drop measured during test. 


Results are usually carried to the nearest 380 litre/min 
for discharges of 3 800 litre/min or more, and to the 
nearest 190 litre/min for smaller discharges, which is 
as close as can be justified by the degree of accuracy 
of the field observations. The data secured during the 
testing of hydrants for uniform marking can be 
valuable for other purposes. The form show in Annex C 
may be used to record information that is taken and 
the results of the flow test should be indicated on a 
hydraulic graph. 


Outlet square and into borrell 
(coef. 0.70) 


Fic. 1 VALUES OF COEFFICIENT OF DISCHARGE 


IS No. 
5: 2007 


636 : 


780 : 


903 : 


908 : 


900 : 


1239 


(Part 1) : 2004 
(Part 2) : 2011 
: 2001 


1536 


1537: 


1538: 


1641 : 


1646 : 


1879: 


2745 : 


2871: 


2025: 


3844 : 


1988 


1984 


1993 


1975 


1992 


1976 


1993 


2013 


1997 


2010 


1983 


2012 


1984 


1989 


IS 13039 : 2014 


Title 


Specification for steel pipes for water 
and sewage (168.3 to 2 540mm 
outside diameter) (third revision) 
Specification for surface boxes for 
sluice valves (first revision) 
Specification for unlined flax canvas 
hose for fire fighting (first revision) 
Specification for multipurpose 
aqueous film forming foam liquid 
concentrate for extinguishing 
hydrocarbon and polar solvent fires. 
Specification for high density 
polyethylene pipes for potable water 
supplies (fourth revision) 
Specification for unplasticized PVC 
pipes for potable water supplies 
(third revision) 

Specification for landing valves 
(third revision) 

Code of practice for laying of 
electrically welded steel pipes for 
water supply (second revision) 
Specification for horizontally cast 
iron double flanged pipes for water, 
gas and sewage (first revision) 
Specification for centrifugally cast 
(spun) ductile iron pressure pipes for 
water, gas and sewage (third revision) 
Specification for controlled 
percolating hose for fire fighting (first 
revision) 

Stand post type water and foam 
monitor for fire fighting — 
Specification 

Code of practice for coating and 
wrapping of underground mild steel 
pipelines (first revision) 
Specification for pumps for fire 
fighting system 

Code of practice for design and 
installation of fixed fire extinguishing 
system 

Low expansion foam 

Specification for sluice valves for 
water works purposes (50 to 1 200 
mm size) 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 2) 
LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 
Title IS No. 
Colours for ready mixed paints and 3589 : 2001 
enamels (fifth revision) 
Specification for non-percolating 
flexible fire fighting delivery hose 3950 : 1979 
(third revision) 
Sluice valves for water works 4927: 1992 
purposes (50 to 300 mm size) 
Specification for fire hose delivery 4989 (Part 4) : 
couplings, branch pipe, nozzles and 2003 
nozzle spanner (fourth revision) 
Specification for fire hydrant stand 
post type (second revision) 4984 : 1995 
Specification for underground fire 
hydrant sluice valve type (third 
revision) 4985 : 2000 
Specification for steel tubes, tubular 
and other wrought steel fittings : 
Steel tubes (sixth revision) 5290 : 1993 
Steel pipe fittings (fifth revision) 
Specification for centrifugally cast 5822 : 1994 
(spun) iron pressure pipes for water 
gas and sewage (fourth revision) 
Specification for vertically cast iron 7181 : 1986 
pressure pipes for water, gas and 
sewage (first revision) 
Specification for cast iron fittings for 832252000 
pressure pipes for water, gas and 
sewage (third revision) 
Code of practice for fire safety of AA 
buildings(general): general 
principles of fire grading and 8442 : 2008 
classification (second revision) 
Code of practice for fire safety of 
buildings (general): Electrical 10221 : 2008 
installations 
Malleable cast iron pipe fittings _ 
Specification 12469 : 1988 
Specification for Non-metal helmet 
for firemen and civil defence 12835 
personnel (second revision) 
Specification for branch pipe, 
universal for fire fighting purposes (Part 1) : 1989 
(second revision) 14846 : 2000 
Specification for Industrial Safety 
Helmets 
Code of practice for installation and 15105 : 2002 


maintenance of internal fire hydrants 
and hose reels on premises (first 
revision) 


17 


Design and Installation of Fixed 
Automatic Sprinkler Fire 
Extinguishing Systems — Code of 
Practice 


IS 13039 : 2014 


IS No. Title IS No. 
15325 : 2003 Code of practice for design and 16088 : 2012 
installation of fixed automatic high 
and medium velocity water spray 

system SP 7 : 2005 


ANNEX B 
(Clause 3) 


Title 


Specification for chlorinated polyvinyl 
chloride (CPVC) pipes for automatic 
sprinkler fire extinguishing system 
National Building Code of India 


BROAD CLASSIFICATION OF INDUSTRIAL AND NON-INDUSTRIAL OCCUPANCIES 
INTO DIFFERENT DEGREE OF HAZARD 


Light Hazard Occupancies 


Moderate Hazard Occupancies 


High Hazard Occupancies 


Abrasive Manufacturing Premises 


Aerated Water Factories 
Agarbatti Manufacturing 


Areca nut slicing and/or Betel nut 
Factories 


Analytical and/or Quality Control 
Laboratories 


Asbestos Steam Packing and Lagging 
Manufacturing 


Battery Charging/Battery Service Stations 


Battery Manufacturing 

Breweries 

Brick Works 

Canning Factories 

Cardamom Factories 

Cement Factories and/or Asbestos or 
Concrete Products Manufacturing 
Ceramic Factories and 

Crockery and Stoneware Pipe 
Manufacturing 


Clay Works 
Clock and Watch Manufacturing 
Coffee Curing Roasting and grinding 


Premises 


Condensed Milk Factories, Milk 
Pasteurising Plant and Dairies 


Confectionery Manufacturing 


Educational and Research Institutes 


Airport and other Transportation Terminal 
Buildings 

Aluminium Factories 

Atta and Cereal Grinding 


Bakeries and Biscuit Factories 

Beedi Factories 

Bobbin Factories 

Bookbinders, Envelopes and Paper bag 
Manufacturing 

Cable manufacturing 

Camphor Boiling 

Candle Works 

Carbon Paper/ Typewriter Ribbon 
Manufacturing 

Cardboard Box Manufacturing 
Carpenters, Wood wool and Furniture 
Manufacturing 

Carpet and Durries Factories 
Cashewnut Factories 

Chemical Manufacturing using raw 
materials having flash points above 23 C 


Cigar and Cigarette Factories 


Coir Factories 


Coir Carpets, Rugs, Tobacco, Hides and 
Skin Presses 


Cold storage premises 


Cork products manufacturing 


18 


SUB-CATEGORY (A) 


Aircraft Hangers 
Aluminium/Magnesium Powder Plants 


Bituminised Paper and/or Hessian Cloth/ 
Tar Felt Manufacturing 


Cotton Waste Factories 

Celluloid Goods Manufacturing 
Chemical Manufacturing using raw 
materials having flash points below 23 C 
Cigarette Filter Manufacturing 


Cinema Films and T.V. Production Studios 


Coal and/or Coke and/or Charcoal Ball and 
Briquettes Manufacturing 


Collieries 

Cotton Seed Cleaning or De-linting 
Factories 

Distilleries 


Duplicating / Stencil Paper Manufacturing 
Fire-works Manufacturing. 


Foam Plastics Manufacturing and/or 
Converting Plants 


Godowns and Warehouses (storing 
combustible/flammable goods). 


Grass, Hay, Fodder and Bhoosa (chaff) 
Pressing Factories 


Industrial Gas Manufacturing (other than 
Inert/ halogenated hydrocarbon gases) 


Jute mills and jute presses 


Linoleum Factories 


ANNEX B — (Continued) 


IS 13039 : 2014 


Light Hazard Occupancies 


Moderate Hazard Occupancies 


High Hazard Occupancies 


Electric Generating Houses (Hydro 
electric) 


Electric Lamps (Incandescent and 
Fluorescent) and TV Picture Tube 


Manufacturing 


Electro Plating Works 


Engineering Workshops 


Fruits and Vegetables Dehydrating and 
Drying Factories 


Fruit Products and Condiment Factories 
Glass & Glass Fibre Manufacturing 


Godowns and Warehouses Storing non- 
combustible Goods only 


Green houses 


Gold Thread /Gilding Factories 


Gum and/or Glue and Gelatine 
Manufacturing 


Ice, Ice Candy and Ice-cream 
Manufacturing 


Ink (excluding Printing Ink) Factories 


Mica Products Manufacturing 


Multiple block apartment buildings 


Multiple block business buildings 


Multiple block star hotel buildings 
Places of worship 
Pottery Works 


Poultry Farms 


Salt Crushing Factories and Refineries 


Stables 


Sugar Candy Manufacturing 


Dry Cleaning, Dyeing and Laundries 


Electric substations/ Distribution stations 


Electric Generating stations (other than 
Underground power houses) 


Enamelware Factories 


Filter and Wax paper Manufacturing 


Flour Mills 
Garages 


Garment Makers 


Ghee Factories (other than vegetable) 


Godowns and Warehouses (other than 
those under light and High Hzard A 
categories) 

Grain and/or Seeds Disintegrating and/or 
Crushing Factories 


Grease Manufacturing 

Hosiery, Lace, Embroidery and Thread 
Factories 

Incandescent Gas Mantle Manufacturing 


Industrial Gas Mfg. (Inert/ halogenated 
hydrocarbon gases) 


Man-made Yarn/Fibre Manufacturing 
(other than Acrylic fibres/yarn mfg) 


Manure and Fertiliser Works. (Blending, 
Mixing and granulating) 


Mineral Oil Blending and Processing 


Museums 
Oil and Leather Cloth Factories. 


Oil Terminals/Depots other than those 
categorised under High hazard A 


Open storage of flammable liquids in 
drums, cans etc 


Oxygen Plants 


Paper and Cardboard Mills. without Raw 
Material Yards 


19 


LPG Bottling Plants (Mini)l) 


Man Made Fibres (Acrylic fibres/yarn 
mfg) 


Match Factories 


Mattress and Pillow Making 


Metal or Tin Printers (where more than 50 
percent of floor area is occupied as 
Engineering Workshop; this may be taken 
as Ordinary Hazard Risk) 

Oil Mills 

Oil Extraction Plants 

Oil Terminals/Depots handling flammable 
liquids having flash point of 23°C and 
below. 


Paints & Varnish Factories 


Paper and cardboard mills having raw 
material yards 


Piers, Wharfs and Jetties — handling 
extra hazardous materials 


Printing Ink Manufacturing. 


Rosin Lamp black and Turpentine 


Factories 


Saw Mills 


Sponge Iron Steel Plants (Gas Based) 


Surgical Cotton Manufacturing 


Tarpaulin and Canvas Proofing Factories 


Turpentine and Rosin Distilleries 
Tyre Retreading and Resoling Factories 
SUB-CATEGORY (B) 


Ammonia and Urea Synthesis Plants 


CNG Compressing and Bottling Plants 


Coal based methane plants 


Explosive Factories 


IS 13039 : 2014 


ANNEX B — (Concluded ) 


Light Hazard Occupancies 


Moderate Hazard Occupancies 


High Hazard Occupancies 


Sugar Factories and Refineries 


Tanneries/Leather Goods Manufacturers 
Umbrella Assembling Factories 
Vermicelli Factories 

Water Treatment/ Filtration Plants and 


Water Pump Houses 


Zinc/Copper Factories 


Piers, Wharves jetties and Dockyards other 
than those categorized under High 
hazard A 


Plastic Goods Manufacturing 
Plywood /Wood Veneering Factories 
Printing Press Premises 

Pulverising and Crushing Mills 

Rice Mills 

Rope Works 

Rubber Goods Manufacturing 
Rubber Tyres and Tubes Manufacturing 
Shellac Factories 

Silk Filatures 

Soaps and Glycerine Factories. 
Spray painting 

Starch Factories 

Tea Factories 

Textile Mills 


Tobacco (Chewing) and Pan-Masala 
Making 


Tobacco Grinding and Crushing 
Tobacco Redrying Factories 


Woollen Mills 


NOTE — In case of complexes having 
separate plants having varying degrees of 
hazard, authority having jurisdiction shall 
be consulted to decide on level of 
protection to be provided 


20 


IS 13039 : 2014 


ANNEX C 
(Clause 14.7) 


HYDRANT FLOW TEST REPORT 


Location Date 


Test made by Time 


Representative of 


Witness 


State purpose of test 


Consumption rate during test 


If pumps affect test, indicate pumps operating 
A, A, A, A4 
Flow hydrants: 


Size nozzle 


Pilot reading 


Dishcharge coefficient Total GPM 
GPM 


Static B psi Residual B psi 
Projected results (020 psi Residual. — | gpn;or?o ________ psi Residual] ________ gpm 


Remarks 


Location map: Show line sizes and distance to next cross-connected line. Show valves and hydrant 
branch size. Indicate north. Show flowing hydrants — Label A, A, A, A,. Show location of static and residual — 
Lable B. 


Indicate B Hydrant Sprinkler Other (identify) 


21 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 22 (7808). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


