9777&T v?-ml

IS 13190 : 1991 (Reaffirmed 2000)

RECOMMENDED PRACTICE FOR EDDY CURRENT EXAMINATION (B'Y ROTATING PROBE METHOD)OF ROUND STEEL BARS

UDC 669'14-422'11 : 620'179'142

@ BIS 1991

BUREAU
MANAK December 1991

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

Price Group 2

Non-Destructive

Testing Sectional Committee, MTD 2 1

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Non-Destructive Testing Sectional Committee had been approved by the rkletallurgical Engineering Division Council. This standard is intended to be a guide for eddy current examination of round steel bars by rotating probe method. The recommendations ~given in this standard are based on accepted current practice and it is hoped that the use of this standard will ensure a more unifed procedure to achieve the best results in eddy current examination of round steel bars. In the preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from the following:

4 ASTM E : 243 : 1980 `Standard practice for electromagnetic

( eddy current > testing of seamless copper and copper alloy tubes', issued by American Society of Testing and Materials, U.S.A.
: 1981 `Standard definitions of term relating to electromagnetictesting', by American Society of Testing and Material, U.S.A.

b) ASTM E : 268

issued

4 ASTM E : 309 : 1983 `Standard practice for eddy current examination of steel tubular products
using magnetic saturations', issued by American Society of Testing and Materials, U.S.A.

d) BS 3889 (Part 2A) : 1965 `Methods of non-destructive
Industrial Standards, Japan.

testing of pipes and tubes; eddy current testing of ferrous pipes and tubes', issued by British Standards Institute,

e) JIS G 0586 : 1974 `Method of eddy current testing for steel products', issued by Japanese
For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the results of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised 1'. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

IS

13190 :1991

Indian Standard

RECOMMENDED PRACTICE FOR EDDY CURRENT EXAMINATION (BY ROTATING PROBE METHOD)OF ROUND STEEL BARS
1 SCOPE 1.1 This recommended practice covers the procedure for applying the eddy current method to detect surface defects in round steel bars.
NOTE - For convenience, the term bars will hereafter be used to refer to round steel bars.

2.5 Rejection Level The value established for a test signal above which test specimen are rejectable. 2.6 Referenee Standard A reference used as a basis for comparison or calibration. In bar inspection, a bar with artificial discontinuities used for establishing the test sensitivity setting and for periodically checking and adjusting sensitivity setting as required. 2.7 Signal to Noise Ratio The ratio of values of signal ( response containing information ) to that of noise ( response containing non-relevant information ). 2.8 Threshold -Level The setting of an instrument that causes it to register only those changes in response greater than a specified magnitude. 2.9 Lift-off Eflect The effect observed in an electromagnetic test system output due to a change in magnetic coupling between a test specimen and a probe coil whenever the distance between them is varied. 3 SIGNIFICANCE
AND USE

procedure is specifically applicable to eddy current examination method using rotating probe coil assembly here after referred to as rotating head on which one or more probe coils are mounted. 1.3 This practice is intended for use on hot rolled and bright bars with diameter from 12 mm to 63 mm. The bars shall be straight with maximum permissible deviation of 1.5 mm per metre. In case of hot rolled bars the tolerance on diameter shall be _t I `2 percent of nominal value, and tolerance on ovality shall be 80 percent of tolerance on diameter. 2 TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall apply. 2.1 Artificial Discontinuity Reference discontinuity like notch that is introduced into a reference standard to provide reproducible sensitivity levels for the test equipment. 2.2 Eddy Current An electrical current caused to flow in a conductor by the time or space variation, or both of, an applied magnetic fields. 2.3 Edge Effect or End Effect In eddy current testing, it is the disturbance of the magnetie field and eddy currents due tothe proximity of an abrupt change in specimen geometry ( edge or end ). This effect generally results in marking of discontinuities within the affected region. 2.4 Probe Coil A small coil or coil assembly that is placed on or near the surface of test objects. The probe can be absolute or differential. An absolute probe has one coil or more than one coil in series. A differential probe generally has two coils, differentially wound.

1.2 The

3.1 The purpose of this standard is to outline a procedure for the detection and location of surface discontinuities such as cracks, laps, seams, sliver, scabs, etc, on bars using the eddy current method. Furthermore, the relative severity of discontinuity may be indicated, and a rejection level may be set with respect to the magnitude of the indication.

3.2 Eddy current testing systems are generally not sensitive to discontinuities adjacent to the ends of the bar. The extent of end effect region can be determined as per 6.3. 4 SUMMARY OF METHOD 4.1 In eddy current testing systems one or more probes mounted on the test head rotate around the bar to be tested. Alternating currents are passed through the probes which induce eddy currents in the bar. Presence of a discontinuity alters the flow of eddy currents and this change is detected by the probe. The probe may be either absolute or differential in nature.

IS 13190 : 1991 4.2 The frequency range used for testing may be from a few kHz to-a few MHz. Partial or total magnetic saturation may be necessary at the lower value of frequency, where it is often necessary to suppress, by the use of magnetic saturation, intrinsic magnetic effects for example permeability variation etc to establish a `working' signal/noise ratio. At the higher end of frequency spectrum, magnetic saturation is rarely used since quite acceptable signal/noise ratio are achievable without its use as it is essentially test of the bar surface immediately adjacent to the test probe. However the following points should be noted. Since the rejection level in this examination is based on amplitude analysis, it is preferable to do the testing in the higher range of frequencies to avoid ambiguity in results. It is often preferable to use partial total magnetic saturation even at higher frequencies to get a good signal/noise ratio. Also the correct choice of frequency depends on the material acceptable defect size and bar diameter.

probes mounted on it, appropriate signal processing circuitry, audio and visual alarms and paint marker. It may also have a strip chart recorder. 5.1.2 Mechanical Handling System It should be capable of passing the bar through rotating test head a constant speed with minimum vibrations of the bar and test head. The speed should be maintained within + 10 percent of the nominal value. It should be noted that the relation between speed of bar, speed of rotation of probe and test frequency play an important role and should be established for the required sensitivity before starting testing campaign. 6 PROCEDURE 6.1 Reference Standard 6.1.1 A reference standard shall be prepared for adjusting the sensitivity of the equipment. 6.1.2 For preparing be selected free from of the same nominal diameter as the bars be atleast 2 metres. reference standard a bar interfering discontinuities alloy, similar properties to be tested. Its length shall and and shall

4.3 The signal detected by the probe is processed by the electronic unit and its amplitude is compared with the threshold level. If the amplitude is more than the threshold level, it actuates some or all of the audio and visual alarms, paint marker and strip chart recorder. 4.4 The bar is advanced at a constant speed so that the probes scan its entire surfaces helically. 5 EQIUPMENT
5.1 The equipment shall consist of the following. 5.1.1 Electronic Units

6.1.3 A longitudinal notch parallel to the axis of the bar shall be produced by electric discharge machining, milling or other means, on the surface more than 500 mm away from either of the ends. 6.1.4 .The notch shall have one of the dimensions given in Table 1 or Table 2 to be agreed upon by the supplier and the purchaser.

It shall consists of test head with one or more

Table 1 Size of Reference Notch for Bright Bars

( CIause 6.1.4 )
Designation

of Notch

Depth mm

`o;eyc=; -0 -I- 10 -0 *_`," -+ 10 -0

Width

Length

mm i-r
Prox 0'15 Max 0'15 Max 0'15 Max 25 25 25 25

N 02
N 03 N 04 N 05

0'2
0'3 0'4 0'5

+ 10

Table 2
Dy;Tb;F; Depth

Size of Reference Notch for Hot Rolled Bars

( Clause 6. I .4 )
mm
0'4 0'6 0'8 1'0 1'2 1'5 Tolerance, Percent + 10 -1_PO -0 i- 10 -0 + 10 -0 -i- IO 3 PO -0 Width Leagt h

mm
0.15

mm
25 25 25 25 25 25

NO4
N 06 N 08 N 10 N 12 N IS

Max
0'15 Max 0'15 Max 0'15 MaX 0' I5 Max 0 15 MPT

2

IS 13190 : 1991 6.2 Adjustment and Standardization of Equipment

6.2.1 The feed speed of the bar shall be adjusted and/or scanning speed of the test head such that there is overlap of 10 to 15 percent in two successive scans, to ensure scanning of entire surface of bar.

6.4.2 The bars that produced signals more than that produced by reference notch shall be segregated. 6.4.3 The functioning of the equipment checked by passing the reference bar; a) Just before commencement shall be

6.2.2 The test parameters of the equipment shall be adjusted to obtain an optimum signal to noise ratio after passing the reference standard through the head. This shall be repeated through the test head every time rotating it in 90" increments. The position of the bar or the probe shall be adjusted mechanically to obtain nearly equal signals from the reference notch regardless of its circumferential location. 6.2.3 The sensitivity/threshold level shall be so adjusted such that signals received will cause rejection. This shall be done under conditions identical to those to be used for testing of bars. 4.3 End Effect
The extent of end effect shall be determined by using a special reference bar with an artificial notch, with depth more than the reference notch and sufficient length at one of its end. 6.3.1

of testing;

b) At intervals not more than 2 hours during continuous testing; c> After completion of testing or shift; and d) Whenever malfunctioning is suspected. of the equipment

6.4.4 If the functioning is not found to be satisfactory the equipment shall be recalibrated and all the bars tested after the last satisfactory check, shall be retested. 7 INTERPRETATION OF RESULTS

7.1 All the bars whiih do not produce any signal with amplitude equal to or more than the amplitude of signal produced by reference notch shall be accepted. 7.2 The bars which produce signals with amplitudes equal to or more than the amplitude of the signal produced by reference standard shall be rejected. $ PRECAUTIONARY INFORMATION

6.3.2 The minimum distance from the end at which the audio, visual alarms and paint marker are actuated shall be found out after passing the reference bar mentioned in 6.3.1 through the test head. 6.3.3 Both the front end effect and the rear end effect shall be determined by passing the reference bar with notch at the front end and then again with notch at the rear end.
-NOTE - It is recommended that the extent of the end effect be determined only once for each specific diameter and speed and need not be repeated for each run or during the periodic calibration checks.

8.1 The surface of the bar shall be free of such metallic particles, scales, other foreign materials and roughness which will interfere with the test results. 8.2 The response from natural discontinuities can be significantly different than that from artificial discontinuities like notches. For this reason, sufficient work should be done to establish the sensitivity level and set up required to detect natural discontinuities of consequence to the end use of the bars. 8.3 The bars shall be free from any burr or deformation at the end which may damage the test head.

6.4 Testing
6.4.1 After calibrating system as per 6.2 the bars shall be passed one by one through the rotating

head.

3

Standard

Mark

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Br~eau Q/" Ztuliurl Stmtlurtls Act, lY86 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by RIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

