IS 10386 (Part 11) : 2012

Hkkjrh; ekud

unh ?kkVh ifj;kstukvksa d s fuekZ.k] izpkyu vkSj j[kj[kko dh lqj{kk lafgrk
Hkkx
11

Hkwfexr mR[kuu

Indian Standard SAFETY CODE FOR CONSTRUCTION, OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF RIVER VALLEY PROJECTS
PART 11 UNDERGROUND EXCAVATION

ICS 13.060.50

� BIS 2012

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG NEW DELHI 110002

September 2012

Price Group 6

Safety in Construction, Operation and Maintenance of River Valley Projects Sectional Committee, WRD 21

FOREWORD This Indian Standard (Part 11) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Safety in Construction, Operation and Maintenance of River Valley Projects Sectional Committee had been approved by the Water Resources Division Council. With large scale increase in construction activity of river valley projects, the number of major accidents has increased. Further, increased construction activity has created certain hazards for persons working on the projects. The degree of safety achieved in project constructions has a direct bearing on the amount of effort expanded to avoid accidents by those who control the conditions and practices on the project. In order to avoid accidents it should be the overall responsibility of the project authorities to provide measures for the safety of all persons working on the projects. There are number of aspects that need to be kept in mind when the safety norms of an entire river valley project are envisaged. To this end, various aspects that need consideration, from the viewpoint of safety, are dealt with in various parts of this standard. The safety code for construction, operation and maintenance of river valley projects is formulated in eleven parts. This part lays down requirements that should be followed with regard to safety aspects during underground excavation. The following standards may be referred in conjunction to this standard: IS No./SP 2379 : 1990 3016 : 1982 3696 (Part 1) : 1987 (Part 2) : 1991 3764 : 1992 6922 : 1973 10386 (Part 2) : 1982 (Part 10) : 1983 13115 : 1991 SP 22 : 1982 SP 70 : 2001 Title Pipelines -- Identification -- Colour code (first revision) Code of practice for fire precaution in welding and cutting operations (first revision) Safety code of scaffolds and ladders: Scaffolds Ladders Code of safety for excavation work (first revision) Criteria for safety and design of structures subject to underground blasts Safety code for construction, operation and maintenance of river valley projects: Amenities, protective clothing and equipment Storage, handling, detection and safety measures for gases, chemicals and flammable liquids Portable first aid kit for general use -- Specification Explanatory handbook on codes for earthquake engineering Handbook on construction safety practices

This safety code represents a standard of good practice and takes the form of recommendations. Compliance with it does not confer immunity from relevant legal obligations. The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)'. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

IS 10386 (Part 11) : 2012

Indian Standard SAFETY CODE FOR CONSTRUCTION, OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF RIVER VALLEY PROJECTS
PART 11 UNDERGROUND EXCAVATION
1 SCOPE This standard (Part 11) lays down requirements for the safety aspects to be taken during underground excavation for structures like underground power house, transformer cavern, tunnels, shafts such as surge shaft, pressure shaft and cable shaft, additionally driven intermediate tunnels (ADITs) and such other structures associated with river valley projects. Safety measures that should be followed during their operation and maintenance are also described. 2 REFERENCES The standards listed below contain provisions which through reference in this text constitute provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, the editions indicated were valid. All standards are subject to revision and parties to agreements based on these standards are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent editions of the standards indicated below: Title Three-phase induction motors -- Specification (fifth revision) 1030 : 1998 Carbon steel castings for general engineering purposes -- Specification (fifth revision) 1136 : 2008 Preferred sizes for wrought metal products (third revision) 1363 Hexagon head bolts, screws and nuts of product grade `C': (Part 1) : 2002/ Hexagon head bolts (size range M 5 ISO 4016 : to M 64) (fourth revision) 1999 (Part 2) : 2002/ Hexagon head screws (size range ISO 4018 : M 5 to M 64) (fourth revision) 1999 (Part 3) : 2002/ Hexagon nuts (size range M 5 to ISO 4034 : M 64) (fourth revision) 1999 1786 : 2008 High strength deformed steel bars and wires for concrete reinforcement -- Specification (fourth revision) IS No. 325 : 1996 Title Hot rolled low, medium and high tensile structural steel (sixth revision) 2189 : 2008 Selection, installation and maintenance of automatic fire detection and alarm system -- Code of practice (fourth revision) 2190 : 1992 Selection, installation and maintenance of first-aid fire extinguishers -- Code of practice (third revision) 2266 : 2002 Steel wire ropes for general engineering purposes -- Specification (fourth revision) 2458 : 2001/ Vocabulary of gear terms -- ISO 1122-1 : Definitions related to geometry (first 1998 revision) 2467 : 2002/ International gear notation -- ISO 701 : Symbols for geometrical data (first 1998 revision) 2535 Cylindrical gears for general and heavy engineering : (Part 1) : 2004/ Standard basic rack tooth profile ISO 53 : 1998 (third revision) (Part 2) : 2004/ Module (third revision) ISO 54 : 1996 3937 (Part 1) : 1974 (Part 2) : 1974 (Part 3) : 1994 3973 : 1984 Recommendations for socketing of wire ropes: Socketing with zinc (first revision) Socketing with white metal (first revision) Socketing with resins Code of practice for the selection, installation and maintenance of wire ropes (first revision) Safety code for blasting and related drilling operations (first revision) Safety code for working in compressed air (first revision) Gears -- Spur and helical gears -- Calculation of load capacity (first revision) IS No. 2062 : 2006

4081 : 1986 4138 : 1977 4460 (Parts 1 to 3) : 1995

1

IS 10386 (Part 11) : 2012 Title Safety code for tunneling work (first revision) 4967 : 1968 Recommendations for seismic instrumentation for river valley projects 5878 (Part 3) : Code of practice for construction of 1972 tunnels: Part 3 Underground excavation in soft strata 7293 : 1974 Safety code for working with construction machinery 10386 Safety code for construction, operation and maintenance of river valley projects: (Part 3) : 1992 Plant and machinery (Part 4) : 1992 Handling, storage and transportation of explosives (Part 5) : 1992 Electrical aspects (Part 7) : 1993 Fire safety aspects 12633 : 1989 First filling and emptying of pressure tunnels -- Guidelines 14329 : 1995 Malleable iron castings -- Specification 14881 : 2001 Method for blast vibration monitoring -- Guidelines 3 GENERAL SAFETY REQUIREMENTS 3.1 The matter of safety and accident prevention is the responsibility of personnel on the job and of the organizations. All persons need to be alert to dangerous conditions and to take necessary precautions for their own safety as well as that of others working at the site. 3.2 The safety requirement during excavation for any structure may vary according to the type of structure, type of construction methodology, type of strata encountered and number of men and type of machinery deployed at site. 3.3 Proper education and organization is necessary for safety requirements to be implemented in a proper manner. The workmen are required to be made aware of the importance of observing the safety rules (see also 14). 3.4 The contractor/owner/department/organization carrying out the work should employ a safety engineer/ manager who should be familiar with all potential hazards on the job and whose duty would be to educate the workmen as well as to supervise installation and maintenance of safety equipment, first aid stations, machinery guards and other safe guards. 3.5 The hazards of going underground are the greatest the engineer has to face. Underground excavation is always a dangerous and unpredictable business. Hazards cannot be entirely removed, but can be greatly reduced by adopting suitable and adequate precautions. 2 IS No. 4756 : 1978 4 INVESTIGATION, DATA AND SURVEYING 4.1 Before proceeding with the work of underground excavation, sufficient knowledge of sub-surface strata is essential. Insufficient geological data will not only lead to delay in completion of work and increase in cost, but is also of great concern to safety. Geological surprises are to be anticipated and adequate measures for such eventualities should be made available in advance. Planning of underground hydropower projects and tunnels should be based on sufficient geotechnical aspects. This will form the basis of excavation and rock support, etc. Latest advancements should be taken in to consideration. 4.2 Details of geological strata using mapping methods supplemented by exploratory drilling to establish fissure systems, faults, folds, etc, are essential. The final geological map should provide information on the extent of soil and rock formation, zones of weakness, the dip and strike, etc, of the strata. 4.3 Adequate measures such as forepoling, pregrouting, etc, should be taken for any geotechnical problems in case of blind/unexplored geological regions. 4.4 Latest available data from codes and outputs of nearby seismic stations should also be considered for design of underground structures (see IS 4967). Actual data obtained from a nearby strong motion network or micro seismic telemetry network should be considered in seismically active areas/region, if necessary. 5 DESIGN DATA 5.1 Excavation size is a key parameter in the stability of underground openings in rock and the larger the excavation, the less stable the roof behaviour. The principle objective in the design of a support system is to help the rock mass to support itself. The use of rock bolts helps to form homogeneity in rock mass. The use of rock bolts is a flexible method that can be combined with wire-mesh, shotcrete and concrete lining to cope with most situations encountered during underground excavation (see 6.7). 5.2 A professional engineer should be engaged for preparation of design and drawings. Due consideration in design process should be given for the experience gained in underground works of nearby areas. Field design and changes should be documented and vetted by a competent engineering person. 6 DRILLING AND BLASTING OPERATIONS 6.1 Handling Explosives During blasting operation proper precautions should be taken for the protection of persons, work and property.

IS 10386 (Part 11) : 2012 All government laws and regulations relating to the design and location of the explosive magazines, the transportation and the handling of explosives and other measures evolved for the prevention of accidents should be strictly observed. Warning sign should be displayed on the magazines and warning signal should be given for each blast. Explosive should be stored in a safe place at a sufficient distance from the work site and under the special care of a watchman [see IS 10386 (Part 4)]. IS 10386 (Part 4) for handling, transportation and storage of explosives, IS 4081 for blasting and related operations and IS 4138 for working in compressed air, should be strictly adhered to in this regard. Copies of the above standards should be widely circulated and kept available at site office. 6.1.1 Whenever blasting operation is to be conducted, workmen/supervisors should be kept at sufficient distance in a safe shelter/pocket. Left over and unblasted detonators should be removed safely. It is to be ensured that no un-blasted detonators are left over in the area before next operations starts. If the hole drilled for blasting is damp, the junction of the fuse and detonators should be made water tight by means of tough grease, white lead or tar. Proper insulated wire should be used for blasting to be carried out by electrical detonators. Only electric blasting should be resorted to in all underground works. 6.1.2 Precautions Against Lightning Necessary safety measures should be taken in order to provide protection from direct stroke lightning and secondary action of the lightning. b) During a thunderstorm, no blasting operation including charging should be carried out. If in case of electrical shot-firing, the firing circuit has to be set-up before thunderstorm appears and the blast lines should be disconnected from the trunk line and thoroughly insulated with tape. At the same time, all persons must be withdrawn from the danger zone. 6.2 Blast Vibration Monitoring Monitoring the vibrations caused by underground blasting plays a vital role since they induce transient or vibratory displacements which could be permanent (see IS 14881). 6.2.1 Preliminary and detailed surveys should be carried out as per standard practices with modern instruments. During execution of work, accuracy should be maintained in alignment, length and breadth, and levels, etc. 6.2.2 Tunnel excavation may generate subsidence or deformation around the structure causing enhanced stress levels. The safety of the existing structures may also be 3 a) endangered. Special consideration on the safety aspects should be taken in the design/execution. Execution of earth tunnels/tunnels through soft strata poses a great hazard. Earth tunnels/tunnels through soft strata should be executed mainly during non-rainy season. Support system and drilling operation should be formulated with extra care and caution [see IS 5878 (Part 3)]. 6.2.3 Tunnel face stability is a severe problem while tunneling, especially in non-cohesive strata. Buildings and services over the excavation and the workers inside the tunnel are under continuous risk due to this problem. There may be sudden falls of soil, creating large caveins up to the surface. Falling material could endanger workers. Such endangered areas should be supported, barricaded or effectively guarded. 6.2.4 Safety of tunnel entry near portal with less rock cover should be taken care of during the investigation/ design stage itself. Normally the soil cover should be twice the diameter of the tunnel. If the overburden is less than twice the diameter, then cut and cover system should be adopted. Necessary concrete cover at the crown as well as the sides with anchor rods, if necessary, should be provided at least for 30 m from the portal. 6.2.5 The arrangement of underground power house and transformer caverns are normally planned adjacent to each other and it should be ensured that there is enough lateral rock cover in-between them for the stability of both the cavities based on the rock mass characteristics. 6.3 Rock Bursting The energy within the rock, as inherent stresses begin to relax on excavation, can be enormous and powerful enough to expel large chunks of rock causing rock burst/ spalling. There are various methods for determining the rock pressure for support design of underground excavation which should be utilized. 6.4 Excavation Slope The slopes in the underground excavation such as pressure shafts, etc, should be decided on suitable engineering practice based on the geological strata, geotechniques and geo-physical data. 6.4.1 Sequence of Excavation Sequence of excavation should be carefully planned, specifying the charge and strength of explosives. Where multiple work fronts/junctions exist involving crossing over of components, abundant care should be exercized in blasting operation and mucking and guiding the vehicles/equipment. 6.5 Excavated Earth/Muck 6.5.1 Excavated muck should be cleared as soon as the

IS 10386 (Part 11) : 2012 excavation process of each cycle is completed and defuming has been done. The free falling muck in the pressure shafts should be removed as frequently as possible, otherwise it may choke up the shafts. Choking of the lower end of the shaft may cause the mucking operations to prove hazardous to the mucking crew and the equipment. After the blasting and before mucking is started, the pollution should be checked on face of mucking as per relevant Indian Standards. Radioactive pollution, if any, should be checked for permissible limits. 6.5.2 No inflammable materials or oil and grease should be stored inside or near the tunnels or shafts and all combustible rubbish from the tunnel or shaft should be promptly removed. 6.6 Overhangs 6.6.1 Overhangs in the excavated face are hazardous as these may come down unexpectedly and result in fatal accidents to persons working at lower levels. Hence, such overhangs should be removed before continuation of further work in that area. Adequate precautions should be taken while removing the overhangs. 6.6.2 All excavated faces, on which work is in progress or work is temporarily suspended, should be maintained or left at safe slopes, so that the danger caused by caving or sliding is eliminated. 6.7 Rock Bolts 6.7.1 Material Rock bolts should not be less than 25 mm diameter. Rock bolt should generally have a tensile strength in the range of 540 N/mm2 to 590 N/mm2, a minimum yield point of 490 N/mm2, a minimum elongation of 12 percent and should be threaded with rolled threads for at least 200 mm length at both ends. However, these values should be checked with reference to the rock strata/type of rock, which may be ascertained by field tests and rock property analysis. The Indian Standards given below should be referred to: a) High strength steel deformed bars b) Black hexagonal bolts, nuts, lock nuts and black hexagon screws c) Expansion anchors -- Black hearth malleable iron casing d) Washers/Bearings -- Structural steel e) Plug -- Carbon steel casting : IS 1786 : IS 1363 (Parts 1 to 3) : IS 14329 : IS 2062 : IS 1030 4 6.7.2 Pullout Test Rock bolts should be tested at intervals as deemed fit. They should be subjected to at least 2 percent testing, prior to grouting the bolts. 6.7.3 Rock Bolt Protection To avoid possible corrosion the rock bolts should be protected by means of hot dip galvanizing, zinc phosphating or epoxy powder coating, for longer life. 6.8 Instrumentation 6.8.1 General Any underground excavation for construction of power houses, transformer cavern, cable shaft, ventilation shaft, surge shaft, etc, is subjected to three dimensional stress, which becomes two dimensional inside the surface of cavity causing readjustment of stresses in and around the cavity. As stress is related to strain, release of stress results in displacements. Displacements also occur due to the opening of cracks on the fault zone or jointed rock. When the rock around excavated cavity is good, then the cavity should be designed as self supporting. Otherwise suitable supports should be provided. Instrumentation is helpful for assessing the quality of rock, monitoring the behaviour of rock mass around openings and also monitoring performance of supporting measures, strengthening/safety arrangements during the life of the structures. 6.8.2 Instrumentation Programme 6.8.2.1 During construction/underground excavation a) To verify the hypothesis and assumption of design; b) To monitor safety during construction/ underground excavation; c) To measure change in parameters during underground excavation/construction; and d) To verify the performance of the underground excavation/construction. 6.8.2.2 After construction Performance monitoring for safety during the life of the structure; b) Evaluation of effect, during operational condition, on parameters like stress, strain, water pressure, inclination, deflection and water seepage, etc; and c) Comparison of observations with design assumptions. 6.8.3 Recommended Instruments Instruments like strain gauge/meters/load cell, extensometer and piezometer conforming to relevant a)

IS 10386 (Part 11) : 2012 Indian Standards should be provided as per recommendations of the instrumentation engineer and instrument manufacturers. Typical instrumentation scheme is shown in Fig. 1. 6.8.4 Automatic Data Acquisition System/Station The data acquisition station should be located in an area near to measuring point and out of hindrance area and should be easily accessible. Readings should be

FIG. 1 TYPICAL INSTRUMENTATION S CHEME 5

IS 10386 (Part 11) : 2012 recorded systematically in a data acquisition system for monitoring. 6.8.5 Data Processing The readings should be processed, reduced, plotted and the values obtained should be interpreted during excavation stage as well as after completion stage. Interpretation of values should be done to ascertain the necessity of additional strengthening measures such as provision of additional rock bolt, shotcreteing, etc, to act as permanent supports for the underground excavation. 6.9 Service Lines Service lines such as power cable, water line, air line, dewatering line, etc, of the owner and contractor, should be segregated and laid/run on opposite face of the tunnel/cavern. 6.9.1 Power Lines Live wires and cables are laid in the area of excavation for blasting operations, drilling of holes and other operations involving the use of electric power. Where such cables are laid, care should be taken to see that these cables are not laid haphazardly. The supervisors, foreman and the construction staff should ensure that workmen or visitors are kept away from live wires. Wherever necessary, warning signals should be posted. Cables which are cut or open should be promptly replaced [see IS 10386 (Part 5)]. All electric wiring should be properly insulated and of sufficient capacity supported on insulators of approved type and not looped on or tied to spikes, ventilating pipes, or other makeshift supports. All switches should be of automatic trip type. Lines should be located so as not to create any electricity or tripping hazard to workers. 6.9.2 Water Lines Water lines are laid for different purposes such as drinking water, fire fighting, construction purpose, etc. Each line should be properly distinguished by a system of colour coding as per the relevant Indian Standards and should be well maintained. 6.10 Lighting, Warning Signals, etc 6.10.1 Adequate lighting arrangements should be provided at the underground excavation worksite in the access tunnel, ADITs (Additionally Driven Intermediate Tunnels), pathways. 6.10.2 Danger lights should be provided at machinery locations and turning points in the access path for guidance of transport vehicles. At bend/crossings of pathways/roadway proper indications should be displayed. 6.10.3 Whenever a workman is required to climb up/ down on an excavation slope for working on shuttering, 6 reinforcement at shafts, inclined tunnels, etc, he should do so with a safety rope tied securely to a safety belt and wearing safety helmet. Safety net should be provided below the work spot. 6.10.4 Single person should not be permitted in the area of underground excavation alone. All entry and exits that is, check-in and check-out times should be recorded. 6.11 Dewatering 6.11.1 During excavation work, adequate arrangements should be provided for dewatering and bailing out of water from the excavated area to prevent slippery surfaces and sliding of slopes due to standing water. 6.11.2 Adequate measures should be taken to drain away the water from the upper surfaces of excavated slopes or benches. This prevents saturation of soil which could result in slips of the excavated slopes. 6.11.3 Temporary drainage system as well as permanent ones, such as ducts, should be constructed. 6.11.4 Necessary full-proof reliable arrangements should be made so that the surface/storm water from valleys near by tunnels, shafts, additionally driven intermediate tunnel (ADIT), etc, do not gain entry into the work area. In pumped storage power houses there is always a threat of flooding if there is leakage or damage to the draft tube gate. Pumps alone may not be able to pump up the water and provision of drainage tunnels to nearby valleys should be considered. 6.11.5 Drainage holes should be provided in the crown, as well as on either side of the cavern, shafts, etc, so that the seepage water can be drained through these holes. 6.11.6 Following measures should be taken whenever adverse geo-thermal conditions are encountered during underground excavation. a) Monitoring of temperature inside the tunnel especially where rock cover is very high and where there is history or evidence of occurrence of hot water springs; b) Provision of additional ventilation including blowing of cool air, etc, at work site; c) Provision of ice-jackets to workers; and d) Reduced working hours inside the cavern. 6.12 Ventilating the Tunnel Ventilating duct/pipe of suitable diameter as per approved norms should be provided inside the tunnel for diffusing the fumes after blasting. b) In addition to the ventilating pipe, a sufficient supply of fresh air should be provided at all times, in all places underground and provision a)

IS 10386 (Part 11) : 2012 should be made for quick removal of toxic gases and dust. The concentration of various gases inside the tunnel should adhere to the limits given in 7.2.2 of IS 4756. The relevant Indian Standards mentioned below should be referred to: a) Steel-wire rope : IS 2266 b) Maintenance of wire rope : IS 3973 c) Preferred size for wrought : IS 1136 metal products (trolley wheels) d) Gears : IS 2458, IS 2467, IS 2535 (Part 1), IS 2535 (Part 2) and IS 4460 (Parts 1 to 3) Motor : IS 325 Socketing of wire rope with: IS 3937 (Parts 1 molten metal to 3)

c)

6.13 Noise Control The noise pollution should be controlled, a) b) c) d) at the source; by enclosure; by sound absorbing materials; and by ear protection.

Control of noise by ear protection should be effected by the following methods depending upon the sound intensity level of the noise: a) b) c) d) e) Cotton; Impregnated cotton; Soft rubber; Muffs and helmets; and Any of the above combinations.

e) f)

6.16 Tools, Plant and Machinery Proper care should be taken in the operation and maintenance of transport vehicles such as loaders, dumpers, tippers and trailers, cranes/winches. Numbers of serious accidents have been associated with transport. The use of trucks/wagons and heavy machinery should be done under the supervision of experienced personnel. Care should be exercised when guiding vehicles for loading so that they don't collide with side cutting and other vital installations such as cables, lights, ventilation ducts, pumps etc. Vehicle pockets should be provided at suitable intervals (say every 750 m) along the tunnel. The underground excavation of inclined shaft is normally done by raise climber or similar machine. Great care should be taken in the operation and maintenance of such machine [see IS 10386 (Part 3) and IS 7293]. 6.17 Access and Escape Ways 6.17.1 Pathways, if required, should be non-slippery and of adequate width. They should be strong enough to withstand the movement of workers and hand carried tools and equipment. 6.17.2 Gangways, if required, should be strong and of proper construction. Planks used should be of uniform and sufficient thickness and free from knots. Gangways should be kept clear of excavated materials or other obstruction. 6.17.3 Proper level steps should be provided where the gradient of roadway exceeds 15�. It is desirable that proper steps be provided in wet and/or slippery roadways, irrespective of the gradient of such roadways, so that the workers can conveniently use protective footwear even under adverse conditions. 7

6.14 Welding Welding equipment and the structure to be welded should be properly earthed. General exhaust system should be available to take care of the evacuation of fumes. Unused gas cylinders should be kept at a safe place. 6.15 Winch/Wire Rope Winch is an important equipment which conveys men and material. It should be operated and maintained with extreme care and caution. Periodical checks for the wire rope, gear box, braking system etc, should be carried out as per relevant standards. Inspection of the wire rope system should be carried out as frequently as possible to locate any kinking, twisting of rope, loosening of the strands and any other damage. Obstruction in the movement of the rope/wires should be eliminated to avoid accident. Log books should be maintained properly recording hours of operation, details of trips, number of men and load carried, problems noticed, repairs carried out, periodical inspections, mandatory checks and maintenance works. There should not be any overlapping of wire ropes in the winch drums which may lead to sudden fall/jerk of the winch/jula in the shaft. This sudden jerk of winch may hit the side rock in the case of small diameter shafts such as power cable shaft, ventilation shafts leading to serious accidents. Comparatively, confined space creates a hazard.

IS 10386 (Part 11) : 2012 6.17.4 Escape routes from different sections or parts of underground power house, underground transformer cavern, tunnels, etc, should be prominently designated by suitable markings so that they are clearly visible underground. This is in addition to the usual mock drills/ rehearsals once in a quarter. 7 TUNNEL WATERPROOFING One of the most persistent problems encountered both during construction and the operation of any tunnel is that of water leakage/seepage. Primary and secondary linings are the main defence against water ingress or leakage but these can be weakened by a faulty method. Grouting techniques and grout composition have become extremely sophisticated during the past few years with the development of modern injection techniques as well as the growing use of additives such as resins and plasticizers and these should be considered for use appropriately. 8 WATER CONDUCTOR SYSTEM -- SAFE FILLING AND EMPTYING During these operations, the stresses in surrounding rock mass of water conductor system gets increased, released or rearranged. These are critical operations involving high risk and due processes. Safeguards should be followed as detailed in IS 12633. 9 FAILURES In certain sections, although the supports are provided as per the rock conditions as stated by the designers, failure of roof and side walls may occur in the form of falling blocks, roof cave-in, crown settlement, buckling of ribs, shotcrete cracking, etc. The possible causes of failure in certain sections could be due to the following: a) Assumption of improper classification of the rock by the wrong choice of support for identified rock class; b) Insufficient thickness of applied shotcrete layer; c) Incorrect rock bolting pattern and/or insufficient number of rock bolts; d) Shotcreting applied after considerable delay that is after loosening of surrounding rock mass, insufficient shotcrete in crown, initial layer of shotcrete omitted; e) Steel supports not positioned properly and no backfilling behind the steel support; f) Non-identification of rock blocks/wedges which are free to fall or free to slide under their own weight; g) Failure to insert rock bolts to stabilize the rock 8 blocks which are likely to fall; h) Additional layer of shotcrete omitted in weak ground; and j) Incorrect grouting of rock bolts and untensioned rock bolts. 10 EMERGENCY PLANNING 10.1 Workers at the face of a long tunnel are deprived of quick access to a medical center. For this, each member of the work force should be given at least some basic first-aid training. A special team of highly trained advanced first aiders is also essential. They should be provided with first-aid kits. Presence of doctors in project area is also important. Safety officers, with a mines safety background, should inspect machinery, monitor for hazards and give regular instruction on safe methods. When there is a fatality or serious untoward incident, each such occurrence should be thoroughly investigated and the management should decide on how to deal with such situation and to avoid recurrence of a similar incident. It is essential for immediate shut down and examination of machinery and all similar equipment involved. In case of major accidents, it is also necessary to inform immediately various levels of management, near by disaster management agency, in addition to fire and rescue team. The respective contact numbers should be readily available and displayed. Review meetings should be held as frequently as possible to sort out and plan for any shortcoming. 10.2 Means of Exit/Escape During excavation work, adequate means of exit/escape for work force from the hazardous areas/situations should be planned, and kept clear. 10.3 Evacuation Plan Suitable evacuation plan, should be planned and made known to all the personnel involved in underground excavation work. 10.4 Communication Reliable communication system should be maintained during and after excavation work. It is desirable to have loud phones or megaphones readily available for announcement of any impending emergency like fire, collapse, etc. 11 HEALTH AND SAFETY Supervisory health and safety course should be conducted and attended by engineers/supervisor/ foremen. Written check lists should be displayed at all work locations for compliance.

IS 10386 (Part 11) : 2012 The rescue team should be highly trained and well equipped. Proper personal protective equipment should be made available to operators. The level of diesel fumes within underground excavation area should be closely monitored by gas analyzer. 12 PERIODIC INSPECTION Periodic inspection of underground excavation areas after commissioning of power house plays a vital role and should be made mandatory specifying periodicity. Necessary periodic maintenance of ladders, landing platforms, top cover grills of various shafts, lining in tunnels, winches for shafts, etc, are very important in the long run. Vegetation growth in the unlined shafts, etc, should be completely cleared. After commissioning, the tunnels, shafts, underground power house and transformer cavern side walls, roof, etc, should be periodically inspected and repairs attended to immediately during shut down period, etc. 13 COMMUNICATION Proper communication system should be established to facilitate communication between workplace and the management, worker and the safety manager and between various work fronts. Walky-talkie, wireless mike system and similar equipment should be installed. Close circuit TV should also be installed to keep watch of critical components, critical locations, auxiliaries, cable routes, transformer cavern, and other vulnerable areas. 14 SAFETY OFFICER It is essential to employ a qualified safety officer/ engineer-in-charge to supervise the safety measures and to ensure the safety of personnel, employees, workers employed at site of underground excavation, equipments, during the excavation, operation and maintenance period also. The duties of the safety engineer/manager/officer are given below: To impart education and training to the workers and employees engaged in the underground excavation works; b) To comply with relevant safety rules and regulations; c) To undertake all steps to reduce risk to employees, property, machine, and surrounding areas; d) To check all machine, equipment, fire fighting water piping system, electrical appliances, first-aid station and to keep them in good working condition; e) To take immediate action during any emergency situation, floods, etc; 9 a) f) g) Sustaining the efforts and continual improvements; To evolve safety planning and conduct review meeting with site management, contractors and workers; To arrange for displaying the warning signals/ boards at vulnerable area; To avoid excessively and unnecessary strenuous work position and movement; To conduct internal safety audit half yearly/ annually, and to conduct external safety audit twice or thrice during the excavation process; To prepare safety manuals for each specific component; and To ensure mandatory inspection and compliance and monitoring at higher management levels.

h) j) k)

m) n)

14.1 Accident Reporting Any accident fatal/non-fatal (injuries) should be reported to the top management and law enforcing authorities within a time frame as below: Reporting time Fatal Non-fatal Damage to costly equipment : : Immediate (detailed report should follow) : within 3 days : within 2 days (preliminary report) and detailed report after due inspection of experts and assessment

14.2 Cause for Accidents Cause for accident should be reviewed/investigated and remedial measures monitored. Necessary safety measures should be adopted. Existing measures, if found deficient, should be modified and corrected and suitable guidelines should be issued, to avoid reoccurrence. 14.3 Disaster Management Close co-ordination should be maintained with the district disaster management cell at all times especially at the aftermath of occurrence of fatal accidents, floods, fire, epidemics and other natural calamities. 15 FIRE RISK 15.1 Smoking by workers increases the risk of fire. Smoking should be strictly prohibited in work spot. Cooking in and around the vicinity of work place should be prohibited. As there is danger of fire and smoke resulting from rubbish, litter during construction operations, they should be removed and taken out in every shift. Safety code for electrical aspects [IS 10386 (Part 5)] and for fire safety [IS 10386 (Part 7)] should be adhered to.

IS 10386 (Part 11) : 2012 15.2 Fire Alarm/Smoke Detection Alarm System After excavation work, vulnerable areas in the tunnel should be provided with automatic fire detection and alarm system (including manual fire alarm call points) conforming to IS 2189. 15.3 Extinguishers Fire extinguishers, of various types suitable for the areas of fire risk covered should be provided in conformity with IS 2190. 16 VISITORS Visitors should not be permitted to enter the area of underground excavation. In unavoidable cases, they should be accompanied by a supervisor. They should be kept at sufficient distance from the cutting edge, running machinery and other potentially dangerous areas. All visitors should be provided with safety gadgets, and their details noted in the entry register. Details of all persons including workers/supervisors, their time of entry into the site and exit should be recorded. 17 BUDGET As the safety aspects of underground structures are of paramount concern to the nation/state/owner, the safety system should be kept alert and reliable and a reasonable budget provision should be allocated, especially during the maintenance period. 18 DOCUMENTATION Proper documents should be prepared indicating problems encountered during the excavation works, such as accidents, flooding, rock fall, if any, and other difficulties encountered during excavation etc. The outcome and action taken on periodic inspections should also be documented. This document will be useful for future underground excavation works.

10

IS 10386 (Part 11) : 2012

ANNEX A (Foreword)
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION Safety in Construction, Operation and Maintenance of River Valley Projects Sectional Committee, WRD 21
Organization NTPC Ltd, New Delhi Bhakra Beas Management Board, Chandigarh Central Board of Irrigation & Power, New Delhi Central Electricity Authority, New Delhi Central Water Commission, New Delhi Geological Survey of India, Kolkata Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee Irrigation Department, Government of Kerala, Thirunvanthapuram Irrigation & CAD Department, Government of Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad Irrigation Department, Government of Punjab, Chandigarh Irrigation Department, Government of Uttarakhand, Dehradun Jaiprakash Industries Ltd, New Delhi Karnataka Power Corporation Ltd, Bangalore Larsen & Toubro, Chennai NHPC Ltd, Faridabad National Projects Construction Corporation Limited, Faridabad North Eastern Electric Power Corporation Ltd, Shillong Saradar Sarovar Narmada Nigam Ltd, Gandhi Nagar Satluj Jal Vidyut Nigam, Shimla Tamil Nadu Electricity Board, Chennai Tehri Hydro Development Corporation Ltd, Rishikesh Tungabhadra Steel Products Ltd, Tungabhadra Dam Water Resources Department, Government of Madhya Pradesh, Bhopal In personal capacity (Venmala Cochin-682028) BIS Directorate General Representative(s) EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR (HYDRO-ENGINEERING) (Chairman ) MEMBER (IRRIGATION) DIRECTOR (DAM SAFETY) (Alternate) SHRI A. C. GUPTA SHRI N. K. BHATIA (Alternate) SHRI R. K. RUSTAGI DIRECTOR (DSM) DIRECTOR (DSR) (Alternate) SHRI D. N. BHATTACHARYA SHRI C. PAUL (Alternate) DR GOPAL CHAUHAN CHIEF ENGINEER (IDRB) DIRECTOR (DESIGNS, IDRB) (Alternate) SHRI I. S. N. RAJU SHRI S. PANDURANGA RAO (Alternate) CHIEF ENGINER (RSDD) DIRECTOR DAMS (RSDD) (Alternate) CHIEF ENGINEER (GANGA VALLEY) SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER (MB DAM) (Alternate) SHRI D. G. KADKADE SHRI NARENDRA SINGH (Alternate) CHIEF ENGINEER (CIVIL DESIGNS) PROJECT ENGINEER (CIVIL DESIGN) (Alternate) SHRI N. RAGHAVAN SHRI D. KARKUN SHRI KAJAL SAHA (Alternate) SHRI S. BASAK SHRI A. K. GUPTA (Alternate) SHRI S. R. NATH SHRI A. K. DAM (Alternate) EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR (D&P) SHRI R. K. SHARMA SHRI V. S. UPADHYAYA (Alternate) SHRI K. GOPAL SHRI V. GOPALAKRISHNAN (Alternate) SHRI R. K. VISHNOI SHRI MANOJ SARDANA (Alternate) SHRI HUSSAIN BIN ALI SHRI Y. S. CHANDRA SHEKAR (Alternate) SHRI K. K. TIWARI SHRI R. K. JAIN (Alternate) SHRI G. B. MENON SHRI J. C. ARORA, Scientist F & Head (WRD) [Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] Member Secretary SHRI R. R. DASH Scientist C (WRD), BIS

11

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act , 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Catalogue' and `Standards : Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: WRD 21 (463).

Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in Regional Offices: Central Eastern : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi KOLKATA 700054 Telephones

{ { {

{

2323 7617 2323 3841

2337 8499, 2337 8561 2337 8626, 2337 9120

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 Western Branches: : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093

{

60 3843 60 9285

2254 1216, 2254 1442 2254 2519, 2254 2315 2832 9295, 2832 7858 2832 7891, 2832 7892

AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. VISAKHAPATNAM.
Published by BIS, New Delhi

