NAT HA IS 17510 : 2021 
Indian Standard 


Wie se Vata — le 


Ready to Eat 
Savories — Specification 


ICS 67.230 


© BIS 2021 


anda AM Sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Tea TH HM, ay freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


October 2021 Price Group 2 


Ready-to-Eat Foods and Specialized Products Sectional Committee, FAD 24 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by Bureau of Indian Standards, after draft finalized by the Ready-to-Eat Foods 
and Specialized Products Sectional Committee had been approved by the Food and Agriculture Division Council. 


Ready-to-eat savouries includes all types of savoury snack foods. Snacks, savouries-potato, cereal, flour or starch 
based (from roots and tubers, pulses and legumes). Includes all salty and savoury snacks, with or without added 
flavourings, but excludes unsweetened crackers. Examples include extruded snacks, potato chips, popcorn, 
pretzels, rice crackers (senbei), flavoured crackers (for example, cheese-flavoured crackers), bhujia (aalubhujia, 
bikaneribhujia, peelibhujia, sevbhujia), namkeens (snack made of a single or mixture of whole pulses, dal(s), 
flours, maize, potatoes, salt, dried fruit, vegetable, peanuts, spices and condiments, masalas, dried fruits, nuts 
and seeds etc), namkeen mix/mixtures (like khatta-meetha, cornflake mix, papads (prepared from soaked cereal, 
pulses, legumes, dals, mixed with salt and spices, and formed into balls or flat cakes). Includes pakoras, samosa, 
chaat, french fries, cornsnacks, nachos, potato hoops, tortila chips, chabena, khari, kara, murukku, namakpara, 
chiwda, palakayalu, ribbon/thattupakoda, dalmoth/mixtures, soya nuts, nimki, fali (for example, cholafali), other 
fried/baked snacks/savouries, uppuseedai, appam, bhel-mix, sev, gathiya, shankarpali, farsan, kurmura, murmura, 
papadi, crisps, chakli, etc. Also includes sweet snacks for example, gudchana, sugar coated dals and other sweet 
dal snacks (dals coated with jaggery, sugar, honey and other ingredients). 


In the formulation of this standard, due consideration has been given to the provisions of the Food Safety and 
Standards Act, 2006 and the Rules framed thereunder and the Legal Metrology (Packaged Commodities) Rules, 
2011. However, this standard is subject to the restrictions imposed under these, wherever applicable. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 17510 : 2021 


Indian Standard 
READY TO EAT SAVORIES — SPECIFICATION 


1 SCOPE 


The standards includes the requirements 
ready-to-eat savories described at 3.1, 3.2 and 3.3. 


for 


2 REFRENCES 


The standards given below contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of these standards: 


IS No. Title 

2491 : 2013 Food hygiene — General 
principles — Code of practice 
(third revision) 

16021 : 2012 Good manufacturing practices 
(GMP) — Requirements for 
organizations in the food 
processing sector 

3 DEFINITION 


Forthe purpose ofthis standard, in addition to definitions 
given in FSSR regulation following definitions shall 


apply. 


3.1 Snacks, Savouries (Potato, Cereal, Flour or 
Starch Based from Roots and Tubers, Pulses and 
Legumes) — Includes all types of savoury snack foods. 
Includes all savoury snacks, with or without added 
flavourings/seasonings. Examples include potato chips, 
other chips, popcorn, pretzels, rice crackers (senbei), 
flavoured crackers (for example, cheese-flavoured 
crackers), Namkeens including bhujia (snack made of 
a mixture of cereal/millet flours and their grits, maize, 
potatoes, salt, dried fruit and fruit products, peanuts, 
spices and condiments, vegetable and their products, 
colours, flavours, and additives, and papads (prepared 
from soaked rice flour or from black gram or cow pea 
flour, millets, mixed with salt and spices, and formed 
into balls, flat cakes or slices). It may have varying 
shapes and sizes. 


3.2 Processed Nuts, Including Coated Nuts and 
Nut Mixtures — Processed nuts, including coated 
nuts and nut mixtures (with for example, dried fruit). 
Includes all types of whole nuts processed by, for 
example, dry-roasting, roasting, marinating or boiling, 


either in shell or shelled, salted or unsalted. Yoghurt, 
cereal, and honey-covered nuts, sugar-coated nuts, and 
dried fruit-nut-and-cereal snacks (for example, “trail 
mixes”) are classified here. Chocolate-covered nuts are 
classified in, and nuts covered in chocolate analogues 
are included in. 


3.3 Fish Based Snacks — This describes savory 
crackers with fish, fish products or fish flavorings. For 
example, fish cutlet, fish fingers, fish based extruded 
products. 


4 COMPOSITION 


The products shall be prepared from the following 
ingredients. 


4.1 Basic Ingredients 


Following ingredients may be used for preparation of 
savories covered under this standard. 


4.1.1 One or more ofingredients like potato, vegetables, 
fruits, cereals/millets and their flours or starch based 
from roots and tubers, pulses and legumes, sweeteners 
(natural/artificial). 


4.1.2 Processed nuts, including coated nuts and nut 
mixtures. 


4.1.3 Fish/Peat/poultry 
It includes all edible portions. 


4.1.4 Seasonings 


It may contain one or more ingredients such as spices, 
condiments and herbs including their extracts, salt and 
its substitutes, fruits and vegetables or their products 
or extracts, edible starches, yeast and its products or 
extracts, soya and its products including soybean 
based seasoning and condiments , hydrolysed protein 
or their products, poultry, meat, marine, aquatic or 
their products , edible vegetable oils and fats or their 
products, cereal and cereal products, milk and milk 
products, nutritive or non-nutritive sweeteners, vitamin 
and minerals, flavours or any other ingredient suitable 
to the product may be added. 


4.2 Other Permitted Ingredients/Additives 


The additives and processing aids may be added as 
given in 5.2 and any other suitable edible ingredients 
appropriate to this product. 


Flavours, processing aids, vitamins and enzymes may 
also be used in the preparation of ready to eat savouries. 


IS 17510 : 2021 


Edible protein, egg powder, meat/poultry/marine 
and/or their products or any other ingredient suitable 
for the product. 


5 REQUIREMENTS 


5.1 Quality Criteria 


a) The product shall be acceptable in terms of 
appearance, texture, aroma, taste and colour; 


b) Sound, produce affected by rotting or deterioration 
such as to make it unfit for consumption should be 
excluded; 


c) The product should be clean, practically free of 
any visible foreign matter; 


d) Should be practically free of pests affecting the 
general appearance of the produce; 


e) Should be free of off odor and off taste; 


f) Should be free of abnormal external moisture, 
excluding condensation following removal from 
cold storage; 


g) Should be free of damage caused by low and/or 
high temperatures or frost; 


h) The product shall be free from pathogenic 
micro-organisms to ensure wholesomeness and 
biological stability; and 


j) The product shall be free from any ingredient that 
may be injurious to health. 


5.2 Food Additives 


The product covered under this standard may contain 
food additive(s) as per FSSR (Food Product Standards 
and Food Additives) Regulations, 2011. In addition 
to food additive mentioned in FSSR (Food Product 
Standards and Food Additives) Regulations 2011, other 
food additives as per Codex General Standard for Food 
Additives (inclusive of Table 3) are also permitted. 


5.3 Contaminants, Toxins and Residues 


The products covered in this standard shall comply 
with Food Safety and Standards (Contaminants, Toxins 
and Residues) Regulations, 2011. 


5.4 Hygienic Requirements 


The products covered by the provisions of this standard 
shall be manufactured, packed and stored under 
hygienic conditions in licensed premises as per the 
Food Safety Standards (Licensing and Registration) 
Regulations 2011 and (see IS 2491). 


6 PROCESSING AIDS 


These guidelines aim to provide information for the 
safe use of substances used as processing aids and the 
safety of their residues in the preparation of ready to eat 
savoury foods. 


6.1 The use of a substance as a processing aid 
is justified when such use performs one or more 
technological functions during treatment or processing 
of raw materials, foods, or ingredients. Any residues of 
processing aids remaining in the food after processing 
should not perform a technological function in the final 
product. Substances used as processing aids shall be 
used under conditions of good manufacturing practices 
(GMP) which includes the following: 


a) The quantity of the substance used shall be 
limited to the lowest achievable level necessary to 
accomplish its desired technological function; 


b 


wm 


Residues or derivatives of the substance remaining 
in food should be reduced to the extent reasonably 
achievable and should not pose any health risk; 
and 


c 


wa 


The substance is prepared and handled in the same 
way as a food ingredient. 


6.2 The safety of a substance that leaves significant 
residues and used as a processing aid should be 
demonstrated by the FBO using the processing aid. 
The demonstration of safety should include appropriate 
risk assessment of unintended or unavoidable residues 
resulting from its use as a processing aid under 
conditions of GMP. 


7 PACKAGING AND MARKING 
7.1 Each package shall be suitably marked as to give 
the following information: 

a) Name of the material; 

b) Month of manufacture; 

c) Name and address of the manufacturer; 

d) Batch or Code number; 

e) Net quantity; 


f) Maximum retail price inclusive of all taxes; 


g) Best before........month....... year; and 


h) Any other information required under the Legal 
Metrology (Packaged Commodities) Rules, 2011 
and the Food Safety and Standards (Packaging 
and Labelling) Regulations, 2011. 


7.2 The following foods and ingredients are known to 
causes hypersensitivity shall always be declared: 


a) Cereals containing gluten, that is, wheat, rye, 
barley, oats, spelt or their hybridized strains and 
products of these; 


b) Crustacean and products of these; 

c) Eggs and egg products; 

d) Fish and fish products; 

e) Peanuts, soybeans and products of these; 
f) Milk and milk products (lactose included); 


c) Tree nuts and nut products; and 
e) Sulphite in concentrations of 10 mg/kg or more. 
7.3 BIS Certification Marking 


The product(s) conforming to the requirements of 
this standard may be certified as per the conformity 


IS 17510 : 2021 


assessment schemes under the provisions of the 
Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and the Rules 
and Regulations framed thereunder, and the products 
may be marked with the Standard Mark. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: FAD 24 (2717). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


