UDC 621.51

: 658.711.3

: 006.87

18:11465-1985
( Reaffirmed 2001 )

Indian Standard

TECHNICAL SUPPLY CONDITIONS FOR RECIPROCATING AIR COMPRESSOR FOR POWER UP TO 25 kW FOR GENERAL PURPOSE AND INDUSTRIAL APPLICATIONS

1. scope -This

standard applies to single acting trunk type piston for the general purpose industrial applications having horse power nittent duty ( 2 000 operating hours per year ) applications.

reciprocating up to 25 kW

air compressor meant for inter

2. TerminologyFor the purpose of this standard, the definitions, Glossary of terms relating to compressors and exhausters (first revision)' 3. Enquiry and Proposal

given in IS : 5727 - 198: shall apply.

3.1 The purchaser shall complete the data as given in Appendix A to the extent In addition, :able, and also specify known abnormal conditions of working. rpecify any of his additional requirements, the supplier 3.2 Propose/In reply to the enquiry by the purchaser, :omponents along with any othe details required by the purchaser.

possible and appli. purchaser may alsc

shall supply

a list

of alI the

3.2.1 The proposal shall include either a specific statement that all equipment are or a specific list of deviations therefrom :ompliance with the purchaser's specifications, urnished. 3.2.2 If required by the purchaser, rision of erection shall be furnished. 3.2.3 The supplier shall furnish the charges for deputing SuPPfi@rS representative

in strici shall be super-

for

any special tools required

for installation

and maintenance

work.

1.3 Guarantee 3.3.1 Performance guarantee -The compressors shall be guaranteed for satisfactory performance These include a guarantee for capacity and powers at the It the specified operating conditions. ime of performance test. The tolerances to be allowed on the capacity and power consumption ;hall be in accordance with IS : 5456 - 1985 `Code of practice for testing of positive displacement ype air compressors and exhausters ( first revision 1'. 3.3.2 Workmanship guarantee-All equipment, components and spare parts shall be guaranteed ry the supplier against defects which despite proper use appear therein and arise from faulty design, This guarantee shall be applicable lefective or improper materials or poor and faulty workmanship. or a period mutually agreed by the supplier and the user. . General .I Requirements to air pressure shall have sufficient strength. shall easily cause mechanical failure.

Parts subjected 4.1.1 4.1.2 Design

&all

be such that no part of the compressor prime mover is used, proper earthing

If electrical

shall be ensured. as not to cause any

4.1.3 Every part shall have the interchangeability hange in the performance by changing a part.

and shall be SO constructed

and tolerances' as per IS : 919 ( Part 1 ) - 1963 4.1.4 Parts shall be manufactured to `fits iecommendations for limits and fits for engineering: Part 1 General engineering ( first revision 1'.

Adopted

3 October L _~-

1985

@ May 1986, ISI I
INDIAN
MANAK

Gr 4 I

.__.A

STANDARDS
BHAVAN,

INSTITUTION
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 119002

16:11465
4.2 Cylinder 4.2.1 adequate

-1985
and Cylinder Head shall have

Cylinder wall and cylinder head which are directly subjected to the pressure wall thickness; and uniformity which is generally acceptable per practice.

4.2.2 Maximum allowable working pressure shall exceed rated discharge pressure by at least 15 percent or one bar whichever is greater but must not be lower than safety valve net pressure. 4.2.3 4.2.4 Cylinders Cylinder shall be spaced and arranged to permit access to all openings, shall have cooling Rod rod small end by piston to withstand design pin of adequate taking into design. account the provision as required by service conditions. valves and controls.

4.3 Piston and Connecting 4.3.1 Piston

shall be carried by connecting material

4.3.2 Piston shall have suitable optimum case of operation. 4.3.3 Piston shall have accurately finished. sufficient

pressure

number

of piston

rings

and grooves

for piston

rings

shall be

4.3.4 Piston pin shall have adequate hardness and surface finish design (whether lubricated or oilless type 1. 4.3.5 condition. Ccnnecting red shall have suitable material with adequate

depending

upon the compressor

strength

for design

operating

4.36 Small end and big end bearings shall be in accordance with the connecting rod material Dependir.g upon the connecting rod material and whether lubricated or oilless type selected. compressor, the bearing type may be selected. 4.4 Crankshaft and Bearings and shall have suitable material with adequate

4.4.1 Crankshaft shall be suitably designed strength for design operating condition. 4.4.2 operating Crankshaft condition. shall be adequately supported

by bearings

suitably

selected

to meet the design

4.4.3 Bearing shall be of plain, load for prolonged usage. 4.5 Valve and Filters

ball

or

roller

type

and

shall be capable to

withstand

the shaft

4.5.1 Double stage compressors shall be provided with a safety valve at the suction side of the second stage cylinder to prevent abnormal pressure rising and to ensure the safety of the unit. 4.5.2 Suitably free from counter designed suction and delivery valves shall be used, flows of the air, failures and resting. so that they operate smoothly,

4.5.3 The valve and valve part design shall be such that no inlet valve shall be fitted discharge valve and vice-versa. 4.5.4 Safety valve shall be free from rusting, for a long period. 4.5.5 Suction shall be effective filters shall be selected for dust prevention. such disorder, etc, even when they

instead

of

a

had not been in use

that

they offer

minimum

resistance

to

suction

and

compressors shall be so constructed that heat generated 4.6 Intercoolers - Double or multi-stage in the first stage cylinder shall be discharged and the compressed air temperature shall be reduced, by installing an intercooler between successive stages. 4.7 Frame - Shall be designed such that it offers maximum sturdiness, hence low level of vibration. In the case of lubricated frame, the frame shall have adequate size of oil sump capacity to meet the need of maximum design condition, which also offers good surface area for cooling of sump oil. in 2

IS:11465-1985
the case of totally oilless compressor the crankcase need not have the oil sump in frame but shall be sturdy enough for keeping compressor vibration level to minimum and offer better air cooling. 4.8 Lubrication System - Shall be provided such that it satisfies the need for compressors design condition and lubricates adequately the crankshaft, journals, bearings, cylinder The method of lubrication may be by a splash or by a positive pressure. 4.8.1 Lubricating oils or greases - Shall be selected depending which, as far as possible, shall be readily available. 4.9 Piston Rings and Oil Wiper Rings 4.9.1 minimum ( for Lubricated such that Cylinder they upon the compressor maximum walls, etc.

design needs,

Compressors

) effectively and offer

Piston rings - Shall be provided of rubbing resistance.

compress

the air

4.9.2 Oil wiper rings - Shall be provided such that they adequately and allow minimal of oil carryover with the discharge air. 4.10 Piston Rings and Wear Bands ( for Oilless Cylinder Compressors )

wipe oil from

cylinder

walls

4.10.1 Piston rings of adequate size and design shall be provided so that they compress the air the material shall be suitably selected to effectively. Also, since it is for an oilless application, The filler material for piston rings shall be suitably selected to give meet this special requirement. longer period of compressor running and better heat dissipation. 4.10.2 Wear bands - Of adequate size and design shall be provided on piston to ensure its proper Its material shall be suitably selected to running within cylinder and avoid metal-to-metal contact. meet the special need for air to be oilless and along with this the filler material shall also be suitably selected to give better life and heat dissipation. 5. Prime Mover and Drive Equipment in the enquiry the type of prime mover required, for example, electric

5.1 The supplier shall specify motors, diesel engine, etc. 5.2 The drive may be through

gear box, belt or directly

connected

as appropriate.

5.3 Prime MoverIn case the prime mover is required to be supplied along with the compressor, the purchaser shall specify in his enquiry the technical data required for the prime mover design (type of motor, electrical supply characteristics, type of engine, etc) and also the standard or code to which the prime mover shall conform. 5.4 The rated power of the prime mover shall be higher by at least IO percent under any operating conditions ( maximum power includes shaft power or brake power plus all transmission losses). Note - This clause includes any required tolerance on capacity and power consumption as per IS : 5456. 5.5 The prime mover shall be capable of taking an overload of 5 percent above n,ormal rating specified in 5.4. This is to allow for any incidental running up to safety valve set pressure. as

5.6 The prime mover shall have sufficient starting torque so as to be capable of starting the compressor from a stopped condition and running, it up to full speed taking into account the view that the compressor commences discharging against the rated discharge pressure from start up. 5.7 When the prime mover is to be procured data: a) Compressor b) Inertia and transmission and details or both. starting by the purchaser, torque the supplier shall furnish the following

characteristics,

valve (GD2), or coupling

c) Mounting

5.8 In case of engine drives, they shall be provided with an over-speed shut down device capable The over-speed trip shall be such as to pervent for running at of being manually tripped and re-set. a speed greater than the maximum allowable speed. 3

IS~:11465 -1985
6. Auxiliary 6.1 Receivers 6.1 .I Maximum compressors. working pressure of air receiver shall be higher than the rated pressure of the Equipment and Safety Devices

6.1.2 Air receiver shall be of circular shape and the end plates sufficient strength. Air receivers shall be as per IS : 7938-1976 `Air installations' or to any other related standard. 6.1.3 withstand Air receivers upon which equipment the stresses due to weight, starting

shall be of dished end, with receivers for compressed air

such as compressors are mounted and stopping of the machine.

shall be capable to

6.2 Couplings, Reduction Gears and Guards
Where a coupling is provided, it shall be suitable for the power transmitted. shall conform to IS : 2693-l 980 `Bush type flexible coupling for power transmission (first revision)`. Any coupling other than that covered by IS : 2693-1980 shall also be acceptable, as mutually agreed by the supplier and the purchaser. The coupling 6.2.2 Replacement of wearing parts of the coupling shaft or other main drive component from the system. shall be possible without disturbing driver

6.2.1

Couplings-

6.2.3

Coupling

shall be suitable

for expansion

and any other movement

of the shaft.

6.3 Reduction Gears 6.3.1 Reduction gear shall be suitable maximum shaft power of the compressor. for power transmission on continuous operation basis for

6.3.2

Gears shall be of suitable

design and make.

6.4 Guards 6.4.1 Guards shall be of removable hazardous to operating personnel. type provided on all movable parts which is considered to be

6.4.2 If guards are not easily removable type, opening, if necessary mechanism shall be provided to have access for any part requiring attention.

with

covers

or suitable

6.4.3 When V - belt driven compressor is considered, the V - belts shall be selected to transmit maximum shaft power of the compressor. The V - belt drive design shall also be suitable for same, and appropriately be provided with the guard. The slide rails used under motor for taking up belt slackness (after some running of unit) shall be selected such that it provides enough room for tightening.

6.5 Piping 6.5.1 The pipe work required base plate) consists of:
a) Air piping for interstage with the compressor discharge, upon compressor design ) cooling water, when given as package (with receiver or with

and final

b) Auxiliary pipe work - Lubricating ( depending drain and vent and instrument air piping.

6.5.2 The scope of supply of pipe work by the supplier shall be properly defined with terminal points clearly fixed. The supplier shall supply all pipe work to inter-connected items of his supply reducing the number of terminal points for the purchasers connection, to a minimum when the scope of supply shall be as mutually agreed upon. 6.5.3 Auxiliary pipe work, that is, lubricating shall be suitably fixed on the package. _ 6.5.4 Unless otherwise specified the supplier 4 oil, cooling water, drain and vent and instrument air

shall supply the pipe work as mutually

agreed.

IS : 11465 - 1985
6.6 Safety Devices

6.6.1 Compressor shall have mechanical unloading device (centrifugal unloaders ) or any other suitably designed device so that at starting of the compressor starts on no-load condition. When the motor picks up its full speed only then the compressor begins to develop set pressure. 6.6.2 receiver. Generally Pressure switches shall be so fitted as to be operated against the static pressure of the air The operations shall be accurate, their contact points shall not be easily damaged. this is given when automatic start/stop is required.

6.6.3 Automatic governor for unloaders shall be so fitted as to be operated against the static pressure of the air receiver and accurately operated when reached to the operating pressure. Also the pressure in the air receiver shall not rise when the air inlet valve is closed. Their operations shall be accurately restorted when reached to the recharging pressure. Generally this is given when constant speed control is required. 6.6.4 Safety valveShall be provided on interstage manifold for multistage compressor. In case when r-r&orethan two stages, each interstage shall have suitable safety valve. When the air receiver is provided it shall be fitted with a suitable safety valve. 6.6.5 desires. For compressor crankcase oil level, a low oil level switch may be provided, if customer

7. Controls 7.1 Controls

and Instrumentation

a) b) cl

Automatic start/stop mode of operations: Makes or breaks electric contact to the motor at pre-determined pressures. This type of regulation is used when the demand of air is small or intermittent, but where pressure shall be continuously maintained. Constant speed mode of operations: Unloads the compressor at a pre-determined pressure This type of regulation is used when the demand while the motor continues to operate. for air shall be practically constant at the capacity of the compressor. Dual control permits a manual selection between constant start and stop control, depending upon the air requirements. speed control and automatic

7.2 Instrumentation 7.2.1 For multistage compressor, pressure gauges shall be provided on each inerstages manifold and for final air discharge pressure in the case where the compressor is air receiver mounted. 8. Name Plate and Rotation Mark attached at an easily accessible point on the compressor and to

8.1 Name Plate - Shall be securely any other major auxiliary equipment. 6.2 Rotation Mark -

Shall be cast in or attached

to major item of rotating

equipment.

9. Tests on Compressors 9.1 The tests other than hydrostatic otherwise specified. and pressure tests shall be in accordance with IS : 5456 unless

9.2 Air-receivers and coolers, shall be subjected to the hydrostatic design pressure or in accordance with the specified code. IO. Preparation for Despatch are completed all exposed machined

test

pressure

of 1'5

times

the

10.1 After test and inspection suitable rust preventive. 10.2 10.3 Unmachined All openings external

surfaces

shall

be coated

with

surfaces shall be cleaned thoroughly with wooden, 5

and painted

with

suitable

paint.

shall be provided

plastic or metal closure.

IS : 11465 - 1985
11. Documentation shall be furnished by the supplier, in addition, any other the purchaser and the supplier before placement of the order

11.1 The following data and drawings documentation mutually agreed between shall be furnished.

with

11 .I.I Manufacturer shall provide data as required deviations and exception etc.

by data sheet given

in 3.1, Appendix

A along

11 .I.2 Overall arrangement drawing drawing shall also show the following:

of the compressor, those

prime mover and for purchasers

other accessories. foundation and

This main-

a) All principal dimensions, including tenance and withdrawal space. b) Direction c) Position of rotation of foundation of drive shaft. bolts.

required

11.1.3 If the prime mover is not included shall be supplied.

in the supply,

the

relevant

data

for

the

prime

mover

11 .I .4 Schematic drawing of control system when required and not covered in the maintenance and operating instruction book, cooling system and outline dimensional drawing for accessories such as after coolers, instrument panel, etc. Make, type, size, etc, shall be indicated for all these accessories. 11 .I .5 Maintenance and operating instructions - These instructions shall be such that they include cross sectional or assembly type drawings, showing all parts, torques for tightening fasteners,, lubricating oil data and other instructions and guidances given for satisfactory operation of the compressor, accessories, etc. 11 .I.6 Certificates of pressure vessels as per manufactured shall be provided. relevant code to which these are designed and

11 .I .7 Materials certificate for material used in manufacture of compressor for mechanical, performance tests and any other tests shall be provided. 11 .I .8 Required data for ordering spare parts shall be provided. and documents shall be mutually

and

all

test reports

11 .I .9 The number of copies for drawings purchaser and the supplier.

agreed

between

the

APPENDIX A ( Clauses 3.1 and 11 .I .I )
DATA A-l, General a) Number of units b) Site c) Service d) Installation e) Type of driver f) Prime mover furnished Continuous/Intermittent Indoor/Outdoor Electric with roof/Outdoor engine/Petrol without engine roof Running/standby SHEET CONTAINING PURCHASER'S SPECIFICATIONS

motor/Diesel

by purchaser/supplier 6

IS:11465 -1985
A-2. Required Operating Condition

a) Site data i) Barometric ii) Relative iii) iv) Ambient pressure Maximum Minimum Maximum Minimum Clean/Very required Grade dusty/In any unusual corrosive atmosphere

humidity temperature condition

Environmental

v) Any special electrical Class vi)

equipment

because of hazard Division pressure and temperature of supply

Cooling water supply for coolers and return characteristics ( each machine) and required

Type of water,

b) Electrical supply included ) c) Capacity d) Discharge e) Discharge A-3. Capacity required

(required

if prime

mover

is a motor

which

has to be

pressure,

temperature

( specify

only if after-cooler

is required

).

Control air receiver pressure at bars

a) For maintaining

This shall be done by: i) Suction ii) b) Any other requirements. A-4. Special Requirements valve unloader start/stop.

a) Oilless construction b) Maximum allowable speed (RPM )

c) Special materials d) Type of filter for air and heat exchanger and

e) Design code for air receiver f) Standard to which -

prime mover shall conform,

g) Transmission V - Belt Flat belt Gear Box

Direct drive h) Any special type of couplings. A-5. Scope of Supply instrumentation, safety devices,

Prime mover, Additional Additional Aftercooler, 7

IS:11465-1985
Air receiver, Safety valves Air filter, Cooling water piping for aftercoolers, Instrument panel, Special tools, Spare parts, and Foundation A-6. Inspection plan. and Tests Hydrostatic test, Mechanical run test, Performance test, Strip test, Run test of the prime mover. (At suppliers end). interstage manifold, air-receiver,

Shop Inspection required Test to be witnessed:

EXPLANATORY

NOTE

Alternative design may be offered provided that covers a construction which is equivalent to or otherwise in accordance with the requirements given in this standard. The proposal shall include either a specific statement that all equipment is in accordance with this standard or a specific fist with explanation of any and all deviations therefrom. 8
Printed at Swatantra Bharat Press, Delhi, India

