( Reaffirmed 2003 )

Indian Standard

TESTMETHODSOFPLASMAEQUIPM~ENT ELECTROHEATAPPLICATIONS
UDC 621'791'755.034 : 621-365

FOR

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDA-RDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

mm4ary 1992

Price Group 4

Jndustrial

Electroheatiog

Equipment

Secticnal Committee,

ETD 17

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Industrial Electroheating Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council. This standard covers the test methods for the plasma equipments for electroheat from installations. the following Applications. IEC

In formulating this standard, considerable assistance has been derived Publication issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission: IEC Pub 680 ( 1980 ) Test Methods of Plasma Equipment

for Electroheat

In reporting the results of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )`.

IS 13263 : 1992

Indian Standard

TESTMETHODS OFPLASMAEOUIPMENTFOR ELECTROHEAT APPLICATIONS
1 SCOPE 1.1 This standard specifies methods of test for: 3.10 Transferred (or Direct ) Arc Plasma Torch A plasma torch in which the main arc is maintained between the internal electrode and an external electrode ( workpiece ). 3.11 Superimposed Arc Plasma Torch

a) spraying, cutting and welding equipment using plasma torches; and b) solid, liquid and gasseous charge equipment using plasma torches. 2 REFERENCES 2.1 IS 9029 : 1978 `Methods of tests for batch furnaces with metallic heating resistors, is a necessary adjunct to this standard. 3 DEFINITIONS 3.1 Plasma Heating Method of heating using the thermal electrical properties of ionized gas. and/or heating

A non-transferable arc plasma torch in which the emitted plasma carries a superimposed electric current between the nozzle and an external electrode ( workpiece ). 3.12 Plasma Flame Flow of plasma from the nozzle of the plasma torch or from an appliance making use of nontransferred arc discharge. 3.13 Plasma Jet Plasma in which the speed plays an important part in the process, emitted from the nozzle of an arc plasma torch, making use of nontransferred arc discharge. 3.14 Plasma Spraying Coating process in which a material introduced in the form of powder or wire and melted in a plasma jet is sprayed into a surface. 3.15 Plasma Cutting Cutting by localized melting followed by the ejection of the molten material by the effect of a plasma jet. 3.16 Plasma Welding Gas ( generally inert as ) welding process, with or without filler meta f in which the energy is supplied by a plasma jet. 3.17 Plasma Furnace A heating appliance comprising a chamber which is heated by one of several plasma torches. 3.18 Plasma Melting Furnace Furnace in which melting effect is achieved using plasma torches. 3.19 Open-Hearth Type Plasma Fornace

3.2 Plasma An ionized gaseous medium in which the electron and ion densities are approximately equal. 3.3 Arc Plasma Plasma which is ionized by an arc discharge. 3.4 Plasmogenic Gas A gas or vapour which is or may be ionized to form a plasma. 3.5 Inductive Plasma Plasma which is ionized through the effect of an alternating electromagnetic field of inductive origin. 3.6 Plasma Generating Torch ( Plasma Torch ) An appliance in which a gas is changed into plasma by electrical energy transfer prior to its emission. 3.7 Nozzle A device which constitutes an electrode which is used to contract the stream of plasma, in order to increase its energy density. 3.3 Nozzle Channel Length Length of the cylindrical part of the nozzle.

Plasma furnace lined with refractory material designed to process large volumes of molten material. 3.20 Crystallizer Type Plasma Furnace plasma remelting equipment in which metal is remelted into a vertical or horizontal copper crystallizer.
1

3.9 Non-Transferred Indirect Arc Plasma Torch A plasma torch in which the main arc is generally maintained between two or more internal electrodes.

IS 13263: 1992
3.21 Bottom Electrode

3.33 Specified Current of a Plasma Torch Maximum current which should be used specified gas. 3.34 Useful Power of a Plasma Torch Difference between the power input to the torch fitted with cooling pipes and the power dissipation in the cooling liquid circuit. 3.35 Specified Power of a Plasma Torch Maximum power which can be used by a plasma torch for a specified gas. 3.36 Efficiency of a Plasma Torch Ratio of useful power to active input power. 3.37 Pilot Arc An arc of low intensity between internal electrodes which is used to initiate the ignition of the main arc and possibly, maintain it. 3.38 Pilot Arc Power Power required to main superimposed current flow in a transferred arc or superimposed arc plasma torch. 3.39 Superimposed Power Power dissipated by superimposition of a current on one or several plasma jets in a plasma equipment. 3.40 Power Deposition Efficiency The ratio of the mass of powder consolidated on a substrate agreed upon by the manufacture and the user, to the mass of powder fed to the torch. 4 TYPE AND GENERAL~CONDITIONS TESTS OF with a

Electrode conducting~current into the charge of an open-hearth type plasma furnace, 3.22 Equipment for the Control of Plasma Jet Stability and Direction System erabling the stabilization and directing of plasma jet using electric and magnetic fields. 3.23 Mean Plasma Temperature Temperature defined on the basis of the measuring method used. 3.24 Cathode Normally the internal electrode of a direct current are plasma torch, usually a refractory metal rod eventually cooled ( such as tungsten ). 3.25 Anode Normally the nozzle of a direct current nontransferred arc plasma torch, usually made of material ( such as copper) having high thermal and electrical conductivity, provided with an The workpiece itself acts as orifice and cooled. anode in the transferred arc plasma torch. 3.26 Vortex State of flow in which the gas is subject to a helical movement before its transformation into plasma. 3.27 Lamioar Plasma Torch Plasma torch whose operation is characterized by a laminar flow of the plasma jet. 3.28 Turbulent Plasma Torch Plasma torch by a turbulent whose operation is characterized flow of the plasma jet. Ignition Device

3.29 High-Frequency

A device usrd in an arc plasma torch to ignite the arc by a high-frequency eJectric discharge between the electrodes. 3.30 Injection Angle Angle between the direction of introduction of powder or wire into the plasma jet and the axis of this plasma jet in the direction of flow.
.

4.1 Tests to be Carried Out on Plasma Spraying, Cutting and Welding Equipment Spraying, cutting and welding equipment comprising one or more plasma torches shall be subjected to the following tests: 4.1.1 Testfor Electric Power Unit Characteristics of the voltage/current a) Determination characteristic [ see 5.1.1 (a) 1; b) Measurement of useful power power [ see 5.1.1 (b) 1; c) FI$ermination and input

\ Angle formed by the two cut edges. The included " ' angle is positive if Ihe cut is larger on the face nearest to the torch. 3.32 Normal Operation of a PlasmaTorch

3.31 Kerf Angle

of efficiency [ see 5.1.1 (c) I;

Operation characterised by reproducible working conditions defined by the nature of the gas, its rate of flow ( l/s or l/min ), the current ( A ), voltage ( V ) and electrode configuration. 2

d) Measurement of insulation resistance and dielectric strength test [ see 5.1.1 (d) I.

IS 13263 : 1992
4.1.2 Tests for Ignition Circlrit Characteristics

a) Measurement of radio interference level [ see 5.1.2 (a) 1; and b) Control of ignition capability in various gases [ see 5.1.2 (b) I. 4.1.3 Testsfor
Cooling Circuit Characteristics

4.2 Tests to be Carried-out Equipment

on Plasma

Heating one or to the

Plasma furnace equipment comprising more plasma torches, shall be subjected following tests. 4.2,I Tests for Electric
istics Power Unit

Character-

a) Measurement of cooling liquid inlet and outlet temperature as a function of its rate of~flow at maximum continuous power of the equipment [ see 5.1.3 (a) I; and b) Determination characteristics of the flow/pressure [ see 5.1.3 (b) 1.

The provisions

of 4.1.1 shall apply.

4.2.2 Test for Ignition Circuit Characteristics The provisions of 4.1.2 shall apply. 4.2.3 Test for Cooling Circuit Characteristics
4.2.3.1 Test for torch circuit

4.1.4 Test for Gas Circuit Characteristics Determination of the flow/pressure characteristics of the gas circuit(s) ( see 5.1.4 ). 4.1.5 Tests for
istics 4.1.5.1 Deposited Material Character-

The provisions

of 4.1.3 shall apply.

4.2.3.2 Tests for furnace circuit a) Measurement of cooling liquid inlet and outlet temperature as a function of the rate of flow at maximum continuous power of the equipment [ see 5.2.3.2 (a) 1; and b) Determination of the flow/pressure characteristics [ see 5.2.3.2 (b) 1. 4.2.4 Tests for Plasma Torch Characteristics
4.2.4.1 Non-transferred operation and transferred arc

Tests for powder used

a) Determination

of range of particle size [ see 5.1.5.1 (a) 1; b) Determination of ease of flow [ see 5.1.5.1 (b) ]; c) Determination of the carrier gas circuits [ see characteristics flow/pressure 5.1.5.1 (c) 1; d) Determination of maximum feed rate as a function of the maximum power of the equipment [ see 5.1.5.1 (d) 1; and of the powder deposition e) setermination efficiency as a function of the powder feed rate ( kg/s > and torch powder feed rate ( kg/s ) and torch powder (kW ) [ see 5.1.5.1 (c) I.

The provisions of 4.1.6 shall apply.
NOTE - Tests under Items (b) and (c) foreseen in 4.1.6 shall be made by agreement between the mar,ufacturer and the user.

4.2.4.2 Tests for superimposed arc operation a) Determination of useful power and superimposed [ see 5.2.4.2 (a) 1, superimposed power inputs

4.1.5.2
a)

Tests for wire

Determination of the wire diameter [ see 5.1.5.2 (a) 1; and b) Determination of maximum feed rate as a function of the maximum power of the equipment [ see 5.1.5.2 (b) 1.

4.1.6 Tests for Plasma Torch Characteristics

a) Measurement of insulation resistance and dielectric strength tests [ see 5.1.6 (a) 1; 4.2.5 Tests j-or Equipment Characteristics b) Temperature measurement of accessible 4.2.5.1 Determination of effectiveness of sealing parts of the torch [ see 5.1.6 (b),J; (see 5.2.5.1 ). c) Noise level measurement under different operating conditions [ see 5.1.6 (c) 1; 2 4.2.5.2 Determination of the gas circuit flow/ d) Determination of the concentration of pressure characteristic, excluding gas(es) used possible toxic compounds evolved in by the torch(es) ( see 5.2.5.2 ). normal operation of the torch [ see 4.2.5.3 Noise level measurement ( see 5.2.5.3 ). 5.1.6 (d) 1; and 4.2.5.4 Temperature measurement of accessible of electrode and nozzle e) Measurement furnace parts ( see 5.2.5.4 ). wear [ see 5.1.6 (e) I. , 3

b) Determination of the ratio of superimposed power to pilot arc power [ see 5.2.4.2 (b) 1, [ see efficiency c) Determination of 5.2.4.2 (c) 1, and d) Measurement of the insulation resistance and dielectric strength test [see 5.2.4.2 (d) 1.

IS 13263 : 1992 4.2.5.5 Determination of the concentration toxic compounds evolved ( see 5.2.5.5 ). 4.3 General Test Conditions The general test conditions in IS 9029 : 1978. 5 TEST METHODS 5.1 Tests applicable welding equipment torch(es). 5.1.1 to spraying, employing cutting and a plasma shall be as given of The specified values are as follows: i) Insulation with a rated voltage lower than or equal to 50 V; test voltage: 500 V; ii) Installation with a rated voltage U above 50 V; test voltage 2U f 1000 ( min 1 500 V ). The test is carried out:

3 between the contact
of the voltage/current

Electric Power Unit Characteristics characteristic

switches in the "open"

pieces of the position;

a> Determination

ii) between the live parts and the accessible metal parts ( depends on the switch construction ); and iii) between the live parts and a metal sheet applied to the outer surface of the external parts made of insulating material.
NOTE - Certain resistances of the high-frequency circuit which are normaliy connected to the frame may be disconnected during the test for operational reasons.

This shall be determined by means of a voltmeter connected to the output terminals of the power unit and an ammeter connected in series with a non-inductive adjustable load. If the plasma. torch is used as load, it is advisable to connect the measuring instruments after ignition of the torch, or to exclude them from the ignition circuit; , b) Measurement
input power of useful power and active

With a dc supply it is usual to define the useful power as the product of voltage multiplied by the current, irrespective of the residual ripple ratio. With an ac supply the useful power shall be measurFor ed by means of a wattmeter. measurement of input power ( see 4.3 );
c) Determinution of ejkiency

Overstress to capacitors which may be incorporated in the installation shall be avoided during the test between the switch contact pieces. Leakage phenomena which do not cause a voltage drop shall be ignored. 5.1.2 Ignition Circuit Characteristics
Measurement a> of radio interference level

The efficiency is the ratio of useful power to active input power; d) Measurement of the insulation and dielectric strength tests: resistance

1) Measurement of the insulation resistance A voltage of 500 V dc shall be applied for 1 min without breakdown: i) between the live parts and the accessible metal parts; ii) between the live parts and a metal sheet not larger than 200 mm x 100 mm applied to the outer surface of the external parts made of insulating material. The insulation resistance shall be not less than 2 MQ.

The level of radio interference generated by the high-frequency ignition circuit shall be measured in accordance with the regulations in force in the country in which the equipment is to be used. It shall comply with local regulations; and

b)

Control gases

of ignition

capability in various

2) Dielectric strength zest A practically sinusoidal "voltage of mains frequency 50-60 Hz, the valuq i of which is specified below, is applied ' 5.~3 Cooling Circuit Characteristics for 1 minute. a) Measurement of cooling liquid inlet and At the beginning of the test, the outlet temperature as a function of its voltage applied is less than half of the rate of flow and of the maximum contiprescribed value, and is then rapidly nuous power of the equipment. raised to the test value. 4

the ignition circuit to After connecting the terminals of adjustable electrodes plasma torch operated with a given type of gas, the electrode spacing shall be varied within the permissible limits and dependent on the torch insulation as specified by the torch manufacturer. At the maximum electrode spacing the gas flow shall be varied till the high-frequency This threshold spark has disappeared. defines the ignition capability of the circuit/torch system.

IS 13263 : 1992

The cooling water temperature difference shall be measured at the terminals of the torch inclusive of the hoses. If thermoelectric sensors such as thermocouples or thermistors are used, they shall be electrically insulated from the cooling liquid. The measurements shall be made at the rate and pressure recommended by the torch manufacturer. b) Determination
characteristics of the Pow/pressure

inserted ahead of the powder feeding system and the flowmeter ahead of the pressure gauge. d) Determination of maximum feed rate as a
function of the torch powder

This test shall be carried using a powder suitable for the design and applications of the installation. Generally, powdered alumina ( 99'5 percent Al,O3 ) with an appropriate range of particle size is suitable. The maximum powder feed rate determined before obstruction nozzle 0 f pipes.
Determination e>

The pressure gauge shall be placed at the inlet of the cooling circuit pipeline of the torch inclusive of the pipes. The flow shall be measured either volumetrically or by means of a flowmeter inserted in the cooling circuit ahead of the pressure gauge.
5.1.4 Gas Circuit Characterirtics flow/pressure

shall be of the

of deposition eficiency

5.1.4.1 D?termInation of the characteristics of the gas circuit(s)

The gas flow is measured in cubic metres per The ratio of gas pressure and flow minute. shall be determined by means of a pressure gauge placed at the inlet of the torch, pipes included, and a flowmeter inserted in the circuit ahead of the pressure gauge. The measurements shall preferably be taken on a torch operating with the currents and gas flows recommended by the manufacturer. 5.1.5 Deposited Material Characteristics
5.1.5.1 Powder used in tests

This t:st shall be carried out using a powder suitable for the design of the installation. Generally, powdered alumina ( 99'5 percent Al203 ) with a range of particle size as specified by the manufacturer is used. The torch useful power and the gas flow shall be determined at the same time as the powder flow in order to obtain optimum efficiency. The mass of powder deposited and the mass fed to the torch shall be measured an efficiency determined as the ratio of these two mxsses according to 3'40.
5.1.5.2 Wire

a) Determination of diameter The wire diameter shall be measured by conventional means with the permissible limits specified by the torch manufacturer. b) Determination of maximum feed rate as a
function of the maximum-power equipment of the

a) Determination

of range of particle size

Standard type sieves shall be used. The latter are usually measured in micrometres.
NOTE - This method is applicable only to powders with particle sizes greater than 20 m. Below this limit, the method should be as stated by the powder manufacturer. b)

Determinkion

of ease of flow

This test shall be carried out using a stainless steel wire with the diameter specified by the torch manufacturer. The maximum wire fed rate shall be determined before obstruction of the torch.
5.1.6 Plasma Torch Characteristics of the insulation resistance a) Measurement and dielectric strength test

It is determined as the ratio of the powder quantity and time of flowing through a ori!ice ( for example, diameter yz:, length 5 mm ). .c) Determination
jlowlpressure
This

of the carrier characteristics

gas circuit LI ? I(

i)

Measurement

of the insulation resistance

test shall be carried out using & powder suitable for the design and application of the installation. Generally, powdered alumina ( 93'5 percent A1203 ) with a range of particle size suitable for the maximum flow and torch powder specified by the torch manufacurer is gauge shdll be -suitable. The pressure

The plasma torch insulation resistance shall be measured under the same conditions as that specified in item (d) of 5.1.1 relating to electric power unit characteristics, the cooling circuit being in operation. The insulation resistance shall be not less than 2 M for the parts provided with functional insulation, or 7 M for

5

IS13263:1992
parts with reinforced insulation and likely to be held by hand when using the torch. ii) Dielectric strength test This test is carried out under the same conditions as that in item (d) of 5.1.1 with an additional test between live parts and the external parts having reinforced insulation ( a metal sheet is applied to the outer surface of the external parts of insulating material ). Test voltage: 4 OCOV. In addition to these requirements, the plasma torches shall satisfy tests carried out at the high-frequency ignition voltage with the maximum admissible spacing specified by the electrode high-frequency manufacturer, no current shall flow between parts of the torch other than electrodes.
b) Temperature measurement parts of theplasma torch of accessible

5.2.2 Ignition Circuit Characteristics The provisions of 51.2 shall apply. 5.2.3 Cooling Circuit Characteristics
5.2.3.1 Torch circuit

The provisions

of 5.2.3 shall apply.

5.2.3.2 Furnace circuit

4

Measurement of cabling liquid inlet outlet temperatures as a function of rate of J70W and equipment power

The cooling liquid temperature difference shall be measured at the inlet and outlet terminals of each of the equipment elements, including pipes. If thermoelectric sensors such as thermocouples or thermistors are used, they shall be electrically insulated from the soolirg liquid. The measurements shall be made at the rate of flow ard pressure recommended by the equipment manufacturer.

The surface temnerature at different noints of accessible paits of the torch shall be measured when conditions of steady state at the maximum continuous power of the equipment have been obtained during operation by a conventional method.

b)

Determination of theflowlpressure istics

character-

c)

Noise level measurement operating conditions

under

different

The pressure gauge shall be placed at the inlet of the cooling circuit of each of the equipment components. The flow shall be measured either volumetrically or by means of a flowmeter inserted in the circuit ahead of the pressure gauge. 5.2.4 Plasma Torch Characteristics 5.2.U Non- transferred arc operation of 5.1.6 shall apply.

These measurements shall comply with the safety regulations prescribed by the statutory authorities in which the area the equipment have been obtained during operation by an equipment is to be used.

The provisions

d)

Determination of concentration compounds evolved

of

toxic

5.2.4.2 Superimposed arc operation
a> Determination of useful superimposed power and superimposed active power input

These measurements shall comply with the safety regulations prescribed by the statutory authorities in the area in which the equipment is to be used.

4

Measurement

of electrode and nozzle wear

Electrode and nozzle wear may be expressed by metal weight ( mg ) per unit operating condition time ( h ) during established by the agreement between the manufacturer and the user. It shall be determined by weighing the electrodes and measuring the gas volume used.
NOTE - Operating conditions may be continuous or intermittent; the volume of gas flow and cturybt _( density affect electrode and nozzle wear.

The useful superimposed power is that defined in 3.39. With a dc supply, the superimposed power input is the product of the voltage across cable terminals multiplied by the current, irrespective of the residual ripple ratio.
NOTE-With an ac supply the superimposed active power input shall be measured by means of
one or more wattmeters.

The power dissipation in the cooling circuit is the product of cooling liquid flow rate q ( kg/s ) multiplied by increase
of temperature difference (K) between the cooling circuit inlet and outlet caused by the superimposition of current and the specific heat CD ( J/kg K > of the cooling

5.2 Tests on Plasma Heating Equipment 5.2.1 Electric Power Supply Characteristics
The provisions

liquid

Cp = 4 200 J/kg K ):

( for

example,

for

water,

of 5.1.1 shall apply. 6

P(kW) = C, (J/kg K) X(K) X q(kg/s) x 10-s

IS 13263:1992

b)

Dcterminaticn of the rario of the superimposed power to pilot arc power

This ratio is equal to the ratio of total superimposed active power input to total pilot arc power input.

per second or cubic rr.etres per hour. The relation between gas pressure and flow rate shall be measured by means of a pressure gauges placed at the equipment circuit inlet, including pipes, and a flowmeter inserted in the circuit before the pressure gauge.

4

Determination

of eficiency

d

the point 7c) On the flow/pressure characteristics, corresponding to the specified power and . . specified gas flow given by the manufacturer The powers to be taken into account for shall be n0te.d. the calculation of efficiency shall be the sum of pilot arc and superimposed 5.2.5.3 Noise level measurement powers. The noise level shall be measured in compliance Measurement of the insulation resistance with the safety regulations prescribed by the and dielectric strength test statutory authorities in the area in which thf furnace is to be used. The provisions of 5.1.1 (d) shall apply. Lh; t$iciency of a plasma tort defined
furnace

5.2.5 Equipment Characteristics
5.2.5.1 Determination of ejgectireness of sealing

5.2.5.4 Temperature
parts

measurement

o accessible

pressure characteristics, the torches

If the~furnace is to be used for the manufacture of toxic products, it shall meet the standard sealing requirements prescribed by the statutory authorities of the area in which the furnace is to be used. Tests for sealing shall include the detection of chlorofluorine products as a vacuum furnaces. 5.2.5.2 Determination of the gas circuit $0~1
excluding gas used for

This measurement shall be made during operation of the furnace, at maximum nuous power, using a conventional temperature measuring method at various in condition of steady state. 5.2.5.5 Determination
of toxic compounds evolved

normal contisurface points
oa

the concenfration

The gas 8cw shall be measured

in cubic

met

The measurements shall comply with the safety regulations prescribed by the statutory authorities in the area in which the furnace is to be used.

7

1

Standard Mark
Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations

by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards. The use of the Standard Mark is governed

Bureau of Indian Standards

__

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of-Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Dire&or ( Publication ), BIS. Revision of Indian Standards Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following reference : Dot : No. ETD 17 (-2818 ) Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Headquarters : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75

Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephones 331 01 31 331 13 75

Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW Delhi-l 10002 Eastern : l/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. CALCUTTA 700054 Northern Southern Road, Maniktola

37 86 62 160036 53 38 43 412916 6 32 92 9s

: SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH
: C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road,

MADRAS 600113 Andheri ( East )

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, BOMBAY 400093

Branches : AHMADABAD, BANGALORE, B&PAL, BHUBANESHWAR, COIMBATORE, FARIDABAD, GHAZIABAD, GUWAGATI, HYDERABAD, JAIPUR, KANPUR, PATNA, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

Printed at Swatantra Bharat Press, Delhi, India

