**************** 



-k t^^ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 3923 (1983) : Leg Guards for Cricket Batsmen and Wicket 
Keepers [PCD 22: Sports Goods] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC 685-63l-3:614'897*1 



IS : 3923 -1983 



( Reaffirmed 2000 ) 




Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

LEG GUARDS FOR CRICKET BATSMEN AND 

WICKET KEEPERS 

( First Revision ) 



1. Scope — Covers requirements of full size leg guards used by cricket batsmen and wicket keepers, 

2. Materials — Shall conform to Table 1. 



TABLE 1 MATERIALS FOR MANUFACTURE OF LEG GUARDS 



Item 



St 
No. 

i) Cover facing 



Material 

a) White sheepskin 



ii) Back cover 

iji) Packing for ribs 

iv) Ribs 

v) Stuffing 



b) Canvas cloth 



c) White vinyl coated fabric 
(leather-cloth) 



Canvas, cotton 

Cardboard or strawboard 

Cane 

a) Coarse cotton/worsted 
cashmilon 

b) Indian kapok (semul) 



vi) Straps 



White cow hide 



vii) Sewing thread 



White cotton sewing thread 



Requirements 

Vegetable-tanned or chrome-tanned 
or semi-chrome-tanned sheepskin, 
having effective and non-toxic fun- 
gicide. It shall show no growth of 
mildew when examined visually and 
shall be fat lacquered or oiled or 
both and the grain side shall be 
smooth finished. The recommended 
thickness being 0"7 to 1'0 mm in 
the finished stage (see IS : 3946- 
1 966 'Leather for leg guard'). 

The yarn used In the manufacture 
of canvas cloth shall conform to 
IS : 2422-1 979 'Specification for 
dyed cotton fabric, waterproofed 
{first revision)'. 

Shall conform to IS : 1 259-1 977 
'Specification for vinyl coated fab- 
rics {secor)€f revision)'. 

The yarn used in the manufacture 
of canvas cloth shall conform to 
IS : 2422-1979 'Specification for 
dyed cotton fabric, waterproofed 
(first revision) \ 



Malabar cane. 

It shall be well carded, clean, dry 
and reasonably free from extraneous 
matter. 

It shall be soft and smooth and 
shall have a silky appearance. It shall 
be clean, dry and reasonably free 
from seeds and other extraneous 
matter {see IS: 3040-1980 Speci- 
fication for Indian kapok for stuffing 
purposes). 

Vegetable-tanned or chrome-tanned 
or semi-chrome-tanned cow hide, 
having effective and non-toxic 
fungicide. It shall show no growth 
of mildew when examined visually 
and shall be fat lacquered or oiled 
or both and the grain side shall be 
smooth finished. 

The yarn used in the manufacture of 
sewing thread shall be evenly spun 
and the twist shall be so adjusted 
as to produce a balance thread. The 
sewing thread shall reasonably be 
uniform in thickness throughout 
and shall be free from defects, such 
as slubs, knots, kinks, projections 
broken or loose ends. 



Adopted 26 December 1983 



April 1984, IS! 



Gr 2 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN» 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 



18:3923-1983 

2.1 The sewing thread used for general sewing shall conform to variety No. 28 of IS : 1720-1978 
'Specification for cotton sewing threads {second revision)' , The sewing thread for straps sewing shall 
conform to variety No. 11 of IS : 1376-1979 'Specification for cotton sewing thread for aerospace 
purposes {second rev ision)\ 

2.1.1 The sewing thread of polyamide/cotton corespun having following requirements shall be used : 
Nominal count and construction — Nm 50/4 'Z' (finishing twist) 

Finish — Glace 

Single thread-breaking load, Min — 53 N ( 5'4 kgf ) 

3. Dimensions — Shall conform to Fig, 1 and 2. 




20*2 



-60 TO 70 



SECTION XX 



General tolerance on dimensions : +5 mm unless specified otherwise. 

All dimensions in millimetres. 

FIG. 1 LEG GUARD, CRICKET BATSMAN 



4. Weights — Shall be as follows : 

a) Leg guards for cricket batsmen 

b) Leg guards for wicket-keepers 



— V5 to 1 '8 kg per pair. 

— V8 to 2'2 kg per pair. 
2 



IS :3923 - 1983 



h' 




-40 J 3 



60TO,70 



SECTION XX 



General tolerance on dimensions : ±5 mm unless specified otherwise. 
All dimensions In millimetres. 

FIG. 2 LEG GUARD, WICKET KEEPER 



5. Other Requirements — Leg guards shall be flexible when tied round the leg and shall not in any 
way impair the player. The side projection in the case of batsman's leg guards for right-handed or 
left-handed players shall be such that they face the direction of* the bowler. The leather straps shall 
be 14 to 15 mm wide and 2 to 2*5 mm thick and of sufficient length to go round the part of the leg 
where these are fitted. The central ribs shall end at a distance of 50 to 60 mm from the arch of the 
instep. On the sides, the ribs shall go right up to the end of the ankle so as to provide adequate 
protection to the ankle. In addition, the ankle portion may be given double layer of canvas or leather. 
The arch of the instep shall be properly padded. Cardboard packing cut to size of the ribs, shall be 
used between the ribs and the stuffing for better results. The straps shall be hand stitched. Machine 
stitching may be used for other stitchings. The number of stitches in both the cases shall be between 
3 and 4 per centimetre. 

5.1 Leg Guards for Cr/cket Batsmen — Each \eg guard shaW have seven ribs. Three straps shall be 
provided, one each at the top, the calf and the ankle. The leg guard shall have a minimum of two 
sponge rubber pads, but at the option of the purchaser, three may be provided. 



5.2 Leg Guards for Wicket Keepers — Each leg guard shall have seven ribs in the main body and two 
at the side. It shall have three straps, one each at the top, the calf and the ankle. The straps shall be 
attached to the lower side of the side ribs so as to allow the sides to be in a line with the main body 
of the leg guard. It shall have a minimum of two sponge rubber pads. 



IS : 3923 -1983 

6. Marking— Each leg gaurd shall be legibly and indelibly marked on the inside with the 
manufacturer's name, initials or trade-mark. 

6.1 fS/ Certification Mariiing — Details available with the Indian Standards Institution. 

7. Packing— Leg guards shall be kept in a pairs and packed in accordance with the best trade 
practice or according to the instructions of the purchaser. 

8. Sampling — Sampling and criteria for acceptance for leg guards shall be as agreed to between the 
purchaser and the supplier. A recommended scheme for the same is given in Appendix A. 



APPENDIX A 

( Clause 8 ) 

RECOMMENDED SAMPLING SCHEME AND CRITERIA FOR 
CONFORMITY FOR LEG GUARDS 

A-1. Lot — In any consignment, all pairs of leg guards of same type and manufactured from same 
raw materials shall be grouped together to constitute a lot. 

A-2. Selection of Sample — The number of pairs of leg guards to be selected at random for inspec- 
tion from each lot shall be in accordance with col 1 and 2 of Table 2. 

A"3. Numberof Tests and Criteria for Conformity — Each pair of leg guards selected in accordance 
with A-2 and Table 2 shall be inspected for all the requirements of the type of leg guard. A pair shall 
be considered as defective if it fails to satisfy any one or more of the requirements of the specification. 
The lot shall be declared as conforming to the requirements of this specification if the number of defec- 
tive pairs in the sample does not exceed the corresponding permissible number of defective pairs 
given in col 3 of Table 2. 



TABLE 2 NUMBER OF PAIRS OF LEG GUARDS TO 
PERMISSIBLE NUMBER OF DEFECTIVE 


BE SELECTED AND 
PAIRS 


Number of Pairs of 

Leg Guards In the 

Lot 

(1) 




Number of Pairs of 

Leg Guards to be Selected 

in the Sample 

(2) 


Permissible Number 
of Defective Pairs 

(3) 


Up to 25 

26 „ 50 

51 „ 100 
101 „ 150 
151 ,,300 
301 ,,500 
501 and above 








3 
5 

8 
13 
20 
32 
50 






1 
2 
3 



EXPLANATORY NOTE 

This standard was first issued in 1966, and it included the requirements of hockey goal keeper's 
also. The present revision has been taken up to incorporate certain modification brought to the 
notice of the Sectional Committee due to the experience gained during the last few years in the imple- 
mentation of this standard. The requirements of leg guards for hockey goal keepers have been covered 
in IS : 10771-1983 'Specification for leg guards for hockey goal keepers. 



Prjnt9d at Printrad«,New Delhi, India 



