Is 14910:2001
ISO 8727:1997

Tiw%�

Indian Standard

MECHANICAL VIBRATION AND SHOCK -- HUMAN EXPOSURE -- BIODYNAMICS COORDINATE SYSTEMS
ICS 13.160

0 BIS 2001

BUREAU

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS

MANAK BHAVAN, !4 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG NEW DELHI 110002 February 2001 Price Group 7

Mechanical Vibration and Shock Sectional Committee, ME 28

NATIONAL FOREWORD This Indian Standard which is identical with ISO 8727:1997 `Mechanical vibration and shock -- Human exposure -- Biodynamics coordinate systems' issud by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendations of the Mechanical Vibration and Shock Sectional Committee and approval of the Mechanical Engineering Division Council. The text of ISO standard has been approved as suitable for publication as Indian Standard without deviations. In the adopted standard, certain conventions are not identical to those used in Indian Standards. Attention is especially drawn to the following: a) Wherever the words `International Standard appear referring to this standard, they should be read as `Indian Standard'. b) Comma (,) has been used as a decimal marker, while in Indian Standards, the current practice is to use a point (.) as the decimal marker. In this adopted standard, reference appears to the following International Standard for which Indian Standard also exists. The corresponding Indian Standard which is to be substituted in its place is given below along with its degree of equivalence for the edition indicated: International Standard ISO 5805:1997 Corresponding Indian Standatd IS 13281:1999 Mechanical vibration and shock affecting man -- Vocabulary Degree of Equivalence Identical

The concerned technical committee has reviewed the provision of 1S0 1503:1977 `Geometrical orientations and directions of movements' referred in this adopted standard and has decided that it is acceptable for use in conjunction with this standard. For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2:1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised). The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

Is 14910:2001 ISO 8727:1997

Indian Standard
MECHANICAL VIBRATION AND SHOCK -- HUMAN EXPOSURE -- BIODYNAMICS COORDINATE SYSTEMS

1 Scope This International Standard specifies anatomical and basicentric coordinate systems for biodynamical measurements,. for reference purposes in cognate standards development, and for precisely describing human exposure to mechanical vibration and shock. The segmental anatomical coordinate systems defined in this International Standa?d are for the head, root of the neck (driving-point for the head and neck system), pelvis, and hand. General principles are stated for the establishment of corresponding anatomical coordinate systems for other skeletal body segments. The biodynamics coordinate systems defined in this International Standard can sewe as frames of reference for the description and measurement of both translational and rotational vibration and shock motion affecting humans.
NOTES 1 Although defined for human subjects, these anatomical coordinate systems are adaptable, using a knowledge of comparative anatomy, to non-human primates or to other animal species whose skeletal anatomy is recognizably comparable, radiographically, with the relevant anatomy of humans. 2 When the need arises for other segmental anatomical coordinate systems (e.g. for the arm, wrist, leg or foot), these should be defined according to corresponding principles of anatomy and of standardization, and may be proposed for inclusion in subsequent revisions of this international Standard. 3 This International Standard recognizes no difference between male and female skeletal anatomy bearing upon the definition and use of biodynamics coordinate systems. Moreover, the same principles apply when defining anatomical coordinate systems for children, and for non-human mammalian species used in ethical biodynamics research, development, testing and evaluation.

2 Normative

references

The following standards contain provisions which, through reference in this text, constitute provisions of this International Standard. At the time of publication, the editions indicated were valid. All standards are subjected to revision, and parties to agreements based on this International Standard are encouraged to investigate the possibilityof applying the most recent editions of the standards indicated below. MeFnbers of IEC and ISO maintain registers of currently valid International Standards. ISO 1503:1977, Geometrical orientation and directions of movements. 1S0 5805:1997, Mechanical vibration and shock -- Human exposure -- Vocabulary.

IS 14910:2001 ISO 8727:1997

3 Biodynamlc

coordhtate

systems

Standard biodynamics cmrdinate systems shall be used, if practicable, whenever collecting, transforming, analysing, reporting, describing, comparing, or evaluating human mechanical vibration and shock input data and consequent
human body structural and system responses. NOTES 1 A biodynarnic coordinate system maybe oriented with respect to a hierarchy of coordinate systems within inertial space (see figures A.1 and A.2). Such inertial reference systems may be geocentric, in which the principal or normal axis lies in the direction of earth's gravity, or basicentric, originating in the contacting swface (or some fully orientatable structure connected rigidly thereto) through wNch the force or motion of interest is transmitted to the body. Baaicentrfccoordinate systems may, for example, be defined with respect to the structure of a vehicle, a workplace, or a laboratory, to an immediate source of vibration or shock affecting persons, such as a vibrating tool or appliance, or to a research vibration machine, motion simulator or impact device. For research and evaluation purposes, a biodynamicscoordinate system may itself provide the external frame of reference for an instrumentation coordinate system, used to define inertial measurements made upon or within the human body. 2 Geometrically speaking, the human body may, for any given posture, be treated as a fully-oriented object (see figure A.3). 3 The use of coordhate systems originating in amorphous or flexible soft-tissue or surface anatomical features which are deformable or freely mobile within the body (e.g. coordinate systems Ioosefy defined as centred in the heart or the buttocks) precludes the precise acquisition or compatfson of biodynamics data, and is accordingly deprecated. The anatomical systems defined in this International Standard all originate in, and are oriented with respect to, radiographically or stereotactically determinable (including palpable) bony landmarks. Moreover, these systems are adaptable, for the purpose of comparative biodynamics, to mammalian species other than humans, and to mechanical analcgue models (dummies or manikins) of humans. 4 A radiographically determinable landmark means one that, for research or reference purposes, can be visualized, and its position measured, by methods of X-ray or ultrasonic radiographical anthropcmetry. It may also be (but not necessarily is) determinable stereotactically, if it is palpable (or reliably related to structures that are palpable) in the surface anatomy. It is of course recognized that in many areas and applications it may be impossible or impractical to define the relevant bony anatomy by radiographical methods. Nevertheless, the applicable anatomical coordinate system or systems should be identified when inertial measurements are made on humans, and the measurements related to the standard anatomical coordinate system(s) to the extent practicable.

3.1

Direction

All orthogonal coordinate systems adopted in biodynamics shall be defined as right-handed (see figure A.4). Definitions of x-, y- and z-axes for anatomical coordinate systems shall be in accordance with ISO 5805 (see figures A.5 and A.6 for examples of these axes). Definitions of orientations and axes for basicentric systems (e.g. in vehicles) shall be in accordance with the principles of ISO 1503.
NOTE -- An exception to the rule regarding right-handedness of the coordinate system may be made in the case of the anatomical coordinate system (hand) adopted specifically for measurements in the left hand (see 3.4.1).

3.2
3.2.1

Biodynamics coordinate
Wholebody

systems

for the whole body

anatomical coordinate system

For most purposes (for example, when considering force or motion inputs to the whole body from a contact or supporting surface upon which the person is standhg, sitting or lying), the anatomical coordinate system of choice shall be that defined for the pelvis (see 3.3.4).
NOTES

1 When practicalconsiderations clearfydictatethat it is more appropriate to do so, whole-body inputs may be defined with reference to an alternative system within the torso, which, together with the posture and the orientation of the body with respect to the source of the vibration or shock, should be defined unambiguously when reporting data referenced to this alternative coordinate system. For example, whole-body inputs appfied mainly to a person's back, as from a vibrating seat-back or a motorized backpack appfiance, may be related to the upper torso anatomical coordinate system. Unless otherwise specified, whole-body vibration or shock shall be deemed to be appfied to pereons in the (conventional) "normal"anatomical position, that is, with the z-axis of the principal axial segmental (i.e. head and trunk) anatomical coordinate systems approximately parallel, the limbs aligned, and the palms facing forward. When a particular posture is adopted (e.g. sitting) during human vibration

2

IS 14910:2001 ISO 8727:1997

measurements, asprwise anaKempt =~*ible $houldbe mtito~i~the relative odentatiM of~H~mdhate systems relevant to the measurement. This may be done by quant~lng the extent of rotation of the principal axes of each segmental anatomical coordinate system (and, if appropriate, displacement of the system's origin) with respect to its normal anatomical position. 2 Bilateral (left-right) skeletal symmetry of the human body is an assumption implicit in the adoption of the anatomical coordinate systems recommended in this International Standard.

3.2.2 Basicentric coordinate systems for the whole body
3.2.2.1

Basicentric coordinate system for standing persons

Origin: The midpoint of a line in the plane of a contact surface (e.g. a ship's deck or the floor of a vehicle containing standing crew or passengers) supporting the standing person, paesing beneath the lowermost points of the heel bones (calcanei).
NOTE -- The orientation of this line in the plane of the contact surface can be defined with respect to the coplanar orientation of that surface as a practical matter, when there is a habitual stance upon it (e.g. of a human operator at a workstation).

Orientation: The y-axis is the line defined above, with the positive direction lying to the sub~t's left. The x-axis passes through the origin, lies in the plane of the contact surface, and is perpendicular to the y-axis. The z-axis is mutually perpendicular to the other two axes (hence, normal to the contact surface).
NOTE -- The orientations of a basicentric coordinate system with respect to the direction of gravity (or to a geocentric coordinate system) varies with the orientation of a vehicle and with the relative orientation of a vehcle and with the orientation of supporting surfaces within the vehicle. It may from time to time happen that the z-axes of the major anatomical (head, pelvis), basicentric and geocentric coordinate systems are all approximately aligned, as when a person stands on a ship's deck in a calm sea and gazes ahead at the horizon. However, non-alignment is more frequently the rule (for example, when a person reclines in a car seat while the vehicle is climbing a hill, see 3.2.2.2).

3.2.2.2

Basicentric coordinate system for seated persons

Origin: The midpoint of a line in the plane of a contact surface (e.g. a vehicle seat) supporting a seated person,

passing through the pressure area of the buttocks and beneath the lowermost points of the ischial tuberoaities.
NOTE -- The orientation of this line in the plane of the contact surface can be defined with respect to the coplanar orientation of that surface as a practical matter, when there is a habitual sitting position and seat alignment (e.g. of a human operator at a workstation).

Orientation: Defined with respect to the origin and the plane of the contact surface in a manner similar to that in which a basicentric system for standing persons is defined above. The direction of the yaxie is positive to the subject's left.
NOTES 1 In a normal sitting posture, the orientation of the principal axis of the basicentric coordinate system for persons seated on a flat seat may be assumed to approximate to that of the corresponding axis of the anatomical coordinate system (pelvis), 2 For some applications, a basicentric ccmrdinatesystem for a vehicle driver (or a mechanical human anaiogue) originating at the seat index point, SIP, (see ISO 5353) is used as a frame of reference, for example, in ergonomic or human factors engineering evaluations of tractor seats and the like. Its use presupposes that the seat ia normally positioned and centred in its ranges of adjustment with respect to the vehicle frame, and relates measurements to the geometry of the vehicle. Reference to the H-point (equivalent to the SIP for a normal adjustment of a tractor operator's seat) is sometimes used for human engineering purposes in the automotive industry. This practice, which has not been generally accepted int6rnational!y, is generally not used in the context of biodynamical evaluations of human exposure to vehicle vibration and shock motiin. 3 When whole-body vibration measurements are taken from a suitable formed instrumentation-mount interposed at the intertace between a rider and his aeat (see ISO 10326-1), the mount serves as the contact surface in ti~ch the origin and orientation of the basicentric coordinate system for the seated pereon may be defined, that in turn provides the frame of reference for the related instrumentation coordinate system.

IS 1491 O:2OO1 ISO 8727:1997

4 When analysing, comparing and reporting biodynamical data or interpreting human vibration and shock standards applying to seated subjects, due allowance should be made for any significant angle that may stand between the seat and the geocentric (or vehicular) and instrumentationcoordinate systems.

3.3

Segmental

anatomical

coordinate

systems

NOTE -- An assumption impticit in the definition and adoption of the following anatomical coordinate systems is that the respective body segment for which each system is established obeys to a sufficient approximation the laws of rigid-body mechanics. (This has been demonstrated for certain biodynamically important skeletal segments, namely, the head and the pelvis.) For examples, see figures A.1 to A.6.

3.3.1 Anatomical coordinate system: head Origin: The midpoint of a line connecting the superior margins of the right and left external auditory meatus of the skull.
NOTE -- In classical anatomy, that line is the base of a triangle defining the transverse plane of the human skull (the apex, i.e. the third point defining that plane, is conventionally the left infraorbitalnotch).

Orientation: The x-axis of this system passes posteroanteriorlythrough the origin and lies in the transverse plane of the head. The y-axis passes through the origin, is directed positively to the left, lies in the same plane, and is perpendicular to the x-axis. The z-axis is mutually perpendicular to the other two axes and is directed approximately through the vertex of the skull. 3.3.2 Anatomical coordinate system: root of neck Origin: The anterior superior border of the body of the first thoracic vertebra (TI ) in the midplane of that vertebra. Orientation: The x-axis of this system passes through the origin and, posteroanteriorly, through the midpoint of a line in the midplane of T1 connecting the posterosuperiorand posteroinferiorpoints of the posterior spinous process of T1, The y-axis passes through the origin and is mutually perpendicular to the x- and z-axes. The z-axis passes through the origin, lies in the midplane of T1, and is perpendicular to the x-axis.
NOTE -- The axes of this system are not necessarily exactly parallel with the corresponding axes of the major axial segmental anatomical coordinate systems (head, pelvis) in the normal anatomical position, and there will in any case be divergences with changes in posture. However, for the purposes of describing force and motion inputs to the upper torso and the root of the neck in the normal anatomical position, a sufficient approximation may be presumed to exist between the orientation for the midplane of T1 and the midsagittal plane of the trunk. A precise description of the postural relationships between body segments is needed to define the orientation of these systems in inertial space.

3.3.3 Anatomical coordinate system: upper torso Origin: The anterior superior border of the fourth thoracic vertebra (T4) in the midsagittal plane. Orientation: Defined in the corresponding manner as for T1 above.
NOTE -- Note in 3.3.2 applies equally to this system,

3.3.4 Anatomical coordinate system: pelvis Origin: The midpoint of a line connecting the right and left anterior superior iliac spines. That imaginary line forms the base of an inverted triangle connecting the anterior superior iliac spines with the most superior anterior point of the symphysis pubis (which accordinglyforms the apex of the triangle). Orientation: The x-axis of this system projects anteriorly from the origin, it is perpendicular to the plane of the triangle defined above. The y-axis is the line passing from right to Ieff that connects the anterior superior iliac spines. The z-axis of the system passes through the origin and is mutually perpendicular to the other two axes, it lies in the plane of the triangle and bisects it.

4

IS 14910:2001 ISO 8727:1997

NOTES 1 The z-axis of the anatomical coordinate system (pelvis) is approximately vertical in humans standing upright on a horizontal surface or sitting erect on a horizontal flat seat. 2 The pelvic anatomical reference points defining the basic triangle used to establish this coordinate system, although they are radiographically), cannotyet be defined normally palpable in the living human subject and in the cadaver(and are identifiable with complete precision, for they are irregularityrounded bony prominences. They may in due course be superseded by more exactly determinable pelvic reference points if such can be established by anatomists. Moreover, biodynamical applications of \ this coordinate system assume approximate bilateral symmetry of the pelvis. 3 In biodynamical measurements in which the motion of the pelvis is assumed to generate the mechanical input to the lumbar spine, it is necessary in any final analysis to define the location and orientation of the interface between the sacrum and the body of the fifth lumbar vertebra (L5). 4 Although in reclining and recumbent postures, substantial fractions of the weight of the person may be distributed through the upper body and the limbs, impressed vibration or shock may neverthelessbe deemed to act throughthe pelvis or the

body's approximatecentre of mass for the purposesof evaluating human exposure to whole-bodyvibrationor shock. Significant exceptions to thisgeneralruleshouldbe reported. 3.4 Biodynamics coordinate systems for the hand

3.4.1 Anatomical coordinate system: hand Origin: The centre of the head of the third metacarpal bone (middle knuckle) of either hand. Orientation: This system is oriented to the bony anatomy of the hand by the z-axis, the z-axis passes proximally through the origin and is the long axis of the third metacarpal bone. The x-axis of the system is approximately normal to the palm of the hand, projecting anteriorly from the origin when the hand lies open in the normal anatomical position, i.e. palms facing forward (see figure A.3). The y-axis passes through the origin, approximately from the root of the first to that of the little finger, and is mutually perpendicular to the x- and z-axes.
NOTES 1 As partof a right-handed orthogonal coordinate system, the y-axis of the anatomical coordinate system (hand) is defined as running from right to left (i.e. from the root of the forefinger towards the root of the fittle finger of the right hand in the normal anatomical position). The mirror image of this system may be applied specifically to measurements in the left hand, but such usage should be unambiguously identified when used as the basis for reporting hand-transmitted vibration data (see ISO 5349). Use of a left-handed anatomical coordinate system, while reasonable for application to symmetrical parts on the left side of the body, can lead to anomalies in vector algebra if resulting data are compared directfy with those derived using a right-handed system (e.g. incorrect sign of vector cross-products). 2 The absolute orientation of the anatomical coordinate system (hand) necessarily varies with the position and posture of the hand, wrist and upper limb. Accordingly, it is rarely parallel with the correspondinglydesignated coordinate systems of the axial body segments (head, thorax, pelvis). The posture of the arm and hand should be defined as precisely as practicable when reference is made to the anatomical coordinate system (hand). The orientation of the system may for many practical purposes be independently defined with reference to an appropriate basicentric coordinate system originating, for example, in a vibrating appliance, a workpiece, or a handle or control device held by the hand in question. Such a basicentric system may `simultaneously serve as the frame of reference for the instrumentationcoor~nate system when instrumentation is fixed to the object grasped, for the purpose of measuring vibration transmitted to the same hand. 3 When, as is commonly done in handling vibrating tools or hand-held appliances, the hand is used to grasp a cylindrical or approximately cylindrical handle, the y-axis of the anatomical coordinate system (hand) may not necessarily be assumed to lie parallel with the axis of the handle, although such an assumption may be a sufficient approximation for some measurement purposes. It should be noted that the orientation of the anatomical coordinate system (hand), being defined by the orientation of the third metacarpal bone, is, over a wide range of movement, essentially independent of flexion or extension of the fingers (see figure A.6).

5

IS 14910:2001 ISO 8727:1997

3.4.2 Baslcentric coordinate system for hand-transmitted force or motion 3.4.2.1 In the case of appliances grasped by one or both hands

Origin: A defined point on a line in the surface of the handle or barrel of the appfiance lying parallel with the axis of the cylinder approximated by the handle or barrel from which measurements are to be taken or standards applied, or on a line defined by two recognizable points on the handle or barrel.
NOTE -- Alternatively, the origin of the basicentric system may be identified as the midpoint of the axis of the cylinder approximated by the handle or barrel of the appliance, when that axis is accessible as a measurement point for direct instrumentation or by geometrical transformation of the data. In every case, however, and whichever method is adopted, the location of the ongin, and the orientation of the basicentric coordinate system (hand), should be carefully reported. Precision in this regard is of particular importance in the measurement of hand-transmitted vibration.

Orientation: The x-axis of this system passes through the origin and projects in the line containing the ongin, as defined above. When the x-axis approximates the principal functional axis of the appliance (e.g. as in the barrel of an electric drill or a pneumatic chipping hammer) or a line parallel to it, the positive direction of the x-axis shall be deemed to lie in the direction of action of the appliance (mostly towards the workpiece). In the case of a handle lying athwart the direction of action or making a large angle with it (e.g. the handles of chain-saws), the positive direction of the x-axis shall be deemed to lie in the thenar direction (towards the placement of the root of the thumb) as defined by the customary method of holding or guiding the appliance in normal operation when the handle or barrel is grasped by a right-handed user. The y-axis of the basicentric system (hand) intersects the x-axis at the origin, is perpendicular to it, and is normal to the surface of the handle or barrel at the notional point of input to the user's hand or an instrumentation mounting. The z-axis passes through the origin and is mutually perpendicular to the x- and y-axes.
NOTE -- The system here defined is most appropriate to measurements on appliances (bearing a general resemblance to the form of a handgun) in which one hand holds a handle having an axis approximately at right angles to the principal geometric axis or line of action of the machhe, while the other hand may be used to support or guide the body or barrel of the appliance. In many such machines (e.g. electric drills, pneumatic chippers, riveting machines), the body of the appliance approximates a cylinder with the principal axis lying in the direction of action of the tool. Similar basicentric systems may be defined for the handles or other contact surfaces of power saws, road-breakers and most appliances normally grasped, guided or supported by both hands, and aiso for separately heid tools (e.g. chisels struck with a hammer) and workplaces.

3.4.2.2 In the case of appliances or workplaces guided or pressed upon by the palm and fingers without grasping Origin: The centre (as precisely as can be determined or defined when the palm or fingers are applied to the tool or workpiece in normal operation) of a surface circumscribing the pressure area of the contact sutface between the hand and the tool or workpiece. Orientation: The x-axis of this system passes through the origin and is normal to the above-mentioned surface. The positive direction of the x-axis shall be deemed to lie in the direction of application of the hand to the appliance. The y-axis passes through the origin, is perpendicular to the x-axis, and accordingly lies in the surface of the pressure area. The y-axis is oriented to be as closely parallel as can be determined with the y-axis of the anatomical coordinate system (hand) of the applied hand, in its customary or most frequent position of use, or, alternatively, in a line determined by two recognizable points on the appliance. The z-axis of the basicentric system (hand) passes through the origin and is mutually perpendicular to the x- and y-axes. Alternatively, a basicentric system may be used that is centred in the face of the appliance or workpiece to which the hand is applied and ,. oriented geometrically with respect to the structure of the apphance or workpiece. In all cases, the respective origins and orientations of the basicentric and instrumentation coordinate systems used should be clearly and precisely reported.
NOTE -- Whenever practicable, the orientations of the axes of a machine-based coordinate system should be defined with respect to the worfdngaxis or the general functional geometry of the appliance, in accordance with the principles established in ISO 1503. In some applications, the basicentric coordinate system may usefuily be deemed to originate at a point iying on the worldng axis of the machkre or in a recognizable position on a workpiece.

6

IS 14910:2001 ISO 8727:1997

Annex A
(informative)

Diagrammatic illustrations of biodynamicscoordinate systems
Diagrams of biodynamicscoordinate systems are shown in figures A.1 to A.6. Figures A.5 and A.6 illustrate the approximate directions of the x- and z-axes defined for the major anatomical segments addressed in this International Standard. In each case, the y-axis must be imagined as projecting normally to the plane of the illustration.Note that these diagrams are to illustrate principles only, they are not drawn to scale, nor intended to be anatomically exact.

Key 1 Geocentric coordinate system (laboratory frame of reference)
2 3 4 Origin of basicentric coordinate system (e.g. a vibration test table) Origin of an anatomical coordinate system (head) Origins of instrumentationcoordinate systems (e.g. head-mounted and seat reference accelerometers)

Figure A.1 -- Diagrammatic illustration of a hierarchy of biodynamics coordinate systems in a fixed location, such as a laboratory

7

IS 14910:2001 ISO 8727:1997

Key
2 3 Origins of basicenttic coordinate systems (e.g. seatdatum andaircrafi centre of gravity) Origin ofananatomical coordinate system (head)

NOTE -- The example shown represents the pilot in an aircraft climbing in flight. Note that, although not illustrated here, it would be possible to include both person- and aircraft-mounted instrumentation, with each mount having a defined instrumentation coordinate system, referenceable to the human anatomy or to the airframe, respectively, and to define instantaneously the orientation of the aircraft's (basicentric) coordhate systems with respect to the geocentric vertical (direction of gravity).

Figure A.2 -- Diagrammatic illustration of a hierarchy of biodynamics coordinate systems in a freely moving vehicle

8

IS 14910:2001 ISO 8727:1997

z

I

--Y

Figure A.3 -- Diagram of the normal anatomical position (anterior view, i.e. the figure is looking in the x-dlreotion)

z

Figure A.4 -- Diagmmmatic illustration of the directions of the three axes of a right-handed orthogonal coordinate system, denoting the order of the x, Y and axes

9

E 1491 O:2OO1 1S0 8727:1997

z

-=+-x
a) Haad b) Thoraclc vartabra

@r. T1or14)

..--(k
z )
.-_l

,J-", /
,L ---

"/'<"
`( `\, 1' /1

x

/(
\

I

`\

--x

c) Pelvis

d)Par'swr standing ontha floor or ~ (baalcsntrlc coordinate aystsmfor tha wholsbody)

NOTE -- The first three diagrams a), b) and c) illustrate anatomical coordinate systems defined in this International Standard. The last diagram d) illustrates a basicentric coordinate system for standing persons. In all four diagrams, the y-axis must be imagined to point away from the observer.

Figure A.5 -- IXagrsmmatlc illuatretions (not to scale or mutually oriented) showing biodynemlc coordinate syetems relating directly to persons

10

IS 14910:2001 ISO 8727:1997 ,
z

x

-------.-- .--

anatomical coordinate system baslcentrlc coordinate system alternativebasicentric coordinate system d mlp" poeltlorr

Y

z-

b)

`Flat palm-position

NOTE -- The anatomical coordinate system (hand), originating in the head of the third metacarpal bone (middle knuckle) remains independent of hand posture and function (compare both diagrams) and rotates with the palm of the hand (see clause B.2)

Figure A.6 -- Biodynsmic coordinate systems for the hand

11

IS 14910:2001 ISO 8727:1997

Annex B
(informative)

Explanatory notes concerning the anatomical frame of reference and the biodynamicscoordinate systems for the hand

B.1 Biodynamicscoordinate systems are by convention defined as right-handed and orthogonal. Anatomical coordinate systems are, whenever practicable, related to the principal (cephalocaudal) anatomical axis of the human body, visualized to be in the "normal anatomical position" adopted in classical anatomy. In that position (illustrated in any standard textbook of anatomy), the body is seen as standing erect (or lying supine on a plane surface), with the legs adducted, the head erect and looking to the front, the arms adducted, and the open hands supinated (palms facing forwards) on each side (see figure A.3). Of murse, such a posture is rarely adopted in life but it serves as the starting reference position from which the relationship between organs and structures are defined, and from which all other postures can be defined as variations and measured using the methods of anthropometry. In a right-handed orthogonal coordinate system (see figure A.4), the three axes (x, y and z) are mutually perpendicular and share a common origin. Moreover, their directions in space are uniquely related.to one another. Such a system may be visualized by holding the thumb, forefinger and middle finger of one's right hand in the positions illustrated in figure A.4. By convention, the first axis of an anatomical coordinate system, designated the x-axis, is defined as the axis lying closest in parallel alignment with the anterior (forward-pointing) direction of the human body in the normal anatomical position (e.g. along the line of sight from the head, or normal to the palm of the hand). The second axis (y) passes conventionally from right to left through the common origin, while the third axis (z), being mutually perpendicular to the other two, runs superiorly. The directions in which the digits of the right hand point when demonstrating such a system, as in figure A.4, are the positive directions for each axis. B.2 In a typical handgrip position, as when grasping the handle of many kinds of hand-held tool, handlebars, or steering-wheel, a fist is made around a cylinder, commonly of radius approximately 20 mm in most kinds of handle that are ergonomically well designed for the human grip. Note in figure A.6 a) that, in such a grip, there is normally a small included angle between the y-axis of the anatomical coordinate system (hand) and the definitive axis of the handle (basicentric coordinate system). That included angle should be allowed for (e.g. by computational rotation of the anatomical coordinate system) when transforming data referenced to such a basicentric system. In many jobs, the hand is pressed onto a surface of relatively large radius, or one that is flat, to advance or guide a power tool. For standard measurement purposes, many such surfaces may be approximated by a sphere of radius 50 mm, whose centre, or a point in a tangent plane cimumecribing the area pressed upon by the user's palm, may be deemed to be the origin of the basicentric cmrdinate system (see 3.4.2.2).

12

IS 14910:2001 ISO 8727:1997

Annex C (informative) Bibliography
[1] [2] ISO 2041:1990, Vibration and shock -- Vocabulary. ISO 2631-1:1997, Mechanica/ vibration and shock -- Evaluation of human exposure to whole-body vibration-- Patt 1: General tiequirements. ISO 5349:1986, Mechanical vibration-- Guidelines for the measumnent and the assessment of human exposure to hand-transmitted vibration. ISO 5353:1995, Earth-moving machine~, and tractom and machinery for agriculture and forestry -- Seat index point. ISO 5982:1981, Vibration and shock -- Mechanical drivingpoint impedance of the human body. ISO 6897:1964, Guidelines for the evacuation of the response of ocoupants of fixed stmctures, espaciah'y buildings and off-shorn structures, to low-frequency horizontal motion (0,1M3 to 1 Hz). ISO 7096:1994, Earth-moving machine~ -- Laboratory evaluation of operator seat vibration. ISO 7962:1987, Mechanical vibration and sh~k -- Mechanical transmissibility of the human body in the z direction. ISO 8041:1990, Human response to vibration-- Measuring instrumentation. ISO 8682-1:1988, Hand-held pottable power tools -- Measunwnant of vibrations at the handle -- Part 1: General. ISO 9996:1996, Classification. Mechanical vibration and shock -- Disturbance to human activity and performance --

[3]

[4]

[5] [6]

PI [8]

[9] [10]

[11]

[12]

ISO 10326-1:1992, Mechanical vibration-- Laboratory method for evaluating vehicle seat vibration -- Part 1: Basic requirements. Anonymous. Vibration Syndrome. Current Intelligence Bulletin 38, US Department of Health and Social Services, National institute for Occupational Safety and Health. Clncinatti, Ohio NIOSH Publication 83-110, 29 March 1983. Becker, E.B. and Willems, G.C., An experimentally vatidated 3-D inetiial tracking package for application in biodynamicsresearch, In: Proceedings of the 19th Stapp Car Crash Conference, Society of Automotive Engineering Transactions, Warrendale, Pennsylvania, 1975, pp 899-930. Brammer, A.J. and Taylor, W. (Eds), Vibration effects on the hand and arm in indust~ (edited presentations at the Third International Conference on Hand-Arm Vibration, Ottawa, May 1981), New York John Wiley and Sons, 1982. Ewing, C.L. and Thomas, D.J., Human head and neck response to impact acceleration, United States Army and Navy Joint Report, Naval Aerospace Medical Research Laboratory Monograph 21 and US Army Aeromedical Research Laboratory Report 73-1, Pensacola, Florida, Naval Aerospace Medical Research Laboratory, August 1972.

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

13

IS

14910:2001

1s0 8727:1997
[17]

Gierke, H.E. von, Nixon, C.W. and Guignard, J. C., Noise and vibration. In: Foundations of space medicirre and bio/ogy. M. Calvin and O.G. Gazenko (Eds), Joint USA/USSR Publication. Washington, DC: National Aeronautics and Space Administration, and Moscow: Academy of Science of the USSR, Vol. 11,Book 1, Ch 9, 1975.
Griffin, M. J., Vibration injuries of the hand and arm: Their occurrence and the evolution of standards and /imits. United Kingdom Safety and Health Executive Research Report No. 9, London: HM Stationary Office,

[18]

1980.
[19]

Griffin, M.J., Handbook

of human vibration. London and New York: Academic Press, 1990.

[20]

Guignard, J.C., Vibration. In: Gillies, J.A. (Ed), A textbook of aviation physiology. Ch 29. Guignard, J.C., Vibration. In: Guignard, J.C. and King, P.F., Aeromedica/
AGARDograph AG-1 51. Neuilly-sur-Seine, France: NATO/AGARD,

Oxford: Pergamon, 1965,

[21]

aspects of vibration 1972, Part 1, pp 2-113.

and noise.

[22]

Guignard,

J. C., Vibration. In: Patty's industria/ hygiene and toxicology, Vol 3B, Theory and Rationale of Industrial Hygiene Practice: Biological responses, L.J. Cralley and L.V. Cralley (Eds), Ch 15, New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1985.

[23]

Korhonen, O., Vibration and work. Proceedings of the Finnish-Soviet-Scandina Helsinki, 10 to 13 March 1975, Helsinki: Institutefor Occupational Health, 1976. Taylor, W. and Pelmear, P.L., Vibration 1975.
white finger in industry.

vian Vibration

Symposium,

[24]

London and New York: Academic Press,

[25]

Thomas, D.J. (Chairman) and Committee Members: Robbins, D.H., Eppinger, R.H., King, A.I., Hubbard, R.P. and (in 1975) Reynolds, H.M., Guidelines for the comparison of human and animal ana/ogue biomechanica/ Chairman, D.J. Thomas, Head, Biomedical data, first and second annua/ repofis of an ad hoc-committee, Research Department, Naval Aerospace Medical Research Laboratory Detachment (now the Naval Biodynamics Laboratory), New Orleans, Louisiana, 6 December 1974 and 19 November 1975, respectively. (Requests for copies of these reports should be addressed to: Commanding Officer, Naval Biodynamics Laboratory, New Orleans, LA 70189-0407, USA.) Wassermann, D.E., Human aspects of occupational Salvendy (Ed) -8. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 1987.
vibration. Advances in human factorsLergonomics, G,

[26]

14

Bureau of Indian Standards

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Stan&rds Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.
Copyright

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS.
Review of Indian Standards

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaftixmed when such review indicates that no changes are needd, if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards: Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. ME 28 (0539).

Amendments Issued Since Publication

Amend No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones :3230131, 3233375, 3239402 Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 : 1/14 C. I.T. Scheme VII M, V. 1. P. Road, Kankurgachl CALCUITA 700054 Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone 3237617 3233841

{

Eastern

3378499,3378561 { 3378626,3379120 603843 602025

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 { Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 { Western : Manakalaya, E9 MlDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093

2350216,2350442 2351519,2352315

8329295,8327858 { 8327891,8327892

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CCJIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUl?. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.
Printed at : Rabhat CMset Press, New Delhi-2

