«qnd AAF IS 16175 : 2014 
Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2019) 


aafaa far us YA: Hed — 
aed & wahr & faa si 


deters tte (uerdtsft) 
faferex — tifa fear 


Periodic Inspection and 
Requalification — Liquefied 
Petroleum Gas (LPG) Cylinders 
for Automotive Use — Code of 
Practice 


ICS 23.020.30; 43.060.40; 75.160.30 


O BIS 2014 


ada unes eq 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
e HAF MAA, 9 TENGENE pi mm. ve fereit-110002 
EE wy MAN Ak BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in  www.standardsbis.in 


March 2014 Price Group 7 


Gas Cylinders Sectional Committee, MED 16 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Gas Cylinders 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering Division Council. 


This standard provides information and procedure for the periodic inspection of liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) 
containers used as a fuel for automotive vehicles. These containers, installed in vehicles are certified by the 
manufacturer to meet the requirements of relevant standard and are designed to store LPG. 


Containers undergo cyclic loading and it is imperative that due importance and care shall be taken during its life 
cycle. Container contains high energy contents due to gas in it which makes the safety concern and therefore, 
compliance with the requirements and following the detailed procedures listed in the standard are of upmost 
importance. 


These containers are certified by the manufacturer for the storage of LPG. Containers for storage of LPG are 
required to maintain or improve the level of safety currently existing in practice. These requirements are achieved 
by following the procedures listed in the standard. 


While implementing this standard compliance with statutory regulations shall be ensured. 
The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex E. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised) . The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 16175 : 2014 


Indian Standard 


PERIODIC INSPECTION AND REQUALIFICATION — 
LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS (LPG) CYLINDERS FOR 


AUTOMOTIVE USE — 


1 SCOPE 


This standard specifies the requirement for periodic 
inspection and testing of auto LPG containers to verify 
the integrity of such gas containers to be reintroduced 
into service for further period of time. 


This standard deals with liquefied petroleum gas 
containers intended for on-board storage of liquefiable 
petroleum gas (LPG) as a fuel, intended to be 
permanently fixed to the automotive vehicle. 


This standard does not apply for periodic inspection 
and testing of composite containers. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions, which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate possibility of 
applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 


IS No. Title 


5:1978 Colours for ready mixed paints and 
enamels 

Recommendations for hydrostatic 
stretch testing of compressed 

gas cylinders 

Glossary of terms used in gas 
cylinder technology 

Periodical inspection interval for gas 
containers in use 

Inspection gauges for checking type 
1 (size 2) taper threads of gas cylinder 
valves, taper 1 in 16 — Specification 
(first revision) 

Inspection gauges for checking type 
2 taper threads of gas cylinder valves, 
taper 3 in 25 — Specification (first 
revision) 

Liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) 
containers for automotive use — 
Specification 


5844 : 1970 


7241: 1981 


8868 : 1988 
9121 : 2005 
9122 : 2008 


14899 : 2000 


CODE OF PRACTICE 


IS No. Title 


15100 : 2001 Multifunction valve assembly for 
permanently fixed  liquefied 
petroleum gas (LPG) containers for 


automotive use valve for auto LPG 


containers 
IS/ISO 9001: Quality management systems — 
2008 Requirements 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given 
in IS 7241 and the following shall apply. 


3.1 Abrasion — Damage to container or equipment 
caused by wearing, grinding or rubbing away of 
material by friction. 
NOTE — Abrasion can be the result of many cycles of 
something rubbing lightly on the surface of the container or 


equipment, or due to a few cycles, perhaps only one, of heavy 
rubbing. 


3.2 Competent Authority — Any national body or 


authority designated or otherwise recognized as such 
for any purpose in connection with this standard. 


3.3 Competent Person — Person who by a 
combination of training, experience and supervision 
is able to make objective judgments on a subject, 
authorized by the competent authority. 


3.4 Periodic Inspection — Activities carried out at 
defined intervals or earlier when necessary, including 
but not limited to examining, measuring, testing or 
gauging the characteristics of a container and 
comparing these with specified requirements as defined 
in the container design standard and marking to attest 
conformity with the standard. 


3.5 Test Station — Place where containers are tested 
and periodically inspected, approved by the competent 
authority. 


3.6 Tare Weight — Sum of the empty weight, the 
weight of the valve including a dip tube where fitted 
and the weight of all other parts that are permanently 
attached to the container such as fixed valve protection 
ring/guard/foot-ring, etc. 


IS 16175 : 2014 


3.7 Pit — Local corrosion not in excess of 6 mm 
diameter and occurring not more frequently than one 
in any 500 mm? of the surface. 


4 APPROVED TESTING STATION AND 
PERIODIC INSPECTION INTERVAL 


4.1 All inspection and tests shall be carried out at 
authorised station complying with the requirements of 
this standard and approved by the competent authority. 
The inspection tests shall be carried out only by 
competent and authorized person. 


Any testing station desiring to obtain recognition for 
periodic testing and examination of containers shall 
provide the facilities listed in Annex A. Additional 
testing facility if any shall be provided as per the 
requirement of the competent authority. 


4.2 Intervals between Periodic Inspection and Test 


All containers are required to be inspected and tested 
at interval of 5 years or the interval in accordance with 
the requirements in IS 8868 or as approved by the 
statutory authority throughout their life. The shortest 
of the specified interval shall be applicable. 


Copies of the original inspection and tests shall be 
checked to ensure that the container complies with the 
approved design and that the retest results are in line 
with those obtained at the time of manufacture and 
that there is no departures except than what is laid down 
in this standard. 


Subsequent periodic inspections and tests shall be 
carried out to ensure that the container is fit for further 
service. 


4.3 Date of First Retest 


A container shall be due for a periodic inspection and 
test before the first retest starts from the date of 
manufacture. Any practice of re-stamping the unused 
containers with a new date at the time of their sale is 
not permitted. 


5 LIST OF PROCEDURES FOR PERIODIC 
INSPECTION AND TEST 


Each container shall be submitted to periodic inspection 
and test. The following procedures form the 
requirements for such inspection and test: 


a) Identification of container and preparation for 
inspection and test (see 6); 

b) Release of gas and de-valving procedure 
(see 7); 

c) External visual inspection (see 8); 

d) Internal visual inspection (see 9); 

e) Tare weight verification (see 10); 


f) Segregation of containers (see 11); 
g) Hydrostatic test (see 12); 


h) Inspection of valve and pressure relief device 
and then fixing of valve (see 13); 


j Pneumatic test (see 14); 


k) Rejection and rendering container 
unserviceable/De-shaping (see 15); 


m) Retest marking (see 16); 
n) Painting (see 17); and 
p) Test report format (see 18). 


It is recommended that the above listed procedures be 
performed in the sequence. In particular, the check of 
internal condition (see 9) shall be carried out before 
the pressure test (see 12). 


Containers that fail an inspection or test shall be 
declared unserviceable. Where a container passes the 
previously listed procedure, but when the condition of 
the container remains in doubt, additional tests or 
methods of examination may be applied to confirm its 
suitability for continued service or the container shall 
be rendered unserviceable. Only when all doubts are 
eliminated, container shall be further processed. 


Depending on the reason for the rejection, some 
containers may be repaired. 


Mechanical properties of steel containers may be 
affected by heat exposure. Therefore, the maximum 
temperature for any operation shall be limited 
according to the manufacturer's recommendation. The 
heat treated containers shall never be heated above 
temperature of 300°C for a period exceeding | h. 


Containers showing evidence of fire or excessive heat 
exposure shall be declared unserviceable and shall be 
destroyed as per the procedure. Fire damage may be 
evident by discoloration, darkening, charring or sooting 
of the surface in the area of exposure of container 
surfaces. 


6 IDENTIFICATION OF CONTAINER AND 
PREPARATION FOR INSPECTION AND TEST 


6.1 Container Removal 


The container shall be removed from the vehicle prior 
to any inspection and testing. Removal and 
reinstallation of the container shall be carried out in 
accordance with the technical requirements of 
Automotive Industry Standard and/or the requirements 
of the relevant agencies. 


The removal and re-installation shall be carried out 
only by competent person. 


6.2 Before any work is carried out, relevant container 
data and its ownership shall be identified and recorded. 


7 RELEASE OF GAS 


All containers shall be presumed to contain gas 
under pressure and following precautions shall be 
observed. 


a) The gas from the container shall be released 
in a safe manner keeping in mind dangers 
associated with the liquefied petroleum gas. 
Containers shall be emptied at stations at the 
designated area approved by competent 
authority only; 


b) Fencing shall be provided to prevent access 
of unauthorised person in the LPG unloading 
area. The minimum clearance between the 
fence and the evacuation vent shall be 30m 
as per the layout approved by competent 
authority; 

c) Incase of degassing by water, the water shall 
be retained for not less than 1 h to ensure that 
the container is degassed. After emptying out 
the water, containers shall be kept in inverted 
position and be tapped gently by non-metallic 
hammer to remove dust, rust or any loose 
remnants in the container. After degassing the 
inside of LPG container shall be checked by 
explosive meter to ensure that the container 
is gas free; 

d) A powder type extinguisher with a rating not 
less than 40 B should be located in the 
decanting area; and 

e) A warning notice reading — ‘FLAMMABLE 
GAS — NO SMOKING OR NAKED 
FLAMES’ should be displayed as closely as 
practicable to the decanting point. 


8 EXTERNAL VISUAL INSPECTION 


8.1 Preparation for External Visual Inspection 


The container shall be cleaned and have all loose 
coatings, corrosion products, tar, oil or other foreign 
matter removed from its external surface by one of the 
following methods: 


a) Wire brushing; 

b) Shot blasting; 

c) Water jet abrasive cleaning; 
d) Chemical cleaning; and 

e) Other suitable methods. 


The method used to clean the container shall be 
validated and controlled process. Care shall be taken 
at all times to avoid damaging the container or 
removing excess amounts of material of container wall 
thickness. If there is any plastic or insulation sticking 


IS 16175 : 2014 


on the surface it shall be removed. The container valve 
opening shall be suitably plugged to prevent entry of 
water or foreign particle into the containers. 

NOTE — Any operation that could result in loss of wall 


thickness to below minimum design wall thickness shall be 
completed before the inspection and testing procedure. 


8.2 Inspection Equipment and Method of 
Measurement 


The external surface of each container shall then be 
inspected for, 


a) dents, cuts, gouges, bulges, cracks, laminations 
or excessive base wear (see Table 1); 


b) heat damage, torch or electric arc burns (see 
Table 1); 


C) corrosion (see Table 2); and 
d) integrity of all permanent attachments. 


The rejection criteria shall be as laid down in Annex 
B. Containers no longer suitable for future service shall 
be rejected and rendered unserviceable. The inspection 
shall be carried out in a well illuminated area. 
Magnifying glass may be employed to detect cracks. 
Any surface coating that may obstruct optimum visual 
inspection shall be removed. 


8.3 Gas Leak 


When a leak is suspected, the container shall be 
pressurized to 2 MPa and submerged in a water-bath 
or soapy water shall be applied to the area of the 
suspected leak. Areas around the base shall be 
particularly checked. Containers found leaking shall 
be rejected and declared unserviceable. 


9 INTERNAL VISUAL INSPECTION 


After degassing, containers shall be inspected 
internally. Before starting the internal inspection the 
containers shall be cleaned internally to remove rust 
or foreign matter under closely controlled conditions 
by one of the following methods: 


a) Wire brushing; 

b) Shot blasting; 

c) Water jet abrasive cleaning; 

d) Chemical cleaning; 

e) Burn out treatment in a furnace at 300°C for 
a period not exceeding | h; and 

f) Other suitable methods. 


The method used to clean the container shall be 
validated and controlled process. Care shall be taken 
to avoid damaging the container or removing excess 
amounts of container wall thickness. Any internal liner 
or coating that may obstruct optimum visual inspection 
shall be removed. 


IS 16175 : 2014 


In determining the condition of container, the examiner 
shall take into consideration its minimum wall 
thickness required by the specification to which the 
container was made. 


Each container shall be inspected internally using 
adequate illumination to identify any defects similar to 
those listed in 8.2 (a) and 8.2 (c). Precaution shall be 
taken to ensure that the method of illumination presents 
no risks to the operator performing the operation. 


The container shall be declared unserviceable where a 
defect exceeding the limits specified in 8.2 is detected 
or the bottom of an internal defect cannot be seen and 
its extent cannot be measured. 


9.1 Threads and Sealing Surfaces 


Where fittings have been removed to allow inspection 
of the container, both the fittings and container shall 
be examined. The following requirements apply: 


a) Thecontainer shall be declared unserviceable 
where examination of the threads shows 
damage or excessive wear except where 
gauging shows the threads to be satisfactory; 

b) Where threads are cleaned using an 
appropriate tap, if any significant metal 
removal has taken place, container shall be 
declared unserviceable except where gauging 
shows the threads to be satisfactory; 


c) Cracks manifest themselves as lines that run 
vertically down the thread and across the 
thread faces. They shall not be confused with 
tap marks (thread machine stop marks). 
Special attention shall be paid to the bottom 
of the threads; and 

d) Threads shall be checked with ‘GO’ or ‘NO 
GO' gauges. Thread gauges shall comply with 
IS 9121or IS 9122 as applicable. 

e) Thecontainer shall be declared unserviceable 
where sealing face including the O-ring 
groove show evidence of corrosion, or other 
damage, which would affect the integrity of 
the seal; and 


f) Faulty fittings shall be replaced with 
appropriate and authorized fittings and 
records for the same shall be maintained. 


10 TARE WEIGHT VERIFICATION 


After degassing and thorough cleaning (internally as 
well as externally), each container shall be checked 
for correct determination of the tare weight. 


The tare weight of the containers shall be determined 
by weighing on a scale calibrated with traceability to 
national or international standards. The weigh scale 
shall be checked for accuracy on a daily basis. The 


capacity of weighing scale shall be suitable for the tare 
weight of the appropriate containers. 


Tare weight of the cyinder shall be compared with the 
original tare weight punched on the container and that 
mentioned in the certificate. Any container which loses 
in its tare weight by over 5 percent shall be declared 
unserviceable. Records of tare weighment shall be 
maintained. 


11 SEGREGATION OF CONTAINERS 


Containers on the basis of inspection shall be 
segregated as unserviceable or repairable. 


11.1 Unserviceable 


Containers with any one or more of the following 
conditions shall be declared unserviceable: 


a) Containers declared unserviceable when 
inspected according to 8, 9 and 10; 

b) Containers having lost their identity 
(Manufacturer's name, serial number of the 
container, test date and original tare weight); 

c) Containers coming for repairs for the second 
time; and 

d) Containers having wall thickness less than the 
minimum design thickness. 


Cause(s) of rejection of all the unserviceable containers 
shall be recorded in the test report format as shown in 
Annex C and cause may be standard in the following 
manner: 


Bulge : FA 
Burn : F-2 
Dent : F-3 
Dig : F-4 
Cut : F-5 
Pit : F-6 
Line corrosion : F-7 
General corrosion : F-8 
Bung thread damage : F-9 
Loss in tare weight : F-10 
Identity lost : F-11 
Container identified as once repaired : F-12 


The wall thickness has reduced below : F-13 
minimum design thickness 


11.2 Serviceable 


Containers which are found serviceable according to 
8 and 9 shall be taken for further processing and 
reconditioning and records shall be maintained. 


11.3 Containers with following type of defects shall 
be permitted for repairs: 


a) Damaged valve protecting ring/shroud may 
be replaced or repaired; and 

b) Dent — De-denting of containers, if required 
shall be done by a process approved by the 
statutory authority. 


11.3.1 All the hot worked or cold worked containers 
shall be normalized or stress relieved suitably. 


12 HYDROSTATIC TEST 


Each container shall be subjected to hydrostatic test. 
During the hydrostatic test, the pressure shall be 
increased gradually till the required test pressure is 
reached. After the test pressure is reached, the external 
surface of the container is dried; the pressure shall be 
retained for a period of not less than 60 s. Any reduction 
in pressure noticed during this retention period or any 
leakage, or visible bulge of deformation shall be treated 
as a case of failure in the test and the container shall be 
declared unserviceable. 


12.1 The value of hydrostatic test pressure for LPG 
shall be taken as 3 MPa as specified in IS 14899. 
Hydrostatic test shall be carried out in according to 10.3 
of IS 14899. 


13 FIXING OF VALVE 


13.1 Drying and Cleaning 


The interior of each container shall be thoroughly dried 
by a suitable method at a temperature not exceeding 
300°C immediately after hydraulic pressure testing, so 
there is no trace of free water. The interior of the 
container shall be inspected to ensure that it is dry and 
free from any contaminants. Immediately after this 
operation the interior of the container shall be sprayed 
with an approved oil based corrosion inhibitor which 
is compatible with LPG, so that harmful combination 
of the gas does not result. 


13.2 Inspection of Valves and Pressure Relief Device 


If valve or any other accessory is to be introduced into 
service, it shall be inspected and maintained to ensure 
that it shall perform satisfactorily in service and meet 
the requirements of gas tightness as per valve IS 15100 
or any standard approved by statutory authority. 
Suitable method for inspection of Pressure Relief 
Device (PRD) is given in Annex D. 


13.3 Prior to fixing of valves on to the container flange 
threads shall be cleaned using appropriate tap and 
checked for any imperfections, distortion, etc. Valves 
shall be fitted using new high tensile screws or as 
recommended by valve manufacturer. A suitable 
jointing material shall be used between the valve and 
flange to arrest leakage of LPG through this joint. 


IS 16175 : 2014 


14 PNEUMATIC TEST 


14.1 Each container after it has been dried and fitted 
with valve shall be tested for leakage by subjecting 
to air pressure of not less than 2 MPa for a period of 
1 min while immersed in water and shall show no 
leakage from the body of the container and the joint 
between valves and bung. This test may be carried 
out after fixing the safety cap on the valve fittings as 
applicable. 


14.2 Pneumatic leakage test shall be carried out 
according to 10.4 of IS 14899. 


NOTE — Take appropriate measures to ensure safe operation 
and to contain any energy that may be released during the 
hydraulic test. It should be noted that pneumatic pressure test 
requires more precautions than water pressure test since, 
regardless of the size of the container; any error in carrying 
out this test is highly likely to lead to a rupture under gas 
pressure. Therefore these tests should only be carried out after 
ensuring that the safety measures satisfy the safety 
requirements. 


14.3 Any container found leakage from the body or 
weld joint shall be rejected and rendered unserviceable. 


15 REJECTION AND RENDERING CONTAINER 
UNSERVICEABLE/DE-SHAPING 


Any container which is declared unserviceable either 
due to failure to pass periodic inspection or test or loss 
in its tare weight by over 5 percent or for any other 
defect found to be unsafe for use or after expiry of the 
service life of the container shall be destroyed by any 
of the following ways under the supervision of 
inspecting authority and under the intimation to the 
container owner: 


a) Hlattening/de-shaping; 

b) Cutting into pieces in such a manner that the 
pieces cannot again be joined together by 
welding or otherwise to form a container; and 


c) Bycrushing until the sides meet. 


Records of all such containers shall be maintained and 
a certificate indicating rejection with reasons shall be 
issued. 


15.1 Disposal of Rejected Containers 
The following guidelines shall be adhered to, 


a) owner’s information shall be noted down 
before rendering a container unserviceable; 

b) keep failed containers in a secure place, away 
from the testing area for a minimum of four 
weeks, unless the reason for failure is obvious; 
and 

c) nounserviceable container shall be returned 
to the owner without de-shaping (see 15). 


IS 16175 : 2014 


15.2 Retesting of Rejected Container 


A container that fails the inspection and test shall be 
condemned without retesting, except as covered below. 
In general the equipment and procedures of the testing 
station should make a retest unnecessary. 


If the tester believes that a fault in his equipment or 
procedure may have invalidated a test result, then the 
container should be retested once the fault has been 
corrected. Records of retesting of such rejected 
containers shall be maintained. 


NOTE — A container should not be subjected to its test pressure 
more than once in any 24 h period. 


16 RETEST MARKING 


16.1 Retest Date and Retester Symbol 


The retest date is the date of the present test, which 
shall be indicated by the year and month. The retester 
symbol is the symbol of the test station. 


16.2 Marking 


After satisfactory completion of the periodic inspection 
and tests, each container shall be permanently marked 
at marking plate fixed on the container or at appropriate 
place below the original stamp marking or retest stamp 
marking, provided space is available or fixing a metallic 
plate on the container. Following shall be marked: 


a) Name/symbol of retesting station; 
b) Month and year of retest date: mm/yyyy; 
c) Month and year next due date for retest: mm/ 


yyyy; and 
d) New tare weight of container, in kg. 


Other systems of identification marking may also 
be used after getting approval from statutory 
authority. 


17 PAINTING 


Containers requiring repainting shall be painted as per 
the requirements of IS 14899. Plastic coating may also 
be re-applied. Paint or coating shall be applied in such 
a manner that all markings stamped on the marking 
plate fixed with the container remain legible. 


18 TEST REPORT FORMAT 


A record of container shall be maintained for all tests, 
reconditioning and inspections at the container re- 
tester's works and copies shall be made available to 
the inspecting authority and to the owner of the 
container, if desired. A test certificate duly approved 
and signed by the repairer and the inspecting authority 
shall be forwarded to the statutory authority and the 
owner of the container. A sample format is as per 
Annex C. A copy of test certificate shall be retained 
by the repairers for a period not less than 6 years. 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 4.1) 


FACILITIES REQUIRED FOR CONTAINER TESTING STATIONS 


A-1 MANAGEMENT 


A-1.1 General Requirements 


Personnel, organization, equipments, inspection 
procedures, recording of container data and test data 
shall be adequate and satisfactory. The test station shall 
be operated with safe operating conditions. The systems 
and procedures shall ensure that containers, which fail 
to meet the requirements and intent of these rules, are 
duly identified and is ensured that same are not returned 
into normal service. All personnel shall fully recognize 
their individual responsibilities and that the minimum 
inspectional requirement shall not be lowered for any 
reason, whatsoever. 


NOTE — The area of responsibility shall be divided into three 
separate functions as indicated below. The numbers of 
personnel employed shall, however, be related to the quantum 
of work. 


A-1.2 Manager 


The manager responsible for the working of the test 
station shall be adequately qualified; his qualifications 
shall include training on the dangers associated with 
gas containers, purpose of inspection, test methods, 
equipment, test requirements, and recording of test 
results, and safety hazards associated with the gas 
containers and their retesting. He shall be a graduate 
in Mechanical or Chemical Engineering with at least 
3 years of experience in the examination and testing 
of gas containers. He shall also be conversant with the 
Standards, Specifications and/or Regulations 
applicable to the Auto LPG containers for which the 
test station is approved. 


A-1.3 Supervisor 


The supervisor shall possess the following 


qualifications: 


a) 


b) 


He shall be a science graduate or diploma in 
Mechanical or Chemical Engineering with at 
least three years experience in the examination 
and testing of gas containers; and 

He shall be conversant with these rules, 
standards, specifications and/or regulations 
applicable to the auto LPG containers for 
which the test station is approved. 


A-1.4 Operator 


Personnel conducting inspections and tests shall have 
qualifications and experience suitable for the work on 
which they are engaged. They shall be trained to 
understand the dangers associated with LPG containers 
and the purpose and method of inspection. 


A-2 EQUIPMENT 


A-2.1 Type of Equipment 


The test station shall have adequate equipment to carry 
out inspection and testing of LPG containers as 
required under these rules. It shall contain, 


a) 


b) 


c) 


d) 


e) 


one set of these rules, standards, specifications 
and/or regulations applying to the auto LPG 
containers, which the test station is authorised 
to test. All these rules, standards, 
specifications and/or regulations shall be 
maintained with all current amendments; 


fenced area having arrangement for 
unloading/de-gassing the containers; 
hydrostatic test apparatus comprising 
pressurizing equipment, pressure gauge and 
volumetric measuring equipment in 
accordance with IS 5844. The apparatus shall 
be equipped with at least two 15 cm diameter 
(minimum) working pressure gauges. 
Pressure gauge shall be capable of reading to 
within 1 percent of the test pressure for 
pressures up to and including 15kgf/cm? and 
within 2 percent for pressures above 
15 kgf/cm?. It shall be tested at regular 
intervals and in any case not less frequently 
than once in a month. It shall have accuracy 
of +0.5 percent; 

non-destructive testing facilities like 
ultrasonic flaw detection, etc, for detection 
of stress corrosion cracks developed during 
the service, and minimum wall thickness of 
the container; 


dead-weight pressure gauge tester of 
appropriate pressure range or a master 
pressure gauge of 15 cm. minimum diameter 
covering the appropriate pressure range. 


g) 


h) 
y 

k) 
m) 
n) 


p) 


q) 


IS 16175 : 2014 


Pressure gauge shall be capable of reading to 
within 1 percent of the test pressure for 
pressures up to and including 15 kgf/cm? and 
within 2 percent for pressures above 15 kgf/ 
cm", It shall be tested at regular intervals and 
in any case not less frequently than once in a 
month. It shall have accuracy of + 0.5 percent. 
Master pressure gauge shall be calibrated 
from a NABL accredited laboratory; 
boroscope, extra-low voltage lamps (6 or 12 
V considering human safety) to permit 
adequate internal viewing of containers and 
other lamps necessary for close examination 
of external surfaces; 

straightedges, templates, steel scale, vernier 
caliper, miscellaneous tool and ‘q? gauges 
for measurement; 


thread gauges, taps for cleaning threads, and 
to correct slightly damaged threads, if any; 
weighing equipment; 

one set of standard test weights for daily 
calibration of the weighing machine, stamped 
by the relevant statutory authority; 

adequate container handling equipment; 
adequate water storage and container draining 
equipment; 

Facilities for internal drying of 
containers.(electrical heater for compressed 
air line is recommended. Blowers are not 
useful for this purpose.); and 

Stamps for marking/stamping. 


A-2.2 Range and Accuracy 


The range and accuracy of equipment shall be as 


follows: 


a) 


b) 


c) 


d) 


e) 


Any measuring instrument/equipment shall 
have range which is 1.5 to 2 times the 
measured value; 

Hydrostatic test apparatus in accordance with 
IS 5844; 


Weighting equipment error not greater than 
0.1 percent; 

Working pressure gauge error not greater than 
] percent of the pressure; and 

Master pressure gauge error not greater than 
0.25 percent of the full-scale deflection. 


A-2.3 Calibration 


Calibration of equipment shall be carried out at periods 
not exceeding the following: 


a) 


Working pressure gauge — 1 month; 


b) Master pressure gauge — 6 months; 


IS 16175 : 2014 


c) Weighing equipment — checked by test 
weight daily when in service; and 

d) Test weights — 2 years or as per the 
requirements of weight and measure 
certification, whichever is lesser. 


A-3 WORKING CONDITIONS 


Working conditions for the test stations shall be 
conducive to satisfactory, accurate and safe inspection 
and testing of gas containers. The test station shall 
comply with the following conditions: 


a) It shall have good lighting to permit ready 
external examination of gas containers, 
preferably including natural lighting; 

b) It shall have adequate ventilation to remove 
residual gases from containers; 


c) The painting area shall also have sufficient 
ventilation; 


d) Itshall provide sufficient space to permit safe 
working; 

e) Itshall be maintained in a clean dry condition; 
and 


f) Itshall have adequate fire safety measures as 
per the statutory requirements. 


A-4 QUALITY MANAGEMENT SYSTEM 


The container testing station shall have in quality 
management system according to IS/ISO 9001 duly 
certified from Bureau of Indian Standards or any other 
internationally reputed agency. 

NOTE — The test station shall adopt procedures, which fully 


comply with the requirements of these rules and guidelines 
issued by statutory authority from time to time. 


ANNEX B 
(Clause 8.2) 
DESCRIPTION AND EVALUATION OF DEFECTS, AND CONDITIONS FOR 


REJECTION OF WELDED CARBON STEEL GAS CONTAINERS AT 
THE TIME OF VISUAL INSPECTION 


B-1 GENERAL 


Gas container defects may be physical, material or due 
to corrosion as a result of environmental or service 
conditions to which the container has been subjected 
during its life. 


The object of this annex is to provide general guidelines 
for gas container users on the application of rejection 
criteria. It is intended, in particular, for gas container 
users with limited practical experience. 


This annex applies to all containers, but those which 
have contained gases having special characteristics may 
require modified controls. 


Any defect presenting a sharp notch may be removed 
by grinding, machining or other approved methods. 
After such a repair, the wall thickness shall be checked, 
for example, ultrasonically, to ensure that the minimum 
design wall thickness has been maintained. 


B-2 PHYSICAL OR MATERIAL DEFECTS 


Evaluation of physical and material defects in the 
container shall be in accordance with Table 1. 


Permanent attachments (for example, foot-rings or 


shrouds, etc) shall be inspected and shall be suitable 
for the intended purposes. 


B-3 CORROSION 


B-3.1 General 


The container can be subjected to environmental 
conditions that could cause external corrosion of the 
metal. Internal corrosion of the metal can also occur 
owing to service conditions. 


There is difficulty in presenting definite rejection limits 
in tabular form for all sizes and types of containers 
and their service conditions. The limits of rejection 
have been established following considerable field 
experience. 


Extensive experience and judgment are required in 
evaluating whether containers that have corroded 
internally are safe and suitable for return to service. It is 
important that the surface of the metal is cleaned of 
corrosion products prior to the inspection of the container. 


B-3.2 Types of Corrosion 


The general types of corrosion are classified as in 
Table 2. 


IS 16175 : 2014 


Table 1 Rejection Limits Relating to Physical and Material Defects in the Container Shell 
(Clauses 8.2 and B-2) 


SI Type of Defect Definition Rejection Criteria 
No. 
(UI Q) (3) (4) 
i) Bulge Visible swelling of the container All containers with such a defect 
ii) Dent A depression in the container that has When the depth of the dent exceeds 3 percent of the external 
neither penetrated nor removed metal and diameter of the container or The mean diameter of the dent is 
is greater in depth than 1 percent of the greater than one-quarter of the diameter of the container or When 
outside diameter the depth of the dent is greater than 1/10 of the mean diameter of 
the dent 
NOTE — Dent on a weld shall not be permitted, but flattening (wear) 
of weld shall not be treated as a dent on the weld. Dent adjacent to 
the flattened weld shall be treated as a dent on the weld 
iii)  Cutorgouge A sharp impression where metal has been When the depth of the cut or gouge exceeds 20 percent of the wall 
removed or re-distributed and whose depth thickness or When the length exceeds 75 mm or 25 percent of the 
exceeds 5 percent of the container wall outside diameter of the container whichever is less or When the 
thickness wall thickness is less than the design minimum wall thickness 
iv) Crack A split or rift in the metal All containers with such defects 
v) Dig A sharp depression where the surface 75mm or more in length and 4mm or more in width or When the 
material has been penetrated depth of the cut or gouge exceeds 20 percent of the wall thickness 
or When the wall thickness is less than the design minimum wall 
thickness 
vi) Fire damage ^ Excessive general or localized heating of All containers in categories (b), (c) or (d). 


container usually indicated by, 

a) chaming or burning of paint 

b) distortion of container 

c) partial melting of container 

d) other signs of excessive heat damage 
are evident 


If only (a) is evident, the container may be accepted by a competent 
person, if the container passes the volumetric expansion test 


NOTE — When applying the rejection criteria given in Table 1, the conditions of use of the container, the severity of the defect and 
safety factors in the design shall be taken into consideration. 


Table 2 Rejection Criteria for Corrosion of the Container Wall 
(Clauses 8.2 and B-3.2) 


SI Type of Definition Rejection Criteria 
No. Corrosion 
UI (2) (3) (4) 
i) General corrosion ` Reduction in wall thickness over an area of more Rejection in all cases 
than 20 percent of container surface area 
ii) Local corrosion Loss of wall thickness over an area of less than If the depth of penetration exceeds 20 percent of the 
20 percent of either the interior or exterior total original thickness of the container wall 
surface area of the container, except for the other or 
types of local corrosion described below If the wall thickness is less than minimum design 
wall thickness 
iii) Chain pitting or Corrosion forming a narrow longitudinal or If a total length of corrosion in any direction exceeds 
line corrosion circumferential line or strip, or isolated craters or the diameter of the container or the depth exceeds 10 
pits which are almost connected percent of the original wall thickness 
or 
If the wall thickness is less than minimum design 
wall thickness 
iv) Isolated pits Corrosion forming isolated craters, without Depth on any penetration of any pit exceeds 0.4 mm" 
significant alignment 
v)  Crevice corrosion Corrosion associated with taking place in, or If, after thorough cleaning, the depth of penetration 


immediately around, an aperture 


exceeds 20 percent of the original wall thickness 
or 

If the wall thickness is less than minimum design 
wall thickness 


D Containers shall be rejected in case the observed thickness of the undamaged remaining wall in the affected portion is less than the 
minimum calculated wall thickness. 


IS 16175 : 2014 


ANNEX C 
(Clauses 11.1 and 18) 


TEST REPORT FORMAT 


C-1 This annex provides guidance on the range of information to be included in the documentation associated 
with retesting of container. Example of suitable format is provided below. Other formats are also acceptable. 
Each report shall be signed by the retester. 


Name and address of the retesting station 


Name of the container manufacturer 


Name and address of the container owner 


Container Description: 


Report No. Date 

Manufacturing standard IS Outside diameter mm 
Container serial number Vehicle registration plate detail 

Guaranteed minimum wall thickness —— mm 

Maximum working pressure Test pressure 

Water capacity marked on Container De 

Tare weight marked on the container kg 


Date of original hydrostatic/hydrostatic stretch test of container 


Container thread type its condition and 


Conformation with gauge 


Weight 

Present tare weight kg 

Difference in present tare weight and tare weight marked on the container kg 
Pass/Fail 


External Examination 


Pass/Fail 


Reason of rejection 


Internal Examination 


Pass/Fail 


Reason 


Hydrostatic Test at 3 MPa 
Pass/Fail 


Reason of rejection. 


Actual water capacity litre 


Actual weight kg 


10 


Variation in tare weight that is weight marked on the container and actual weight 


Container actual wall thickness 


mm 


IS 16175 : 2014 


kg 


Test reports and certificates furnished by the manufacturer, if available 


Detail of valve fitted on the container 


Make 


Type 


Thread condition 


Remarks 


Supervisor's name and signature 


Approved by: Name, designation and signature 


Place Date 


Seal of the organization 


ANNEX D 
(Clause 13.2) 


PRESSURE RELIEF DEVICE (PRD) INSPECTION 


D-1 GENERAL 


The LPG container for automotive use is equipped with 
a multifunction valve with a PRD. All PRDs shall be 
in direct communication with the contents (vapour 
phase) of the container, regardless of whether the 
container valve is open or closed. 


D-2 REQUIREMENTS 


a) External inspection of PRD(s) for corrosion 
damage, plugging of the PRD vent system and 
mechanical defects, such as leakage, extrusion 
of fusible metal or looseness of attachments. 
This shall be done each time, and 

b) Leak testing of all connection between the 

valve and container port, and the plug PRD(s) 


11 


and container port. AII PRD connections and 
the valve shall be checked for leakage, These 
connections shall be serviced if any leakage 
from these areas is deleted. 


D-3 APPROVED EQUIPMENT 


The inspector shall verify that the PRD(s) in use with 
the container is (are) approved and specified by the 
manufacturer for the container type. 


D-4 REPLACEMENT 


Once removed, PRDs shall not be installed on any other 
container but may, if they are appropriate and pass 
inspection, be reinstalled on the same container from 
which they were removed, as recommended by the 
container manufacturer. 


IS 16175 : 2014 


ANNEX E 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Gas Cylinders Sectional Committee, MED 16 


Organization 


Petroleum and Explosive Safety Organization, Nagpur 


All India Industrial Gases Manufacturers Association, New Delhi 


Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


Bharat Pumps and Compressors Limited, Allahabad 


BOC India Limited, Kolkata 


Everest Kanto Cylinder Limited, Mumbai 


Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


Indian Oil Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


Indraprastha Gas Limited, New Delhi 


International Industrial Gases Limited, Kolkata 


Kabsons Gas Equipments Limited, Hyderabad 


Kosan Industries Limited, Surat 


LPG Equipment Research Centre, Bangalore 


Mahanagar Gas Limited, Mumbai 


Maruti Koatsu Cylinders Limited, Mumbai 


Ministry of Defence (DGQA), Pune 


Praxair India Limited, Bangalore 


Research and Development Establishment (Engineers), Pune 


Sakha Engineers Private Limited, New Delhi 
SICGIL India Limited, Chennai 


Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers (ARAI), New Delhi 


Steel Authority of India Limited, Salem 


Steel Authority of India Limited, Ranchi 


Supreme Cylinders Limited, Delhi 


Tata Motors Limited, Pune 


12 


Representative(s) 


Suri T. R. Tuomas (Chairman) 
Suri D. K. Gupta (Alternate) 


SHRI SAKET TIKU 
SHRIMATI VEENA PETER (Alternate) 


Suri J. VEDAGIRI 
SHRI SANJAY PHULLI (Alternate) 


SHRI MOHAN KUMAR 
Suri P. G. CHoupuury (Alternate) 


SHRI K. MANOHARAN 
SHRI RAMANA VUTUKURU (Alternate) 


Suri P. M. SAMVATSAR 
SHRI A. K. KHAMKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI M. SELVAKUMAR 
SHRI ALOK Kumar Gupta (Alternate) 


SHRI SHANKAR SHARAN 
Suri S. M. RAMBHAL (Alternate) 


SHRI PRAVEEN K. PANDEY 
SHRI UJWAL BHANDARI (Alternate) 


SHRI DEVENDRA K. GARG 
SHRI NIKHILESh K. GARG (Alternate) 


SHRI SATISH KABRA 
SHRI S. GOPALAIAH (Alternate) 


SHRI S. K. Dey 
SHRI S. B. BomaL (Alternate) 


Suri U. V. MANNUR 
SHRIMATI KAROBI MUKHERJEE (Alternate) 


SHRI RAGHUNATH KULAI 
SHRI ARUN Nayak (Alternate) 


SHRI Nitin J. THAKKAR 
Suri A. S. SARAN (Alternate) 


Suri J. P. Tiwari 
SHRI K. SUDHAKARAN (Alternate) 


SHRI MILAN SARKAR 
SHRI ARINDAM Das (Alternate) 


Suri P. K. CHATTOPADHYAY 
Suri A. Basu (Alternate) 


SHRI AMARJIT S. KOHLI 


SHRI FAROOQUE DADABHOY 
SHRI R. PADMANABAN (Alternate) 


Suri K. K. GANDHI 
SHRI PANKAJ KUMAR Karn (Alternate) 


SHRI M. PRABAKARAN 
Suri N. K. VuavavanaiA (Alternate) 


SHRI DEBASHIS KARMAKAR 
Dr B. K. Jua (Alternate) 


Suri M. L. FATHEPURIA 


SHRI P. K. BANERJEE 
SHRI AMUL VERMA (Alternate) 


Organization 


Tekno Valves, Kolkata 

The Automotive Research Association of India, Pune 

Trans Valves (India) Private Limited, Hyderabad 

Vanaz Engineers Limited, Pune 

In personal capacity (Menon and Patel, 14/1, Mile, Mathura Road, 


Faridabad) 


In personal capacity (303, Shantikunj, Pandav Bunglows 
Lane Athwalines, Surat) 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 16175 : 2014 


Representative(s) 


Suri Y. K. BEHANI 
Suri R. BEHANI (Alternate) 


Dn S. S. THIPSE 
Suri S. D. RAIRIKAR (Alternate) 


Suri A. K. Jain 
SHRI Anus JAIN (Alternate) 


SHRI S. R. SARVATE 
Suri S. J. Vispute (Alternate) 


SHRI EBRAHIM M. PATEL 


Suri L. D. THAKKAR 


SHRI J. A. Spot, Scientist ‘F and HEAD (MED) 
[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI VISHAL TOMER 
Scientist ‘C’ (MED), BIS 


Composition of Low Pressure Gas Cylinders Sub-committee, MED 16: 2 


Organization 
Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


All India Industrial Gases Manufacturers Association, New Delhi 


Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


Bhiwadi Cylinders Private Limited, New Delhi 


Hindalco Industries Limited, Mumbai 


Ideal Engineers Private Limited, Hyderabad 


In Personal Capacity, Faridabad 


Indian Oil Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


J. R. Fabricators Limited, Halol 


Jindal StainlessLimited, Hisar 


LPG Equipment Research Centre, Bangalore 


Ministry of Defence (DGQA), Pune 


Petroleum and Explosive Safety Organization, Nagpur 


Sahuwala Cylinders (P) Limited, Visakhapatnam 
Shri Shakti Cylinders Private Limited, Hyderabad 


Shiv Energy India Limited, Hyderabad 
Steel Authority of India Limited, Salem 


Supreme Cylinders Limited, Delhi 


Tata Iron and Steel Company Limited, Jamshedpur 


13 


Representative(s) 
SHRI ALOK Kumar Gupta (Convener) 


SHRI SAKET TIKU 
SHRIMATI VEENA PETER (Alternate) 


Suri J. VEDAGIRI 
SHRI SANJAY PHULLI (Alternate) 


SHRI MANVINDER SINGH 
SHRI RAJNEESH CHopra (Alternate) 


SHRI SUBHANKAR GUPTA 
Suri S. Devaposs (Alternate) 


SHRI SATISH KABRA 
SHRI DEEPAK KABRA (Alternate) 


Suri E. M. PATEL 


SHRI SHANKAR SHARAN 
Suri S. M. RAMBHAL (Alternate) 


SHRI AsuwiN H. MEHTA 
Suri S. Sesu Kumar (Alternate) 


Suri L. C. JAIN 
SHRI PRAVAIN GOEL (Alternate) 


Suri U.V. MANNUR 
SHRIMATI KAROBI MUKHERJEE (Alternate) 


Suri J. P. TIWARI 
SHRI K. SUDHAKARAN (Alternate) 


SHRI T. R. THOMAS 
Suri D. K. Gupta (Alternate) 


Suri S. S. S. KRISHNA REEDY 


Suri D. V. RAJA SEKHAR 
SHRI Younus GEELANI (Alternate) 


SHRI R. R. Ras 


SHRI M. PRABAKARAN 
Suri N. K. VuayavarciA (Alternate) 


Suri M. L. FATHEPURIA 


SHRI SUDIPTO SARKAR 
Dr A. N. BHAGAT (Alternate) 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 16 (1158). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern. : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.L T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. KOCHI. 
LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


