**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 4636 (1988) : Method for determination of colour fastness 
of textile materials to dry-heat treatments (excluding 
pressing) [TXD 5: Chemical Methods of Test] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS: 4636 -1988 
_ ,. ^ - . (Reaffirmed 2004) 

Indian Standard 

METHOD FOR 

DETERMINATION OF COLOUR FASTNESS OF 

TEXTILE MATERIALS TO DRY-HEAT 

TREATMENTS ( EXCLUDING PRESSING ) 

(First Revision) 



UDC 677-016473-4 : 53.5-682 



® Copyright 1988 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 1 10002 

G* 1 Octobtr 1988 



18:4636-1988 



Indian Standard 

METHOD FOR 

DETERMINATION OF COLOUR FASTNESS OF 

TEXTILE MATERIALS TO DRY-HEAT 

TREATMENTS ( EXCLUDING PRESSING ) 

(First Revision) 

0. FOREWORD 



0.1 This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was 
adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 
20 May 1988, after the draft finalized by the 
Chemical Methods of Test Sectional Committee 
had been approved by the Textile Division 
Council. 

0.2 This standard was first published in 1968 
and has been revised to align it with ISO 105/P- 
1978 ' Textiles — Tests for colour fastness POl 
Colour fastness to dry heat ( excluding pressing )'; 



issued by the International Organization for 
Standardization ( ISO ) and also to incorporate 
changes in line with other standards on colour 

fastness tests. 



0.3 Colour fastness of textile materials is likely 
to be affected by the action of dry-heat treat- 
ments as employed in processes of pleating, sett- 
ing, etc, and check for colour fastness is, therefore, 
of considerable importance. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard prescribes a method for 
the determination of colour fastness of textile 
materials of all kinds and in all forms to the 
action of dry-heat as employed in processes 
designed to give textiles stability of dimensions 
or shape such as pleating and setting. It is 
mainly applicable to synthetic fibres or textiles 
containing synthetic fibres. 

1.1.1 Three tests differing in temperature are 
provided; one or more of them shall be used 
depending on the requirements and the stability 
of the fibres. 

1.2 When this method is used for assessing colour 
change and staining in dyeing, printing and 
finishing processes, it should be recognized that 
other chemical and physical factors may influ- 
ence the results. 

2. PRINCIPLE 

2.1 A specimen of the textile in contact with 
adjacent fabrics is heated by close contact with 
a medium which, in turn, is heated to the requir- 
ed temperature. The change in colour of the 
specimen and the staining of the adjacent fabrics 
are assessed with the grey scales. 

3. SAMPLING 

3.1 Sample to determine conformity of a lot of 
coloured textile material to a specification shall 
be selected so as to be representative of the lot. 



3.2 Sample drawn in accordance with the 
relevant material specification or as agreed to 
between the buyer and the seller to evaluate 
colour fastness of the material in the lot shall be 
representative of the lot. 

4. PREPARATION OF COMPOSITE 
SPECIMEN 

4.1 If the textile to be tested is fabric, place a 
test specimen of suitable size from the sample 
( see Note ) adapted to that of heating device 
( see 5.1 ) between the two pieces of adjacent 
fabrics and sew along one of the shorter sides to 
form a composite specimen. 

Note — The size of the specimen should be such that 
the pressure on the composite specimen would amount 
to 4 ± 1 kPa. 

4.2 If the textile to be tested is yarn, knit or 
weave it into a fabric and prepare the composite 
specimen as in 4.1 or, alternatively, form a layer of 
parallel lengths of yarn between the two pieces of 
adjacent fabrics; the amount of yarn taken being 
approximately half of the combined mass of the 
adjacent fabrics, sew along two opposite sides to 
hold the yarn in place and to form a composite 
specimen. 

4.3 If the textile to be tested is loose fibre, comb 
and compress an amount approximately equal to 
half the combined mass of the adjacent fabrics 
into a sheet of required size ( see Note under 4.1 ). 
Place the sheet between the two pieces of adja- 
cent fabrics and sew along all four sides to hold 
the fibre in place and to form a composite speci- 
men. 

1 



IS s 4636 - 1988 



5. APPARATUS 

5.1 A Suitable Heating Arrangement — 

Providing even heat transfer at controlled temper- 
atures by close contact with the composite speci- 
men. 

Notbj 1 — A pair of hot plates equipped with an 
electrical heating system which is accurately^controllable 
is suitable. In order to obtain a pressure of 4 ± i kf a, 
the total area of the composite specimen shall bear a 
suitable relationship to the mass of the plate pressing 
down on the specimen. 

Note 2 — A molten metal-bath, in which a holder 
( see Fig. 1 ) containing the composite specimen is 
immersed, is also suitable. The metal alloy of the 
following composition should be used: 



( see Fig. 1 and 2 ). Leave it there for 30 seconds 
at one or more of the following temperatures: 



Alloy 


Percent 


Bismuth 


50*0 


Lead 


26-6 


Tin 


13-4 


Cadmium 


10-0 



Note 3 — Other devices may also be used provided 
that the same results are obtained as with the apparatus 
described in 5.1. 



SPRING CLIP 



WINDOW 




65 mm 



Fig. 1 Holder 

5.2 Alaniiaausn Foil — of thickness Q'001 to 
0'G02 cm. 

5.3 Two Adjacent Fabrics — each of size 
adapted to that of heating device, one piece 
made of the same fibre as that in the sample to 
be tested or that predominating in case of blends, 
the second piece made of polyester fibre, unless 
otherwise specified. 

6, PROCEDURE 

6.1 Place the composite specimen in the heating 
device with a pressure of 4 ± 1 kPa on it, or alter- 
natively cover both sides of the composite speci- 
men with aluminium foil and mount in the holder 



Test 


Temperature 


Mild 


150 ± 2°C 


Intermediate 


180 ± 2°C 


Severe 


210 ± 2°G 




ALUMINIUM FOIL 

WHITE ADJACENT 
MATERIAL 

TEST PIECE 



Fio s 2 Loading Arrangement 

Note 1 — The composite specimen should be placed 
after the required temperature is attained. 

Note 2 — When desired, other temperatures and/or 
times may be used, provided that they are specially 
noted in the test report. 

6*2 Remove the composite specimen and leave 
it in air at 27 ± 2°C and 65 ± 2 percent relative 
humidity for 4 hours. 

6.3 Evaluate the change in colour of the test 
specimen by the method prescribed in IS : 768- 
1982* and the staining of the two pieces of 
adjacent fabrics by the method prescribed in 
IS : 769-1982|. 

Note 1 — Treated test specimens and the piece of 
adjacent fabrics should have cooled after drying and 
shouid have regained their normal moisture content 
before evaluation. 

Note 2 — In cases of doubt in the colour fastness 
rating as assessed by an observer, the assessment should 
be done by at least three observers and the overall 
average rating should be reported. 



7. REPORT 

7.1 Report individually the numerical ratings for 
the change in colour of the specimen and for 
staining of each kind of adjacent fabric used in 
the preparation of composite specimen. 

7.2 Report also the test used, that is, mild, 
intermediate or severe. 



♦Method for evaluating change in colour {first revision \ 
t Method for evaluating staining ( first revision ). 



Printed at Printograph, New Delhi , India 



