Waa ATAF IS 16271 : 2014 
Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2019) 


gersie vecia tre fas — 
Wa & aaa Aao — 


art cif 


Dissolved Acetylene Gas Cylinders 
— Inspection at Time of Filling — 
Code of Practice 


ICS 23.020.30 


© BIS 2014 


ada AM oR 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
WM To, 9 Teg St Art, ae feeeit-110002 
Š MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2014 Price Group 5 


Gas Cylinders Sectional Committee, MED 16 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Gas Cylinders 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering Division Council. 


The Gas Cylinder Rules, 2004 and the Indian Standards Specifications relating to compressed gas cylinders 
require that a cylinder be subjected to the pre-fill and post-fill inspections by the competent person of licensed 
cylinder filling station. This standard covers requirements that reflect current practice and experience considering 
the provisions of the Gas Cylinder Rules, 2004. 


Each gas cylinder for dissolved acetylene is inspected at time of filling in order to establish that: 


a) Ithas no defects such that the cylinder is unsafe for filling or continued use; 


b) It can be identified and complies with the relevant requirements with regard to marking, labelling, 
colour coding and completeness of its accessories; 


c) Its valve functions satisfactorily; 
d) The appropriate amounts of solvent and acetylene have been determined and charged. 


The cylinder filling inspection is to be carried out only by persons who are trained and competent in the subject, 
for the purpose of ensuring that a cylinder is safe for continued use. 


In the preparation of this standard considerable assistance has been taken from ISO 11372 : 2011 ‘Gas cylinders 
— Cylinders for dissolved acetylene — Inspection at time of filling’. 


While implementing this standard compliance with statutory regulations shall be ensured. 
The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex C. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 16271 : 2014 


Indian Standard 


DISSOLVED ACETYLENE GAS CYLINDERS — 
INSPECTION AT TIME OF FILLING — 
CODE OF PRACTICE 


1 SCOPE 


This standard specifies minimum requirements for 
inspection at time of filling of single cylinders for the 
safe storage and transport of dissolved acetylene gas 
under pressure. 


1.1 This standard is not applicable to palletized 
cylinders, or to manifold cylinders or manifold bundles 
on trailers. 


1.2 This standard does not cover aspects related to the 
inspection or testing of the porous material. 


2 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions in addition to given in IS 7241 shall apply. 


2.1 Acetylene Bundle — Transportable unit consisting 
of two or more acetylene cylinders manifolded together 
within a rigid frame, equipped with all necessary 
equipment for filling and emptying in the assembled 
State. 


2.2 Dissolved Acetylene Cylinder — Dissolved 
acetylene cylinder means a cylinder having a valve and 
with or without safety devices, containing a porous 
mass, a solvent for the storage of dissolved acetylene 
and at least sufficient acetylene to saturate the solvent 
at atmospheric pressure and at a temperature of +15°C. 


NOTE — Acetone or any other solvent used shall not be capable 
of chemical reaction with the acetylene gas or with the porous 
mass or with the metal of the cylinder or valve. 


2.3 Acetylene/Solvent Ratio — Ratio of the 
maximum acetylene content to the specified solvent 
content. 


2.4 Regulatory Authority — Any regulatory 
authority designated for any purpose in connection with 
this standard. 


2.5 Competent Person — Person who by a 
combination of training, experience and supervision 
is able to make objective judgments on a subject, 
authorized by the Competent Authority. 


2.6 Complete Cylinder — Cylinder shell ready to be 
charged with acetylene gas that is complete with porous 
mass, solvent (where applicable), saturation gas (where 
applicable), valve and any valve protection permanently 
fixed to the cylinder shell. 


2.7 Cylinder Shell — Pressure vessel manufactured 
and suitable for receiving and containing a porous mass 
and to be filled as an acetylene cylinder. 


2.8 Manufacturer — Company responsible for filling 
the cylinder shell with porous mass and which generally 
prepares it for the first charge of acetylene. 


2.9 Maximum Acetylene Content — Specified 
maximum mass of acetylene the cylinder is designed 
to contain. 


NOTES 
1 Maximum acetylene content is expressed in kg. 


2 When a solvent is used, it includes the saturation gas. 


2.10 Maximum Permissible Settled Pressure — 
Maximum permissible gauge pressure, at a uniform 
temperature of 15°C, in a cylinder containing the 
maximum acetylene content and the specified solvent 
content. 


NOTE — Maximum permissible settled pressure is expressed 
in bar. 


2.11 Porosity — Ratio of the total volume (water 
capacity) of the cylinder shells minus the volume of 
the solid material of the porous mass, to the water 
capacity of the cylinder shell. 


NOTE — Porosity is expressed as a percentage. 


2.12 Porous Mass Porous Substance — Single or 
multi-component material introduced or formed in the 
cylinder shell in order to fill it and that, due to its 
porosity, allows the absorption of the solvent and 
acetylene gas solution. 


NOTE — The porous mass may be monolithic or non- 
monolithic. Monolithic porous mass consists of a solid product 
typically obtained by reacting materials or by bonding 
materials together with a binder. Non-monolithic porous mass 
consists typically of granular, fibrous or similar materials 
without addition of a binder. 


2.13 Solvent — Liquid that is absorbed by the porous 
mass and is capable of dissolving and releasing the 
acetylene. 


2.14 Tare Weight 


a) Acetylene cylinder means the weight of the 
cylinder together with any fittings, 
permanently attached and includes the weight 
of valve any safety device, porous mass, 


IS 16271 : 2014 


requisite quantity of solvent for dissolving 
acetylene, and the weight of acetylene gas 
saturating the solvent at atmospheric pressure 
and temperature of 15°C; 

b) Liquefiable gas cylinder means the weight of 
the cylinder together with any fittings 
permanently attached thereto and includes the 
weight of valve; 

c) Permanent gas cylinder means the weight of 
the cylinder together with any fittings 
permanently attached thereto and excludes the 
weight of valve. 

NOTE — Total weight is expressed in kg. 


2.15 Water Capacity (Cylinder Shell Volume) — 
Actual capacity of the cylinder shell, measured by 
filling the shell with water. 


NOTES 
1 Water capacity is expressed in litres. 


2 The cylinder shell is defined as being empty of any porous 
mass (see 2.7). 


3 FILLING INSPECTION 
3.1 General 


Each cylinder shall be submitted to an inspection prior 
to, during and immediately after filling. Filling of an 
acetylene cylinder includes determination of its solvent 
content and replenishment of its solvent, where 
applicable. The items described in 3.2 to 3.5 shall be 
covered by a filling inspection. 


Cylinders not fulfilling these requirements shall be 
clearly identified for further treatment according to the 
written procedures of the filling station. 


Before filling, the identity of the cylinder’s owner shall 
be established and his authorization to fill the cylinder 
obtained as specified in the Gas Cylinder Rules, 2004. 


The filling conditions of acetylene cylinders are 
established based on statutory regulations/codes. 


3.2 Pre-fill Inspection 


3.2.1 Verification of Stamp-Marking and Necessary 
Documentation 


The information required in the following list shall be 
made available to the filler, for example, by providing 
him with an appropriate list. 


Before filling an acetylene cylinder, it shall be 
established that: 


a) The cylinder is permitted for filling at the 
filling station; 

b) The cylinder has not exceeded its due date 
for periodic inspection; 

c) The porous material contained within the 


cylinder is fit for further service and does not 
have a current history of problems, for 
example by reference to the manufacturer of 
the material; and 

d) The stamp marking, label and colour coding 
shall be in accordance with statutory 
requirements 


Before filling an acetylene cylinder, the following 
information shall be made available: 


a) Identification of the porous material, 
b) Type of solvent, 
c) Specified solvent content, 


d) Tare, and 
e) Total weight and/or its maximum acetylene 
charge. 


3.2.2 Verification of Serviceable Condition 


It shall be established that each cylinder is in a 
serviceable condition before filling. It shall therefore 
be established that the cylinder is clean and free from 
foreign material, so that the cylinder can be assessed 
for mechanical damage that would otherwise prevent 
it from being filled safely, that it does not exhibit any 
abnormalities that could impair the safety, including 
arc burns, severe corrosion, heat/fire damage, or have 
any other significant mechanical damage. 


Any fusible plug, if fitted, shall be inspected to ensure 
that it is in a satisfactory condition. 


Cylinders that have been found to be unserviceable 
shall be clearly identified and segregated in accordance 
with the written procedures of the filling organization, 
and shall not be filled. 


3.2.3 Verification of Integrity of Permanent 
Attachments 


Before filling a cylinder, it shall be established that 
the neck ring/threaded boss is fit for its intended use 
and that the neck ring, if one exists, is not loose. If 
there is a permanent valve guard, it shall be checked 
to ensure that it is in good condition and properly 
attached. Similarly, the integrity of the foot ring, if 
fitted, shall be checked for its intended use. 


NOTE — If a permanent valve guard is exchanged, this might 
affect the tare of the cylinder. 


3.2.4 Verification of Valve Integrity and Suitability 


Before filling a cylinder, it shall be established that 
the installed valve is suitable for acetylene and is in a 
satisfactory condition. As a minimum, it shall be 
established that: 


a) The valve outlet is suitable for the intended 
use; 


b) The valve is easy to operate; 

c) The valve is free from contaminants; 

d) The valve-operating mechanism is operable 
(hand wheel or key operated), if the valve is 
suspected to be blocked, isolate and identify 
the acetylene cylinder and rectify it in 
accordance with an appropriate procedure as 
described in Annex A; 


e) The fusible plug, where present, is 
undamaged; 

f) The outlet thread and body are undamaged; 
and 

g) The filling connector attaches securely to the 
valve. 


3.3 Solvent Content 
3.3.1 Determination of Solvent Content 


Before filling an acetylene cylinder with acetylene, its 
actual solvent content shall be determined by 
measuring the pressure, temperature and weight of the 
cylinder in conjunction with the appropriate 
documentation. Calibrated weighing scales, 
manometers and other instruments which have a 
working range and measuring accuracy appropriate for 
the cylinder size to be filled shall be used. 


Acetylene cylinders take time to reach temperature 
equilibrium. Special care should be taken if the 
temperature of the cylinder is very low and/or the 
pressure is very high or if the cylinder has been exposed 
to a significant environmental temperature change in 
the preceding 3 h. 


Since the determination of the solvent content is not 
accurate for acetylene cylinders that contain high 
amounts of residual gas, cylinders should be emptied 
until a low amount of residual gas has been reached. 


Typically, this would amount to a pressure of less than 
7 bar for cylinders with a working pressure of 17 bar 
or higher and to less than 4 bar for cylinders with a 
working pressure below 17 bar. 


Emptying of the cylinder should be carried out slowly; 
a typical rate would be 1/8 of the maximum acetylene 
content per hour. The determination of the solvent 
content should not be done immediately afterwards as 
the cylinder will cool down considerably during 
emptying and will need time to reach temperature 
equilibrium again. 

Calculation of the actual solvent content in cylinders 


shall be in accordance with Annex B. 


NOTE — The result of these calculations normally is made 
available to the filler, for example in the form of a table or a 
chart indicating the residual acetylene content. 


IS 16271 : 2014 


If the weight of the acetylene cylinder after deduction 
of the residual gas is below the appropriate tare stamped 
on the cylinder, the solvent loss shall be replenished. 
The type of solvent shall not be changed for a given 
acetylene cylinder. 


The uncertainty of the method for determining the 
solvent loss is influenced by several factors including 
the accuracy of the balance and the accuracy of 
temperature measurement, etc. These factors shall be 
taken into account for solvent replenishment. 


If the weight of the acetylene cylinder after deduction 
of the residual gas exceeds the appropriate tare stamped 
on the cylinder, the cylinder shall be examined and the 
reason for the excess weight shall be determined before 
further handling. 


3.3.2 Solvent Replenishment 
For solvent replenishment, it shall be checked that: 


a) The valve is not blocked/obstructed and that 
the operation is progressing satisfactorily; and 
b) The valve does not leak when it is in the open 
position; if leakage is suspected, a leak check 
shall be performed, including around the valve 
gland nut. The filling process of the cylinder 
shall be stopped and only recommenced after 
the leak has been rectified. 
During replenishment of the solvent, it shall be ensured 
that the porous material is not damaged by the pressure 
with which the solvent is pumped into the cylinder. If 
no reliable information is available, it is recommended 
to limit the pressure to a pressure a few bar above the 
pressure to which cylinders are supposed to be emptied, 
in accordance with 3.3.1. 


3.4 Inspection During Filling 
3.4.1 General 


During the filling cycle of an acetylene cylinder, which 
includes the solvent-replenishment stage, the filler shall 
verify that: 


a) the valve is not blocked/obstructed by 
checking that the cylinder is filled normally 
(for example: by checking its surface 
temperature); 

b) the valve and fusible plugs, where fitted, do 
not leak (external leak tightness). If leakage 
is suspected, a leak check, including around 
the valve gland nut, shall be performed. The 
filling process of the cylinder shall be stopped 
and only recommenced after the leak has been 
rectified in a safe manner. 


3.4.2 Simultaneous Filling of Acetylene Cylinders 


Acetylene cylinders which are to be filled 


IS 16271 : 2014 


simultaneously shall have the same type of solvent if 
the backflow of solvent cannot be prevented by an 
appropriate technical device. 


Special care shall be taken with cylinders having 
different types of porous material or high amounts of 
residual gas because they might have different filling 
properties. 


3.5 Post-fill Inspection 
3.5.1 Verification of Tightness 


After filling a cylinder, the filler shall ensure that there 
are no leaks. Leak tests shall be carried out by using 
an appropriate leak-detection fluid. Checks shall be 
made 


a) for seat leakage at the valve outlet (internal 
tightness), 

b) at the interface between the valve and the 
cylinder, and 

c) at the fusible plugs (if fitted) including the 
interface between the fusible plug and the 
cylinder or valve. 


3.5.2 Weight and Pressure Checks 


After the cylinder has been filled it shall be verified by 
weighing that the maximum acetylene content or 
maximum acetylene charge, respectively, is not 
exceeded. For example, this can be achieved, by 
checking that the actual measured weight does not 
exceed the total weight. Calibrated weighing scales, 
which have a working range and measurement accuracy 
appropriate to the respective cylinder size shall be used. 


NOTE — There is no need to check that the pressure 
corresponds to the stamped working pressure for every cylinder 
under the following conditions: 


a) the total weight of the cylinder is not 
exceeded; 

b) the solvent content has been verified as being 
correct in accordance with 3.3; 

c) the reason is that the acetylene-to-solvent ratio 
has been established during the type approval 
of the single cylinder. However, there might 
be reasons to carry out a pressure check (for 
example because the cylinder is difficult to 
fill). If the pressure is too high at ambient 
temperature and the total weight is not 
exceeded, it is indicative of the following 
possible conditions; 


d) deficiency of solvent; 

e) the solvent has become contaminated, for 
example by water; 

f) high concentration of other gases in the 
acetylene which are not soluble in the solvent 
used. 


Conversely, too low a pressure at ambient temperature 
is indicative of an excessive solvent content. 


3.5.3 Valve Protection 


It has to be checked that the valve is protected 
appropriately, where applicable. 
NOTE — Appropriate protection can be achieved by a valve- 


protection cap or a valve guard. Alternatively, a valve can be 
designed to resist impacts. 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 3.2.4) 


PROCEDURE TO BE ADOPTED WHEN DE-VALVING AND WHEN IT IS SUSPECTED 
THAT A CYLINDER VALVE IS OBSTRUCTED 


A-1 CHECK FOR OBSTRUCTED VALVE 


The following procedures shall be carried out only 
by trained personnel. In view of the potential hazards 
in acetylene cylinders, this operation can lead to 
injury from stored energy release and fire; hence 
personnel shall take such precautions as deemed 
necessary for the work to be performed. When the 
acetylene, if any, has been released and the pressure 
within the cylinder reduced to atmospheric pressure, 
the valve may be removed after an additional check 
has been made to establish that there is free passage 
through the valve. 


The method adopted shall be a recognized procedure, 
such as (a) followed by either (b) or (c) below, or one 
that provides equivalent safeguards. 


a) First check to establish that the actual total 
weight of the cylinder is the same as the tare 
stamped on the cylinder, adjusted if necessary 
to represent the condition of the cylinder 
being weighed (for example, tare A is likely 
to require adjustment in most cases). If there 
is a positive difference, the cylinder may 
contain either a liquefied gas under pressure 
or contaminants. 


b) Introduce inert gas at a pressure of up to 5 bar 
and check its discharge. 

c) Use the device shown in Fig. 1. Press the 
rubber bulb by hand and press the device tight 
against the valve outlet. If the rubber bulb 
inflates (tight on the outlet) the free passage 
through the valve is established. If there is a 
positive weight difference (actual total weight 
minus tare), the cylinder may contain 
contaminants (for example, water or other 
liquids). 


A-2 VALVE UNOBSTRUCTED 


When it is established that there is no obstruction to 


IS 16271 : 2014 


gas flow in the cylinder valve and there is no longer 
residual pressure in the cylinder, the valve may be 
removed. 


A-3 VALVE OBSTRUCTED 


When a cylinder is found to have an obstructed gas 
passage in the valve, the cylinder shall be set aside and 
handled only by personnel specially trained in this task. 
The preferred method is to partially unscrew the valve 
within a glanded cap, secured and joined to the cylinder 
and vented to a safe discharge. 


The principles of a suitable device are illustrated in 
Fig. 2. This procedure shall be performed in a controlled 
manner in such a way as to avoid personal injury. 


Fang een or A 
LRR 


Key 

1) Rubber Tube (Internal Diameter 8 mm, External Diameter 13 mm) Ground to olive shape and Bonded 
2) Steel Tube (Internal Diameter 3 mm, External Diameter 8 mm) 

3) Bonded 

4) Rubber Bulb 

5) Hand Pressure 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


Fic. 1 TYPICAL DEVICE FoR DETECTING AN OBSTRUCTED CYLINDER VALVE. 


IS 16271 : 2014 


ZZ 


= 
SQV 


T E i 


EZZ 


N 


Key 

1) Drive for De-Valving Machine 

2) Gas Tight Gland 

3) Gas Tight Seal 

4) Cylinder Frame and Clamping Device 
5) Pressure Gauge 

6) Vent Valve 

7) Direction of Rotation 

8) To Gas Disposal 


Fic. 2 TYPICAL DEVICE FOR THE REMOVAL OF A DAMAGED GAS CYLINDER VALVE 


IS 16271 : 2014 


ANNEX B 
(Clause 3.3.1) 
DETERMINATION OF THE SOLVENT CONTENT IN ACETYLENE CYLINDERS 


B-1 The determination of the actual solvent content 
in acetylene cylinders returned for filling, containing 
acetone as the solvent, is achieved by measuring the 
pressure, temperature and weight of the cylinder and 
carrying out a subsequent calculation as described 
below. The result of the calculation normally is made 
available to the filler, for example in the form of a table 
or a chart indicating the residual acetylene content. 


B-2 Measurement of the acetylene-cylinder weight 
alone will only give the sum of the weights of the 
solvent and acetylene in the cylinder but will not 
indicate the shortfall or excess of its solvent and 
acetylene content. 


B-3 The actual acetylene-to-solvent ratio in the cylinder 
shall be determined using the following equation: 
10/7) 

= m 11070) 


F = actual acetylene-to-solvent ratio; 
m, = residual acetylene content, in kg; 
mg = actual solvent content, in kg; 
f@,T) =factor dependent upon pressure, 
temperature and solvent. 


For acetone, f(p,T) is determined by the following 
equation: 


log, (p+ 1.013)-4.194 5 p cae 
E T +273.15 
f(p,T)= aa 
0.456 94 —<— 2 
T +273.15 


where 


p = actual pressure in the cylinder, in bar; 


T = temperature of the cylinder, in °C. 


Based on the calculated actual acetylene-to-solvent 
ratio F in the cylinder [see Equation 1)], the solvent 
content actually contained in the acetylene cylinder is 
calculated as follows: 


Equation to be used for cylinders on which tare S is 
stamped: 


m, —tareg +m FMis 
m = : ond. 
3 1+F 


where 


m, = actual weight of the cylinder, in kg; 
tare, = tare as stamped on the cylinder, in kg; 


Mso = specified solvent content in the cylinder 
(according to the approval), in kg; 


m, , = Saturation acetylene, in kg. 
NOTE — Equation (3) is derived as follows: 


The actual weight of the bundle, as measured before filling, 
can be expressed as follows: 


m,= tare, — My, + Mg, + M, + My 


Considering the actual acetylene-to-solvent ratio F in the bundle, 
as calculated according to Equation (1) and solving for m, leads 
to Equation (3) which is used for calculating the actual solvent 
content contained in the cylinder. 


IS 16271 : 2014 


ANNEX C 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Gas Cylinders Sectional Committee, MED 16 


Organization 


Petroleum and Explosive Safety Organization, Nagpur 


All India Industrial Gases Manufacturers Association, 


New Delhi 


Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


Bharat Pumps and Compressors Limited, Allahabad 


BOC India Limittd, Kolkata 


Everest Kanto Cylinder Limited, Mumbai 


Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


Indian Oil Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


Indraprastha Gas Limited, New Delhi 


International Industrial Gases Limited, Kolkata 


Kabsons Gas Equipments Limited, Hyderabad 


Kosan Industries Limited, Surat 


LPG Equipment Research Centre, Bangalore 


Mahanagar Gas Limited, Mumbai 


Maruti Koatsu Cylinders Limited, Mumbai 


Ministry of Defence (DGQA), Pune 


Praxair India Limited, Bangalore 


Research and Development Establishment (Engineers), Pune 


Sakha Engineers Private Limited, New Delhi 
SICGIL India Limited, Chennai 


Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers (ARAI), New Delhi 


Steel Authority of India Limited, Salem 


Steel Authority of India Limited, Ranchi 


Supreme Cylinders Limited, Delhi 


Tata Motors Limited, Pune 


Representative(s) 


Suri T. R. Tuomas (Chairman) 
Suri D. K. Gupta (Alternate) 


SHRI SAKET TIKU 
SHRIMATI VEENA PETER (Alternate) 


SHRI J. VEDAGIRI 
SarRI SANJAY PHULLI (Alternate) 


SHRI MOHAN KUMAR 
Suri P. G. CHoupuury (Alternate) 


SHRI K. MANOHARAN 
SHRI RAMANA VUTUKURU (Alternate) 


Suri P. M. SAMVATSAR 
SHRI A. K. KHAMKAR (Alternate) 


Suri M. SELVAKUMAR 
SRI ALOK Kumar Gupta (Alternate) 


SHRI SHANKAR SHARAN 
Suri S. M. RamBuat (Alternate) 


SHRI PRAVEEN K. PANDEY 
Suri UswaL BHANDARI (Alternate) 


SHRI DEVENDRA K. GARG 
Suri NIKHILESh K. GarG (Alternate) 


SHRI SATISH KABRA 
SHRI S. GopaLalAH (Alternate) 


Suri S. K. Dey 
Suri S. B. Boma (Alternate) 


Suri U. V. MANNUR 
SHRIMATI KAROBI MUKHERJEE (Alternate) 


SHRI RAGHUNATH KULAI 
SHRI ARUN Nayak (Alternate) 


SHRI Nitin J. THAKKAR 
Suri A. S. Saran (Alternate) 


Suri J. P. Tiwari, JASG 
SHRI K. SUDHAKARAN (Alternate) 


SHRI MILAN SARKAR 
SHRI ARINDAM Das (Alternate) 


Suri P. K. CHATTOPADHYAY 
Suri A. Basu (Alternate) 


SHRI AMARJIT S. KOHLI 


SHRI FAROOQUE DADABHOY 
Suri R. PADMANABAN (Alternate) 


Suri K. K. GANDHI 
SHRI PANKAJ Kumar Karn (Alternate) 


SHRI M. PRABAKARAN 
Suri N. K. VuayavarciA (Alternate) 


SHRI DEBASHIS KARMAKAR 
Dr B. K. Jua (Alternate) 


Suri M. L. FATHEPURIA 


Suri P. K. BANERJEE 
SHRI AMUL VERMA (Alternate) 


Organization 


Tekno Valves, Kolkata 


The Automotive Research Association of India, Pune 


Trans Valves (India) Private Limited, Hyderabad 


Vanaz Engineers Limited, Pune 


In personal capacity (Menon & Patel, 14/1, Mile, Mathura 


Road, Faridabad) 


In personal capacity (303, Shantikunj, Pandav Bunglows Lane 


Athwalines, Surat) 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 16271 : 2014 


Representative(s) 


Suri Y. K. BEHANI 
Suri R. BEHANI (Alternate) 


Dr S. S. THIPSE 
Suri S. D. RARIKAR (Alternate) 


Suri A. K. JAN 
SHRI Anus Jan (Alternate) 


SHRI S. R. SARVATE 
Suri S. J. Vispute (Alternate) 


SHRI EBRAHIM M. PATEL 


Suri L. D. THAKKAR 


Suri J. A. Sippiqui, Scientist ‘F’ and Head (MED) 
[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI VISHAL TOMER 


Scientist ‘C’ (MED), BIS 


Dissolved Acetylene Cylinders, Generators, Acetylene Pipe Lines and High Pressure 
Gas Cylinders Subcommittee, MED 16:3 


Organization 
BOC India Limited, Kolkata 
Al-Can Exports Private Limited, Distt Thane 


All India Industrial Gases Manufacturers Association, 


New Delhi 


Bharat Pumps and Compressors Limited, 


Allahabad 


Everest Kanto Cylinder Limited, Mumbai 


Hindalo Industries Limited, Mumbai 


Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


Indian Oil Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


Indraprastha Gas Limited, New Delhi 


International Industrial Gases Limited, Howrah 


Jai Maruti Gas Cylinders Gases Limited, Gwalior 


KVK Corporation, Mumbai 


Maruti Koatsu Cylinders Limited, Mumbai 


Ministry of Defence (DGQA), Pune 


Petroleum and Explosive Safety Organization, Nagpur 


Praxair India Limited, Bangalore 


Rama Cylinders Private Limited, Mumbai 


Representative(s) 
SHRI VUTUKURU RAMANA (Convener) 


SHRI Voay K. PARIKH 
Suri D. C. Dave (Alternate) 


SHRI SAKET TIKU 

SHRIMATI VEENA PETER (Alternate) 
SHRI MOHAN KUMAR 

Suri P. G. CHoupuury (Alternate) 
SHRI P. M. SAMVATSAR 

SHRI A. G. KHAMKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI SUBHANKAR GUPTA 
Suri V. Ramaswamy (Alternate) 


SHRI M. SELVAKUMAR 
SHRI ALOK Kumar Gupta (Alternate) 


SHRI SHANKAR SHARAN 

Suri S. M. Ramsuat (Alternate) 
SHRI PRAVEEN K. PANDEY 

Suri UswaL BHANDARI (Alternate) 
Suri D. K. GARG 

Suri N. K. Gara (Alternate) 
SHRI AsHOK K. NIGAM 

Suri Manu Kumar Nigam (Alternate) 


Suri R. CHANDGOTHIA 
SHRI V. CHANDGOTHIA (Alternate) 


Suri Nitin J. THAKKAR 
Suri A. S. SARAN (Alternate) 


Suri J. P. TIWARI 
SHRI K. SUDHAKARAN (Alternate) 


Suri T. R. THOMAS 
Suri D. K. Gupta (Alternate) 


SHRI MILAN SARKAR 
SHRI ARINDAM Das (Alternate) 


Suri SANJAY R. NAPHADE 
Suri SANJAY S MANDE (Alternate) 


IS 16271 : 2014 


Organization 


Sahuwala High Pressure Cylinder (P) Limited, Visakhapatnam 


SICGIL India Limited, Chennai 


Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers (ARAI), New Delhi 


Tata Motors Limited, Pune 


Tekno Valves, Kolkata 


The Automotive Research Association of India, Pune 


10 


Representative(s) 


SHRI T. SUBRAMANIAN 
Suri Evny MURALIDHAR (Alternate) 


SHRI FROOQUE DADABHOY 
Suri R. PADMANABAN (Alternate) 


Suri K. K. GANDHI 
SHRI PANKAJ KumAR Karn (Alternate) 


Suri P. K. BANERJEE 
SHRI AMUL VERMA (Alternate) 


Suri Y. K. BEHANI 
Suri R. BEHANI (Alternate) 


Dr S. S. THIPSE 
Suri S. D. RARIKAR (Alternate) 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 16 (1127). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


