IS 15591 :2005 ISO 8569:1996

*TF%

Indian Standard MECHANICAL MEASUREMENT VIBRATION VIBRATION AND SHOCK -- OF SHOCK AND EQUIPMENT

AND EVALUATION IN BUILDINGS

EFFECTS ON SENSITIVE

ICS

17.160

@ BIS 2005

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG NEW DELHI 110002
I)dy 2005

Price Group 5

Mechanical

Vibration

and Shock Sectional

Committee,

ME 28

NATIONAL FOREWORD

This Indian Standard which is identical with ISO 8569 : 1996 `Mechanical vibration and shock -- Measurement and evaluation of shock and vibration effects on sensitive equipment in buildings' issued by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendations of the Mechanical Vibration and Shock Sectional Committee and approval of the Mechanical Engineering Division Council. The text of ISO Standard has been approved as suitable for publication as an Indian Standard without deviations. Certain conventions are, however, not identical to those used in Indian Standards. Attention is particularly drawn to the following: a) Wherever the words `International be read as `Indian Standard'. Comma practice Standard' appear referring to this standard, they should

b)

(,) has been used as a decimal marker while in Indian Standards, is to use a point (.) as the decimal marker.

the current

In this adopted standard, reference appears to certain International Standards for which Indian Standards also exist. The corresponding Indian Standards which are to be substituted in their places are listed below along with their degree of equivalence for the editions indicated: International ISO 2041:1990 -- Vocabulary Standard and shock Corresponding IS1171 7:1999 and shock Indian Standard Degree of Equivalence Identical

Vibration

Vocabulary on vibration

ISO 4866:1990 Mechanical vibration and shock -- Vibration of buildings -- Guidelines for the measurement of vibrations and evaluation of their effects on buildings

IS 14884:2000 Mechanical vibration and shock -- Vibration of buildings -- Guidelines for the measurement of vibrations and evaluation of their effects on buildings

do

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2:1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical value (revised)'. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

IS 15591 :2005 ISO 8569:1996

Indian Standard MECHANICAL VIBRATION AND SHOCK -- MEASUREMENT AND EVALUATION OF SHOCK AND VIBRATION EFFECTS ON SENSITIVE EQUIPMENT IN BUILDINGS

1

Scope

d)

Thk International Standard defines methods of measuring and reporting shock and vibration data for shockand vibration-sensitive equipment (in operating and non-operating modes) in buildings. The shock and vibration data obtained are used to establish a database. f) To facilitate comparison of data (e.g. comparison of shock and vibration levels measured in different countries on equipment from different manufacturers), a database reporting system is discussed. The reporting system presented will aid in the establishment of limiting values for specific equipment and also for classification of their environmental conditions. The types of shock and vibration considered in this international Standard are those transmitted from floors, tables, walls, ceilings or the isolation system to a unit of equipment. The vibration and shock response of individual mechanical or electronic parts inside the unit are not considered. The classification system of environmental conditions established from the database should serve as a guide for those who construct, manufacture and use shockand vibration-sensitive equipment and for building contractors. The types of sensitive equipment envisaged include: e)

mechanical high-precision instruments such as equipment for microelectronic tion; optical high-precision instruments, duction instruments and E-beams; electromechanical centres; security equipment for access control. systems

(tools),
produc-

photo-repro-

in train traffic

control

g)

(fire detection)

and equipment

The types of shock and vibration considered International Standard can be generated by: a)

in this

external sources (e.g. traffic or building and construction activities such as blasting, piling and vibratory compaction); the vibration response to sonic booms and acoustic excitations is also included; equipment for indoor use,'t$uch as punch presses, forging hammers, rotary equipment (e.g. air compressors, air-conditioner pumps) and heavy equipment transported or operated inside a building; human activities in connection operation-of the equipment; natural sources, wind; internal sources; equipment itself. with the service or

b)

c)

a)

stationary pherals);

computer

systems

(including

the peri-

d)

such as earthquakes,

water and

e) b) c) stationary telecommunication equipment;

i.e. vibration

cjenerated

by the

stationary laboratory instruments, such as electron microscopes, mass spectrometers, gas chromatography, lasers and X-ray apparatus ot general character;

The frequency range of interest is 0,5 Hz to 250 Hz. (The frequency range of interest for earthquakeinduced vibration is 0,5 Hz to 35 Hz.) Normally the dominant frequencies are less than 100 Hz, because

1

IS 15591 :2005 ISO 8569: `1996
they represent building. the response of the elements of the 4.2

Engineering

analysis

The vibration amplitude and duration depend mainly upon the source, its distance from the sensitive equipment and the response of the elements of the building supporting the sensitive equipment. Expressed in terms of particle velocity, which is the parameter used currently in building vibration evaluation, the values are in the range of IOA m/s to 2 x 10�2 m/s. The vibration values of interest tinuous vibration from different information in annex B. for transient and consources are given for

In order to determine the vibration and shock conditions to which equipment may be exposed, accurate and comprehensive measurements in the field shall be made. The time history should be recorded and analysed in three orthogonal axes. Measurements should be made with the shock- and vibrationsensitive equipment in place, or with a dummy having the same mass and similar dynamic behaviour as those of the equipment under consideration. The effective mass of the equipment on raised floors or tables may significantly change the response levels and frequencies. If the mass of the equipment is very small, it has no influence on the behaviour of the floor. For ultrasensitive equipment (e.g. E-beams), measurements should be carried out whenever possible on the sensitive equipment, on its isolation system and on the floor nearby in order to define the transfer function and the effect of the isolation system. The equipment itself may generate vibration which produces excitation in qther units in the immediate area. Vibration can also arise from ventilation equipment and from persons walking, especially on raised floors. Whenever possible it is recommended that the vibration and shock be measured with the sensitive equipment in both operating and non-operating modes in order to distinguish between the various possible sources. For a comparison of target source vibration with limiting values given by the manufacturer, references can be obtained by measuring the environmental vibration under normal working conditions.

2

Normative

references

,

The following standards contain provisions which, through reference in this text, constitute provisions of this International Standard. At the time of publication, the editions indicated were valid. Ail standards are subject to revision, and parties to agreements based on this International Standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent editions of the standards indicated below. Members of IEC and ISO maintain registers of currently valid international Standards.

ISO 2041:1990,

Vibration and shock -- Vocabulary.

ISO 4866:1990, Mechanical vibration and shock -- Vibration of bujldings -- Guidelines for the measurement of vibrations and evaluation of their effects on buildings.

3

Definitions
Standard, the

4.3

Pick-up positions

and mounting

For the purposes of this International definitions given in ISO 2041 apply.

4 4.1

Measurement
Field survey

methods

The pick-ups should be mounted as close as possible to the points of contact of the equipment or its support with a floor or a wall (less than 0,2 m away). If there is a soft covering (e.g. a rug) on the floor, the pick-up should be mounted on the floor under the covering whenever possible. When the floor is not rigid enough to transmit the frequency under consideration without significant attenuation, the mounting should be on the equipment itself. In order to define the transfer functiQn between the source and the sensitive equipment, pick-ups shall be mounted in positions situated approximately on the same vertical line of the floor, raised floor, the isolation system and the equipment itself. The pick-ups and cables should be mounted in such a way that accurate results are obtained over the total frequency range of interest.

A field survey should be made in order to assess the vibration severity, often in comparison with values specified by manufacturers or regulatory authorities. The minimum requirement for measurement is that the shock or vibration is characterized by continuous registration of the peak particle velocity values and/or the peak acceleration values, with the assumption that the base frequency content can be determined.

2

1S 15591 :2005 ISO 8569:1996 4.4 Instrumentation specification techniques and
sirable to collect and report method given below. data according to the

Velocity pick-ups or accelerometers may be used. It is recommended to use battery-powered amplifiers to reduce noise due to ground-loop currents. Mica washers and insulation studs may be used for electrical insulation of the accelerometer base from the mounting surface. Time history recording and analysis should take into account the following requirements: a) vibration data records or graphics shall be long enough (several cycles of the source) to allow averaging during analysis; shock data records or graphics shall include the initial pulse and shall continue until any response decay occurs; repetitive shock pulse records or graphics shall include at least 10 pulses to enable determination of the repetition rate. spectral analysis of the

5.1

Items to be considered
items should be considered: to be measured; to be recorded for analysis; techniques;

The following a) b) c) d) e) f)

parameters

data and information instrumentation

and measurement

data analysis techniques; data-reporting responsibility mation. format; for coordinating the database infor-

b)

c)

5.2 5.2.1

Parameters Shock

to be measured

Data analysis should include recorded data.

The pick-up mounting and all instrumentation shall have an adequate response and range to anticipate the overall expected frequency and amplitude range.

The time history (for all three axes) should be recorded and should include the following measurements: a) acceleration or velocity mum values; duration of the maximum pulse shape; repetition rate, if applicable. variation, including maxi-

4.5

Calibration

and accuracy
b) c)

Calibrate the entire system from the pick-up to the recorder as a unit. Perform the calibration using a known source. Note the calibrated output signal from each of the pickup/amplifier/data channel combinations used on the time history record to provide an amplitude reference for each data channel. T1-ieaccuracy of the entire data channel shall be within 10 `%. of the true value. The signal-to-noise ratio shall be at least 6 dB at the low end of the signal range.

half-wave;

d)

5.2.2

Vibration

Vibration amplitudes shall be given with the same parameter in all frequency ranges to facilitate measurement and comparison of data. As the values have to be compared to those of the building (outside or inside source propagation), particle velocity is the preferred parameter. The time history (for all three axes) should include the following measurements: a) velocity variation, including -- -- b) c) the maximum values,

5

Data-reporting

system

For the various types of investigation, as described in 4.1 and 4.2, the reporting method should be as consistent as possible. For field surveys (see 4.1), it may be sufficient to record the peak velocity or acceleration values and to give information about the mounting method and the position of the pick-ups, together with the normal reporting method for the survey of buildings subjected to vibration and shock (see ISO 4866). For engineering analysis (see 4.2), it is de-

the average values in given time intervals;

duration; frequency spectral nant frequencies. analysis, including the domi-

3

IS 15591 :2005 1S0 8569:1996 5.3 Data and information to be recorded
are as fol-- in 5.2; installation, includ-

--

The data and information lows: a) b) the parameters description ing

to be recorded

instrument model and manufacturer, ing calibration equipment, pick-ups, fiers, recorders and analysers, pick-up location and direction of axes,

includampli-

specified

--
--

pick-up, including cable and mounting, frequency response.

of the equipment

--
-- -- --

room size and layout, and site location, building construction equipment type and floor plan,

6

Data analysis

make, machine type and age, (i.e. floor, table, wall; equipment, shimmed

mounting of equipment for telecommunication or not shimmed), vibration isolators;

6.1 The preferred method is spectral analysis to obtain plots of velocity versus frequency and power spectral density. For vibration, the characteristic frequencies and their peak values should also be determined. 6.2 For shock analysis, a time history plot (acceleration, duration and pulse shape) is required. It

-- c) d)

definition

of any equipment

failures; or other

description of the construction activity source of shock and vibration conditions;

is also recommended be computed.

that the shock response spectra

e)

description of the shock- and vibration-measuring instrumentation, including:

6.3 Data should be reported using the format shown in annex A.

IS 15591 :2005 ISO 8569:1996

Annex A (informative) Format for reporting data obtained during an engineering analysis type of

investigation
A.1 Form for vibration and shock database information

Vibration/shock database information
Installation information Businessname: Streetaddress: City,state, countryand postalcode: Typeof buildingconstruction: FloorconstructionIn equipmentroom: Bu!ldingfloor plan(attach): Equipment information Manufacturer: Equipmentmodel, type, ageand mounting (i.e.floor, wall or table and, for telecommunicationracks,shimmedor not shimmed): Malfunctionsdue to shockandvibrationconditions: Instrumentation information
P!ck-up

I

Record identification

.

Manufacturer: Model: Type: Location[seedatachart,sketchor photographs): Mountingmethod, includingeffect on accuracy of dataoverfrequency rangeof Interest:
Amp/ifier

Manufacturer: Model: Type:
Recorder

Manufacturer: Model: Type:
Ana/yser

Manufacturer: Model: Type: Analysisfrequencyrangeand numberof spectralIInes: Window shapefor spectralanalysisof continuousv[bratlon(blockwise processing, fast-Founer-transform method)or analysts frequencyrange andpercentagebandwidth[bandpass fllterlng, analogor dlgltal):
Cahbrator

Manufacturer: Model: Type' Cal(brat/on Overall,p(ck-up to recorderor analyseroutput (Includestatementof accuracy):
Frequency response

Overall,pick-upto recorderor analyseroutput

5

IS 15591 :2005 ISO 8569: 1996

A.2

Data chart format

Data Input activity/source2): Maximum observed accelerationor ve!ocity3]: Acceleration or velocity leve14): Frequency):
Shock duratior$}: ShockJvibration type: Name, address and telephone number of person taking the data:

Data identification )

1) Data identification is a sequential number assign~d to each successive reading. Descriptive information, drawings or photographs should be attached to the data chart to indicate the actual point and axis of measurement. The same data identification number should beshown onanyattached time histories orana{yser hardcopies. 2) 3) 4) Frequency information shall resupplied This isthemaximum This isacceleration toenable data conversion between acceleration, velocity or displacement. histo~or spectral analysis. analyses. Specify theanalyser reading, ortheanalysis bandwith.

acceleration orvelocity obsewed inatime orvelocity forarandom vibration overthe

frequen~range

5) This isthefrequency ation r.m.s. summation. 6)

of thespectral

line forapeak

acceleration orvelocity

ra~eforanacceler-

This is the length of the primary pulse in a shock input, not including any subsequent ringing.

IS 15591 :2005 ISO 8569:1996

Annex

B

(informative) Examples of typical vibration values due to blasting

The introduction of shock- and vibration-sensitive equipment and their accessories has become a problem for the building construction industry. Manufacturers of accessories specify very low maximum vibration values for their equipment. As a result, the building construction industry is often limited in its choice of methods for excavation and improvement of the ground for foundation work in areas near existing sensitive equipment. An investigation (see reference [41)was carried out to investigate the guidelines and shock and vibration cri-

teria proposed by manufacturers, suppliers and users of shock- and vibration-sensitive electronic equipment, such as computers, disc drives and telephone switches. Figure B.1 shows some typical vibration values measured during construction work where blasting was taking place. The measurement points were situated on a computer frame or on the floor close to a computer.The peak particle velocity (or acceleration) is plotted as a function of the dominant frequency.

IS 15591 :2005 ISO 8569:1996

Peakdisplacement, pm

Peakacceleration, m(sz

/

x m

1

100

10

1 x 0,5 1 10 100 1000

Frequency, Hz

NOTE -- Measurements

were made on the computer frame or on the floor close to the computer

Figure

B.1 -- Typical vibration values caused by blasting

IS 15591 :2005 ISO 8569:1996

Annex C (informative) Bibliography
[11 [2] [3]

ISO 5348:1987, Mechanical
IEC 68-1:1988, Environmental

vibration and shock -- Mechanical

mounting

of accelerometers, parts. parameters and their

testing -- Part 1: General and guidance, and subsequent conditions -- Part 1: Environmental

IEC 721-1:1990, Classification of environmental severities, and subsequent parts.

[41 HOLMBERG,R., EKMAN,G., SAN DSTROM,H. Comments
equipment. SveDeFo Report DS, Vol. 3, Stockholm, 1983.

on present

criteria

for vibration

sensitive

electronic

9

bureau

of Indian

Standards
institution established under the Bureau

61S is a statutory harmonious

of Mian

Standards

Act, 1986 to promote certification of

development

of the activities

of standardization,

marking

and quality

goods and attending Copyright 61S has the copyright of implementing designations. Review

to connected

matters in the country.

of all its publications.

No part of these publications details, such as symbols

may be reproduced and sizes, type

in any

`" "

form without the prior permission the standard, Enquiries

in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of necessary or grade BIS. be addressed to the Director (Publications),

relating to copyright

of Indian

Standards
to standards a standard as the need arises on the basis is reaffirmed of comments. Standards are

Amendments also reviewed

are issued periodically;

along with amendments

when such review indicates of the latest amendments Monthly Additions'. or

that no changes

are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. should ascertain that they are in possession

Users of Indian Standards

edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Catalogue' and `Standards:
This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot:

No. ME 28 (0804).

Amendments
Amend No.

Issued Since Publication
Text Affected

Date of Issue

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 website: Telephones 23230131, 23233375,23239402 Regional Central Offices: : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 : 1/1 4 C.I.T. Scheme Vll M, V.i.p. Road, Kankurgachi KOLKATA 700054 : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 www.bis.org. in Telephones 23237617 { 23233841 23378499,23378561 { 23378626,23379120 2603843 { 2609285 22541216,22541442 { 22542519,22542315 28329295,28327858 { 28327891,28327892 COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD.

Eastern

Northern

Southern

: C.I.T. Campus,

IV Cross Road, CHENNAI

600113

Western

: Manakalaya, E9 MlDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093 AHMEDABAD. GHAZIABAD. NALAGARH. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR.

Branches:

GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. VISAKHAPATNAM.

Printed at Simco Printing Press, Delhi

