1S 6756:2001 IEC 1187 (1993)

/ndian Standard ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONIC MEASURING EQUIPMENT -- DOCUMENTATION (First Revision )

ICS 17.220.20

@ BIS 2001

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

IN DI AN

STAN

DARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

August2001

Price Group 7

Electronic

Measuring

Instruments,

Systems and Accessories

Sectional Committee,

LTD 21

NATIONAL This Indian measuring (lEC) was Measuring Electronics

FOREWORD Standard (First Revision) which is identical with IEC 1187 (1993) `Electrical and electronic equipment -- Documentation' issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation of Electronic Instruments, Systems and Accessories Sectional Committee and approval of the and Telecommunication Division Council. and electronic

This standard applies to the technical documentation to be supplied with electrical measuring equipment for use in laboratories and for testing and servicing.

This standard was first published in 1972 and was identical to IEC 278 (1968) `Electronic measuring equipment -- Documentation'. IEC 278 has been withdrawn and replaced by IEC 1187 (1993). In view of the technological advances at the international level this Indian Standard is being revised to align it with the latest international practices. The text of the IEC has been approved as suitable for publication as Indian Standard without deviations. Certain conventions are, however, not identical to those used in Indian Standards. Attention is particularly drawn to the following: a) Wherever the words `International read as `Indian Standard'. Standard' appear referring to this standard, they should be

b)

Comma (,) has been used as a decimal marker while in Indian Standards, is to use a point (.) as the decimal marker.

the current practice

CROSS REFERENCES In the adopted standard, reference appears to certain International Standards for which Indian Standards also exist. The corresponding Indian Standards which are to be substituted in their place are listed below along with their degree of equivalence for the editions indicated: International Standard IEC 68 Environmental testing Corresponding Indian Standard IS 9000 Basic environmental procedures for electrical electronics items testing and Degree of Equivalence Technically equivalent Identical

IEC 359 (1987) Expression of the of electrical and performance electronic measuring equipment IEC 414 (1973) Safety requirements for indicating and measuring recording electrical instruments and their accessories

IS 9176: 2001 Expression of the performance of electrical and electronic measuring equipment (under print) a) IS 9249 (Part 1) : 1979 Safety requirements for indicating and recording electrical measuring instru-ments and their accessories: Part 1 Common safety requirements for instruments IS 9249 (Part 2) : 1982 Safety requirements for indicating and recording electrical measuring instru-ments and their accessories: Part 2 Safety requirements for instruments using a mains supply

1
Technically equivalent

b)

1

(Continued

on third cover)

Indian Standard ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONIC MEASURING EQUIPMENT -- DOCUMENTATION (First Revision )
1 Scope and object to be supplied with electrical

IS 6756:2001 IEC 1187(1993)

This standard applies to the technical documentation electronic measuring equipment for use in laboratories. The object of this standard is: to achieve an acceptable level of uniformity,

and

to prevent the use of incorrect expressions, to determine in general terms the basic contents and structure,

of the documentation supplied with the equipment in order to give the user sufficient information on installation, use, safety, application, technical specification, principle of operation, testing, servicing and lists of options, accessories and replaceable parts.
NOTE - This documentation may be contained in one manual or in a set of separate manuals covering the various topics. In the latter case, each volume should contain a list of contents of the other volumes.

2

Normative

references

The following normative documents contain provisions which, through reference in this text, constitute provisions of this International Standard. At the time of publication, the editions indicated were valid. All normative documents are subject to revision, and parties to agreements based on this International Standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent editions of the normative documents indicated below. Members of IEC and ISO maintain registers of currently valid International Standards. lEC 68, ErwironrnerW I EC 113, Diagrams, IEC 359: 1987, equipment testing charts, tab/es of the performance of electrical and electronic measuring

Expression

I EC 414: 1973, Safety requirements instruments and their accessories IEC 417:1973, Graphical the single sheets IEC 617, Graphical symbok symbols

for indicating

and

recording

electrical

measuring

for use on equipment.

Index, survey

and compilation

of

for diagrams compatibility for industrial-process measurement and control

IEC 801, Electromagnetic equipmerd

1

IS 6756:2001 IEC 1187(1993) IEC 950: 1991, Safety equipment of information technology equipment, including electrical business

I EC 1010-1: 1990, Safety requirements for electrical and laboratory use - Part 1: General requirements Amendment 1 (1992)

equipment

for measurement,

control,'

CISPR 11: 1990, Limits and methods of measurement of electromagnetic disturbance characteristics of industrial, scientific and medical (ISM) radio-frequency equipment

CISPR 14:1985, Limits and methods of measurement of radio interference characteristics of household electrical appliances, portable tools and similar electrical apparatus

ISO 216: 1975, A and B series

Writing

paper

and certain

classes

of printed

matter

-

Trimmed

sizes

-

3

Definitions

For the purposes of this International Standard the following definitions apply. Some of these definitions have been taken from the International Electrotechnical Vocabulary (IEV), from IEC 359, or from other applicable IEC standards. 3.1 address: operations. A unique code identifying the equipment when it is used in remote control

3.2 assembly: A number of basic parts or subassemblies, joined together to perform a specified function.

or any combination

thereof,

3.3 adjustments: specification.

The

process

of making

the

equipment

conform

to its technical

3.4 block diagram: A relatively simple diagram to facilitate understanding of the principle of operation. It is a diagram in which the main functional units of the equipment (or part thereof) together with the mutual relationships between them are represented by symbols or simple figures without necessarily showing all the connections.

3.5 calibration: All the operations for the purpose of determining the values of the errors and, if necessary, other metrological properties of a measuring instrument. After calibration and possible adjustment, the residual errors can be noted to produce correction values if required. 3.6 circuit diagram: An explanatory diagram intended to facilitate the understanding the details of the operation of the equipment. It shows by symbols all the components the equipment (or part(s) of the equipment) and all their interconnections, particularly the electrical connections. of of all

IS 6756:2001 IEC 1187 (1993) 3.7 communication protocol: A formal statement of the procedures (a set of rules) that are adopted by the interconnected equipment to ensure an orderly and correct transfer of information between the devices. 3.8 component location iiiustration: A diagram or photograph in which the eiements are displayed in a possibly simplified, but weli recognizable form, showing their piaces in the equipment or subassemblies. 3.9 correction tabie or graph: Tabie or graph containing data which provide for corrections on equipment dispiays, taking into account errors found during calibration, but which shail be disregarded when assigning a ciass index (accuracy) to the equipment.

3.10 data bus (instrumentation bus): A set of signai iines used by an interface system to which a number of instruments or parts of an instrument are connectable and over which messages can be carried. 3.11 preset vaiue (defauit): The initial settings exampie, after a `power-on" or a generai clear action. of the equipment or function, for

3.12 device dependent codes: The set of males, specific to a given intended for sending and receiving messages to and from the outside worid.

equipment,

3.13 error codes: Codes indicating the possibie causes of abnormai operation malfunctioning of the equipment, programming errors or measuring errors.

such as

fiow chart: A graphicai representation of the definition, anaiysis, or soiution of a 3.14 problem in which symbois are used to represent the operation, data fiow, sequence of events and decisions reiated to the operation of the equipment.

3.15 functional drawing of moving parts: A drawing in which, by means of perspective and/or conventional pictures, symbols, signs and inscriptions, the functioning of the moving parts and mechanisms beionging to the equipment is identified and, where necessary, expiained. 3.16 instruction card: A card iisting, in condensed manuai and, if applicable, remote controi. form, the operating instructions for

3.17 interface: A common boundary between one system and another, or between of a system, through which information is conveyed.

parts

3.18 manuai controi: A method whereby the equipment is set by means of its iocai (front or rear panei) controis in order to enabie it to perform its tasks (aiso caiied iocai controi). 3.19 operating manuai: A technical document, which may be in more than one voiume, containing the information necessary for the proper operation and application of the equipment and for a basic understanding of its functions.

3

IS 6756:2001 IEC 1187(1993) 3.20 options: Additional features specified or ordered separately. or ftinctions of the equipment which have to be

3.21 preventive maintenance: Routine work carried out on the equipment - according to the manufacturer's instructions - in order to keep it in good working condition.

3.22 programmable equipment: Measuring equipment which performs specified operations on command from the system and may transmit the results of the performed function to the system. 3.23 remote control: A method whereby the equipment interface connection in order to enable it to perform its tasks. is programmable via its

3.24 repair: Work carried out on equipment which is no longer functioning, or which no longer complies with its specification, with the purpose of restoring its specified performance. 3.25 service manual: A technical document, which may be in more than one volume, containing the information necessary for both maintenance and repair of the equipment.

3.26 signature analysis: A technique which generates compressed, normally four-digit, codes, called signatures, of the digital data flow at logic nodes, facilitating accurate, logical fault finding. 3.27 soft control: A method of setting the operating conditions of the equipment the control panel indirectly by interaction with internally stored software. from

3.28 status reporting: A method of reporting the internal states, conditions of the equipment to the system controller. 3.29 storage: The action of keeping the equipment, in an inoperative state under specified conditions. its accessories

and errors

and the spare parts

3.30 storage (long-term): Any storage of equipment, its accessories, and the spare parts which requires some preliminary and/or continuous observation of special protective measures stated by the manufacturer. 3.31 syntax: Set of rules stating the arrangement of the data sent via the databus.

3.32 system (measuring achieve a given objective.

system):

A set of interconnected

instruments

combined

to

3.33 wiring diagram: A diagram intended to show the internal and/or external connections of the equipment (or part of it). It may show the layout of the different parts and accessories such as connectors and the wiring between them.

4

IS 6756:2001 IEC 1187(1993) 4 4.1 4.1.1 General requirements documents manual (clause 5)

Mandatory Operating

The operating manual is a mandatory document to be supplied with each device. 4.1.2 Packing list and/or if it is

The packing list shall indicate all separate packages with details of the accessories parts tramspofied together with the equipment, including the operating manual enclosed in the package. 4.1.3 Correction tables and graphs (if applicable)

Correction tables and graphs may be included in the operating manual or may be supplied as separate documents. 4.2 4.2.1 Optional Service documents manual (clause 6) in the operating manual or may be available

The service separately. 4.2.2

information

may be included

Instruction/programming

card be provided, preferably

A brief instruction or programming card (local/remote) may attached to the instrument, to give basic operator guidance.

5

Detailed

contents

of the operating

manual

The operating manual shall contain the following information, according to the nature and complexity of the equipment. The preferred sequence is given below.

5.1 5.1.1

Introduction Title page release and full name of the equipment.

Type (model) number, version number, software Manufacturer's name and address. 5.1.2 Illustration(s)

Optional photograph or drawing.

5

IS 6756:2001 IEC 1187 (1993) 5.1.3 Safety precautions and procedures

A clear statement shall be given of all measures for safeguarding personnel and all precautions to be obseryed so that the user will not accidentally damage the equipment. All safety measures to be observed before, during and after using the equipment, its accessories or any other connected part or equipment, in order to avoid electric shocks, other hazards or any damage, shall be clearly described.

Safety warnings may have to be repeated such danger may occur.

in corresponding

sections

of the manual

where

Attention shall be directed to any danger, and to the corresponding warning symbols and inscriptions on the equipment. Pictures or suitable representations of these symbols shall be given and explained. Where possible, symbols as defined in IEC 417 shall be used.

The operation

and use of any protective

device shall be described. standards, for example, IEC 1010-1, IEC 414,

Reference shall be made to IEC safety IEC 950, etc. Instructions regarding the handling materials used shall be given.

and safe disposal

or safe storage

of any hazardous

5.1.4

Amendments

In the case of functional or specification amendments it is preferable to produce a new edition of the manual. If this is not practicable, separate sheets may be used, which are clearly marked (e.g. with a different colour), and added to the manual. In this instance, it is advisable to add a stick-on label to the front cover of the manual, drawin~ attention to date, version number and software release of the amendment.

5.1.5

Table of contents

and index If useful, an alphabetical index

Optional, depending on the length of the documentation. can be provided at the end of the manual. 5.2 General description

A brief description should be given of the capabilities of the equipment, or functions for which it is intended and relevant additional features.

the measurements

Depending on the complexity of the equipment, based on one or more functional block diagrams, flow charts, state diagrams or other illustrations, a description of the equipment should be given in sufficient detail to allow a skilled user to understand the basic principles of operation.

IS 6756:2001 IEC 1187(1993) 5.3 5.3.1 Preparations Initial material and locking devices used for use

Instructions shall be given for the removal of packaging for protecting the equipment during transportation.

A guideline for initial inspection and damage detection shall also be given.

5.3.2

Assembly the equipment when its parts are transported

Directions shall be given for assembling separately.

If applicable, instructions shall also be given accessories as well as the loading of software.

for

the

fitting

of optional

units

and

If necessary, directions shall be given on the necessary space and access to connectors. 5.3.3 Supply voltage

clearance

for ventilation,

working

Mains supply: Instructions shall be given for setting the mains voltage. Battery supply: The type of battery and method of insettion shall be given. For rechargeable batteries, information such as charge/discharge time, recharging intervals, overcharging/discharging danger, methods of determining charge status, etc. should be provided.

Information shall be given about the type and characteristics replacement. 5.3.4 Installation (grounding),

of fuses

used

and their

Further installation instructions, such as earthing cable connections shall be given.

power supply

and signal

5.3.5

Functional

verification use of special test

Instructions equipment),

shall be given for a functional check (without the including testing of the remote operation (if applicable).

7

IS 6756:2001 IEC 1187 (1993) 5.3.6 Calibration successive calibrations (if applicable) shall be stated. on the traceability to measurement standards and on the skill

The time interval between Information shall be included of personnel. Instructions 5.3.7

shall be given for carrying

out correct

calibration.

Storage after storagq under limiting conditions, as well as the recovery time,

Measures to be taken shall also be stated. 5.4 5.4.1 Operating General

instructions

This part shall outline

the procedures

and precautions

necessary

for correct operation.

Because much equipment possesses the capability of both manual and remote control, it is possible to merge the operation commands for manual as well as remote control in the functional (operational) description. It should be noted, however, that all controls (or functions) which do not have a manual counterpart (e.g. status reporting, addressing etc.), should be described clearly as defined in 5.4.3:

Detailed instructions software. Information

shall

be given

on the

loading

and

use of additional

functional

shall be given about reset functions and default control settings.

5.4.2

Manual

control

This section shall identify, and briefly describe, the positions and functions of the various panel controls, indicators and connectors, preferably by means of illustrations.

Detailed information shall be given on how to use the equipment for each function. possible, examples shall be included of the various possible settings and functions.

Where

A list of the various errors and the meaning of the error codes generated shall be given, together with the actions to be taken. Instructions shall be given on how to install and operate, own manual.

by the equipment

options which do not have their

IS 6756:2001 IEC 1187(1993) 5.4.3 Remote control

This part shall specify the various possible interfaces which can be used for remote control of the equipment. For interfaces not adequately defined in International Standards, the manual shall briefly describe the positions and pin allocation of all the connectors used. All information shall be given about the interface aspects for hardware as well as software (for example, addresses, communication protocols, switch settings, defaults, etc).

Reference

shall be made to International

Standards,

if available. used. A

Detailed data shall be given on the device dependent codes and the coding syntax complete list of the various commands and their meaning shall be included.

Elaborate examples also be given.

for sending

programming

instructions

and retrieving

information

shall

A complete description of status reporting e.g. operation functional error, measurement error, etc shall be given. Any other system 5.5 Preventive aspect not covered in the above paragraphs

completed,

command

error,

shall be given.

maintenance

This part shall give instructions on preventive maintenance (if applicable) to ensure proper operation of the equipment, including periodic calibration and adjustment. (Reference may be made to the service manual.) 5.6 Technical specification

5.6.1

General

This part shall specify the properties of the equipment. The specifications shall be given in accordance with IEC 359 and/or other IEC publications including product standards for the particular type of equipment. This section shall include the following statement: "Only values with tolerances are guaranteed data. Values without tolerances are for information only. or limits

9

IS 6756:2001 IEC 1187(1993) 5.6.2 Characteristics performance

Functional

The specification of the equipment shall include the information indicated below, with a stated range of influence quantities and the related tolerances and accuracies:

-

functions and ranges; reference conditions;

stability, drift, linearity, ,etc; period of time for which the accuracy is valid; parameters for remote control; for the user.

other data of importance Safety Reference to IEC publications IEC 414 and IEC 950. General data weight,

or other international

documents,

for example,

IEC 1010-1,

Such as dimensions, (if critical), etc. 5.6.3 Environmental

power requirements

(mains and battery),

operating

position

conditions information concerning the use of the

The operating manual shall include all relevant equipment under the following conditions: climatic conditions such as temperature,

humidity, pressure (altitude)

(see IEC 68);

mechanica/

propedies

such as vibration, shock, drop (see IEC 68); (see IEC 801); (see CISPR 11 or 14). if

electromagnetic electromagnetic

compatibility interference

The above conditions should be defined in such a way that they can be verified, required, by reference to the above lEC/CISPR publications. 5.6.4 Storage and transport locking devices.

Instructions shall be given for repackaging and reinserting conditions for storage and transportion shall be stated.

Any limiting

5.6.5

Accessories

and options and options, both supplied and available separately, shall be given.

A list of accessories

10

IEC 5.6.6 Sales and service and addresses shall be supplied (if necessary as a separate

IS 6756:2001 1187(1993)

A list of names

leaflet).

6

Detailed

contents

of the service

manual

The service manual, which is optional, is intended for quaiified users and, if provided, shaii contain, preferably in the sequence given beiow, the foiiowing information, according to the nature and complexity of the equipment. If the service manuai is separate from the operating manuai, the introducto~ inciude type (modei) number, version number, manufacturer, etc. part shouid

6.1 6.1.1

Introduction General

information about the circuits, construction, software and test programs which may be required when maintaining and repairing the equipment should be given, together with the necessary drawings. The service manuai must give a technical overview of the complete equipment, based on block diagrams, fiow charts and state diagrams or equivalents, including the functional description. Each basic circuit and, as far as necessary, each component, shaii be expiained. it will facilitate servicing if the manuai is so arranged that the service engineer can quickiy be ied to a fauity block and then has all information needed in one part of the manuai to repair that block. That also means that information (voltages, ievels, frequencies, impedances, waveforms, signatures, etc.) about signais entering or ieaving this block shail be available in the corresponding part of the manual. The service engineer shail, if possibie, be abie to find faults in a block and repair them without requiring detaiied information from other parts of the manual.

if computer-generated diagnostic programmed, for example, expert systems etc.,. are avaiiabie, the service manual shall supply information on how these can be utilized.

6.1.2

Amendments

in the case of functional or specification amendments it is preferable to produce a. new edition of the manuai. If this is not practicai, separate sheets may be used, which are cieariy marked (e.g. with a different coiour) and added to the manuai. in this instance it is advisabie to add a stick-on Iabei to the front cover of the manuai, drawing attention to date, version number and software release of the amendment.

11

IS 6756:2001
IEC 6.1.3 1187(1993) Table of contents and index If useful, an alphabetical index

Optional depending on the length of the documentation. can be provided at the end of the manual. 6.2 Safety instructions and procedures:

Safety precautions

A clear statement shall be given of all measures for safeguarding personnel and all precautions to be observed so that the service engineer will not accidentally damage the equipment. All safety measures to be observed before, during and after handling the equipment, its accessories or any other connected part or equipment, in order to avoid electric shocks, other hazards or any damage, shall be clearly described.

It may be necessary to repeat the safety instructions in the appropriate nual where such danger may arise.

sections of the ma-

Attention shall be drawn to any danger, and to the corresponding warning symbols and inscriptions on the equipment. Illustrations or suitable representations of these symbols shall be given and explained. Where possible, symbols as defined in IEC 417 shall be used. The operation and use of any protective device shall be described. Reference etc. shall be made to IEC safety standards such as IEC 1010-1, IEC 414, IEC 950,

Instructions shall be given for the handling hazardous material used.

and safe disposal

or safe

storage

of any

6.3

Dismantling

and reassembling shall be given: the

The following information

safety measures to be observed before dismantling and during work within dismantled equipment. A list of any special tools required shall be given;

how to obtain access to the interior of the equipment (method of disassembly) and how to remove subassemblies, functional parts or connectors while noting their location; how to reassemble parts and covers;

how to carry out non-electrical maintenance work such as cleaning and lubricating the moving parts, replacing air fifters (recommended solvents and lubricants should be specified); safety measures. to be observed after reassembling the equipment.

12

IEC 6.4 Performance verification and adjustment

IS 6756:2001 1187(1993)

The manual shall contain information on: how to verify that the equipment warm-up time (if relevant); the recommended characteristics connection for each verification stage; the sequence is within its specification, of the test equipment to taking be into aCCOUnt used and its

in which these measurements

shall be carried out;

what to do if the test result is outside the scope of specification; how to make adjustments. and adjustment

Because of their special importance to the service engineer, the legend points must be clearly marked on the component location illustrations.

A form for calibration provided. 6.5 Preventive

and/or

test results,

giving nominal values

and tolerances,

may be

(routine)

maintenance

In order to avoid premature failures, the service manual shall contain information on recommended time intervals between calibrations, scheduled maintenance and indications showing the necessity for maintenance (e.g. a preset mntrol turned fully one way may indicate that a particular component is near the end of its life).

Reference

can be made to the preventive

maintenance

section in the operating

manual.

6.6

Repair

Repair instructions shall be sufficiently complete to enable a qualified service engineer to carry out all repairs in a safe manner (see clause 6.2). The only exceptions are those repairs stipulated to be performed by the manufacturer or his authorized representative. This shall be emphatically stated in the service manual.

In order to meet the above requirements, Functional description

the following

information

shall be provided:

technical circuit description of each element repairable by the user, crossreferenced to schematics with values of voltages, waveforms, timing diagrams, etc. for normal operation of the equipment at all main points of the circuit diagrams; data bus connections between blocks given in a special drawing;

the function of all integrated circuits (including customized integrated circuits). This can be done, for example, by means of a simple block diagram with input and output signals indicated and commented.

13

IS 6756:2001 IEC 1187(1993)
Test equipment and tools characteristics of test equipment needed for servicing;

the essential

a list of all service and

kits required tools

or recommended; (e.g. hot-air pistols for changing surface-mounted

methods devices).

special

Methods

of trouble-shooting system, it shall be clearly stated which sort of location of faults;

when there is a built-in fault-reporting fault this system is able to indicate; trouble-shooting flowcharts

and/or tables for methodical

databus connections

with information for systematic

location of faulty blocks; of processors and other

methods and aids for verification LSI devices;

of the correct functioning and commands

accurate specification of addresses fault finding equipment, where feasible;

required when using automatic

when advanced fault-indicating equipment (e.g. functional trouble-shooters, signature analyzers, expert systems, etc.) can be used, all relevant information shall be easily accessible in the manual as well as support for understanding the results.

6.7

List of parts,

list of spare parts and replacement shall be given:

of parts

The following information

-

list of components with name, type number, description, values and rated tolerances; list of replaceable moving parts subject to wear or other failures;

� instructions for the replacement of components. If a component can only be replaced by an exact equivalent of the original one, and not by any other having the same characteristic function or rated value, this should be clearly stated, also indicating how such components can be obtained. If necessary, instructions should be given for the ageing of replacement components.

14

IS 6756:2001 IEC 1187(1993)
6.8 Schematics, flow charts and layout diagrams and to

In order to facilitate the understanding of the functional principles of the equipment make it easier for the service engineer, the service manual shall contain:

complete circuit diagrams with component values and/or functions; the functions of switches and adjustable components shall be marked on them adjacent to the components; complete wiring diagrams should be provided if they are necessary to assist in servicing. When a wiring colour code is used in cabling, this code should be indicated; flow charts or other graphical methods to explain the data paths and data flow;

illustrations of the location of components in the equipment (including those on printed circuit boards) by means of which any component, connection or test point can be easily found or identified; connections of units. 7 7.1 between separate units, if the circuit diagram is divided into a number

Presentation of the manual(s)
Cover and bindings

A size of A4 (or smaller, but in accordance with ISO 216) for the manuals is recommended. Where a separate service manual is provided, preference is for loose-leaf ring binders with four rings at the standard 8 cm. spacing, which enables pages to be added for easy changes or updating. The spine should be placed on the longer side. Wire or plastic bindings which allow the manual to be folded back at the spine may be used, in particular when there is no need for updating.

Where there is sufficient width, the title should be clearly shown on the spine.

The title should also appear visible through a window. 7.2 Pages

on the front cover, either directly

printed

on the cover or

All pages should carry a page number which is sequential the manual(s).

within each part and section of

The title of the manual (abbreviated if necessary) or other identification on every page of the documenf~s well as the related version number(s).

should be shown

15

IS 6756:2001 IEC 1187(1993)
In general, the page height should be not greater than that of A4. Larger diagrams can be accommodated on facing pages or on larger sheets folded to A4 ("fold-out"). If the diagram is on the outer extremity of the sheet, it can be consulted whilst reading the accompanying text elsewhere in the manual ("fold-clear").

It is advisable to include an amendment record sheet, a tear-off card for receiving further amendments and modifications and a set of cards for feedback information from the user to the manufacturer. 7.3 Diagrams, charts and tables to IEC 113 and IEC 617.

All diagrams 7.4

shall be drawn according

Illustrations can make a considerable contribution to the clarity of a text. should be

Illustrations Photographs incorporated 7.5

and line drawings (retouched and annotated as appropriate) in the text wherever they are likely to be of assistance.

Abbreviations list of the abbreviations used in the text or on the diagrams

If necessary, an explanatory should be included. 7.6 Contents list and index

When applicable, each manual shall begin with a table of contents which also lists diagrams, illustrations and tables. When the manual is divided into several volumes, each should include a table of contents of the other volumes.

If the manual contains an index, this should be placed at the back of the volume.

16

(Continued

from second cover) International Standard Corresponding Indian Standard IS 14700 (Part 4) Electromagnetic compatibility (EMC): Part 4 Testing and measurement techniques Degree of Equivalence Identical to IEC 61000-4

IEC 801 Electromagnetic compatibility for industrial-process measurement and control equipment (since withdrawn and replaced by IEC 61 000-4) CISPR 11 (1990) Limits and methods of measurement of electromagnetic disturbance characteristics of industrial, scientific and medical (ISM) radio-frequency equipment (since revised in 1997) CISPR 14 (1985) Limits and methods of measurement of radio interference characteristics of household electrical appliances, portable tools and similar electrical apparatus (since revised in 1993)

IS 6873 (Part 4) : 1999 Limits and methods of measurement of radio disturbance characteristics: Part 4 Industrial, scientific and medical (ISM) radio-frequency (first equipment revision) IS 6873 (Part 2) :1999 Limits and methods of measurement of radio disturbance characteristics: Part 2 Electrical motor-operated and thermal appliances for household and similar purpose electrical tools and electrical apparatus (first revision)

Identical to CISPR 11 (1997)

Identical to CISPR 14 (1993)

The concerned Technical Committee responsible for preparation of this standard has reviewed the provisions of the following International publications and has decided that they are acceptable for use in conjunction with this standard: IEC 113 IEC 417 (1973) Diagrams, charts, tables Graphical symbols for use on equipment. of single sheets Safety of information technology equipment, equipment (since revised in 1999) Index, survey and compilation

IEC 950 (1991)

including electrical

business

IEC 1010-1 (1 990)

Safety requirements for electrical equipment for measurement, and laboratory use -- Part 1: General requirements Writing paper and certain classes of printed matter -- Trimmed A and B series Standard has been retained while adopting

control

ISO 216:1975

sizes --

Only the English language text of the International Indian Standard.

it in this

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institutiorl established under the Bureau of/rtdkm Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyrighi of all its publications. No part of these publications maybe reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standardS as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Catalogue' and `Standards: Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. LTD 21 (1852).

Amendments Amend No.

Issued Since Publication Text Affected

Date of Issue

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones: 3230131,3233375,3239402 Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 : 1/14 C. I.T. Scheme Vll M, V. 1.P. Road, Kankurgachi CALCUTTA700054 : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone 3237617 3233841

{

Eastern

3378499,3378561 { 3378626,3379120 603843 { 602025 2350216,2350442 { 2351519,2352315 8329295,8327858 8327891,8327892

Northern

Southern:

C. 1.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113

Western

: Manakalaya, E9 MlDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MU MBA1400093

{

Branches

AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.
Rinted st : Rsbhat Offset Press, New Delhi-2

