Indian Standard 


verst aa at Rein gari — 
antes fagra 


am 5 fade ver fa at dant a fam 


Retaining Wall for Hill Areas — 
Guidelines 


Part 5 Construction of Cement Stone Masonry Walls 


ICS 93.020 


© BIS 2018 


ada AM SKİ 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
ө +в ач, 9 чете VHC APM, Чї feeet-110002 
мыны МАМАК BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


November 2018 Price Group 3 


Hill Area Development Engineering Sectional Committee, CED 56 


FOREWORD 


The Indian Standard (Part 5) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft was finalized by Hill 
Area Development Engineering Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 


Retaining walls are structures, which support the backfill and maintain the difference in elevation of the two 
ground surfaces. They are generally located at the toe of cut slopes on valley side of a hill road section or excavated 
platform. Retaining walls are effectively utilized to tackle the problems of landslide in hill areas by providing 
support to the hill slopes or cut slopes. 


In general, 1 m of extra width in filling and requiring retaining wall at the end may cost more than excavating the 
same width by cutting inside the hill. However, considering maintenance cost, progressive slope instability and 
environmental degradation resulting from unprotected excavation, the use of retaining walls becomes essential. 
This standard (Part 5) is therefore formulated to provide necessary guidelines for construction of cement stone 
masonry retaining walls for stability of hill slopes this standard is being published in different parts. The following 
parts have already been published: 


Part 1 : 1998 Selection of type of wall 

Part 2 : 1997 Design of retaining/breast walls 

Part3 : 1998 Construction of dry stone walls 

Part4 : 2018 Construction of banded dry stone masonry walls 


Other parts being formulated are: 


a) Construction of gabion walls, 

b) Construction of RCC crib walls, 

c) Design of RCC cantilever walls/buttressed walls/L-type walls, and 
d) Design and construction of reinforced earth retaining walls. 


Presently various types of retaining walls such as dry stone, gabion, banded dry stone, cement stone or other such 
retaining walls are preferred for heights up to 4 m. The choice of a particular wall is dependent on the nature of 
ground, available budget and availability of construction materials. In general, the cement stone retaining walls, if 
constructed properly, perform better in most of the terrain conditions. However, it is preferable to construct 
cement mortar masonry wall or RCC walls, when the height of retaining walls exceeds 4 m. 


In most cases, the failures of retaining walls, particularly cement stone masonry walls and RCC walls, are often 
resulted if the provisions of drainage are inadequate, especially during rains. Inadequate section of walls and poor 
quality construction are other reasons for failure of cement stone masonry walls. This standard (Part 5) therefore, 
provides suitable guidelines to the field engineers for construction of cement stone masonry retaining walls. Strict 
supervision is essential for long life of these types of walls. 


The composition of Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result ofa test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 14458 (Part 5) : 2018 


Indian Standard 


RETAINING WALL FOR HILL AREAS — GUIDELINES 
PART 5 CONSTRUCTION OF CEMENT STONE MASONRY WALLS 


1 SCOPE 


This standard (Part 5) deals with the construction 
aspects of cement stone masonry retaining walls. 


2 REFERENCE 


The following standard contains provision, which 
through reference in this text, constitute provision of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the edition 
indicated was valid. All standards are subject to revision 
and parties to agreements based on this standard are 
encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying 
the most recent edition of the standard indicated below: 


IS No. Title 
1123 : 1975 Method of identification of natural 
building stone (first revision) 
3 GENERAL 


3.1 A cement stone masonry retaining wall is a gravity 
wall, which shall be considered safe, if the following 
expected conditions of loading are satisfied: 


a) It shall be safe against overturning, 

b) The shear stress at the base shall be less than 
the shearing strength available, 

c) The pressure at the toe of the wall shall remain 
less than the safe bearing capacity of the 
foundation material, and 


d) No tensile stress develops at the heel. 


It may be assumed that there is adequate frictional bond 
between the cement stone layers from face to back and 
from top to base, so that entire section of the retaining wall 
acts as one integral unit. This can be achieved by suitable 
selection of stones and proper bonding with cement mortar. 


3.2 Retaining walls are not normally intended to support 
the soil behind it against the slope failures. They are 
primarily meant to support the active or passive earth 
pressure from the assumed failure wedge above the base 
of the wall. Separate treatment and specific design 
approaches are required to stabilize the existing or 
probable failure planes in addition to the retaining walls. 


3.3 The stability of retaining walls mainly depends upon 
the allowable bearing pressure of the foundation material, 
particularly under the toe. The compressive strength of well 
compacted natural soil is usually adequate to support 4 m 
to 6 m height of retaining walls. In case if the height is more 
or the foundation is weak, it is advisable to provide 
a 200- 300 mm thick RCC raft at the bottom of the retaining 
wall. The width of this raft can be suitably increased, if the 


foundation soil is not well compacted. For increasing the 
shear resistance between the raft and the ground below, a 
series of 10 mm to 16mm diameter steel bars shall be driven 
into the soil below RCC band up to a depth of 2 m at 
500 mm centre-to-centre using a jack hammer. The free 
end of the bars shall be tied to the reinforcements of the 
RCC raft. Further, it is advisable that the reinforcements 
from the raft shall penetrate into the lower two courses of 
the stone masonry part of the retaining wall for better 
bonding between the raft and the masonry section. 


The sliding at the base depends on the coefficient of friction 
between the wall base and the foundation soil. The total 
earth pressure above any level along the height of the 
retaining wall reduces parabolically from base upwards, 
whereas the wall thickness reduces linearly. Therefore, in 
most cases, the critical section in the wall is at the base. 


3.4 It should be assured that the quality of construction 
of the wall is maintained and does not suffer due to 
lack of supervision, non-availability of skilled workers, 
improper mixing of mortar, lack of post-construction 
curing and also sometimes paucity of water in the area. 


3.5 After excavation at the toe for road or terrace 
purpose, the construction of the retaining wall should 
be taken as early as possible with least time gap in order 
to prevent even minor de-stressing of cut slope material. 


3.6 A series of retaining walls, one above the other on 
an unstable or marginally stable slope results in 
accumulation of earth pressure on to the lower walls 
leading to destabilization of the slope (see Fig. 1). 


3.7 The causes of wall failure commonly noticed in the 
hills as a result of poor construction are: 


a) Differential settlement of the foundation 
during rains, 

b) Poor bonding of masonry stones within the wall, 

c) Roots of big trees pushing the wall from 
behind, 

d) Designed section not fully adopted during 
construction, 

e) Poor backfill material and inadequate 
compaction, 

f) Not providing specified inverted filters in the 
backfill, 

g) Not providing weep holes at all or improper 
design of weep holes leading to high pore 
water pressure in the back fill, and 

h) Lack of toe protection for walls. 


IS 14458 (Part 5) : 2018 


Fic. 1 DESTABILIZATION OF SLOPE BY SERIES OF RETAINING WALLS 


4 MATERIAL 


Stones, the main material required for the construction 
of cement stone masonry retaining walls, are generally 
available in large quantity in hills. To select and utilize 
them for their satisfactory performance, it shall be 
necessary to know the various properties which can be 
determined according to relevant Indian Standards. The 
strength of rocks depends on its mineral constituents, 
which form the basis of classification and identification 
of rocks. Identification of stones,may be done in 
accordance with IS 1123. In general, fresh or fairly fresh 
igneous rocks like granite, syenite, charnockite, basalt, 
etc, form good host rocks for masonry stones. Other 
rock types like quartzite, well lithified sandstones, 


limestones, massive granitic gneisses and other such 
hard rocks can also be used as masonry stones. 


5 BASE SLOPE 


An inward slope of the base provides good keying of the 
wall into the hill and also helps to reduce the toe pressure, 
besides greatly increasing the sliding strength of the wall 
at the base (see Fig. 2). A minimum inward slope of 
1 (Vertical) in 6 (Horizontal) in the base shall be provided 
and it shall not be more than 1 (Vertical) in 3 (Horizontal). 
Base slope is very effective in seismic stability of walls. 


6 STONE WORK 


Fresh to fairly fresh rough rectangular flat stones are 
more preferred as they give better contact and friction 


HEIGHT OF WALL 


H= 


TOE DRAIN 


SURFACE 


IS 14458 (Part 5) : 2018 


an ATZ 
a ATA 
n WTA Il 
Y KL? РУ, ol _ 
20° -25° 
“IN "ıl 
— NATURAL , 


SOIL 


Fic. 2 TYPICAL SKETCH OF RETAINING WALL WITH BACKFILL MATERIAL AND THE ToP LAYER 


at joints. However, the available boulders can be shaped 
into rectangular pattern and used. There shall be no 
dumping of stones. Stones shall be hand placed tight 
with proper bonding of cement around the stones. The 
masonry stones used for construction shall have a 
maximum size of 300 mm x 300 mm x 200 mm with 
a weight of about 40 kg and the minimum size of 
100 mm x 100 mm x 200 mm with a weight of about 
5 kg. The largest dimension, that is, the length shall be 
placed across the length of the retaining wall for 
maximum stability. The stones may be placed row wise 
with suitable bonding of cement mortar. Where the 
stones are not available, cement masonry blocks of 
suitable strength may be used for construction. 


7 PLACEMENT OF BACKFILL 
The backfill behind the wall shall consist of inverted 


filter for a thickness of 700 mm to 800 mm. The inverted 
filter shall have materials ranging in size from boulder 
to sand, with boulders placed immediately behind the 
wall and sand towards the hill side. The filter should 
consist of three zones: about 300 mm thick layer of 
small boulders (30 mm to 40 mm in size) close to the 
wall, 200 mm to 250 mm thick gravel fill (5 mm 
to 10 mm in size) in the middle and 200 mm to 250 mm 
thick coarse sand (2 mm to 4 mm in size) further inside. 
The material of inverted filter should be properly 
packed behind the retaining wall in layers of 200 mm 
to 300 mm to cover the whole height, leaving about 
500 mm to 700 mm space towards the top of the 
retaining wall. On the top close to the surface, natural 
soil or impervious clayey soil shall be placed and 
compacted well to prevent ingress of surface water 
directly into the filter. The surface material should be 


IS 14458 (Part 5) : 2018 


filled in such a way that it forms a minimum angle of 
10° or more. Grass or other green plantation may be 
grown on the top slope surface. The inverted filter is 
essentially required as it will help to drain out the 
subsurface water. A typical sketch of retaining wall with 
backfill material and the top layer is shown in Fig. 2. 


8 DRAINAGE 


The seepage water collected in the backfill has to be 
drained out safely without causing excessive pore 
pressure, which may destabilize the retaining wall. In 
order to efficiently drain out the sub-surface water, a 
series of weep holes of 80 mm - 100 mm size should 
be provided in the wall at a spacing of 1.0 m - 1.5 m с/с 
and in a staggered pattern. The weep holes should be 
inclined down towards the valley at gradients of about 
10° to 15°. Preferably, the weep holes should be made 
out of PVC/GI pipes and inserted in between the stones 
during construction of the retaining wall. The bottom 
most row should be located as close as possible to the 
ground and not more than100 mm above the ground. 
The PVC pipes shall end exactly at the back surface of 
retaining walls and shall not extend into the backfill. 
The inner free end of the pipe shall be provided with 
two layers of wire meshes, coarse and fine wire meshes, 
to prevent movement of backfill material in to the pipe. 


9 TOE PROTECTION 


If the retaining wall is located on the hill side end of 
road/terrace, a 500 mm size curved toe drain (see Fig. 2) 
shall be provided with a gradient of | (vertical) : 20 
(horizontal). This will help to collect the drained water 
through the pipe and safely dispose it off. However, if 
the wall is located on the valley side end of the terrace 
or no toe drain is provided, the toe of retaining wall 
should be suitably protected following anyone of the 
methods suggested in Fig. 3, as otherwise, the toe 
erosion may lead to destabilization of the wall. 


10 APPROACH TO DESIGN OF RETAINING 
WALLS 


The level of efforts required for designing retaining 
walls are different depending on the resources available. 
However, depending upon the height of retaining walls, 
the following approaches can be used. 


10.1 Design Consideration 


The retaining walls up to 3 m height can be designed 
by the following thumb rule: 


a) Top width = 0.50 m, and 
b) Base width = 0.65 to 0.70 times the height of 
walls. 


For heights more than 3 m and less than 8 m, the walls 
can be constructed using standard designs or drawings, 
provided the foundation conditions are within the 


maximum pressure indicated in the standard design. 
The standard design of cement stone masonry wall for 
varying heights of 3 m, 6 m and 8 m is given in Table 1. 
It is generally safe to construct this type of walls up to 
5.0 m, although in exceptional conditions, these may 
be constructed up to 8.0 m. This standard design is 
based on Coloumb’s Wedge analysis. The wall design 
shall provide for inclined front face and near vertical 
back face. It should be ensured that the backfill is of 
good quality following the specifications as indicated 
in 7. 


The foundation pressure must not exceed the safe bearing 
capacity of foundation material. The specifications as 
indicated for different heights of retaining walls shall 
vary under the following conditions: 


a) The backfill is fair or poor and the 
specifications do not follow as indicated in 7. 

b) Free drainage can be achieved following the 
guidelines indicated in 8. If the specifications 
as indicated in 8 are not followed, it may lead 
to build-up of pore water pressures at the back 
of retaining wall leading to change in the 
specifications of design of retaining walls. 


The above dimensions also include the effect of seismic 
forces. 


Table 1 Standard Design of Cement Stone 
Masonry Retaining Walls 
(Clause 10.1) 


SI Height Top Width Base Width 
No. m m m 

a) (2) (3) (4) 

i) 3 0.50 1.95-2.10 
ii) 6 0.65 3.90-4.20 
iii) 8 0.65 5.20-5.60 


NOTE — The backfill should consist of sandy gravel type of 
materials having good drainage properties. 


10.2 Depth of Foundation 


The depth of foundation ofthe retaining walls shall be 
kept at 0.50 m for walls up to 3.0 m in height and 0.75 m 
for heights more than 3.0 m. 


10.3 Semi-Empirical Designs and Theoretical 
Method of Designs 


The field conditions outside those covered by standard 
designs or drawings need to be checked in detail. 
Simplified design methods based empirical values 
obtained from observed performance or standard text 
books can be used for more effective designs. 
Moreover, various theories and methods for the analysis 
of earth pressure and detailed design are available in 
books related to geotechnical engineering. Computer 
softwares are also available, which can be effectively 
used for better analysis and designs. 


IS 14458 (Part 5) : 2018 


FALLING RAIN WATER 


| 
WALL WITH TOE 
BUILT AS PART 
OF WALL | 
| 
ТОЕ WALL TOE BUILT SEPARATELY / 
h SERVES AS SUPPORT // 
TO WALL / 


OIL AND SOFT ROCK 


MAY ERODE OR CREEP AWAY 


Fic. 3 ToE PROTECTION FOR RETAINING WALLS 


IS 14458 (Part 5) : 2018 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Hill Area Development Engineering Sectional Committee, CED 56 


Organization 


Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 


Advance Technology & Engineering Services, New Delhi 


Building Materials & Technology Promotion Council, New Delhi 


Central Public Works Department, Shillong 


Central Soil & Materials Research Station, New Delhi 


Central Water Commission, New Delhi 


CSIR-Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


CSIR-Central Institute of Mining & Fuel Research, Roorkee 


CSIR - Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 


Defence Terrain Research Laboratory (DRDO), New Delhi 
Department of Science & Technology, New Delhi 
Directorate General of Border Roads, New Delhi 


G B. Pant Institute of Himalayan Environment Development, Almora 
Geological Survey of India, Kolkata 


Housing & Urban Development Corporation Ltd, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Remote Sensing, Dehradun 


Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 


Indian Metrological Department, New Delhi 


Konkan Railway Corporation, Mumbai 
Maccaferri Environment Solution Pvt Ltd, Gurugram 


National Highway Authority of India, New Delhi 


National Hydroelectric Power Corporation Ltd, Hepali 
National Institute of Hydrology, Roorkee 


Rail Vikas Nigam Ltd, Rishikesh 

SJVN Ltd, Shimla 

Snow Avalanche Study and Establishment (DRDO), Chandigarh 
THDC India Ltd, Rishikesh 

Wadia Institute of Himalayan Geology, Dehradun 

BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 
Dr R. ANBALAGAN (Chairman) 
Dr V. M. SHARMA 
Suri J. К. PRASAD 


SHRI SHEO PRASAD SINGH 


Suri PREM CHAND MATHUR (Alternate) 


DR MANIsSH GUPTA 
Suri Hari Dev (Alternate) 


Director HCD (NW & S) 


Director (SARDAR SAROVAR) (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHOK KUMAR 
Suri Asay CHAURASIA (Alternate) 


Dr R. К. Сок: 
Suri ANIL Swarup (Alternate) 


Dr KISHOR KUMAR 
DR PANKAJ Gupta (Alternate) 


Dr L. K. SINHA 
SHRI BHOOP SINGH 


Bric V. S. KATTARYA 
Bric R. K. SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI KIREET KUMAR 


Suri M. S. Bopas 
Dr T. B. Goshal (Alternate) 


CHAIRMAN AND MANAGING DIRECTOR 


Dr P. K. CHAMPATI Ray 
Dr AJANTA GOSVAMI (Alternate ) 


Dr M. М. VILADKAR 
DR MAHENDRA SINGH (Alternate) 


Dr O. Р. MISHRA 
Dr Н. S. MANDAL (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJESH AGARWAL 
SHRIMATI MINI KORULLA 


DR RAM KUMAR 
Suri R. P. SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI S. MURUGAPPAN 


Suri К. D. SINGH 
Dr SupHiR KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI Sumit JAIN 

SHRI A. К. CHADHA (Alternate) 
CoL Р. MATHUR 

Suri T. S. ROUTELA 


DR S. K. BARTARYA 


Suri SANJAY Pant, Head and Scientist ‘F’ (Civil Engg) 
[Representating Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI Manos KUMAR RAJAK 
Scientist ‘C’ (Civil Engg), BIS 


6 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 56 (10719). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme УП M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 26 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


