**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 4043 (1969) : Recommendations for Symbolic Designation of 
Direction of Closing and Faces of Doors, Windows and 
Shutters [CED 11: Doors, Windows and Shutter] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS i 4friJ . 1961 

Reaffirmed 2001 ) 



Indian Standa 

RECOMMENDATIONS FOR 

SYMBOLIC II ON OF DIRECTION 

OF CLOSING I FACES OF DOOK 

WINDOWS AND SHUTTERS 

( Sctnd lUprim MAY LflBG ) 



IDC 69i0aa-5?OO3.6t 



us 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
MANAK BHAVAN. fl BAHADUR SHAH ZAJ=AR MAKG 
«." DELHI Hffljftl 

Gr 3 



IS: 4043- 1969 

Indian Standard 

RECOMMENDATIONS FOR 

SYMBOLIC DESIGNATION OF DIRECTION 

OF CLOSING AND FACES OF DOORS, 

WINDOWS AND SHUTTERS 

Doors, Windows and Shutters Sectional Committee, BDC 1 1 

Chairman 

SHRI T. S. NaRAYANA RAO 

Members 

Shri B, D. Ahuja 

Shri K, R. Jam ( Alternate) 
«Shri R. M. Chaudhri 

Shri J. K. Anand ( Alternate) 
Deputy Director Standards 

( Architecture ) 
ShriR.D.Gautam 
Shri Ghulam Qadir 

Deputy Manager ( Alternate ) 
Honorary Secretary 
Shri M, J. Jal 

Shri G. K. Datar ( Alternate ) 
&hriG. R. Jolly 
Da Joseph George 

Shri T. N. Gupta ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. T. Kansb 
Shri B. K. Khaitan 
Shri A. N. Khira 

Shri K. Vbnugopal ( Alternate ) 
Shri L. S. Kumawat 
Shri K. S* Lauly 
Managing Director 

Shri K. G. Salvi ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. J. Masani 
Shri J. S. Mathabu 

Shri G. M. Mehta 

Shri R. L. Chadha ( Alternate) 



In personal capacity ( 9 Mahatma Gandhi Road, 
Bangalore' 1 ); and The Institution of Engineers 
( India ), Calcutta 



National Buildings Organization, New Delhi 
Indian Aluminium Go Ltd, Calcutta 
Ministry of Railways ( Railway Board ) 



Albion Plywood Co Ltd, Calcutta 
J & K Industries Ltd, Srinagar 

Indian Metal Window Association, Bombay 
Godrej & Boyce Mfg Ltd, Bombay 

Builders' Association of India, Bombay 
Central Building Research Institute 
Roorkee 



fCSIR) 



Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals 
Andamans X imber Industries Ltd, Calcutta 
Jayanand Khira & Co Private Ltd, Calcutta 
j 

Engineer-in-Chief *s Branch, New Delhi 
Indian Plywood Manufacturing Co Ltd, Dandeli , 
Hindustan Housing Factory Ltd, New Delhi 

Forest Research Institute and Colleges, Dehra Dun 
Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 
Standard Rolling Shutters and Engineering Works 

Pvt Ltd, Bombay 



( Continued on page 2 ) 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 



IS: 4043- 1969 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri S. K, Muixick Hopes Metal Window ( India ) Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri S. K. Bharoava ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. K. Nag Federation of Indian Plywood and Panel Industry, 

New Delhi 
Shri Thomas Paul ( AUerncie ) 
Shbi K. B. Pabkkh Mysore Commercial Union Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri A. K. Ramachandra Indian Plywood Manufacturers' Research Association, 

Bangalore 
Shri N. Venkataraman ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. Sankarakrikhnan Kutty Flush Doors and Furniture Co Pvt Ltd, 

Madras 
Shri C. S. Dorairaja ( Alternate ) 
Senior Abchitegt B (1) Central Public Works Department 

Shbi J. D, Shastbi Indian Institute of Architects, Bombay 

Shri C. D. Sharma ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. R. Sunheram Man Industrial Corporation Ltd, Jaipur 

Shri K. R. Ananthaswamy ( Alternate ) 
Shbi H. Thomoson Plywood Products, Sitapur 

Shri G. W* M. Whittle ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. V, Viswanathan Diana Rolling Shutters and Engineering Works, 

Calcutta 
Shri R. Naoabajan, Director General, ISI ( Ex-oJficie Member ) 



Director ( Civ Engg ) 



Secretary 

Shbi J, Venkataraman 

Assistant Director ( Civ Engg ), ISI 



IS 1 4043*. 196* 

Indian Standard 

RECOMMENDATIONS FOR 

SYMBOLIC DESIGNATION OF DIRECTION 

OF CLOSING AND FACES OF DOORS, 

WINDOWS AND SHUTTERS 

©/FOREWORD 

Q.l This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 6 September 1969, after the draft finalized by the Doors, Windows and 
Shutters Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineer- 
ing Division Council* 

0.2 Hardware rotating components, like hinges and hinge-pins, pivots, or 
components for locking ana closing, like bolts and locks used on doors, 
windows or shutters, are not identical; their form depending on whether 
they are used on leaves closing in one direction or the other and, fre- 
quently, on their position on the various faces. The structure of these 
components itself differs often with the kind of hardware. 

The purpose of this standard is to facilitate the trade of these compo- 
nents by specifying a standard convention to identify the direction of rota- 
tion of the leave of a door, window or shutter and to provide designations 
and symbols^accordingly which are unambiguous, avoiding the use of such 
terms is s left hand * and * right hand * which cause mistakes owing to diver- 
gent national uses. These designations do not necessitate the use of draw- 
ings. By designating the direction of rotation and, if necessary, the faces, 
i ... — *iop of svmbojs allow to order without_jmistake_thc hardware 




0.2.1 This standard is intended to provide uniform terminology for desig- 
nation of doors and windows and their hardware with respect to direction 
of operation to facilitate purchase and specifying the same in the various 
standards. This standard deals with the conventions and general princi- 
ples for the determination of symbols. Particular cases and components 
with more than one leaf will be dealt with in other standards. 

3 This standard is based on the Draft ISO Recommendation No. 951 — 
2nd Draft (3rd drafting) c Symbolic designation of direction of closing and 
faces of doors, windows and shutters '. 



Kt 4043- 1969 

1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard fixes conventions: 

a) to designate and symbolize the direction on plan of closing of door, 

window or shutter leaves; 

b) to identify by a symbol each of the faces of doors, windows or 
shutters in relation to their direction of operation; and 

c) to specify the arrangement of the frame of doors, windows or 
shutters in relation to the premises or the room to be isolated. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2*0 For the purpose of this standard the following definitions shall apply. 

2.1 Directions of Rotation 

2.1 .1 Clockwise — A rotation in which the upper part of the object is 
moved to the right. 

2*1*2 Anticlockwise — A rotation in which the upper part of the object is 
moved to the left. 

2*1*3 Conventional Direction of Rotation — That of the two directions of 
rotation causing the leaves to open or to close which is chosen according 
to this standard for the designation of the latter ( see 5*1 ). 

2*2 Identification of Faces 

2*2*1 Closing Face — The face of the leaf located on the side on which 
the leaf closes ( see Fig. 1 and Fig. 2 ). 



CLOSING FACE 




V/ 




-OPENING FACE 

Fig, 1 Clockwise Closing : 5 Fig, 2 Anticlockwise Closing : 6 

2,2.2 Opening Face — The face of the leaf located on the side on which 
the leaf opens ( see Fig. 1 and Fig. 2 ). 

2.23 Conventional Face — That of the two faces, closing face or opening 
face which is chosen according to this standard to fix the position of doors, 
windows or shutters ( see 5.2 ). 



IS: 4043 -1969 

3. FIELD OF APPLICATION 

3.1 This standard applies to doors, windows and shutters, the leaves of 
which move around one or more vertical axis. 

3.1.1 It applies neither to components, the leaves of which move around 
horizontal axis, nor to components the leaves of which move by transla- 
tion. 

4. SYMBOLS 

4.1 The following are the recommended symbols: 

Symbol 

a) Clockwise 5 

b) Anticlockwise 6 

c) Closing face 1 

d) Opening face 

Note — When the symbols 1 and are insufficient to determine the position of the 
hardware, the conventional face of the shutter will be identified by that of its faces 
which is situated in the part to be isolated or designated in some other manner. 

5. CONVENTIONS 

5*1 Direction of Rotation — The conventional direction of rotation is 
the direction of closing. 

5*2 Face of Identification — The conventional face to identify is the one 
which is located inside the premises or the room to be isolated or designat- 
ed in another way. 

5.2.1 When there is an ambiguity, for example, for a communicating 
room between two rooms of the same nature, the room to be isolated is 
the room in which is situated the opening face of the leaf when the door 
is closed, 

6. APPLICATION TO DOORS, WINDOWS AND SHUTTERS 

6.1 Single Leaf Component — Unless otherwise stated in the standard, 
the single leaf components should be designated by a whole set of symbols 
in accordance with the conventions stated in 5. 

6.1.1 Example of Designation — A door which moves clockwise should be 
designated by the symbol 5.0 if its inside face is the opening face and by 
the symbol 5.1 if it is the closing face. Typical examples of designation 
are illustrated in Fig. 3. 



IS t4043 -1969 







Room A 


— Doors: entry: 60 




Communicating with room B : 50* 




Windows: 2 type 60 — 2 type 50 


RoomB 


— Doors : entry : 60 




Communicating with room A : 60* 




Windows: 2 type 60 — 2 type 50 
— Doors : entry : 60 


RoomC 




Communicating with room B : 60 




Windows: 2 type 60 — 2 type 60 


RoomD 


— Doors: entry: 60 




Communicating with room C : 50 


Corridor £ 


— Door: 60 


HallF 


— Door: 50 


Room G 


— Doors : entry : 50 




Communicating with room H : 50 




Windows : 1 type 50 with shutter 61 — 1 type 60 with shutter 51 


Rooms H, J, 


K — Doors:50 




Windows: 1 type 50 with shutter 61 — 1 type 60 with shutter 51 


Lavatory 


— Door: 50 


W.C. 


— Door: 50 




Window: t type 51 


•The communicating door between the rooms A and B it a double door ( not a 


door with two leaves), ^ 



Fro. 3 Typioal Examples or Designation 
6 



IS 1 4043 -1969 

6.2 Components with More than One Leaf — The designation of com* 
ponents with more than one leaf should be individual, each leaf being 
designated by a whole set of symbols in accordance with the conventions 
stated in 5. 

Note — For components which have more than one leaf certain additional conven- 
tions allowing a reduction of the resulting symbolization will be included later, 

7. APPLICATION TO HARDWARE ACCESSORIES 

7.1 While placing orders it is acfcisable to order the suitable Jhardware 
items by referring to the whole standard designations of the components 
they are intended for even when, in particular cases, a single one of these 
symbols would seem sufficient. 

Examples: 

Hinges for window 6.0 

Mortice lock, with safety blocks and closing knob for door 5.1. 



