IS 13163 : 1991 (Reaffirmed 2005) qw?itT m-$i ff mf i+ TT+wm

u

fvsra - *f% Fif@r

Indian Standard

MINEHAULAGETRACKS -.LAYINGCODEOFPRACTICE
UDC 622'625'144 : 006'76

@ BIS 1991

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARC

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

September

1991

Price Groop 2

Mine Transportation

Sectional Committee,

HMD 8

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, the Mine Transportation Sectional Committee had been approved Engineering Division Council. after the draft finalized by by the Heavy Mechanical

In mining field the importance of efficient mine haulage system is being realised day by day. Properly laid, straight and graded track is regarded as sign of efficient transport system. Maximum output, economically and with maximum safety, are the key parameters for determining the performance of a mine haulage track. This standard is expected to provide uniform guidelines to those laying and using the tracks. The standard also provides brief information on periodical inspection and maintenace of such tracks.

IS 13163 : 1991

ZndianStandard MINE HAULAGE TRACKS - LAYING CODE OF PRACTICE
1 SCOPE This standard describes a code laying mine haulage tracks. 2 REFERENCES The following Indian Standards adjuncts to this standard: are necessary of practice for
4 MATERIALS

materials and components/parts used in laying the mine haulage tracks shall conform to predetermined and pre-selected standards and norms. Special attention shall be given while selecting and using rails; fish plates and fish bolts, sleepers and rail fastenings; gauge ties, ballast, etc. 4.2 While selecting and using the materials, components/parts due consideration shall be given to economical but efficient use of tracks keeping the `safety' aspect above all. 4.3 Since the quality of ballast h?s a very important bearing on the standard of the finished track, the most suitable available material shall be used all the times. Few suggested materials are: a) Crushed granite, b) Crushed lime stone, c) Crushed blast furnace slag, d) Crushed hard stone, e) Selected mine rocks, and f) Fused boiler clinkers. 4.4 The essential characteristics be as given below. of ballast shall

4.1 Various

IS No.
9203

Title

( Part 1 ) : 1979

Friction rollers for mine haulage tracks: Part 1 Technical supply conditions

Friction rollers for mine 9203 tracks: Part 2 ( Part 2 ) : 1979 haulage Parallel rollers
9203

( Part 3 ) : 1979

9203

( Part 4 ) : 1979

9227 : 1979 3 TERMINOLOGY

Friction rollers for mine haulage tracks: Part 3 Tapered and vertical rollers and horizontal and vertical pulleys Friction rollers for mine Part 4 haulage tracks: Rollers with non-metallic rope bearing surfaces Friction roller mountings for mine haulage tracks

For the purpose of this standard, definitions shall apply. d
3.1 Boxing-In

the following

4.4.1 It shall not crumble or disintegrate easily under working conditions eithx due to load or due to wet surroundings. 4.4.2 It shall have a high frictional characteristic so that the mass shall bind well together when laid down and yet remain porous to allow drainage and to maintain an elastic road bed. 4.4.3 The coarser material shall be us3d for the initial layer of ballast and the finer for the final packing and lifting to grade. 4.4.4 Crushed slag and clinkx ar: unsuitable for dlmp conditions as they lead to increased corrosion of the rails. 4.4.5 Since some mine rocks disintegrate in wet conditions, care shall be taken while using these particular rock ballast. 4.4.6 Ballast of inert material shall be preferred in case of gassy mines where use of carbonaceous material such as coally shale, coal, etc, is to be avoided.
5 MARKING 5.1 Marking AND SIZE OF ROADWAYS

It means putting in the ballast between the sleepers. .3.2 Fettling

in the spaces

It is the work done to ensure that the track is on -the line and that all waves are removed. 3.3 Formation The part of the rock which track is laid. 3.4 Opening Out It means removing the ballast to the bottom of the sleeper and in the spaces between the sleeper. 3.5 Packing It means inserting ballast under sleeper to ensure proper distribution of weight. floor of the roadway on

Roadways shall be mxde such that the line of roads shall be regular both on straight as well
I

IS 13163: 1991

as round curves. It shall be ensured that the roadway is of uniform gradient and its alignment shall more or less be straight except at curves. The track shall be laid with proper alignment acd gradient. 5.2 Size The sizes of the roadways shall be such that, including the clearance, they conform to the Statutory Acts, Rules and Regulations. 6 BALLASTING 6.1 Ballasting of tracks is important from performance point of view. Ballast shall be such that it fulfills its basic functions such as to transfer the applied load over a large supporting surf:.cc, holding the sleepers in a horizontal plar e but allow them to be readily -adjusted in a vertical plare to maintain correct gradient and provide an elastic road-bed. 6.2 Laying of Ballast 6.2.1 To prepere the formation, the floor of the roadway shall be roughly graded out at a depth of at least 100 mm to 300 mm from the bottom of the rail depending on the competence of the rock formation on which the track is being laid subject to the condition that such thickness shall not be less than the thickness of the sleeper. 6.2.2 A thick bed of ballsst varying between 75 mm to 150 mm depending upon condition and load shell be provided between the sleeper and the formation. 6.2.3 Where considerable floor lift is anticipated, this depth of formation shall be increased to allow for extra ballast which can then be removed to maintain the correct rail level and grade as the floor rises. 6.2.4 Ballast shall be spread before the sleepers are laid. Size of ballast shall not be larger than ~50 mm nor finer than 15 mm. 6.2.5 It is important that the sleepers shall have a firm support and ballast shall be tamped under them and particularly under the ends and urder the rails, while it shall be loose under the middle of the track. 7 MARKING FOR TRACK LINES

marked on the side of the roadway at a predetermined height above the final rail level. 8.2 By marking grade lines on both sides of the roadway, cross levelling of the track shall be easy. Also, the track layers may string across the roadway and measure down to the rail heads. 9 CHANNELS
9.1 .In wet conditions,

a chennel shall be marked and cut at one side to facilitate flow of water.

9.2 Depth of the channel shall be such that the normal water level in the channel shall remain below the bottom of the ballast. 9.3 Edge Edge of the channel shall be at least 600 mm from the gauge line of the track to allow correct ballasting. Also, ends of the sleepers shall not block the channel. 9.4 In some cases it may also be required to lire the channel with wood or concrete slabs to stop rush of water washing away the channel sides and ultimately destroying the drainage system. 9.5 If it is required that the channel has to cross the track, then in that case, the channel shall be completely covered over and protected from blockage at each end, since such a Iblockage may rapidly lead to flooding of the roadbed.
10 INSPECTION

AND MAINTENANCE

10.1 Once the track has been laid and boxed-in it shall be essential to follow a systematic schedule of inspection and maintenance, to keep the track in a safe condition and for the efficient working of the haulage system, The schedule of inspection and maintenance shall include daily, weekly and annual checks to be made and corrective actions to be taken. 10.1.1 Daily Inspection and Maintenance lo.-1.1.1 Haulage track, used by locomotives, shall be examined at least once in 24 hours. It is recommended that all heavy haulage tracks shall be examined in the same way. 10.1.1.2 The person incharge of each gang for inspection and maintenance of track layer shall daily examine and report on all the track layer under his charge. The arrangement may include that he walks one way and rides the other portion. He shall ensure that all points, crossings and movable parts are thoroughly examined Any defect found during the and lubricated. inspection shall receive his immediate~attention and shall be rectified. 2

7.1 Lines of proposed tracks shall be marked clearly on the roof of the roadways. These shall be known as `Track Lines'. 7.1.1 The track line shall be marked directly above the one rail of the track, so that by plumbing down this line, another rail can be set to gauge. 8 MARKING 8.1 The grade OF GRADE LINES lines for track shall be clearly

IS 13163 : 1991 10.1.2 Weekly Inspection and Maintenance It shall include the following:

pulleys conform to, IS 9203 ( Parts 1 to 4 > : 1979. The mountings shall conform to IS 9227 : 1979. 10.1.3 .4nnual Inspection and ~Maintenance
10.1.3.1 All main haulage tracks and men riding tracks shall be examined at least once a year as specified in 10.1.3.2.

4 All fasteners and fish bolts shall be tested

b)

4
4

with hammer and a spanner and tightened if found loose. Also the rails and sleepers shall be checked for cracks, fractuies etc and replaced if needed; All curves shall be inspected to check super elevation and alignment; All turnouts and crossings shall receive particular attention; and Inspection of alignments, levels and clearance along the length of the tracks shall be made.

10.1.2.1 The head lamp of the locomotives, if available, shall be used to detect bad alignment and level. The person incharge for inspection and maintenance shall stand about 15 to 20 meters from the locomotive and then by looking towards the head lamp, he shall see the defects, if any, for corrective action.
10.1.2.2 Horizontal and vertical rollers used for guiding ropes, skid plates, etc, shall be checked and replaced if found damaged. Rollers and

10.1.3.2 All fish plates shall be removed, the ends of the rails examined, cleaned, fish plates greased and bolts oi!ed; and worn out fish plates replaced. All fasteners and sleepers shall be re-examined for further use or discarding before these are re-used after annual inspection. 10.2 Any fasteners or sleepers or other components which do not appear to be in good condition, shall be examined under load that is, as the train passes over them, as these defects may not be revealed. 11 TYPICAL SECTIONS OF TRACKS
11.1 Typic&l section across straight single track -roadway with drainage channel is given in Fig. 1. 11.2 Typical section across curved double track roadway with drainage channel is given in Fig. 2.

THIS RAIL TO BE LAID FIRST AND SET TO LINE

SFT

TO RAIL GAUGE :R L H RAIL II

- /

/ _ 22.9

--

\

\

`ROX `BALLAST AID LOOS CENTRE Ok SLEEP&S AND IN BETWEEN SLEEPERS LY

BALLAST PACKED TIGHTLY UNDER SLEEPERS FOR A LENGTH OF ABOUT 229mm EACH SlDi OF RAIL

FIG. 1

All dimensions in millimetres. TYPICAL SECTION ACROSSSTRAIGHTSINGLE TRACK ROADWAY WITH DRAINAGE CHANNEL 3

IS 13163:1991

ALONG

ROAOWAY

ROX BALLAST PACKED TIGHTLY UNDER SLEEPERS FOR, A LENGTH OF ABOUT 229mm EACH SIDE OF THE. RAIL WALLAST LAID LOOSELY CENTRE OF SLEEPERS, IN BETWEEN SLEEPERS AND IN BETWEEN TRACKS

DRAINAGE CHANNEL

All dimensionsin millimetres. FIG.

2

TYPICAL SECTION ACROSS CURVED DOUBLE TRACK ROADWAY WITH DRAINAGE CHANNEL

4

Standard Mark by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the ptoducer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards. The use of the Standard Mark is governed
Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations

