**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 13563 (1992) : Textile machinery and accessories - 
Numbering of harnesses for drawing-in on jacquard machines 
[TXD 14: Machinery for Fabric Manufacture] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 13563 :1992 
ISO 7506 : 1984 

(Reaffirmed 2003) 



TRflrf 



Indian Standard 

TEXTILE MACHINERY AND ACCESSORIES — 

NUMBERING OF HARNESSES FOR DRAWING-IN 

ON JACOUARD MACHINES 



UDC 677054-247 






©BIS 1992 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR IMARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

November 1992 Price Group 5 



Machinery for Fabric Manufacture ( Excluding Knitting ) Sectional Committee, TX 14 



NATIONAL FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard, which is Identical with ISO 7506:1984 'Textile machinery and 
accessories — Numbering of harnesses for drawing-in on jacquard machines' issued by the 
International Organization for Standardization ( ISO ) was adopted by the Bureau of hidlan 
Standards on the recommendation of the Machinery for Fabric Manufacture (Excluding Knitting) 
Sectional Committee ( TX 14 ) and approval of the Textile Division Council. 

In the adopted standard, some terminology and certain conventions are not identical with 
those used in Indian Standards, attention is drawn especially to the following: 

Wherever the words 'International Standard' appear referring to this standard, they should 
be read as 'Indian Standard'. 



IS 13663 :1992 
ISO 7606 : 1984 



Indian Standard 

TEXTILE MACHINERY AND ACCESSORIES — 

NUMBERING OF HARNESSES FOR DRAWING-IN 

ON JACQUARD MACHINES 



1 Scope and field of application 

This International Standard establishes a system for the 
numbering of harnBsses used for drawing-in on Jacquard 
weaving machines. It covers continuous pattern cards, banded 
pattern cards, Jacquard machines, comber boards and harness 
cord guides for the manufacture of fabrics, the face sides of 
which lie uppermost in the weaving machine. 

This International Standard does not cover Jacquard equip- 
ment for special patterns {for example, symmetrical harnesses) 
where the standardized pattern holes, hooks and harness cords 
do not control the first warp threads but rather those deter- 
mined by the particular type of equipment used. 

This International Standard may also not apply fully to some 
types of Wilton carpet weaving, where certain full rows of 
cords from the Jacquard do not go straight down to the same 
appropriate rows in the comber board, and full rows of cords 
across the Jacquard must be crossed back to the front of the 
comber board. When reference is made to the drawing-in of 
harnesses, this is always to complete rows of hooks for the 
sake of greater clarity. 



2 Basic positions 

On the weaving machine, there are four different ways of orien- 
tating the Jacquard machine according to the fall of the cards 
which gives the following positions : 

a) axial fall position (here the axis of the card cylinder is 
parallel to the reed): 

— "in front" or "fall over the operator" position, 
where the card is in front of the weaving machine; 



— "at the back" or "behind" or "fall over the warp" 
position, where the card is placed above the back of the 
weaving machine; 

b) lateral fall position (here the axis of the card cylinder is 
perpendicular to the reed) : 

— "right" or "fall on the right" position, where the 
card is placed above the right of the weaving machine; 

— "left" or "fall on the left" position, where the card is 
placed above the left of the weaving machine. 

The expression "interlaced" harness is used when the cards are 
in a lateral position, while in cases where the cards are in an ax- 
ial position, the harness cord guide is described as being 
"open". If the equipment operates on the basis of this "open" 
harness, the following two systems for the positioning of the 
cards are possible : 

a) system 1 : Card position in front-left-right; 

b) system 2: Card position at the back-left-right. 

In these systems, the following elements correspond to the first 
warp line on the left of the design (based on one thread per 
warp line) : 

a) the first pattern hole on the Jacquard card; 

b) the first hook with its needle; 

c) the first harness cord; 

d) the first harness cord hole in the comber board; 

e) the first warp thread in the repeat. 



IS 13563 :t992 
ISO 7506 : 1984 



3 System 1 : Card position in front-left-right 

3.1 Numbering of Jacquard cards 

Jacquard cards are numbered close to the right-hand edge. The number of the Jacquard card corresponds to the number of the weft 
line on the design. If the punched card is positioned in front of the observer, such that the card number is visible on the right, the first 
pattern hole is on the left at the back and the last pattern hole is on the right at the front. 



®-. 



•• \ 


\ ^' 




z 




t 




► 



3-^ 

© 



t 



Observer's position 



(a) first pattern hole 

(b) last pattern hole 

(c) numbered side 



3.2 Numbering of harness cord holes 

Looking down on the comber board from the point of view of the operator, the first harness cord hole is on the left at the back and the 
last harness cord hole is on the right at the front. 



dH" 




.--® 



Operator's position 



(d) first harness cord hole 
(ej last harness cord hole 
(fj comber board 



IS 13563 :1992 
180 7506:1984 



3.3 Numbering of hooks 

Looking down on the bottom board from the point of view of the operator, the first hook is on the left at the back for controlling the 
first harness cord in the harness draft repeat, and the last hook is on the right at the front for controlling the last harness cord in the 
harness draft repeat. 




Operator's position 
Bottom board 



Type A 



Type B 










Y 




TypeC 



>-^^#-/ 
^^^\ 

^mm 






m> 



T 



@ for the first hook 
(hj for the last hook 



1813563 :1892 
ISO 7506 : 1984 



3.4 Diagram of drawing-in of harness 

(a) first pattern hole 

(b) last pattern hole 

(d) first harness cord hole 

(e) last harness cord hole 
(T) connber board 

(9) first hook 
(h) last hook 
(k) Jacquard cards 
@ bottom board 
NOTE — These reference points are common to the three card positions indicated in 3.4.1 to 3.4.3. 

3.4.1 Card position at the front 




J-_L 



t 



\ 



XB) 






Operator's position 



3.4.2 Card position on the left 



IS 13563 :1992 
180 7506 : 1984 



® ® ^ 

n — T t\i is — ~f i 



(EK 



^ 



y 



<s 




^ 



~~^, y.. 



/- 



:b)(^ f 

Operator's position 



--€) 



3.4.3 Card position on the right 




N-^ 



Operator's position 



IS 13563 :1992 
180 7506:1984 



4 System 2: Card position at the back-left-right 



4.1 Numbering of Jacquard cards 

Jacquard cards are numbeped close to the right-hand edge. The number of the Jacquard card corresponds to the number of the weft 
line on the design. If the punched card is positioned in front of the observer such that the card number is visible on the right, the first 
pattern hole is on the right at the front and the last pattern hole is on the left at the back. 



'- 1 


\ ^- 




z 




i 




V. 



3-^ 
© 



t 



Observer's position 



(a) first pattern hole 

(b) last pattern hole 

(c) numbered side 



4.2 Numbering of harness cord holes 

Looking down on the comber board from the point of view of the operator, the first harness cord hole is on the left at the back, and 
the last harness cord hole is on the right at the front. 



(Sy^ 




t 



Operator's position 



(d) first harness cord hole 
(V) last harness cord hole 
Qj comber board 



IS 13563 :1992 
ISO 7506 : 1984 



4.3 Numbering of hooks 

Looking down on the bottom board from the point of view of the operator, the first hook is on the left at the back for controlling the 
first harness cord in the harness draft repeat, and the last hook is on the right in front for controlling the last harness cord In the 
harness draft repeat. 




Observer's position 
Bottom board 



Type A 



Type B 






(^ 








Type C 





(V) for the first hook 
(h) for the last hook 



1813563 :1992 
180 7506:1984 



4.4 Diagram of drawing-in of harness 

(a) first pattern hole 

(b) last pattern hole 

@ first harness cord hole 
(e) last harness cord hole 
(7) comber board 
(g) first hook 
(h) last hook 
(k) Jacquard cards 
(m) bottom board 
NOTE — These reference points are common to the three card positions indicated in 4.4.1 to 4.4.3. 

4.4.1 Card position at the back 



(3)-T 




operator's position 



IS 13563 :1992 
ISO 7506 : 1984 



M4 Card position on the left 




4^3 Card poaition on the rigitt 



©-I 




Operator's position 



Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 



standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark 
on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been 
produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system 
of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and 
operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by 
BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under 
which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or 
producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



