Indian Standard 


mA At oe Ata Wear 
om fa ater at usta 


( daa FRAT ) 


Methods of Test for Safety 
Evaluation of Cosmetics 


( Third Revision ) 


ICS 71.100.40 


© BIS 2018 


RMA AH ART 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAF Fo, 9 FGM WAL At, ae fereit-110002 
Velie” MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


July 2018 Price Group 7 


Cosmetics Sectional Committee, PCD 19 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Third Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Cosmetics Sectional Committee, had been approved by the Petroleum, Coal and Related Products Division 
Council. 


In this revision, the standard has been divided into three sections. Section 1 provides guidelines for skin irritation 
testing of cosmetics and Section 2 covers guidelines for assessing contact hypersensitivity and photosensitization. 
It includes tests to enable the diagnosis of contact allergy and photosensitization. Section 3 includes an Informative 
Annexure covering inclusion-exclusion criteria and latest updates on alternatives to in-vivo safety testing on 
animals. 


Depending on the products, prior human participant studies may be carried out in order to confirm the safety of 
the cosmetic finished product and to evaluate its tolerance in humans. Any human testing must be scientifically 
justified, as unjustified testing is unethical. The test should be conducted on selected panels of human volunteers, 
using good clinical practices, under the supervision of dermatologist, and/or ophthalmologist and/or pediatrician 
(depending on the nature of the evaluation). These tests are not intended to be carried out on a batch-to-batch 
basis or random samples as a quality control tool. 


Many new cosmetic products are variations on the existing ones. It is the task and responsibility of the qualified 
safety assessor in-charge of product safety evaluation, to decide whether each new formula represents a minor 
adaptation without toxicological significance, a toxicologically important modification, or a new technological 
concept. 


Safety assessor’s decision is key in the choice of the subsequent safety-testing programme, which is constructed 
on the case-by-case basis. Examination of the degree of innovation of the new formula in relation to the known 
formula requires considerable experience in the field of cosmetic toxicology. The outcome of safety assessor’s 
conclusion is the decision on the necessity to carry out or not, additional clinical safety testing and extent of the 
test, in order to confirm formulas tolerance in humans. 


There is sufficient published scientific evidence to support the concept of universality of human skin reactions to 
chemicals. In this respect, a qualified safety assessor applies his or her knowledge to predict, from the available 
data, the market place tolerance of the new product. It will be upto the safety assessor, allowing for the state of 
knowledge, to conclude that the product should not present unacceptable risks of damage to human health under 
normal or reasonable foreseeable conditions of use anywhere in the world. 


Prior to conducting any tests on human volunteers one needs to check each ingredient in the formulation for 
potential effects through available literature or on the basis of Quantitative Risk Assessment (QRA) techniques. 
In vitro, in chemico and Quantitative Structure-Activity Relationship Models (QSAR) should be used in a Weight 
of Evidence (WoE) approach prior to testing in humans. 


IS 4011 : 2018 


Indian Standard 


METHODS OF TEST FOR 
SAFETY EVALUATION OF COSMETICS 


( Third Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard covers methods of test for safety 
evaluation of cosmetics. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions, which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication the conditions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below. 


IS No. Title 

Classification of cosmetics raw 
materials and adjuncts: 

Dyes, colours and pigments 

List of raw materials generally not 
recognized as safe for use in 
cosmetics 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


4707 


(Part 1) : 2001 
(Part 2) : 2017 


For the purpose of this standard, the following definition 
and explanations shall apply. 


3.1 Allergic Reactions — Symptoms/Sign caused by 
exposure to allergens. 


3.2 Bullae — Bullae are blisters on the skin each of 
which is more than 5 mm in diameter. These may be of 
any colour and shape. 


3.3 Carcinogenicity — Carcinogen is any substance 
that is an agent either directly involved in causing 
cancer or increasing its incidence or promotes the 
activity of other carcinogens in causing cancer. Since 
genetic events are central in the overall process of 
cancer development, evidence of mutagenic activity 
may indicate that a chemical has a potential for 
carcinogenic effects. Carcinogenicity studies are 
performed for substances where there is concern about 
their carcinogenic potential. 


3.4 Cauterizing Agents — Chemical substances which 
burn the skin on local application. 


3.5 Cauterizing Reaction — The change in the skin 


produced by the local application of a cauterizing agent. 


3.6 Cross Sensitization — Sensitization to a primary 
allergen spreading to one or more allergens which are 
of such closely similar chemical constitution to the 
primary allergen that the sensitized cells are unable to 
distinguish between them. This has to be distinguished 
from false cross sensitization which occurs when the 
same chemical substance is present in different 
products. 


3.7 Dermatitis — Inflammation of the skin. 


3.8 Epidermal Barrier — Epidermal barrier pertaining 
to the most superficial layer of the skin (stratum 
corneum) which allows only certain substances to enter 
the skin from outside. 


3.9 Erythema — Redness of the skin due to dilation 
of the blood vessels. 


3.10 Eschar Formation — A dry scab or slough formed 
on the skin as a result of a burn or by the action of a 
corrosive or caustic substance. 


3.11 Exudation — The discharge of fluids (serum or 
pus) on the diseased skin surface. 


3.12 Fissuring — Cracks on the surface of the skin. 


3.13 Genotoxicity — Genotoxicity describes the 
property of chemical agents that damages the genetic 
information within a cell causing mutations, which may 
lead to cancer. While genotoxicity is often confused 
with mutagenicity, all mutagens are genotoxic; however, 
not all genotoxic substances are mutagenic. 


3.14 Hyperaemia — Increased blood circulation. 


3.15 Hypersensitivity (Sensitization) — A process by 
which an individual develops the capability of reacting 
in an abnormal (allergic) manner to an external agent. 


3.16 Milliaria — A papular or vesicular eruption on 
the skin which accompanies profuse sweating and is 
due to the blockage of the ducts of the sweat glands. 


3.17 Mutagenicity — Mutagenicity refers to the 
induction of permanent transmissible changes in the 
structure of the genetic material of cells or organisms. 
These changes (mutations) may involve a single gene 
or a block of genes. 


IS 4011 : 2018 


3.18 Necrosis — Death of a portion of a tissue. 


3.19 Occlusion Area — An area of skin which is 
isolated from the environment. 


3.20 Oedema — The swelling of soft tissues (skin) as 
a result of excess fluid accumulation. 


3.21 Papules — A small circumscribed solid elevation 
of the skin not larger than 5 mm in diameter. It may be 
of any shape and colour. 


3.22 Percutaneous Absorption — Transfer of an agent 
(usually a chemical) through the skin from outside. 


3.23 Photopatch Test — A test where the skin is 
exposed to sunlight or any other equivalent source of 
light after contact with a particular chemical agent. 


3.24 Pustular Reaction — A reaction in the skin 
characterized by appearance of several lesions 
(eruptions) containing pus. 


3.25 Repeated — Insult Irritant — An agent which 
causes an irritant reaction only after repeated 
applications to the surface of the skin. 


3.26 Skin Sensitization — An allergic reaction to a 
particular irritant that results in the development of skin 
inflammation and itchiness. Unlike skin irritation, the 
skin becomes increasingly reactive to the substance as 
a result of subsequent exposures. A skin sensitizer is a 
substance that will induce an allergic response 
following skin contact. 


SECTION 1 GUIDELINES ON SKIN 
IRRITATION TESTS 


4 GENERAL 
4.1 Raw Material Purity 


The purity of raw materials used in a formulation must 
be established by physicochemical analysis and 
specifications established for use, before the products 
containing them are subjected to safety testing. 


4.2 Facilities 


The testing should be carried out by the manufacturer 
in-house or in reputed laboratories both national and 


international, which maintain high standards including 
compliance to national regulatory guidelines for human 
participant studies. 


The test should be carried out by trained personnel 
under the supervision of toxicologists (for example, 
persons having qualifications and/or competence in 
biomedical research methodology in the case of human 
volunteer studies). 


4.3 Tests 


The type of tests to be performed for particular type of 
cosmetics is given in Table 1. 


Additional data may be generated on skin sensitization 
and/or skin photosensitization, if the product contains 
any suspect ingredients, which are above the 
recommended levels that are indicated by the 
international agencies. 


Carcinogenicity, Genotoxicity and Mutagenicity testing 
may be necessary using various methods as part of an 
integrated testing strategy or weight of evidence 
approach. Human carcinogens identified by IARC 
monograph 1992 (and updated later) must never be 
directly added into the cosmetic formulations. Naturally 
occurring chemicals also need to be safety tested. 


4.3.1 Skin Irritation Test (Patch Test in Humans) 
4.3.1.1 Principle 


Irritants are substances that may damage the skin. The 
damage will depend upon the nature, concentration and 
duration of exposure. Irritation is manifested as 
erythema (redness), oedema (swelling), vesiculation 
and finally to an intense suppurate reaction without the 
involvement of immune system. The irritation potential 
of a substance can be assessed in human patch test. 
This patch test is carried out on human volunteers. 


This test with the product may be carried out in humans, 
only after ensuring that all the ingredients used have 
acceptable toxicological end points based on available 
literature or by carrying out alternate evaluation 
techniques. No product with unknown ingredient should 
be directly tested in humans. The same is also applicable 
for new/novel ingredients. 


Table 1 Tests to be Carried Out on Different Types of Cosmetics 
(Clause 4.3) 


Test 


(2) 
Skin irritation test 
Photo irritation tests 
irritation. 
Relevant in-vitro/ex-vivo tests from those listed 
in Annex B 


2 


Type of Product 


GB) 


Skin and hair products and lip products. 


Skin and hair products and lip products showing a potential of causing photo- 


Skin and hair products, lip products and oral care products prior to human 
participant studies. 


IS 4011 : 2018 


Table 2 Method of Product Application* 
(Clause 4.3.1.2) 


Type of Patch 
qd) 


Products 


2) 


Open Paints, glues, essential oils, perfumes 


Semi occluded (keep open for up to half an Nail lacquers, colognes, after shave lotion, alcohol based products, solvent based 


hour post application and then occlude 
Occluded 


products 


Skin powder for infants, shampoos (8%), surfactant based products (8%), skin creams, 


hair creams, hair oils, pomades, brilliantine, cosmetic pencils, lipstick, lip salve, bindi- 
liquid, kum kum powder, liquid foundation make up, sindoor, cold wax, face pack, kajal, 
herbal cosmetics, leave-on and rinse-off conditioners, mascaras 


Short duration open patch test (30 min) 


Dyes, colours, pigments, oxidation hair dyes, henna powder, depilatories, bleaching 


creams, permanent wave solutions 


* The above list is not exhaustive but indicative of the categories. Any new category or new product should be similarly considered, 


depending on its nature and end use. 


4.3.1.2 Procedure 


Apply the neat cosmetic product as such (or diluted 
solution where defined in Table 2) on the upper arms 
or back of human subjects as follows: 


The skin should essentially be non-hairy and free from 
any type of skin lesions or other dermatological 
problems. In case the back is hairy, the hair can be 
cut off by clipper or shaver before applying the 
patches, taking care to avoid any abrasions, cuts or 
lesions. In case of rinse off products, rinse the treated 
sites with water to remove any residue after removal 
of the patch (or the specified time of contact in case 
of open patch). 


If the volunteer experiences unbearable discomfort with 
any of the patches the volunteer is instructed to remove 
such patches any time prior to the targeted 24 h contact 
(where applicable). Mark such sites with a blue/ black 
skin marker to facilitate evaluation later. 


The volunteer is also requested to note down the sign 
and symptoms of the discomfort and the time of removal 
of the patch and hand it over to the investigator. Assess 
the skin reactions subjectively using the Draize scale 
given in Table 3, 24 h after removal of the patches. 
Follow up the reactions if any, after one week to confirm 
recovery and later if necessary at the discretion of the 
investigator. 


4.3.1.2.1 Human subjects 


Select 24 healthy adult subjects, preferably equal 
number of males and females who do not have any 
previous history of adverse skin conditions and are not 
under medication likely to interfere with the results. 
Pregnant ladies and breast-feeding mothers should be 
excluded. The typical inclusion /exclusion criteria to 
be kept in mind are as listed in Annex A. Explain the 
test procedure to volunteers and obtain a signed 
informed consent from each of them. 


4.3.1.2.2 Test patches for topical treatment 
Ideally use ready-made standard test patches (Finn 


chambers/IQ chambers or such suitable equivalent) 
measuring about | cm diameter or 1 sq cm. Take 0.04 ml 
or 0.04 g of the sample using a micropipette or weighing 
balance (as applicable) on the patch and apply the patch 
on the upper arm or back as mentioned in 4.3.1.2. 
Alternatively if such patches are not available, use 1 cm 
diameter discs made out of chromatography paper 
(Whatman No. 3) taken on a slightly bigger polythene 
sheet having about 0.25 cm hole punched at the centre 
and fixed on the adhesive tape. Keep about 2.5 cm 
distance between the two adjacent test patches (filter 
paper discs). 


4.3.1.2.3 Volatile substances 


Volatile substances can act as primary irritant if tested 
by the standard occluded patch test technique. Products 
having volatile substances, where the volatile 
substances are likely to be in contact with the skin for 
a longer duration of time should, therefore, be tested 
by the cup technique. In this method, the volatile agent 
is soaked into a small piece of absorbent cotton filter 
paper which is placed at the bottom of specially 
designed cup (see Fig. 1). This cup is inverted on the 
forearm skin of the individual and bandaged. Care 
should be taken to ensure that the piece of filter paper 
remains sticking to the bottom of the cup and does not 
fall on the skin, and the skin is exposed only to the 
vapours of the agent. 


4.3.1.2.4 Positive and negative control 


Use Sodium Lauryl Sulphate (SLS) analytical grade at 
1 percent (w/v) concentration in distilled water in the 
form of occluded patch as the positive control. 


Use 0.9 percent Isotonic Saline Solution in the form of 
occluded patch as negative control. 


4.3.1.3 Observation and scoring 


Assess the skin reaction under a constant artificial 
daylight source, 24 h after the removal of the patches 
(or 24 h after product contact in the case of open 


IS 4011 : 2018 


Fic. 1 Cup FoR VOLATILE SUBSTANCES 


patches). Score the reaction, namely, erythema 
(including dryness, scaliness and wrinkles) on a 0-4 
point scale and oedema on another 0-4 points scale as 
per the Draize Scale given in Table 3. 


4.3.1.4 Results 


The combined mean scores and standard deviation of 
the 24 subjects are calculated: 


a) Positive control must give a combined mean 
score of < 2.0. Negative control must give a 
combined mean score of <2. If positive control 
gives a combined mean score less than 2.0 and/ 
or negative control gives a combined mean 
score of < 2.0, then the test need to be repeated 
on another group of newly recruited volunteers. 

b) A combined mean score of up to 2.0/8.0 will 
mean that product is non-irritant. 

c) Usage of cosmetic product with a score up to 
4.0/8.0 which is mildly irritating may be 
reviewed by manufacturer for safety of the 
formulation. 

d) No cosmetic product should be marketed 
which has irritation score above 4.0/ 8.0. 


4.3.2 Photopatch Test 


4.3.2.1 In case a substance is considered to produce 
skin irritation by photocontact-sensitivity, it will be 


necessary to undertake photopatch tests rather than the 
standard patch tests. This evaluates the potential of a 
product to induce phototoxicity (photo-irritation). This 
test is of particular significance if the suspected photo- 
irritant product (or ingredient) shows absorbance in the 
UV-A and UV-B region (290-400 nm). 


4.3.2.2 Phototoxicity occurs due to the formation of 
toxic photoproducts and results in tissue damage. 


4.3.2.3 Sample size for the evaluation is typically 
24 subjects. 


4.3.2.4 For this, each substance is applied in duplicate 
patches in the same manner as for standard patch tests, 
but after 24 h, one of the patches in each pair is removed 
and the skin at the test site is exposed to sunlight for 
30 min or appropriate sources of ultraviolet light (UVA 
5 J/cm’). These patches are covered again. The other 
patches in each of the pairs are left undisturbed. 


4.3.2.5 One additional site in the adjoining skin is 
exposed to sunlight or ultraviolet light for the same 
period to act as a control for the ultraviolet exposure. 


4.3.2.6 After a further period of 24 h, all the patches 
are removed and the test sites are examined for 
evidence of skin irritation. Scoring is carried out using 
Draize scales (Table 3) and results are reported as 
combined mean scores. The photopatch test is 


Table 3 Draize Scale for Scoring the Treatment Sites 
(Clauses 4.3.1.3 and 4.3.2.6) 


Score for Reaction Score for Oedema Reaction 
Erythema/ 
Dryness/ Wrinkles 

E9) (2) 6) iG) 

0 No reaction 0 No reaction 

1 Very slight erythema/dryness with shiny appearance 1 Very slight oedema 
2 Slight erythema/dryness/wrinkles 2 Slight oedema 

3 Moderate erythema/dryness/wrinkle 3 Moderate oedema 

4 Severe erythema/wrinkle/scale 4 Severe oedema 


considered to be positive if there is no reaction at the 
site of the standard patch (not exposed to light), but 
the site of the exposed patch (exposed to sunlight or 
UV light) shows evidence of skin irritation. The skin 
area taken as control and exposed only to sunlight or 
ultraviolet light should also not develop any skin 
irritation for the results to be valid. 


4.4 Use Test 


4.4.1 After the cosmetic has passed appropriate tests, 
15 human volunteers shall be asked to use the cosmetics 
as normally used for 15 days. If there is no adverse 
reaction, the cosmetic may be released for consumer 
tests. 


4.5 Restricted Consumer Test 


4.5.1 The cosmetic may be then released into the market 
on a limited scale and should be closely monitored for 
any adverse consumer response. It is customary to release 
between 5 000 and 10 000 units of the cosmetic. In case 
adverse reactions are reported/collected during this 
period, they should be studied adopting appropriate tests. 


NOTES 


1 It is important to realize that all tests are experimental 
laboratory based and therefore, the results cannot be considered 
to represent exactly what is likely to happen when the cosmetic 
is actually released for mass use. It will, therefore, be necessary 
to keep a watch on the reactions if any, which may occur 
following general release of the cosmetics when the agent is 
used by a much larger number of individuals and for much 
longer periods. 


2 It is also known that there are some differences in the reactivity 
of the skin of various racial groups, the two sexes and various 
age groups. It will therefore, be appropriate to perform the above 
mentioned tests on the same type of individuals who are targeted 
to be the main consumers of that particular cosmetic. 


SECTION 2 GUIDELINES ON ASSESSING 
CONTACT HYPERSENSITIVITY AND 
PHOTOSENSITIZATION 


5 GENERAL INFORMATION ABOUT 
CONTACT HYPERSENSITIVITY 


5.1 Before an individual can manifest an allergic 
reaction to a locally applied agent, he normally develops 
hypersensitivity to the agent. In biological terms, this 
means that some lymphocytes in the blood acquire the 
capability of recognizing and reacting with the same 
chemical whenever and wherever that chemical is 
applied on the skin. An individual may start developing 
hypersensitivity following the very first exposure but 
generally it does not happen this way. Nevertheless, 
every exposure to the allergen has a chance of 
sensitizing the individual. Therefore, the more the 
number of exposures, the greater the chances of 
developing hypersensitivity. This also means that 
individual develops allergy to only those agents which 
he or she has already been using for several days, 


IS 4011 : 2018 


months or even years. Once, however, an individual 
becomes allergic to a substance, he is likely to develop 
a reaction following every subsequent exposure 
provided the exposure is adequate. 


5.2 If an individual is exposed to a chemical agent for 
the first time, he is not likely to be allergic to that agent 
and, therefore, he cannot develop an allergic reaction. 
Sometimes, however, if the individual had already been 
allergic to another chemical agent, whose chemical 
structure resembles that of the present chemical, then 
even the so called first exposure will be able to produce 
an allergic reaction. This is called a reaction of cross- 
sensitivity. It is, however, important to be aware that 
many times, a person may get exposed to an agent 
without being aware of it. Thus he may become allergic 
during one such exposure and develop an allergic 
reaction during the subsequent exposure. 


5.3 Some substances may cause sensitization more 
easily than others. The chemical basis of this 
characteristic of these agents is not known, but such 
substances are considered to be more potent sensitizers 
than the others. 


5.4 Stratum corneum, the most superficial layer of skin 
is a very selective barrier which allows only some 
substances to pass through. It is quite obvious that if a 
substance cannot penetrate this barrier and enter the 
skin, it cannot cause contact allergy. In case, however 
this barrier is defective due to disease or injury, there 
is a greater change of an allergic reaction. 


5.5 The process of sensitization takes a minimum of 5 
days during which there are no clinical signs or 
symptoms. Thus even if an individual starts developing 
hypersensitivity following the very first exposure, there 
will be no clinical signs or symptoms during the first 5 
days. However, after the individual has become allergic, 
a subsequent exposure will result in signs and symptoms 
within a day or two. 


6 CLINICAL SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS 


6.1 The earliest indication of an allergic reaction is 
itching. This is soon followed by redness. If the reaction 
is mild, it may subside soon, but generally, because of 
continued exposure, the reaction progresses through 
papules, papulo-vesicles, vesicles and bullae, exudation 
and crusting. These reactions are called acute reactions. 
Subacute reactions generally result in erythema and 
scaling, while chronic reactions due to continued 
exposures may lead to darkening and thickening of the 
skin. On the lips and palms, the reaction frequently 
manifests as scaling and fissuring. 


6.2 The reaction is generally limited to the area where 
the causative substance is applied. Sometimes, however, 
the agent may get applied on the other areas of the body 


IS 4011 : 2018 


by mean of the fingers, clothes, pillows, etc. In such 
instances, the reaction will be sent at other areas as well. 


6.3 If further applications of the agent are continued, 
the reaction keeps on increasing in severity and extent, 
but in case further applications are stopped, the reaction 
tends to subside even without any treatment. 


6.4 The degree of allergy varies in different individuals. 
Some individuals are more severely allergic and, 
therefore, they will react to even smaller amounts of 
substance. Moreover, an allergic individual will develop 
a severe reaction if exposed to a larger amount of 
substance. Conversely, an allergic individual may not 
develop any signs or symptoms if he is not exposed to 
an adequate amount of the substance. 


6.5 Photocontact Dermatitis 


Some agents, particularly dyes and perfumes, cause 
dermatitis only after the skin area on which they have 
been applied is exposed to sunlight or ultraviolet rays. 
Sunlight alone or the agent alone (without exposure to 
sunlight) does not result in dermatitis. This type of 
reaction often consist of darkening of the skin, though 
in acute cases, itching, papular, papulo-vesicular or 
scaly lesions may also be present. 


7 DIAGNOSTIC TESTS FOR CONTACT 
HYPERSENSITIVITY 


Prior to conducting any tests on human volunteers for 
contact hypersensitivity, one needs to check each 
ingredient in the formulation for potential to produce 
contact allergy through available literature or on the 
basis of dermal sensitization Quantitative Risk 
Assessment (QRA) techniques. In vitro methods and 
Quantitative Structure—Activity Relationship models 
(QSAR models) should be used in a Weight of Evidence 
(WoE) approach prior to the HRIPT. If all the 
ingredients do not show any contact allergy potential, 
HRIPT with the final product is recommended as a 
confirmatory test to rule out any ingredient-ingredient 
interactions. HRIPT should not be carried out directly 
on human volunteers with the product, if it contains 
unknown ingredients or ingredients with moderate/ 
strong sensitization potential. The same is also 
applicable for new/novel ingredients. 


7.1 Human Repeat Insult Patch Test (HRIPT/RIPT) 


7.1.1 This test is based on the principle that in an allergic 
individual, the whole skin is capable of reacting with 
the allergen. Therefore, if the substance is applied on 
the skin on any part of the body, it will result in 
dermatitis at the site. Although this test is simple, yet a 
little experience is essential for accurate interpretation 
of results. 


7.1.2 The test should not be applied if the volunteer is 
already having acute dermatitis because there is risk of 
aggravation of the dermatitis and occurrence of false 
positive reactions. The test should also be postponed 
if the volunteer is being given systemic corticosteroid 
or other cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, azathioprine, 
etc, because these drugs can suppress the reaction and 
lead to false negative results. Further, it should be 
ensured that the volunteer is not under any form of 
medication immediately before or during the study, 
which might impact the outcome of the study; in which 
case the volunteer should be excluded or dropped from 
the study as the case may be. 


7.1.3 The substance to be used as allergen for human 
repeat insult patch test may be either the finished 
product as such or preferably each of the suspect 
ingredient used in the product. 


7.1.4 When using ingredients, it is important to use each 
agent in a specified concentration and also in a specified 
vehicle (or base). This is necessary to avoid false 
positive or false negative results, because if the 
concentration of the agent is too high, it may result in 
irritant dermatitis at the test site, while if the 
concentration is too low, it may not evoke any reaction. 
Similarly, if the vehicle used for dissolving the agent 
does not allow the agent to penetrate the epidermal 
barrier, it may result in a false negative reaction. In the 
case of cosmetic, it will be especially useful if agents 
which may be used as substitutes of the standard 
ingredients are also included for patch tests. This will 
help the industry to know the substitutes which may be 
employed in the manufacture of the cosmetic in place 
of the ingredient causing contact dermatitis. 


7.1.5 Normal saline (0.9 percent aqueous solution of 
sodium chloride) or any other agent(s) used as a vehicle 
for dissolving the ingredient should also be applied as 
controls for the human repeat insult patch test. It is 
necessary to ensure that the controls do not produce 
any reaction at the site of patch test. 


7.1.6 Procedure 


Prior to conducting the HRIPT, a preliminary Skin 
Irritation Test is carried out (as per methodology 
described in 4.3.1) on about 5-10 volunteers using 
different concentrations of the test product or ingredient 
to be tested, prepared by using suitable diluents (where 
necessary) as explained in 7.1.4 in order to arrive at 
the highest non-irritant concentration to be used for 
conducting the HRIPT study. Apply the neat cosmetic 
product as such (or diluted solution where defined in 
Table 4) or the highest non-irritant concentration as 
determined through the Preliminary Patch Test (if the 
highest non-irritant concentration is found to be lower 
as compared to the neat product or the dilution where 


IS 4011 : 2018 


Table 4 Method of Product Application® 
(Clause 7.1.6) 


Type of Patch 
qd) 
Open 


Products 


Paints, glues, essential oils, perfumes 


Semi-occluded (keeps open for up to half an hour Nail lacquers, colognes, after shave lotion, alcohol based products, solvent based 


post application and then occlude.) 
Occluded 


products 


Skin powder for infants, shampoos (8%), surfactant based products (8%), skin creams, 


hair creams, hair oils, pomades, brilliantine, cosmetic pencils, lipstick, lip salve, bindi- 
liquid, kum kum powder, liquid foundation make up, sindoor, cold wax, face pack, 
kajal, herbal cosmetics, leave-on and rinse-off conditioners, mascaras 


Short duration open patch test (30 min) 


Dyes, colours, pigments, oxidation hair dyes, henna powder, depilatories, bleaching 


creams, permanent wave solutions 


* The above list is not exhaustive but indicative of the categories. Any new category or new product should be similarly considered, 


depending on its nature and end use. 


specified in Table 4) on the upper arms or back of 
human subjects as follows: 


The skin should essentially be non-hairy and free from 
any type of skin lesions or other dermatological 
problems. In case the back is hairy, the hair can be cut 
off by clipper or shaver before applying the patches, 
taking care to avoid any abrasions, cuts or lesions. 


In case of rinse off products, rinse the treated sites with 
water to remove any residue after each patch removal 
(or the specified time of contact in case of open patch). 


If the volunteer experiences unbearable discomfort with 
any of the patches the volunteer is instructed to remove 
such patches any time prior to the targeted 24 h contact 
(where applicable). Mark such sites with a blue/black 
skin marker to facilitate evaluation later. 


The volunteer is also requested to note down the sign 
and symptoms of the discomfort and the time of removal 
of the patch and hand it over to the investigator. 


7.1.6.1 Select 200 healthy adult subjects, preferably 
equal number of males and females who do not have 
any previous history of adverse skin conditions or 
allergic reaction and are not under medication likely to 
interfere with the results. Pregnant ladies and breast- 
feeding mothers should be excluded. The typical 
inclusion / exclusion criteria to be kept in mind are as 
listed in Annex A. Explain the test procedure to 
volunteers and obtain a signed informed consent from 
each of them. 


7.1.6.2 Ideally use ready-made standard test patches 
(Finn Chambers/IQ Chambers or such suitable 
equivalent) measuring about 1 cm diameter or 1 cm?. 
Take 0.04 ml or 0.04 g of the sample using a 
micropipette or weighing balance (as applicable) on 
the patch and apply the patch on the upper arm or back 
as mentioned in 4.3.1.2. Alternatively if such patches 
are not available, use 1 cm diameter discs made out of 
chromatography paper (Whatman No. 3) taken on a 
slightly bigger polythene sheet having about 0.25 cm 


hole punched at the centre and fixed on the adhesive 
tape. Keep about 2.5 cm distance between the two 
adjacent test patches (filter paper discs). 


For volatile substances, refer to 4.3.1.2.3 for sample 
application. 


7.1.6.3 Various allergens should be incorporated into 
different patches and all these patches should be applied 
on the skin of the volunteer so that the allergen is in 
direct contact with the skin. Various patches should be 
numbered and an accurate account of the allergens put 
on these patches should be entered into a register for 
records. 


7.1.6.4 The patches are generally applied on the back 
or the upper arm. The skin should essentially be non- 
hairy and free from any type of skin lesions. In case 
the back is hairy, the hair can be cut off by clipper or 
shaver before applying the patches, taking care to avoid 
any cuts or lesions. 


7.1.6.5 Timing and location of the patch test 
7.1.6.5.1 Induction phase 


There is first induction phase where patches as 
described above, will be applied on thrice a week basis 
for three weeks (single patch of the sample on each 
volunteer). The patch is removed after 24 h of contact 
each time and clinical examination is carried out 24 h 
after patch removal (or 24 h after product contact in 
the case of open patches). In case the original site shows 
areaction of >2 on the erythema scale, then an adjacent 
area will be patched. 


7.1.6.5.2 Rest phase 


After the three week induction phase, there will no more 
patch application, this is called as rest phase. The rest 
phase involves two weeks (14 days) of no application 
of any patch in order to develop (if at all) sensitization 
to the test product. 


7.1.6.5.3 Challenge phase 
During challenge phase, single patch for each product 


IS 4011 : 2018 


or ingredient (applied during induction phase) will be 
put on a new site on upper arm or back (naive skin site) 
at approximately a similar position. 


Patch is removed at 24 h and scoring done at 24 h, 
48 h, and 72 h after removal (or 24 h, 48 h, and 72 h 
after product contact in the case of open patches) (120 h 
optional). 


The Draize scale (erythema and oedema) is used for 
evaluation during induction phase (see Table 5). 


The International Contact Dermatitis Research Group 
Scale (ICDRG Scale) is used for evaluation during 
challenge phase (see Table 6). 


7.1.6.5.4 Reactions produced by solid substances are 
generally milder, as the amount of the allergen that can 
enter the skin is usually much less. Thus even milder 
reactions produced by solid agents should be considered 
significant. 


7.1.6.5.5 Sometimes, when the hypersensitivity in a 
volunteer is very mild, there may be no reaction at the 
patch test site after 48 h, though after an additional 
24h, there may be evidence of dermatitis. It is, 
therefore, preferable to take another reading after 
approximately 72 h. 


7.1.6.5.6 Reaction during induction phase suggests skin 
irritation or pre-existing sensitization to the test 
material. Prominent reactions in the challenge phase 
suggest allergenicity to the ingredients of the test 
material. 


7.1.6.5.7 Some individuals develop dermatitis reaction 
to the adhesive plaster which may spread to involve 
the entire test site, making it difficult to observe any 
reaction to the allergen. In such an instance the patch 
can be applied on the upper arm using only small strips 
of adhesive plaster or suitable hypo allergenic plaster. 


7.1.6.5.8 Sometimes particularly in summer, the 
volunteer may develop a miliaria (prickly heat) — like 
reaction at the patch test site due to occlusion. This 
reaction is not reproducible and, therefore, it should 
be regarded as false positive reaction. 


7.1.6.5.9 Some chemicals particularly nickel sulphate 
can at times lead to a pustular reaction which also is 
non-specific. 


NOTE — A report of a Human Repeat Insult Patch Test is not 
complete unless it mentions the following data: 


a) Concentration of the chemical/ agent; 

b) Amount used; 

c) Areas of skin contacted; 

d) Site of application; 

e) Number of days the patch was left on the skin; and 


f) Period after removal of the patch that the readings were 
made. 


7.2 Exposure and Withdrawal Test 


7.2.1 Hypersensitivity of an individual to an agent can 
also be confirmed by asking the individual to stop the 
suspected agent for a week or so. If the reaction subsides 
during this period, it suggests that the agent was 
probably responsible for the dermatitis. Then the 
individual should be asked to use the agent again. In 


Table 5 Draize Scale for Scoring the Treatment Sites 
(Clause 7.1.6.5.3) 


Score for Reaction Score for Oedema Reaction 
Erythema/ 
Dryness/Wrinkles 
dd) (2) (3) (4) 
0 No reaction 0 No reaction 
1 Very slight erythema/dryness with shiny appearance 1 Very slight oedema 
2 Slight erythema/dryness/wrinkles 2 Slight oedema 
3 Moderate erythema/dryness/wrinkle 3 Moderate oedema 
4 Severe erythema/wrinkle/scale 4 Severe oedema 
Table 6 ICDRG Scale for Scoring the Treatment Sites 
(Clauses 7.1.6.5.3 and 7.3.5) 
Symbol Morphology Interpretation 
dd) (2) (3) 
- No reaction Negative 
? Erythema only, no infiltration Doubtful reaction 


+ Erythema, infiltration, possibly discrete papules 


Erythema, infiltration, papules, vesicles 


+ Erythema, infiltration, confluent vesicles 


Ir Different types of reactions (soap effect, vesicles, blister, necrosis) 


nt 


Weak positive reaction 
Strong positive reaction 
Extreme positive reaction 
Irritant reaction 

Not tested 


case the reaction reappears within the next 2-3 days, it 
is suggestive of the causal relationship of the dermatitis 
with the agent. For further confirmation, withdrawal 
of the agent and exposure can be repeated. In case 
multiple agents are suspected, it will be necessary to 
re-expose to these agents one by one and to add every 
new substance after an interval of at least 2 or 3 days 
and preferably after 7 days. 


7.3 Human Repeat Insult Photo Patch Test 
(HRIPPT/RIPPT) 


7.3.1 This is a common methodology for photo 
allergenicity testing and is usually carried out after 
conducting an HRIPT. This test is of particular 
significance if the suspected photo-allergenic product 
(or ingredient) shows absorbance in the UV-A and 
UV-B region (290- 400 nm). 


7.3.2 In induction phase, test material neat cosmetic 
product as such (or diluted solution where defined in 
Table 4) or the highest non-irritant concentration as 
determined through the Preliminary Patch Test (if the 


IS 4011 : 2018 


highest non-irritant concentration is found to be lower 
as compared to the neat product or the dilution where 
specified in Table 4)] is applied twice a week, for three 
weeks on the same site on the back or upper arm (six 
consecutive applications of the product/s). Patches are 
kept in place for 24 h. Skin reaction (if any) is checked 
after patch removal and the test site is exposed to UV 
(UVA, 5 J/cm’). Reactions if any are observed 
immediately and after 24 h. 


7.3.3 The rest phase involves one week of no 
application of any patch in order to develop (if at all) 
sensitization to the test product. 


7.3.4 In the challenge phase only one patch is applied 
to a naive skin site on the back or upper arm. Patch is 
removed after 24 h. Skin reaction (if any) is checked 
after patch removal and the test site is exposed to UV 
(UVA, 5 J/cm’). Reactions (if any) are observed 
immediately and after 24 h, 48 h and 72 h. 


7.3.5 Scoring is carried out as per the ICDRG scales 
(Table 6). A positive reaction in even one subject 
indicates that the product is likely to be photo allergenic. 


SECTION 3 INFORMATIVE ANNEX COVERING INCLUSION-EXCLUSION CRITERIA AND 
LATEST UPDATES ON ALTERNATIVES TO IN-VIVO SAFETY TESTING ON ANIMALS 


ANNEX A 
(Clauses 4.1.3.2.1 and 7.1.6.1) 


TYPICAL INCLUSION / EXCLUSION CRITERIA TO BE FOLLOWED WHILE CONDUCTING 
SKIN IRRITATION / SKIN SENSITIZATION STUDIES ON HUMAN VOLUNTEERS (INCLUDING 
PHOTO-IRRITATION / PHOTO-SENSITIZATION) 


A-1 INCLUSION CRITERIA 


1. Voluntary mn/women beetween 18 and 65 
years. 


Photo type III to V. 

3. Having apparently healthy skin on test area 
For whom the investigator considers that the 
compliance will be correct. 

5. Cooperating, informed of the need and 
duration of the examinations and ready to 
comply with protocol procedures. 

6. Having signed a Consent Form. 

7. Willingness to avoid intense UV exposure on 
test site (sun or artificial UV), during the 
course of the study. 

8. Willingness to avoid excessive water contact 


(for example swimming) or activity which 
causes excessive sweating (that is exercise, 
sauna...), during the course of the study. 


9. Should be able to read and write (in English, 
Hindi or local language). 


10. Having valid proof of identity and age. 
A-2 EXCLUSION CRITERIA 


Pregnant/nursing mothers 


2. Scars, excessive terminal hair or tattoo on the 
studied area. 


3. Henna tattoo anywhere on the body (in case 
of studies involving hair dyes). 


4. Dermatological infection/pathology on the 
level of studied area. 


5. Hypersensitivity, allergy antecedent (to any 


IS 4011 : 2018 


cosmetic product, raw material or hair dye). 
6. Any clinically significant systemic or 
cutaneous disease, which may interfere with 
study treatment or procedures. 
7. Chronic illness which may influence the 
outcome of the study. 


8. Subjects on any medical treatment either 
systemic or topical which may interfere with 
the performance of the study treatment 
(presently or in the past 1 month). 

9. Subject in an exclusion period or participating 
in another food, cosmetic or therapeutic trial. 


ANNEX B 
[Table 1, SI No. (iii)] 
ALTERNATE METHODS FOR SAFETY TESTING 
(Source Reference — OECD Guidelines, EURL ECVAM Recommendations) 


B-1 TESTS THAT MAY BE USED FOR THE 
TOXICITY ASSESSMENT OF COSMETIC 
INGREDIENTS AND PRODUCTS 


B-1.1 Skin Corrosion — Test No. 431 — OECD 
Guideline? — To be used in the frame of a testing 
strategy for corrosion/irritation. 


The test described in this Test Guideline allows the 
identification of corrosive chemical substances and 
mixtures and discriminates corrosives from non- 
corrosive substances and mixtures. The test protocol 
may also provide an indication of the distinction 
between severe and less severe skin corrosives. This 
Test Guideline does not require the use of live animals 
or animal tissue for the assessment of skin corrosivity. 


The test material (solid or liquid) is applied uniformly 
and topically to a three-dimensional human skin model, 
comprising at least a reconstructed human epidermis 
(RhE) with a functional stratum corneum. At least two 
tissue replicates should be used for each test chemical 
and controls for each exposure time. For liquid as well 
as solid chemicals, sufficient amount of test chemical 
should be applied to uniformly cover the epidermis 
surface while avoiding an infinite dose,that is a 
minimum of 70 ul/cm? or 30 mg/cm? should be used. 
Depending on the methods, the epidermis surface 
should be moistened with deionized or distilled water 
before application of solid chemicals, to improve 
contact between the test chemical and the epidermis 
surface. Whenever possible, solids should be tested as 
a fine powder. The application method should be 
appropriate for the test chemical. At the end of the 
exposure period, the test chemical should be carefully 
washed from the epidermis with an aqueous buffer, or 
0.9 percent NaCl. Depending on which of the four 


10 


validated RhE test methods is used, two or three 
exposure periods are used per test chemical (for all four 
valid RhE models: 3 min and 1 h; for EpiSkin™ an 
additional exposure time of 4 h). Depending on the RhE 
test method used and the exposure period assessed, the 
incubation temperature during exposure may vary 
between room temperature and 37°C. 


Concurrent negative and positive controls (PC) should 
be used in each run to demonstrate that viability (with 
negative controls), barrier function and resulting tissue 
sensitivity (with the PC) of the tissues are within a 
defined historical acceptance range. The suggested PC 
chemicals are glacial acetic acid or 8N KOH depending 
upon the RhE model used. It should be noted that 8N 
KOH is a direct MTT reducer that might require 
adapted controls. The suggested negative controls are 
0.9 percent (w/v) NaCl or water. 


The principle of the human skin model assay is based 
on the hypothesis that corrosive chemicals are able to 
penetrate the stratum corneum by diffusion or erosion, 
and are cytotoxic to the underlying cell layers. 
Corrosive materials are identified by their ability to 
produce a decrease in cell viability below defined 
threshold levels at specified exposure periods. 


Suitable Models for the test include: 


a) In Vitro Skin Corrosion: Human Skin Model 
Test (HSM): EpiSkin™ (SM) 

b) Jn Vitro Skin Corrosion: Human Skin Model 
Test (HSM): EpiDerm™ SCT (EPI-200) 

c) In Vitro Skin Corrosion: Human Skin Model 
Test (HSM): SkinEthic™ RhE 

d) Zn Vitro Skin Corrosion: Human Skin Model 
Test (HSM): epiCS® 


The optical density (OD) values obtained for each test 
chemical should be used to calculate percentage of 
viability relative to the negative control, which is set at 
100 percent. The cut-off percentage cell viability values 
distinguishing corrosive from non-corrosive test 
chemical (or discriminating between different corrosive 
sub-categories) depend on the RhE Model adopted as 
specified in the Guideline. 


For each tissue, OD values and calculated percentage 
cell viability data for the test material, positive and 
negative controls, should be reported in tabular form, 
including data from replicate repeat experiments as 
appropriate, mean and individual values. 


Also kindly refer to OECD Guidance Document 203 
— New Guidance Document on An Integrated 
Approach on Testing and Assessment (ZATA) for Skin 
Corrosion and Irritation 


B-1.2 Skin Irritation — Test No. 439 — OECD 
Guidelines!) — To be used in the frame of a testing 
strategy for corrosion/irritation. 


Also kindly refer to OECD Guidance Document 203 
— New Guidance Document on An Integrated 
Approach on Testing and Assessment (ZATA) for 
Skin Corrosion and Irritation: 


This Test Guideline describes an in vitro procedure that 
may be used for the hazard identification of irritant 
chemicals (substances and mixtures) in accordance with 
the UN Globally Harmonized System of Classification 
and Labelling (GHS) Category 2 and discriminates 
Category 2 chemicals from those not classified for skin 
irritation. It is based on reconstructed human epidermis 
(RhE), which in its overall design closely mimics the 
biochemical and physiological properties of the upper 
parts of the human skin. Cell viability is measured by 
enzymatic conversion of the vital dye MTT into a blue 
formazan salt that is quantitatively measured after 
extraction from tissues. Irritant test chemicals are 
identified by their ability to decrease cell viability below 
defined threshold levels (below or equal to 50 percent 
for UN GHS Category 2). This Test Guideline also 
includes a set of Performance Standards for the 
assessment of similar and modified RhE-based test 
methods. Depending on the regulatory framework and 
the classification system in use, this procedure may be 
used to determine the skin irritancy of test substances 
as a stand-alone replacement test for in vivo skin 
irritation testing, or as a partial replacement test, within 
a tiered testing strategy. 


The Test Guideline is applicable to solids, liquids, semi- 
solids and waxes. The liquids may be aqueous or non- 
aqueous; solids may be soluble or insoluble in water. 
Whenever possible, solids should be ground to a fine 
powder before application; no other pre-treatment of 


IS 4011 : 2018 


the sample is required. The current Test Guideline does 
not allow testing of gases and aerosols. It should also 
be noted that highly coloured chemicals may interfere 
with the cell viability measurements and need the use 
of adapted controls for corrections. 


A single testing run composed of three replicate tissues 
should be sufficient for a test chemical when the 
classification is unequivocal. However, in cases of 
borderline results, such as non-concordant replicate 
measurements and/or mean percent viability equal to 
50 + 5 percent, a second run should be considered, as 
well as a third one in case of discordant results between 
the first two runs. 


The test chemical is applied topically to a three- 
dimensional RhE model, comprised of non-transformed 
human-derived epidermal keratinocytes, which have 
been cultured to form a multilayered, highly 
differentiated model of the human epidermis. It consists 
of organized basal, spinous and granular layers, and a 
multilayered stratum corneum containing intercellular 
lamellar lipid layers representing main lipid classes 
analogous to those found in vivo. 


a) In Vitro Skin Irritation: Reconstructed Human 
Epidermis Model Test (RhE). EpiSkin™ 


b) In Vitro Skin Irritation: Reconstructed Human 
Epidermis Model Test (RhE). Modified 
EpiDerm™ SIT 

c) In Vitro Skin Irritation: Reconstructed Human 


Epidermis Model Test (RhE). SkinEthic™ 
RHE 


B-1.3 Skin Sensitization 


B-1.3.1 In Chemico Skin Sensitisation: Direct Peptide 
Reactivity Assay (DPRA) — Test No. TG 442C - OECD 
Guidelines |») 


There is general agreement regarding the key biological 
events underlying skin sensitisation. The existing 
knowledge of the chemical and biological mechanisms 
associated with skin sensitisation has been summarised 
in the form of an Adverse Outcome Pathway (AOP), 
from the molecular initiating event through the 
intermediate events to the adverse effect namely allergic 
contact dermatitis in humans. Within the skin 
sensitisation AOP, the molecular initiating event is the 
covalent binding of electrophilic substances to 
nucleophilic centres in skin proteins. 


The Direct Peptide Reactivity Assay (DPRA) is proposed 
to address the molecular initiating event of the skin 
sensitisation (AOP), namely protein reactivity, by 
quantifying the reactivity of test chemicals towards model 
synthetic peptides containing either lysine or cysteine. 
Cysteine and lysine percent peptide depletion values are 
then used to categorise a substance in one of four classes 


IS 4011 : 2018 


of reactivity for supporting the discrimination between 
skin sensitisers and non-sensitisers. 


The test method described in this Test Guideline can 
be used, in combination with other complementary 
information, to support the discrimination between skin 
sensitisers (that is UN GHS Category 1) and non- 
sensitisers in the context of an Integrated Approach on 
Testing & Assessment (IATA). This Test Guideline 
cannot be used on its own, neither to sub-categorise 
skin sensitisers into sub-categories 1A and 1B as 
defined by UN GHS (1), for authorities implementing 
these two optional sub-categories, nor to predict 
potency for safety assessment decisions. However, 
depending on the regulatory framework, a positive 
result with the DPRA may be used on its own to classify 
a chemical into UN GHS category 1. 


The DPRA is an in chemico method which quantifies 
the remaining concentration of cysteine- or lysine- 
containing peptide following 24 h incubation with the 
test chemical at 25 + 2.5°C. The synthetic peptides 
contain phenylalanine to aid in the detection. Relative 
peptide concentration is measured by high-performance 
liquid chromatography (HPLC) with gradient elution 
and UV detection at 220 nm. Cysteine- and lysine 
peptide percent depletion values are then calculated 
and used in a prediction model which allows assigning 
the test chemical to one of four reactivity classes used 
to support the discrimination between sensitisers and 
non-sensitisers. 


B-1.3.2 In Vitro Skin Sensitisation: ARE-Nrf2 
Luciferase Test Method - Test No. TG 442D - OECD 
Guidelines ))->) 


There is general agreement regarding the key biological 
events underlying skin sensitisation. The existing 
knowledge of the chemical and biological mechanisms 
associated with skin sensitisation has been summarised 
in the form of an Adverse Outcome Pathway (AOP), 
going from the molecular initiating event through the 
intermediate events up to the adverse health effect, that 
is. allergic contact dermatitis in humans. The molecular 
initiating event is the covalent binding of electrophilic 
substances to nucleophilic centres in skin proteins. The 
second key event in this AOP takes place in the 
keratinocytes and includes inflammatory responses as 
well as gene expression associated with specific cell 
signaling pathways such as the antioxidant/electrophile 
response element (ARE)-dependent pathways. The 
third key event is the activation of dendritic cells, 
typically assessed by expression of specific cell surface 
markers, chemokines and cytokines. The fourth key 
event is T-cell proliferation. 


The test method described in this Test Guideline (ARE- 
Nrf2 luciferase test method) is proposed to address the 


12 


second key event as explained above. Skin sensitisers 
have been reported to induce genes that are regulated 
by the antioxidant response element (ARE). Small 
electrophilic substances such as skin sensitisers can act 
on the sensor protein Keap! (Kelch-like ECH- 
associated protein 1), by e.g. covalent modification of 
its cysteine residue, resulting in its dissociation from 
the transcription factor Nrf2 (nuclear factor-erythroid 
2-related factor 2). The dissociated Nrf2 can then 
activate ARE-dependent genes such as those coding 
for phase II detoxifying enzymes. 


B-1.4 Eye Irritation 


B-1.4.1 Bovine Cornea Opacity Test (BCOP) — Test 
No. 437 — OECD Guidelines) ? 


Useful for the identification of ocular corrosives and 
severe irritants (chemicals inducing serious eye 
damage) as well as chemicals not requiring a 
classification for eye irritation (non-irritants) but not 
of mild/moderate ocular irritants. If combined with 
other alternative test methods in the frame of a testing 
strategy (for example Bottom-Up and Top-Down 
Approach, Scott L. et al. 2009), can lead to full 
characterization of the eye irritation and corrosion 
potential of an ingredient or product. 


The BCOP test method is an organotypic model that 
provides short-term maintenance of normal physiological 
and biochemical function of the bovine cornea in vitro. 
In this test method, damage by the test chemical is 
assessed by quantitative measurements of changes in 
corneal opacity and permeability with an opacity meter 
and a visible light spectrophotometer, respectively. 
Corneal opacity is measured quantitatively with the aid 
of an opacity meter as the amount of light transmission 
through the cornea, resulting in opacity values measured 
on a continuous scale. Permeability is measured 
quantitatively as the amount of sodium fluorescein dye 
that passes across the full thickness of the cornea, as 
detected in the medium in the posterior chamber. Test 
chemicals are applied to the epithelial surface of the 
cornea by addition to the anterior chamber of the corneal 
holder. Both measurements are used to calculate an TVIS, 
which is used to assign an in vitro irritancy hazard 
classification category for prediction of the in vivo ocular 
irritation potential of a test chemical. 


Once the opacity and mean permeability (OD490) 
values have been corrected for background opacity and 
the negative control permeability OD490 values, the 
mean opacity and permeability OD490 values for each 
treatment group should be combined in an empirically- 
derived formula to calculate an in vitro irritancy score 
(TVIS) for each treatment group as follows: 


IVIS = mean opacity value + (15 x mean 
permeability OD490 value) 


The IVIS cut-off values for identifying test chemicals 
as inducing serious eye damage (UN GHS Category 1) 
and test chemicals not requiring classification for eye 
irritation or serious eye damage (UN GHS No 
Category) are given hereafter: 


IVIS UN GHS 

<3 No category 

<3;<55 No prediction can be made 
> 55 Category 1 


B-1.4.2 The Isolated Chicken Eye Test (ICE) — Test 
No. 438 — OECD Guidelines?) ? 


The Isolated Chicken Eye Test (ICE) Method is an in 
vitro test method that can be used to identify chemicals 
(substances or mixtures) as either (a) causing “serious 
eye damage” [category 1 of the Globally Harmonized 
System for the Classification and Labelling of 
chemicals (GHS)], or (b) not requiring classification 
for eye irritation or serious eye damage according to 
the GHS. 


The ICE test method is an organotypic model that 
provides short-term maintenance of the chicken eye in 
vitro. In this test method, damage by the test chemical 
is assessed by determination of corneal swelling, 
opacity, and fluorescein retention. While the latter two 
parameters involve a qualitative assessment, analysis 
of corneal swelling provides for a quantitative 
assessment. Each measurement is either converted into 
a quantitative score used to calculate an overall 
Irritation Index, or assigned a qualitative categorization 
that is used to assign an in vitro ocular hazard 
classification, either as UN GHS Category 1 or as UN 
GHS non-classified. Either of these outcomes can then 
be used to predict the potential in vivo serious eye 
damage or no requirement for eye hazard classification 
of a test chemical. However, no classification can be 
given for chemicals not predicted as causing serious 
eye damage or as not classified with the ICE test 
method. 


B-1.5 Photo Toxicity 


B-1.5.1 In Vitro 3T3 NRU Phototoxicity Test — Test 
No. 432 — OECD Guidelines" 


The in vitro 3T3 NRU phototoxicity test is based on a 
comparison of the cytotoxicity of a chemical when 
tested in the presence and in the absence of exposure 
to a non-cytotoxic dose of simulated solar light. 
Cytotoxicity in this test is expressed as a concentration- 
dependent reduction of the uptake of the vital dye 
Neutral Red when measured 24 h after treatment with 
the test chemical and irradiation. Neutral Red is a weak 
cationic dye that readily penetrates cell membranes by 
non-diffusion, accumulating intra cellularly in 
lysosomes. Alterations of the cell surface of the 


IS 4011 : 2018 


sensitive lysosomal membrane lead to lysosomal 
fragility and other changes that gradually become 
irreversible. Such changes brought about by the action 
of xenobiotics result in a decreased uptake and binding 
of NR. It is thus possible to distinguish between viable, 
damaged or dead cells, which is the basis of this test. 


Balb/c 3T3 cells are maintained in culture for 24 h for 
formation of monolayers. Two 96-well plates per test 
chemical are pre-incubated with eight different 
concentrations of the test substance for 1 h. Thereafter 
one of the two plates is exposed to the highest non- 
cytotoxic irradiation dose whereas the other plate is 
kept in the dark. In both plates the treatment medium 
is then replaced by culture medium and after another 
24h of incubation cell viability is determined by Neutral 
Red uptake. Cell viability is expressed as percentage 
of untreated solvent controls and is calculated for each 
test concentration. To predict the phototoxic potential, 
the concentration responses obtained in the presence 
and in the absence of irradiation are compared, usually 
at the IC., level, that is, the concentration reducing cell 
viability to 50 percent compared to the untreated 
controls. 


Test chemicals shall be dissolved in buffered salt 
solutions, for example Earle’s Balanced Salt Solution 
(EBSS), or other physiologically balanced buffer 
solutions, which must be free from protein components 
and light absorbing components (for example, pH- 
indicator colours and vitamins) to avoid interference 
during irradiation. Since during irradiation cells are kept 
for about 50 minutes outside of the CO, incubator, care 
has to be taken to avoid alkalisation. If weak buffers 
like EBSS are used this can be achieved by incubating 
the cells at 7.5 percent CO,. If the cells are incubated 
at 5 percent CO, only, a stronger buffer should be 
selected. 


Test chemicals of limited solubility in water should be 
dissolved in an appropriate solvent. Ifa solvent is used 
it must be present at a constant volume in all cultures, 
that is in the negative (solvent) controls as well as in 
all concentrations of the test chemical, and be 
noncytotoxic at that concentration. Test chemical 
concentrations should be selected so as to avoid 
precipitation or cloudy solutions. 


Dimethylsulphoxide (DMSO) and ethanol (EtOH) are 
the recommended solvents. Other solvents of low 
cytotoxicity may be appropriate. Prior to use, all 
solvents should be assessed for specific properties, for 
example, reaction with the test chemical, quenching of 
the phototoxic effect, radical scavenging properties and/ 
or chemical stability in the solvent. 


The highest concentration of the test substance should 
be within physiological test conditions, for example 
osmotic and pH stress should be avoided. 


IS 4011 : 2018 


A test substance with a PIF < 2 or an MPE < 0.1 
predicts: “no phototoxicity”. A PIF >2 and < 5 or an 
MPE > 0.1 and < 0.15 predicts: “probable 
phototoxicity” and a PIF > 5 or an MPE > 0.15 predicts: 
“phototoxicity”. 


B-1.6 Skin Absorption 


B-1.6.1 Skin Absorption: In Vitro Method — Test No. 
428 — OECD Guidelines” 


This Test method has been designed to provide 
information on absorption of a test substance, (ideally 
radiolabelled), applied to the surface of a skin sample 
separating the two chambers (a donor chamber and a 
receptor chamber) of a diffusion cell. Static and flow- 
through diffusion cells are both acceptable. 


Skin from human or animal sources can be used. 
Although viable skin is preferred, non-viable skin can 
also be used. Either epidermal membranes 
(enzymically, heat or chemically separated) or split 
thickness skin (typically 200-400 im thick) prepared 
with a dermatome, are acceptable. Full thickness skin 
may be used but excessive thickness (DB. > 1 mm) 
should be avoided unless specifically required for 
determination of the test chemical in layers of the skin. 
The selection of species, anatomical site and preparative 
technique must be justified. Acceptable data from a 
minimum of four replicates per test preparation are 
required. 


The skin has been shown to have the capability to 
metabolize some chemicals during percutaneous 
absorption. In this case, metabolites of the test chemical 
may be analyzed by appropriate methods. Normally 
more than one concentration of the test substance is 
used in typical formulations, spanning the realistic range 
of potential human exposures. The application should 
mimic human exposure, normally 1-5 mg/cm? of skin 
for a solid and up to 10 ul/cm? for liquids. The 
temperature must be constant because it affects the 
passive diffusion of chemicals. The absorption ofa test 
substance during a given time period (normally 24h) is 
measured by analysis of the receptor fluid and the 
distribution of the test substance chemical in the test 
system and the absorption profile with time should be 
presented. 


The test substance is the entity whose penetration 
characteristics are to be studied. Ideally, the test 
substance should be radiolabelled. The test substance 
preparation 


(for example, neat, diluted or formulated material 
containing the test substance which is applied to the 
skin) should be the same (or a realistic surrogate) as 
that to which humans or other potential target species 
may be exposed. Any variation from the ‘in-use’ 


14 


preparation must be justified. 


Normally more than one concentration of the test 
substance is used in typical formulations, spanning the 
realistic range of potential human exposures. Likewise, 
testing a range of typical formulations should be 
considered. 


In all studies adequate recovery should be achieved 
(the aim should be a mean of 


100 +10 percent of the radioactivity and any deviation 
should be justified). The amount of test substance in 
the receptor fluid, skin preparation, skin surface 
washings and apparatus rinse should be analysed, using 
a suitable technique. 


The analysis of receptor fluid, the distribution of the 
test substance chemical in the test system and the 
absorption profile with time, should be presented. When 
finite dose conditions of exposure are used, the quantity 
washed from the skin, the quantity associated with the 
skin (and in the different skin layers if analysed) and 
the amount present in the receptor fluid (rate, and 
amount or percentage of applied dose) should be 
calculated. Skin absorption may sometimes be 
expressed using receptor fluid data alone. However, 
when the test substance remains in the skin at the end 
of the study, it may need to be included in the total 
amount absorbed. When infinite dose conditions of 
exposure are used the data may permit the calculation 
of a permeability constant (Kp). Under the latter 
conditions, the percentage absorbed is not relevant. 


B-1.7 Others 


B-1.7.1 Stably Transfected Human Estrogen Receptor- 
alpha Transcriptional Activation Assay for Detection 
of Estrogenic Agonist-Activity of Chemicals (STTA). 
STTA for EDs — Test No. 455 - OECD Guidelines” 


This Test Guideline describes an in vitro assay, which 
provides mechanistical information, and can be used 
for screening and prioritization purposes. The test 
system utilises the hERalpha-HeLa-9903 cell line 
derived from a human cervical tumor and stably 
transfected. This cell line can measure the ability of a 
test chemical to induce hERalpha-mediated 
transactivation of luciferase gene expression. The cells 
are exposed to 7 non-cytotoxic concentrations of the 
test chemical for 20-24 h to induce the reporter gene 
products. Four reference chemicals should be included 
in each experiment: a strong estrogen (17beta- 
estradiol), a weak estrogen (17alpha-estradiol), a very 
weak estrogen (17alpha-methyltestosterone) and a 
negative control (corticosterone). The activity of the 
luciferase enzyme is measured in a luminometer. A test 
chemical is considered to be positive if the maximum 
response induced is equal to or exceeds 10 percent of 


the response of the positive control (1 nM 17alpha- 
estradiol) in at least two of two or two of three runs. 


B-1.7.2 3T3 Neutral Red Uptake Cytotoxicity Assay 
for Acute Oral Toxicity Testing — EURL ECVAM 
Recommendations - April 2013 


3T3 NRU test method shows a high sensitivity (ca 95 
percent) and, consequently, a low false negative rate 
(ca 5 percent) when employed in conjunction with a 
prediction model to distinguish potentially toxic versus 
non-toxic (that is classified versus non-classified) 
substances. However, chemicals not exhibiting 
significant cytotoxicity but which act through 
mechanisms specific only to certain cell types and 
tissues (for example of the heart or central nervous 
system) may not be indicated as potentially acutely toxic 
by this method. Moreover, chemicals requiring 
metabolic activation to induce toxicity may also go 
undetected since the cell model lacks significant 
metabolic capacity. Care must be taken therefore in 
interpreting negative results derived from this assay. 
Results derived from the 3T3 NRU test method should 
be always used in combination with other information 
sources to build confidence in the decision not to 
classify a substance for acute oral toxicity. Possible 
complementary information sources include chemical 
analogues, physico-chemical properties, structural 
alerts, structure—activity relationships, and toxicokinetic 
data. The 3T3 NRU method would fit well therefore 
within a Weight of Evidence (WoE) approach or as a 
component of an Integrated Testing Strategy (ITS). 


The 3T3 NRU cytotoxicity assay employs the BALB/ 
c3T3 mouse fibroblast cell line and is based on the 


15 


IS 4011 : 2018 


ability of viable cells to incorporate and bind the dye 
Neutral Red (NR). The uptake of NR is measured 
spectrophotometrically (Stokes et al., 2008). The basic 
concept of basal cytotoxicity assays is that chemicals 
exert their toxic effects by disrupting structures and 
functions universal to all cells, such as cell membranes 


(Gennari et al, 2004). With the basal cytotoxic assays 
it is possible to quantify the cytotoxicity of a compound 
by its IC, value, that is the concentration of the tested 
substance that decreases cell viability by 50 percent in 
the cell culture. 


B-1.8 Genotoxicity 
The following OECD Guidelines may be considered — 


a) OECD 471 — Bacterial Reverse Mutation 
Test 
OECD TG 473 — In vitro Mammalian 


Chromosomal Aberration Test 


b) 


c) OECD 476 — In Vitro Mammalian Cell Gene 
Mutation Test 
d) OECD TG 487 — In vitro Mammalian Cell 


Micronucleus Test 
NOTES 


1 The test method described in this Annex is based on the official 
guidelines/recommendations as mentioned. Kindly refer to the 
latest updated version of the Guideline/Recommendation for 
complete information on the scope, methodology and 
limitations. 

2 This test can also be used for evaluating oral mucosal irritation 
in the absence of a suitable alternate methodology. 


3 For skin sensitization, an Integrated Testing Strategy needs 
to be adopted and the results cannot be interpreted on the basis 
of only one test. Prediction should be considered in the 
framework of an IATA and at least 2 out of 3 tests need to show 
absence of skin sensitization. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: PCD 19 (10323). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.1.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 26 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


