Handbook of Agricultural Machinery Terminology

`Handbook of Agricultural Machinery Terminology

BUREAU
MANAK

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFA/R MARG

BHAVAN,

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

SP 44 : 1989
FIRST PUBLISHED MARCH 1989 FIRST REPRINT JANUARY 1990 SECOND REPRINT SEPTEMBER 1993 0 BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS

UDC ISBN

631&021)

: 001.4

81-7061-022-2

PRICE Rs 250.00

PRINTED

IN INDIA

AT KAPOOR ART PRESS, A3813 MAYAPURI, NEW DELHI 110064 AND PUBLISHED BY BUREAU OF INDlAN STANDARDS, NEW DELHI 110002

FOREWORD
With the increasing emphasis on farm mechanization for boosting agricultural a large number of agricultural production and for post-harvest processing, machinery for various operations are being designed, developed, manufactured and used in the country. For providing authentic definition of the terms used in respect of various agricultural machinery, a number of Indian Standards have been brought out as well as some definitions covered in various product specifications. However, the need for consolidated publication covering all the terms has always been acutely felt. It is hoped that the Handbook will help in the adoption of uniform definitions thereby facilitating interpretation and communication amongst various interests. The Handbook will also satisfy a longfelt need of agricultural engineering profession. The terms included operations performed in the Handbook are grouped on the basis of sequence of by various equipment and are given in the following order :

Harvesting m>

4 General terms, b) Tractors and power tillers, cl Tillage, 4 Tillage equipment, e) Sowing and fertilizers application equipment, equipment, r) Intercultivation Irrigation equipment and systems, 8) Horticultural equipment, h) 3 Forestry equipment, k) Plant protection equipment,
and threshing equipment, Farm transport equipment, and 4 Processing equipment. P) an alphabetical index of the terms has been provided at the

For ease of reference, end.

In case of dispute or ambiguity, the definitions, standards (see Appendix A), shall be applicable.

as appearing

in the relevant

CONTENTS
PAGE
0. FOREWORD I. GENERAL 2. TERMS 3. TILLAGE 4. TILLAGE 4.1 Primary 4.2 Other EQUIPMENT Tillage Equipment TERMS RELATING TO TRACTORS AND POWER TILLERS
V

1 2 ,,I 2 15 15 23 Equipment. APPLICATION EQUIPMENT 23 29 37 39 43 48 52 EQUIPMENT 56 64 64 74 75

Implements Tillage

4.3 Secondary 5. SOWING AND

FERTILIZER

6. INTERCULTIVATION 7. IRRIGATION

EQUIPMENT

EQUIPMENT EQUIPMENT

8. HORTICULTURAL 9. FORESTRY 10. CROP

EQUIPMENT EQUlPMENT THRESHING EQUIPMENT

PROTECTION AND

11. HARVESTING 12. FARM

TRANSPORT

13. PROCESSING APPENDIX INDEX A

EQUIPMENT

SP : 44-1989

1. GENERAL

TERMS

1.1 Animal-Drawn 1.2 Belt-Driven pulley. 1.3 Draft -The pull. -

-

Drawn

by animal. by a driving component belt and of the

1.17.2 Maintenance Instructions - A document which explains the maintenance and adjustand the manner of underment required, taking work on the equipment at the operator's level. 1.18 Parts Catalogue - A document which lists parts which are required to service the equipment. (It is recommended that this should be a separate publication). 1.19 Power power. Lift -- Raised or lowered by engine

Operated horizontal

1.4 Effective Field Capacity-The actual area covered by the implement based on its total time consumed and its width. 1.5 Engine-Driven Operated by an engine.

1.6 Field Efficiency-The quotient of the effective field capacity and theoretical field capacity expressed in percentage. 1.7 Ground Wheel Driven in contact with the ground. 1.8 Hand-Operated Operated by a wheel

1.20 Power Operated -Operated by a prime mover, such as engine, tractor, power tiller and electric motor. 1.21 Power-Take-Off (PTO) Driven by power-take-off of a tractor. Operated

Operated

by hand.

1.22 Pre-Delivery Set-Up Publications - Documents which outline, in detail, the procedures for properly preparing equipment for delivery to the customer. 1.23 Preventive Maintenance - Systematic series of inspections and operations performed periodically to maintain or improve the efficiency and performance of the tractor. 1.24 Pull -The implement. total force required to pull an speed for

1.9 Implement - Equipment generally having no driven/moving parts, such as harrow or having only simple mechanisms such as piough. 1.10 Implement Drive Line -- The shafts, universal joints, connectors and fasteners provided with the implements to transmit rotational power from tractor power-take-off (PTO) to the first component on the implement, such as a gear set, pulley, sprocket or fly wheel. 1.11 Installation - Operations performed to make the tractor field-worthy to give trouble-free service for maximum working hours. 1.12 Machine-A combination of rigid or resistant bodies having definite motions and capable of performing useful work. 1.13 Manually-Operated beings. Operated by human

1.25 Rated Engine Speed -The engine specified by the tractor manufacturer continuous operation at full load. 1.26 Self-Lift - Raised or lowered a ground wheel or wheels.

by drive from

1.27 Self-Propelled - Propelled and operated by a power unit or units integral with the machine. 1.28 Semi-Mounted tractor, both when -Partly in and out carried on of operation. a

1.14 Manufacturer-Any person or organization who actually manufactures tractor components fully or partially and assembles the tractor. 1.15 Mounted-Attached to a tractor so as to form a single unit and to be completely carried on the tractor when out of operation. 1.16 Operator - A person who actually operates the tractor. An operator may or may not be the user. 1.17 Operator's Handbook - A document which explains the procedures for the proper operation and maintenance of the equipment. 1.17.1 Lubrication Instructions - A document which outlines ail aspects of lubrication of the equipment. 1

1.29 Service Manual - A document which provides detailed procedures for the proper repair and/or overhaul of the equipment by a qualified mechanic. 1.30 Side Draft-The horizontal component of the pull perpendicular to the direction of motion. This is developed if the centre of resistance is not directly behind the centre of pull. 1.31 Soil Working Surface - Portion of a tool, implement or machine designed to be in contact with soil in order to effect proper manipulation. 1.32 Specific Fuel Consumption-The fuel consumed per unit of work. 1.33 Steerage - Allowing limited lateral ment under manual control independent tractor. mass of

moveof the

SP : 44-1989 - Any person or organization appointed or recognized by the manufacturer for sale of tractor of his make. The manufacturer may or may not be a supplier. 1.34 Supplier

transmitted to the ground, both by the rear and the front wheels. The rear and the front wheels need not be of the same diameter. 2) Standard tractor with rear-wheel drive A standard tractor whose engine power is transmitted to the ground exclusively by the rear driving wheels.

1.35 Theoretical Field Capacity-The rate of field coverage of an implement based on 100 percent of time at the rated speed and covering 100 percent of its rated width.
1.36 Tool -

An individual working element. - Operated by a by a tractor. but not tractor

d) Tricycle tractor - A wheeled tractor which e) Wasp-waisted

1.37 TractqrrOperated 1.38 Trailed - Drawn carried on by it.

is supported on three or four wheels with both front or rear wheels placed very close.
tractor - A wheeled tractor which, depending on its type of construction, is not only suitable for working with implements and machines at front and rear but is also designed to operate under-slung implements.

1.39 Unit Draft - Draft per unit cross-sectional area of the furrow. 1.40 User - Any person or organization purchases and uses the tractor. 2. TERMS RELATING POWER TILLERS 2.1 Types 2.1.1 Agricultural Tractor - A self-propelled wheeled vehicle having two axles or a track-laying or semi-track-laying machine, more particularly designed to pull, push, carry, and operate implements and machines used for agricultural work (including forestry work). 2.1.1.1 Semi-track laying tractor - A tractor in which the means of propulsion in rear consist of an endless track(s) passing round the driving wheel(s) and the pinion(s), and the front wheels consist of pneumatic tyres. 2.1.1.2 Track which the means endless track(s) wheel(s) and the
tractor - A tractor in of propulsion consist of an passing round the driving pinion(s). laying

who AND

TO TRACTORS

2.1.2 Power Tiller - A prime mover in which direction of travel and its control for field operation is performed by the operator walking behind it. It is also known as hand or walking type tractor.
NOTE - Power for riding. tillers may be provided with the attachment

2.1.2.1 General purpose type - The power tiller which can be used for a number of farm operations including the types defined under 2.1.2.2 and 2.1.2.3.

2.1.2.2 Pull typeThe power tiller which pulls various kinds of implements. 2.1.2.3 Tilling type - The power tiller which uses an engine power driven tilling device, such as rotary and crank or screw blades. 2.1.2.4 Track-laying power tiller - A power tiller propelled by tracks passing around the drive sprocket (see Fig. 1 ).

2.1.1.3 Wheeled tractor - An agricultural tractor, with at least two axles, the means of propulsion of which consist of wheels generally fitted with pneumatic tyres. a) Hillside tractor-A wheeled tractor equipped with manual or automatic means of compensating for sloping ground. b) Self-propelled tool carrier - A wheeled tractor which, apart from the work it is able to accomphsh with implements placed behind or in front, is adapted and designed primarily for working with rigid full-width implements mounted between the axles. c) Standard tractor - A wheeled tractor adapted and designed, more particularly bq' its construction, for workihg with implements and machines fixed behind or in front and interchangeable. 1) Standard tractor with four-wheel drive A standard tractor whose engine power is

FIG. 1
2.1.2.5 Wheeled power tiller - A power tiller propelled by wheels fitted with pneumatic tyres.

a) Single-wheel

power tiller - A wheeled power tiller with one driving wheel (see Fig. 2).

b) Two-wheel power tiller - A wheeled power

tiller with two driving wheels (see Fig. 3 ).

2

SP : 44-1989 2.2.5 Cage Wheel, HaF-

is used in conjunction

A cage wheel which with pneumatic wheel.

23.6 Cleat-A flat or angle strip fitted to the rim of a steel wheel. 23.1 Cleated Wheelcleats. A steel wheel fitted with

2.2.8 DifferentialA device to enable two wheels, driven from a single shaft, to rotate at different speeds.
2.2.9 Differential Lock - A device when engaged would permit two driven wheels on two separate shafts to rotate at the same speed with a common drive member. 2.2.10 Drawbar - A member fitted to a tractor through which the pulling force to an implement or trailer is applied. It may be swinging or fixed type and may be a adjustable. 2.2.11 Extension Rim-A rim with lugs or cleats, fitted to the side of a steel driving wheel. 2.2.12 Final Drive - A device provided for additional reduction of speed between the drive shaft from the transmission and the axle connecting the drive member. 2.2.13 Girdle - A traction aid with a series of strakes whjch are connected together by a chain or chains or an articulated frame (see Fig. 5).

FIG. 2

FIG. 3 2.2 Components 2.2.1 Belt Pulley - A pulley driven by a power unit to transmit power to another machine or machines by means of a belt.

2.2.2 Breakaway Hydraulic Coupling - A quick-release hydraulic coupling incorporating automatic disconnection as a safety device. 2.2.3 Cage WheelA wheel or an attachment to a wheel with spaced crossbars for reducing ground pressure and/or improving traction of a tractor or power tiller, generally used in wet-land seed-bed preparation (see Fig. 4).

FIG. 5

2.2.14 Grass Stud - A round pyramid-headed bolt fitted to a steel driving wheel in place of a lug or cleat. 2.2.15 Grouser - A transverse strake, incorporated in or attachable to a track, to assist adhesion between the track and the ground. 2.2.16 Hydraulic Power Lift - A mechanism driven by a tractor's power unit to raise, hold or lower mounted or semi-mounted equipment by hydraulic means. 2.2.17 Main Transmission - A combination of gears and shafts to transmit the power from-the engine of a tractor to its wheels or tracks.
2.2.18 Pick-Up-Hitch - A hitch, operated by a power lift, for connecting the drawbar of a trailer or machine to a tractor.

FIG. 4 23.4 Cage Wheel, Full-

in place of pneumatic

The cage wheel used wheels (tyres).
3

SP : 44-1989 2.2.19 Pneumatic Tyred Wheelfitted with a pneumatic tyre. A wheel 2.2.31 generally Steel fitted CF'heel- A wheel made of steel with spade lug:, or cleats. of metal lugs or tyred Lvheel.

2.2.20 Power-Llyt -- A mechanism driven by a tractor's power unit to raise or lower mounted or semi-mounted equipment. 2.2.21 Power Take-Off -~ A shaft, usually externally splined, to transmit torsional power to another machine. It is abbreviated as PTO (see Fig. 6).

An assembh 2.2.32 Strakes cleats attached to a pneumatic

2.2.33 Three-Point Linkuge ~~ A combination of one upper link and two lower links. each articulated to the tractor and the implement at their ends. to connect the implement to the tractor (see Fig. X ). 2.2.33.1 Hitch point An articulated connection between a link and the implement. For geometrical purposes. the hitch point is the centre of the articulated connection hetwcen ;t link and the implement. 2.2.33.2 L_c\~cllitlg adjustI)lwt tay~~ (4 of Fig. 9 )-- The mobcment. measured vertically, of one lower hitch point higher or lower than the other, to provide an inclination to the implement.

TME- OFF WELD

TAKE-OFF 0XJER~ FIG.

6

2.2.33.3 Llf't rods Connections that transmit force to the lower links for raising and lowering. 2.2.33.4 Linch pin A pin fitted \vith a spring retaining ring by which the lower and upper links of three-point linkage are retained in position at their hitch and link points.
NOTE -~ This 19 also used for retaining the implement with drawbar and also attachments like check chakns, etc.

2.2.22 Power Take-Off Cover ---- A protective cap enclosing a power take-off (see Fig. 6). 2.2.23 Power- Take-Off Shield -- A rigid guard fitted on a tractor, covering the tractor power take-off as a safety device (see Fig. 6). 2.2.24 Quick-Release Hydraulic Coupling - A self-sealing' coupling providing quick connection and disconnection of a tractor-to-implement hydraulic pipeline. 2.2.25 Road BandA rim fitted to a steel wheel to prevent contact of the lugs or cleats with the road surface. 2'.2.26 Road PlatesPlates with a flat surface fitted to a track to prevent contact of the grousers with the ground. 2.2.21 Skeleton Wheel -- A steel wheel to give a minimum ground ccntact area (see Fig. 7).

2.2.33.5 Linch pin hole distunce ~~~The distance from the centre line of a linch pin hole to the shoulder of the hitch pin. 2.2.33.6 Link point ~~ An articulated connection between a link and the tractor. For geometrical purposes, the link point is the centre of the articulated connection between a link and the tractor. 2.2.33.1 LoMjer hitch attachment ~~ A pin or clevis and pin usually attached to the implement, on which a lower link is secured. 2.2.33.8 connection implement. Lower hitch point -- An articulated between a lower link and the

FIG. 7 2.2.28 Skid Ring -- A circumferential the rim of a front wheel. flange on

2.2.33.9 Lower hitch point clearance (5 of Fig. 9)-The clearance expressed as a radial dimension from a lower hitch point to the outside diameter of the tyre, mud-guard or other ;>art of the tractor, measured in a longitudinal vertical plane with the implement in the raised position and all side away removed from the links. 2.2.33.10 Lower hitch points height (3 of Fig. 9)--- The height of the centre of the lower bitch Doints above ground level when thev, are in fully iowered positron. 2.2.33.11 Lower hitch point span-The distance between the shoulders of the lower hitch pins against which the sides of the lower link ball swivals about.

2.2.29 Spade Lug - A wedge-shaped metal projection fitted to the rim of a steel wheel. 2.2.30 Spark Arrester -- A device fitted with the exhaust system of an engine to arrest the glowing carbon particles.

4

SP : 44-1989

UPPER LINK POINT +PPER HITCH POINT

-UPPER

HITCH PIN

-LOWER LINK'

LOWER

1

I

h&S

L LOWER HITCH POINT

\

LINCH PIN HOLE DISTANCE

FIG. 8

FIG. 9

$Y : 44-1989 2.2.33.12 Lower link point-An articulated between a lower link and the tractor.
LIFT ARM-, AlPPER LINH

connection

2.2.33.13 Mast - The component that provides location of the upper hitch point on the implement. 2.2.33.14 Mast adjustment - The usable range of pitch of the mast in a vertical plane. It is measured as the maximum and the minimum heights of the lower hitch points above the ground between which a mast can be adjusted to any inclination between the vertical and 10" to the vertical towards the rear (see Fig. 10).

FIG.

11

2.2.33.19 Three-point linkage stabilizer - A link connected between ends of one or both lower links and the tractor to hold mounted equipment in fixed lateral position in relation to the tractor.

2.2.33.20 Upper hitch pin - A pin, usually detachable and forming part of the upper link assembly by which the upper link is connected to the implement. 2.2.33.21 Upper hitch point-An articulated connection between the upper link and the implement. 2.2.33.22 Upper link and lower linkElements of the linkage, each fitted with an articulated connection at both ends. 2.2.33.23 Upper link pin - A pin by which the upper link is connected to the tractor. 2.2.33.24 Upper link point connection between the upper tractor. An articulated link and the

FIG. 10 NOTE - Adjustment of the mast controls the pitch of the implement. Specifying the mast adjustment to be provided, enables the tractor designer to determine the minimum acceptable adjustment of the length of the top link in relation to the points of attachment of the linkage. It also permits the implement designer to determine the range of operating depths of the implement over which pitch adjustment can be obtained. 2.2.33.15 Mast height - The vertical distance between the upper hitch point and the common axis of the lower hitch points.

2.2.33.16 Power range (2 of Fig. 9)-The total vertical movement of the lower hitch points corresponding to the power travel of the lift excluding any adjustment in the linkage of lift rods. 2.2.33.17 Transport height (1 of Fig. 9)The height of the -lower hitch points above the ground utilizing the full extent of manual adjustment provided in the lift rods in conjunction with the power range, the lower hitch point axis being maintained horizontal to the ground in a transverse plane. 2.2.33.18 Three-point linkage check chain A chain connected between each lower link and the tractor to control the lateral movement of mounted -quipment (see Fig. 11).
,

2.2.34 Track - A series of jointed track links or a flexible band forming an endless weight carrying rail to transmit and drive to the ground. 2.2.35 Variable Speed Governor - A mechanism to maintain the speed of a power unit at any selected value within a given range. 2.3 Dimensions
23.1 Ground Clearance clearance of power tiller 2.3.1.1 Ground

The height.of the lowest point of the power tiller chassis from a firm horizontal supporting surface (see E in Fig. 12). 2.3.1.2 Ground clearance of tractor - The height of the lowest point of the tractor chassis from a firm horizontal supporting surface, the tractor being ballasted as used for drawbar test (see E in Fig. 13).

6

SP : 44-1989 2.3.2.2 Height of tractor-The distance between the firm horizontal supporting surface and the horizontal plane touching the uppermost part of the tractor (see D in Fig. 13). 2.3.3 Length-The distance between two vertical planes at right angles to the median plane of the tractor/power tiller and touching its front and rear extremities. 2.3.4 Minimum Clearance Diameter - The diameter of the smallest circle described by the outermost point of the projections of the tractor while executing its sharpest practical turn (see Fig. 14).
f
CLEARANCE CIRCLE

FIG. 12

FIG. 14

2.3.5 Minimum Turning Diameter - The diameter of the circular path described by the centre of tyre of the outermost wheel of the tractor while executing its sharpest practical turn (see Fig. 14). 2.3.6 Track (Tread)
2.3.6.1 Track of power tillerThe distance at the ground level between the median planes of the wheels on the same axle at stationary position and with the wheels in position for travelling in a straight line ( see A in Fig. 12).

2.3.6.2 Track of tracklaying tractors - The distance between the median planes of the tracks.
NOTE- The median plane of the wheel or track assembly is equidistant from the two planes containing the peripheries of the rims of the track plates respectively at their outer edge.

FIG. 13 2.3.2 Height
2.3.2.1 Height of power tiller - The distance between a firm horizontal supporting surface and the horizontal plane touching the uppermost part of the power tiller wiph the engine in horizontal position (see D in Fig. 12).

2.3.6.3 Track (tread) of wheeled tractor The distance at ground level between the median planes of the wheels on the same axle, with the tractor stationary and with the wheels in position for travelling in a straight line. The track may be thus defined for both front and rear wheels. When there are twin wheels, the track is the distance between two planes each being the median plane of the pairs of wheels. 2.3.7 Wheel Base - The horizontal distance between the front and the rear wheels in the same 7

SP : 44-1919 plane measured contact. at the centre of their ground to make it functional, and drawbar. such as PTO, belt pulley

2.3.8 Width-The distance between two vertical planes parallel to the median plane of the tractor/power tiller, each plane touching the outermost point of the tractor/power tiller on its respective side. 2.4 Mass 2.4.1 Dry Mass of Power Tiller-The mass of the power tiller fitted with all components necessary for its operation but without water, fuel and oil. 2.4.2 Mass of Ballasted Tractor tractor as ballasted for drawbar test. Mass of

2.5.6 Power-Take-Off Power - Power obtained at the main power-take-off with the governor control in position recommended by the tractor manufacturer for PTO work, the tractor being stationary. 2.6 Power-Take-Off Connections Shaft-Male of a sliding

2.6.1 Male Shaft and Female and female members respectively assembly (see Fig. 15).

2.4.3 Operational Mass of Power Tiller-The mass of the power tiller in normal working condition with fuel tank and radiator full, and lubricants filled to the specified levels.
NOTE -Any

accessory

ktted

and

its mass

should

be

stated.

2.4.4 Operational Mass of Tractor-The mass of the tractor in normal working condition with fuel tank and radiator full, lubricants, etc, filled to the specified levels and the mass of the driver (assumed to be 75 kg):
NOTE ---

Any accessory

fitted and its mass should

also be

SHAFT

GUARD

stated.

2.5 Power 2.5.1 Belt Pulley Power - Power transmitted rhrough a belt with the governor control in the position recommended by the tractor manufacturer for belt pulley work. L 2.5.2 Drawbar Power - Power obtained at the drawbar with the governor control in the position recommended by the tractor manufacturer for drawbar work and the tractor moving on a horizontal surface with the drawbar pull applied horizontally. 2.5.3 Engine Power - Power tiasured at the crank shaft of the engine with the governor control lever in the position recommended by the manufacturer.
NO'TE- The engine should be fitted with all the accessories required for continuous operation; these should be set in the same relative position as when fitted in the tractor.

MALE

SHAFT

FIG. 15

2.6.2 Male Shaft Yoke and Female Shaft Yoke - Yokes attached to the male and female shaft respectively (see Fig. 15 ). 2.6.3 Power Znput Connection - An externally keywayed, splined or drilled stub shaft on a machine (see Fig. 15). It is abbreviated as PIC. 2.6.4 Power Input Connection Shieldrigid guard fitted on a machine, shielding power input connection (see Fig. 15). A the

2.5.4 `Maximum. Drawbar Pull - The maximtim horizontal &`Svbar pull, at a drawbar height recommended by the manufacturer, corresponding up to 15 percent wheels slip on standard concrete test track for wheel tractors and up to 7 percent track slip for track laying tractors on earthen test track which a tractor is able to sustain in the line of its longitudinal axis. 2.5.5 Power Outlet-Any outlet transmits the engine power to the tractor which in order

2.6.5 Power Input Connection Yoke BossAn internally keywayed, splined or drilled member which receives a power input connection. 2.6.6 Power-Take-off and Power Znput

SP : 44-1989

connection appropriate

yoke bosses respectively or, in an context, a yoke itself (see Fig. 15).

2.6.13 Yoke Journal Assembly

-

An assembly

which couples two yokes. 2.7 Rear Tyres
2.7.1 Conventional Ply Tyre - A tyre in which the cords of the body plies run diagonally from bead to bead.

2.6.7 Power-Take-Off Drive Shaft - The assembly from power-take-off yoke boss to power input connection yoke boss (inclusive) (see Fig. 15). 2.6.8 Power-Take-Off Drive Shaft GuardA safety guard fitted over a power-take-off drive shaft ( see Fig. 15).
guard -

2.6.8.1 Non-rotating PTO drive shaft A PTO drive shaft guard held stationary while the shaft is rotating.

2.7.2 End of Lug Clearance-Distance from trailing side of a lug to end of the lug that follows (see Fig. 16). 2.7.3 Inflation Pressure - For air filled tyres, it is the gauge pressure measured with the valve in any position. For tyres containing liquid, it is the gauge pressure measured with the valve in the bottom position. 2.7.4 Lug AngleThe angle between the centre line of the lug face and the centre line of the tyre (see Fig. 16). 2.7.5 Lug Base-The projected thickness or width of the lug at the points where the projected planes of the leading and trailing sides meet the projected undertread face (see Fig. 16). 2.7.6 Lug Face - The outermost surface of the lug ( see Fig. 16 ). 2.7.7 Lug Fillet -The curved section which blends the lug sides into the undertread face (see Fig. 16). 2.7.8 Lug Height - Distance measured from the undertread face to the lug face (see Fig. 16).

2.6.8.2 Rotating PTO drive shaft guard - A PTO drive shaft guard which can rotate with the shaft except when it comes into contact with some other object. 2.6.9 Power-Take-Off Yoke Boss - An internally splined member which receives a powertake-off (see Fig. 15 ). 2.6.10 Shaft Closed Length - The distance between the centres of the journal crossassemblies when the PTO drive shaft is fully
closed.

The distance between the centres of the journal crossassemblies when the PTO drive shaft is extended to the maximum length recommended by the manufacturer.
Extended Length -

2.6.11 Shaft

2.6.12 Universal Joint - A combination of two yokes and a yoke journal assembly (see Fig. 15 ).

I

I

/-LUG

ANGLE LUG SPACING PERPENDICULAR

LUG SPACING CIRCUMFER-

UNDERTREAD

FACE

SECTION

AA

FIG. 16
9

SP : 44-1989 2.7.9 Lug Length - Distance measured from end-to-end along the centre line of the lug face (see Fig. 16). 2.7.10 Lug Pitch - Centre-to-centre spacing of lugs on one side at the centre line of the tyre. It is measured at the lug face (see Fig. 16). 2.7.11 Lug Side - The lug surface between the undertread face and the lug face (see Fig. 16). 2.7.12 Lug Spacing, Circumferential-The distance from the leading side of a lug to the trailing side of the lug ahead of it, measured parallel to the centre line of the tyre (see Fig. 16). 2.7.13 Lug Spacing, Perpendicular - The measured perpendicularly, from the distance, leading side of a lug to the trailing side of the lug ahead of it (see Fig. 16 ). 2.7.14 Lug TaperThe angle, the lug side makes with a line parallel to the radius that extends from the centre line of the lug to the centre line of the wheel (see Fig. 16). 2.7.15 Lug Width-Width of lug face measured perpendicularly to the centre line of the lug face ( see Fig. 16 ). 2.7.16 Ply RatingIdentification of a given tyre with its maximum recommended load when used in a specific type of service. It is an index of the strength and does not necessarily represent the number of cord plies in the tyre. 2.7.17 shoulder Tread Width -The distance from to shoulder of a lug (see Fig. 16). 2.9.2 Angle of Departure - The angle between the ground and the section of track between the rear bogie wheel and the rear idler or sprocket (see Fig. 17). 2.9.3 Grouser the track shoe Fig. 17). Height -Vertical distance from face to tip of the grouser (see width of the

2.9.4 Grouser Width-Overall grouser (see Fig. 17).

2.9.5 Grouser Spacing or Pitch - The distance between corresponding points on adjacent grousers (see Fig. 17). 2.9.6 Nominal Ground Contact Length - The horizontal distance between the centre of the drive sprocket and the front idler (see Fig. 17). 2.9.7 Track Pitch corresponding points on band tracks, it is corresponding points on Fig. 17). - Distance between adjacent track shoes (On the distance between `adjacent drive lugs) (see width of an

2.9.8 Track Width-Overall individual track (see Fig. 17). 2.10 Traction

2.10.1 Ballast - Any mass that can be added or removed from a tractor for the purpose of changing traction and stability. 2.10.2 Coefficients of Traction - Ratio of the total force output of the traction device in the direction of travel to the dynamic weight (normal force) on the traction device. 2.10.3 Coefficient of Vehicle Traction as gross traction ratio (see 2.10.17). Same

2.7.18 Undertread Face - The outermost surface of the rubber on the carcass where no lugs are located (see Fig. 16). 2.8 Speed 2.8.1 Maximum Travel Speed - The maximum attainable speed of the unladen tractor, where the engine speed governor has been set at the maximum top idle speed rating recommended by the manufacturer. 2.8.2 Theoretical Travelling Speed - The speed of the tractor determined at the rated engine speed for drawbar use, having regard to the total gear ratio and the effective radius of the driving wheels or tracks.
NOTE-~ the case of wheeled tractors, the tractor shall be under its own operational mass (without extra ballast), the tyre pressure as recommended by the manufacturer for field work, and the tyre lugs not worn more than l/3 of its . normal height.

2.10.4 Efficiency, Tractive - Output power divided by input power, usually expressed in percent. 2.10.5 Floatation - Ability of the traction device to resist sinkage into the medium being traversed. 2.10.6 Power, Input - Power input to traction device calculated from input torque and angular velocity of the driving axle. 2.10.7 Power, Output-Power output traction device calculated from net traction and velocity in the direction of motion. of a force

2.9 Track-Type

Traction

Device

2.10.8 Rolling Circumference, Zero- Pull Distance travelled per revolution of the traction device with only enough input torque to overcome the rolling resistance. 210.9 Rolling Circumference, Zero-Torque Distance travelled per revolution of the traction device when being towed and with no torque between it and the axle.

2.9.1 Angle of Approach - The angle between the ground and the section of track between the front bogie wheel and the front idler or sprocket (see Fig. 17).

10

SP : 44-1989

H LL-J-----~O~~N~~ CONTACT GROUND LENGTH

.

-

-IT

hRACK WIDTH

---i

k-e---

TRACK

PITCH

GROUSER WIDTH

GROUSER
FIG. 17 11

PITCH

SP :44-I989
2.10.10 Rolling

Resistance

of

Non-driving

Force required, in the direction of travel, to overcome motion resistance of the nondriving wheels or transport device. 2.10.11 SlipRelative movement in the direction of travel at the mutual contact surface of the traction device and the surface which supports it,
Wheels -

2.10.22 Weight Transfer-The change in normal forces on the supporting devices (traction and transporting) on a vehicle under operating conditions as compared to a static vehicle on a level surface.

3. TILLAGE 3.1 Adhered Soil Bodies - Masses of soil which adhere on soil working surfaces and act as a part of the tool. Soil bodies may be stationary or in a relatively slow motion. 3.1.1 Soil Coneresembles a cone. An adhered soil body which

2.10.12 Thrust - Net traction plus rolling resistance of traction device while pulling. 2.10.13 Torque, measured between traction device.
Input -

the driving

The moment axle and the

2.10.14 Traction Device - A device for propelling a vehicle using the reaction forces from the supporting surface. 2.10.15 Traction, Net - Force in direction of travel developed by the traction device and transferred to the vehicle. 2.10.16 Traction Ratio, Dynamic - Ratio of drawbar pull to actual force on traction device normal to traction surface while pulling. 2.10.17 Traction Ratio, Gross - Ratio drawbar pull to total weight of vehicle. of

3.1.2 Soil Sheet - An adhered soil body which covers a large area of a tool like a sheet. 3.1.3 Soil Wedge - An adhered which resembles a narrow vedge. soil body

3.2 Aggregates - Agglomerations of primary soil particles produced by natural processes. 3.3 Anchoring - A tillage operation used to partially bury and thereby preventing movement of foreign materials such as plant residue or paper mulches. 3.4 Back Furrow - A raised ridge left at the centre of the strip of land when ploughing is started from centre to side (see Fig. 18). 3.5 Bedded Land -The land which is broken in alternate back furrows and dead furrows. 3.6 Bedding - A tillage operation soil into a specific configuration. which places

2.10.18 Travel Ratio - Ratio of distance travelled per revolution of the traction device while pulling to the distance travelled per revolution of the traction device with zero drawbar pull of vehicle or zero net traction of traction device only. 2.10.19 Travel travel ratio.
Reduction -

One

(1)

minus

2.10.20 Weight, Dynamic - Total force exerted by the traction device normal to the supporting surface under operating conditions. 2.10.21 Weight, Static -Total vertical force exerted by the traction device when stationary, on a level surface, and with zero drawbar pull.

3.7 Broadcast Tillage - Coverage of an entire area as contrasted to a partial coverage as in bands or strips. It is also known as overall tillage. 3.8 Bulldozing-The pushing and rolling of soil by an inclined blade. 3.9 Chiseling - A tillage operation in which a narrow tool is used to break up hard pan in the I

r

FURROW

BACK

FURROW

FIG. I8
12

SP : 44-1989

soil. It is usually performed at a depth greater than the normal ploughing depth. 3.10 Clods- Soil blocks or masses that are cut, sheared or broken loose by tillage tools. 3.11 Combined Tillage Operations - Operations simultaneously utilizing two or more different types of tillage tools or implements (subsoilerlister, lister-planter or plough-planter combinations) to simplify, control or reduce the number of operations over a field. 3.12 Concretions - Soil structural are irreversibly cemented together. units which

3.24

Intercultivation

-

Soil

cultivation

performed

in standing crop.

3.25 Land Forming - Tillage operation which move soil to create desired soil configurations. Forming may be done on a large scale such as contouring or terracing, or on a small scale such as ridging or pitting. 3.25.1 Land Grading - Tillage operation which moves soil to establish a desired soil elevation and slope, such as levelling, contouring, cutting and filling. 3.252 Lund Plaining - Tillage operation that cuts and moves small layers of soil to provide a smooth and refined surface. 3.26 Levelling - The tillage operation in which the soil is moved to establish a desired soil elevation slope. 3.27 Listed Land-See 3.5. 3.28 Listing - A tillage and land-forming operation using a tool which splits the soil and turns two furrows laterally in opposite directions, thereby providing a ridge-and-furrow soil configuration. 3.29 Mechanical Impedance - The mechanical resistance of the soil to the movement of plant roots or tillage tools. 3.30 Mechanical Stability - The degree of resistance of the soil to the deformation or breakdown by a specified mechanical force. 3.31 Mechanical Strength -The mechanical resistance of soil to deformation or separation by forces. 3.31.1 Bulk Strength - The mechanical strength of the overall soil mass as contrasted to the strength of loose but individually strong clods, fragments or aggregates. 3.31.2 Clod Strength - The strength of individual soil clod. mechanical

3.13 Conventional Tillage -The combined primary and secondary tillage operations normally performed in preparing a seed bed. 3.14 Dead Furrow - An open trench left in between two adjacent strips of land after finishing of ploughing (see Fig. 19 ). 3.15 Deep Tillage - A primary tillage operation which manipulates soil to a greater depth than normal ploughing. It may be accomplished with a heavy-duty mould board or disc plough which inverts the soil, or with a chisel plough or subsoiler which shatters soil. 3.16 Depth of Cut - The maximum depth of the penetration of the tool measured with reference to the initial soil surface. 3.17 Earth Moving - Tillage action and transport operations utilized to loosen, load, carry and unload soil.
1

3.18 Foreign Body - Foreign objects including pieces of tiles, pipes, wires, or crushed rock that occur in or have been inserted in soil. 3.19 Foreign Materials-All foreign matter in soils including residues, soil additives and foreign bodies that have not originated in the development of the soil. 3.20 Fragments - Masses of soil which are created by fracture along natural surfaces of weakness. 3.21 Furrow-The trench formed by a tool in the soil during operation (see Fig. 20). 3.21.1 Furrow Crown -The peak turned furrow slice (see Fig. 20). of the

3.32 Middle Breakin -The use of a lister in a manner that opens t%e furrow midway between two previous rows of plants. 3.33 Minimum Tillage - The minimum soil manipulation necessary to meet tillage requirements for crop production. 3.34 Mixing -see 3.23.

3.21.2 Furrow Slice-The soil mass cut and turned by tool (see Fig. 20). 3.21.3 Furrow Sole-The the furrow (see Fig. 20). 3.21.4 Furrow Wall-The furrow (see Fig. 20). bottom surface of

3.35 Mulch Tillage - Preparation of soil in such a way that plant residues or other mulching materials are specially left on or near the surface. 3.36 Optimum Tillage - A system of tillage contributing to maximum net return for a crop under given field conditions. 3.37 Oriented Tillage - Tillage operations which are oriented in specific paths or directions with respect to the sun? prevailing winds, previous tillage actions or field base lines.
13

undisturbed side of

3.22 Harrowing - A secondary tillage operation which pulverizes, smoothens and packs the soil in seedbed preparation and/ or controls weeds. 3.23 Incorporating - Tillage operations which mix or disperse foreign materials, such as chemicals or plant residues into the soil.

SP : 44-1989

DEAD FURROW

FURROW

FIG. 19

`;;
FURROW WALL

FURROW SLICE

CROWN /--

I-

FURROW

SOLE
c'

/-FURRow

m

FIG. 20 3.38 Peds See 3.2. -

3.39 Ploughing

A primary tillage operation which is performed to cut, break and invert the soil partially or completely.

leaching and facilitate transplanting seedlings by making the soil softer.

of paddy

3.39.1 Contour Ploughing - The method of ploughing in which the Soil is broken and turned along contours. 339.2 Normal Ploughing - Ploughing up to a depth of 15 cm. 3.40 Primary Tillage - Tillage operations which constitute the initial major soil-working operation. It is normally designed to, reduce soil strength, cover plant materials and re-arrange aggregates. 3.41 Puddling - The mechanical manipulation of soil in the presence of standing water in the field to create and impervious hard an below the puddle zone so as to prevent loss o P water through

3.42 Pulverization - The general fragmentation of a soil mass resulting from the action of tillage forces. 3.43 Reduced Tillage - A tillage system in which the primary tillage operation is performed in conjunction with special planting procedure in order to reduce or eliminate secondary tillage operations.
3.44 Residue - Foreign materials including roots, remaining in or on the soil in significant amounts such that they can be detected, or that they can exert a separate and distinct influence on soil properties or machinery operations.

3.45 Residue Processing - Operations that cut, crush, anchor or otherwise handle residues in conjunction with soil manipulation.

SP : 44-1989 3.46 Ridging See 3.6. soil profile modified by for use by plant roots. part of of plants. soil profile or destruction 3.61 Soil Failure - The alteration forces, of a soil structure caused by mechanical and impact. such as shear, compression 3.62 Soil Heaving from natural forces The swelling of soil resulting such as freezing. reaction caused by the forces to the soil.

3.47 Root Bed -The tillage or amendments 3.48 Root Zone -The exploited by the roots

3.49, Rotary Tillage - Tillage operation employing rotary action to cut, break and mix soil. 3.50 Scouring - A soil-tool reaction in which soil slides over the soil engaging surface of tillage tool without significant adhesion. 3.51 Secondary Tillage - Tillage operations, following primary tillage, which are performed to create proper soil tilth for seeding and planting. 3.52 Seed Bed-The soil zone which affects the germination of seeds and emergence of seedlings. 3.53 Shear Blocks - The blocks of soil which are sheared loose from the main soil mass as a result of ultimate shearing strains applied by tillage tools. 3.54 Shear Surface - Failure where the soil has sheared. surfaces occurring

3.63 Soil Reaction -The application of mechanical 3.64 Soil Shatter -

See 3.42. slicing of soil across a

~.u6~a~eoil Slicing-The 3.66 Strip Tillage only isolated bands 3.67 Sub-soiling than 40 cm. -

A tillage system of soil are tilled. Chiseling at depth

in which greater

3.68 Throw -The movement of soil in any direction as a result of kinetic energy imparted to the soil by tillage tool. 3.69 Tillability - The degree of ease with which a soil may be manipulated for a specific purpose. 3.70 Tillage - The mechanical manipulation of soil for any purpose; but in agriculture the term is usually restricted to the changing of soil conditions for crop production. 3.71 Tillage Action -The action of a tillage tool in executing a specific form of soil manipulation, such as soil cutting, pulverizing or inversion. 3.72 Tillage Depth-Vertical initial soil surface to penetration of the tool. a distance specific from point the of

3.54.1 Primary Shear Surfaces and distinct, shear surfaces which failure and are caused mainly by resulting from the advance of a

- The initial appear during soil movement tool.

3.54.2 Secondary Shear Surfaces - Shear surfaces which result from the twisting, pushing or tumbling of the soil after or during the initial displacement. Secondary shear surfaces are often perpendicular to the primary shear surfaces. 3.55 Soil Abrasion abrading of tillage soil. -The scratching, cutting tools caused by the action or of

3.73 Vertical Mulching - A sub-soiling operation in which a vertical band of mulching material is put in the soil. 3.74 Weeding from the field. 4. TILLAGE 4.1 Primary Eradication of unwanted plants

3.56 Soil Additives - Foreign materials, other than seeds, which are added to or incorporated in soil for directly influencing the soil condition or environment. These include pesticides, fertilizers, mulches, or conditioners but not foreign bodies, such as drain tiles which have an indirect influence. 3.57 Soil Adhesion-The tillage tools or wheels. sticking of soil to

EQUIPMENT Tillage Equipment

4.1.1 Plough - An implement used to cut the furrow slice with partial or complete soil inversion and in some cases to break it (see Fig. 21 ). 4.1.1.1 Types of ploughs 1) Alternate plough - A plough having an even number of bodies turning to right and left respectively and mounted side by side, which can be raised or lowered separately turning about a transverse axis (see Fig. 22). 2) Balance plough - A plough with bodies mounted facing one another on beams or frames which are situated on opposite sides of transverse axis and are joined together at an obtuse angle. The plough is not turned at the ends of the field, but are partially rotated about the axis and works

3.58 Soil Compaction - Reduction in the specific volume of soil by means of mechanical manipulation. 3.59 Soil Cultivation - Tillage operations performed to create soil conditions conducive to improve aeration, infiltration, compaction and moisture conservation as well as to control weeds. 3.60 Soil Cutting - Soil separation mass by slicing action. from the soil

15

1 HANDLE
GRIP

\

P

/ / Q / / / / / 9
0
0 / 0 1

/

.oBOARo

LANOSM

J

/ FIG. 21

-

\

-

WARF .e.._.-

4) Disc plough - A plough the working parts of which are concave or truncated cone discs which act simultaneously as mould board and share (see Fig. 24).

FIG. 22

to and fro with right and left bodies alternately work (see Fig. 23).

in

3) Chisel plough - A plough used to cut through hard soils by means of one or a number of narrow tines.

FIG. 24

i) Framed plough - A plough the body (or bodies) of which is (are) attached to a framed beam. ii) Gallows plough plough, the end of the bolster fixed to two front through the front wheel 5) Gangplough more bottoms. - An animal-drawn beam rests freely on a wheels, which is drawn assembly (see Fig. 25). plough with two or plough with the soil in

A riding

FIG. 23

6) Lister plough double mouldboards opposite directions.

A mouldboard for throwing

16

SP : 44-1989

ii) Reversible plough, roll-over type - A plough of which the right and left bottoms (bodies) are on opposite sides of a transverse axis, perpendicular to the direction of travel, about which they. can turn 180' (see Fig. 28).

FIG. 25 7) Mouldboard plough - A plough with share and mouldboard which cuts furrow slice, lifts and inverts it. 8) Off-set plough - A plough with beam to work borders and headland. off-set

9) One-way plough - A plough which turns the furrow slice in the same direction with respect to the forward travel (see Fig. 26).

FIG. 28 iii) Reversible plough, turnwrest type - A plough in which a compound body is turned from the right to the left hand by rotating it through approximately 180" about a longitudinal axis (see Fig. 29).

FIG. 26 10) Pore hal- A narrow wooden plough with sowing attachment. 11) Reversible plough - A plough which turns the furrow slice to the right and to the left alternatively with respect to the forward travel. i) Reversible plough, half-turn type - A plough with bottoms (bodies) mounted on opposite sides of a beam or frame which can be rotated approximately 180" about a longitudinal axis (see- Fig. 27). FIG. 29

iv) Reversible plough, quarter-turn slough of which the bottoms (bodies) &I the same beam are fixed at an angle each other and able to pivot through circle about the longitudinal axis (see

type - A mounted of 90" to a quarte,r Fig. 30 ).

v) Riding ploughA plough balanced on wheels and on which the operator rides during the operation. 12) Rotary plough - A plough used to cut and to pulverize soil by impact forces by means of a number of rotating tines or knives which are mounted on a horizontal rotar.

FIG. 27

SP : 44-1989

FIG. 30

13) Rotating auger plough (combinous) - A plough with short plough bottom followed with vertical rotars having blades (see Fig. 31 ).

15) Stump-jump plough - A plough with spring-loaded plough bottom or discs which rides over stumps and other obstructions in the soil (see Fig. 33 ).

FIG. 33 FIG. 31

14) Stubble plough - A plough specially designed to turn over and bury stubble (see Fig. 32).

16) Sub-soiler - A plough designed to penetrate the soil to depths more than those achieved during normal ploughing operation, usually 40 cm or more.
17. Sulky plough.

plough - A single

bottom

riding

i) Swing plough - An animal-drawn plough without supporting wheel whose stability is ensured by the handles, the depth and width of work being regulated by using a draft adjustment (see Fig. 34). ii) Double-wheel plough - A swing plough with a land and a furrow wheel mounted on vertical standards on a crossbar (see Fig. 35). iii) Single-wheel plough - A swing plough provided with a wheel or a toe at the front (see Fig. 36) 18) Trip beam plough - A plough with a latch or trip mechanism which permits the body to swing back to ride over an obstruction. 18

FIG. 32

SP : 44-1989 23) Wooden plough - An implement made mainly of wood cutting and breaking the soil with (see Fig. 40). It is a also known as 4.1.1.2 Disc plough details indigenous and used for bar like share deshi plough.

a) ConcavityThe depth measured at the lowest point at the centre of the disc by placing its concave side on a flat surface. b) Disc -- A circular, concave and revolving steel plate used for cutting and inverting the soil. FIG. 34 c) Disc angle-The angle at which the plane of the cutting edge of the disc is inclined to the direction of travel (see Fig. 41 ). d) Eccentricity - The radial deviation of points on the disc edge in a plane perpendicular to the axis of the disc when the disc is rotated about its centre. FIG. 35 19. Vertical disc plough - A plough which combines the principles of the disc plough and the disc harrow and used for shallow working in soil (see Fig. 37). 20) Vineyard plough -- A plough specially designed to perform not only ploughing operation but also the earthing up and similar operations in vineyards (see Fig. 38 ). 21) Walking piough - A plough in which balancing and controlling is done by the operator while walking behind it. 22) Winch ploughA plough having two wheels of unequal diameter permitting intermittent ploughing, the paths of work being in the direction of winch (see Fig. 39). e) Scraper - A device to remove soil that tends to stick to the working surface of a disc. f) Tilt angle - The angle at which the plane of the cutting edge of the disc is inclined to a vertical line (see Fig. 41). g) Wobble-The axial deviation of points on the disc edge in a plane parallel to the axis of the disc when the disc is rotated about its centre. 4.1.1.3 Mouldboard plough details a) Plough bottom (body) - An assembly comprising the frog, standard (leg), mouldboard, share and land side (see Fig. 42). 1) FrogThe part to which other corn onents of the plough bottom are attached (see F!g. 42). 2) Land side- The flat plate which against and transmits the rear side lateral
DRAUGHTS ROD COMPLETE WITH REGULATING BAR, RING AND SHACKLE

bears thrust

HANDLE

QRIP

GAUGE WHEEL STRAP MOULDEOARB

GWGE

WHEEL

FIG. 36

SP : 44-1989

FIG. 37
GROUND LINE

FIG. 41 FIG. 38 of the plough bottom Fig. 42). to the furrow wall (see

T WING BEARING

L SHIN
FIG. 42 FIG. 39 i) Heel of land side - The rear underside of the land side which slides along the furrow sole (see Fig. 42). ii) Replaceable heelwhich is replaceable. A heel of the !,lnd side

3) Edge clearance - The maximum clearance between the cutting edge of share and straight line touching the point of share and wing of share (see Fig. 42). 4) Wing bearing- The level portion of the wing of the share providing a bearing for the outer corner of the plough bottom (see Fig. 42 ). 5) Tail piece - An adjustable extension which can be fastened to the rear of a mouldboard to help in turning or comprising a furrow slice (see Fig. 43).
20

SP : 44-1989

v) Sod mouldboard

or breaker

mouldboard

-

A long mouldboard with a gentle curvature which lifts and inverts unbroken furrow slice (see Fig. 44). vi) Solid moutdboardunbroken surface.
CAPI

A mouldboard

with

SHARE

SIDE

-.--

__

-HEEL FIG. 43

vii) Stubble mouldboardA short but broader mouldboard with a relatively abrupt curvature which lifts, breaks and turns the furrow slice used in stubble soils (see Fig. 44). 12) Share - The parts of the plough bottom which penetrates into the soil and makes a horizontal cut below the surface (see Fig. 45 ). i) Cutting edge-The front edge of the share which makes the horizontal cut in the soil (see Fig. 45).
/GUNNEL

6) Knife

tail piece -

A tail piece to cut a

furrow slice. 7) Side cap (see Fig. 43). A plate fitted above a land side

8) Shade - A horizontal plate bearing on a furrow bottom, usually integral with a land side (see Fig. 43 ). 9) Standard (leg) - The part connecting the soil'cutting unit of the implement to the beam. In a curved beam, the standard is a part of the beam (see Fig. 43 ). 10) Beam - A rigid member connecting the plough bottom with power source (see Fig. 43 ). 11) Mouldboard - The curved part which lifts and turns the furrow slice (see Fig. 43). i) Shin of mouldboard mouldboard which lies (see Fig. 43 ).
-

CUTTING

EDGE

FIG. 45

in

The edge of the a vertical plane A lying

ii) Gunnel-The vertical face of the share which rubs against the furrow wall (see Fig. 45). iii) Share point-The leading end of the cutting edge which facilitates the penetration of a share into the soil (see Fig. 45). iv) Wing of share-The right or left end of the cutting edge of share in right or left hand ploughs (see Fig. 45 ). v) Bar-point share - A share in which the point of the share is provided by an adjustable and replaceable bar (see Fig. 46).

ii) General purpose mouldboardmouldboard having a medium curvature between stubble and sod (see Fig. 44).

GENERAL PURPOSE MOULDBOARO

STUBBLE

MOULDBOARD

SOD OR BREAKER HOULDBOARD

SHARE SLAT MOULDBOARD

JI FIG. 46

FIG. 44

iii) Rod mouldboardconsisting of rods.

A

mouldboard

vi) Shine share - A share having a shin as an additional part. vii) Slip-nose share - A share with detachable point. viii) Slip share - A one piece share with curved cutting edge, having no additional part.
21

iv) Slat mouldboard - A mouldboard the surface of which is made of slats placed along the length of the mouldboard (see Fig. 44).

SP : 44-1989

ix) Straight cutting edge.

share-

A

share

with

straight a

b) Drawbar--The member trailed plough to a tractor.

that

connects

2) Disc couher - A circular flat or concave revolving steel disc fitted to the beam through a shank and yoke (see Fig. 49). 3) Shank qf coulter - The part that connects the coulter to the plough beam (see Fig. 49).

c) Safety hitch - A hitch incorporating a device to avoid breakage when a plough works against an abnormal resistance. d) Gauge wheel- An auxiliary wheel of an implement to maintain a uniform depth of working. e) Horizontal clevis - A device to effect lateral adjustment of the plough relative to the line of pull. f) Vertical clevis- A vertical plate with a number of holes at the end of the beam to control the depth of operation and adjust line of pull. g) Front furrow wheel - The front wheel of a plough which runs in the furrow (see Fig. 47).

SHANK OULTER

LDISC
COULTER

FIG. 49

m) JointerA device which resembles a miniature plough bottom which cuts and turns over a small ribbon-like furrow slice directly ahead of the plough bottom (see Fig. 49). n) Levelling control mechanism - A lever or other mechanism to level a plough transversely. p) Levelling control lever -The lever which operates the levelling control mechanism. q) Horizontal clearance (side clearance) - The maximum clearance between land side and a horizontal plane touching point of share at its gunnel side and heel of landside. It is also known as horizontal suction (see Fig. SO).

FIG. 47 h) Land wheel - The wheel of a plough which runs on the unploughed land (see Fig. 47). j) Rear furrow wheel -The rear wheel of the plough which runs in the furrow (see Fig. 47). k) Coulter - A device to cut the soil vertically from the land ahead of the plough bottom. 1) Stationary (knife) coulter - A stationary blade fixed downward in a vertical position on the beam (see Fig. 48).

`&IDE

CLEARANCE

FIG. 50 r) Vertical clearance - The maximum clearance under the land side and horizontal surface when the plough is resting on a horizontal surface in the working position. It is also known as vertical suction (see Fig. 5 1).
s) Throat clearance - The perpendicular distance between point of share and lower portion of the beam (see Fig. 52). t) Centre of power -The

true point of hitch

FIG. 48 22

(see Fig. 53 ).

SP : 44-1989 4.2.2 Basin ListerAn implement which makes continuous ridges with furrows in between the ridges. 4.2.3 Bund Former - An implement which gathers soil and forms a bund (see Fig. 54). VERTICAL FIG. 51 CLEARANCE 4.2.4 Ditcher ditcpes. An implement used for making for

4.2.5 Lund Plane-An smoothening and planing

implement used the soil surface.

4.2.6 Leveller - An implement for smoothening the surface of uneven tilled land (see Fig. 55). 4.2.7 Puddler - An implement churning the soil in standing water. used for

4.2.7.1 Plank puddler - A puddler consisting of a wooden plank provided with a number of small spikes on one edge and a handle at the centre of the other edge. FIG. 52 4.L7.2 Kotary pud2ier -- A puddler with blahes fixed on a horizontal shaft (see Fig. 56). 4.2.8 Ridger - An implement which cuts and turns the soil in two opposite directions simultaneously for forming ridges ( see Fig. 57 ). It is also known as furrower. 4.2.9 Soil Scoop - An implemerit used to collect and move soil from one spot to another (see Fig. 58 ).

u) Cen.tre of resistanceThe point at which the resultant of all the horizontal and vertical forces act (see Fig. 53 ). w) Line of pull - An imaginary straight passing from the centre of resistance through clevis to the centre of pull (see Fig. 53). 4.1 .1.4 Wooden plough a) Body-The beam and handle details to which shoe, line the

4.3 Secondary Tillage

Equipment

main frame are attached.

4.3.1 Float - An implement used for packing down and smoothening the surface of the soil (see Fig. 59). 4.3.2 Harrow - An implement used to break the clods after ploughing to collect trash from the ploughed land, to level the seed bed and to mix the material with the soil. 4.3.2.1 Chain harrow>- A harrow consisting of a frameless network of links (see Fig. 60). 4.3.2.2 Disc harroM3 - A harrow which performs the harrowing operations by means of a set (or a number of sets) of rotating steel discs, each set being mounted on a common shaft.

b) Share - A narrow steel bar attached to the upper surface of the shoe longitudinally along the central line and projecting slightly out. c) Shoe - The wedge-shaped lower portion the plough which moves inside the soil. 4.2 Other Implements of

4.2.1 Bakkhar - An implement, consisting of one or more blades atiached to a beam or frame, used for shallow working of soil with minimum of soil inversion. It is also known as blade harrow.

,-CENTRE

OF

rCLEVlS

FIG. 53

23

SP : 44-1989

FIG. 54

FIG. 56

FIG. 57

a) Double-action disc harrow - A disc harrow consisting of two or more gangs in which a set of one or more gangs follows behind the set of the other one or more arranged in such a way that the front and back gangs throw the soil in opposite directions. I) Off-set disc harrow - A disc harrow with two gangs in tandem, capable of being off-set to either side of the centre line of pull (see Fig. 61). 2) Tandem disc harrow-A disc harrow comprising four gangs with provision of angling m opposite direction (see Fig. 62). 24

FIG. 58

FIG. 59

c

SP : 44-1989

3) Gang - An assembly ot concave discs mounted on a common shaft with spools in between. 4) Gang angle - The angle between the axis of the gang and the line perpendicular to the direction of travel. 5) Gang axle (arbor axle) - A shaft on which a set of discs are mounted. 6) Gang control lever - A lever which operates the angling mechanism of disc harrow. 7) Spool (spacer) - The flanged tube mounted on the gang axle between every two discs to retain them at fixed position on the shaft. 4.3.2.3 Flexible tine harrow - A harrow consisting of network of spring tines (see Fig. 64).

FIG. 60

FIG. 61

FIG. 64 4.3.2.4 Reciprocating power harrow - A harrow fitted with rigid tines driven by the powertake-off in a reciprocating transverse or rotary motion as the machine travels forward (see Fig. 65). FIG. 62 b) Single action disc harrow - A disc harrow with two gangs placed end-to-end displacing the soil outwardly (see Fig. 63).

FIG. 63
FIG. 65 c) Disc harrow details I) Angling mechanism - A mechanism by means of which the gang angles are adjusted.

2) Disc spacing - The transverse distance between the edges of two discs separated by a spool. 25

43.2.5 Rolling or rotary harrow - A harrow consisting of rigid or flexible tines mounted on one or more horizontal or vertical shafts. It is also known as gyro harrow.

SP : 44-1989

a) Cage harrow - A rolling harrow with horizontal shafts each fitted with star-shaped tines Jomed by rods forming the lines of cylinder (see Fig. 66).

d) Roller horrow - A roiling harrow with a horizontal shaft consisting of a light roller with projecting teeth (see Fig. 69).

FIG. 66

FIG. 69
4.3.2.6 Spike-tooth harrow - A harrow with pegs as working part fitted on rigid, articulated or flexible frame (see Fig. 70).

b) Circular harrow - A rolling harrow consisting of a circular frame fitted with teeth and turning about a shaft slightly inclined towards the vertical (see Fig. 67).

FIG. 70 FIG. 67

c) Clod crusherA rolling harrow with horizontal shafts fitted with star shaped tines (see Fig. 68).

4.3.2.7 Spring-tooth harrow - A harrow with tough and flexible teeth designed primarily to work in hard and stony soils (see Fig. 71).

FIG. 71

FIG. 68 26

433.8 Triangular harrow - A spike-tooth harrow with a triangular frame (see Fig. 72).

SP : 44-1989

FIG. 72 FIG. 75 4.3.2.9 Zigzag harrow - A spike-tooth harrow with a zigzag frame and teeth attached at the junctions of frame members (see Fig. 73).

4.3.4.2 Cambridge roller - Roller corn rising a number of thick discs, each having the Form of two frusta of a cone with a smooth periphery, joined base-to-base and placed on the same shaft without gap (see Fig. 76).

FIG. 73

4.3.3 Patela - A wooden plank used for smoothening the soil and crushing the clods. In certain cases weeds can be collected with the help of the curved spikes attached behind the wooden board (see Fig. 74).

FIG. 76

4.3.4.3 Coil roller - Roller having the form of a cylindrical cage circumscribed by a spiral (see Fig. 77).

FIG. 77

FIG. 14

4.3.4.4 Continental Cambridge roller Roller comprising discs of unequal diameters and of alternating smooth and notched surface placed on the same shaft (see Fig. 78). 4.3.4.5 Corrugated roller - RoHer consisting of one or more cylinders of which the surface has corrugations in a concentric form or parallel to the axis of the cylinder (see Fig. 79). 43.4.6 Cross-kill roller - Roller comprising metallic discs placed on the same shaft. These 21

4.3.4 Roller - An implement with parts mounted on a horizontal shaft used for compacting the soil and crushing the clods. 4.3.4.1 Cage roller - Roller consisting of a cage of metal bars arranged so as to form the shape of a cylinder (see Fig. 75).

SP : 44-1989

FIG. 81

FIG. 78

more widely spaced than those of the spaced ring roller (see Fig. 82).

FIG. 82

FIG. 79

4.3.4.9

Land

packer

(culti-packer)

-

rough-surfaced discs have unequal projections on their periphery (see Fig. 80).

Tandem combination in the same frame either of two Cambridge rollers (deep and wide corrugation type) off-set by half a disc or of a Cambridge and cross-kill rollers (see Fig. 83).

FIG. 80
FIG. 83

4.3.4.1 Flat roller - Roller consisting of one or more hollow or solid cylinders with a smooth surface (see Fig. 8 1). 4.3.4.8 Furrow press - Roller comprising a number of spoked wheels of larger diameter and

4.3.4.10 Pulverizing roller - A helically formed roller attached behind a cultivator for breaking the clods (see Fig. 84).

28

SP : 44-1989 5. SOWING AND APPLICATION 5.1 Anhydrous FERTILIZER EQUIPMENT Ammonia Applicator A

machine to apply ammonia in gaseous form at a specified pressure. 5.2 Bed Planting-Planting on elevated level beds, which are separated by furrows. 5.3 Boot -The part of the sowing machine which conveys seeds or fertilizer from the delivery tube to the furrow. 5.4 BroadcastingThe process of scattering of agricultural inputs, such as seed, fertilizer and manure on the surface of the soil.
4.3.4.11 Ridge roller - Roller comprising reels, the diameter of each reel decreasing from the outer ends to the centre for use on ridged land so that the -surface of the rollers has the same form as the ridges over which they pass.

FIG. 84

5.5 Check Head - A device which, by means of a check wire, actuates the feed mechanisms of a check-row planter. 5.6 Check-Row Planting-The process of planting in which row-to-row and plant-to-plant distances are uniform and plants across the rows are also in line. 5.7 Check Wire - A wire or rope with equally spaced buttons or knots tied between two stalks at the ends of the field so as to actuate the checkrow planter. 5.8 Covering Body - A mouldboard or mouldboards which throw(s) a shallow ridge of soil over planted potatoes. 5.9 Covering Device - A device to refill a furrow after seeds have been placed in it.

4.3.4.12 Spaced ring roller - Roller with ring segments tapering at the periphery to a narrow rim spaced at intervals along the shaft. The individual ring segments are smooth, thinner at the periphery than those of the Cambridge rollers and sometimes have perforated edges (see Fig. 85).

FIG. 85

5.10 Covering Discs-Paired concave discs set to throw a shallow ridge of soil over planted potatoes. 5.11 Cut-Off Mechanism - A device which cuts off or brushes out excess seeds from the cells of a feed mechanism. 5.12 Dibbler - A device used for dibbling. 5.13 Dibbling - The process of placing seeds in the holes made in a seed bed and covering them. 5.14 Distributing Mechanism - A device which helps in spreading fertilizer.

4.3.5 Soil Surgeon - An implement consisting of a number of rows of U-shaped knives fixed to the underside of a rectangular board used for breaking clods and uprooting weeds. 4.3.6 Weeder Mulcher - An implement consisting of flexib!:: tines attached to a frame for mulching breaking the soil crust over germinating seeds and uprooting small weeds (see Fig. 86).

FIG. 86
29

SP : 44-1989 5.15 Drilling-The process of placing seeds in rows at uniform rate and at controlled depth with or without covering them with soil. 5.16 Farmyard Manure Spreader - A machine to carry farmyard manure and spread it in a regulated quantity. 5.16.1 Beater Type Spreader-A manure spreader using a fixed non-adjustable mechanically driven spreading unit (see Fig. 87 ). FIG. 89

aperture to a distributing mechanism consisting of a rotating brush (see Fig. 90).

FIG. 87

5.16.2

Field-Heap

Spreader

spreader for spreading (see Fig. 88).

- A manure heaps arranged in rows

FIG. 90

5.18.3 Endless Chain Mechanism - A combined feed and distributing mechanism consisting of an endless chain with slanting fingers travelling along the bottom of a hopper ar\d pushing fertilizer under a feed gate (see Fig. 91).
FIG. 88

5.16.3 Liquid Manure Spreader - A machine for transporting and spreading liquid manure on the soil or injecting it into the soil. 5.17 Feed Gate-An adjustable control the flow of material. shutter to FIG. 9 I 5.18.4 Plate-and-Flicker Mechanism - A combination of a horizontal, rotating-plate feed mechanism and a rotating-flicker distributing mechanism (see Fig. 92). 5.18.5 Reciprocating Plate Mechanism - A combined feed and distributing mechanism at the base of a hopper consisting of a series of reciprocating super-imposed slotted or perforated

5.18 Feed MeehanismA mechanism for discharging the fertilizer from hopper at predetermined rate. 5.18.1 Agitator Feed Mechanism - A feed or distributing mechanism or both consisting of an agitator or agitators which cause a substance to flow evenly (see Fig. 89). 5.18.2 Conveyor and Brush Mechanism - A feed mechanism incorporating an endless belt or chain which conveys fertilizer through a feed

SP : 44-1989 plates, each pair being separated by a fixed plate or other component (see Fig. 93 ).

FIG. 95

FIG. 92

5.20 Fertilizer Broadcaster - A fertilizer distributor with a spreading width substantially greater than the width of the machine (see Fig. 96).

FIG. 93

FIG. 96

518.6 Roller Feed Mechanism-A feed or distributing mechanism or both consisting essentially of a fluted or plain roller at the base of a hopper (see Fig. 94).

5.21 Fertilizer Distributor - A machine which distributes fertilizer at regulated and selected rates. 5.21.1 Agitator Feed Distributor - A gravityfeed fertilizer distributor whose discharge mechanism pushes or directs the fertilizer through fixed slots and consists of a shaft fitted with obliquely mounted agitator plates, discs, etc. 5.21.2 Centrifugal Distributor - A fertilizer distributor for solid fertilizers in which the fertilizer is broadcasted by centrifugal force.

FIG. 94

5.21.3 Endless Belt and Brush Delivery Distributor - A gravity fertilizer distributor in which the floor of the hopper consists of an endless conveyor belt. 5.21.4 Endless Chain Distributor - A gravity feed fertilizer distributors fitted with an endless chain running transversely to the direction of travel across the bottom of the hopper. The chain is provided with obliquely mounted fingers, the ends of which push the fertilizer through a slot which extends across the width of the hopper. 5.21.5 Full Width Distributordistributor in which the fertilizer A fertilizer falls to the

5.18.7 Star Wheel Mechanism - A feed mechanism consisting of a series of toothed wheels rotating in a horizontal plane in the base of a hopper, each conveying fertilizer under a feed gate (see Fig. 95). 5.19 Fertilizer Attachment - A detachable device which is fitted to a seed drill to apply fertilizer at the time of sowing.

31

SP : 44-1989 ground across the entire width of the spreader (see Fig. 97). 5.24 Fertilizing - Process of fertilizer application in or on the soil, or on the plants. 5.25 Furrow Opener - A part of seed drill for opening a furrow and assisting in placing of seeds. 5.25.1 Double-Disc Furrow Opener - A furrow opener consisting of two flat discs, set at an angle to each other. 5.25.2 Hoe-Type Furrow Opener - A furrow opener consisting of a single or double pointed shovel fastened to the lower part of the boot (see' Fig. 98).

FIG. 97 521.6 Gravity-Feed Distributor - A gravityfeed fertilizer distributor fitted with a mechanical distribution mechanism which provides a width of spread greater than the width of the hopper. 5.21.7 Oscillating Spout Distributor - A centrifugal fertilizer distributor in which the broadcasting mechanism consists of at least one oscillating spout. 521.8 Plate and Flicker Type Distributor - A gravity-feed fertilizer distributor in which fertilizer is flicked from plates mounted horizontally below the bottom of the hopper by means of a rotating shaft fitted with fingers. 5.21.9 Pneumatic Distributor - A fertilizer distributor in which the fertilizer is transported either to a distributor mechanism or directly to the soil surface by pneumatic means. 5.21.10 Reciprocating Plate Distributor - A gravity-feed fertilizer distributor whose discharge mechanism consists of reciprocating plates in the base of the hopper. 521.11 Roller-Feed Fertilizer Distributor - A gravity-feed fertilizer distributor whose discharge mechanism consists of a rotating roller mounted transversely to the direction of travel and at the base of the hopper. 5.21.12 Rotating Disc(s) Distributor - A fertilizer distributor in which the centrifugal broadcasting machanism consists of at least one rotating disc. 5.21.13 Star Wheel Distributor - A gravityfeed fertilizer distributor in which the fertilizer is discharged by means of notched discs (star wheels) through adjustable slots. 5.21.14 Studded Cylinder Distributor - A gravity-feed fertilizer distributor in which fertilizer is discharged from a hopper by a cylinder fitted with studs. 5.22 Fertilizer Drill - A machine to deposit fertilizer in soil at regulated and selected rates and at predetermined depth. 5.23 Fertilizer Gun- A machine to throw a jet of fertilizer by mechanical, pneumatic or other means, usually fitted to the side of the machine. 32

FIG. 98

5.25.3 Shoe-Type Furrow Opener - A furrow opener sledge shaped in elevation, with a Vshaped leading edge and hollow body through which seeds are dropped (see Fig. 99).

FIG: 99

5.25.4 Single-Disc Furrow Opener - A furrow opener consisting of one concave disc (see Fig. 100 ).

FIG. 100

5.25.5 Stub Runner-A furrow opener consisting of two tapered flat pieces of steel welded together so as to form a narrow V-shaped leading end and a hollow body into which seeds are dropped.

SP : 44-1989 5.26 Furrow Planting - Planting in the bottom of furrows. 5.27 Gaseous Fertilizer Distributor - A machine for applying mineral fertilizer in gaseous form which injects the fertilizer under pressure into the ground (see Fig. 101).
FIG. 102

5.32.2 Auger-Feed Mechanism - A feed and/or distributing mechanism consisting of an auger which causes a substance to flow evenly. 5.32.3 Brush-Feed Mechanism - A feed mechanism in which a rotating brush regulates the flow of seed from the hopper (see Fig. 103).

. --. .

FIG. 103

FIG. 101
5.32.4 Cell-Feed Mechanism - A mechanism in which seeds are collected delivered by a series of equally spaced (apertures or indentations ) on the periphery circular plate or wheel (see Fig. 104).

5.28 Hill Dropping - The process of placing seeds in small groups at regular intervals along straight parallel furrows and covering the seeds with soil so as to get assurance that there will be at least one plant from each spot where the group of seeds are placed. 5.29 Lime Spreader - A machine of large hopper capacity able to distribute heavy dressings of lime and similar materials at selected rates on the surface of the soil. 5.30 Liquid Fertilizer Distributor - A machine for applying mineral fertilizer in liquid form which either spreads the fertilizer on the surface of the ground or injects it into the soil. 5.31 Manure Application - Process of spreading manure on the soil and, in some cases, mixing it with the soil. Feed Mechanism - The 5.32 Metering mechanism of a seed drill, planter or fertilizer drill which delivers seeds or fertilizers from the hopper at selected rates. 5.32.1 Agitator-Feed Mechanism - A feed mechanism in which an agitator wheel maintains the flow of seed through an adjustable aperture (see Fig. 102 ).

feed and cells of a

FIG. 104

33

SP : 44-1989 5.32.5 Cup-Feed Mechanism -A feed mechanism consisting of cups or spoons on the periphery of a vertical rotating disc which picks up seeds from the hopper and delivers them into a seed tube (see Fig. 105).

FIG. 108 Mechanism - A 5.32.11 Seed- Taue feed mechanism which delivers a pre-prepared tape of biodegradable material containing seeds at predetermined intervals. Nutrients and/ or crop protection chemicals may be incorporated in the tape.

FIG. 105

A seed metering device with adjustable fluted roller to collect and deliver seeds into a seed tube (see Fig. 106).
5.32.6 Fluted-Feed Roller -

5.32.12 Seed- Wheel Mechanism - A feed mechanism consisting of a toothed wheel rotating in a horizontal plane and conveying the fertilizer through a feed gate below the star wheel (see Fig. 109 ).

FIG. 106

5.32.7 Internal Double Run - A seed metering mechanism in which the feed wheel is provided with fine and coarse ribbed flanges (see Fig. 107).

FIG. 109

5.32.13 Studded-Roller Feed Mechanism - A feed mechanism with series of rollers having regular peripheral projections which meter seeds from a seed hopper (see Fig. I 10).
FIG. 107

5.32.8 Knock-Out Mechanism - A device which knocks out seeds from the cells or picker heads of the feed mechanism. 5.32.9 Picker- Wheel Mechanism - A feed mechanism for larger seeds like potato in which a vertical plate is provided with radially projected pick-up arms which lifts the seeds by means of jaws or pins and drops them by means of knockout mechanism. 5.32.10 Plate-Feed Mechanism -A feed mechanism in which cells are provided on the periphery of a horizontal or slightly inclined plate (see Fig. 108).

FIG. 110 5.33 No

Tillage Planting - Direct

planting

in

SP : 44-1989 534 Precision Drilling - Uniform placing of seeds in rows at a predetermined depth and seed rate. 535 Planter - A machine used for precision drilling, hill dropping or check-row planting. 535.1 Maize Planter - A machine for planting of maize seeds in the seed bed. 5.35.2 Sugarcane Planter - A machine for planting sugarcane sets in the field. used

5.35.3 Tuber Planter-A machine which deposits tubers in the soil in parallel rows and at a pre-determined spacing and depth, and subsequently cover them with soil. 5353.1 Automatic tuber planter - A tuber planter with automatic feed mechanism with or without hand or automatic compensator.

FIG. 111 536 Pressure Bar - A spring or weight loaded bar which assists in penetration of the furrow opener. 537 Press Wheel - A wheel which compacts the soil and covers seeds in the furrow. 538 Ridge Fertilizer Attachment - A series of baffles fitted to a fertilizer distributor to direct fertilizer between the ridges. 539 Ridge PlantingPlanting on ridges. 5.40 Row Marker - An attachment to a sowing machine to mark a line on the field to guide the position of extreme furrow opener during the next
trip.

4 Automatic

tuber planter with a belt or vertical cup feed - An automatic potato planter with a vertical flexible belt with cups mounted on it or a cup feed planter having one or several rows of cups per element.

b) Automatic

tuber planter with horizontal belts - An automatic potato planter which selects potatoes on a horizontal strip formed by a row of sockets or two belts. tuber planter with clamp feed mechanism - An automatic planter, the feed mechanism of which consists of a wheel fitted with automatically opening and shutting clamps which are held closed by spring pressure.

cl Automatic

5.41 Seeding Attachment - An attachment provided in a cultivator for sowing seeds. 5.42 Seed Broadcasting Machine-A device or machine used for broadcasting seeds. 5.43 Seeder - A device for placing seeds on or in the soil. 5.44 Seed Drill- A machine to place seeds at uniform rate at selected depth and row spacing (see Fig. 112).

4 Automatic tuber planter with spiked wheel

feed mechanism - An automatic planter, the feed mechanism of which consists of a wheel fitted with spikes which impale tubers to hold them until delivery.

5.35.3.2 Combine tuber planter - A machine to plant potatoes and apply fertilizer in one operation. 53533 Hand-feed tuber planter - A tuber [fn,xer, the planting element of which is fed by a) Cup-feed tuber planter - A manually-fed tuber planter, the planting element of which consists of cups mounted on an endless chain. b) Drop-tube tuber planter - A manually-fed tuber planter, the planting element of which consists of a drop-tube (see Fig. 111).
c) Notched-wheel tuber planter -

A manuallyfed tuber planter, the planting element of which consists of a vertical spacing wheel with self-emptying indentations or cells.

FIG. 112

35

SP : 44-1989 5.44.1 Agitator- Wheel Drill - A seed drill, the metering mechanism of which consists of agitator wheels. The seed rate is controlled mainly by varying the discharge apertures in the hopper base. 5.44.3 Centrifugal-Feed Drill - A seed drill in which seeds are metered by centrifugal force.

5.44.2 Cell- Wheel Spacing Drill - A spacing drill, the metering mechanism of which consists of a wheel with cells on its rim. The distance between seeds sown is controlled by varying the speed of rotation of the wheel or by selecting wheels with different cell spacings (see Fig. 113 ).

5.44.4 Cup-Feed Seed Drill - A seed drill, the metering mechanism of which consists of discs fitted with cups on their periphery. The seed rate is controlled either by altering the size of the cups or by changing the speed of rotation of the discs. 5.44.5 Disc-Selector Drill - A spacing drill, the metering mechanism of which consists of a disc with notches mounted either vertically or inclined. A seed spacing is usually controlled by varying the speed at which the disc rotates orby selecting discs with different notch spaci'ngs (see Fig. 114 ). 5.44.6 Force-Feed Drill - A seed drill in which a positive metering mechanism comprises flutted rollers or internal double run wheels. 5.44.1 Gravity-Feed Seeder - A seeder in which the metering of seeds is done through gravity and positive metering is not possible. 5.44.8 Pneumatic-Feed Drill i A seed drill in which the metering of seeds is done by air stream at set spacing in continuous parallel rows. 5.44.9 Pneumatic-Spacing Drill - A spacing drill in which the placing of seeds is achieved pneumatically. A spacing drill in which distribution is effected by means of an air jet directed at the feed mechanism, which leaves only single seeds in the cells of the distributor mechanism. A seed spacing is usually controlled either by changing the speed of rotation or the spacing of the perforations of alternative seeding discs.
Perforated Blower -

5.44.10

Pneumatic-Spacing

Drill

with

5.44.11

Pneumatic-Spacing Drill with Discs - A spacing drill in which the

FIG. 113

distribution is affected by providing a negative pressure to the metering mechanism which

0

FIG. 114

36

SP : 44-1989 consists of a perforated disc., A seed spacing is usually controlled either by changing the speed of rotation of the disc, or by selecting discs into different hole spacings. 5.44.12
Perforated

5.48 Spreading Rotor - A rotating auger, disc, or series of toothed or paddle shaped blades at the rear of a manure spreader which spreads the manure. 5.49 Transplanter - A machine which sets seedlings into the ground in rows. The spacing between the seedlings is adjustable (see Fig. 116). 5.49.1 Clamp Type Transplanter - A transplanter, the planting mechanism of which consists of plates which carry clamping devices to hold seedlings. 5.49.2 Clamp with Disc Transplanter-A transplanter with a clamp holder used in association with discs. 5.49.3 Clamp with Tipping Share Transplanter - A transplanter with a tipping share fitted with a clamp. 5.49.4 Flexible Disc transplanter, the planting consists of flexible discs.
Transplanter

drill in which distribution is affected by providing a negative pressure to the metering mechanism which consists of perforated drums. The seed spacing is usually controlled either by changing the speed of rotation of the drum or by selecting drums into different hole spacings. 5.44.13
Perforated

Pneumatic-Spacing Drums - A spacing

Drill

with

drill in which distribution is effected by providing a negative pressure to the metering mechanism which incorporates perforated rims. The seed spacing is usually controlled either by changing the speed of rotation or by altering the spacing of holes in the rim. 5.44.14 Seed-cum-Fertilizer Drill - A machine which drills seeds and fertilizer simultaneously in the same or different rows. 5.44.15 Spacing (Precision) Drill - A seed drill in which the metering mechanism distributes seeds singly or in groups at a set spacing in continuous parallel rows. 5.44.16 Spacing-Drill with Perforated Belt - A spacing drill in which the metering mechanism consists of a perforated belt. The spacings are adjusted by varying the belt speed or by selecting belts with differently spaced perforations (see Fig. 115 ). 5.44.11 Studded-Roller the metering mechanism studded rollers. The seed varying the speed of the A seed drill, of which consists of rate is controlled by rotating shaft.
Drill-

Pneumatic-Spacing Rim - A spacing

Drill

with

element

- A of which

5.50 Transplanting - The process seedlings in prepared seed beds. 6. INTERCULTIVATION

of planting

EQUIPMENT

6.1 Cultivator - An implement for intercultivation with laterally adjustable tines or discs to work between crop rows. This can be used for seed bed preparation and for sowing with seeding attachment. The tine may have provision for vertical adjustments also. 6.1.1 Disc Cultivator - A cultivator fitted with discs. 6.1.2 Rotary Cultivator - A cultivator with tines or blades mounted on a power-driven horizontal shaft( s ) (see Fig. 117 ). 6.1.3 Tine Cultivator - A cultivator fitted with tines having shovels (see Fig. 118 ). 6.2 Cultivator Point - A replaceable soil working part attached to the lower end of the cultivator tines such as shovel and sweep. 6.2.1 ShovelA soil working element with one or both end point. The later is known as reversible shovel.

5.45 Seed Tube-A tube which carries seeds from the metering device to the boot. 5.46 Solid Mineral Fertilizer Application Equipment - A machine which distributes solid mineral fertilizers in pre-determined quantities. 54: ,%,Grg -The process of placing seeds in

FIG. 115 37

SP : 44-1989
6.3.3 Spring Tine - A cultivator tine made of spring steel which can deflect when an obstacle is encountered in the soil.

6.4 Hoe - A hand tool with blade( s), tine( s) and sometime with disc(s) attached to a frame used for inter-cultivation of row crops. 6.4.1 Hand-Hoe - A hand operated Fig. 119). hoe (see

FIG. II6

FIG. 117
FIG. 119

6.4.2 Rotary Hoe - A hoe with curved pointed spikes rigidly attached to horizontal shaft. 6.4.3 Wheel Hoe - A hoe with one or two wheels. 6.5 Khurpi - A hand tool comprising a blade and a short handle used for loosening the soil, weeding and earthening up (see Fig. 120).

FIG. 118
FIG. 120

6.2.2 Sweep - A two-winged cutting point which cuts the soil in a horizontal direction under the surface. 6.3 Cultivator Tine -- A member cultivator point to main frame. 6.3.1 Rigid Tine- A cultivator does not deflect during work. connecting tine which

6.6 Kodali - A hand tool comprising a narrow blade and a wooden handle used for loosening and cutting the soil (see Fig. 121). 6.7 Paddy Weeder - An equipment used to uproot the weeds in paddy crop planted in line (see Fig. 122 ). 6.7.1 Float (Sleigh)A component in front of the weeding roll which ensures an easy sliding motion during operation through better floatation of the weeder.

6.3.2 Spring-Loaded Tine - A rigid tine hinged to the frame and loaded with one or more springs to enable it to swing on encountering an obstacle.

38

SP : 44-1989

. 4ztf
FIG. 121
6.7.2 FrameThe part that holds float, and front and rear weeding rolls in position and to which the yoke of the handle is attached.

7.7 Capillary Conductivity - Capacity of partially saturated soils to transmit water, measured at the ratio of water flow velocity to the driving force. As soil becomes more saturated, capillary conductivity approaches the hydraulic conductivity.

7.8 Capillary Fringe - A zone just above the water table (Tero gauge pressure) that remains almost saturated. (The extent and the degree of definition of the capillary fringe depends upon the size-distribution of pores ).

7.9 Capillary Moisture - Water held in the soil pores by force of surface tension as a continuous film around the soil particles.

6.7.3 Weeding Roll - A revolving assembly with finger-like projections or tines which performs the operations of weeding and submerging the weeds in water. 6.8 Rotary Weeder - A ground-driven implement with straight or curved spikes mounted on disc rims for destroying weeds and breaking the soil surface. 6.9 ShovelA hand tool comprising a narrow blade and a wooden handle having a grip at the rear for digging, scooping and throwing the soil (see Fig. 123 ). 6.10 Spade (Pow&)A hand tool comprising a broad blade and a wooden handle used for loosening, cutting, earthing, dressing and removing the soil (see Fig. 124). 7. IRRIGATION
EQUIPMENT 7.1 AdapterA device used in sprinkler system as a fitting to connect two variable pipes of different sizes.

7.10 Capillary Potential - The energy required per unit mass to move water against the capillary field forces in the soil from a free water surface to any point in the soil. 7.11 Capillary Pressure Head - Head water that rises by surface tension above a free water surface in the soil. Also called capillary rise. 7.12 Capillary Soil Moisture - Moisture in soil held by surface tension forces against the force of gravity. 7.13 Capillary ZoneSoil zone above water level up to a limit in which pores become filled as a result of surface tension. 7.14 Check IrrigationApplication of a comparatively large stream of water in level plots surrounded by levees. 7.15 Conduit - Any open or closed intended for the conveyance of water. channel

7.2 Application Rate - Rate at which the water is applied to a given area, usually expressed in depth of water per hour. 7.3 BaffIes- Vanes, guides, grids, grating or similar devices placed in a conduit to check, deflect or regulate flow. 7.4 Basin Irrigation-The application of water by flooding within areas of approximately level land surrounded by levees. Basins may vary in size from a few square feet to several acres. 7.5 Border Irrigation -The application of water to strips marked by levels 3 to 30 metres apart. The soil is essentially level between levels on even topography with a gentle slope so that the water forms a sheet over the whole area. 7.6 Canillarv CaDacitv - The maximum amount of cap\llary" watkr remaining in soil after the gravitational water has drained away.

water, Water - Underground 7.16 Confined constrained b an overlying confining bed, which icient pressure to rise above the is under suf t* bottom of the confining bed. 7.17 Consumptive Use-The water used by plants in transpiration and growth plus water vapour loss from adjacent soil or snow or from intercepted precipitation in any specified time. Usually expressed as equivalent depth of free water per unit of time, 7.18 Continuous Flow Irrigation - System of irrigation water delivery where each irrigator receives his allotted quantity of water at a continuous rate. 7.19 Contour Basin-Basin made by levees or borders following the contours of the land. 7.20 Contour approximately Ditch-Irrigation on the contour. ditch laid out

7.21 Contour Flooding - Method of irrigating by flooding from contour ditches. 7.22 Contour Furrows - Furrows ploughed on the contour on pasture or range land to prevent

39

SP : 44-1989 7.31 Distributory - Smaller conduit taking water from a canal for delivery to farms; any system of secondary conduits; river channel flowing away from the main stream and not rejoining it, as contrasted to a tribufary.

FIG. 123

b

7.32 Distribution Efficiency - Measure of the uniformity of irrigation water distribution over a field. 7.33 Diversion Duty of Water-The irrigation water diverted at the intake of a canal system, usually expressed in depth or the irrigable area under the system. 7.34 Diversion Box - Structure built into a canal or ditch for dividing the water into predetermined portions and diverting it into other canals or ditches. 7.35 Drip Irrigation-This is a method of application of water directly to the land surface or below the surface near the plant root in small quantities but continuously. Water application is accomplished through an extensive network of small diameter pipes fitted with emitters or drippers. 7.36 Field Capacity-The amount of water retained in a soil against a force of gravity at any specified time (about 24 to 36 hours) after flooding. It is approximated by moisture equivalent and one-third atmosphere percentage. 7.37 Field Ditch-A smaller ditch constructed within a field either for irrigation or for drainage. 7.38 Flooding-The water is released from field ditches and allowed to flood over the land. 7.39 Foot Valve - Check valve opening upwards installed at the inlet end of the suction pipe to retain water in the pump for priming. 7.40 Furrow Irrigation - This method consists in making the land into ridges and furrows, and irrigating the area through furrows. 7.41 Gate - Structure or device in irrigation for controlling the rate of flow into or from a canal or ditch. 7.42 Gravity Irrigation - Irrigation in which the water is not pumped but flows by gravity including sprinkler system. 7.43' Hydraulic Ram - An automatic device with which the energy of a quantity of water with small head is used to lift proportionate quantity of this water to a greater height. It works on the principle of water hammer. 7.44 Infiltration -The into the soil. downward entry of water

FIG. 124 soil loss and allow water to penetrate into the soil. Also furrows are laid out on the contour for irrigation purposes. 7.23 Contracted Weir - A measuring notch which has sides designed to produce a contraction in the cross-sectional width of the overflowing water.
7.24 ControI

structure,

Structure - Water regulating usually for gravity flow systems.

7.25 Corrugation Irrigation - Application of water in small furrows running down from the head ditch. The furrow guides the water but some over-topping may occur. 7.26 Cross- Pipe fitting with four outlets or connections each 90" apart in sprinkler system. 7.27 Cubic Metre Per Second - A flow of water equivalent to a stream one metre wide and one metre deep flowing at a velocity of one metre per second. 7.28 Cumulative Infiltration - Summation of the depth of water absorbed by a soil in a specified elapsed time with reference to the time of initial water application. 7.29 Deep Percolation - Water which percolates downward below the root zone and cannot be used by plants. 7.30 Depth of Irrigation - Depth of soil to be brought to field capacity.
41

7.45 Infiltration Rate-The maximum rate at which a soil, in a given condition at a given time can absorb water* impounded on the surface at a
*Also the maximum rate at which a soil will absorb water.

SP : 44-1989 shallow depth when adequate precautions are taken regarding border or fringe effects. Defiiled as the volume of water passing into the soil per unit of area er @t of time. It has the dimensions of velocity PLT 1. 7.46 Infiltrometer - A device for measuring the rate of entry of fluid into a porous body when applied uniformaly over the area, for example, watir into soil. 7.47 Irrigatable Area - Area capable of being irrigated, principally as regards quality and elevation of land. 7.48 Irrigation - Artificial application of water to soil for the purpose of supplying moisture essential to plan! growth. 7.49 Irrigation Effkiency - The ratio of the water consumed by crops of an irrigated farm or project to the water diverted from a river or other natural water source into the farm or project canals. 7.50 Irrigation Frequency - Time between irrigations. interval portion of the entire flow in turn for a limited period of time. 7.60 Sprinkler Irrigation - The application of water to the soil by spraying through nozzle. 7.61 Sprinkler Systems - All the equipments required to apply water to a given area from the source of water to sprinkler nozzle. 7.61.1 Boom Type - An elevated, cantilevered sprinkler( s ) mounted on a central stand. The sprinkler boom rotates about a central pivot. 7.61.2 Farm System-System which will properly distribute the required amount of water to the entire farm. 7.61.3 Field System-That part of a farm system which covers one field or area for which it is designed. 7.61.4 Hand Move-Method of moving the spnnkler system by uncoupling and picking up the pipes manually requiring no special tools. This includes systems in which lateral pipes are loaded and unloaded manually from racks or trailers used to move the pipes from one lateral setting to another. 7.61.5 Mechanized - System which is moved either by engine power, tractor power, water power or hand power on wheels or skids. Generally considered as any type of system that can be moved without carrying manually. 7.61.6 Permanent - System consisting of permanent underground piping with either permanent risers for sprinklers or quick coupling valves in such a manner that sprinklers may be attached. 7.61.7 Self-Propelled System - Portable powered system which moves continuously when in operation. May rotate about a pivot in the centre of field or move laterally across the field in a predetermined direction. 7.61.8 Semi-Portable - Systems designed with permanent pumping units and mains but with portable sprinkler laterals. 7.61.9 Side-Roll System - System mounted on wheels, usually employing the lateral pipeline as an axle, where the lateral is moved at right angles to the mainline by rotating the pipeline either by hand or by engine power. 7.61.10 Solid Set - System, either permanent or portable, which covers the complete field with pipes and sprinklers in such a manner that a!1 the field can be irrigated without moving any of the system. 7.61.11 Towed System - System where lateral lines are mounted on wheels, casters, sleds or skids and are pulled or towed in the field to be irrigated in a direction approximately parallel to the lateral.

7.51 Irrigation Methods- The manner in which water is artificially applied to an area. 7.52 Irrigation Stream - Flow used for irrigation of a particular tract of land; flow of water distributed at a single irrigation or that in a single farm lateral. 7.53 Lift Magnification -The ratio of the delivery head to the intake head in case of hydraulic ram. It is also known as magnification factor. 7.54 Moisture Content - Percentage by weight of moisture based on wet weight in a sample. 7.55 Moisture Density - Mass of water per unit volume. When expressed in grams per cubic it is numerically equal to the centimetre, percentage of total space occupied by the water. 7.56 Moisture Penetration - Depth to which moisture penetrates following irrigation or rainfall before the rate of downward movement becomes negligible. 7.57 Moisture Percentage - The percentage of water in soil and plant usually expressed on a dryweight basis. If otherwise expressed, the basis should be stated. 7.58 Moisture Tension - The equivalent negative gauge pressure or suction in the soil moisture. Soil moisture tension is equal to the equivalent negative or gauge pressure to which water must be subjected in order to be in hydraulic equilibrium through a porous permeable wall or membrane with the water in the soil. 7.59 Rotation Irrigation System - System of irrigation in which a number of irrigators rotate a

42

SP : 44-1989 7.62 Sub-Irrigation - Application of water by percolating from wide-spaced furrows to an impermeable layer in the soil with a temporary rise of water table to wet the entire soil body. This practice requires an impervious sub-soil layer, a porous surface soil and a uniform topography of moderate slope. 7.63 Supplemental is used primarily Irrigation - Irrigation to supplement rainfall. which 7.74 Water Level - Water surface; also its elevation above any datum; gauge height; stage. 7.75 Water ResourcesSupply of water in a given area or watershed, usually interpreted in terms of availability of surface or underground water. 7.76 Water Table - The upper surface of ground water, locus of points in soil water at which the is e'qual to atmospheric hydraulic pressure pressure. 7.77 Wilting Point -The percentage of water in soil ( based on dry weight soil) when permanent wilting of plants occurs. 7.78 Zone of Aeration - Subsurface zone above the water table in which the soil or permeable rock is not saturated. 7.79 Zone of Saturation - Layer of earth (may be both soil and underlying strata) containing gravitational or free water. 8. HORTICULTURAL EQUIPMENT

7.64 Surface Irrigation ~ Irrigation where the soil surface is used as a conduit as in furrow and border irrigation. 7.65 Surface Water - Water stored on or flowing over the surface of the soil. 7.66 Total Suction Head -The vertical head, in metres, from the water level to the centre line of the pump plus velocity head, entrance losses and friction losses in suction line including foot valves, striners, and fittings. 7.67 Transpiration Ratio - Ratio of weight of water absorbed and transpired by the plant to the weight of the dry matter produced. Evaporation from soil not included. 7.68 Trapewidal Weir - A liquid flow measuring device with ,a trapezoidal notch. 7.69 Triangular Weir - A contracted measuring weir notch with sides that torm an angle with its apex downward. 7.70 Trickle Irrigation see 7.35. Soil water held so

8.1 Bill Hook - A hand tool used for lopping of branches and cleaning in plantation and estate. It may have single edge or double edge (see Fig. 125).

7.71 Unavailable Water firmly by adhesion.

G=FIG. 125

7.72 Unsaturated Flow-The water in a soil which is not capacity with water.

movement of filled to its field

8.2 Budding and Grafting Knife - A knife used for budding and grafting purposes (see Fig. 126). 8.3 Budding Knife - A knife to remove the bud from the scion, to cut the stock, slit and raise the bark to insert the bud (see Fig. 127).

7.73 Water Application Efficiency - The ratio of water stored in soil root zone to the amount of water delivered at the farm.

h
INNER HANDLE SCALES y A LSPRING

OUTER HANDLE

SCALES

CUTTING EDGE7

FNAIL

GROOVE

/CUTTING

EDGE

t
BUDDING BLADE HANDLE

\NAlL GROOVE GRAFTING BLADE

FIG. 126

43

SP : 44-1989

FIG. 127 FIG. 131

8.4 Budding Tape-Tape used in holding the buds in their position after budding operation.
8.5 Dah - A metal piece with handle used for cutting trees and clearing jungle growth (see Fig. 128 ).

FIG. 128

8.6 Digging '

Fork - Fork with long handle used for digging (see Fig. 129). FIG. 132

FIG. 129

8.12 Garden Trowel - A transplanting trowel used for digging and lifting small plants (see Fig. 133).

and Tapping Knife-A blade attached to a wooden handle and is designed to have a V-shaped cutting edge to make narrow channels in the bark of rubber trees to open the latex cells and to facilitate easy tappling and draining of latex from the tree. 8.7 Draining

8.8 Forester's thicker stock.

Shear -

A shear

for

pruning

8.9 Garden Fork - A hand tool with handle and prongs placed in line of handle or perpendicular to it used for loosening the soil (see Fig. 130).

FIG. 133

FIG. 130

B

Knife-A knife to cut the wood from scion and to insert the same in the stock (see Fig. 134). 8.13 Grafting

8.10 Garden Hatchet - An axe-like tool with one side sharp edge having long handle used for cutting branches (see Fig. 13 1). 8.11 Garden R&e-A hand tool used for collecting uprooted weeds, breaking clods and to some extent levelling of seed bed in the garden (see Fig. 132).
8.14 Grass Shear -

FIG. 134

A scissor-like tool used for cutting the grass (see Fig. 135). 8.15 Grass Sword-A thin metal strip with a handle having one side cutting edge used for

SP : 441989

FIG. 140 FIG. 135

cutting the grass ( see Fig. 136).

normally

in bending

position

8.20 Lawn Mover - A means operate in the which uses the ground cut by means of wheels, (see Fig. 141).

machine where the cutting plane of the ground and to determine the height of air cushion or skides, etc.

FIG. 136

8.16 Hand Cultivator - A hand tool with prongs handle used for cohecting the weeds and breaking the clods in the garden (see Fig. 137).

G?= FIG. 137

8.17 Hand Dibbler - A peg type tool used for making holes in soil for placing the seeds (see Fig. 138).

FIG. 138 FIG. 141 8.18 Hedge Shear - A scissor-like tool used for pruning of hedges and twigs (see Fig. 139).

8.20.1 Attachment - Any assembly or component connected to a power unit for the purpose of accomplishing work such as cutting grass. 8.20.2 Blade Tip Circle-The path described by the outermost point of the cutting means as it rotates about its shaft axis. 8.20.3 Braking System - A combination one or more brakes and the related means operation and control. of of

8.20.4 ControlA means or device which will control the operation of the mower or any specific operating function thereof. FIG. 139 8.20.5 Cutting Means (Blade) - The mechanism used to provide the cutting action for the width of cut of a lawn mower. hand tool side hoe (see 8.20.6 Cutting Means Enclosure - The part or assembly which provides the protective means around the cutting means. 45

8.19 Hoe and Rake Combined-A having one side rake and opposite Fig. 140).

SP : 441989
8.20.7 Cutting Positions - Any designated height adjustment (setting) of the cutting means where it remains operative.

8.20.22 Ride-on
Garden (Riding)

(Riding) Machine; Lawn and Tractor - A self-propelled

8.20.8 Cutting WidthThe width of cut measured across the cutting means at right angles to the direction of travel and calculated from the dimensions of the cutting means or the diameter(s) of the blade tip circle(s). 8.20.9 Cylinder (Reel) Mower - A grasscutting machine with one or more blades rotating about a horizontal axis to provide a shearing action with a stationary cutter bar or knife. 8.20.10 Automatic Declutching Control - A control designed so that it will automatically interrupt power to a drive when the operator's actuating force is removed. xtension of the 8.20.11 Discharge Chute discharge opening generally L.,bu to control the discharge of material from the cutting means. 8.20.12 Discharge OpeningA gap or opening in the cutting means enclosure through which grass may be discharged. 8.20.13 Edger - A power grass-cutting machine suitable for cutting lawn and soil, usually in a vertical plane. 8.20.14 Flail Mower - A grass-cutting machine which'utilizes a power source to rotate a horizontal shaft with blade. Cutting action is accomplished by impact with rotating blades. 8.20.15 Grass Catcher-A part or combination of parts which prcvide a means for collecting grass clippings or debris. 8.20.16 GuardA means such as bar, barrier, structural component, etc, that restricts an inadvertent access to a hazardous area. 8.20.17 Lawn Trimmer-A power grasscutting machine where the operator determines, the plane of operation of the cutting means and the height of cut, possibly assisted by a wheel or skid, etc. 8.20.18 Mower Attachment - A cutting means designed to be easily detached from the vehicle generally to allow vehicle to be used without the mower or with other attachments. 8.20.19 Mulching Mower - A rotary mower having a fixed or optional configuration without openings in the mower housing above the plane of the blade for the discharge of grass clippings. 8.20.20 Pedestrian-Controlled grass-cutting machine, either propelled, normally controlled walking behind the unit. A pushed or selfby the operator
Mower -

vehicle on which an operator rides which is generally intended for cutting grass. The cutting means may either be an integral part of the vehicle or suspended from or attached to the vehicle. 8.20.23 Safety Device - An installation designed to protect the operator or other persons, for example, shields, grass catching equipment, deflectors, covers for chains, belts, drive shafts, etc. 8.20.24 Shield-A part or an assembly that, unless displaced or removed, restricts access to or from a hazardous area. 8.20.25 Sickle Bar Mower - A cutting machine which utilizes a power source to operate a knife or knives to provide a shearing action with a stationary cutter bar or movable knife. 8.20.26 Sulky Type Unit - A walk behind power lawn mower which has been converted to a riding mower by the addition of an optional trailing device on which the operator rides. 8.20.27 Swing-Over Handle - A handle that pivots from one end of a walk-behind mower to the other end to allow reversing the direction of travel of the mower without turning the mower around. 8.20.28 Thrown Object Hazard - The potential for injury caused by object(s) propelled by the moving cutting means. 8.20.29 Towed Unit - Implement pulled from the drawbar of a propelling machine and usually equipped with wheels for transport. 8.20.30 Traction Drive - The means ( system ) used to transmit power from the power source to the ground drive means. 8.20.31 Transport Position - The designed state of the mower for propelled transport of the unit or position to which the cutting means is brought when transporting the mower. 8.21 Lopping tShear - A shear with long handle and smaller blade (see Fig. 143). 8.22 Orchard Ladder-Ladder used for facilitating picking of fruits, pruning, spraying and other common operations carried out in the gardens. 8.23 Pruning Knife - A folding knife with handle used for pruning of small plants (see Fig. 144). 8.24 Pruning Saw - A metal strip with serrated teeth and handle for cutting green stock (see Fig. 145 ). 8.25 Secateur - A scissor-like tool pruning the plants (see Fig. 146). used for

8.20.21 Power Lawn Mower - A grass-cutting machine which is powered by mechanical means or electric motor (see Fig. 142).

46

SP : 44-1989

GRASS

REFLECTOR

BACK ROLLER

FIG. 142

.

FIG. 145

4----I

SIZE

OF f

THE SCREW

SECATEUR

..Ni----Zl

~
FIG. 143

BLADE /

LPIVOT

FIG. 146

bANDLE

FIG. 144 47

8.26 Transplanting Trowel -- A scoop-shaped tool with handle used for digging and lifting small plants without damaging the root zone for their transplanting ( see Fig. 147 ).

SP : 44-1989 8.29 Watering Can-A water holding container normally with perforated openings used for applying water to the plants preferably in a spray form (see Fig. 150).

FIG. 147

4
SOCKET BODY

FIG. 150

8.27 Tree Pruner - A hand tool with long handle used for pruning of high tree (see Fig. 148).

9. FORESTRY EQUIPMENT 9.1 Angle transmitting transmission Transmission - Device for the power from the power shaft to the saw blade.

9.2 Boring - The process of cutting with the saw chain at the nose (tip) of the guide bar in order to make a hole. This is also known as straight-in-cut [see Fig. 151 (A and B)].

LINK

FIG. 148

FIG. 151(A)

8.28 Trenching Hoe-A hand tool, having one side a miniature spade and opposite side kodali used for making small trenches in nurseries and gardens (see Fig. 149).

FIG. 151(B)

FIG. 149

9.3 Bucking-Cross cutting felled or uprooted trees or parts of trees, into lengths (see Fig. 152). 48

SP : 44-1989

FIG. 152

9.4 Bunching -

Gathering and arranging trees or parts of trees in bunches to facilitate loading and transportation. 9.5 Cable Skidder-Skidder that uses winch cable(s) (rope) (usually with chokers) to assemble and hold its load. 9.6 Chain Brake-Device for stopping or locking the chain, activated manually or released automatically when kick-back occurs. 9.7 Chain Catcher - Device for restraining chain if it breaks or degrooves. the

9.17

Clutch-Device for engaging and disengaging a driven member to and from a rotating source of power. Cover - Protective clutch and the sprocket. 9.19 Conversion - Transformation timber into any kind of product. 9.18 Clutch

cover

on

the

of natural to remove

9.20 Debarker - Machine bark.

designed

9.21 Debarking-Removing bark from trees or parts of trees (see Fig. 153 ). 9.22 Debranching - Removing trees or parts of trees.
9.23 Delimber -

9.8 Chain GuidesPlates or guides, fitted on one or both sides of the guide bar where the chain enters the groove, for assisting in guiding the chain between the sprocket and the guide bar. 9.9 Chain Oil Pump Adjuster - Device for adjusting the delivery of chain oil from the cham oil pump to the guide bar and the chain. 9.10 Chain Pitch-The arithmetic mean of the two distances between three adjacent rivets. 9.11 Chain Tension Adjuster - Device acting on the guide bar for adjusting the chain tension. 9.12 Chipper - Machine designed to chip trees or parts of trees. 9.13 Chipping - Converting logs or billets into small pieces for further processing. 9.14 Choke - Device for enriching the fuel air mixture in the carburettor, to aid starting. 9.15 Clam Bunk Skidder-Skidder that uses an integrally mounted loader to assemble the load into an inverted grapple or top-opening jaws to hold its load. 9.16 Clearing - Removing unwanted residues, shrubs, trees and stumps. logging

branches

from

Machine branches from trees.

designed

to remove

FIG. 153 49

SP : 44-1989 9.24 Delimbing -See 9.22 and Fig. 154. 9.38 Grapple Skidder - Skidder that suspended grapple or bottom opening assemble and hold its load. 9.39 Handles - Support handles manoeuvring the saw (see Fig. 155). uses a jaws to for

9.40 Harness - Adjustable straps of leather, plastic or other suitable material by means of which the saw is suspended from the operator. 9.41 Harvester - A self-propelled multi-function machine which combines felling with other processing functions. 9.42 Heated Handle - Handle equipped with a device which allows it to be heated, for example, by exhaust gases or electricity. 9.43 High Speed Mixer Adjuster - Device, normally a screw, for adjusting the fuel delivery at full throttle. 9.44 Hip Pad-Strap or pad of leather, plastic or other suitable material fastened either to the saw or to the harness, to cushion the operator from impact and to reduce transmission of vibration. 9.45 Idle Speed Adjuster - Device, normally a screw, acting on the throttle, for adjusting the idle speed. 9.46 Ignition Switch - Device for connecting and disconnecting the ignition system and thus allowing the engine to be started or stopped. 9.47 Kick-Back (Brush Saw) - Uncontrolled (sudden and accidental) sideways or backward motion of the saw blade which may occur when it contacts an object such as a sampling, tree stump, etc, especially when the cutting force is directed towards the operator. 9.48 Kick-Back (Chain Saw) - Uncontrolled (sudden and accidental) upward and/or backward motion of the guide bar which may occur when the saw chain at the nose (tip) of the guide bar contacts an object such as a log or branch or when the wood closes in and pinches the saw chain in the cut. 9.49 Loading - Picking up trees or parts of trees from the ground or from a vehicle and transferring them to and piling them on another vehicle. 9.50 Log Loader - Self-propelled machine, with grapple and supporting structure, designed to pick up and discharge trees or parts of trees for the purpose of piling or loading. 9.51 Logging - Operation comprising felling of trees, limbing, bucking and transportation of the resulting product out of the forest. 9.52 Lopping-Cutting standing tree. of branches from a

FIG. 154

9.25 Decompression Valve - Device for lowering the compression in the cylinder to aid starting. 9.26 Feller - Self-propelled fell standing trees. machine designed to

9.27 Feller Buncher - Self-propelled machine designed to fell standing trees and arrange them in bunches on the ground. 9.28 Feller Forwarder - Self-propelled, selfloading machine designed to fell standing trees and move the felled trees by carrying them. 9.29 Feller Skidder designed to fell standing by dragging. 9.30 Felling root system. Cutting Self-propelled machine trees and transport them a standing stem above the

9.31 Felling Sights - Marks on the chain saw to aid felling a tree in a desired direction. 9.32 Forwarder - Self-propelled machine, usually self-loading designed to move trees or parts of trees by carrying them completely off the ground. Normally forwarders are used for offroad transportation, 9.33 Forwarding - Moving trees or parts of trees out of the forest by carrying them. 9.34 Front or towards Handle - Support handle located the front of the engine housing. at

9.35 Front Hand front handle and from injuries and the hand slips off used to activate

GuardGuard between the chain for protecting the hand aiding in control of the saw if the handle. This guard is often the chain brake. part that supports and

9.36 Guide Bar-The guides the saw chain.

9.37 Guide Bar Cover - Removable device for covering the guide bar and chain when the saw is not being used.

SP : 44-1989

SUSPENSION REAR

EYELET

FRONT GROUND ~\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\(

LEFT

HANDLE

RIGHT
FIG. 155

HANDLE

9.53 Low Speed Mixer Adjuster-Device, normally a screw, for adjusting the fuel delivery at idling speed. 9.54 Manual Oiler - Manually delivering oil to the chain. operated pump

9.62 Processor - A multi-function machine which does not fell trees but performs two or more subsequent functions. 9.63 Pruning - Removing of live or dead branches or multiple leaders, from standing trees for the improvement of the tree or its timber. 9.64 Quick Release Mechanism - Device enabling the operator to free himself quickly from the saw in case of emergency. 9.65 Rear-Handle - Support handle located or towards the rear of the engine housing. at

9.55 Muffler Silencer - Device for reducing engine exhaust noise and directing the exhaust gases. 9.56 Mulching - Applying a layer matter on the surface of the soil. of organic

9.57 Nose Guard-Device, covering the nose area of the guide bar, for reducing the incidence or severity of kick-back. 9.58 On-Off Switch - Device for connecting and disconnecting the electric current and thus allowing the motor to be started or stopped. 9.59 Piling - Depositing orderly piles. trees or parts of trees in

9.66 Rear Hand Guard - Extension on the lower part of the rear handle for protecting the hand from the chain if it breaks or degrooves. 9.67 Rim Sprocket-Chain drive wheel with teeth, with rims on which the side and cutter links run. 9.68 Saw Blade cutting teeth. Metal disc with peripheral

9.60 Power Transmission Shaft - Shaft inside the shaft tube for transmitting the power from the engine to the saw blade. 9.61 Primer aid starting. Device for supplying extra fuel to

9.69 Saw Blade Cover - Removable cover completely shielding the saw blade teeth when the saw is not in use.

51

SP : 44-1989 9.70 Saw Blade Guard - Device covering rear part of the saw blade in order to protect operator. the the 9.85 Suspension Eyelet - Ring or other fitting, fixed to the saw near its centre of gravity, to which the harness is attached (see Fig. 155). 9.86 Throttle Lock - Device setting the throttle a partially aid. starting. for open temporarily position, to

9.71 Saw ChainChain serving as a cutting tool, usually consisting of drive links, cutters and side links, held together by rivets. 9.72 Scarifying - Preparing a site for regeneration by scaring the ground surface to penetrate the covering material and expose the soil underneath. 9.73 Shaft Tube-Part provides a casing for shaft. of the saw body that the power transmission

9.87 Throttle Trigger - Device, usually a lever, activated by the operator's hand or finger, for controlling the engine speed. 9.88 Throttle Trigger prevents the accidental trigger until manually 9.89 Topping pre-determined Cutting height. Lockout - Device that operation of the throttle released. off the top of a tree at a trees with the root

9.74 Skidder - Self-propelled machine designed to transport trees or parts of trees by dragging. 9.75 Skidding -Transporting trees by dragging. trees or parts of cut

9.90 Uprooting - Removing systems from the ground.

9.76 Slasher - Machine designed to cross felled trees to pre-determined lengths. 9.77 Slashing 9.78 Sliding timber along See 9.3.

9.91 Wrap Round Handle - Special type of front handle allowing the saw to be used also in the right-hand side up ( RSU) position. 9.92 Yarder - Machine designed to perform cable logging with the use of a tower which may be integral to the machine or a separate structure. 9.93 Yarding -The collecting point. 10. CROP operation of initial EQUIPMENT haul to a

- Downward transport&ion a pre-determined path. similar items after bucking).

of (for

9.79 Sorting - Collecting example, pieces of timber

9.80 Spiked Bumper-Device, fitted in front of the guide bar mounting point, acting as a pivot when in contact with a tree or log. 9.81 Splitting longitudinally Dividing trees or parts of trees into pieces (see Fig. 156).

PROTECTION

10.1 Agitation - An operation which produces and maintains uniform spray mixture in the tank, and in the case of dusts or granules to facilitate their flow from the hopper. 10.1.1 Hydraulic Agitation - Agitation of the spray mixture by using an auxiliary pump flow or a partial flow of the main pump. 10.1.2 Mechanical Agitation - Agitation of the spray mixture, dust or granules by means of mechanically-operated stirrer inside the tank or hopper. 10.1.3 Pneumatic Agitation - Agitation of the spray mixture, dust or granules inside the tank or hopper using an air flow. 10.2 Agitator 10.1). A device used for agitation (see

10.2.1 Hydraulic Agitator - A device used for hydraulic agitation (see 10.1.1).
FIG. 156

10.2.2 Mechanical Agitaror - A device for mechanical agitation (see 10.1.2).

used

9.82 Spur Sprocket - Chain drive wheel with teeth in which the drive links run, and the side and cutter links are supported. 9.83 Stacking-Piling sizes. 9.84 Stump stumps. Lowering of timber in specified of

10.2.3 Pneumatic Agitator - A device used for pneumatic agitation (see lOi1.3). 10.3 Air Compressor - An appliance for raising the pressure of air above that of the atmosphere. 10.4 Air direction 10.5 Air appliance Deflector-A device of the air flow. Flow - Volume of air per unit of time. to alter the by an

Reducing

the height

flowing

SP : 44-1989 10.6 Air Output - Volume of air discharged an appliance per unit of time. by 10.18.3 Pneumatic Dusting - Distribution dust by means of flow of gas, usually air. of

10.7 Anti-Drip Device-A device, which normally forms part of or is fitted within the nozzle, to instantly prevent any further flow or dripping from the' nozzle after the spray boom has been shut-off. 10.8 Application Rate-The dust or granules mixture, appliance per hectare. quantity distributed of spray by an

10.18.4 Wet Dusting - Method of treatment comprising the simultaneous emission of dust and a liquid spray. 10.19 Dust Nozzle in an air flow. A device for directing dust

10.20 Fan-An appliance for producing an air flow by means of blades fixed to a rotating shaft. 10.21 Flame Gun-An produces a burning flame control weeds, pests, etc. 10.22 Fumigator distribute gases appliance which under pressure to to generate and for

10.9 Automatic Cut-Off Valve - An automatic device which closes when the pressure of the fluid or gas reaches pre-determined value. 10.10 Axial Flow Fan (Axial Flow Blower) An appliance for producing an air flow parallel to the blower shaft. 10.11 By-PassA device part of the fluid delivered returned to the tank. which allows all or by the pump to be

- An appliance or smokes.

10.23 Granule Applicator - An appliance applying materials in the form of granules. 10.24 Granule granules. Hopper Container for

holding

10.12 Centrifugal Fan ( Centrifugal Blower) An appliance for producing an air flow at right angles to the blower shaft. IO.13 Collector Deflector - A device intended to collect and direct an air flow in a definite direction. 10.14 Cut-Off Device - A hand-operated mechanism situated between the delivery hose and the spray lance for controlling the flow of the liquid. 10.15 Droplet SizeThe mean diameter droplet expressed in micrometres. 10.16 Duster(see 10.18). An appliance used of the

10.25 Granule Metering Mechanism - Part of a granule applicator which controls the flow of granules at desired application rate. 10.26 Granule Nozzle-A granules in an air flow. device for directing

10.27 Hydraulic Injector - A device using the velocity of a jet of liquid to produce a vacuum in a suction pipe for the purpose of filling a tank. 10.28 Injection - The act of forcing a fluid under pressure into another fluid or porous medium. 10.29 Liquid Output-Volume of liquid discharged by an appliance per unit of time. 10.30 Multi-Outlet Control Valve - A enabling the flow of the spray mixture directed to one or more outlets. 10.31 Nominal Spray Angle - Spray obtained at a reference pressure characterizes a given type of nozzle. device to be angle which

for dusting

10.16.1 Knapsack Duster - A duster which could be mounted on the back of the operator. 10.16.2 Mechanical Duster - An appliance used for mechanical dusting (see 10.18.2). 10.16.3 Pneumatic Duster - An appliance used for pneumatic dusting (see 10.18.3). 10.16.4 Rotary Duster - A duster with a handoperated rotor usually carried in front or side of the operator. 10.17 dust. Dust Hopper Container for holding in the

10.32 Non-Return Valve - An automatic device which permits the flow of a fluid in one direction only. 10.33 Nozzle Bar to the end supplying Rigid or flexible tube fitted the nozzles with spray liquid.

10.34 Nozzle Boss-The leg on the spray boom (see 10.55) or spray lance (see 10.59) to which the nozzle body or nozzle cap is fitted. 10.35 Nozzle Parts 10.35.1 Anvil - A component of a deflector nozzle which deflects the spray liquid after its emission from the nozzle orifice. 10.35.2 Body -The main component into or on which the other components of the nozzle are fitted. 53

10.18 Dustingform of dust.

Application

of materials

10.18.1 Electrostatic Dusting - Process where electrostatic forces are applied for the deposition of dust. 10.18.2 Mechanical Dusting dust by mechanical means. Distribution of

SP :44-1989
10.35.3 Cap - The component which the assembled parts' in or on the body.

retains

10.35.4 Disc - The disc shaped component containing the final orifice of a cone nozzle (see 10.64.2) or some type of fan nozzles (see 10.64.5). 10.35.5 Gasket - A compressible insert placed between the two surfaces to obtain a liquid- or gas-tight sealings. 10.35.6 Strainer - A component for separating foreign matter from the spray liquid. 10.35.7 Swirl Back Plate - Part of a particular type of turbulence nozzle which forms the rear part of the swirl chamber and the tangential liquid entry channels. 10.35.8. Swirl Chamber - The cavity the nozzle disc and the swirl plate. between

10.44.2 Diaphragm Pump - A volumetric pump in which the flow of the liquid is achieved by the deformation of a diaphragm.

10.44.3 Gear Pump -A volumetric which the flow of the liquid is achieved

pump in by gears.

10.44.4 Peristaltic Pump - A volumetric pump in which the flow of the liquid is achieved by the continuous progression of a flexible tube.

10.445 Piston Pump-A volumetric pump in which the flow of the liquid is achieved by the movement of a piston in a cylinder. 10.44.6 Roller Pump - A volumetric pump in which the flow of the liquid is achieved by the radial displacement of rollers placed in a rotor and in contact with an eccentric stator. 10.44.7 Vane Pump-A volumetric pump in which the flow of the liquid is achieved by the radial displacement or deformation of a vane placed or fixed in a rotor, and in contact with an eccentric stator. 10.44.8 Volumetric Pump - A pump in which the flow of the liquid is achieved by means of the variation in volume of one or more capacities which alternately sucks in and discharges the liquid. 10.45 Pump Output charged by a pump - Volume of liquid per unit of time. dis-

10.35.9 Swirl Plate-The part of the cone nozzle. ( see 10.64.2 ) which imparts rotation to the liquid passing through it. It is also known as swirl core. 10.35.10 Tip - The component containing the final orifice of a fan nozzle (see 10.64.5) or of some type of cone nozzle (see 10.64.2). 10.36 Nozzle Spacing - The distance between centre-to-centre of adjacent nozzles on a spray boom (see 10.55). 10.37 Overflow Pipe-A pipe through which excess fluid from a pump is by-passed by the action of a relief valve or pressure regulator. 10.38 Overhead Spraying - The spraying performed in the field on top of the crop. 10.39 Piston Displacement - The volume displaced by the piston during one stroke. 10.40 Plantation Spraying - The spraying performed vertically to cover the height of the plant or trees. 10.41 Pressure Chamber - A chamber with or without air pressurization to even out the fluctuations of the liquid pressure and induce uniform flow of liquid. It is also known as air vessel, air bottle and air chamber. 10.42 Pressure Pulsation Damper reducing pressure pulsations. A device for

10.46 Quick-Acting Shut-Off Valve enabling a spray system to be opened instantly.

A device or closed

10.47 Pressure Relief Valve - An automatic device which opens when the pressure of `the fluid or gas reaches a predetermined value. 10.48 Safety ValveAn automatic valve which opens and relieves the pressure when it reaches a predetermined value thereby protecting the spray system and operator. 10.49 Seed Dresser-A machine to coating of protective chemical to seeds. apply

10.50 Shutter (Air Flow Control ) - A part of an appliance to control the flow of air. 10.51 Soil Injector chemicals into soil. 10.52 Spraynozzle. The Appliance droplets for produced injecting by a

10.43 Pressure Regulator - An automatic device to control the pressure of a fluid or gas within a range of settings.
10.44 Pump

10.52.1 Air-Assisted Spray - Spray which is carried wholly or partly by a stream or flow of air. 10.52.2 shape. 10.52.3 Conical Spray Flat SpraySpray with a conical

Pump - A non-volumetric pump in which the liquid energy is increased by one or more impellers.

10.44.1 Centrifugal

Spray

with a flat shape.

SP : 44-1989 10.52.4 Hydraulic Pressure Spray - Spray which is projected to the target by its own pressure. 10.52.5 cylindrical Solid Stream shape. SpraySpray with a 10.58 Spray Gun - A lance from which the spray is readily adjustable during the operation. 10.59 Spray LanceA hand-held tube through which the liquid, after being released from cut-off device, reaches to nozzle. 10.60 Spray Lance Boom - Spray pipe attached to the end of spray lance on to which a number of nozzles are fitted. 10.61 Spray Lance Extension tube for increasing the overall lance (see 10.59). - A length detachable of a spray auxiliary a main

10.53 Spray Angle - The angle formed close to a hydraulic spray nozzle by the edges of the spray. 10.54 Spray Area-Area covered by the spraying (see 10.57 ) expressed in hectare. In case of overhead spraying (see 10.38), this will be equal to the land area; in case of strip spraying (see 10.68), this will depend on row width and strip length; and in case of plantation spraying (see 10.40), the height of the tree and strip length. 10.55 Spray Boom - A device on which the nozzles are mounted and' which may form or support one or more pipelines which are carrying the liquid to the nozzle. 10.56 Sprayer (see 10.57). An appliance used for spraying

10.62 Spray Leg ( Drop Leg) - An vertical spray boom fixed below horizontal spray boom.

10.63 Spray Mixture - Liquid containing the diluted formulated product ready for spraying (see 10.57). 10.64 Spray Nozzles - A part or an assembly of parts having orifice which transforms the fluid being ejected under pressure into a spray (see 10.52). 10.64.1 Adjustable Spray Nozzle - A hydraulic spray nozzle designed so that the shape Jf the spray may be altered without changing the components. 10.64.2 Cone Nozzle-A hydraulic nozzle which produces a circular spray spray pattern.

10.56.1 Air-Assisted Centrzyugal Sprayer - A centrifugal sprayer using an air flow to convey the droplets. 10.56.2 Air-Assisted Hydraulic Sprayer - A hydraulic sprayer using an air flow to convey the droplets. 10.56.3_ Centrifugal Sprayer - A sprayer for centrifugal spraying (see 10.57.1). used

10.56.4 Compression Sprayer - A hydraulic sprayer in which the liquid pressure is obtained by means of a previously compressed gas. 10.56.5 Hydraulic Sprayer - A sprayer for hydraulic spraying (see 10.57.2). used

10.64.3 Deflector Nozzle - A hydraulic spray nozzle with a deflector producing a flat sheet of spray of full circular pattern or narrower pattern of 25 to 180� 10.64.4 Directional NozzleA type of nozzle which enables the direction of spray to be altered in relation to the angle of the supply tube or pipe. 10.64.5 Fan Nozzle - A hydraulic spray nozzle which produces a narrow eliptical spray pattern. 10.64.6 Hollow Cone Nozzle - A cone nozzle in which the formation of an air core within the orifice and the swirl chamber due to a high rotational velocity results in the production of a hollow cone of the liquid. 10.64.7 Hydraulic Spray Nozzle - A type of nozzle used for hydraulic spraying (see 10.57.2). 10.64.8 Impinging Stream Nozzle - A hydraulic spray nozzle designed so that spraying is achieved by the impact of two or more streams of liquid. 10.64.9 Pneumatic Spray Nozzle - A type of nozzle used for pneumatic spraying (see 10.57.3 ). 10.64.10 Slit Nozzle - A hydraulic spray nozzle with an opening in the shape of a slit, producing a flat sheet of spray. 10.64.11 Shut-Off Nozzle - A nozzle with a shut-off device which may be used without changing parts. 55

10.56.6 Knapsack Sprayer - A sprayer which can be mounted on the back of the operator. 10.56.7 Pneumatic Sprayer - A sprayer for pneumatic spraying (see 10.57.3). 10.56.8 i%ermal Sprayer - A sprayer thermal spraying (see 10.57.4 ). used

used for

10.57 Spraying -The division and emission into the air of a liquid or a spray mixture in the form of droplets. 10.57.1 Centrifugal Spraying - Spraying performed by the use of centrifugal force imparted to the liquid by mechanical rotational energy such as spinning disc. 10.57.2 performed 10.57.3 performed Hydraulic Spraying - Spraying by the use of hydraulic energy. Pneumatic Spraying - Spraying by the action of flow df gas.

10.57.4 Thermal Spraying - Production of very small droplets either partly or wholly by thermal energy, in such a, dense cloud that visibility is impaired. It is also known as fogging.

SP : 44-1989 10.64.12 Solid Cone Nozzle which extra liquid enters in centrally from its base so that to form a solid cone of the 10.64.13 Turbulence spray nozzle through rotationally producing 10.65 Spray Rate of pesticide applied - A cone nozzle in the swirl chamber the air core is filled droplets. 10.73 Volumetric Efficiency - Tb,e quotient of the actual volume of the spray fluid discharged in one stroke and the piston disnlacement in the same stroke. 11. HARVESTING EQIJIPMENT AND THRESHING

Nozzle - A hydraulic which the liquid flows a conical spray.

Amount of active ingredient per unit area. part of the sprayer liquid or mixture. volume of spray volume

11.1 Baffle Plate-An element (see 1 in Fig. 157 ) placed near the rear beater to prevent grain from being thrown to the straw walkers. 11.2 Blower - A rotary device ( see 2 in Fig. 157 ) which produces a draught of air across the chaffer and cleaning sieve(s) to blow away the material lighter than grains. 11.3 Chaffer - The upper sieve on which grain and chaff mixture falls from stepped grain bed for initial cleaning. The sieve is oscillated so as to toss the chaff and unthreshed material rearward while the grains sift through chaffer openings (see 3 in Fig. 257). 11.4 Chaffer Extension -The bars (see 4 in Fig. 157) provided at the rearward of chaffer to receive the material passed by chaffer for separating unthreshed grains, chaff and remaining grains to the tailing auger. 11.5 Chaffing - The cleaning of grain. 11.6 Cleaning-The desired grain from incompletely threshed grains. process of pneuvatic

10.66 Spray Tank-The which contains the spray

10.67 Spray Volume -Total mixture applied to an area.

10.67.1 High Volume (HV)Spray -more than 560 litres per hectare.

10.67.2 Low volume (LV)Spray volume more than 5.6 and less than 56 litres per hectare. ,I 10.67.3 Medium Volume (Mk) - Spray volume more than 56 and less than 560 litres per hectare. 10.67.4 Ultra-Low Volume (ULV) - Spray volume more than 0~56 and less thak .5*6,litres per hecta@. 10.67.5 Ultra- Ultra-Low Volume Spray volume less than 0~56 litre ( U- UL V) per hectare.

10.68 Strip Spraying - The spraying performed on the field between the rows of the crop. 10.69 Suction Strainer - A device situated at the bottom of the tank or on the end of the suction preventing undesirable solids from entering the spray system. 10.70 Tank Filling Strainer - A device in the filling opening of the tank which prevents undesirable solids from entering the tank. 10.71 Tank Sump - Depression in the bottom of the spray tank into which the suction strainer and pump inlet are attached. 10.72 Volume Median Diameter ( VMD ) - The droplet size that divides the spray into two equal parts by volume, one half containing droplets smaller than this diameter, the other half containing larger droplets. 10.72.1 Aerosols - The distribution of droplets with a VMD value of below 50 pm. 10.72.2 Coarse Spray - The distribution droplets with a VMD value of more than I.cm. of 400

operation of isolating the chaff, small debris, and and completely unthreshed

11.7 Cleaning Sieve(s) - One sieve or a set of sieves (see 5 in Fig. 157 ) which separate chaff and other undesirable elements from grain after being received from chaffer and chaffer extension. 11.8 Cock A small conical heap of hay.

11.9 Combine-Harvester-Thresher - A machine (see Fig. 157 ) designed for harvesting, threshing, separating, cleaning and collecting grain while moving through the standing crop. Bagging arrangement may be provided. With a pick-up attachment, it may be used for handling crop that has been swathed. It may be of self-propelled type or tractor-operated ( trailed or side-mounted ) type. 11.9.1 ,Self-Propelled Combine - A combine on which an engine of suitable power rating is mounted to serve as source of power. This may be wheeled type or track-laying type. 11.9.1.1 Wheeled which the pneumatic combine-A wheels are combine used. in A of

10.72.3 Fine Spray - The distribution of droplets with a VMD value in range of 100 and 400 pm. 10.72.4 Mist - The distribution of droplets with a VMD value in range of 50 and 100 pm.

11.9.1.2 Track laying combinedcombine fitted with full or half tracks instead pneumatic wheels.

11.,9.2 Tractor-Operated Combine - A combine which requires a tractor of suitable

56

SP : 44-1989

107

FIG. 157

power rating to serve as a source of power for its working. It may be trailed type or side mounted type. 11.10 Combine Height - The vertical distance from the horizontal plane on which the combine is standing to the highest point on the combine expressed in millimetres.
NOTE I - Tyre and wheel or track shall be stated and tyre shall be inflated to the field operating pressure recommended by the manufacturer. NOTE 2 ~~ The plane on which shall be substantially level. the combine is standing at

11.12 Combine Mass - The mass of the complete combine equipped for field operation expressed in kilograms to the nearest 10 kg.
NOTE 1 - The mass shall be determined under the conditions specified in Notes 1 to 4 under 11.10. NOTE 2 -Any other attachments, shall be specified. which affect the mass,

11.13 Combine WidthThe overall width measured horizontally covering outer extremities of combine expressed in millimetres.
NOTE-The width shall be measured in both road travel condition and equipped for field operation. In field condition the header fitted shall be the same as that fitted when determining header width.

NOTE 3 - The size and type of header and reel installed the time of measurement shall be stated. NOTE 4 -The grain tank the fuel, radiator, hydraulic full.

shall be effectively empty and and lubrication tank shall be

NOTE 5 - The height with all components in position for transport and with all component in position for field operation shall be specified. NOTE 6 with cab. 11.11 It shall be stated whether the combine is fitted

11.14 Concave - A concave shaped metal grating (see 6 in Fig. 157 ) partly surrounding the cylinder against which the cylinder rubs the grain from the ears and through which the grains fall on the sieve. 11.14.1 Concave Arc - A means of defining the width of a concave in degrees (see CY in Fig. 158 ). This shall be measured from the front of the first bar to the rear of the last bar and in relation to the centre of the cylinder.
NOTE- While using this means of defining the concave width, it is essential that the cylinder diameter is also quoted.

Combine Length - The overall length, from the foremost point to the rearmost point of the combine equipped for field operation, measured parallel to the longitudinal centre line of the combine expressed in millimetres.
NOTE 1 -The 3ther attachments header installed shall be stated and any which affect the length shall be specified. tractor-operated combines, the

NOTE 2-In case of tractor shall be excluded.

11.14.2 Concave concave length and square millimetres.

Area concave

The product width expressed

of in

57

SP : 44-1989 11.14.5 Concave Grate Extension Area - The product of concave grate extension width (see G in Fig. 159) and the concave length expressed in square millimetres. 11.14.6 Concave Length -The minimum distance between the two panels of the combine in which the concave is mounted (see LZ in Fig. 160) expressed in millimetres.

L

FIG.158
RASP BAR CONCAVE r -

NOTE 1 -Concave area is not to be taken as a means of indicating a component of separation, since there is no distinction between a closed and an open or partly open concave. To indicate the size of concave in the context of separating characteristics, the concave grate area should be used. NOTE i-Where more than one concave separate area for each shall be calculated. is used, the

Lc

FIG.

160

11.14.3 Concave Grate Area -- The portion of the concave (see L in Fig. 159 ) area which is sievable for separation. This area shall be calculated using the outside dimensions of the sievable surface and expressed in square millimetres.

11.14.7 Concave Width - The distance from the front of the first bar to the rear of the last bar, measured along the contour formed by the inner surfaces of the concave bars (see L in Fig. 158 ) expressed in millimetres. 11.15 Conveyor Platform - An assembly for carrying the cut crop to the threshing unit or to the feeder conveyor. 11.16 Cotton cotton stalks Stalk Puller - A device to pull the from the field.

11.17 Cutter Bar - The assembly comprising finger bar, fingers, knife guides, wearing plate, outer shoe and main shoe, that is, the nonreciprocating part of the cutting mechanism (see Fig. 161 ). 11.17.1 Cutter Bar Effective Width -The distance between the points at which the tips of the knife sections meet the last effective shearing edges of the guards (fingers) or shoes at the extremities of the cutter bar expressed in millimetres ( see Fig. 161 ). 11.17.2 Cutter Bar Height-The height of the forward tip of any knife section above the plane on which the combine in standing expressed in millimetres. Where the height is adjustable, maximum and minimum values shall be measured.
NOTE- The height shall be measured given in Notes I to 4 under 11.10. under the conditions

FIG. 159

11.14.4 Concave Grate Extension - A sievable element ( see Fig. 159 ) approximately concentric with the cylinder and generally forming an extension of the concave contour and helps in separating and bringing loose straw to straw walkers.

58

SP : 44-1989
WGRKltiG WIDTH IVE CUTTER BAR

FIG. 161

1'1.17.3 Cutter provided for lifting

Bar Lift - Arrangement the cutter bar.

11.25 Dump Rake - A machine which collects and dumps material at a desired interval. 11.26 Feeder Beater-In front of the threshing cylinder and rotating in the same direction, the beater is provided to aid in stripping the crop from the conveyor and feeding it to the cylinder. 11.27 Feeder Conveyor - The auxiliary conveyor (see 8 in Fig. 157 ) to assist in feeding the crop to the cylinder. 11.28 Feeding-The operation cut crop into threshing unit. of conveying the

11.17.4 Cutter, Bar Working Width -The distance expressed in millimetres (see Fig. 161 ) between two vertical planes passing through the points of the outermost dividers and parallel to the centre line of the cutter bar. If adjustable dividers are used, the maximum and minimum dimensions shall be stated. lU8 Cutter Loader - A machine and to deliver them to a vehicle. to cut crops

11.19 Cylinder - A balanced rotating assembly comprismg rasp, beater bars or spikes on its periphery and their support for threshing the crop (see 7 in Fig. 157). 11.19.1 Beater Bar Drum helically arranged rubber-faced bars. 11.19.2 Peg Drum spikes or pegs. 11.19.3 Rasp Drum-A with serrations. A cylinder having angle iron beater having rows of having bars

11.29 Finger - A linger like attachment bolted to the forward edge of a guard bar and through which knife section reciprocates (see Fig. 162).

r

KNIFE SECTION

/-KNIFE

GUIDE

A cylinder

cylinder

11.20 Cylinder and Concave Clearance - The gap between the tip of the cylinder to the inner surface of the concave expressed in millimetres (see C in Fig. 158 ). The minimum and maximum clearance in a particular setting and adjustment range for both the front and the rear side of the concave shall be stated. 11.21 Cylinder DiameterThe diameter of the circle generated by the outermost point of the cylinder threshing elements (see D in Fig. 158 ) expressed in millimetres. 11.22 Cylinder Length - The distance the outermost points of the cylinder elements ( see LI in Fig. 160).
NOTE-If stated and measured.

FIG. 162

11.30 Finger Bar - A steel bar to carry guards ky;g;F2)), wearing plates and kinfe guide (see 11.31 Forage Harvester-A machine to cut or pick up, chop or lacerate fodder and deliver it to a vehicle. 11.32 Gathering Width-the distance between the centre lines of the outermost divider points, expressed in millimetres. Where adjustable dividers are used, the maximum and minimum dimensions shall be stated. 11.33 Grain Auger - The Fig. 157) which carries elevator. 59 device (see 9 in the grain to grain

between threshing

more than one cylinder is used, this shall be the dimensions of all the cylinders shall be

11.23 Divider - An attachment to a shoe mainly for dealing with tangled crops. 11.24 Drum See 11.19.

SP : 44-1989 11.34 Grain Discharge Auger - The device (see 10 in Fig. 157) which carries the grain from tank to discharge elevator. 11.35 Grain Discharge Elevator - A device to discharge the grain from tank through grain auger. 11.35.1 Clearance Height of Unloader - The vertical distance from the plane on which the combine is standing to a point on the underside of the unloader at a horizontal distance of 1000 mm from the lowermost point of the discharge opening (see Fig. 163) expressed in millimetres.
specified

11.38 Grain Tank - A tank (see 13 in Fig. 157 ) to hold the grain after having received it from grain elevator. il.39 Groundnut Digger - A machine to expose the pods of groundnut from the soil to facilitate their picking. 11.40 Groundnut Digger digger with a mechanism the pods. Shaker - A groundnut for separating soil from used

11.41 Groundnut Thresher - An equipment for threshing of groundnut crop. 11.42 Guard -see 11.43 Guard Bar11.29. See 11.30.

NOTE - The height shall be measured under the conditions in Notes 1 to 4 under 11.10.

`\,",`,

ALTERNATIVE

11.44 Harvesting - The operation of detaching, picking or cutting the crop from the undesired portion of the same rooted to the ground. 11.45 Hay Loader - A machine load hay from windrows. to pick up and

11.46 Hay Rake - A machine to collect dried cut crops into transverse windrows. 11.47 Header -The portion of the combine comprising the mechanism for gathering, cutting, stripping or picking the crop and deliver it to the cylinder.
NOTE Small combines often use scoop-type headers with a canvas conveyor to take the crop to the cylinder. Large combines use T-type headers with auger tables which bring the crop to a conveyor feeding to the cylinder. Auger tables have now largely replaced the canvas tables. REACH +

FIG. 163 11.35.2 Discharge Height of Unloader - The vertical distance from the plane on which the combine is standing to the lowermost point under discharge opening with the unloader in operating position (see Fig. 163) expressed in miliimetres.
NoTE-T~~ height shall be measured under the conditions specified in Notes 1 to 4 under 11.10.

11.48 Header Width - The distance between the side sheets of the feed table meausured immediately above the tips of the knife sections expressed in metres. Where the feed table is offset from the centre line of the machine, the amount of offset and whether it is to left or right shall be stated. 11.49 Hill Divider - The projections provided on stepped grain bed, chaffer, and cleaning sieve(s) to prevent material from sliding to one side specially when working on slopes (see Fig. 164).

11.35.3 Reach - The horizontal distance measured perpendicular to the longitudinal centre line of the combine from the innermost point of the unloader discharge opening to the outermost point of the header on the unloader side (see Fig. 163 ) expressed in millimetres.
NOTE -The reach shall be measured under the condition specified in Notes I to 4 under 11.10.

11.36 Grain Elevator - The device (see 11 in Fig. 157) which carries the grain from grain auger to grain tank or bin. 11.37 Grain Pan-The pan (see 12 in Fig. 157) for collecting the clean grain after being passed through cleaning sieve(s) for conveying to grain auger.

FIG. 164

60

SP : 44-1989 11.50 Hummeler Plate - A plate attached below the feed of the concave for removing awns from the grains (see 14 in Fig. 157). 11.51 Inner Shoe Skid - A steel skid fitted underneath an inner shoe to adjust the height of the cutter bar. 11.52 Inner Shoe Wheel - A wheel fitted to an inner shoe to adjust the height of the cutter bar. 11.53 Inner Swath Board - An attachment inner shoe to narrow the swath. to an

11.54 Knife-The reciprocating part of the cutting mechanism comprising knife head, knife back and knife sections. 11.55 Knife Back-The strip of steel to which knife sections are riveted and knife head is attached (see Fig. 162). 11.56 Knife Frequencycycles the knife makes The number per minute. of the 11.67 Mower-A and leave them FIG. 165

machine to cut herbage in swath (see Fig. 165). Mower A

crops mover

11.57 Knife Guide - A guide bolted to the finger bar to maintain the knife section and the finger in close contact (see Fig. 162). 11.58 Knife Head -The connected to a mechanism motion. portion of the knife to give reciprocating

11.67.1 Animal-Drawn operated by animal(s).

11.67.2 Cylinder MowerA rotating helical blades arranged cylindrical form.

mower with in horizontal

11.59 Knife? Registration - The alignment of centre line of knife section with the centre line of guard. 11.60 Knife Section - A flat steel plate ( roughly triangular in shape) with two cutting edges. The cutting edges may be plain or serrated (see Fig. 162). 11.61 Knife Stroke - The distance that a point of the knife travels with respect to the centre line of a guard in one-half cycle expressed in millimetres. II.62 Ledger Plate - A hardened metal insert in a guard over which knife section moves to give a scissor-like cutting action. This may have plain or serrated cutting edge (see Fig. 162). 11.63 Main Shoe - The non-reciprocating part to SuPPort the inner end of the cutter bar. It is also known as inner shoe (see Fig. 165). 11.64 Maize Header Effective Width -The average distance between the centre lines of adjacent picking units multiplied by the number of units. Where the header width is adjustable, maximum and minimum dimensions shall be stated. Effective width shall be expressed in millimetres and the number of picking units shall be stated. 11.65 Millet Thresher - An equipment threshing of millet crop. 11.66 Mobile performs the machine itself Thresher threshing is moving. used for

11.67.3 Flair MowerA mower with high speed swinging knives operating either in horizontal plane or around a horizontal cylinder. 11.67.4 Gang MowerAn assembly more ground-driven cylinder mowers. of two or

11.67.5 Horizontal Rotary Mower - A mower with high speed knives rotating in the horizontal plane. 11.67.6 Power-Operated Mower operated by tractor or power tillers. A mower

11.67.7 Reciprocating Mower - A mower having knife section that reciprocates against stationary fingers (guards) (see Fig. 166). 11.68 Multicrop Thresher - An equipment used for more than one crop with or without minor adjustments. 11.69 Olpad Thresher consisting of a series three axles fixed on which a seat and a thresher is operated - A mainly wheat thresher of notched discs placed on a wooden or iron frame on platform are provided. This by animal(s).

11.70 Outer Shoe - The non-reciprocating pointed attachment at the outer end of the cutter bar carrying a wheel or a skid and a grass board (see Fig. 165 ). 11.71 Outer Shoe Skid-A steel skid fitted underneath an outer shoe to adjust the height of' the cutter bar. 11.72 Outer Shoe Wheel - A wheel fitted to an outer shoe to adjust the height of the cutter bar.

The thresher which operation while the

61

SP : 44-1989
11.73 Paddy Thresher-An

equipment used for

threshing of paddy crop. 11.74 Pedal-Operated Paddy Thresher - A paddy thresher consisting of mainly a balanced cylinder with series of threshing teeth fixed on slats and worked by a pedal and gear drive mechanism. 11.75 Pick-Up Attachment - A device gathering the crop from a windrow. for

systems. Usually a centrifugal blower is provided for partial separation and cleaning of grains. 11.85.4 Feed Roller-Fed Thresher - A thresher in which the feeding is done with the feed rollers equipped with chute or an endless conveyor. 11.85.5 Hammer-Mill Thresher - A thresher with threshing unit consisting of the hammers or beaters with a closed cylinder casing and concave. It is equipped with a set of oscillating sieves and an aspiratory blower for separation and cleaning. 11.85.6 Hopper-Fed Threshers - A thresher in which feeding of the crop is done through a hopper. It is also known as bulk-fed thresher. 11.85.7 Rasp-Bar Cylinder Type Thresher - A thresher, the threshing unit of which consists of bars with serrations having an open concave. 11.85.8 Spike- Tooth Cylinder Type Thresher - A thresher, the threshing unit of which consists of drum having rows of spikes with a closed cylinder casing and concave, and equipped with a set of sieves and an aspiratory blower. 11.85.9 Syndicator- Type Thresher - A thresher, the threshing unit of which consists of a corrugated fly wheel with serrated chopping knives and a closed cylinder casing and concave. This is also known as chaff cutter-type thresher. 11.86 Reaper - A machine to cut grain crops. 11.87 Reaper Binder - A reaper which, after cutting the crops, ties them into neat and uniform sheaves. 11.88 Reaping Attachment - A set of attachments to adopt a mower to cut grain crops. 11.89 Rear Beater - An element (see 15 in Fig. 157) placed on the rear side of the cylinder and above to rearward of concave or concave grate extension or transition grate to assist the deflection of straw on straw walker. It also assists in stripping the straw from the cylinder and prevents it from wrapping around. 11.90 Reel-Revolving slats or arms with battens (see 16 in Fig. 157) arranged parallel to the cutter bar to hold the crop being cut by the knife and to push and guide it to a conveyor platform or feeder conveyor auger. The reels may be of spring-tine type or slat type. 11.91 Returns - The process for recirculating incompletely threshed or completely unthreshed grain for further processing. 11.92 Screening -The operation of isolating the desired grains by a mechanical device where the desired grain is carried over the device and the undesired material penetrates the device. 11.93 Separating - The operation of isolating the detached grain, small debris and incompletely 62

11.76 Pick-Up Attachment Width - The minimum distance including the width of the outermost conveying elements but not including the gather of the flared side sheets expressed in millimetres. 11.77 Pick-Up Baler - A machine to collect the crop or straw from swaths or windrows, to compress it to rectangular shaped mass and to tie firmly with wire or twine for easy handling and storage. 11.78 Pitman - A connecting rod to transmit reciprocating motion to the knife head (see Fig. 165). 11.79 Potato Digger - A machine to bring the potatoes to the surface of the soil for collection. 11.80 Potato Digger Shaker - A potato digger to separate potatoes from soil by means of reciprocating grids and to deliver the potatoes in a narrow band on the ground. 11.81 Potato Elevator Digger - A potato digger to separate potatoes from soil by means of a open-web elevator and to deliver the potatoes in a narrow band on the ground. 11.82 Potato HarvesterA potato digger to separate potatoes from soil, trash, etc, and to deliver them into a container. 11.83 Potato Plough - A plough used for harvesting potatoes and also raising the potatoes to the surface of the soil. 11.84 Potato Spinner - A potato digger to deliver potatoes to one side by means of fingers carried on a rotating hub. 11.85 Power Thresher - A machine operated by a primemover, such as electric motor, engine, tractor and power tiller used for threshing (see Fig. 167 ).
NOTE -The threshers may be designed to separate the grains, to clean the grain elevating system for direct bagging. 11.85.1 Chute-Fed Thresher to make bhusa, with or without

A thresher in which the feeding of the crop is done through a chute. 11.852 Conveyor-Fed Thresher - A thresher in which the feeding of the crop is done through a conveyor. 11.85.3 Drummy- Type Thresher - A hammer mill type thresher without separation and cleaning

SP : 44-1989 threshed or completely unthreshed bulk of straw, stem or stalk. grain from the the remaining Fig. 157). 11.108 Straw grains Walker from straw
(see

19 in

11.94 Sickle-A curved steel blade having a hand grip used for harvesting by manual power. 11.95 Side-Delivery Reaper - A reaper which delivers the harvested crop on the side having the space for the next run clear. 11.96 Sieving-The operation of separating the desired grains by a mechanical device where the desired grain penetrates the device and the undesired materal is carried over the device. 11.97 Shoe - The oscillating structure which supports cleaning sieve( s) and which may also support the chaffer and chaffer extension (see Fig. 168 and 169). 11.98 Soyabean Thresher - An equipment for threshing soyabean crop. used

Area-See

11.104.

11.109 Sugarbeet Harvester - A machine which lifts, tops and/or cleans the tubers and delivers them ready for carting. 11.110 loosen Sugarbeet Lifter - An implement and lift sugarbeets from the soil. to

11 .lll Sugarcane Harvesting Knife - The steel plate with sharp cutting edge with hand grip. 11.112 Sugarcane Stripper - A device used for removal of dry leaves and leave sheaths from cane. 11.113 Swath machine. 11.114 Swathing to mower cutter Cut material as left by a

Attachment - An bar to concentrate

attachment the swath.

11.99 Specific Ground Pressure - The quotient of front axle mass (or combine mass in case of full-track-laying combines ) and ground contact area giving a rating comparable to tyre pressure in case of wheeled combine. 11.100 Stationary Thresher - The thresher which performs the threshing operation while the machine itself being stationary. Il.lO,l Stepped Grain Bed - An oscillating bed or pan (see 17 in Fig. 157 ) on which the grain and chaff mixture fall from the cylinder and straw walker. 11.102 Stone TrapA device (see 18 in Fig. 157 ) mounted on the feeding side of the cylinder to trap the stones or any other similar objects in order to avoid any damage to the crop conveying and threshing units. 11.103 Straw Rack - An oscillating rack assembly of one piece construction which separates the remaining grains from straw. 11.104 Straw Rack Area - The product of the straight length ( see P in Fig. 168 and 169 ) and the inside width (see G in Fig. 170) of the separator side structure immediately adjacent to the straw walker or rack expressed in square millimetres. NOTE- Where walker extensions are used, the length
(see P in Fig. 168 and 169) shall be taken able portion fully extended. with the adjust-

11.115 Swath BoardAn attachment to an outer shoe to direct the swath away from the uncut crop. 11.116 Tailing Auger Fig. 157 ) which carries elevator. A device (see 20 tailings from pan in to

11 .I17 Tailing Board - A device ( see 2 1 in Fig. 157 ) provided at rear side of the cleaning unit to prevent unthreshed material from passing out of the combine. 11.118 Tailing Elevator - A device ( see 22 in Fig. 157) to carry tailings from auger to cylinder for rethreshing. 1 I .I 19 Tailing Pan -- A pan (see 23 in Fig. 157 ) on which the unthreshed grains and ears are collected after being removed from cleaning unit. 11.120 Thresher operation. A machine used for threshing

11.121 Threshing - The process of detaching the grains from the earheads or from the plants. 11.122 Total Cleaning Area -The sum of the area of each chaffer, chaffer extension, cleaning sieve(s) and sieve extension(s), if any, obtained by using the outside dimensions of the sievable surface expressed in square millimetres (see S in Fig. 164). 11.123 Transition Grate - A or elements (see Fig. 159) to from the concave or concave the straw rack, walker or a permeable element provide transition grate extension to second concave.

11.105 Straw Raddle Area-The product of raddle length (see C in Fig. 169) and exposed width of raddle (see R in Fig. 170) expressed in square millimetres. 11.106 Straw Spreader-cum-Cutter - A component used to cut the straw in pieces coming out from walker or rack and to spread in the field. 11.107 Straw Walker-The assembly of two or more racks which agitates the straw and separates

11.124 Wearing Plate - A hardened steel plate attached to the finger bar to form a bearing surface for the back of the knife (see Fig. 162). 11.125 Wheat Thresher - An equipment used for threshing of wheat crop with or without Bhusa making provision.

63

SP : 44-1989 11.126 Wheel Base - The horizontal distance between front and rear wheels on a wheeled combine measured at the centre of ground contact. 11.127 Wheel Track -The distance between the median planes of wheels or tracks on the same axle mea.sured at the point of ground contact. 11.128 Width of Track-Chain Width of track shoes including any expressed in millimetres. on Ground rounded ends it 12.5 Animal-Drawn Vehicle - A loading platform fitted with at least two wheels and pulled by animals. 12.6 Axle Load - The axle load for each manufacturer. technically permissible axle stated by the

12.7 Balanced Trailer - An agricultural trailer whose total load is supported by its wheels when detached from the towing tractor. This is a double or multiple axle trailer. 12.8 Fixed Platform Trailer - An agricultural trailer in which the platform is fixed with the chassis. 12.9 Gross Load -The sum unladden mass of the trailer. 12.10 Over-Run Braking device in which the energy braking force is generated towed vehicle towards the of pay load and

11.129 Wind-Deflector-A device (see 24 in Fig. 157) to direct the air blast over the sieve(s). The uppet wind deflector is set to throw the air blast to the front of the shoe while lower to direct the air more towards the centre of the shoe to avoid accumulation of the material. 11.130 Windrow - A row of material combining two or more swaths. formed by

11.131 Windrower - A machine to cut crops and deliver them in a uniform manner in a row. 11.132 Windrowing Attachment - A series of bars attached to the cutter bar, curved upward at the rear end, to roll the swath into a windrow. 11.133 Winnower - A machine with one or two sieves and fan using air steam across falling grain. 11.134 Winnowing - The process of separation of grains from the mixture of grain and chaff or straw or Bhusa. 11.135 Winnowing FanA machine used creating air blast mainly for the purpose winnowing of grain. for of

Device - A braking needed to produce the by movement of the towing machine.

12.11 Parking Braking Device - Assembly of parts by means of which the trailer can be maintained at rest even on a slope and in the absence of the driver. 12.12 Pay Load - The uniformly distributed maximum safe load which can be transported by the trailer. 12.13 Pneumatic-Wheel Vehicle - Animal-drawn vehicles having pneumatic wheels. 12.14 Semi-Trailer - An agricultural trailer which, while in use, transfers a part of its total load on the towing tractor and carries the rest of the load in its axle(s). 12.15 Service Braking Device - A device whose function is to reduce the speed of a moving trailer and to bring it to a halt. 12.16 Tipping-Platform Trailer - An agricultural trailer in which the platform can be tilted. 12.17 Tow Eye -The hitching point of the drawbar of trailer which is attached to the towing tractor hitch point. 12.18 Trailer Breaking Device - A of parts whose function is to reduce the trailer or to bring it to a halt stationary, if already halted. The consist of control, transmission themselves. combination the speed of or to keep it device may and brakes

11.135.1 Manually-Operated Winnowing FanA winnowing fan operated by manual power either by hand or by pedals (see Fig. 171). 11.135.2 Power-Operated Winnowing Fan - A winnowing fan operated by a prime mover, such as engine, electric motor, tractor or power tiller. 12. FARM TRANSPORT EQUIPMENT

12.1 Agricultural Trailer - A transport vehicle used for carrying agricultural produce or articles, and which according to its design is suited and intended for being coupled to an agricultural tractor. 12.2 Angle of Pitch - Rotation around a horizontal axis passing through the coupling point and perpendicular to the longitudinal plane of symmetry of the vehicle (see Fig. 172). 12.3 Angle of horizontal axis point and located vehicle (see Fig. Roll - Rotation around a passing through the coupling in the plane of symmetry of the 173). Rotation around a vertical the coupling point (see

12.19 Unladden Mass-The mass of the trailer with all its usual fittings but without any load on it. 12.20 Wooden-Wheel Vehicle vehicles having wooden wheels. 13. PROCESSING EQUIPMENT Animal-drawn

12.4 Angle of Yaw axis passing through Fig. 174).

13.1 AbrasivityThe property of particles of bulk materials, when in motion, to wear away the surface they are in contact with. 64

SP : 441989

FIG. 166

PULLEV EOING CHUTE , f/-BELT

G V-PULLEV
DEFLECTORS SlEVE ROCKING

FIG.

167

FIG.

168

FIG. 169

65

SP :44-1989

.

G

c

RADDLES

STRAW STRAW

WALKERS RACK

FIG.170

FIG.172 FIG.171
COilk'~l

NG

POIN1

FIG. 173

SYMETRY OF TRACTOR

FIG. 174

SP : 44-1989 13.15.1 Large/ Big Brokens - Rice kernels of less than 2/ of the size of whole grain in length but bigger than medium broken rice shall be called large/ big brokens.

13.2 Aeration -

It is the process of blowing small quantity of air through the bulk of agricultural produce for cooling and equallzlng. the temperature of the produce, to prevent moisture migration and for preserving the agricultural produce from biological deterioration.

13.3 Ambient Temperature - The temperature of the surrounding atmospheric air. 13.4 Angle of Internal Friction -The angle whose tangent is the coefficient of the internal friction between particles. The limit of this angle is a right angle. 13.5 Angle of Nip-The angle between the roll faces at the level where they will `just hold a particle or grain and draw it into the crushing or husking zone. 13.6 Angle of Repose - When a granular material is allowed to flow freely from a point into a pile, the angle which the side of the pile makes with the horizontal plane is called the angle of repose.
NOTE-The angle of internal friction and the angle of repose are not synonymous because of the presence of interlocking and cohesive forces.

13.15.2 Medium Brokens - Rice kernels of less than 1/2 of the size of whole grain in length but bigger than small/fine broken rice shall be called medium brokens. 13.15.3 Small/ Fine Brokens - Rice kernels of less t\lan `/dand bigger than `/8of the size of whole grain in length shall be called small/fine brokens. 13.15.4 Total Brokens -The sum total of the small, medium and large brokens is termed as total brokens. 13.16 Brown Rice- Paddy from which husk only has been removed. It is also known as dehusked rice.
13.17 Cage -The enclosure within which the worm assembly works, consisting of two chamber `halves' assembled by chamber bars, chamber plates, centre bars, side bars, cage bars and screws. Two halves of the chamber placed in their position and fastened by clamping bars and chamber bolts, form a hollow cylinder within which the worm assembly works.

13.7 Aspiration - It is the process of cleaning by air blast and separating the foreign material which is substantially lower in specific gravity than the produce to be cleaned. 13.8 Aspirating Leg-A verticle duct in which the upward movement of a controlled air blast remove lighter grains and impurities from vertically falling grain. 13.9 Aspirator - A component used for cleaning the seeds by drawing the air through the seed. 13.10 Available Heat in Drying AirThe quantity of heat in air that may be utilized in evaporating water from the grain. 13.11 Batch - Quantity of grain put into a bin or a container on a repetitive basis, specially for treatment such as drying. 13.12 Blending -The process of mixing two or more different products together such as grains and supplements to obtain desired food ratios, or of mixing differknt quantities of the same product with different moisture contents to obtain a final mass with a uniform moisture content. 13.13 Blower - A device which gives air blast to blow the light material, that is, chaff, small seeds, trash, etc, out of the seed mass. 13.14 Bran - The powdered material obtained from the outermost part of the brown rice. 13.15 Broken Rice-Rice kernels which are broken and whose length is less than 3/4 of the original length.

13.18 Cage Bar- A steel bar usually of rectangular cross-section and sometimes chamfered, fitted inside the chamber so as to provide slit gaps for the expelled oil to drain out. Slide and centre bars screwed to chamber bars give support to cage bars. 13.19 Cage Bar Set - The entire fitting of the chamber consisting of cage bars, taper bars, side bars, centre bars and spacers. 13.20 Casing - The outer enclosure surrounding the entire heat exchanger and confining the air being heated. 13.21 Centre Bar - A steel bar of trapezoidal cross-section fastened on the chamber bar in the centre of `half of a chamber. Usually three centre bars cover the entire length of the chamber. They facilitate the filling of cage bars in the chamber. 13.22 Chaffing - Pneumatic separation light materials from the produce. of very

13.23 Chaff Cutter - A machine with blades for cutting the fodder. 13.24 Chamber Bar- A bar of square crosssection to which chamber plates are fixed in their position to make `half' of a chamber. 13.25 Chamber Bolt - Bolts (25 to 37 mm dia) used to keep the two halves of chamber in position with the help of clamping bars. They pass through the gaps between the chamber plates.

67

SP : 44-1989 13.26 Chamber Plate--Plates suitably cut into shape to provide support to frame bars, centre bars, side bars and cage bars in forming a semicircular chamber. They provide space to clamping bars on the outside. 13.27 Chute-Fed Chaff Cutter - A chaff cutter in which the feeding of the fodder crop is done through a chute. 13.28 Collar-A ring formed on a shaft, either by forging integrally or made as a separate casting or forging, bored or turned, and held in a place with a set-screw or a split pin. 13.29 Conduction - Transmission through or by means of a conductor. of heat 13.40 Cooling Zone-The portion of the grain mass in storage where the temperature of the grain falls during aeration. 13.41 Convection - Transmission of heat by moving masses of matter, as by current in gases and liquids, caused by difference in density. 13.42 Conveyor - An equipment through which material is moved to other. or component from one point

13.43 Conveyor-Fed Chaff Cutter - A chaff cutter in which the feeding of the fodder crop is done through a conveyor. 13.44 Curing ~ Natural or artificial aging of the agricultural produce brought about usually by some (dry or wet) heat treatment.
NOTE -- In case of rice, it is the process of steaming freshly harvested paddy so that rice undergoes a little heat treatment and attains, to some extent, the properties of aged rice.

13.30 Cone - A hollow truncated cone fitted on the cone head. The annular space between the cone and cone collar is controlled by its linear movement. 13.31 Cone Bush - A spacing collar between sleeve and the pressing worm. the

13.32 Cone CollarA ring shaped member fixed in the cone body on which the chamber rests. It is generally in two pieces with a tapered bore forming an annular spaced with the cone, through which the cake discharges. 13.33 Cone Driving Pinion - A pinion with clutches on both sides loose fitted on cone driving shaft, and in teeth with cone gear. It can be clutched with the expeller body to stop rotation or with cone driving shaft to increase rotation. 13.34 Cone Driving Shaft - It is fitted with a clutch and has a speed about double that of the main shaft. Cone driving pinion can be clutched with it. 13.35 Cone Gear - A gear fitted on sleeve nut, in teeth with the cone driving pinion and generally in two parts. At normal position this gear has the same speed as cone shaft. By giving a higher or lower speed to this gear with the help of cone driving pinion, the whole assembly of cone, cone head and sleeve nut is caused to move in or out in order to adjust the position of the cone. 13.36 Cone Head - A mild steel member, keyed with the sleeve, screwed with the cone and fastened loose to sleeve nut with the help of cone head collar. Its function is to hold the cone in position and to transmit only the linear motion of the sleeve nut to the cone. 13.37 Cone Head CollarA ring shaped member used to clamp the cone head and sleeve nut loosely. It is generally in two pieces. 13.38 Control - Any component of a dryer or heat source designed to effect or limit any normal or abnormal conditions of the drying operation. 13.39 Cooling Stage-The time required to move a cooling zone entirely through a grain mass.

13.45 Cutter Head-The assembly of the component which actually cuts the fodder. This may be of cylinder or fly-wheel type. 13.46 Cyclone Separator - It is a separating device in which strong centrifugal force acting radially is used in place of relatively weak gravitational force acting vertically downwards. 13.47 Cycling Burner-Type wherein application of maximum such as : a) cycling between high high of operation heat is periodic, low fire; a constant

fire and fire and

b) cycling between pilot; and

c) cycling from high fire to off, then restarting to high fire by constant or intermittent ignition. 13.48 Cylinder Type Chaff Cutter - A chaff cutter, the cutting mechanism of which consists of a rotating cutting cylinder. 13.49 Dead Clutch - A clutch fixed to. the expeller body. By clutching the cone driving pinion to it, the rotation of cone assembly stops. 13.50 Degree of Polish-The quantity of bran removed from brown rice during polishing expressed in terms of percentage of brown rice. 13.51 Dehydration - The rapid removal of moisture to a very low level by applying external heat. 13.52 Delinter - A machine used to residual tint (fuzz) from cotton seed. remove

13.53 Depth Factor - When drying with air, a depth which would contain enough product that, if all the theoretical heat available for drying could be used., it would all dry to equilibrium in a period of time equal to time required for fully exposed grain to dry half-way to equilibrium. 68

SP : 44-1989 13.54 Destoner - A mechanical separates stones from the grain. device which 13.58.11 Tunnel Dryer - A dryer in which the grain being dried is conveyed through a tunnel like chamber. It may be continuous flow or batch type. 13.59 Drying -The reduction of moisture in a g;;Ifeunc usually to some predetermined moisture 13.60 Drying Air - The air being passed through the grain being dried. 13.61 Drying Air Temperature - The temperature of the air entering the grain being dried. 13.62 Drying Conveyor - A mechanical linkage or assembly to carry the grain being dried through the drying chamber. 13.63 Drying Front - The divisional layer between the dried and undried grains in drying systems with shallow drying zones. 13.64 Drying Zone -The bend or layer of grain in a dryer in which most of the drying occurs at any instant. 13.65 Elevator - A conveyor material is moved upwards. in which the

13.55 Dielectric - A non-conducting having few electrons of fixed polarity

material or charge.

13.56 Discharge Grain Temperature - The maximum temperature indicated by a thermometer inserted in a sample of grain immediately collected after being discharged from the dryer. 13.57 Double Aspirating Separator - A separator which uses an aspirating leg both before and after sieving. 13.58 DryerA unit which provides the conditions for reducing moisture generally by forced ventilation with or without addition of heat. 13.58.1 Batch DryerA dryer wherein the product to be dried is placed in batches and drying is regulated by the length of time the whole batch is under treatment in the dryer. This is usually portable but may be stationary. 13.58.2 Circulating Dryer - A batch equipped to circulate or mix the product drying or cooling period. dryer during

13.58.3 Continuous Flow Dryer - A dryer in which the material being moved through the machine in a substantially continuous stream, its rate of progress being regulated in order to adjust the amount of drying effected. 13.58.4 Counter-Flow Dryer - A continuousflow dryer wherein the grain being dried move in one direction and the drying air moves in the opposite direction. 13.58.5 Cross-Flow Dryer - A continuous flow dryer wherein the flow of the grain being dried. 13.58.6 Direct-Fired Dryer - A dryer in which the product of combustion comes into direct contact with the product being dried. 13.58.7 Indirect Fired Dryer - A dryer in which the product of cumbustion does not come in contact with the product being dried. 13.58.8 In-silo DryerA dryer in which usually large quantity of grain is dried in a container (bin) or compartment in which it may be stored. 13.58.9 Parallel-Flow Dryer - A continuous flow dryer in which the drying air flows in the same direction as that of the grain being dried. 13.58.10 Self-Contained Dryer - Any dryer manufactured as a package unit consisting of the drying and/or cooling chamber, necessary heat or all fans and duct work radiation source, alongwith the necessary controls and product handling equipment. This may be stationery or portable.

13.66 Equilibrium Moisture Content - The moisture content of the grain when it is in equilibrium with the surrounding atmosphere, 13.67 Equilibrium Relative Humidity - The relative humidity of the air surrounding the grain which is in equilibrium with grain of a given moisture content. The air and grain are at the same temperature. 13.68 Evaporationevaporated by the calculated from the content or the grain grain treated; except dryers. The total mass of water dryer per hour or per bath input and output moisture and the output mass of the in case of the batch or in-silo

NOTE- In batch or in-silo dryer, there may be circumstances where the output moisture content is most accurately estimated by reference to the total loss of mass during drying.

13.69 Excess Flow Valve - A check valve which permits flow of fluid in either direction but which limits excessive flow in one direction. If the designated flow rate is exceeded, the valve automatically closes. 13.70 Fail Safe Control - A control so designed that a malfunction of any of its components shall automatically stop the operation of the device or equipment controlled by it. 13.71 Fan - A revolving device used to move air for drying or aeration. It includes blade assembly,

13.72 Feed Interference - The obstruction in advancing the fodder against the back of the blades.

SP : 44-1989 43.73 Final Aspiration - The suction or air blast which removes light seeds of poor germination or trash from the screened bold seed mass after it has passed over the last screen of the seed cleaner. 13.74 Firing - A process of applying a substance rapidly as in processing heat to dry tea. 13.89 Heat Air Unit - A basic heated air producing unit including fan, burner and eEctrica1 system. It is usually coupled to drying structure by means of a flexible duct. It may be portable. 13.90 Heated Air Drying - Use of forced ventilation with the addition of heat for reducing moisture. 13.91 Heated Air Temperature - Mean temperature of the air to be used for drying the grain, measured at a number of points as close as practicable to its entry to the grain. 13.92 Heat Exchanger - A device used to transfer heat from one fluid stream co another without intermixing. 13.93 Huller - A machine used for While removing the hull, the machine part of the bran also. 13.94 Hulling or husk and hulling. removes hull

13.75 Floatation - It is a process to remoje light materials like bran from heavy materials like wheat by adding a floatation agent in the water. 13.76 Foreign Matter - It includes inorganic and organic matter. The inorganic matter shall include sand, gravel, dirt, pebbles, stones, lumps of earth, mud and iron chips. The organic matter shall include chaff, straw, weed seed, dead insects, worms and other grains. 13.77 Friction Polisher-The type of polisher which operates on the principle of removing the bran from the kernel by using friction between the rice kernels and ,the screen in the polisher. 13.78 Fly Wheel Type Chaff Cutter - A chaff cutter having rotating fly wheel with blades. 13.79 GandasaAn iron plate attached to a wooden frame and having cutting edge at one side and operated by hand. 13.80 Germination-Growth of the radicle and plumule in seed, when the latter absorbs adequate water and is placed in a normal environment of temperature and humidity. LX81 Grading-The process of sorting grains into different lots conforming to certain predetermined standards. 13.82 Grain Cleaner - A machine to remove foreign matter from grain mass. This may be termed on the basis of grain, such as paddy and seed. 13.83 Grain Grader-A grading the grain. machine used for

- It is the process of removing bran in one operation.

13.95 Indented Cylinder - A machine which separates grain on the basis of length by picking up shorter grains in the indents provided on the cylinder drum and leaving the long grain rolling at its base. 13.96 Indented Cylinder Grader - A machine which makes a length separation of seeds by either lifting or rejecting them in pockets or indentation pressed into the side of a cylindrical body which revolves with the seed mass inside the cylinder. 13.97 Indented Disc Grader - A grader in which head rice is separated from brokens which are picked up in the indents provided on a set of revolving discs. 13.98 Indented Drum Grader which indents are formed in a which revolves slowly and picks thus separate them from rice known as trieur cylinder. 13.99 Kernel Edible part - A grader in cylindrical drum up brokens, and mass. It is also

13.84 Grain Processing-The process of upgrading grains for improving their marketability: storability and suitability for human consumption. 13.85 Grain Separator - A machine to remove impurities from grain or other seeds and to sort them into two or more fractions. 13.86 Groundnut Decorticator - A machine separate groundnut kernels from pods. to

of groundnut.

13.100 Kettle-Kettle may be long and round. In medium and large kettles, a steam jacket is provided for cooking the feed. The fan or agitator working in the kettle pushes the feed towards the outlet. 13.101 Knife Bar-Mild steel flat with projections to scrap the material collected around the spacing and taper collars. In one chamber, two knife bars are fitted at the joining line of the two chamber ha&es. 13.102 Maize Sheller - An equipment maize grain from cobs. to remove

13.87 Gyrosifter - A grader in which head rice and brokens are separated by screening after passing them over a set of gyrating screens. Rotary flat sieve could also be used for grading. 13.88 Head RiceRice grains of size % and above in length of a whole rice grain shall be called head rice.

13.103 Magnetic Separator - A device to remove magnetic materials from the grain mass.

70

SP : 44-1989 13.104 Maximum Permissible Driving Time The maximum elapsed time that may be used to complete drying any portion of the grain without undesirable change in grain quality. 13.105 Modulate - Automatically governing the rate of fuel flow by a control which is temperature sensitive in order to maintain a constant temperature at the location of the sensing device. 13.106 Moisture Content - Content of water in the grain on wet basis expressed as percentage by mass. 13.107 Paddy removes fdreign CleanerA machine matter from the paddy which mass. 13.118 Pressure Regulator - A device which reduces the fluid (liquid or gas) pressure to a relatively constant delivery pressure while inlet pressure and volume of gas may vary. 13.119 Pressure Relief Valve-A valve designated as a safety device to open and remain open, to discharge a fluid whenever the fluid pressure reaches the start-to-discharge setting of the valve. When the fluid pressure drops somewhat below this setting, the relief valve automatically closes. 13.120 Pressure System - Method of air movement in which the air is forced through the product with the air duct or ducts at a pressure above atmospheric pressure. It is called a `pushing' or `forcing' system of air movement. 13.121 Pressing Worm - A steel worm with a helical thread on its length equal to one revolution and mounted on the main shaft in the chamber. It pushes the feed ahead towards the cone head. The setting of the worm assembly differs with the expeller and the type of seed to be crushed. 13.122 Preventilation plenum or duct of any ignition of the burner. It by a device which ensures for a certain period of permitted. The cleaning of the volatile gases prior to is usually accomplished that the fan is operating time before ignition is

13.108 Paddy Dehusker remove husk from paddy as paddy sheller.

- An equipment to grain. It is also known

13.109 Paddy Separator-A machine which is used for the separation of brown rice from the paddy-brown rice mixture. 13.109.1 Compartment Type Paddy Separator A paddy separator which works on the principle of differences in specific gravity, buoyancy and surface characteristics of the paddy and brown occurs in compartments rice; and .separation moving to-and-fro horizontally. 13.109.2 Tray-type Paddy Separator I- A paddy separator which works on the principle of difference in specific gravity, and length of the paddy and brown rice; and separation occurs in the dimpled trays which have both horizontal and vertical motions. 13.110 Parboilingpaddy by imparting paddy-tiy steaming. It is partial heat treatment cooking of to the soaked

13.123 Quick Acting Valve-A manuallyoperated valve specially designed to accomplish rapid shut-off of fuel flow to dryer. 13.124 Quill Worm (Feed Worm) - A member having a helical thread running throughout its length which receives the feed from the hopper and pushes it to the pressing worm assembly. Quill worm is longer than the pressing worm. 13.125 Radiation - Transmission the help of intervening media. of heat without A potato

13.111 Peeling-The removal of the outer layer of a fruit or vegetable is generally referred as peeling, paring or skinning. 13.112 Plenum - An air chamber maintained under pressure (positive or negative) usually connected to one or more distributing ducts in a drying or aeration system. The term is also used to designate the air chamber under the perforated floor in a grain bin and the pressure chamber between grain columns in a batch dryer. 13.113 Pod Unbroken shell with kernel inside.

13.126 Reciprocating Potato Sorter sorter with reciprocating grids.

13.127 Reel - Cylindrical screens with slight inclination into which the material enters at one end and falls through openings into a collecting mechanism while over-size material is discharged at the opposite end. 13.128 Relative Humidity - A measure of moisture content of air expressed as percentage. It is the ratio of the mass df water vapour in a given volume of air at a given temperature to the maximum quantity of water vapour which the same volume of air could hold at the same temperature. 13.129 Revolving Screen See 13.127. with

13.114 Polishing - Removal of bran layer from the brown rice by mechanical operations. It is also known as whitening or pearling. 13.115 Potato Grader - A machine potatoes according to size. 13.116 Potato Sorter See 13.115. used to grade

13.117 Pre-cleaner - A separator to remove extraneous matter from grain before drying by means of sieves and an air-stream.

13.130 Rice Glazing - Polished rice treated talc (and in some cases with glucose).

71

SP : 44-1989 13.131 Rice Grader for grading polished broken rice. A machine which is used rice into head rice and 13.142 Seed Treating - The process application of a thin coat of insecticide fungicide over seeds or similar applications improve the storability and protect viability. 13.143 Shaft - A spindle which revolves bearings and carries pulleys or gears transmission of power. 13.144 Shaft Clutch-A clutch driving shaft. Cone driving pinion to it. 13.145 ShellOuter hull of or to in for

13.132 Rice Polisher - A machine which is used for the removal of bran layer from the brown rice. 13.132.1 Abrasive Cone Polisher or Pearling Cone-The polisher in which the emery-coated inverted frustum of a cone imparts polish while rotating about a vertical shaft. 13.132.2 Abrassive Horizontal Polisher - The polisher in which emery-coated or vitrified silicon carbide abrasive roll imparts polish while rotating about a horizontal shaft. 13.132.3 Metallic Polisher - The polisher in which a metallic cylinder imparts polish in conjunction with air pressure while rotating about a horizontal shaft.
NOTE- Polishing section of a rice mill may comprise combinations of single or multiple units of 13.132.1, 13.132.2 and 13.132.3 to work as primary and secondary polishers.

keyed to cone can be clutched

of the pod. from cobs

13.146 Shelling - Removal of grains or kernels from pods or husk. 13.147 Side Bar - A steel side, which is sometimes are fitted on the frame bar side of the chamber halves cage bars.

bar with projection on tapered. The side bars lengthwise on both the to provide support for a bearing

13.148 Side Stand-A stand with block to support the rotating shaft.

13.133 Rice remove fine ke'mel after drum fitted screwed roll a perforated

Refining Machine -The machine to bran adhering to the surface of the whitening operation. It consists of a with small leathers and a feeding fixed to a shaft, which are enclosed in steel cylinder.

13.149 Side Shaft - A shaft on which are mounted the drive pulleys and the pinion. The pinion mates with the gear of the main shaft. It is supported by side stand and also side brackets fixed to the body. 13.150 Sieve Aspirator - A rice grader which separates brokens from rice mass by means of vibrating screen in conjunction with air stream. The traces of bran adhering to head rice and brokens are separated by an aspirator. 13.151 Sieve Separator - A simple employing an oscillating sieve. separator

13.134 Riddle - Oscillating deck used for holding the grain of specific size, usually used in dockage tester. 13.135 Rotary Potato Sorter - A potato grader with a rotating, perforated drum having appropriate size of peripheral openings. 13.136 Rubber Roll Sheller - A machine used to remove husk from paddy. It consists of two rubber rollers, rotating with a differential speed and the paddy passing between the two surface is dehusked. 13.137 Scalping-The process of cleaning in which good grains or seeds are dropped through screen openings while larger material is carried over the screen into a separate spout. 13.138 Scarification - Scratching of hard seed coat to remove the mechanical barrier to obtain uniform germination with better penetration of moisture into the seed. 13.139 Screen-Perforated sheet with round or slotted holes or wire mesh used for separating brokens from rice mass. 13.140 Screw Conveyor - A type of conveyor in which a long screw is used to transport grains horizontally or on inclinations up to 30". 13.141 Seed Processing-The upgrading the seeds for plantability and storability. process of improving their

13.152 Sifting - It is the process of separating small size particle through sieves moved in circuicir motion. 13.153 Single Aspirating Separator separator with a single aspirating leg. A

13.154 Sleeve-A hollow cylinder threaded on the outside and fixed on the main shaft with the key. It rotates with the main shaft. 13.155 Sleeve Nut-A threaded member made of steel or cast iron fastened to the cone through cone head, which can be made to move forwards or backwards on the sleeve for adjusting the position of the cone. 13.156 Sorting - It involves inspection, followed by separation according to variety, size, colouf, degree of ripeness, maturity, defects, etc. It 1s actually a separating operation supplementary to grading.
NOTE - Sorting is a form of separation of food materials and food products at any stage of processing, whereas grading is done only during assembly and receipt of raw food materials for the purpose of establishing their commer-

72

SP : 44-1989 13.157 Soaking-The part of parboiling when paddy is soaked in water in order to raise its moisture content. , 13.i58 S acers - Mild steel strips ranging from 0.25 to 1 .63 mm in thickness inserted between unchamfered cage bars to provide slit gaps. 13.159 Spacing the worms. Collar-A collar used to space 13.172 Temperature Rise -The difference between ambient temperature and temperature of the drying air resulting from the addition of heat by dryer burner. 13.173 Tempering - It is a process wherein the grain is held temporarily in a bin between two drying passes so that the moisture content and temperature within the centre of the kernel equalize with moisture content and temperature on the surface of the grain. 13.174 Thickness Grader - A machine which separates particles by thickness. It is effective for the separation of unripe grain from whole grain. 13.175 through cutting. 13.176 bearing Evaporation - The mass per unit of fuel, corrected conditions. of to Throat - The rectangular which the compressed fodder Thrust Bearin - Specially to take tangential load. passage passes for designed

13.160 Specified Ambient Conditions - The ambient conditions of temperature, pressure and relative humidity to which the results of a dryer may be corrected. 13.161 Specified consumption of kilogram of water all power used by ambient conditions. 13.162 Specified water evaporated specified ambient Energy energy including the dryer Consumption - The for evaporating one the heat equivalent of corrected to specified

13.177 Tie Rod-A round bar threaded at both ends and used in connecting all the bodies and for tying them in their positions. 13.178 Time of Drying -The elapsed time from the start of the drying process to the instant the drying front arrives at any point or place in the grain. 13.179 Time of One-Half required to dry fully exposed equilibrium. Response -Time grain half way to

13.163 Static Pressures - The pressure exerted by a static fluid medium on the wall of the container. 13.164 Steady State - Condition when operation or process reaches equilibrium. the

13.165 Steel Huller - A machine used for paddy hulling. It consists of a flutted cylinder rotating within a steel screen and a steel blade. 13.166 Steeping See 13.157.

13.167 Suction System - Method of air movement in which air is moved through the product with the air duct or ducts at a pressure lower than atmospheric. It is also called exhaust system of air movement. 13.168 Sugarcane Crusher - A machine extracting juice from sugarcane. used for

13.180 Tray - The cast iron tray attached to the body below the chamber. The expressed oil collects into the tray and flows down to the outlet hole. 13.181 Traverse Time - The in-product time of air from entrance to any point. travel

13.182 Turning -The process of moving grain through the air within a bin or storage structure or from one bin or structure to other. 13.183 Under-run Disc Sheller - A machine which removes the husk from the paddy. It consists of two horizontal discs, the top one stationary and the lower one rotating. 13.184 Vaporizer -A type of heat exchanger wherein heat is supplied to change the liquid fuel to vapour ready for combustion. The vaporizer may be integral with the burner so that part of the heat of combustion is used for vaporization. 13.185 Vaporizer Burner - An integral unit dependent upon the heat generated by the burner as the source of heat to vaporize the liquid fuel. 13.186 Velocity of Air Flow of air flow of air flow by

13.168.1 Horizontal Sugarcane Crusher - A sugarcane crusher in which the crushing rollers are placed in horizontal position. 13.168.2 Vertical Sugarcane Crusher - A sugarcane crusher in which the rollers are placed in vertical position. 13.169 Supplemental Heat-Any heat added to that already present in the atmosphere to obtain a limited temperature rise to accomplish drying within the maximum permissible drying time to prevent spoilage. 13.170 Taper Bar - - A cage bar with a taper on one or both sides used for fixing cage bars in proper position. 13.171 Taper Collar-A collar which tapers to join two worms of varying diameters and also serves as a spacing collar for the generation of pressure.

13.186.1 Apparent -The rate determined by dividing the quantity the cross-sectional area.

13.186.2 Average -The rate of air travel through product void space. It is determined by 73

SP : 441989 dividing the apparent velocity by the product void space. 13.187 Void Space -The space between the particles in a bulk of stored grain usually expressed as percent of total volume. 13.188 Worm - A form of helical gear consisting of a continuous screw thread wrapped around a cylinder which continuously engages a segment of helix of the worm wheel. 13.189 Worm-Assembly - Mountings on the main shaft from quill worm to cone bush including quill worm, pressing worms, reversible pressing worms, spacing collars, taper collars, cone bush and cone. 13.190 Worm Wheel- One of the gear pairs, each of whose teeth consists of small segment of a helix and mates with worm. 13.191 Worm Wheel Assembly - An assembly a worm wheel which changes the direction rotation by a right angle and also plane rotation. it gives a high reduction ratio rotation. of of or of

APPENDIX ( Clause 0.5 )

A

LIST OF RELEVANT INDIAN STANDARDS

IS : 4596-1968 Glossary of terms relating to oil expellers IS : 8122 (Part l )-1976 Test code for combineharvester-thresher : Part 1 Terminology IS : 8420-1977 Glossary of terms relating to grain dryers IS : 8480-1977 Glossary of terms relating to crop protection equipment IS : 98 18 ( Part l )-198 1 Glossary of terms relating to tillage and intercultivation equipment : Part 1 General terms IS : 9818 ( Part 2)-1981 Glossary of terms relating to tillage and intercultivation equipment : Part 2 Terms relating to equipment IS : 9821-1981 Glossary of terms relating to farm transport equipment,

IS : 9826-1981 Glossary of terms relating harvesting and threshing equipment

to

IS : 9855-1981 Glossarv of terms relating to sowing, planting, fertilizer and manure application equipment IS : 9939-1981 Glossary of terms relating to agricultural tractors and power tillers IS : 9981-1981 Glossary of terms relating to agricultural produce processing equipment
IS : 11077-1984 Glossary

of terms on soil and relating relating to to

water IS : 11272-1985 Glossary of terms horticultural equipment IS : 11580-1986 Glossary forestry equipment of terms

74

SP : 44-1989

INDEX (The index number refers to the clause number in the Handbook)

A

Abrasion, soil 3.55 Abrasivity 13.I Adapter 7.1 Additives, soil 3.56 Adhesion, soil 3.57 Adjuster Chain oil pump 9.9 tension 9.11 High speed mixer 9.43 Idle speed 9.45 Low speed mixer 9.53 Adjustable spray nozzle 10.64.1 Adjustment Mast 2.2.33.14 Range, levelling 2.2.33.2 Aeration 13.2 Zone of 7.78 Aerosols 10.72.1 Aggregates 3.2 Agitation 10.1 Hydraulic 10.I. I Mechanical 10.1.2 Pneumatic 10.1.3 Agitator 10.2 Feed distributor 5.21.1 mechanism 5.18. I Hydraulic 10.2.1 Mechanical 10.2.2 Pneumatic 10.2.3 Wheel drill 544.1 Agricultural Tractor 2.1.1 Trailer 12.1 Air Assisted centrifugal sprayers 10.56.1 hydraulic sprayer 10.56.2 spray 10.52. I Available heat in drying 13.10 Compressor 10.3 Deflector 10.4 Drying 13.60 Heated 13.90 Flow 105 control 10.50 velocity of 13.186 output 10.6 temperature heated 13.91 drying 13.61

Anchoring 3.3 Angle Disc 4.1.1.2 (c) Gang 4.2.2.2 (c) (iv) Lug 2.7.4 Nominal spray 10.31 approach 2.9.1 departure 2.9.2 internal friction 13.4 nip 13.5 pitch 12.2 repose 13.6 roll 12.3 yaw 12.4 Spray 10.53 Transmission 9.1 Angling mechanism 4.3.2.2 (c) ( I ) Animal-drawn 1.1 Vehicle 12.5 Anvil 10.35.1 Apparent 13.186.I Application Efficiency, Water 7.73 Manure 5.31 Rate 7.2, 10.8 Applicator, Granule 10.23 Arc, Concave Il. 14.1 Area Concave 1I. 14.2 grate 11.14.3 extension 11.14.5 Irrigatable 7.47 Spray 10.54 straw rack 11.104 raddle 1I. 105 walker 11.108 Total cleaning I 1.122 Aspiration #13.7 Final 13.73 Aspirating Leg 13.8 Separator double' 13.57 single 13.153 Aspirator 13.9 Sieve 13.150 Assembly, yoke journal 2.6.13 Attachment 8.20. I Fertilizer 5.19 ridge 5.38 Lower hitch 2.2.33.7 Mower 8.20.18

Attachment-Conld Pick-up 1I .75 width 11.76 Seeding 5.41 Reaping I 1.88 Swathing 1I. 114 Windrowing 1I. 132 Auger Feed mechanism 5.32.2 Grain 1I .33 discharge I 1.34 Plough, Rotating 4.1.1. I (xiii) Tailing Il. 116 Average 13.186.2 Axial flow fan 10.10 Axle load 12.6
B

Baffles 7.3 Plate 11.1
Bakkhar 4.2.1

Balance Plough 4.1.1.1 (ii) Trailer 12.7 Baler, Pick-up 1I .77 Ballast 2.10. I Ballasted tractor, Mass of 2.4.2 Band, Road 2.2.25 Bar Cage 13.18 set 13.19 Centre 13.21 Chamber 13.25 Cutter 11.17 Finger 1I .30 Guide 9.36 cover 9.37 Knife 13.94 Nozzle 10.33 Point share 4.1.1.3 (a) ( 12) (v) Side 13.142 Taper 13.165 Base Lug 2i7.5 Wheel 11.126 Basin Contour 7.19 Irrigation 7.4 Lister 4.2.2 Batch 13.11 Beam 4.1.1.3 (a) (IO)

SP : 44-1989
Beater Bar drum 11.19.1 Feeder 11.26 Rear 11.89 Type spreader 5.16. I Bed Planting 5.2 Root 3.47 Seed 3.52 Stepped grain 11.101 Bedded land 3.5 Bedding 3.6 Belt Driven 1.2 Pulley 2.2.1 power 2.51 Bill hook 8.1 Blade 8.20.5 Saw cover 9.69 guard 9.70 Tip circle 8.20.2 Blending 13.12 Blocks, shear 3.53 Blower 11.2 Axial flow 10.10 Centrifugal 10.12 Board, tailing I 1.I I7 .Body 4.1.1.4 (a) Covering 5.8 Foreign 3. I8 Nozzle 10.35.2 Boom Spray 10.55 lance 10.60 Type 7.61.1 BJot 5.3 Boring 9.2 Border irrigation 7.5 Boss Nozzle 10.34 Power input connection yoke 2.6.5 Bottom, Plough 4.1.1.3 (a) Box, Diversion 7.34 Brake, Chain 9.6 Braking Device, over run 12.10 parking 12.1I service 12.15 trailer 12.18 System 8.20.3 Bran 13.14 Breaker, Mouldboard 4.1.1.3 (a) (ii) (v) Breaking, Middle 3.32 Breaking hydraulic coupling 2.2.2 Broadcast, Tillage 3.7 Broadcaster, Fertilizer 5.20 Broadcasting 5.4 Machine, seed 5.42 Broken rice 13.15 Brown rice 13.16 Brush-feed mechanism 5.32.3 Bucking 9.3 Budding and grafting knife 8.2 Knife 8.3 Tape 8.4 Bulldozing 3.8 Bumper, spiked 9.80 Buncher, Feller 9.27 Bunching 9.4 Bund former 4.2.3 Bunk skidder, clam 9.15 Bush, cone 13.31 By-pass 10.11 c Cable skidder 9.5 Cage 13.17 Bar 13.18 set 13.19 Harrow 4.3.2.5 (a) Roller 4.3.4.1 Wheel 2.2.3 full 2.2.4 half 2.2.5 Cambridge roller 4.3.4.2 Continental 4.3.4.4 Can, watering 8.29 Cap 10.35.3 Capacity, field 7.36 Capillary Capacity 7.6 Conductivity 7.7 Fringe 7.8 Moisture 7.9 Potential 7.10 Pressure head 7. I I Soil moisture 7.12 Zone 7.13 Casing 13.20 Catalogue, parts I. 18 Catcher, grass 8.20.15 Cell Feed mechanism 5.32.5 Wheel spacing drill 5.44.2 Central bar 13.21 Centre of power 4.1.1.3 (t) Centrifugal Distributor 5.21.2 Fan 10.12 Feed drill 5.44.3 Pump 1044.1 Sprayer 10.56.3 Spraying 10.57. I Chaff cutter 13.23 Conveyor-fed 13.43 Cylinder type 13.48 Fly wheel type 13.78 Head 13.45 Chaffer 11.3 Extension 1I .4 Chaffing 11.5, 13.22 Chain Brake 9.6 Chain-Conrd Catcher 9.7 Distributor, Endless 5.21.4 Harrow 4.3.2.1 Guide 9.8 Mechanism, endless 5.18.3 Oil pump adjuster 9.9 Pitch 9.10 Saw 9.71 Tension adjuster 9.11 Chamber Bar 13.24 Bolt 13.25 Plate 13.26 Pressure 10.41 Check Head 5.5 Irrigation 7.14 Row planting 5.6 Wire 5.7 Chipper 9.12 Chipping 9.13 Chisel plough 4.1.1.1 (iii) Chiseling 3.9 Chute Discharge 8.20.11 Fed chaff cutter 13.27 thresher 11.85. I Circle, blade tip 8.20.2 Circular harrow 4.3.2.5 (b) Circumferential lug spacing 2.7.12 Clam bunk, skidder 9.15 Clamp Type transplanter 5.49.1 with disc transplanter 5.49.2 tipping share transplanter 5.49.3 Cleaner Grain 13.82 Paddy 13.107 Cleaning 11.6 Area, Total 11.122 Sieves I 1.7 Clearance Diameter, Minimum 2.3.4 End of lug 2.7.2 Height of unloader 11.35.1 Horizontal 4.1.1.3 (q) Lower hitch point 2.2.33.9 Throat 4.1.1.3 (s) Vertical 4.1.1.3 (r) Clearing 9.16 Cleat 2.2.6 Cleated wheel 2.2.7 Clod 3.10 Crusher 4.3.2.5 (c) Clutch 9.17 Cover 9.18 Dead 13.49 Shaft 13.144 Cock 11.8 Coil roller 4.3.4.3

76

SP : 44-1989
Collar Spacing 13.159 Taper 13.171 Collector deflector 10.13 Combine Harvester thresher 1I .9 Height 11.10 Length 11.11 Mass 11.12 Self-propelled 11.9.1 Track-Laying 11.9.1.2 Tractor-Operated 11.9.2 Tuber planter 5.35.3.2 Wheeled 11.9.1.1 Width 11.13 Compaction, Soil 3.58 Compression sprayer 10.56.4 Concave I 1.14 Arc 11.14.1 Area 11.14.2 Grate area 11.14.3 Extension 1I 14.4 area 11.14.5 Length I I. 14.6 Width I I. 14.7 Concavity 4.1.1.2 (a) Concretion 3.12 Conduit 7.15 Cone 13.30 Bush 13.31 Collar 13.32 Driving pinion 13.33 shaft 13.34 Gear 13.35 Head 13.36 collar 13.37 Nozzle 10.64.2 hollow 10.64.6 solid 10.64.12 Connection, Power input 2.6.3 Shield 2.6.4 Yoke 2.6.6 boss 2.6.5 Consumptive use 7.17 Content, Moisture 13.106, 7.54 Contour Basin 7.19 Ditch 7.20 Flooding 7.21 Furrows 7.22 Contracted weir 7.23 Control 8.20.4, 13.38 Automatic declutching 8.20.10 Fail safe 13.70 Lever Gang 4.3.2.2 (c) (6) Levelling 4.1.1.3 (p) mechanism, Levelling 4. I. 1.3 ( n) Structure 7.24 Valve, multi out-let 10.30 Conversion 9.19 Conventional tillage 3.13 Conveyor 13.42 Drying 13.62 Fed chaff cutter 13.43 Fed thresher 11.85.2 Feeder 11.27 Platform I I. I5 Cooling Stage 13.39 Zone 13.40 Corrugated roller 4.3.4.5 Corrugation irrigation 7.25 Cotton stock puller II.16 Coulter 4.1.1.3 (k) Disc 4.1.1.3 (k) (2) Shank of 4.1.1.3 (k) (3) Stationary 4.1.1.3 (k) (1) Cover Guide bar 9.37 Saw blade 9.69 Covering Body 5.8 Device 5.9 Discs 5.10 Cross 7.26 Crosskill roller 4.3.4.6 Crown, furrow 3.21. I Crusher, sugarcane 13.168 Cultipacker 4.3.4.9 Cultivator 6.1 Disc 6.1.1 Hand 8.16 Point 6.2 Rotary 6. I .2 Tine 6.1.3 Cultivation Inter 3.24 Soil 3.59 Cup feed Mechanism 5.32.5 Seed drill 5.44.4 Tuber planter 5.35.3.3 (a) Curing 13.44 Cut, Depth of 3.16 Cut-off Device 10.14 Mechanism 5. I I Cutter bar I I. 17 Effective width 1I. 17. I Height 11.17.2 Lift 11.17.3 Working width I 1.17.4 Cutting Edge 4.1.1.3 (a) (12) (i) Means 8.20.5 enclosure 8.20.6 Position 8.20.7 Soil 3.60 Width 8.20.8 Cycling burner 13.47 Cyclone Separator 13.46 Cylinder 11.19 concave clearance 1 I .20 Diameter II.21 Distributor, Studied 5.21.14 Cylinder-Conrd Indented 13.95 grader 13.96 Length 1I .22 Mower 8.20.9, 11.67.2 Type chaff cutter 13.48

D Dah 8.5 Damper, Pressure pulsation 10.42 Debarker 9.20 Debarking 9.21 Debranching 9.22 Declutching control, Automatic 8.20. IO Decompression valve 9.25 Decorticator, Groundnut 13.86 Deep Percolatitin 7.29 Tillage 3.15 Deflector Air 10.4 Collector 10.3 Nozzle 10.64.3 Wind Il.129 Degree of polish 13.50 De-husker, Paddy 13.108 Dehydration 13.51 Delimber 9.23 Delimbing 9.24 Delinter 13.52 Density, Moisture 7.55 Departure, Angle of 2.9.2 Depth Factor 13.53 of cut 3.16 of irrigation 7.30 Tillage 3.72 Destoner 13.54 Device Anti-drip 10.7 Cut-off 10.14 Over-run braking 12.10 Parking braking 12.11 Safety 8.20.23 Service braking 12.15 Trailor braking 12.18 Diameter Clearance 2.3.4 Cylinder I 1.21 Turning 2.3.5 Volume median 10.72 Diaphragm Pump 10.44.2 Dibbler 5.12 Hand 8.17 Dibbling 5. I3 Differential 2.2.8 Lock 2.2.9 Digger Groundnut 11.39 shaker I 1.40 Potato II.79 elevator 1I .81

77

SP : 44-1989
Digging fork 8.6 Direction nozzle 1064.4 Disc 4.1.1.2 (b) Angle 4.1.1.2 (c) Coulter 4.1.1.3 (k) (2) Cultivator 6.1.1 Furrow opener double 5.25.1 single 5.25.4 Grader, Indented 13.97 Harrow 4.3.2.2 double action 4.3.2.2(a) off-set 4.3.2.2(a) ( 1 ) single action 4.3.2.2 (b) tandem 4.3.2.2 (a) (2) Plough 4.1.1.1 (4) vertical 4.1.1.1 (19) ' sheller, Under run 13.183 spacing 4.3.2.2 (c) (2) Discharge Auger, grain 11.34 Chute 8.20.11 Elevator, grain I I .35 Grain temperature 13.56 Height of unloader 11.35.2 Opening 820.12 Distributing mechanism 5.14 Distribution efficiency 7.32 Distributor Agitator feed 5.21.1 Centrifugal 5.21.2 Endless belt and brush delivery 5.21.3 chain 5.21.4 Fertilizer 5.21 Roller feed 5.21.11 Full width 5.21.5 Gravity feed 5.21.6 Oscillating spout 5.21.7 Plate and flicker type 5.21.8 Pneumatic 5.21.9 Reciprocating plate 5.21.10 Rotating discs 5.21.12 Star wheel 5.21.13 Studded cylinder 5.21.14 Distributory 7.31 Displacement, Piston 10.39 Ditch Contour 7.20 Field 7.37 Ditcher 4.2.4 Diversion Box 7.34 Duty of water 7.33 Divider 11.23 Double Aspirating separtor 13.57 Run, Internal 5.32.7 Draft 1.3 Side 1.30 Unit 1.39 Draining and tapping knife 8.7 Drawbar 2.2.10 Power 2.5.2 Pull, Maximum 2.5.4 Dresser, Seed 10.49 Drill Agitator wheel 5.44.1 Cell wheel spacing 544.2 Centrifugal feed 5.44.3 Cup feed 5.44.4 Disc selector 544.5 Force feed 5.44.6 Pneumatic feed 5.44.8 spacing 5.44.9 Seed 5.44 Seed-cum-fertilizer 5.44.14 Spacing 5.44.15 with perforated belt 544.16 Studded roller 5.44.17 Drilling 5.15 Drip irrigation 7.35 Drive Final 2.2.12 Line, implement 1.10 shaft guard, power-take-off 2.6.8 power-take-off 2.6.7 Traction 8.20.30 Driving, Cone Pinion 13.33 Shaft 13.34 Drop Leg 10.62 Let size 10.15 tube tuber planter 5.35.3.3 (b) Dropping, Hill 5.28 Drum 11.24 Beater bar 11.19.1 Grader, Indented 13.98 Peg 11.19.2 Rasp 11.19.3 Dryer 13.58 Batch 13.58.1 Circulating 13.58.2 Continuous flow 13.58.3 Counter flow 13.58.4 Cross flow 13.58.5 Direct fired 13.58.6 Indirect fired 13.58.7 In-silo 13.58.8 Parallel flow 13.58.9 Self-contained 13.58.10 Tunnel 13.58.11 Drying 13.59 Air, Available heat in 13.10 temperature 13.61 Conveyor 13.62 Front 13.63 time, Maximum Permissible 13.104 Time of 13.178 Zone 13.64 Dust Hopper 10.17 Nozzle 10.19 Duster 10.16 1 Knapsack 10.16.1 Mechanical 10.16.2 Duster-Coned Pneumatic 10.16.3 Rotary 10.16.4 Dusting 10.18 Electrostatic 10.18.1 Mechanical 10.18.2 Pneumatic 10.18.3 Wet 10.18.4 Dielectric 13.55 Dynamic Traction ratio 2.10.16 Weight 2.10.20
E

Earthmoving 3.17 Eccentricity 4.1.1.2 ( d) Edge Clearance 4.1.1.3 (a) (3) Cutting 4.1 Edger 8.20.13 Electrostatic dusting 10.18.1 Elevator Digger, Potato 11.81 Grain 11.36 discharge 11.35 Tailing 11.118 Energy consumption, Specified 13.161 Engine Driven 1.5 Power 2.5.3 Speed, rated 1.25 Equilibrium Moisture content 13.66 Relative humidity 13.67 Evaporation 13.68 Specified 13.162 Eye, tow 12.17

Face Lug 2.7.6 Undertread 2.7.18 Fan 13.71 Axial flow 10.10 Centrifugal 10.12 Nozzle 10.64 Winnowing 11.135 Farm system 7.61.2 Feed Interference 13.72 Mechanism 5.18 agitator 5.18.1 auger 5.32.2 brush 5.32.3 cell 5.32.4 conveyor and brush 518.2 cup 5.32.5 endless chain 5.18.3 metering 5.32 plate 5.32.10 and flicker 5.18.4 reciprocating plate 5.18.5

78

SP : 44-1989
Feed-Conrd Mechanism-Contd roller 5.18.6

star wheel 5.18.7 studded-roller 5.3213 Feeder beater 11.26 conveyor 1I .27 Feeding 11.28 Faller 9.26 Buncher 9.27 Forwarder 9.28 Skidder 9.29 Felling 9.30 Sights 9.31 Fertilizer Application equipment, Solid mineral 5.46 Attachment 5.19 Broadcaster 5.20 Distributor 5.21 Gaseous 5.27 Liquid 5.30 Field Capacity 7.36 effective 1.4 theoretical 1.35 Ditch 7.37 efficiency, 1.6 System 7.61.3 Fillet, Lug 2.7.7 Finger 11.29 Bar 11.30 Firing 13.74 Flat Roller 4.3.4.7 Spray 10.52.3 , Flail mower 8.20.14, 11.67.3 Flame gun 10.21 Flexible Disc transplanter 5.49.4 Tine harrow 4.3.2.3 Float 4.3.1 Flooding 7.38 Flotation 2.105, 13.75 Flow Air 10.5 Irrigation, continuous 7. I8 Valve, Excess 13.69 Velocity of air 13.186 Fly-wheel type chaff Uter 13.78 Fork, garden 8.9 Foot valve 7.39 Forage harvester 11.31 Forester's shear 8.8 Forwarder 9.32 Fragments 3.20 Frame 6.7.2 Framed plough 4.1.1.1 (iv) (1) Frequency Irrigation 7.50 Knife 11.56 Friction polisher 13.77 Fringe, capillary 7.8 Frog 4.1.1.3 (a) (1 ) Fumigator 10.22

Furrow 3.21 Back 3.4 Contour 7.22 Crown 3.21.2 Dead 3.14 Irrigation 7.40 Opener 5.25 double disc 5.25.1 hoe type 5.25.2 shoe type 5.25.3 single disc 5.25.4 Planting 5.26 Press 4.3.4.8 Slice 3.21.2 Sole 3.21.3 Wall 3.21.4 Wheel Front 4.1.1.3 (g) Rear 4.1.1.3 (j)

G Gallows plough 4.1.1.1 (4) (ii)
Gandasa 13.79

Gang 4.3.2.2 (c) (3) Angle 4.3.2.2 (c) (4) Axle 4.3.2.2 (c) (5) Control lever 4.3.2.2 (c) (6) Plough 4.1.1.1 (5)t Garden Fork 8.9 Hatchet 8.10 Rake 8.11 Trowel 8.12 Tractor, ride on riding machine 8.20.22 Gaseous fertilizer distributor 5.27 Gasket 10.35.5 Gate 7.41 Gathering width Il.32 Gauge wheel 4.1.1.3 (d) Gear Cone 13.35 Pump 10.44.3 Germination 13.80 Girdle 2.2.13 Glazing, rice 13.130 Grader Indented cylinder 13.96 disc 13.97 drum 13.98 Potato 13.115 Rice 13.131 Grading 13.81 Land 3.25.1 Grafting kmfe 8.13 Budding 8.2 Grain Auger 11.33 discharge 11.34 Bed, stepped 11.101 Cleaner 13.82

Grain-Conrd Elevator 1I .36 discharge I 1.35 Grader 13.83 Pan 11.37 Processing 13.84 Separator `3.85 Tank 11.38 Temperature, Discharge 13.56 Grapple skidder 9.38 Granule Hopper 10.24 Metering mechanism 10.25 Nozzle 10.26 Grass Catcher 8.20.15 Shear 8.14 Sword 8.15 Stud 2.2.14 Grate Concave area 11.14.3 extension 11.14.4 area 11.14.5 Transition I 1.123 Gravity Feed distributor 5.21.6 seeder 5.447 irrigation 7.42 Ground Clearance 2.3.1 power tiller 2.3.1.1 tractor 2.3.1.2 Pressure, specific 11.99 Wheel driven 1.7 Width of track chain on 11.128 Groundnut Decorticator 13.86 Digger 11.39 shaker 11.40 Thresher 11.41 Grouser 2.2.15 Height 2.9.3 Spacing 2.9.5 Width 2.9.4 Guard 11.42, 8.20.16 Bar 11.43 Nose 9.57 Power-take-off drive shaft 2.6.8 Non-rotating 2.6.8.1 rotating 2.6.8.2 Rear hand 9.66 Saw blade 9.70 Guide Bar 9.36 cover 9.37 Chain 9.8 Knife I I .57 Gun Fertilizer 5.23 Flame 10.21 Spray 10.58 Gunnel 4.1.1.3 (a) (12) (ii) Gyrosifter 13.87

79

SP : 44-1989
H Hal, pore 4.1.1.1 (k) Hand Cultivator 8.16 Dibbler 8.17 Feed tuber planter 5353.3 move 7.61.4 Operated I .8 Handbook, operator's 1. I7 Handle 9.39 Front 9.34 Heated 9.42 Swing over 8.20.27 Harness 9.40 Harrow 4.3.2 Cage 4.3.2.5 (a) Chain 4.3.2. I Circular 4.3.2.5 (b) Disc 4.3.2.2 Double action 4.3.2.2. (a) Off-set 4.3.2.2 (a) ( I) Single action 4.3.2.2 (b) Tandem 4.3.2.2. (a) (2) Flexible tine 4.3.2.3 Reciprocating power 4.3.2.4 Roller 4.3.2.5 (d) Rolling 4.3.2.5 Rotary 4.3.2.5 Spike-tooth 4.3.2.6 Spring-tooth 4.3.2.7 Triangular 4.3.2.8 Zig-zag 4.3.2.9 Harrowing 3.22 Harvesting 1 I .44 Knife, sugarcane I I. I I 1 Harvestor 9.41 Potato I 1.82 Sugarbeet 11.109 thresher, combine I 1.9 Hatchet, garden 8.10 Hay Loader I 1.45 Rake I 1.46 Head Capillary pressure 7. I I Cone 13.36 Knife I I .58 Rice 13.88 Total suction 7.66 Header I I .47 Effective width, Maize 11.64 Width 1 I .48 Heat Air unit 13.89 Exchanger 13.92 In drying air, Available 13.10 Supplemental 13.169 Heated air Drying 13.90 Temperature 13.91 Heaving, soil 3.62 Heel Landside 4.1.1.3 (a) (2) (i) Replaceable 4.1.1.3 (a) (2) (ii)

Height Cutter bar 11.17.2 Grouser 2.9.3 Lug 2.7.8 Mast 2.2.33.15 power tiller 2.3.2. I tractor 2.3.2.2. Transport 2.2.33. I7 Hedge shear 8.18 High volume 10.67.1 Hill Divider 1 I .49 Dropping 5.28 Side tractor 2.1.1.3 Hip pad 9.44 Hitch

(a)

Attachment, Lower 2.2.33.7 Pick-up 2.2.18 point 2.2.33. I lower 2.2.33.8 clearance 2.2.33.9 height 2.2.33.10 span 2.2.33.1 I Hoe 6.4 Rake Hand Rotary combined 6.4. I 6.4.2 8.19

Trenching 8.28 Type furrow opener 5.25.2 Wheel 6.4.3 Hole distance, Linch pin 2.2.33.5 Hollow cone nozzle 10.64.6 Hook, Bill 8.1 Hopper Dust IO.17 Granule 10.24 Huller 13.93 Steel 13.165 Hulling 13.94 Hummeler plate I I .50 Hydraulic Agitation IO. I. 1 Agitator 10.2.1 Coupling breakaway 2.2.2 quick release 2.2.24 Injector 10.27 Power lift 2.2.16 Pressure spray 10.52.4 Ram 7.43 Spray nozzle 1064.7 Sprayer 10.56.5 Spraying 10.57.2 I Ignition switch 9.46 Implement I .9 Drive line I.10 Impedance, mechanical 3.29 Impinging stream nozzle 1064.8 Incorporating 3.23 Input, power 2.10.6 Connection 2.6.3 shield 2.6.4 _

Input, power--Could Connection-Contd yoke boss 2.6.5 Infiltration 7.44 Cumulative 7.28 Rate 7.45 Infiltrometer 7.46 Intercultivation 3.24 Injection 10.28 Injector Hydraulic 10.27 Soil IO.51 Swath board 11.53 Installation I. I I Instructions Lubrication 1.17. I Maintenance I. 17.2 Irrigable area 7.47 Irrigation 7.48 Basin 7.4 Border 7.5 Check 7.14 Continuous flow 7.18 Corrugation 7.25 Depth of 7.30 Drip 7.35 Efficiency 7.49 Frequency 7.50 Furrow 7.40 Gravity 7.42 methods 7.51 Sprinkler 7.60 stream 7.52 Sub 7.62 Supplemental Surface 7.64 7.63

System, Rotation 7.59 Interference, Feed 13.72 J Joint, Universal 2.6.12 Jointer 4.1.1.3 (m):

K Kettle 13.100 Kernel 13.99 Khurpi 6.5 Kickback 9.47 and 9.48 Knapsack Duster IO. 16.1 Sprayer 1056.6 Knife II.54 Back II.55 Bar 13.101 Frequency 11.56 Guide I I .57 Head II.58 Registration I I .59 Section I 1.60 Stroke I I .6l Tail piece 4.1.1.3 (a) (6) Kodak 6.6

80

SP : 44-1989
L

Lance, spray 10.59 Boom 10.60 extension 10.61 Land Bedded 3.5 Forming 3.25 Grading 3.25.1 Plane 4.25 Plaining 3.25.2 Listed 3.27 Side 4.1.1.3 (a) (2) heel of 4.1.1.3 (a) (2) (i) Wheel 4.1.1.3 (h) Lawn Mower 8.20 Power 8.20.21 Trimmer 8.20.17 Ledger plate 11.62 Leg 4.1.1.3 (a) (9) Aspiration 13.8 Drop 10.62 Spray 10.62 Length 2.3.3 Combine 11.11 Cylinder 11.22 Shaft closed 2.6.10 extended .2.6.11 Lug 2.7.9 Nominal ground contact 2.9.6 Level, water 7.74 Leveller 4.2.6 Levelling 3.26 Adjustment range 2.2.33.2 Control lever 4.1.1.3 (p) mechanism 4.1.1.3 (n) Lever, Gang control 4.3.2.2 (c) (6) Life Cutter bar 11.17.3 Magnification 7.53 Power 1.19 Rods 2.2.33.3 Self 1.26 Lime spreader 5.29 Linch pin 2.2.33.4 Hole distance 2.2.33.5 Line Implement drive 1.10 Pull 4.1.1.3 (x) Link Lower 2.2.33.22 Point 2.2.33.6 lower 2.2.33.12 upper 2.2.33.24 Upper 2.2.33.22 pin 2.2.33.23 Linkage, Three-point 2.2.33 Check chain 2.2.33.18 Stabilizer 2.2.33.19

Liquid Fertilizer attachment 5.30 Manure spreader 5.16.3 output 10.29 Lister Basin 4.2.2 Plough 4.1.1.1 (6) Listing 3.28 Load Axle 12.6 Gross 12.9 Loader Cutter 11.18 Hay 11.45 Loading 9.49 Lock Differential 2.2.9 Throttle 9.86 Lockout, Throttle trigger 9.88 Log loader 9.50 Logging 9.51 Lopping 9.52 Shear 8.21 Lubrication instructions 1.17.1 Lug Angle 2.7.4 Base 2.7.5 Clearance, end of 2.7.2 Face 2.7.6 Fillet 2.7.7 Height 2.7.8 Length 2.7.9 Pitch 2.7.10 Side 2.7.11 Spacing circumferential 2.7.12 perpendicular 2.7.13 Taper 2.7.14 Width 2.7.15 M Machine 1.12 Rice refining 13.133 Magnetic, Separator 13.103 Magnification, Lift 7.53 Maintenance Instructions 1.17.2 Preventive 1.23 Maize Beader effective width 11.64 Planter 5.35.1 Maize, sheller 13.102 Male shaft 2.6.1 Yoke 2.6.2 Manual Oiler 9.54 Service 1.29 Manually Operated 1.13 winnowing fan 11.135.1

Manufacturer 1.14 Manure Application 5.31 Spreader farm yard 5.16 liquid 5.16.3 Mass Combine 11.12 Power tiller dry 2.4.1 operational 2.4.3 Tractor ballasted 2.4.2 operational 2.4.4 Mast 2.2.33.13 Adjustment 2.2.33.14 Height 2.2.33.15 Material, Foreign 3.19 Matter, Foreign 13.76 Maximum Drawbar pull 2.5.4 Permissible drying time 13.104 Travel speed 2.8.1 Mechanical Agitation 10.1.2 Agitor 10.2.2 Duster 10.16.2 Dusting 10.18.2 Impedance 3.29 Stability 3.30 Strength 3.31 Mechanism Conveyor and brush 5.18.2 Cut-off 5.11 Distributing 5.14 Endless chain 5.18.3 Feed 5.18 Agitator 5.18.1 Metering 5.32 Plate 5.32.10 Roller 5.18.6 Studded 5.32.13 Granule metering 10.25 Knock out 5.32.8 Levelling Control 4.1.1.3 (n) Picker wheel 5.32.9 Plate and flicker 5.18.4 Quick release 9.64 Reciprocating plate 5.18.5 Seed tape 5.32.11 Star wheel 5.18.7 Mechanized 7.61.5 Methods, Irrigation 7.51 Millet thresher 11.65 Mixture, spray 10.63 Mobile thresher 11.66 Modulate 13.105 Moisture Capilary 7.9 soil 7.12 Content 13.106

81

SP : 44-1989
Moisture-Contd Content-Contd Equilibrium 13.66 Density 7.55 Penetration 7.56 Percentage 7.57 Tension 7.58 Mouldboard 4.1.1.3 (a) (11) Breaker 4.1.1.3 (aj (II) (v) General purpose 4.1.1.3 (a) (11) (ii) plough 4.1.1.1 (g) Rod 4.1.1.3 (a) (II) (iii) Shin of 4.1.1.3 (a) (II) (i) Slat 4.1.1.3 (a) (II) (iv) Sod 4.1.1.3 (a) (II) (v) Solid 4.1.1.3!(a) (II) (vi) Stubble 4.1.1.3 (a) (11) (vii) Mounted 1.15 Semi 1.28 Mower 11.67 Animal-drawn 11.67.1 Attachment 8.20.18 Cylinder 820.9 Flail 820.14 Gang 11.67.4 Horizontal rotary I I .67.5 Lawn 8.20 Power 8.20.21 Mulching 8.20.19 Pedestrian-controlled 8.20.20 Power-operated 1I .67.6 Reciprocating 11.67.7 Sickle bar 820.25 Muffler silence 9.55 Mulch tillage 3.35 Mulcher, Weeder 4.3.6 Mulching 9.56 N *" Net traction 2.10.15 Nip, Angle of 13.5 Nose guard 9.57 Notched wheel tuber planter 5.35.3.3 (c) Nozzle Adjustable spray 1064.1 Bar 10.33 Boss 10.34 cone 1064.2 hollow 1064.6 solid 1064.12 Deflector 1064.3 Directional 1064.4 Dust 10.19 Fan 1064.5 Granule 10.26 Hydraulic spray 1064.7 Impinging stream 1064.8 Pneumatic spray 1064.9 Shut-off 1064.11 Slit 10.64.10 Spacing 10.36
Nozzle-Contd Piston displacement 10.39 Pitch Grouser 2.9.5 Lug 2.7.10 Track 2.9.7 Pitman 11.78 Planter 5.35 Maize 5.35.1 Sugarcane 5.352 Tuber 5.35.3 automatic 5.35.3. I combine 5.35.3.2 hand feed 5.35.3.3 Planting No tillage 5.33 Ridge 5.39 Plate Chamber 13.26 Feed mechanism 5.32.10 Hummler Il.50 Ledger 11.62 Swirl 10.359 back 10.35.7 Wearing Il.124 Plate and Flicker Distributor 5.21.8 Mechanism 5.18.4 Plemum 13.112 Plough 4. I. I Alternate 4.1.1.1 (1) Balance 4.1.1.1 (2) Bottom 4.1.1.3 [a) Chisel 4.1.1.1 (3) Disc 4.1.1.1 (4) vertical 4.1.1.1 (19) Framed 4.1.1.1 (4) (i) Gallows 4.1.1.1 (4) (ii) Gang 4.1.1.1 (5) Lister 4.1.1.1 (6) Mouldboard 4.1.1.1 (7) Off-set 4.1.1.1 (8) Reversible 4.1.1.1 (II) Riding 4.1.1.1 (II) (v) Rotary 4.1.1.1 (12) Rotating auger 4.1.1.1 (13) Stubble 4.1.1.1 ( 14) Stump jump 4.1.1.1 (IS) Sulky 4.1.1.1 (17) Tripbeam 4.1.1.1 (18) Vineyard 4.1.1.1 (20) Walking 4.1.1.1 (21) Winch 4.1.1.1 (22) Wooden 4.1.1.1 (23) Ploughing 3.39 Contour 3.39. I Normal 3.39.2 Pneumatic Agitation 10.1.3 Agitator 10.2.3 Distributor 5.21.9 Drill feed 5.44.9 spacing 5.44.8 Duster 10.16.3

Spray IO.64 Turbulance 10.64.l3 Nut, Sleeve 13.155
0

Off-set Disc harrow 4.3.2.2 (a) ( I ) Plough 4.1.1.1 (viii) Oil Pump adjuster, Chain 9.9 Oiler, Manual 9.54 Olpad thresher I I.69 Opening, Discharge 8.20.12 Operational mass of Power tiller 2.4.3 Tractor 2.4.4 Operator I. 16 Handbook 1.17 Oscillating spout distributor 5.21.7 Outlet, Power 2.5.5 output Air 10.6 Liquid 10.29 Power 2.10.7 Pump 10.45
P

Packer, land 4.3.4.9 Pad, hip 9.44 Parking braking device 12.1I Paddy Cleaner 13.107 Dehusker 13.108 Separator 13.109 Compartment type 13.109.I Tray-type 13.109.2 Thresher I I .73 Pedal operated I I .74 Pan, tailing Il.1 19 Parboiling 13.110 Parts catalogue 1.18 Patela 4.3.3 Pay load 12.12 Peeling 13.111 Penetration, Moisture 7.56 Permanent 7.61.6 POW&I 6.10 Pick-up Attachment 11.75 width 11.76 Baler 11.77 Hitch 2.2.18 Picker wheel mechanism 5.32.9 Piece, tail 4.1.1.3 (a) (5) Knife 4.1.1.3 (a) (6) Piling 9.59 Pin Lich 2.2.33.4 hole distance 2.2.33.5 Upper hitch 2.2.33.20 link 2.2.33.23 Pipe, overflow 10.37

82

-

SP : 44-1989
Pneumatic-Contd Dusting 10.i8.3 Spray nozzle 10.64.9 Sprayer 10.56.7 Spraying 10.57.3 Tyred wheel 2.2.19 Wheel vehicle 12.13 Point Cultivator 6.2 Hitch 2.2.33.1 Lower 2.2.33.8 Upper 2.2.33.21 Link 2.2.33.6 Lower 2.2.33.12 Upper 2.2.33.24 Share 4.1.1.3 (a) (12) (iii) Wilting 7.77 Pore ha1 4.1.1.1 (x) Polish, Degree of 13.50 . Polisher Abrasive cone 13.132.1 horizontal 13.132.2 Friction 13.77 Metallic 13.132.3 Rice 13.132 Polishing 13.114 Potato Diggei elevator 11.81 shaker i 1.80 Grader 13.115 Harvestor 11.82 Plough 11.83 Sorter reciprocating 13.126 rotary 13.135 Spinner I 1.84 Power Belt pulley 2.5.1 Centre of 4.1.1.3 (t) Drawbar 2.5.2 Engine 2.5.3 Harrow, reciprocating 4.3.2.4 Input 2.10.6 connection 2.6.3 shield 2.6.4 yoke boss 2.6.5 Lift 2.2.20 hydraulic 2.2.16 Operated 1.20 Outlet 2.5.5 output Range 2.2.33.16 Take-off 2.2.2. I cover 2.2.2.2 drive shaft 2.6.7 guard 2.6.8 driven I .2I power 2.5.6 shield 2.2.23 yoke boss 2.6.9 Thresher II,85 Tiller 2.1.2 dry mass of 2.4.1 ground clearance of 2.3.1.1 height of 2.3.2.1 operational mass 2.4.3 track of 2.3.6.1 transmission Shaft 9.60 PreGleaner 13.117 Pressing worm 13.121 Pressure Bar 5.36 Chamber 10.41 Head, capillary 7.11 Inflation 2.7.3 Pulsation damper 10.42 Regulator I3. I I8, 10.43 Relief valve 13.119, 10.47 System 13.I20 Preventilation 13.122 Press wheel 5.37 Primer 9.6 I Processing Grain 13.84 Residue 3.45 Seed 13.141 Processor 9.62 Pruner, tree 8.27 Pruning 9.63 Knife 8.23 Saw 8.24 Puddler 4.2.7 Plank 4.2.7. I Rotary 4.2.7.2 Puddling 3.41 Pull 1.24 Line of 4.1.1.3 (w) Maximum drawbar 2.5.4 Pulverization 3.42 Pulverizing roller 4.3.4.10 Pump Centrifugal 10.44.1 Diaphragm 10.44.2 Gear 10.44.3 output 10.45 Peristaltic 10.44.4 Piston 10.44.5 Roller 10.44.7 Vane 10.44.7 Volumetric 10.44.8 Rake Dump Il.25 Garden 8.11 Hay 11.46 Ram, Hydraulic 7.43 Rasp bar cylinder type thresher 11.85.7 Ratio Traction dynamic 2.10. I6 gross 2.10.7 Transpiration 7.67 Travel 2.10.18 Reach 11.353 Reaction, Soil 3.63 Reaper 11.86 binder 11.87 Side delivery Il.95 Reaping attachment 11.88 Reel 11.90 Registration, Knife 11.59 Residue 3.44 Processing 3.45 Resources, Water 7.75 Returns 11.9 I Ride on machine 8.20.22 Ridge Fertilizer attachment 5.38 Planting 5.39 Ridger 4.2.8 Rigid tine 6.3.1 Ridging 3.46 Riding plough 4.1. I. I ( I 1) (v) Rim sprocket 9.67 Rod mouldboard 4.1.1.3 (a) (11) (iii) Roll, weeding 6.7.3 Roller Cage 4.3.4.1 feed fertilizer distributor 5.2 I. 11 fluted 5.32.6 mechanism 5.18.6 Cambridge 4.3.4.2 Continental 4.3.4.4 Coil 4.3.4.3 Corrugated 4.3.4.5 Cross-kill 4.3.4.6 Flat 4.3.4.7 Harrow 4.3.2.5 (d) Pulverizing 4.3.4.10 Pump 10.44.6 Ridge 4.3.4.11 Spaced ritig 4.3.4.12 Root Bed 3.47 Zone 3.48 Rotary Cultivator 6. I .2 Harrow 4.3.2.5 Hoe 6.4.2 Plough 4.1.1.1 (m) Tillage 3.49 Weeder 6.8

Q
Quick Acting shut off valve 10.46 Release hydraulic coupling 2.2.24 mechanism 9.64 R Rack Straw 11.103 area 11.104 Raddle area, straw I I .I05

83

SP : 44-1989
Rotor, spreading 5.48 Row marker 5.40 Run, internal double 532.7 Runner, stub 5.255 Shaft-Coned Power take-off drive 2.6.7 transmission 9.60 Tube 9.73 Share 4.1.1.3 (a) (12) Bar point 4.1.1.3 (a) (12) (v) Point 4.1.1.3 (a) (12) (iii) Shin 4.1.1.3 (a) (12) (vi) Slip 4.1.1.3 (a) (12) (viii) nose 4.1.1.3 (a) (12) (vii) Straight 4.1.1.3 (a) (12) (ix) Wing of 4.1.1.3 (a) (12) (iv) Shank of coulter 4.1.1.3 (k) (3) Shear Block 3.53 Hedge 8.18 Lopping 8.21 Surface 3.54 primary 3.54.1 secondary 354.2 Shell 13.145 Sheller Maize 13.102 Rubber roll 13.136 Under-run disc 13.183 Shelling 13.146 Shield 8.20.24 Power input connection 2.6.4 Shin of mouldboard 4.1.1.3 (a) (11) (i) Shoe 11.97 Inner skid Il.51 wheel 1I .52 Main 11.63 Outer 11.70 skid 11.71 wheel 11.72 Type furrow opener 5.25.3 Shovel 6.2.1, 6.9 Shut-off Nozzle 10.64.I 1 Valve, Quick acting 10.46 Shutter 10.50 Sickle 11.94 Bar mower 8.20.25 Side Bar 13.147 Cap 4.1.1.3 (a) (7) Delivery reaper 11.95 Draft 1.30 Lug 2.7.11 Shaft 13.149 Stand 13.148 Sieve Aspirator 13.150 Cleaning 11.7 Separator 13.151 Sieving 11.96 Sifting 13.152 Sight, felling 9.31 Silencer, muffler 9.55 Single Aspirating separator 13.153 Wheel power tiller 2. I .2.5 (a) Size, droplet 10.15 Skelton wheel 2.2.27 Skid ring 2.2.28 Skidder 9.74 Cable 9.5 Clamp bunk 9.15 Feller 9.29 Grapple 9.38 Skidding 9.75 Slade 4.1.1.3 (a) (8) Slasher 9.76 Slashing 9.77 Slat mouldboard 4.1.1.3 (a) (11) (iv) Sleeve 13.154 Nut 13.155 Slice, Furrow 3.21.2 Sliding 9.78 Slip 2.10.11 Slit nozzle 10.64.10 Soaking 13.157 Sod mouldboard 4.1.1.3 (a) (12) (v) Soil Abrasion 3.55 Additives 3.56 Adhesion 3.57 Bodies, adhered 3.1 Compaction 3.58 Cone 3.1.1 Cultivation 3.59 Cutting 3.60 Failure 3.61 Heaving 3.62 Injector 10.51 Moisture, Capillary 7.12 Reaction 3.63 Scoop 4.2.9 Shatter 3.64 Sheet 3.1.2 Slicing 3.65 Surgeon 4.3.5 Wedge 3.1.3 Working surface 1.3 1 Sole, furrow 3.21.3 Solid Cone nozzle 1064.12 Mineral fertilizer application equipment 5.46 Mouldboard 4.1.1.3 (a) (11) (vi) Set 7.61.10

s
Safe control, Fail 13.70 Safety Device 8.20.23 Hitch 4.1.1.3 (c) Valve IO.48 Saw Blade 9.68 cover 9.69 guard 9.70 Chain 9.71 Pruning 8.24 Scalping 13.137 Scarification 13.138 Scarifying 9.72 Scouring 3.50 Scraper 4.1.1.2 (e) Screen 13.139 Revolving 13.129 Screening 11.92 Screw conveyor 13.140 Secateur 8.25 Seed Boradcasting machine 5.42 Dresser 10.49 Drill 5.44 Fertilizer drill 5.44.14 Processing 13.141 Tape mechanism 5.32.11 Treating 13.142 Tube 5.45 Seeder 5.43 Seeding attachment 5.41 Separator Cyclone 13.46 Double aspirating 13.57 Grain 13.85 Magnetic 13.103 Paddy 13.109 compartment-type 13.109.1 tray-type 13.109.2 Single aspirating 13.153 Separating I 1.93 Service Braking device 12.15 Manual 1.29 Set, Cage bar 13.19 Shaft 13.143 Clutch 13.144 Cone driving 13.34 Female 2.6.1 yoke 2.62 Length closed 2.6.10 extended 2.6.11 Male 2.6.1 yoke 2.6.2

Rotary 13.135 Sorting 9.79, 13.156 Sowing 5.47 Soyabean thresher 1I .98

84

SP : 44-1989
Space, Spaced Spacers Spacing Collar Disc Drill void 13.187 ring roller 4.3.4.12 13.158 13.159 4.3.2.2 (c) 5.44.15 Spraying-Contd Pneumatic 10.57.3 strip 10.68 Thermal 1057.4 Spreader Beater type 5.16.1 Farmyard manure 5.16 Field heap 5.16.2 Lime 5.29 Liquid manure 5.16.3 Spreading rotor 5.48 Spring Tine 6.3.3 loaded 6.3.2 Tooth harrow 4.3.2.7 Sprocket, Rim 9.67 Spur sprocket 9.82 Stability, Mechanical 3.30 Standard 4.1.1.3 (a) (9) Tractor 2.1.1.3 (c) with four-wheel drive 2.1.1.3
(c)

Strip Spraying 10.68 Tillage 3.66 Stroke, Knife 11.61 Structure, Control 7.24 Stub runner 5.25.5 Stubble Mouldboard 4.1.1.3 (a) (vii) Plough 4.1.1.1 (xiv) (11)

(2)

perforated belt 544.16 Grouser 2.9.5 Nozzle 10.36 Spade 6.10 Lug 2.2.29 Spark arrestor 2.2.30 Speed Adjuster, idle 9.45 Governor, Variable 2.2.35 Maximum travel 2.8. I Rated engine 1.25 Theoretical travel 2.8.2 Spike tooth Cylinder type thresher 11.85.8 Harrow 4.3.2.6 Spiked bumper 9.8~ Spinner, potato 11.84 Splitting 9.81 Spray Air assisted 10.52.1 Angle 10.53 nominal IO.31 Area 10154 Coarse 10.72.2 Conical 10.52.2 Fine 10.72.3 Flat 10.52.3 Gun IO.58 Hydraulic pressure 10.52.4 Lance 10.59 boom 10.60 extension 10.61 Leg IO.62 Mixture IO.63 Nozzle 10.64 adjustable 10.64.1 hydraulic 10.64.7 pneumatic 1064.9 Rate 10.65 Solid stream 10.52.5 Tank 10.66 Volume 10.67 Sprayer IO.56 Centrifugal 10.56.3 air-assisted 10.56. I Compression 10.56.4 Hydraulic 10.56.5 air-assisted 10.56.2 Knapsack 10.56.6 Pneumatic 10.56.7 Thermal 10.56.8 Spraying IO.57 Centrifugal 10.57. I Hydraulic 10.57.2 -

(c) (I) rear-wheel drive 2.1.1.3 Stacking 9.83 Stalk puller, Cotton Il. 16 Star wheel Distributor 5.20.13 Mechanism 5.18.7 Static Pressure 13.163 Weight 2.10.21 Stationary Coulter 4.1.1.3 (k) (I) Thresher I 1.100 Steady state 13.164 Steel Huller 13.165 Wheel 2.2.31 Steeping 13.166 Steerage I .33 Stepped grain bed Il.101 Stone trap 11.102 Stage, cooling 13.39 Strainer 10.35.6 Suction 10.69 Tank filling 10.70 Strakes 2.2.32 Straw Rack 11.103 area I I. 104 Raddle area 1I. 105 Spreader-cum-cutter Walker I 1.107 area 11.108 Stream Irrigation 7.52 Nozzle, impinging Strength Bulk 3.31.1 Clod 3.31.2 Mechanical 3.3

(2)

Stud, grass 2.2.14 Studded Cylinder distributor 5.21.14 Roller drill 5.44.17 feed mechanism 5.32.13 Stump Jump plough 4.1.1.1 (15) Lowering 9.84 Sub Irrigation 7.62 Soiler 4.1.1.1 (16) Soiling 3.67 Suction Head, total 7.66 System 13.167 Sugarbeet Harvestor I I. 109 Lifter 11.110 Sugarcane Crusher 13.168 horizontal 13.168.1 vertical 13.168.2 Harvesting knife I 1.I 11 Planter 5.35.2 Stripper 11.112 Sulky Plough 4.1.1.1 (17) Type unit 8.20.26 Sump, tank 10.71 Supplier I .34 Surface Irrigation 7.64 Water 7.65 Suspension eyelet 9.85 Swath 11.113 Board II.115 Inner 1I .53 Swathing attachment 1 I. I 14 Sweep 6.2.2 Swing Over handle 8.20.27 Plough 4.1.1.1 (17) (I) Swirl Chamber 10.35.8 Plate 10.35.9 back 10.35.7 Switch Ignition 9.46 On-off 9.58 Syndicator type

Il. 106

10.64.8

I

thresher

I 1.85.9

85

SP : 44-1989
System Farm Field 7.61.2 7.61.3 irrigation 7.61.7 7.59 Thrust Tie rod 2. IO. I2 13.176 13.177 3.69 3.7 3.70 Traction-Confd Net 2.10.15 Ratio dynamic Tractivc Tractor 3.13 Agricultural Ground Height 3.33 combined 3.36 3.37 3.40 3.43 3.49 3.5 I 2. I .2 2.3. I. I l-railed Ifrailer Agricultural Balanced Braking Fixed Semi drying (f) 12. I 12.7 device platform 12.14 platform grate 8.20.31 2.2.33. I7 I I.102 weir 7.68 5.49 " 12. I6 I I. 123 12.18 12.8 3. I I Hill 2. I, I of 2.3.1.2 clearance of 2.3.2.2 2. IO.16 2.10.4 gross 2. IO. I7

Bearing `Tillability Tillage Action

Rotation Side

Self-propelled Sprinkler Towed 7.61 7.61.11

roll 7.61.9

I
3.7

efficiency

Broadcast Deep 7 Depth Mulch 3.14 3.72 3.35

Conventional

Minimum Tailing Auger I I.1 I6 Board It.117 Elevator II.118 Tale piece 4.1.1.3 4.1.1.3 (a) Knife Tandem Operation. Optimum

side 2.1.1.3

(a)
2.4.2

Mass of ballasted Operated I .37 combine Operational Standard Track track Tricycle 11.9.2

. (a) (5)
(6) 4.3.2.2

Oriented Primary Reduced

mass 2.4.4 2.1.1.3

(c)

laying 2. I. I .2 2.3.6.2 2.1.1.3 2. (d) 2. I. I .3

disc harrow

(a)

Rotary

semi 2.1.1.1

(2)
Tank Filling Grain Spray Sump Tape, Taper Bar 13.170 13.171 Collar strainer I I .38 10.66 10.71 8.4 IO.70

Secondary Strip 3.66 Tiller. Dry power

Wasp-wasted Wheeled track I .3.8

( e)

mass of 2.4.1 clearance of 2.3.2.1 mass of 2.4.3 laying 2. I .2.4

I. I .3

Ground Height Track

2.3.6.3

Budding

Operational

Track of 2.3.6.1 Wheeled 2. I .2.5 Tilling type 2. I .2.3 Tilt angle 4.1.1.2 Time 13.56 Maximum 13.104 drying one-half Traverse Tine 9. I I 2.2.33 cultivator Cultivator Rigid Spring Tip Tool 2.2.33. I8 13. I74 6.3. I 6.3.3 6.3.2 6.1.3 6.3 13.178 response 13. I8 I 13.179

Lug 2.7.14 Temperature Ambient Discharge Drying Heated Rise Tension Adjuster, Moisture Three-point Check Stabilizer Chain 7.58 linkage 2.2.33.19 Tempering air air 13.3 grain 13.61 13.91

Tripping Transition Transport Position Height Trap, Trapezoidal Transplanter Clamp Stone

permissible

13.173 13.173

type 5.49. I with disc 5.49.2. tipping share 5.49.3 Flexible disc 5.49.4 Transfer, weight 9.1 power 9.60 5.50 2.10.22 2. I. I .3 Transmission Angle Shaft, Travel

chain

loaded 1.36

10.35. IO Self-propelled Input 2. IO. I3

Thickness grader Thresher I I. 120 Chute fed I I .8 Combine Conveyor Millet Mobile Olpad Paddy pedal Power

Carrier, I I.9 (b) Torque, Tow Towed Unit Track

harvester fed I I .66

11.85.2

I I .65 I I .69

eye 12.17 8.2029 7.61. I I 2.2.34

Transplanting Ratio Speed maximum 2.10.18

I I .73
operated I I .85 type 11.85.7 I I .74

System Laying

Reduction

2. IO. I9 2.8. I 2.8.2 13.109.2

Rasp bar cylinder Soyabean I I .98 Spike type tooth

combine tractor

I I .9. I .2
2.1.1.2 Tray

theoretical 13.180

cylinder I I. 100 type I I .85.9

semi 2 1.1.1 Pitch 2.9.7 Width Traction Coefficient Device of 2.10.2 vehicle 2.10.3 2. IO. I4 8.20.30 2.9.8

I I .85.8

Type paddy separator Tread width 2.7.17 Treating, Tree Trenching Triangular Trickle Trigger, seed 13.142 8.27 weir 7.69 7.70 9.87 throttle hoe 8.28 pruner

Stationary Syndicator Wheat Threshing Throat Clearance

I I.125 I I.121 4.1.1.1 (3) 13.175

irrigation

Drive

86

SP : 44-1989
Width--Conld Lug 2.7.15 Pick-up attachment

Trimmer. lawn 8.20.17 Trip beam plough 4.1.1.1 Trowel Garden 8.12 Transplanting 8.26 Tube, Shaft 9.73 Tunnel dryer 13.58. I I Turbulance nozzle 10.64. Turning 13.182 Tyred wheel, pneumatic

(xviii)

Water Application efficiency 7.73 Confined 7. I6 Divers/on duty of 7.33 Level 7.74 Resources 7.75 Surrace 7.65 Table 7.76 Unavailable 7.71 Watering can 8.29 Wearing plate I I. 124 Wedge. Soil 3.1.3 Weeder Mulcher 4.3.6 Paddy 6.7 Rotary 6.8 Weeding 3.74 Roll 6.7.3 Weight Dynamic 2.10.20

Il.76

I3
2.2. I9

Track 2.9.8 Trackchain on ground I I. 128 Tread 2.7. I7 Wilting point 7.77 Winch plough 4.1.1.1 (22) Wind deflector I I. 129 Windrow 1I.131 Windrower II.131 Windrowing attachment II.132 Wing Bearing 4.1.1.3 (a) (4) Share 4.1.1.3 (a) (12) (iv) Winnower I I.133 Winnowing I I. 134 Fan II.135 manually operated I I. 135. power operated I 1.135.2 Wire, check 5.7 Wobble 4.1.1.2 (g) Wooden Plough 4.1.1.1 (23) Wheel vehicle 12.20 Worm 13.188 Assembly 13.189 Pressing 13. I21 Quick Wheel 13.190 assembly 13.191 Wrap-round handle 9.91

u Ultra 10.67.5 Ultra low volume 10.67.4 Undertread face 2.7.18 Unit Draft 1.39 Heat air 13.89 Universal joint 2.6.12 Uprooting 9.90 Use, consumptive 7. I7 User 1.40

I

v
Valve Decompression 9.25 Excess flow 13.69 Foot 7.39 Multi outlet control

10.30

Non-return 10.32 Pressure relief 13.119 Quick acting 13.123 Vane pump 10.44.7 Vaporizer 13.184 Burner 13.185 Vehicle Animal-drawn 12.5 Pneumatic wheel 12. I3 Traction, coefficient of 2.10.3 Wooden wheel 12.20 Velocity of air flow 13.186 Vineyard plough 4.1.1.1 (xx) Volume, Medium 10.67.3 Volumetric Efficiency 10.73 Pump 10.44.8 W Walker, Straw 11.107 Area II.108 Wall, furrow 3.21.4 Wasp-waisted tractor 2. I. I .3 ( e)

Static 2.10.21 Transfer 2.10.22 Weir Trapezoidal 7.68 Triangular 7.69 Wheat thresher I I. I25 Wheel Base 2.3.7 Cage 2.2.3 full 2.2.4 half 2.2.5 Cleated 2.2.7 Furrow front 4.1.1.3 (g) rear 4.1.1.3 (j) Gauge 4.1.1.3 (d) Hoe 6.4.3 Inner shoe 11.52 Land 4.1.1.3 (h) Pneumatic tyred 2.2.19 Skeleton 2.2.27 Steel 2.2.31 Track 11.127 Vehicle, wooden 12.20 Wheeled tractor 2.1.1.3 Width 2.3.8 Combine 11.13 Concave 11.14.7 Cutter bar effective 11.17.1 working 11.17.4 Gathering 11.32 Grouser 2.9.4 Header 1 I .48 maize, effective 1 I .64

Y Yarder 9.92 Yarding 9.93 Yoke Journal assembly 2.6. I3 Power input connection 2.6.6 boss 2.6.5 Power-take-off 2.6.6 boss 2.6.9 Shaft female 2.6.2 male 2.6.2 Z Zone Capillary 7.13 Cooling 13.40 Drying 13.64 Drying of aeration 7.78 Drying of saturation 7.79 Root 3.48

