IS 15142:2002

VRmwm m @i * Wm-fa a w-l-fad

faw'lc a

*mmi-vT"

a

faa-a

&

W-wVJir " *

WdPl

Wid2icM

Indian Standard GUIDE TO THE USE OF ELECTRICAL APPARATUS FOR POTENTIALLY EXPLOSIVE ATMOSPHERES IN THE PRESENCE OF COMBUSTIBLE DUST

ICS 29.260.20

Q BIS 2002

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

Sep~ember 2002

Price Group

4

Electrical Apparatus for Explosive Atmosphere Sectional Committee, ET 22

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the drafi finalized by the Electrical Apparatus for Explosive Atmosphere Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council. This standard gives guidance on the use of electrical apparatus and systems complying with the requirements for electrical apparatus' to be used in explosive gas atmospheres under conditions when the hazard will be from combustible dust. While preparing this standard, assistance has been derived from British Standard BS 7535:1992 `Guide to the use of electrical apparatus' complying with BS 5501 or BS 6941 in the presence of combustible dust. For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2: 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)'. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

Is 15142:2002

Indian Standard GUIDE TO THE USE OF ELECTRICAL APPARATUS FOR POTENTIALLY EXPLOSIVE ATMOSPHERES IN THE PRESENCE OF COMBUSTIBLE DUST
1 SCOPE
1.1 This standard gives guidance on using electrical apparatus and systems complying with the requirements of Indian Standards for electrical apparatus to be used in explosive gas atmospheres under conditions when the hazard will be from combustible dust. The guidance covers selection, installation and maintenance.

This standard is based upon the use of apparatus and systems specified in IS 2148, IS 5780, IS 6381, IS 7389 (Part 1) and IS 8289 without modification. This is so that any claim for compliance of the appatatus or systems with those standards will not be invalidated and so that the apparatus or systems remain suitable for use, as originally intended in an explosive gas atmosphere. Not all such apparatus and systems will be suitable for use according to the recommendations of this standard. The guidance in this standard takes as a criterion of acceptability that the electrical apparatus is able to operate safely under a dust Iayer on the external surface of the enclosure having a maximum thickness of 5 mm, which is the thickness used in the measurement of the ignition temperature of dust layers. This standard does not apply to the use of electrical apparatus in dust from materials regarded as explosives, nor does it take into account any risk resulting fkomthe emission of flammable gas or vapour from the dust. It does not apply to electrical apparatus and systems intended for or used in mines susceptible to firedamp (Group 1 apparatus). This standard gives guidance on the application of apparatus constructed for use in explosive gas atmospheres and complying with IS 2148, IS 5780, IS 6381, IS 7389 (Part 1) and IS 8289, in situations where the hazard is only from the presence of combustible dusts. It does not give guidance on the use of electrical apparatus in atmospheres that may simultaneously contain explosive gas and combustible dust.
1.2 The guidance in this standard has been prepared to be as widely applied as possible without requiring modification of apparatus or systems which are likely

to have been certified and without detailed assessment of the apparatus or system being required from the user. There may be particular circumstances in which the recommendations are felt to be too restrictive and suitably experienced and qualified persons may make an assessment of the circumstances and then decide either not to apply or else to modify the recommendations taking responsibility for maintaining an adequate level of safety. In such cases, the guidance in this standard should be followed as for as is practicable. Exceptionally the user may decide that a modification should be made, for example, to improve the degree of protection by enclosure. As this would invalidate the original claim for compliance and any certificate, the marking of the apparatus or systems and any documentation should be changed so that there can be no fhture misunderstanding. 2 REFERENCES 2.1 The Indian Standards listed in Annex A are necessary adjuncts to this standard. 3 DEFINITIONS 3.0 For the purposes of this standard, the following definitions shall apply. 3.1 Rating The designed performance of an electrical apparatus. 3.2 Degree of Protection of Enclosure The measures applied to the enclosures of electrical apparatus to ensure the following: `a) protection of persons against contact with live or moving parts inside the enclosure and protection of the apparatus against ingress of solid foreign bodies. b) protection of apparatus against ingress of liquids. NOTE --Theenclosure togivethe`degree ofprotection' isnot necessarily identical totheapparatus enelosure for`typeofpToteetion' andwillbedefined bythemanufacturer.
3.3 Terminal Compartment

A separate compartment or part of a main enclosure, 1

IS 15142:2002 communicating or not with the main enclosure, and containing connection facilities. 3.4 Connection Facilities Terminals, screws and other parts, used for the electrical connection of conductors of external circuits.
3.5 Maximum Surface Temperature 3.11 Non-Hazardous Area (Dust)

Area in which combustible dust-air mixtures are not expected to be present so that special precaution for the construction and use of electical apparatus are not required.
3.12 Source of Release (Dust)

The highest temperature which is attained in service under the most unfavorable conditions (but within the tolerances) by any part or surface of an electrical apparatus, which is able to produce an ignition of the surrounding atmosphere.
NOTES 1 Since this definition is from IS 5571, `surroundingatmosphere' should be understoodas `surroundingexplosive gas atmosphere'. The `part' or `surface' may therefore be inside or on the outside for any enclosure of the apparatus depending on the type of protection. 2 The most unfavorable conditionsincluderecognizedoverloads and fault conditions specified in the standard for the type of protectionconcerned.

Place from which combustible dust may be released into the atmosphere,
3.13 Maximum Enclosure Surface Temperature of the

Highest temperature that is attained under the most adverse electrical conditions (but within the specified tolerances) by any part of the external surface of the enclosure of an electrical apparatus that would be able to produce an ignition of the surrounding atmosphere.
3.14 Ignition Temperature of a Dust Layer/Cloud

3.6 Dust Small solid particles that settle out under their own weight but that may remain suspended for some time. 3.7 Combustible Dust Dust that is combustible or ignitable in mixtures with air.
NOTES 1 Most combustible dusts form explosive mixtures with air only between certain concentration limits. 2 Although a mixturewhich is abovethe upperconcentrationlimit is not an explosive mixture, it can become so by dilution. 3 Combustible dusts are capable of being ignitedby externalignition sources and will continue to burn at atmosphere temperatures but they will only spontaneously ignite above a certaintemperature,

Lowest temperature at which ignition occurs under defined test conditions of a combustible dust Iayed cloud.
3.15 Area Classification (Dust)

National division of works, plant or installation (hereinafter referred to as plant) into zones in accordance with the likelihood of the existence of a hazardous area (dust) for the purpose of selection, installation and maintenance of electrical apparatus.
3.16 Extent of Zone

Distance in any direction from a source of release to the point where the hazard associated with that zone is considered no longer to exist.
3.17 Zone 21

3.8 Free Dust Apparatus that can either be moved while in operation or that can easily be moved from one tiace to another ready for use, while connected to the supply.
3.9 Hazard (Dust)

Area in which combustible dust, is, or may be, present as a cloud during normal processing, handling or cleaning operations in suftlcient quantity to be capable of producing an explosive concentration of combustible or ignitable dust in a mixture with air.
NOTE -- Zone 21 is an area outside the dust containment.

3.18 Zone 22

Presence, or risk of the presence, of a combustible mixture of dust and air, 3.10 Non-Hazardous
Area (Dust)

Area not classified as Zone 21, in which accumulations or layers or combustible or ignitable dust may be present under abnormal conditions and give rise to ignitable mixtures of dust and air.
NOTE -- Zone 22 is an area outside the dust containment.

Area in which combustible mixtures of dust, in close or layer form, and air are, or may be expected to be, present in quantities such as to require special precautions for the construction and use of electrical apparatus.
2

3.19 Dust Containment

Those parts of the process equipment inside which dust is handled, processed, transported or stored.

IS 15142:2002 3.20 Conductive Dust A dust with electrical resistivity equal to or less than 103Q cm. 4 CLASSIFICATION OF HAZARDOUS AREAS consideration of matters such as those listed in 6.2 to 6.6 which might have implications for the electrical apparatus and which should be taken into account by the plant designer and operator. 6.2 Toxic Risks Even though there may be no ignition risk, there maybe toxic risks associated with combustible, or other, dusts particularlywhere these are deposited on heated surfaces. 6.3 Fire Risks Attentions should be given to the installation of apparatus, particularly to any guards or covers, including those intended to reduce the deposition of combustible dust on electrical apparatus, to avoid thereby an increasing fue risk. 6.4 Static Electricity Reference is made to electrostaticcharges on enclosures of electrical apparatus. Attention also needs to be given to the avoidance of electrostatic charges on other parts of that plant. It is recommended that reference be made to IS 7689. 6.5 Lightning and Electromagnetic
Radiation

This standard adopts the concept, which is internationally agreed for flammable gases and vapours, of using an area classification (see 3. 15) to denote the risk of tire andfor explosion. As the hazard from combustible dusts, unlike that from flammable gases and vapours, will not necessarily be removed by ventilation or diffusion after the release has stopped, a common classification is not practicable. Indeed, in the case of combustible dusts, accelerated ventilation may, by the creation of dust clouds, give a greate] rather than less hazardous condition. Furthermore, the formation of dust layers may be cumulative, thus increasing the hazard unless the dust is physically removed. The definitions of Zones21 and 22 are given in 3.17 and 3.18 respectively, this classification relying on an assessment of the likelihood of the existence of a hazardous area (dust). The situation where there could be the simultaneous presence of combustible dust and of flammable gas or vapour is not directly considered and it is recommended that such situations should be the subject of individual assessments based on the recommendations of this standard and of IS 5572. In classifying a hazardous area, account should not be taken of catastrophic failures, whether of electrical apparatus producing a source of ignition or of for example, process equipment and pipelines which by fracture, could beoome sources of release. Such catastrophic failures would be assumed to be of low probability in plants designed, constru~ted, tested, inspected and maintained in accordance wib accepted standards and codes of practice. By implication, an area outside the dust containment that is not classified as Zone 21 or Zone 22 is deemed to be a non-hazardous area for the purposes of this standard. 5 PROPERTIES OF COMBUSTIBLE [flee IS 14154 (Part 2)]
6 OTHER HAZARDS 6.1 General

Although outside the scope of this standard, it should not be forgotten that combustible dust under certain circumstances, may be ignited by lightning and electromagnetic radiation and the implications for the electrical installation should be borne in mind. It is recommended that reference be made to IS 2309. 6.6 Miscellaneous Ignition Sources In any plant, irrespective of size, there are likely to be source of ignition other than those represented by electrical apparatus. The possible implications of these should be taken into account when installing electrical apparatus.
7 PRINCIPLES FOR SELECTION OF APPARATUS AND SYSTEM

7.1 General DUSTS The selection of electrical apparatus complying with IS 2148, IS 5780, IS 6381, IS 7389 (Part 1) and IS 8289 for use in any specific application in areas where a combustible dust hazard may be present, should be taken into account of all of the following: a) b) c) d) e) 3 the construction and design of the apparatus; the maximum surface temperature; the area classification; the concepts of protection of the apparatus and systems; and the degree of ingress protection provided by the enclosure of the apparatus.

This standard is concerned specifically with the ignition risks associated with apparatus complying with IS 2148, IS 5780, IS 6381, IS 7389 (Part 1) and IS 8289 when used in a hazardous area. There are other hazards that exist in plants where such apparatus is used and the assessment of the risk, which is not within the scope of this standard, will involve

IS 15142:2002
7.2 Selection According to Apparatus Construction Table 1 1P Rating Requirements and Impact Strength of Apparatus Complying with IS 2148, IS 6381, IS 7389 (Part 1) and IS 8289 [Clause 7.2(b)l

For any specific application consideration should be given to the design and construction of the apparatus, and particularly to its enclosure, taking into account the points discussed in (a) to (Q as follows: a)
Dust Layer Thickness -- The thickness of any

IS No.

Types
of Protection

Solid

Liquid

layer of deposited dust on the external surface of the enclosure should be as small as possible and should not exceed 5 mm. In any specific application, the extent to which dust will accumulate on the enclosure will depend upon a number of factors, such as the design of the enclosure and of the apparatus; the ventilation natural or artificial; the proximity of the apparatus to other objects; the ease of cleaning, by manual or other means; the presence of attractive forces, magnetic or electrostatic [see (c) and (d)]. In some cases, the accumulation of dust in unacceptable thicknesses may be: 1) avoided by the choice of attitude for the apparatus, for example by mounting it so that large flat surfaces are not horizontal; or 2) hindered, for example by using protective guards, although it should be remembered that these may also make cleaning more difficult and/or the presence of dust more difficult to discern. Degree of protection of enclosure (see Table 1). In Zone 21 or where the dust is electrically conductive, apparatus having a degree of protection by enclosure 1P 6X should be used. In Zone 21 apparatus having enclosures providing a degree of protection of at least 1P 5X and without permanently open breathing and draining devices may be used. The degree of protection by the enclosure should be inherent in the design of the enclosure. It is not recommended for the user or installer to achieve 1P 5X or 1P 6X for the purpose of dust ingress protection by the use of additional sealing measures, for example, adhesive or tape. This does not, however, preclude their application additionally by the user or installer for weatherproofing. c)
Magnetic Attraction -- If ferromagnetic dust

Ingress (First Characteristic Numeral) (3) 4 Not Scecitied 512 2/0 5/2

Ingress (First Characteristic
Numeral) (4) 0 Not Specified 4/0 0 4/0

Impact (J) Range 7/1(High

RjskLow
Rkk) (5) 711 Ill 711 Not Specified 3.5/0.5

(1) 7389 (Psrt 1) 2148 6381 5780 8289

(2) `, P $. d `, e ,., 1 `> n

b)

d) Electrostatic Attraction -- When nonmetallic enclosures are used they may not have been designed and constructed to minimize the accumulation of electrostatic charges (see IS 2148) and may bear the warning label indicating the safety measures to be applied in service. It is important that the siting and installation of the apparatus does not encourage dust accumulation due to electrostatic attraction. -- Under e) Light Metal Construction conditions of frictional contact, the light metals, for example ahnniniurn, magnesium and titanium, and their alloys containing more than 50 percent light metal by atomic proportion, can give rise to incendive sparking. Conditions -- As the f) Environmental continued compliance of apparatus in accordance with IS 2148, IS 5780, IS 6381, IS 7389 (Part 1) and IS .8289 is often dependent on the continued integrity of its enclosure and/or the quality of its insulation, it is important that the selection process gives c~eful consideration to factors such as the risk of mechanical damage, chemical and solvent attack. Similarly other environmental factors which could affect the temperature classification, for example, the proximity of hot items of plant, solar gain and the presence of obstructions to cooling should be considered. 7.3 Selection According to Surface Temperature In selecting IS 2148, IS 5758, IS 6381, IS 7389 (Part 1) and IS 8289 apparatus, attention should be given to the fact that the marked temperature cIass may refer to a surface inside the enclosure. The degrees of protection by enclosure referred to in this standard are assumed to prevent the entry of dangerous 4

may be present, it is desirable that the apparatus should have the smallest possible external magnetic field and its enclosure should preferably be of non-magnetic material [see (d) and (e)].

IS 15142:2002

quantities of dust into the apparatus and the significant temperature is, therefore, taken to be that of an external surface on which dust may accumulate. Consequently the use of certain IS 2148, IS 5780, IS 6381, IS 7389 (Part 1) and IS 8289 apparatus with a given temperature classification is likely to give a safety margin. Alternatively the maximum surface temperature of the enclosure may be measured under the conditions specified in IS 2148, IS 5780, IS 6381, IS 7389 (Part 1) and IS 8289 as applicable and the apparatus selected on the basis of the measured value of temperature and the guidance in this clause. The temperature class of apparatus is determined in accordance with the results of temperature measurements made under normal operating conditions and with recognized overloads, if any. The validity of temperature classification may be dependent upon operation within recognized tolerances of supply voltage variation; in cases of doubt the apparatus manufacturer should be consulted. Generally, an ambient temperature of 40�C is assumed in the rating of electrical apparatus for use in hazardous areas. Higher temperatures in exceptional cases lower temperatures, may have been taken into account in determining the rating of apparatus. In that event, the value of the maximum ambient temperature should be clearly marked on the apparatus and/or stated on the certificate. It should be noted that a certificate will be invalidated if the apparatus is used at an ambient temperature higher than that for which the certification applies. The principle to be observed is that the maximum surface temperature should be less than the ignition temperature of the dust(s) concerned, in cloud and layer form, with a suitable safety margin. It is recommended that the safety margin is obtained by selecting apparatus having a temperature class or a maximum surface temperature less than the following: a) two-third of the minimum ignition temperature of the combustible dust/air mixture(s) cloud(s) concerned; and b) 75 K less than the mini!nurn ignition temperature of a 5 mm layer of the combustible dust(s) concerned.
NOTE -- Group 11apparatus complying withIS2148, IS 5780, 1S 6381, 1S 7389 (Part 1) and IS 8289 is normally temperature classified as follows: Temperature Class T1 T2 T3 T4 T5 T6 MaximumSurface Temperature,0C 450 300 200 135 100 85

7.4 Selection for Use within the Dust Containment 7.4.1 The selection of apparatus for use within the dust

containment requires special consideration because the effect on the apparatus of thick dust layers, or immersion in dust cannot be predicted. It is considered, however, that non-heat dissipating apparatus, part of whose enclosure forms part of the dust containment and whose electrical parts may thus be considered to be outside the dust containment is permissible. For the purposes of this standard, non-heat dissipating apparatus is considered to be apparatus whose surface temperature at the hottest point of the external surface of the enclosure atler thermal stability has been reached does not exceed 5 K above ambient temperature when measured in free air under the conditions specified for the allocation of the temperature classification in the standard for the method of protection. This may be determined by test, from a declaration by the certificate holder for the apparatus or by a declaration from the certifying body. Such apparatus includes, but is not necessarily limited to the following: measuring devices operating via a pocket or thermowell which forms part of the dust containmen~ b) apparatus having only mechanical parts within the dust containrnenc c) apparatus which has access to the inside of the dust containment only through a solid window, or other solid boundaxy of the dust containment. In this case the general recommendations given in 7.1, 7.2 and 7.3 and the specific recommendations in 7.4 to 7.8 inclusive should be followed on the basis of the area classification outside the dust containment; and d) capacitance probes. 7.4.2 Where intrinsically safe apparatus and systems are considered for use within the dust containment they should be of category IA, Group IIC, in accordance with IS 5780, and the apparatus intended for use therein should have an 1P 6X enclosure. The installation should be accepted as suitable only if consideration of potential causes of ignition demonstrates that the apparatus will not ignite the d,ust under the fault conditions specified in IS 5780. The potential causes of ignition which should be considered include, but are not necessarily limited to the following: a) the thick layer ignition temperature of the dust; b) the surface temperature of the enclosure of the apparatus under a thick layer of the dust; c) accumulation of electrostatic charge on the enclosure of the apparatus or parts thereofi a)

5

IS 15142:2002

d) e)

sparking between the enclousre of the apparatus and its surroundings; and ohmic heating of the dust.

dust is electrically conductive, apparatus having a degree of protection by enclosure of 1P 6X should always be selected. In circumstances where the IS 5780 intrinsically safe apparatus does not have the 1P 6X or 1P6X enclosure recommended, an assessment of suitability shou Id be carried out by examination and, where necessary, testing to show that the required integrity of the intrinsically safe circuit is maintained despite a layer of dust. For this purpose all exposed clearance and creepage distances should be assumed to have failed to the most onerous conditions. The normal criteria for acceptable. energy release are those for Group IIC gases and vapours specified in IS 5780. The category of intrinsic safety chosen should be `IA' for Zone21 applications and at least' IB' for Zone 22 applications. It is necessary to re-assess the temperature classification of the apparatus taking into account the additional possibility of failure of exposed clearance and creepage distances. In particular the temperature classification of any exposed small components shou Id be reconsidered. In the design, advantage may have been taken of the small component relaxation on surface temperature requirements and these may achieve a temperature higher than the marked temperature classification. Temperature excursions of small components under conditions of test may exceed the ignition temperature of the dust (in cloud or layer form) provided that the dust(s) in question is (are) not ignited or charred by the component. The additional assessment and any necessary testing should be documented and carried out by a competent body using techniques and facilities similar to those normally used by a national certi@ing authority for intrinsically safe apparatus. Each piece of apparatus or its immediate location should be marked or identified so that the particu Iar application can readily be traced back to the related safety documentation. If there is any doubt about the suitability of the appakatus, then enclosures having the recommended 1P ratings should be used. 7.9 Selection of Apparatus Complying with Type of Protection `n'
with IS 8289

7.5 Selection of Apparatus Complying with IS 7389 (Part 1) (Pressurized Apparatus `p') Pressurized apparatus may be used in Zone 22 provided the degree of protection by enclosure is at least 1P5X. In Zone 21, or where the dust is electrically conductive an 1P 6X enclosure should be used. The pressurized enclosure should have one or more inlet apertures and one or more outlet apertures for the connection of the inlet and outlet ducts for the protective gas. These apertures are excluded from the degree of protection recommendations in 3.2. However, outlet apertures discharging into the hazardous area should be so constructed that they are closed at the end of the purging period in the case of leakage compensation systems, or on cessation of pressurization in the case of continuous circulation systems. 7.6 Selection of Apparatus Complying with IS 2148 (Flameproof Enclosure `d')
Apparatus with flameproof enclosures may be used in Zone 21 or Zone 22 and should have a degree of protection by enclosure of at least 1P 5X for Zone 22 and 1P 6X for Zone21. Where the dust is electrically conductive, apparatus having degree of protection by enclosure of 1P 6X should always be selected.

7.7 Selection

of Apparatus IS 6381(Increased Safety `e')

Complying

with

increased safety apparatus may be used in Zone 22 provided the degree of protection by enclosure is at

least 1P5X. In Zone 21 or where the dust is electrically conductive, increased safety apparatus having a degree of protection by enclosures of 1P6X should always be selected. 7.8 Selection
of Apparatus and Systems in Accordance with IS 5780 (Intrinsically Safe Apparatus `i')

Intrinsically safe apparatus, having enclosures providing a degree of protection of at least 1P 5X, and systems may be used in Zone 21. Intrinsically safe apparatus, having enclosures providing a degree of protection of 1P 6X, and `systems may be used in Zone 21. Uncertified parts of intrinsically safe systems such as simple devices, junction boxes, etc, should have a degree of protection by enclosure of at least 1P5X for Zone 22 and 1P 6X for Zone21. Where the

Type of protection `n' apparatus having enclosures providing a degree of protection of 1P5X may be used in Zone 21. Where the dust is electrically conducting an 1P 6X enclosure should always be used.

6

IS 15142:2002

ANNEX A (Clause 2.1)
LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS

IS No.

Title

IS No.

Title

2148:1981 2309:1989

5571:1979

5572:1994

5780:1980 6381:1972

Flame proof enclosures for electrical 7389 apparatus (second revision) Code of practice for the protection (Part 1): 1976 of buildings and allied structures against lightning (second revision) Guide for selection of electrical equipment for hazardous areas (first revision) 7689:1989 Classification of hazardous areas (other than mines) having 8289:1976 flammable gases and vapours for electrical installation (second 14154 revision) (Part 2): 1997 Intrinsically safe electrical apparatus and circuits first revision) Construction and testing of electrical

apparatus with type of protection `e' Pressurized enclosures of electrical apparatus for use in explosive atmospheres: Part 1 Pressurized enclosures with no internal source of flammable gas or vapour (jirst
revision)

Guide for the control of undesirable static electricity @rst revision) Electrical equipment with type of protection `n' Electrical apparatus with protection by enclosure for use in the presence of combustible dusts: Part 2 Guide to election, installation and maintenance

Bureau

of Indian

Standards

i31S is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.

Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS.
Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffn-med when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Catalogue' and `Standards: Monthly Additions'.

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. ET 22 (3796)

Amendments

Issued Since Publication

Amend No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones :3230131,3233375,323 9402 Regional Offices : Central Eastern : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi KOLKATA 700054 Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone 3237617 3233841 { 3378499,3378561 { 3378626,3379120 603843 { 602025 2541216,2541442 { 2542519,2541315 8329295, 8327858 { 8327891,8327892

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093

Branches ,: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. NALAGARH. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. VISAKHAPATNAM Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India

