Wala HIT IS 18225 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


MRa us AAA Hard — AA 
SEUS FAT Weta 
CAREJAR IR IT TUN 


Media and Entertainment Services — 
Categorization of Programmes 
Offered by Skill Development 
Service Providers 


ICS 03.180, 03.080.01, 03.080.99 


© BIS 2023 


AA AH SALT 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Se EEA UA, 9 FRIST Mle MHL AT, Ag Reet - 110002 


MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


March 2023 Price Group 7 


Media and Entertainment Services Sectional Committee, SSD 13 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft finalized by the Media and 
Entertainment Services Sectional Committee had been approved by the Services Sector Division Council. 


Media and entertainment industry is an extensively skill based industry with each and every job role ranging from 
the most basic to the highly technical ones requiring specialized and exclusive skill set. To cater to this need of 
skills development in this sector, a lot of government and private institutes have been established that provide 
educational and skill development programmes and training opportunities for various kinds of job roles existing in 
the industry. 


There is a plethora of institutes/individuals offering programmes with their own norms for programme duration, 
types of programmes, outcomes and monitoring mechanisms. This lack of uniformity and lack of standardization 
often leads to ambiguity and causes confusion among stakeholders including the trainees, employers, institutes and 
learners. 


Keeping this in mind, this standard has been prepared to standardize the categorization of programmes offered by 
skill development service providers for Media and Entertainment services sector so as to clear any ambiguity 
arising out of various types of programmes being offered. The following parameters have been considered for 
categorization of programmes: 


a) Nature of the programme; 
b) Skill level imparted; and 
c) Duration of the programme. 


This standard aims at providing a better understanding of the options of programmes being offered by different 
institute and help a prospective learner identify and select a programme fitting his/her requirements. It also intends 
to help institutes offering skill development programmes in media and entertainment sector to design and present 
their programmes to a prospective learner in an organized and structured way for better and appropriate selection 
of a programme by the learner. 


In the formulation of this standard, assistance has been drawn from the following publications: 


a) Guidelines for providing skill based education under National Skill Qualification Framework. 
b) Qualification Packs (QPs) of the Media and Entertainment Skills Council (MESC), New Delhi. 


This standard has been prepared based on indigenous practices prevalent in the field in India. 


The composition of the committee responsible for development of the standard is listed in Annex C. 


IS 18225 : 2023 


Indian Standard 


MEDIA AND ENTERTAINMENT SERVICES — 
CATEGORIZATION OF PROGRAMMES OFFERED BY SKILL 
DEVELOPMENT SERVICE PROVIDERS 


1 SCOPE 


This standard specifies categorization of different 
programmes being offered by skill development 
service providers in the field of media and 
entertainment services sector. 


NOTES 
1 The skill development services provider is hereinafter 
called as service provider. 


2 The service provider can be an institute or an individual 
recognized by appropriate authority. 


3 The programmes being considered are the ones with 
curriculum that suit requirements of various job roles 
existing in the media and entertainment service industry. 


4 The programmes may be conducted in physical mode, 
online mode or a combination thereof with the 
programme curriculum clearly outlining the mode of 
learning for each component or course being offered in 
the programme. 


2 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 


2.1 Advanced Level Skill — Skill level where the 
learner has advanced experience and training with 
the skill and understands advanced concepts. 


2.2 Assessment — Test, examination, 
observations or other process, designed to measure a 
learner’s knowledge, competence or performance in 
a defined area against specific reference points or 
standards (educational or professional). 


2.3 Award — Designation given by a service provider 
to a learner, in order to indicate a level of performance 
or attainment, or the completion of a programme. 


2.4 Beginner Level Skill — Skill level where the 
learner has a novice understanding of and exposure 
to the skill and understands basic concepts. 


2.5 Competence — Ability of an individual to 
perform a job properly through a combination of 
training, demonstrated skills and accumulated 
experience. 


NOTE — Competence can be understood as the 
consistent application of knowledge and skill to the 
standard of performance required in the workplace. It 
embodies the ability to transfer and apply skills and 
knowledge to new situations and environments. 


2.6 Course — Distinct set of teaching and learning 
activities, designed to meet defined learning 
objectives or learning outcomes. 


NOTE — A course is sometimes referred to as a credit- 
unit or a subject/module. 


2.7 Curriculum — Plan of study prepared by the 
service provider which describes the aims, content, 
learning outcomes, teaching and learning methods, 
assessment processes, etc, relating to a programme. 


2.8 Intermediate Level Skill — Skill level where 
the learner has the experience with and ability to 
carry out the skill, but does not understand advanced 
concepts. 


2.9 Job Role — Description of what an individual is 
expected to do in an organization and includes 
general purpose of the role, main responsibilities and 
personal attributes required for carrying out the job 
effectively. 


2.10 Knowledge — Facts, information, principles or 
understanding acquired through skill development, 
education, or experience. 


2.11 Learner — An individual undergoing a skill 
development programme. 


2.12 Learning Outcome — Specifies what a learner 
is expected to know, understand or be able to do at 
the end of a training programme, course or module. 


2.13 Performance Criteria — The criteria that 
specifies the standard to which elements must be 
achieved and reflect the applied knowledge that 
enables competent performance. 


2.14 Programme — Consistent set of courses 
designed to meet defined learning objectives or 


IS 18225 : 2023 


learning outcomes, and leading to recognition. 


NOTES 

1 Recognition may take the form of a degree, a certificate 
of successful completion, participation or achievement,a 
badge, diploma, skill card or other forms. 

2 The programmes being considered are intended for skill 
development. 


2.15 Qualification — Formal outcome of an 
assessment and validation process whichis obtained 
by the service provider to determine that a learner 
has achieved learning outcomes to given parameters. 


2.16 Refresher Programme — Skill development 
programme being offered to a skilled learner to 
refresh the skills previously acquired for a particular 
job role. 


2.17 Reskilling — Acquiring a new set of skills or 
training for a new role by a skilled learner, often 
with the goal of transitioning to a new role or a 
different industry. 


2.18 Skill — Ability to perform a task or activity 
with a specific intended outcome acquired through 
education, training, experience or other means. 
NOTES 
1 Skill may be: 
a) Cognitive—involving the use of logical, intuitive,and 
creative thinking. 


b) Practical-involving manual dexterity andthe use of 
methods, materials, tools, and instruments. 


2 Skill may be developed by training or practice which 


may be intellectual, manual, motor, perceptual, or social. 


2.19 Skill Development — A skill training activity 
leading to employment or any outcome oriented 
activity that enables a learner to acquire a skill or 
improve a skill already acquired with a view of 
developing competence, which enables the learner to 
get wage or self-employment or improve the 
prospects of the same and/or improved working 
conditions. 


2.20 Skilled Learner — An individual who had 
already acquired a skill set either by attending a skill 
development programme for the same or through 
work experience. 


2.21 Skill Development Service Provider — An 
institute or an individual offering learning service by 
conducting skill development programmes duly 
recognized by appropriate authority. 


2.22 Upskilling — Acquiring additional skills or 
enhancing existing abilities by a skilled learner, often 
with the goal of advancement in that particular job 
role. 


3 SKILL DEVELOPMENT IN MEDIA AND 
ENTERTAINMENT SERVICES SECTOR 


3.1 The media and entertainment sector consists of 
many different segments under its folds, such as 
television, print, films, radio, music, and animation. 
Education in skill development in the media and 
entertainment sector helps in creating skilled 
professionals. 


3.2 Different segments in the media and 
entertainment sector are classified as follows: 


a) Film; 

b) Television (broadcast/OTT); 

c) Print media; 

d) Animation and visual effects (VFX); 

e) Gaming, augmented reality, virtual 
reality and mixed reality; 


f) Radio; 

g) Digital media; 

h) Advertising and OOH (out of home); 

j) Creative and performing art; 

k) Sound and music; 

m) Theme and amusement park; and 

n) Event management and live 
performance. 


3.3 Each segment is different in many aspects from the 
other and offers different kinds of job and requires 
different kinds of skill set. A service provider may run 
one or more programme offering different category of 
courses on any one or more segments as mentioned. 


3.4 Types of programmes offered by the service 
provider usually results in award of certificates in the 
form of participation certificate, certificate of 
successful completion, diploma, degree, etc. Each 
programme may have one or more than one course as 
per the requirement of the programme. 


4 CATEGORIZATION OF SKILL 
DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMMES 


4.1 The following features form the basis of 
differentiating and categorizing various programmes 
offered by the services providers: 


4.1.1 Duration of Programme 


The duration of programme is based on the common 
norm of providing minimum 4 contact hours training 
per day, 5 days a week. However, the norm is not 
restrictive and the service provider can follow their 
own regular practices until it falls under the total 
duration and contact hours as specified in the 
standard. 


4.1.2 Admission Criteria 


4.1.2.1 Technical programme 


For enrolling in a technical programme, the learner 
shall have an educational qualification of at least 
secondary education or equivalent and/or shall have 
prior knowledge and competence with respect to the 
skill offered by the programme, authenticated by a 
certificate of successful completion of a skill 
development programme or a course or training in that 
particular or similar skill or a certificate of experience 
issued by his/her employer, whichever is applicable. 


4.1.2.2 Non-technical programme 


For enrolling in a non-technical programme, the learner 
does not require a minimum educational qualification 
for enrolling in the programme, unless otherwise 
deemed necessary by the service provider for a 
particular programme. However, for enrolling in non- 
technical programmes from intermediate to advanced 
level, the learner shall have prior knowledge and 
competence with respect to the skill offered by the 
programme, authenticated by a certificate of successful 
completion of a skill development programme or a 
course or training in that particular or similar skill or a 
certificate of experience issued by his/her employer, 
whichever is applicable. 


4.1.3 Faculty 


The faculty shall be qualified and trained professionals 
or trainers certified by appropriate authority. The faculty 
shall have undergone a minimum of an advanced level 
skill development programme or a course from a 
certified service provider or equivalent and/or is an 
experienced professional in the relevant field with a 
minimum of 3 years’ experience in the industry as a 
working professional or in an institute as a faculty in the 
relevant subject. The faculty shall have sufficient 
knowledge about the sector which shall be ascertained 
by the service provider through suitable means. 


4.1.4Programme Components 


A programme shall consist of at least the following 
two components: 


a) Skill development component — Skill 
development component of the programme 


IS 18225 : 2023 


shall be employment oriented and focus on 
work-readiness leading to comprehensive 
specialization in the target domain suitable for 
the relevant job role. This component shall 
also include imparting practical aspect of skill 
through on the job training, project work, 
apprenticeship, industry training, etc. The skill 
development component shall have at least 50 
percent weightage of the complete programme. 


b) General education component — General 
education component of the programme shall 
consist of education in areas supportive to the 
relevant job role in addition to other skills, as 
deemed necessary, like communications 
skills, ICT skills, soft skills, 
entrepreneurship, critical thinking, problem 
solving and value education. 


The programme shall be designed in such a format 
that a minimum of 50 percent weightage is given to 
the practical work. 


4.1.5 Performance/Learning Outcomes 


The major learning outcomes of any skill 
development programme offered by a service 
provider shall consist the following: 


a) Core skills — These are basic skills involving 
dexterity and use of methods, tools and 
instruments used to perform the job, including 
IT skills if needed for that job. 


b) Professional skills — These are the skills that 
a learner should be able to do and expected to 
do in the relevant job role after successful 
completion of the programme. 


c) Professional knowledge — This is what a 
learner should know and understand with 
reference to the subject(s) of the programme. 


d) Duties and responsibilities — The learner 
should be aware of the duties and 
responsibilities consistent with the relevant 
job role. 


IS 18225 : 2023 


4.1.6 Performance/Learning Outcomes 


The successful completion of a programme generally 
requires a minimum of 70 percent attendance and 
may require a qualifying criteria like an examination 
or assessment of learning outcomes of the learner, 
the qualifying percentage in that case being a 
minimum of 70 percent. The service provider may 
conduct examination or assessment as per prevailing 
standards and procedures. 


4.1.7 Certificate of Award 


Award of certificates for successful completion of 
and qualifying the programme shall be made 
depending upon minimum qualification parameters 
set by the service provider for the relevant 
programme. 


4.2 Based on the kind of skill acquired, skill 
development programmes in media and 
entertainment services sector offered by a service 
provider are classified into the following broad 
categories: 


a) Technical Programme — Skill development 
programme offering development of skills 
specific to a trade, profession or field that 
typically requires use of technical tools, 
equipment and/or software as a part of job. A 
non-exhaustive list of examples of technical 
programmes/job roles is given at Annex A 
for information. 


b) Non-technical 
development programme offering 
development of skill not necessarily 
requiring use of technical tools, equipment 
and/or software as a part of job. A non- 
exhaustive list of examples of non-technical 
programmes /job roles is given at Annex B 
for information. 


Programme — Skill 


4.3 Based on duration and skill level being offered, 
the skill development programmes are classified into 
the following categories: 


a) Beginner Level Programme; 
b) Intermediate Level Programme; 
c) Advanced Level Programme; and 


d) Reskilling and Upskilling Programme. 
4.3.1 Beginner Level Programme 


4.3.1.1 Duration of programme 


Up to 6 months with the number of hours ranging 
from 120 contact hours to 390 contact hours. 


4.3.1.2 Admission criteria 


A minimum education qualification of secondary 
education or equivalent for technical programme and 
no minimum educational qualification for non- 
technical programme, unless otherwise deemed 
necessary by the service provider for a particular 
programme. 


4.3.1.3 Faculty 


Certified trainers or experienced professionals with 
minimum 3 years experience in the relevant field. 


4.3.1.4 Programme components 


The programme curriculum should preferably 
include 30 percent theory and 70 percent practical. 


4.3.1.5 Performance outcomes 


The minimum qualifying percentage shall be 
70 percent. 


4.3.1.6 Assessment criteria 


The successful completion of the programme 
generally requires a minimum of 70 percent 
attendance and may or may not require a qualifying 
criteria like an examination or assessment of learning 
outcomes of the learner. 


4.3.1.7 Certification of award 


The service provider shall provide a participating or 
qualifying certificate to the learner after successful 
completion of the programme subject to the 
condition that the learner must qualify in all the 
subjects. 


4.3.2 Intermediate Level Programme 


4.3.2.1 Duration of programme 


From above 6 months to up to 2 years with the 
number of hours ranging from 390 contact hours to 
840 contact hours. 


4.3.2.2 Admission criteria 


For technical programme, a minimum educational 
qualification of secondary education or equivalent 
and prior knowledge and competence with respect to 
the skill offered by the programme, authenticated by 
a certificate of successful completion of a 


beginner level skill development programme 
or course or training in that particular or 
similar skill or a certificate of experience 
issued by his/her employer, if applicable. For 
non-technical programme, prior knowledge 
and competence with respect to the skill 
offered by the programme, authenticated by 
a certificate of successful completion of a 
beginner level skill development programme 
or course or training in that particular or 
similar skill or a certificate of experience 
issued by his/her employer, if applicable. 


4.3.2.3 Faculty 


Qualified and trainedprofessionals or 
certified trainers who have undergone a 
minimum of an advanced level skill 
development programme from a certified 
service provider or equivalent and/or is an 
experienced professional in the relevant field 
with a minimum of 5 years’ experience in the 
industry as a working professional or in an 
institute as a faculty in the relevant subject. 
The faculty shall have sufficient knowledge 
about the sector to be ascertained by the 
service provider through suitable means. 


4.3.2.4 Programme components 


The programme curriculum should 
preferably include 30 percent theory and 
70 percent practical and shall include 
industry exposure in the form of on-job 
training/apprenticeship, live projects or 
training. 


4.3.2.5 Performance outcomes 


The minimum qualifying percentage shall be 
70 percent. 


4.3.2.6 Assessment criteria 


The successful completion of the programme 
generally requires a minimum of 70 percent 
attendance and a qualifying criteria like an 
examination or assessment of learning 
outcomes of the learner. 


4.3.2.7 Certification of award 


The service provider shall provide a 
qualifying certificate to the learner after 
successful completion of programme subject 
to the condition that the learner must qualify 
in all the subjects. 


IS 18225 : 2023 


4.3.3 Advanced Level Programme 
4.3.3.1 Duration of programme 


From above 12 months with the number of 
hours ranging from 540 contact hours to 
1 440 contact hours. 


4.3.3.2 Admission criteria 


For technical programmes,a minimum 
educational qualification of higher secondary 
education or equivalent and prior knowledge 
and competence with respect to the skill 
offered by the programme, authenticated by a 
certificate of successful completion of an 
intermediate level skill development 
programme or course or training in that 
particular or similar skill or a certificate of 
experience issued by his/her employer, if 
applicable. For non-technical programmes, 
prior knowledge and competence with respect 
to the skill offered by the programme, 
authenticated by a certificate of successful 
completion of an intermediate level skill 
development programme or course or training 
in that particular or similar skill or a certificate 
of experience issued by his/her employer, if 
applicable. 


4.3.3.3 Faculty 


Qualified and trained professionals or 
certified trainers who have undergone a 
minimum of an advanced level skill 
development programme from a certified 
service provider or equivalent and/or is an 
experienced professional in the relevant field 
with a minimum of 5 years’ experience in the 
industry as a working professional or in an 
institute as a faculty in the relevant subject. 
The faculty shall have sufficient knowledge 
about the sector to be ascertained by the 
service provider through suitable means. 


4.3.3.4 Programme components 


The programme curriculum should preferably 
include 50 percent theory and 50 percent 
practical and shall include industry exposure 
in the form of on-job/apprenticeship live 
projects or training. 


4.3.3.5 Performance outcomes 


The minimum qualifying percentage shall be 
70 percent. 


IS 18225 : 2023 


4.3.3.6 Assessment criteria 


The successful completion of the programme 
generally requires industrial involvement, an 
internship/apprenticeship in relevant sector of 
industry for at least two months and a qualifying 
criteria like an examination or assessment of 
learning outcomes of the learner and generally 
requires a minimum of 70 percent attendance. 


4.3.3.7 Certification of award 


The service provider shall provide a qualifying 
certificate to the participant after successful 
completion of the programme subject to the 
condition that the learner must qualify in all the 
subjects. 


4.3.4 Reskilling and Upskilling Programmes 
4.3.4.1 Duration of programme 


From 20 contact hours to 40 contact hours. 
4.3.4.2 Admission criteria 


Working professionals with minimum of 3 years’ 
experience in the field or prior knowledge and 
competency with respect to the skill offered by the 
programme, authenticated by a certificate of 
successful completion of an intermediate or 
advanced level skill development programme or 
course or training in that particular or similar skill 
or a certificate of experience issued by his/her 
employer, if applicable, or a certificate of 
Recognition of Prior Learning (RPL) by an 
appropriate authority. 


4.3.4.3 Faculty 


Qualified and trained professionals or certified 
trainers who have undergone a minimum ofan 


advance levelskill development programme 
from a certified service provider or equivalent 
and/or is an experienced professional in the 
relevant field with a minimum of 5 years’ 
experience in the industry as a working 
professional or in an institute as a faculty in the 
relevant subject. The faculty shall have 
sufficient knowledge about the sector to be 
ascertained by the service provider through 
suitable means. 


4.3.4.4 Programme components 


The programme curriculum should preferably 
include 30 percent theory and 70 percent 
practical and shall include industry exposure in 
the form of on-job/apprenticeship live projects 
or training. 


4.3.4.5 Performance outcomes 


The minimum qualifying percentage shall be 
70 percent. 


4.3.4.6 Assessment Criteria 


The successful completion of the programme 
generally requires 100 percent attendance and 
may or may not require a qualifying criteria 
like an examination or assessment of learning 
outcomes of the participant. 


4.3.4.7 Certification of award 


The service provider shall provide a 
participating or qualifying certificate to the 
participant after successful completion of the 
programme subject to the condition that the 
learner must qualify in all the subjects. 


IS 18225 


[Clause 4.1(a)] 


EXAMPLES OF TECHNICAL PROGRAMMES/JOB ROLES 


Animation Director 

Art Director 

Character Designer 
Colour Key Artist 
Compositor 

Director of Photography 
Colourist 

Modelers (2D/3D) 
Sound Designer 

VFX Editor 

Music Composer 

Music Producer 
Lighting Director 

Game Artist 

Game Designer 

Game Tester 

Search Engine Marketing Executive 
Lighting Technician 
Music Programmer 

Post Production Supervisor 
Foley Artist 


AR Developer 

VR Developer 

Quality Analyst 

Creative Visualizer 

Animator 

Assistant Cameraman 

Camera Operator 

Editor (Film and Video) 

Graphic Designer 

Motion Graphics Designer 
Sound Editor/Designer 

Sound Mixing Editor 

Lighting Artist 

Rendering Artist 

Rigging Artist 

ROTO Artist 

Sound Assistant 

Sound Engineer Texturing Artist 
Search Engine Optimization Executive 
Digital Mastering 

Digital Imaging Technician (DIT) 


: 2023 


IS 18225 : 2023 


[Clause 4.1(b)] 


EXAMPLES OF NON-TECHNICAL PROGRAMMES/JOB ROLES 


Advertising Operations Coordinator 
Line Producer 

Location Manager 

Production Assistant 

Props Master 

Sales Coordinator (Media Organization) 
Sales Director (Media Organization) 
Sales Executive (Media Organization) 
Sales Manager (Media Organization) 
Set Carpenter 

Set Decorator 

Set Painter 

Set Plasterer 

Manager Maintenance 

Project Manager-Digital 

Project Manager-OOH 
Officer-Legal and Statutory 
Celebrity Manager 

Script Researcher 

Script Writer 

Hairdresser 

Storyboard Artist 

Event Organizer 


Traffic Coordinator (Media Organization) 
Unit Production Manager 
Social Media Executive 
Social Media Manager 
Digital Marketing Manager 
Spot Boy 

Correspondent 
Correspondent — TV and Radio 
Senior Correspondent 
Assignment Editor 

Layout Designer 

Radio Jockey and Producer 
Editor—in—Chief 

Desk Editor 

Voice-Over Artist 
Community Journalist 
Prosthetic Artist 

Script Editor 

Actor 

Clean-Up Artist 

Dancer 

Live Action Director 
Make-Up Artist 


IS 18225 : 2023 


ANNEX C 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Composition of Media and Entertainment Services Sectional Committee, SSD 13 


Organization Representative(s) 


Noida Film City and President - Asian Academy of DR SANDEEP MARWAH (Chairperson) 
Film and Television 


Advertising Standards Council of India, (ASCI) SHRI VINOD BERRY 
MS MANISHA KAPOOR (Alternate) 


Airtel Digital TV SHRI MOHIT BHATNAGAR 
SHRI AMANPREET SINGH (Alternate) 


Amazon Prime Video India SHRI RAHUL JAIN 


Association of Bangalore Animation Industry (ABAT) SHRI BIREN GHOSE 
SHRI B. S. SRINIVAS (Alternate) 


Association of Radio Operators Of India (AROT) SHRI ASHOK NARAYAN 
SHRI UDAY CHAWLA (Alternate) 


Central Board of Film Certification (CBFC) REGIONAL OFFICER 
REGIONAL OFFICER (Alternate) 


Children’s Film Society MS SMITA VATS SHARMA 
SHRI RAJESH GOHIL (Alternate) 


Confederation of Indian Industry (CH) SHRI GAJENDRA TIJARE 
MS SHALINI SHARMA (Alternate) 


Dolby Technology India Pvt Ltd SHRI RAJ VARTAK 
SHRI HAREENDRANATH DWARAK 
(Alternate) 
Event and Entertainment Management Association SHRI SHAILENDER SINGH 
(EEMA) SHRI K. J. S. GURNA (Alternate I) 
SHRI DEEPAK PAWAR (Alternate II) 


Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and SHRI BOBBY BEDI 
Industry (FICCI) MS LEENA JAISANI (Alternate) 


Film and Television Institute of India (FTID SHRI SUMIT KUMAR 
SHRI AMLAN CHAKRABORT Y (Alternate) 


Film Federation of India (FFI) SHRI FIRDAUSUL HASAN 


Disney Hotstar (Novi Digital Entertainment) SHRI PARITOSH SAHA 
SHRI GAJENDRA TIJARE (Alternate) 


Indian Institute of Mass Communication SHRI VIRENDER KUMAR BHARTI 


Indian Motion Picture Producers Association (IMPPA) SHRI T. P. AGGARWAL 


IS 18225 : 2023 
Organization Representative(s) 


Indian Music Industry (IMI) SHRI BLAISE FERNANDES 
SHRI MRIDULA DALVI (Alternate) 


Jagran Prakashan Ltd SHRI BASANT RATHORE 
SHRI VIPIN KHATWANI (Alternate) 


Media and Entertainment Association of India SHRI ANKUR BHASIN 
(MEAD SHRI SUSHIL KUMAR BHASIN (Alternate) 
Media and Entertainment Skills Council (MESC) SHRI MOHIT SONI 


SHRI ARPANESH MANI (Alternate) 


Ministry of Commerce and Industry SHRI VIPUL BANSAL 
DR BRIJ MOHAN MATHUR (Alternate D 
SHRI R. P. KANCHAN (Alternate II) 


Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food And Public SHRI VINEET MATHUR 
Distribution SHRI ALOK KUMAR VERMA (Alternate) 
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology MS ASHA NANGIA 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting SHRI SUBHASH KUMAR 
Ministry of Skill Development &Entrepreneurship SHRI B. K. RAY 


COL SANTOSH KUMAR (Alternate D) 
MS RUCHIKA TANDON (Alternate II) 


News Broadcasters Federation (NBF) SHRI R. JAI KRISHNA 
Newspaper Association of India (NAD SHRI VIPIN GAUR 
SHRI VIKAS KUMAR SHARMA (Alternate I) 


DR B. THOMAS (Alternate II) 


Prasar Bharati MS MITALI CHATTERJEE 
MS NAVNEET KAUR (Alternate I) 


Press Council of India (PCI) SHRI RAKESH SHARMA 

Press Information Bureau (PIB) MS KANCHAN PRASAD MANDLAVS 
SHRI SHAMBHUNATH CHOUDHARY 
(Alternate) 

PVR LTD SHRI TARUNKUMAR MAZUMDAR 


SHRI AGNEET KUMAR (Alternate D 
SHRI PRADEEP BHARDWAJ (Alternate 1) 


Services Export Promotion Council (SEPC) SHRI CHANDRANSHU AWASTHI 


Society of Motion Picture and Television Engineers, SHRI UJWAL NIRGUDKAR 
India Section 


Star India SHRI PARITOSH SAHA 
SHRI K. ARAVAMUDHAN (Alternate) 


Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAD MS SAPNA SHARMA 
MS SHIVANI SHARMA (Alternate) 


10 


IS 18225 : 2023 
Organization Representative(s) 


Yash Raj Films SHRI AKSHAY WIDHANI 
SHRI GAURAV CHOMAL (Alternate) 


Zee Entertainment Enterprises Limited (ZEEL) SHRI AMITABH KUMAR 


In Personal Capacity (#74 Nupur, Gulmohar SHRI DHARMESH THAKKAR 
Cross Road No. 4, JUPD, Mumbai - 49) 


In Personal Capacity (#/498P, 4th Floor SHRI PRAKASH NARAYANAN 


Saraswati Kunj II, Sector 52, Wazirabad, 
Gurugram- 122003) 


BIS Directorate General SHRI S.K. KANOGIA, SCIENTIST ‘F’/SENIOR 


DIRECTOR AND HEAD (SERVICE SECTOR) 
[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRIMATI NEHA YADAV 
SCIENTIST 'D/JOINT DIRECTOR 
(SERVICES SECTOR), BIS 


Composition of Education and Skill Development Services Subcommittee (SSD 13:1) 


Organization Representative(s) 


Chief Executive Officer, Media and Entertainment SHRI MOHIT SONI (Convenor) 
Skill Council (MESC) 


Media and Entertainment Skills Council (MESC) SHRI ARPANESH MANI 
Confederation of Indian Industry (CI) MS SHALINI S SHARMA 


Indian Institute of Mass Communication (IMC), DR VIRENDER KUMAR BHARTI 
Delhi 


Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce & MS LEENA JAISANI 
Industry (FICCI) 


Film and Television Institute of India, (FTI) Pune SHRI SUMIT KUMAR 
SHRI AMLAN CHAKRABORT Y 
(Alternate) 

Whistling Woods International, Mumbai SHRI CHAIT ANYA CHINCHLIKAR 


MS SAUMYA DIXIT (Alternate) 


University of Media and Arts, Raipur DR SHIKHA VERMA 


11 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: SSD 13 (16880). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRE Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern :8® Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


