NAT HA IS 17236 : 2019 
Indian Standard 


Waa H ahs Rreg TRUTH Us WAT — 
tifa atear 


Prevention and Safety Against Fire 
in Ropeways — Code of Practice 


ICS 93.110 


© BIS 2019 


anda AM sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Te TH HM, ay Reef — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


July 2019 Price Group 2 


Continuous Bulk Conveying, Elevating, Hoisting, Aerial Ropeways and Related Equipment Sectional 
Committee, MED 06 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Continuous 
Bulk Conveying, Elevating, Hoisting, Aerial Ropeways and Related Equipment Sectional Committee, had been 
approved by the Mechanical Engineering Divisional Council. 


An aerial ropeway is a special form of transportation system where passengers/materials are carried on a tensioned 
wire rope supported above the ground. In ropeways handling passengers, safety, reliability, and conformance to 
high-quality and good industry practices are paramount for securing the safety of the users. Aerial ropeways are 
particularly useful in regions where the facility in surmounting natural barriers gives them a great advantage over 
railways or roads, both of which may need the heavy civil engineering work to secure easy gradient. They are 
inexpensive to maintain, pollution free, environment friendly, does not affect aesthetics, their power demand is 
modest; and, they are not seriously affected by adverse climatic conditions. 


Nothing in this standard is intended to contravene any provisions of the statutory regulations wherever they are 
in force. 


Composition of the Panel-1 on ‘Aerial Ropeways’ of MED 06 responsible for the formulation of this standard is 
given at Annex A. 


The Standard recognizes that safety of life is more than a matter of means of egress and accordingly deals with 
various matters which are considered essential to the safety of life. The standard therefore covers provisions 
relating to means of egress covering various components thereof namely, exit access, exit and exit discharge. 


It also covers provisions relating to fire protection of buildings through portable and fixed firefighting installations. 
Fire protection techniques have to be based on the fire behaviour characteristics of different materials and structural 
elements of buildings. The activities pursued by the occupants of buildings must also be taken into consideration 
for assessing the extent of hazards, and method should then be devised by which the hazards could be minimised. 


An indefinite combination of variables is involved in the phenomenon of fire, all of which cannot be quantified. 
The requirements of this standard should, therefore, be taken as a guide. 


Absolute safety from fire is not attainable in practice. The objective of this part is to specify measures that will 
provide that degree of safety from fire which can be reasonably achieved. 


The standard endeavours to avoid requirements that might involve unreasonable hardships or unnecessary 
inconvenience or interference with normal use and occupancy of buildings, but insists upon compliance with 
minimum standards of fire safety necessary for building occupants and users. For ensuring compliance of fire 
protection equipment/installations to the laid down quality requirements, it is desirable to use such equipment/ 
installation duly certified under the BIS Certification Marks Scheme. 


While providing guidelines for minimizing chances of occurrence of fire through passive fire protection measures, 
this Part does not intend to cover all aspects of general fire prevention including sources of ignition. Nor does it 
cover the prevention of accidental personal injuries during the course of normal occupancy of buildings. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised) . The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 17236 : 2019 


Indian Standard 


PREVENTION AND SAFETY AGAINST FIRE IN 
ROPEWAYS — CODE OF PRACTICE 


1 SCOPE 


This standard deals with safety from fire and covers the 
requirements for fire prevention, life safety in relation 
to fire and fire protection of ropeway installations. This 
standard specifies definitions, different hazards and 
over all fire prevention. 


2 REFERENCES 


The Indian Standards listed in Annex A contain 
provisions which through reference in the text, 
constitute provision of this standard. At the time 
of publication, the editions indicated were valid. 
All standards are subject to revision, and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most recent 
editions of the standards. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, all terminology given 
in IS 7649 and the following shall be applicable. 


3.1 Inspecting Authority — Any competent authority 
recognized by the statutory regulations to inspect 
the aerial ropeways installation and, determine 
its acceptability or otherwise, on the basis of this 
standard and compliance to prevailing statutory rules 
and regulations. If required, competent authority may 
hire external agencies like engineering institutions/ 
independent experts for carrying out said inspection. 


4 GENERAL APPLICABILITY 


The provisions of this Part are applicable to, 
a) Drive unit area; 
b) Carrier; 
c) Lifts, if any; and 
d) Electrical control area. 


5 DEFINITIONS 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 


5.1 Assisted Evacuation 


Strategy that exists during which a designated person 
or persons provide assistance, during an emergency, to 
another person(s) to leave a building or a specific part 
of the built environment and to reach a final place of 
safety. 


5.2 Authorities Concerned 


An organization, office, or individual responsible 
for enforcing the requirements of a standard or,for 
approving or accepting equipment, materials, an 
installation, or a procedure. 

5.3 Automatic Fire Detection and Alarm System 


A system comprising components and sub-systems 
required for automatically detecting smoke, heat or fire 
initiating an alarm and other actions as appropriate. 

5.4 Combustible Material 

A material which either burns itself or adds heat to a 
fire. 

5.5 Emergency Lighting 

Lighting provided for use when the supply to the 
normal lighting fails. 

5.6 Reaction to Fire 

It is the behaviour of a material that as a result of its 
own decomposition, feeds a fire to which it is exposed 
under specified conditions. 

5.7 Lift Lobby 


A space from which people directly enter a lift car(s) 
and into which people directly enter upon exiting a lift 
car(s). 

5.8 Station 


A place designated for the purpose of loading/boarding/ 
de-boarding and unloading, including service area and 
ancillary spaces associated with the same structure. 


6 HAZARDOUS SITUATION 


6.1 It arises when fire is located at: 

a) Station; 

b) Machinery area particularly at drive unit; 

c) Electrical control area; 

d) Carrier; and 

e) Weird behaviour of passenger. 
6.2 In the event of any outbreak of fire, the following 
hazards may occur: 

a) Breathing difficulties from smoke and fumes; 

b) Burns; 


IS 17236 : 2019 


c) Injury while escaping fire; and 
d) Building debris which may impact injuries. 


7 CAUSES OF FIRE 


Most common causes of fire outbreaks are: 

a) Combustible dust; 

b) Work involving high temperatures(hot work) like 
welding, gas cutting etc.; 

c) Faulty equipment and machinery; 

d) Easily inflammable liquids and gases; 

e) Improperly supervised electrical circuitscreating 
an ignition source for combustible dust and 
flammable liquids; and 

f) Electrical fire hazards from wiring done not 
in conformity to Indian Standards, overloaded 


outlets, extension cords, overloaded circuits and 
static discharge which can cause a spark. 


8 PREVENTION OF FIRE 


8.1 General 
a) Avoid hot work inside station, if possible; 


b) Provide periodic awareness and training program 
so that all workers understand the hazards 
associated with hot work, any site-specific hazards 
and the use of safety equipment; 


c) Ensure that the area is clear of flammable or 
combustible materials including dusts, liquids, 
and gasses; 

d) Make sure a safety professional is on hand to 
provide supervision; 

e) Equipment and machinery should be properly 
rated as per installation specific design; 

f) Equipment and machinery especially electrical 
equipment, which is covered with dirt or grease, 
should always be kept clean; 


g) Follow manufacturer’s recommended maintenance 
procedures for maintenance all of the equipment 
and machinery; and 

h) Implement a reporting system in the event of fire 
detection. 


8.2 Ropeway Station 
a) Area requirement to be designed as per the volume 
of the traffic; 
b) Separate exit; 


c) Availability of Fire extinguishers. The number 
of extinguishers and their extinguishing capacity 
must correspond to the National and all local 
regulations in force; 


d) Trained personnel for operation of extinguisher; 


e) Adherence to local area regulation/ National 
Building Code(NBC) Vol I; 


f) Spread of fire to the adjacent building is limited; 
g) Rescue of the stranded persons, if required; 
h) Prohibition of smoking; and 
j) Prohibition of transportation and storage of 
inflammable materials. 
8.3 Drive Unit Area 
a) Prohibition of smoking; 


b) Prohibition of transportation of inflammable 
materials; 


c) For hydraulic circuits, metallic piping should be 
used; 


d) Hydraulic oil recommended by the manufacturer 
shall be used; 


e) Appropriate earthing system; 
f) Proper laying of power cables in dedicated cable 
tray; 


g) Availability of smoke detection system, wherever 
possible; 


h) Availability of Fire extinguisher; 
j) Availability of proper trained personnel for using 
Fire extinguisher; and 
k) Electrical equipment fire protection as per 
IP-54. 
8.4 Carrier 
a) Prohibition of smoking; 


b) Prohibition of transportation of inflammable 
materials; 


c) Use of fire resistant material for chair and 
wall coverings with non-flammable materials. 
Fabrics and papers used for such purpose shall 
be treated with an effective flame-retardant 
material; and 


d) Lift. 
Generally in ropeway installations lift is provided in 


the open areas. Body of the lift shall be made of fire 
resistant materials. 


8.5 Electrical Control Area 
a) Use and maintain wiring, tools and equipment 
correctly. Keep everything oil and dust free; 
b) Avoid temporary equipment plugged in when it’s 
not in use; 
c) Avoid using extension cords; 


d) In the event of any fire or smoke, electrical power 
supply should immediately be shut off; 


e) Availability of smoke detection and alarm system 
wherever possible; 


f) Electrical conductors and components be used 
with electrical overload protection; 


g) Metallic electric cabinets shall be used; 


h) Outer sheath of electrical cables shall be made 
from non-flammable material; and 


j) Appropriate earthing system. 
8.6 Supply — Diesel Generator Set 


a) Diesel generator set(s) shall not be installed at 
any floor other than ground/first basement. If the 
same are installed indoors, proper ventilation and 
exhaust shall be planned. The DG set room shall 
be separated by 120 min fire resistance rated walls 
and doors; 


b 


wm 


Diesel generator set in sound proof enclosure shall 
preferably be installed outside the Plant building. 
If installed indoors, proper ventilation and exhaust 
shall be provided in the room; 


c) DG set should be properly earthed; 


d) Before refuelling the set, it shall be turned off and 
allowed to be cooled; 


e) ‘No smoking’ directive within the vicinity shall be 
strictly enforced; 

f) Any possibility of back-feeding from grid power 
or the system shall be prevented; 


g) Fuel shall be stored outside DG room /area and 
also away from any appliances that may ignite it; 


h) Lightning protection of buildings; 


j) Routing of down conductors (insulated or un- 
insulated) of lightning protection through electrical 
or other service shafts are not allowed as it can 
create fire and explosion during lightning. For 
details, see Part 8 “Building Services, Section 2 
Electrical and Allied Installations’ of the NBC 
Vol I; and 


k) Escape lighting and exit signal. 


All exits shall be properly identified, with adequate 
lighting so that all occupants shall be able to leave the 
facility safely. Emergency lighting shall be powered 
from a source independent of that supplying the normal 
lighting. The emergency lighting shall be provided to 
be put on within 5s of the failure of the normal lighting 


IS 17236 : 2019 


supply. Also, emergency lighting shall be able to 
maintain the required illumination level for a period of 
not less than 90 min in the event of failure of the normal 
lighting. 


9 FIRE FIGHTING SYSTEMS 
a) Carbon dioxide (CO,), dry chemical and foam- 
based portable fire extinguisher; 
b) Emergency alarm and mass notification systems; 


c) Enforcement of ‘NO SMOKING?’ directive in and 
around the installation; and 


d) Provision of sand bucket. 


10 FIRE SAFETY PLAN 


The fire safety plan (as under) shall be distributed to all 
working in the ropeway establishments. 


10.1 Fire Safety Plan Format 
a) Ropeway installation Address; 
b) Street and pin code number; 


c) Telephone number of local police and fire 
authorities; and 


d) Purpose and objective. 
10.2 Purpose 


To establish method of systematic, safe and orderly 
evacuation in ropeway installation in case of fire or 
other emergency, in the least possible time, to a safe 
area by the nearest safe means of egress, also the use 
of such available fire appliances (including sounding 
of alarms) as may have been provided for controlling 
or extinguishing fire and safeguarding of human life. 


10.3 Objective 


To provide proper education to the personnel working 
in the ropeway system to ensure prompt reporting of 
fire, the response of fire alarms as designated, and 
the immediate initiation of fire safety procedures to 
safeguard human life as well as the installation. 


IS 17236 : 2019 


ANNEX A 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Composition of the Panel-1 on ‘Aerial Ropeways’ MED 06 


Organizations Representative(s) 
In Personal Capacity Suri A. BHADRA (Convener) 
In Personal Capacity Suri C. K. KARMAKAR 
In Personal Capacity, Kolkata SHRI DWIJENDRA LAL Das (Invitee) 
CSIR-CIMFR, Dhanbad Dr DEBASISH BASAK 
CRS, Pvt Ltd, Kolkata SHRI K. Bose 
Damodar Ropeways & Infra Ltd, Kolkata SHRI RANJAN MUKHERJEE 
Usha Breco Limited, Ghaziabad SHRI MANOJ PANWAR 

Member Secretary 


Suri A. K. MOHINDROO 
SCIENTIST ‘C’ (MED), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 06 (13858). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


