IS 13583 ( Part 1 ) : 1993 IS0 9926-1 : 1990

(Reaffirmed 2003)

SF-Indian CRANES Standard OF DRIVERS

TRAINING
PART 1 GENERAL

UDC

621'873/`875.656'052'8

@ BIS 1993

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN, 9

INDIAN
BAHADUR NEW DELHI

STANDARDS
SHAH 110002 Price Group 2 ZAFAR MARG

February

1993

Cranes, Lifting

Chains and Its Related

Equipment

Sectional

Committee,

HMD 14

NATIONAL

FOREWORD 9926-l : 1990 `Cranes - Training of drivers Organization for Standardization ( IS0 ) was the recommendations of the Cranes, Lifting Committee ( HMD 14 ) and approval of the Other parts of this standard are as follows:

This Indian Standard which is identical with IS0 issued by the International Part 1 : General', adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on Chains and Its Related Equipment Sectional Heavy Mechanical Engineering Division Council. This standard Part 2 Part 3 Part 4 Part 5 is being published Mobile cranes Tower cranes Jib cranes Overhead travelling in five parts.

cranes and portal bridge

cranes

The text of IS0 standard has been approved for publication as Indian Standard without deviations. Certain terminology and conventions are however not identical to those used in Indian Standards. Accordingly wherever the words `International Standard' appear referring to this standard, they should be read as `Indian Standard'.

IS 13583 (Part 1) : 1993 IS0 9926 -1 : 1990

Indian CRANES -

Standard OF DRIVERS

TRAINING
PART 1 GENERAL

1

Scope

b)

no disqualifying no drugs-

ailment

or infirmity; troubles.

This part of IS0 9926 specifies the minimum training to be given to trainee drivers of cranes, to develop basic operational skills and to impart the requisite knowledge for the proper use of those skills It defines the overall training scheme within which specific training should be given for each type of crane (for example tower cranes, mobile cranes, etc.). It assumes that tical experience any procedure qualifications. the trainees have no previous pracin driving cranes. It does not specify for evaluating their capabilities or

or alcohol-related

Mentally

-

behaviour mental sense

under balance:

stress;

of responsibility.

the aptitude of the Tests may be used to determine trainees (manual skill, common sense, self-control, motion coordination and recoolness, accuracy, flexes). Trainees shall be able to understand and read the language in which the documents and information labels of the crane are written. If the drivers have to transport their crane by road, they shall know the legislation concerned, have the appropriate documentation, and possess driving authorisation if required by the legislation of the country.

2

General

The driving of cranes must incorporate the safety of persons and property situated within their field of action. Cranes are often installations of considerable value occupying a key position in the working process. The drivers shall therefore be selected carefully and shall receive basic training by experienced specialists. It is also essential that the persons making up the handling team (slingers, signalmen, supervisor) receive appropriate training

3

Prerequisite

aptitudes

and knowledge

4

Training

objectives
of the training are of the rules apenvironment, and

The objectives Drivers shall be at least 16 years old. They shall be recognized to be medically fit for the profession The following items should be considered: a) Physically -~ _ sight and hearing; when driving at a height: a)

to provide thorough knowledge plicable to cranes and to their to apply them at all times;

no dr7ziness

b) to provide knowledge of hand signals and radio communication, and also equipment and tech~ nique for load handling, sufficient to allow the driver to

IS 13583 IS0 9926-l

( Pm-t 1) : 1993 : 1990

-

perform operations endangering himself

effectively and others,

and

without

b) the time c)

allotted

(depends

on the trainee); aids and rec-

_ carry out normal ations;

and emergency

crane oper-

the methods, means, ommended information
are not dealt with

teaching media. in this

These

part of IS0 9926.

c) to provide technical knowledge of cranes, their characteristics and load diagrams, mechanisms and safety equipment, sufficient to drive different
make optimal

The programme is the list of subjects which should be taught. It is given by topic and not chronologically

cranes of the same type,
use of their characteristics,

6.1 6.1.1
-

Theoretical
The driver

programme

identify perform
know

detects, daily checks,

His aptitudes His role

and responsibilities the handling team

how to use the documentation; of driving skills, including of movements,

within

(slingers,

signalmen, d) the acquisition combination determination
6.1.2

supervisor)
of cranes and characteristics versions and their methods of setting

and accuracy

Technology

of loads and distances, and instru-

-

Terminology Different UP

optimal use of control devices ments in the driver's cabin.

-

Engines

(operational

principles) operating prin-

5

Training

procedure
should be sufMechanisms (kinematic chain, ciples and appropriate conlrol) Brakes, principles Electrical principles, travel and and tests) speed

The duration and content of training ficient to attain the objectives.

limiters

(operating

Training should essentially be directed towards the practical aspects of driving (at least 75 % of training time), and theoretical learning should be checked through operational aptitudes. For practical training, the crane take-over phase should be carried out with a single trainee per crane with the trainer. For the subsequent phases, it is advisable to have no more than two trainees at the same time, except for a school-crane specially equipped for this purpose. One trainer should not have to monitor more than three cranes. Training should be marked by theoretical and practical tests designed to check whether the objectives have been attained.

remote-control safely functions

equipment (operating tests and setting) (opand

Hydraulic and pneumatic control equipment erating principles, safety functions, tests setting)

-

Steel wire ropes discard criteria) Safety setting) devices

(installation.

periodic

checks.

(operating

principles:

tests

a@

6.1.3

Putting

crane Into and out of service
(jacking. rails, anchorage

6

Content

of the training

The content of the training programme is the essential facior for meeting the objectives. It includes the assessment requirements and the programme. For each subject, fine the following: the assessment requirements de-

Ground blocks) -Specific climbing

connections

setting inside

up (arlchored the htlilrling) and

or

guyed

crane,

-

Auxlllary cquipnlent ple fly jh) Electric power

arccssories

(for- exam

a) the level reach;

of know-how

that the trainees

should
(dangers, prutrction systems)

2

IS 13583 ( Part 1 j : 1993 IS0 9928-l : 1990

-

Hydraulic (dangers

and pneumatic and precautions)

systems

and

fuels

Appropriate driving of the to obtain maximal output 6.1.6 Communication signals (direct or relay

various

mechanisms

-

Erection, putting into service, maintenance operations Travel of the crane

tests,

dismantling,

-

on site and on road

Hand Radio

signalling)

communication assisted by video circuit

6.1.4

Use of cranes

and safety rules

-

Control

Load diagrams. reeving and crane configuration: selection procedure (optimum use) Rated capacity limiters principles and tests) Forces acting of sewice) Stability of the figurations) and indicators (operating

6.1.7 -

Materials

handling (rules for use) (rules for use)

Slinging Load

equipment

lifting load

attachments guidance centre

on the crane

(conditions

in and out

-

Manual

-

crane

(influence

of various

con-

Loads (evaluation, fluence of wind) Common load) Handling Personnel handling

of gravity,

balance,

in-

-

Influence of atmospheric and ambient conditions (for example low temperatures, build-up of ice, fog, wind, storm, lightning. dust, smoke, corrosive atmosphere) Environment of the crane and its [power lines, lines, prohibited or areas, other cranes, radio transmitters, (beaconing), noise or pollution limits] Start-up Prohibited Limits and shut-down or dangerous procedures constraints dangerous air traffic

-

operations

(turning

over

a

-

a load

with

more

than

one crane

-

transport maintenance and incidents

6.1.8 -

Inspection,

Using Regular eration Reports

the documentation inspections and inspections prior to op-

--

operations

to the use of cranes work of the crane or -

on malfunctions or failure of drive

.

Instructions specific to the to the site where it is used Action priorities

Actions in case of malfunctions power (how to lower the load)

-

6.2

Practical

programme

6.1.5

Driving cabin (access, to the driver's and monitoring aids (indicators safety and comfort) equipment and interference detecfeatures con-

Driver's tributing Control

The practical programme shall include visualisation equipment and attachments of the components, mentioned in the theoretical programme, together with the' following. 6.2.1 Operating exercises operating aids and monitoring

-

Driving tor) Operation control)

Use of controls, instruments Executions load. then Combination then loaded Reduction

-

from

the

ground

(by

cable

or

radio

of rnovemenfs loaded of two

one

by one,

with

no

The proper binations Distance

lJS@

of movements

and of their

com-

movements

with

no

load,

estimation

and marking

of load

swinging

IS 13583 ( Pm 1) : IS0 9926 -1 : 1990

Combination

of three or four movements no load., then loaded (as appro-

-

Handling Exercises

of loads with specific in load slinging exercises

attachments

Site travelling. priate)

and guidance by hand signals and

Crane preparation

and travel by road

Communication radio

Exercises with targets to develop the faculties of = =
n

6.2.3 Exercises In use, tests, maintenance emergency sltuatlons Jacking and start-up the environment Start-up and shut-down of the crane

and

the evaluation

of distances in space and checking

the accuracy of load picking-up and placing the speed of travel in space the search for optimal time of handling cycle -

procedures safety devices and

n

Regular inspections load state monitor) Change in reeving

(brakes,

Operation when the load is out of the driver's sight (with signalman or with radio communication) Driving various cranes of the same family

-

Change of lifting Lubrication Safe escape

attachments

and level checks

Operation with interference or from another crane Driving from the ground this is applicable

from a fixed obstacle -

for types of crane where

7

Training

follow-up

6.2.2 Handling exercises (load picking-up and placing) Handling of common pallets, skips, etc.) Handling =
n

loads

(crates,

containers,

of

The training is only intended to give the trainee the knowledge and skills required for the proper and safe use of cranes. The driver's capability can only be developed through experience gained by working under actual conditions and adequate supervision. For these reasons, it may be useful that the experience gained in driving different cranes be recorded chronologically on arraining form. It is also necessary to plan sessions for updating the drivers' knowledge in order to retrain drivers who have temporarily ceased their activity and to give advanced training in technical changes and improvements to drivers.

long and flexible loads high loads loads with large horizontal loads with large vertical area

n

n

area

Keprography

Unit, BiS, New

Drlhi,

India

Standard Mark

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indim Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by Details of conditions under BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.
Standards

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyrigbt BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BlS. This does not preclude the free use, in the cuurse of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type Enquiries relating or grade designations. to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. Revision of Indian Standards Amendments arc issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision, Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook. and `Standards Monthly Additions'. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following reference: Dot : No HMD 14 ( 0116 ) Amendments Amend NO. Issued Since Publication of Issue Text Affected

Date

~~

~~

~~

~ DUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS

-

Headquarters: Manak
Telephones

Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar : 331 01 31, 331 I3 75

Marg,

New Delhi

110002 Telegrams ( Common : Manaksanstha to all Offices ) Telephone

Regional Central Eastern

Offices : : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur NEW DELHI 110002 : l/l4 C. I. T. Scheme CALCUTTA 700054 : SC0 445-446, Sector Shah Zafar Marg Maniktola 37 84 99, I 37 86 26, 53 38 43, I 53 23 84 235 02 16, 1 235 1.5 19, 632 92 95, 632 78 91,

331 01 31 r 331 13 75 37 85 61 37 86 62 53 16 40

VII M, V. 1. P. Road,

Northern Southern Western Bt-anches

35-C, CHANDIGARH MADRAS Andheri

160036 600113

: C. I. T. Campus,

IV Cross Road, Marol,

235 04 42 235 23 15 632 78 5X 632 78 92

E9 MiDC, : Manakalaya, BOMBAY 4011093

( East )

: AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. Printed at Printwell Printers, Aliparh. India

