IS 15872 : 2009

ern

~, ~ cf> ~tT 3tf~ Qi3I'-S1 q)T . . cfi ~ . \JWf ~ ~ ~ ~ cfi ~ ~

-gg

\JfCT

cf>

~~ (~ \JfCT ~ ~ 1i4?=i) cfi

~cf>~~
Indian Standard

APPLICATION OF COIR GEOTeXTILES (COIR WOVEN BHOOVASTRA ) FOR RAIN WATER EROSION CONTROL IN ROADS , RAILWAY EMBANKMENTS AND HILL SLOPES - GUIDELINES

ICS 59.0XIUO

O BIS 2009

B UR E A U O F I NDI A N S TAN DA R DS
MANAK B HAVA N . 9 BAH AD lJ R S HA H Z A F A R MAR G
N EW DEL H I I 10002

March 2009

Pri ce Group 2

Gco synthet ics Sectional Commiuce, TXD 30

H>REWORD This Indian Stand ard was adopted by the Bureau o f Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Geosynthetics Sect ional Committee had been approved by the Textile Div ision Council. Th e use of natural li bre geotext iles has been recogn ized in erosion co ntrol in embankmen t co nstruc tio n for roads and railways, dam engineerin g, cana ls, etc and in road pavements. Th eir increasin g imp ortance is due to their versatility based on the ir spec ific prop erties. For applicat ion s, it is de sired that the geotextiles maintain integrity during the course of its life and do not tear, split and deteriorate under constructi onal or post-con stru cti onal stresses. From the view po int o f appl icati on s of natural fibre geote xtil es, guidelin es for applica tio n in wat er erosion co ntrol need to be es tablished . Woven coi r bhoovastra is a natural coi r matt ing. Th is woven co ir bhoova stra ca n be used for rainwater erosion co ntrol in road a nd railwa y embankment s and hill slopes. Exposed soi l surface road and ra ilway embankments and hill slopes by impa ct of rain drops and surface wind which cause surface run off particles. These particles carry seeds and soil nutrients. Natural growth of vegetation on slope will protect the surface soil. By the application of woven co ir bhoovustra redu cing the effects of raindrops and controlling s urface soil particles. Woven co ir bhoovustru form s mulch and foster s qu ick veget at ive growth. The selection o f wov en co ir bhoovastra is basicall y depend on type o f so il to he protected ensured pr imarily from rain water e rosio n is gee- tec hnically stable. Th e se lec tion o f woven coi r bhoovastra basicall y dep end s upon the slope and the ex tre me rain fall in a lim ited time spa n. For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with , the final va lue, observed or calculated, e xpres sing the result of a test or analy sis, shall he rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 'Rules for rounding off numerical value s ( rev ised)' . The number of sig nifica nt places retained in the rounded off va lue sha ll he the sa me as that of the speci fied val ue in this standa rd .

IS 15872 : 2009

Indian Standard

APPLICATION OF COIR GEOTEXTILES (COIR WOVEN BHOOVASTRA) FOR RAIN WATER EROSION CONTROL IN ROADS, RAILWAY EMBANKMENTS AND HILL SLOPES - GUIDELINES
I SCOPE This standard pre scribes the code for the guidel ine s o f woven coir bhoovastra suitable for application in slopes of road and railway embankments and also in hill slopes including the selection o f wo ven coir bhoova stra a nd installation methods. 2 MATERIALS 2.1 Coir Woven Bhoovastra Open stru cture coir woven bhoovastra made out of coir threads in wh ich each warp thread get s interl aced alternatively over and under by successive weft thre ad. 3 MECHANISM OF SOIL EROSION Ex pose d soi l surfac e road and railway emban km ent s and hill slope s by impact of rain drops and surface wind wh ich ca use s ur fac e run off particles . These impacts d etach the soi l particles and carrie d away by the surface run off. These particles carry seed s and soi l nutrients. Nat rral growth of vegetation on slope is thus hindered. 4 ROLE OF COIR WOVEN BHOOVASTRA IN SURFACE EROSION CONTROL Coir woven bho ovastra are permeable co ir fabrics made from natural coir fibre. Coir wo ven bhoovastra control soil erosion by acting as a ground co ver. As a ground cover. it reduces the flow velocity of run off water by forming check dams with help of net structured strands of co ir woven bhoovastra in firm co ntact with so il, wh ich ab sorb the impact of water flow and resist washing down keeping the soil intact. 5 SELECTION OF COIR WOVEN BHOOVASTRA The choices o f coi r woven bhoovastra basi cally depend on the typ e o f so il to be pro tected . It requires to be ensured primaril y that the slope to be protected from rainwater er os ion is gee-technically sta ble. It abo required considering the ex treme rainfall in a limited time span at that location as the intensity of ra infall is more impo rta nt than the average annual rain fall. It is recommended that the choice of coir woven bhoovastra shall be 400nOO where inte ns ity of ra infall is severe irre spective of type so il and slo pe is < I : I . 6 INSTALLATION METHOD 6.1 The stage s o f laying of woven coir wo ven bhoovastra on slope s for rain water erosion co ntro l arc as under. 6.1.1 Th e slope shall he made free from undulations. soil slurry, mud and sharp projections and compac ted with additional earth where necessar y. 6.1.2 An choring tren ches shall he excavated at the top and toe of the slope along the slope downward. caring 10 see that it touches the soi l surface at all points. 6.1.3 The selec ted co ir woven bh oovastra shall be unrolled ac ross the top tren ch and along the slope downward , caring to sec that it touches the soil surface at all points. 6.1.4 O verlaps sha ll be minimum 150 mm ar side s and ends (see Fig . I). The coir woven bhoovastra at the higher level on the slope shall be placed over level. Side overlaps of a coir woven bhoovastra piece shall be placed over its next piece o n o ne side and under the next pie ce on the other. 6.1.5 The coir woven bhoovastra shall be fixed in position by steel staples of 220 mm lengths (usually of 11 gauge diameter) or by spilt bamboo pegs . Stapling shall be done normally at an interval of 500-750 mm both in longitudinal and transverse directions. Special care shall be taken to staple the co ir woven bhoovastra within the an choring trenches (300 mm depth and 150 mm width ) both at the bottom and at the sides . 6.1.6 The anch oring tren ches shall be filled up with brick-bats/soil for preventing displacement o f the co ir wo ven bhoovastra. Care shall be taken that the overlaps are not di spl aced during installation . 6.1.7 Care shall be taken to ensure that the coir woven Bhoovastra is not damaged due to puncture. lear and othe r ope rationa l stresses. 6.1.8 Seeds of vegetation (grass. legumes . etc . o f appropriate variety) shall than be spread (Annex A for

IS 15872 : 2009

FIG. I

OV ERLAPPING OF COIR WOVEN BHOOVASTRA

guidance in selecting the species of vegetation). If seeds are not available, saplings of the appropriate plant species may be planned at suitable intervals through the opening of the coir woven bhoovastra. 6.1.9 In special circumstances. a second dose of seed s may be spread with dibbling of locally available grass. 6.1.10 Installation shall be completed preferably befor e the monsoon to take advantage of the rains for quick germination of seeds.

cattle and other grazing an imals till the time of maturity of vegetation. 7.3 The damage and d isplacement of coir woven bhoo vastra shall be noted for corrective act ion . Torn portions of the coir woven bhoo vastra shall be covered with new pieces of coi r woven bhoovastra of ide ntical specification duly stapled at all sides. 7.4 Watering/maintenance of identical speci fications duly stapled at all sides. 7.5 Advice shall be sought from specialist to find out cause of unsatisfactory growth of vegetation. Withered plants shall be replaced. Species of vegetation needs to be selected carefully considering the local soil and climatic conditions.

7 MONITORING
7.1 Close mon itoring shall be done for at least one season cycle. 7.2 The treated area shall be kept out of bounds for

2

IS 15872: 2009

ANNEXA (Clause 6.1.8)
GUIDANCE IN SELECTING THE SPECIES OF VEGETATION
Name of the Species Avicennia officinalis Rhizophora mucrunata Cyperus mxaltatus Acrostichum mureum Adiantum spices Cyanodon dactyl on Cenehurs ciliaries Eragrostis curuvla Dianthum annulatum Pennisetum pedicellatum Both rochola glabra Stylosunthis gra cilis Stylosamth is gusine usis Pucraria hirsute Pennisetum purpureum Peuraria hirsta Suited for
Shrub suitable for marshy places Shrub suitable for marshy place s Grass suitable for highway slopes Shrub suitable for dam sites Shrub suitable for dam site s For light sandy soil s For mo st type s of soil For protecting terraces and channels For light soil For sandy loa :n soil For red scmi-arid soi I For light soils with low moisture For light and med ium soil with low moisture Cover cro p suited to alluvial soil and for hills in humid cl imate For hill slopes Cover crop suited to alluvial soil

']

Bureau or Indian Standards
BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of indian Standards :L I. : ')' /' harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and qu ality ccrtui c.:' : and attending ( 0 connected mailers in the co untry.
'0

:!

promote of go ods

Copyright
BIS has the copyright of all its publi cations. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS . Thi s does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbol s and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications). BIS .

Review or Indian Standards
Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a sta ndard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed. it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 'BIS Catalogue' and 'Standards : Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc: No. TXD 30 (0959).

Amendments Issued Since Publication
Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS

Headquarters :
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg. New Delhi 110 002 Telephones: 23230131.23233375.23239402 Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone 2323 76 17 { 23233841 23378499,23378561 { 23378626.23379120 26O 3843 { 260 9285 2254 1216.22541442 { 2254 2519. 2254 2315 {2832 9295. 28327858 28327891. 28327892

Regional Offices :
Central Eastern Northern Southern Western Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002

1/14 C.IT Scheme VII M. V. I. P. Road. Kankurgachi KOLKATA 700 054
SCO 335-336. Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 C.IT Campus. IV Cross Road. CHENNAI600 1):3

Manakalaya, E9 MIDC. Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400 093

Branches

AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHAThHYDERABAD . JAIPUP.. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR . PARWANOO . PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM . VISAKHAPATNAM .
Prin ted by the Manager. Govt of India Press . Faridabad

