NAT Alan IS 17082 : 2019 
Indian Standard 


Uda gan SST det / Te ge SUT at 


AREN ufzat & Tears ta 
Nato Hiet fender 


Guidelines for Design and 
Construction of Continuous 
Pusher Type Oil/Gas Top Fired 
Reheating Furnaces 


ICS 25.180 


© BIS 2019 


MÍT Ae ST 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR HAY, 9 Tee TH AMT, TŽ ect 110002 


s MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


July 2019 Price Group 8 


Industrial Fuel Fired Furnaces Sectional Committee, MTD 26 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft finalized by the Industrial 
Fuel Fired Furnaces Sectional Committee had been approved by the Metallurgical Engineering Division Council 
(MTDO). 


Pusher hearth furnace is most widely used for continuous reheating of steel billets/ingots/slabs/plates for the 
purpose of rolling. 


Main reasons for formulating standard of pusher hearth furnace are to appraise the purchaser about the general 
description with broad specification of a continuous pusher type oil/gas top fired reheating furnaces and the 
input to be specified for designing the furnace. However purchaser has the option to further improve upon the 
specification as per their specific choice/reguirement. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular reguirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in 
the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 17082 : 2019 


Indian Standard 


GUIDELINES FOR DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION 
OF CONTINUOUS PUSHER TYPE OIL/GAS TOP 
FIRED REHEATING FURNACES 


1 SCOPE 


This Indian Standard covers the general guidelines for 
design and construction for oil/gas fired continuous 
pusher type reheating furnace. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
are indicated below: 


Title 


Colours for ready mixed paints 
and enamels (sixth revision) 


IS No. 
5 : 2007 


Material to be charged... ... n.. 610 cece 


a) Material specification <. cece ceee 
b) Material dimensions (range) 
Length 
Cross-section 
c) Reference charge material ` dimensions 
and material specification on the basis of 
which Furnace will be sized and designed 
Specification 
Length 
Cross-section 
d) Straightness of charge material.. 
e) Rhombodity of charge material.. 


f) Twist of charge material 10.0.0... 060.000 


Title 


Specification for moderate heat 
duty fireclay refractories, group ‘A’ 
(fourth revision) 


IS No. 
6 : 1983 


8 : 1994 High heat duty fireclay refractories 


( fifth revision) 


Hot rolled low, medium and high 
tensile structural steel (sixth 
revision ) 


2062 : 2011 


6533 Code of practice for design and 


construction of steel chimney 


(first 


Mechanical 
revision) 


(Part 1) : 1989 aspects 


(Part 2): 1989 Structural aspect (first revision ) 


3 DESIGN PARAMETERS 


The following basic performance parameters need to 
be specified for designing of continuous pusher type 
reheating furnace: 


Billets / Blooms / Ingots / Slabs 


Mild Steel / Low or Medium or High Carbon 
Steel / Mn. Steel / Stainless Steel 


IS 17082 : 2019 


g) 
h) 


j) 
k) 


m) 


n) 


p) 
g) 


w) 


x) 
y) 
z) 


aa) 
ab) 


ac) 


Number of Charging row. we 


Material charge temperature in °C 


Reference charge material of Charge 
temperature in °C 


Material discharge temperature in °C 
(reference) 


Material discharge temperature range in °C 


Discharge Temperature uniformity in the 
material in °C that is, temperature difference 
between top & bottom surface of hot billet in 
°C (required) 

Combustion air preheated temperature °C 
Furnace output in MT per hour on continuous 
production for reference size charge at reference 


conditions in required number of charging row 
(Single/double/triple) ... ... 2.0... 


Fuel to be used — 


LCV of fuel in case of oil firing 
LCV of fuel in case of gas firing 
Supply temperature and pressure 


Estimated specific fuel consumption in Million 
KCal/MT or KJ/Kg on continuous and normal 
operation for rated output, for reference charge 
material, under specified reference condition 
and number of charging rows (to be indicated 
by the furnace designer). 


Estimated connected heat load in Million 
KCal/hr or KW (to be indicated by the furnace 
designer). 


Type of charging 
Type of discharging 
Type of flue outlet (down take or uptake) 


Electricity supply characteristic for various 
motors, heaters and controls/instruments. 


Compressed air quality with its pressure and 
temperature ...... 


Water quality with its pressure and temperature 


NOTE 一 1KCal = 4.186 KJ 


1 K Cal/h = 1.163*10* KW 


4 GENERAL CONSTRUCTION 


4.1 The furnace will be generally designed for end 
charging and side/end discharging arrangement 
(see Fig. 1). The material will be brought in front of 
the charge door through charge rollers, or directly 


Single/double/triple 

Cold charge at ambient temperature/Hot at 
temp range 

Ambient/20 °C 


Furnace oil/LDO/HSD 
Gas (Natural Gas/ LPG/Coke Oven Gas/other 
fuel)/Gas with composition 


kCal/Kg. 
kCal/Nm? 


Whether side/end charging 
Whether side/end discharging 


placed on charge table. For proper dispositioning of the 
material at the charge end, in single/double/triple row, 
fixed and vanishing stopper arrangement will be used 
when charge approach rollers are used. The material 
will be pushed by means of hydraulically/electro- 
mechanically operated pusher mechanism. After the 


material have reached the discharge end, same will be 
taken out one by one from the side by hydraulically/ 
electrically operated discharge ejector mechanism. The 
furnace charge table with billet positioning may be 
provided. 


In case of end discharge type furnace (see Fig. 2), the 
material will get discharged through end door one by 
one over inclined slope refractory bed on to discharge 
rollers. 


4.2 Type of material discharging arrangement will 
be either from side with the help of discharge ejector 


IS 17082 : 2019 


machine or through end over inclined slope refractory 
bed on to discharge rollers. However side discharge 
with the help of ejector machine is preferred since 
during end-discharging, the discharge door through the 
width of the furnace will remain open and heat losses 
will increase considerably. 


4.3 The furnace will be eguipped with oil burners/gas 
burners or dual fuel (oil/gas) burners, as per customer’s 
reguirement especially suitable for steel reheat furnaces 
which can easily handle air preheat temperature up to 
preferably 350°C and above. 


Ks KKK KKK K R S G C O O VAN 


Fic. 2 TYPICAL DIAGRAM END CHARGING AND END DISCHARGING ARRANGEMENT 


IS 17082 : 2019 


4.4 Hot gases after passing through the furnace will 
escape through flue port located at the charge end. Flue 
ports will be connected to an overhead/underground 
flue collector and thereafter pass through recuperator 
to chimney. In the flue duct there will be a recuperator 
for combustion air preheat. Flue duct from furnace to 
chimney may be underground or overground depending 
on site and soil conditions and layout. In case of 
probable water seepage below ground level, it is better 
to use overground flue duct from furnace to chimney. 


4.5 The furnace will be divided in heating and soaking 
zones and the length of the furnace including unfired, 
heating and soaking zones is to be decided on the basis 
of heating and soaking time reguired for the material 
inside the furnace from charging to discharging to 
achieve uniformity of temperature and maximum 
capacity of the furnace. 


4.6 The furnace will be provided with convection 
type multi-channel tubular cross-current flow type 
recuperator for preheating the combustion air from the 
flue gas leaving the furnace thereby the furnace would 
be very effectively designed in terms of fuel economy. 


4.7 Heating and soaking zones are to be controlled 
through stand-alone PID type temperature controllers 
with other necessary instruments on mass flow control 
philosophy. In order to maintain positive pressure in the 
furnace, necessary PID type furnace pressure control 
instruments will be used. 


4.8 PLC-PC based iInstrumentation for process control 
can also be used in place of standalone controllers. 


4.9 Complete interlocking and seguential control of 
the furnace with respect to charge roller table, furnace 
charge pusher and discharge ejector and pull-out 
roll will be carried out through relay logic panel or 
Programmable Logic Controllers (PLC) complete with 
control processors, power supply module, I/O modules, 
digital input as well as off line programme. In case of 
failure of PLC some emergency sequence operation 
like pusher, discharge doors, ejector’ can be operated 
through push buttons in manual mode. 


5 CONSTRUCTIONAL DETAILS 


The furnace profile, effective lengths, width and sizing 
of the different zones will be decided so as to ensure 
optimum heating efficiency, uniformity of charge 
temperature and flexibility of furnace operation during 
varying capacity utilization. 


Furnace profile will be such that the charge material 
stays for only the required (desired) time in the 
fired zones, but nevertheless undergoes very gradual 
heating in the long unfired preheating zone, through 
direct transfer of heat via the outgoing flue gases. This 


gives only advantages without increasing the scale 
levels. 
5.1 Sizing of Furnace 


Effective length and width of the furnace are to be 
calculated on the basis of output, reference charge 
material size, number of rows, material discharge 
temperature and uniformity, heating and soaking time. 
The following dimensions for the furnace are to be 
calculated: 


The furnace effective length 
Inside furnace length 
Soaking zone length 
Heating zone length 
Preheating zone length 


Charge level of material with 
respect to mill floor level 


To suit plant 
requirement 


Discharge level of material with 
respect to mill floor level 


To suit plant 
requirement 


5.2 Furnace Casing 


The furnace casing will be fabricated from minimum 
5 mm thick IS 2062 (Grade E 250 A) quality steel 
plates adequately reinforced with structural members. 
The burner cut-out areas will be made of minimum 
10 mm thick mild steel plates. 


The suspended/arch roof is constructed by suitable 
beams framed to the structural members attached to 
the side buckstays. The intermediate beams are to be 
provided as required to stiffen the main beams and the 
support walkways. The main structural members will 
support the fired burner walls. 


5.3 Walkways and Platforms 


All necessary platforms and access walkways on the 
furnace proper for servicing the burner, valve, drive 
mechanism, thermocouples and door drives. 


The platforms and access walkways include all 
necessary structural supports, gratings, chequered 
plates and hand rails. 


The platform will be designed for a minimum of 
800 Kg/M.sq. and walkways will be designed for a 
minimum of 500 Kgs/M.sq. loading. 


5.4 Doors 
5.4.1 End Charge Door 
End charge door will have following details: 
Type Vertical rise and fall, 
counterweighted 
Quantity 1 no. 


Operation Manual, winch-operated or electric 
motor/ hydraulic cylinder driven 
Material MS fabricated with graded cast 
iron cladding around periphery 
Door Ceramic fibre/ refractories of 
insulation adequate thickness 


The charge door will be manufactured from steel 
plates (IS 2062 Grade E 250 A) and structural 
with heat resistant cast iron at periphery. The door 
opening periphery will be fitted with heat resistant 
cast iron. 


5.4.2 Door Drive Operation 


The door will be operated manually for which necessary 
shaftings, bearings, sprockets, chains, winch etc. will 
be provided. 


The door can also be operated hydraulically by means 
of hydraulic cylinder with necessary shafting, bearings, 
sprockets, chains etc. or electro-mechanically operated 
by suitable motor electric gear box with necessary 
electro-magnetic brake, chain and pulley etc. will be 
provided. 


5.4.2.1 Side discharge door 


Side discharge door will have following details: 


Type Vertical rise and fall 

Quantity 2 nos. (one at each side of furnace) 

Operation Hydraulic cylinder/Electric motor/ 
pneumatic 

Opening As required 

size 

Material Heat resistant cast iron/Alloy steel 


5.4.3 Door Drive Operation 


The door can be operated hydraulically/pneumatically 
by means of hydraulic cylinder/pneumatic cylinder 
with necessary shafting, bearings, sprockets, chains 
etc. or electro-mechanically operated by suitable motor 
electric gear box with necessary electro-magnetic 
brake, chain and pulley etc. will be provided. 


5.4.4 Inspection Door 


Type Manual, hinged type 

Quantity As required 

Opening 250 mm x 250 mm approx. 

size 

Material Graded cast iron and heat resistant 
cast iron 

Operation Manual 


IS 17082 : 2019 


5.4.4.1 Adequate number of inspection doors on 
both side walls will be provided. These doors will 
be manufactured from heat resistant cast iron for 
preheating zone and heat resistant cast iron for heating/ 
soaking zones. The doors will be suitable for manual 
operation. The door opening periphery would be fitted 
with heat resistant cast iron. 


5.4.5 Access Doors 

Type Manual, cover type, bolted 

Quantity As required 

Opening Minimum 600 mm x 750 mm 

size 

Material Mild steel plate (IS 2062 grade E 
250 A) of Min 5 mm thick 

Operation Manual 


Adequate number of access doors made of minimum 
5mm thick mild steel plate will be provided on the side 
of the furnace wall and will be bolted to the furnace 
casing suitably. The opening in the furnace side wall 
brick work for the access doors will be normally filled 
with refractory brick laid dry for easy removal of bricks 
at the time of maintenance/requirement of access inside 
the furnace. 


5.4.6 Clean Out Door 


Type Manual, cover type, bolted 
Quantity As required 

Opening Minimum 250 mm x 270 mm 
size 

Material Heat resistant cast iron 
Operation Manual 


Adequate number of clean-out doors made of heat 
resistant cast iron construction will be provided. The 
doors will be hinge type construction. 


5.5 Refractory and Insulation Material 


5.5.1 Roof construction will be arch type if the width 
of the furnace is up to 2.2 M. Beyond this, furnace roof 
is to be constructed with suspended roof hanger bricks. 
Refractory materials shall be selected to achieve skin 
temperature of furnace as under: 

a) All walls including hearth - 100°C (Max) 

b) Roof - 120°C (Max) 
Temperature will be measured 1 m away from burner, 
door opening and any other opening on the furnace. 
Quality of refractory bricks shall be selected to with 
stand minimum 100°C more than the maximum surface 
temperature at furnace face as well as at each layer face. 
Physical properties of refractory shall be selected as per 
customer choice. In absence of customer’s choice, the 
same may be specified by supplier. 


IS 17082 : 2019 


5.5.2 Furnace Roof with Suspended Bricks 


a) Soak zone and 
part of heating 
zone 


b) Balance zone 


The roof hangers shall be made of heat resistant cast 
steel (HA alloy), which will be held in position to the 


250 mm thick special 
shape roof brick made 
of minimum 45 percent 
alumina firebricks 


115 mm hot face insulation 
bricks and 


75 mm cold face insulation 
bricks. 


250 mm thick special 
shape roof brick made 
of 40 percent alumina 
quality fire bricks 


115 mm hot face insulation 
bricks 


75 mm cold face insulation 


anchors of roof steel beams. 


5.5.3 Furnace Roof with Arch Bricks 


a) Soak zone and 
part of heating 
zone 


b) Balance zone 


5.5.4 Walls 


a)Furnace 
discharge end 
wall, furnace 
soak and part 
of heating zone 
side wall 


b) Remaining zone 
side wall and 
charge end wall 


5.5.5 Furnace Hearth 


230 mm thick end arch 
fire bricks made of 45 
percent alumina 


115 mm Hot face 
insulation bricks 


75 mm cold face insulation 


230 mm thick end arch 
bricks made of 40 percent 
alumina firebricks backed 
by -115 mm hot face 
insulating bricks 


75 mm cold face insulation 


230 mm 45 percent 
alumina quality firebricks 


115 mm hot face insulation 
bricks 


115 mm cold face 
insulation bricks 


40 mm block insulation 


230 mm 40 percent 
alumina quality firebricks 


115 mm hot face insulation 
bricks 


115 mm cold face 
insulation bricks 


40 mm block insulation 


5.5.6 Soak Hearth 


5.5.7 Heating Zone 
Hearth 


5.5.8 Unfired Zone 
Hearth 


200 mm high alumina 
(70 percent) low cement 
castable 


115 mm high heat duty 
(IS8) firebricks. 


75 mm hot face insulation 
bricks. 


190 mm 
castable 


insulating 


115 mm hot face chromite 
bricks up to 4 M from soak 
zone end and 58 percent 
alumina quality firebricks 
at remaining heating zone. 


115 mm high heat duty 
(IS 8) firebricks 


75 mm hot face insulation 
bricks 


150 mm cold face 
insulation bricks 


115 mm high heat duty 
(IS 8) firebricks. 


115 mm medium heat 
duty (IS 6) firebricks 


75 mm hot face insulation 
bricks 


115 mm cold face 
insulation bricks 


Castable on the soak hearth will be laid in position by 


AISI-310 anchors. 


5.5.9 For Over- 
ground Flue Duct 
Before and After 
Recuperator 


5.5.10 For Under- 


ground Flue 
Duct Before 
Recuperator 


5.5.11 For Under- 
ground Flue Duct 
After 


5.5.12 Recuperator 


150 mm thick of ceramic 
fibre blankets of different 
grades for sides and top 


230 mm thick hot face 
and cold face insulation at 
bottom 


230 mm high heat duty 
firebricks (IS 8) 


75 mm cold face insulation 
bricks 

150 mm red bricks to be 
used as ventilation course. 
230 mm medium heat 
duty firebricks (IS 6) 


150 mm red bricks to be 
used as ventilation course 


5.5.13 Stack 


5.5.14 Hot Air 
Lagging 


5.5.15 Discharge 
Doors 


5.5.16 Charge 
Door 


5.5.17 Burner 
Blocks 


NATURAL GAS 


Bell portion of the 
chimney will be lined 230 
mm. Medium heat duty 
quality firebricks backed 
by broken insulation 
bricks and portion up 
to a height of 5 M. from 
bell portion with 115 mm. 
medium heat duty quality 


firebricks and balance 
portion would remain 
unlined. 


In case the fuel is furnace 
oil having sulphur content 
3-4 percent, fully lined 
chimney is preferred. 


100 mm thick mineral 
wool mattress covered 
with galvanized steel/ 
aluminium sheet cladding 


115 mm 45 percent 
alumina firebricks 


115 mm cold face 
insulation 


25 mm block insulation 


115 mm 40 percent 
alumina firebricks 


75mm cold face insulation 
bricks 


90 percent alumina 
refractory castable or 
equivalent. 
VENT 
SOLENOID 


VALVE 


IS 17082 : 2019 


6 COMBUSTION EQUIPMENT 


6.1 Burners 


Burners are selected based on available fuel (oil or 
gas), fuel oil grade and calorific value, type of fuel gas 
(also cleanliness and calorific value), and combustion 
air preheat temperature and pressure. Accordingly, 
burners can be chosen exclusively for oil firing, gas 
firing or dual fuel burner for firing either oil or gas as 
fuel or both. 


Burner shall be suitable for combustion air preheat 
temperature of 350°C and above. 
6.1.1 Burner Accessories 
Generally Following burner accessories are to be 
envisaged in the combustion system. 
6.1.1.1 For gas firing system 
a) Limiting orifice valves in gas line; 
b) Metering orifice valves in gas line; 
c) Manual gas shut off valves in burner gas line; and 
d) Solenoid operated gas safety shut off valves in 


burner gas lines. 


7 GAS TRAIN COMPONENTS 


One (1) set of gas train components comprising of the 
following will be provided (see Fig. 3). 


a) Iset - Gas filter 

b) Iset - Solenoid operated safety shut off 
valve 

c) 1No. - Gas governor 

d) Iset - Solenoid operated safety shut off 
valve in bleed line 

e) Iset - © Pressure gauge 

f) 1 set High/low gas pressure switch 

MENT 
SOLENOID 


VALVE 


SAFETY SHUT 
OFF VALVE 


XD 


To 
BURNERS 


GAS LINE © 


© 


Fic. 3 GAS TRAIN CONTROL Loop 


IS 17082 : 2019 


7.1 UV Flame Monitoring Devices and Auto Burner 
Ignition 

UV photocell flame monitoring devices for each burner 
with pilot ignition eguipment may be provided as 
reguired for safety. 


Each burner will be provided with standard UV 
adaptor detector assembly which include UV detector 
and observation port. The UV photocell assembly 
is threaded into the back of the burner in place of its 
observation port. 


In case of failure of burner flame, UV photocell will 
give impulse to solenoid valve to cut-off fuel supply 
to burner to avoid generation of un-burnt fuel in the 
furnace resulting fire hazards/explosion. 


Auto burner ignition system for each burner will consist 
of ignition transformer, spark plug. 


UV flame monitoring system is recommended in case 
of gas firing system (for self ignition temperature of the 
fuel is higher than 800°C). 


7.2 For Oil Firing System 
a) Sensitrol oil valves in oil line; 
b) Oil flexible hoses; 
c) Oil shut-off valve; 
d) Adjustable port valve for zone control; and 


e) Oil solenoid valve for zone (oil solenoid valve for 
each burner, when UV flame monitoring system is 
used). 


7.3 Oil Pumping and Heating System 


For supply of oil at constant pressure and temperature, 
one oil recirculation system from termination point 
to the burners through ring main system are to be 
provided. To terminate the oil supply, an isolating valve 
is to be provided. Oil should be supplied from day oil 
tank at slightly higher temperature (depending on the 
visco city) with free flow gravity pressure. 


In order to preheat fuel oil at day tank, one no. out flow 
heater of adequate kW rating is to be provided at oil 
day tank. 


For low viscosity fuel oils like LDO and HSD, heater 
may not be required. 


Complete pumping and heating set shall comprise the 
following: 


a) 2 Oil pumps (1 working + 1 standby); 
b) 1 Suction side duplex filter; 
c) 1 Delivery side duplex filter; 


d) 1 Pressure regulating valve on return line With 
valves and by-pass valve; 


e) 1 Set Interconnecting pipe line; and 


f) 1 Lot of duplex oil heaters, each of adequate kW 
(1 working + I standby). 


Zonal heaters are also to be provided for large furnaces 
where burners are located far from oil heating unit to 
maintain desired temperature of oil. In case of furnace 
oil, an outflow heater of adequate kW rating is to be 
provided at outlet of oil day tank to preheat depending 
on viscosity of oil so that oil flows to main heating and 
pumping unit smoothly. 


Combustion air flow will be controlled zone-wise 
through: 


a) Wafer style butterfly valves with stainless steel 
internals for combustion air control (to be operated 
with modulating motor/pneumatic actuator with 
linkages); 


b) Butterfly valves in burner combustion air; and 


c) Butterfly valves in burner atomizing air (in case of 
oil firing). 


The complete pumping and heating set will be 
fitted on fabricated base frame with oil drip tray. 
The pump will circulate approximately 2-3 times 
of oil requirement per hour in the oil ring main to 
maintain oil supply to burners at required flow and 
pressure. 


8 BLOWERS 


8.1 Combustion Air Blower 


Adequate number of combustion air blowers with 
standby of suitable capacity and pressure are to be 
provided. The blower will be arranged for direct/V-belt/ 
coupling driven through a suitable motor. Following 
details shall be indicated on the blower: 


a) Capacity (m*/h); 

b) Pressure, mm WG; 

c) Motor rating (kW); and 
d) Type of drive. 


Blowers shall be centrifugal type, mild steel 
construction and statically and dynamically balanced. 
Blower capacity cannot be less than the air requirement 
considering connected load of the furnace. 


NOTE — VVED for combustion air blower may be considered 
as optional. 


8.2 Atomizing Air Blower (for Oil Firing) 


Adequate number of atomizing air blowers with standby 
of suitable capacity and pressure are to be provided. 
The blower will be arranged for direct/V-belt/coupling 
driven through a suitable motor. Following details shall 


be indicated on the blower: 
a) Capacity ( m/h); 
b) Pressure, mm WG; 
c) Motor rating (kW); and 
d) Type of drive. 


Blowers shall be centrifugal type, mild steel 
construction and statically and dynamically balanced. 
Blower capacity cannot be less than the air reguirement 
considering connected load of the furnace. 


NOTE — VVED for atomizing air blower may be considered 
as optional. 


8.3 Mode of Firing 


The furnace will be divided into required automatically 
controlled zones for heating and soaking zones in 
addition to unfired preheating zone. All the burners of 
heat zone will fire across width/length of furnace and 
will be mounted on the side/end walls depending on 
design of the furnace. Burners of soak zone will fire 
longitudinally (axially) and will be mounted on back 
wall. The burner firing configuration should ensure 
proper heat distribution, maximizing heat transfer and 
minimum fuel consumption. 


8.4 Heat Distribution 


Adequate number of burners are to be selected on the 
basis of zone-wise heat distribution in the furnace 
considering the total connected heat load in Million 
Kcal per hour/ KW. 


The approximate number of burners with firing 
arrangement and heat distribution in different zones 
are to be decided considering proper heat distribution, 
charging and discharging arrangement and preheating, 
heating and soaking time. 


Zone No. of Total Heat Firing 
Burners Release Arrangement 
(Approx.) (Approx.) 
Soak zone required Million KCal/ Across width/ 
hr/KW length 
Heating Zone - I required Million KCal/ Across width/ 
hr/KW length 
Heating Zone -II required ` Milllon KCal/ Across width/ 
hr/KW length 
9 PIPE WORK 


9.1 Combustion Air Pipeline 


Cold air piping from the combustion air fan to the 
recuperator and hot air piping between the recuperator 
and burners through individual zone headers would be 


IS 17082 : 2019 


provided. The pipeline will be flanged at appropriate 
interval and supported by brackets. Combustion air 
blower will be located near the recuperator. Flexible 
bellows should be provided in preheated combustion 
air line to take care of expansion and alignment during 
pipe assembly. Hot air piping shall be internally lined 
or of suitable grade to withstand the hot air temperature 
with external insulation. 


9.2 Atomizing Air Pipeline (In Case of Oil Firing) 


Necessary atomizing air pipeline up to burners will be 
provided. The pipelines will be supported at appropriate 
places. 


9.3 Dilution Air Piping 


Dilution air piping from dilution air fan to the flue 
tunnel where the recuperator is placed. 


9.4 Gas Piping 


Gas piping from termination point to various zones 
including distribution network complete with valves 
and fittings will be included. An isolating valve is to be 
provided. Gas pressure at takeover point should be min 
0.07-0.08 Kg/cm’.g. 


9.5 Oil Piping 


Oil piping from the oil pumping and preheating unit 
to the burners through the ring-main system will be 
included. Fuel oil supply to the oil pumping and heating 
unit at a free flow gravity pressure of 0.5-1.5 Kg/cm?.g 
and pumpable temperature (about 50-60°C temperature 
for furnace oil) at header at the battery limit with an 
isolating valve is to be provided. All pipeline from this 
point to the points of usage through the ring-main will 
be provided. 


9.6 Hydraulic Piping (if Applicable) 


The hydraulic pipe work for the pusher and ejector 
mechanism as well as charge and discharge doors 
including all necessary valves, flexible pipes, fittings 
and supports are to be provided. All fittings and 
sockets will be of weldable quality. All the pipes will 
be from seamless tubes suitable to withstand hydraulic 
pressure. 


10 RECUPERATOR 


One multi-channel tubular type, cross-current flow 
type. Recuperator will be required for preheating the 
combustion air to a temperature of 350 to 650°C. 


The recuperator includes two or more completely 
assembled suspended units in which the front (hot) 
bank of tubes are made of suitable special alloy steel 
and the balance tubes are made of carbon steel. 


IS 17082 : 2019 


Operating Data (Approximately) 


a) Fuel 


b) Connected ` heat 
with recuperator 


load for furnace 


c) Waste gas flow 

d) Temperature of waste gas: 
1) At entry to recuperator 
2) At exit to recuperator 


e) Combustion air flow 


f) Temperature of air: 
1) At entry to recuperator 


2) At exit to recuperator (desired) 


g) Pressure drop across: 
1) Ar side 
2) Flue side 


10.1 Dilution Air Blower 


Adequate number of dilution air blowers with standby 
of suitable capacity and pressure are to be provided. 
The blower will be arranged for direct/V-belt/coupling 
driven through a suitable motor. Following details shall 
be indicated on the blower: 


a) Capacity (m*/h); 

b) Pressure, mm WG; 

c) Motor rating (kW); and 

d) Type of drive. 
Blowers shall be centrifugal type, mild steel 
construction and statically and dynamically balanced. 


Blower capacity cannot be less than the air requirement 
considering connected load of the furnace. 


NOTE — VVED for dilution air blower may be considered as 
optional. 


10.2 Hot Air Bleed 


A hot air bleed system will be provided to give further 
protection to the recuperator. Should the hot air 
temperature exceeds the safe temperature limit, the hot 
air bleed control opens the bleed valve which allows 
a greater quantity of combustion air to flow through 
the recuperator tubes. The hot air that is exhausted is 
usually piped back into the waste gas flue between the 
recuperator and the stack. 


10.3 Flues 


a) Type 
b) Insulation 


Underground or overhead 
Inside 


The furnace will be provided with underground/ 
overground flue duct for exhausting of waste gas from 
furnace to the chimney through recuperators. Overhead 


10 


°C (Max.) 


°C (indicative) 


°C (ambient) 
°C (350°C or above) 


150 - 250 mmWG approx. 
10 - 20 mmWG approx. 


flue duct will be made of steel plates with flanges and 
supporting structures. The flue duct will be lined inside 
with suitable insulation material. 


Underground flue duct will be made of RCC which will 
be lined inside with suitable refractory and insulation 
material. 


10.4 Dampers 


a) Application : To regulate outgoing flue 
gases, and hence, Furnace 


chamber pressure 

In the overhead/ 
underground flue duct after 
recuperator 

Rise and fall type for 
underground and rotary 
type for overhead 


b) Location 


c) Type 


One guillotine rise and fall type (or, rotary type) damper 
would be provided in the underground flue, after the 
combustion air recuperator. The damper would be made 
of AISI-304 stainless steel plates suitably stiffened. 
The damper will be suitable for actuation with electro- 
mechanical/pneumatic actuator and will be provided 
with damper operating mechanism. 


10.5 Stack (See IS 6533) 


a) Type Self-supported, natural 
draught 
b) Height M 
c) Material of : Mild steel ( IS 2062 Grade 
construction E 250. A) 
d) Insulation Inside 


The stack is a self-supporting partially/fully refractory 
lined natural draft chimney of suitable height. The 
stack is of welded construction The chimney will be 
of suitable height and diameter considering Central 
Pollution Control norms and will be designed and 
constructed as per relevant IS standard along with 
lightening arrestor, earthing, platform, ladder, aviation 
lamp, sample ports etc. The lining configuration of 
the chimney will be as described under refractory and 
insulation material. 


Induced draft chimney can also be provided, if desired 
due to limitation of height in the plant area. 


11 CHARGE PUSHER MECHANISM 


Application To feed charge into the furnace 
Type Hydraulic/electro-mechanical 
Operation Hydraulic/motorized 

Speed tne, m/min 

Pushing force: wee Kg 

Stroke T amenes Mm 


The material will be pre-positioned in front of the 
charge end of the furnace through charge roller table 
(or, placed directly on charge table in front of the 
furnace). 


For pushing the material inside the furnace, 
hydraulically/electro-mechanically operated charge 
pusher mechanism will be provided. The hydraulically/ 
electro-mechanically operated pusher mechanism will 
push the material up to a required distance and adequate 
speed. 


Pusher will be designed considering the total pushing 
load in hearth, cycle time required for output, speed and 
stroke length. 


The pusher head will be constructed from heavy 
mild steel structural section with necessary stiffening 
arrangement. Hydraulic cylinders along with necessary 
valves for proper operation will be required. 


Hydraulically/electro-mechanically operated pusher 
mechanism will push the material in one/two/triple row 
as desired. 


12 DISCHARGE EJECTOR 


a) Application To discharge the material 


from the furnace 


b) Type Electro-mechanical or electro- 
hydraulic 

c) Operation Motorized (or, through 
hydraulic arrangement) 

d) Speed tn. m/min 

e) Pushing force :.—......... Kg 

D Stoke e mm 


11 


IS 17082 : 2019 


For charging of the hot billets from the furnace to the 
discharge roller table, one (1) no. electro-mechanically 
(or, electro-hydraulic) operated discharge ejector shall 
be provided. The main drive roll will be connected 
with suitable capacity motor and gearbox assembly. 
Necessary guide rolls and support rolls will be provided 
throughout the ejector rod for uniform loading. 
Necessary water piping will be provided above the 
ejector rod for uniform spray of water. The ejector 
machine shall have facility for cross movement. The 
cross movement shall be effected by means ofa hydraulic 
cylinder, which will be operated from hydraulic power 
pack. The ejector rod will have adequate stroke to push 
the billets onto the furnace discharge table. However, to 
reduce the stroke of ejector a furnace pull out roll may 
be provided. 


13 PULL-OUT ROLL ASSEMBLY 


a) Application To discharge the 
material from the 
furnace 

b) Type Hydraulic/electric 

c) Operation Hydraulic/electric 

d) Speed it ne m/min 

e) Weight of charge  : .......... Kg 

material 


One set furnace pull out roll assembly, which will work 
in conjunction with discharge ejector mechanism are to 
be provided. 


Pull-out role will help in pulling-out the material 
from the furnace faster and ultimately place it on the 
discharge roller conveyor. This will help the ejector 
machine to be designed for smaller pushing stroke. 


The pull out roll will consist of two driven rolls (one 
stationary bottom roll and the other hydraulically 
clamping top roll). Both the rollers will be driven 
by a pinion stand, which will be driven by electro- 
mechanical drive unit consisting of motor, gearbox, 
couplings and shaft etc. 


Both the rollers shall be of solid steel rolls of suitable 


diameter supported on anti-friction bearings and housed 
in water-cooled bearing block. 


14 HYDRAULIC POWER PACK 


a) Application Operation of pusher, ejector, 


pull-out roll assembly 


2 Nos. (1 working + 1 
standby) 


b) Number of 
hydraulic 
pumps 

c) Pump capacity l/min each 

d) Design 
pressure 


160 kg/cm? approximately 


IS 17082 : 2019 


e) Normal 100—120 kg/cm? 
working approximately 
pressure 

f) Connected sn. hp, energy-efficient 
motor 


g) Accessories 1) Hydraulic pumps with 


couplings and motors 
2) Solenoid operated 
direction control valves 


3) Solenoid 
unloader valve 


operated 


4) Pressure relief valve 
5) Flow control valves 


6) Oil reservoir with air 


breather and strainer 

7) Pressure gauges 

8) Heat exchanger for oil 
cooling 

9) Level indicator 

10) Low level switch 

11) Non-return valves 

12) Interconnecting piping 


13) Manifolds 
fittings 


and other 


For operation of hydraulic cylinders of charge pusher, 
hydraulic cylinder for discharge doors, hydraulic 
torque motor and cross travel cylinder for ejector, 
one common composite hydraulic power pack unit 
comprising of hydraulic oil storage tank, 2 Nos. 
(1 working + 1 standby) pumps with suitable HP 
motor, necessary valve station etc. are to be provided. 
The system would be suitable for operating pressure 
of 120 Bar and system pressure will be 160 Bar. The 
hydraulic system would also include one water cooled 
heat exchanger which will cool the hydraulic oil during 
operation. 


15 INSTRUMENTATION 


15.1 Alternative — 1 PID Type Control Through 
Stand Alone Controllers 


a) The furnace zone temperature will be 
automatically controlled through microprocessor- 
based PID temperature controllers on mass flow 
based control principle. Manual override facility 
shall be provided, 


b 


wm 


In order to maintain positive pressure in the furnace, 
necessary furnace pressure control instruments 
will be used. Automatic furnace pressure control 
will maintain positive pressure inside the furnace 
to reduce ingress of outside air to minimum, which 
will ultimately reduce oxidation of charge material 


12 


and thereby scale loss. Manual override facility 
shall be provided, and 


c) The furnace sequence will be controlled by Relay 
Logic Panel or PLC-PC based system. 


The furnace will be divided into required control zones 
and zone temperature shall be controlled by the stand- 
alone PID controllers. The instrumentation system 
shall be suitable for operating on a power supply of 
220 V, single phase, 50 Hz, AC supply obtained from 
MCC Panel. 


The instrumentation system of the furnace will consist 
of the following controls and interlocking: 


a) Zone temperature control; 
b) Furnace pressure control; 


c) Preheated air temperature control (recuperator 
protection); 


d) Hot air bleed control; 


e) Flue gas temperature control through dilution air 
(recuperator protection); and 


f) Safety interlocking as required for the furnace 
system. 
15.1.1 Zone Temperature Control 


a) Pt. Pt/Rh 13 percent simplex thermocouple with 
necessary compensating cable; 

b) PID temperature controllers; 

c) Gas/oil/air ratio controllers; 

d) Air/gas orifice plates; 

e) Air/Gas flow transmitters; 

f) Oil flow meters; 

g) Air control valve with electro-mechanical/ 

pneumatic actuator; 


h) Gas control valves with electro-mechanical/ 


pheumatic actuator; 


j) Oil control valves with electro-mechanical/ 


pneumatic actuator; and 


k) ON/OFF override temperature controllers. 


Quantity of above instruments will be decided on the 
basis of heating and soaking control zones. 


15.1.2 Furnace Pressure Control 


a) | No.- Furnace pressure transmitter. 

b) 1 No. - PID type microprocessor based pressure 
indicating controller. 

c) 1 No.- Modulating motor /pneumatic actuator 


for damper actuation in flue line. 


15.1.3 Preheated Air Control Loop (Hot Air Bleed 
Control) 


a) One (1) - Ni.Cr./Ni.Al. simplex thermocouple 
with compensating cable 


b) One (1) - ON/OFF temperature controller. 


c) One(1) - Wafer style control valve with 
electromechanical/pneumatic actuator 


15.1.4 Flue Gas Temperature through Dilution Air 
Control 


a) One(1) - Ni.Cr./Ni.Al. simplex thermocouple 
with compensating cable 

b) One (1) - ON/OFF temperature controller 

c) One(1) - Wafer style control valve with 


electrical/pneumatic actuator 


15.2 Instrument Panel 


One 2 mm thick sheet steel construction, single 
cubicle type with fixed front and rear two leaf 
hinge door suitably sized instrument panel to house 
the required front panel micro processor based 
controllers, lamps, switches and other back of panel 
devices like relays, fuses, MCBs, terminal blocks etc. 
will be provided. 


15.3 Annunciator 


The instrument panel will be provided with one no. 
stand alone solid state multi-channel audio/visual solid 
state annunciator having front facia with legends of 
fault points and shall have the following features: 


Fault conditions will activate audible alarm and flash 
the associated facia of the annunciator. 


a) On pressing the “acknowledge push button” 
the audible alarm will be silent and fault facia 
nameplate will become steady; 

b) When fault is cleared, the facia will go “off” when 
reset push button is pressed; and 

c) All alarm units will be independent of each other 
and will have legends engraved on the front 
facia. 


Alarm conditions will include the following fault points 
for safety: 


a) High gas pressure 1 point 

b) Low gas pressure 1 point 

c) Low oil Pressure 1 point 

d) Low combustion I point 
air pressure 

e) Low atomizing pressure I point 


f) High zone temperature as required 


g) High combustion 
air temperature after 


recuperator 1 point 
h) High waste gas entry 

temperatre to 

recuperator I point 
j) High furnace pressure 1 Point 


k) Spares as required 


13 


IS 17082 : 2019 


16 SAFETY 
FURNACE 


INTERLOCKING IN THE 


The safety against various abnormal conditions like 
excess zonal temperature, excess furnace pressure, low 
oil pressure, high/low gas pressure, Low combustion air 
pressure, shall be interlocked in such a way so that in 
the event of occurrence of such faults, respective safety 
devices (control/alarm) will be activated to prevent any 
adverse situation in the furnace. 


16.1 Alternative — 1 PLC-PC Based Mass Flow 
Control 


The furnace will be provided with PLC-PC based 
instrumentation system for the following: 


a) Indication, recording and control of furnace 
temperature in each zone; 

b) Indication and control of fuel oil/gas in each zone; 

c) Indication, recording, control and totalization 
of fuel Oil/gas flow in main header; 

d) Indication and control of combustion air flow; 

e) Indication, recording and control of furnace 
pressure; 

f) Indication of flue temperature and control of 
dilution air to recuperator; 

g) Indication of preheated air temperature control; 
h) Indication and recording of combustion air 
temperature at recuperator inlet and outlet; 

j) Indication of fuel oil/gas pressure at main 

header; 
k) Data for Process Control, and 
m) Any other data, required. 


The PLC-PC based instrumentation system shall be 
flexible and user friendly with user friendly interface in 
HMI (Human Machine Interface) (see Fig. 4). 


The PLC-PC based instrumentation system will consist 
of the following. 

16.2 Temperature and Air/Fuel Ratio Control (Mass 
Flow Based) — (see Fig. 5 and Fig. 6) 


a) ‘R’ type with suitable length below flange simplex 
thermocouple with extension leads for zone 
temperature control and recording; 


b) ‘R’ type with suitable length below flange simplex 
thermocouple for excess zone temperature control; 


c) Modulating motor /pneumatic actuator for air flow 
control valves; 


d) Airline orifice plates; 
e) Air flow transmitter; 

f) Oil flow meters; 

g) Oil flow control valves; 


IS 17082 : 2019 


h) Modulating motor/pneumatic actuator for oil 
control valves; 


j) Gas line orifice plates; 
k) Gas flow transmitters; 
m) Gas control valves; 


n) Modulating motor/pneumatic actuator for gas 
control valves; and 


p) ON/OFF excess zone temperature controllers. 


16.3 Preheated Air Control Loop (Hot Air Bleed 
Control) (see Fig. 7) 


a) One (1) - Ni.Cr/Ni.Al. simplex thermocouple 
with compensating cable 
b) One (1) - Wafer style control valve with 


electromechanical/pneumatic 
actuator 


16.4 Flue Gas Temperature through Dilution Air 
Control 


a) One (1) - Ni.Cr./Ni.Al. simplex 
thermocouple with compensating 
cable 

b) One (1) - Wafer style control valve with 


electrical /pneumatic actuator 


The PID controllers for furnace zone temperature 
shall be constituted within the PLC through intelligent 
software PID blocks. The value and status of zone 
temperature can be viewed on the Human Machine 
Interface (HMI) screen of the colour monitor for the 
furnace work station. 


r 


For excess temperature control of respective zone, 
provision for stand-alone ON/OFF override temperature 
controllers have been considered. In case the zonal 
temperature overshoots the maximum set value it will 
shut off the zone fuel oil/gas valve and at the same time 
the system will raise an audio-visual alarm. Details of 
alarm and fault will be logged in HMI. 


16.5 Furnace Pressure Control (see Fig. 8) 


The furnace will be provided with one set of furnace 
pressure controlling instrument consisting of the 
following: 


a) 1 No. draft range furnace pressure transmitter; and 
b) 1 Set damper and actuating motor. 


Furnace pressure control is important to maintain 
slightly positive pressure inside the furnace to prevent 
ingress of atmosphere air into the furnace which will 
help in reducing oxidation thereby reducing scale 
formation. 


Furnace pressure control will be through common PLC 
in which necessary components will be provided in the 
PLC. 


16.5.1 PLC and its Panel 


The PLC, its accessories and relays shall be housed 
inside a non-compartmentalized 2 mm thick sheet 
steel construction, self standing dust and vermin 
proof type panel. Wirings shall be completed up to 
the terminals. All incoming and outgoing cable shall 
be through 3 mm thick gland plate provided at bottom 
of panel. 


MONITOR 
(COMMERCIAL GRADE) 


| EEE 8 are PLC SYSTEM 
- lulujuju| (dg ops? Hi 
| COMMERCIAL GRADE 
Jm: zam: = 
ee dE sch 
a ij A 
p > 
< | 
El 
Si l 
| 
+I l == ee 4-20mA O PRESNE: 
| 1 
ac ee S od o o a ee 一 den | 
. &€ : | 
| = (ZONE-1) (ZDNE- 4) | 
| | | 
Le -ARC -全 FURNACE : 
mv) | ( FOE. PRESSURE | 
: TRANSMITTER ) | 
ee e | — „— FLUE LINE GAMPER 
4—20mA 


Fic. 4 SYSTEM CONFIGURATION 


14 


IS 17082 : 2019 


TEMP. CONTROL LOOP 


CA 


(S-TYPE) 


3 
< 


Te 
CEOE 


| 
| (K-TYPE) | | | 
| | 3 VALVE 
| | MANIFOLD 
| | | mv | 
lee | EN 
II OIL | | 
| | | 
| 
3 VALVE | | d 
| MANIFOLD | | IS 
| | | 3 
| | 
| | t 
| | 
d | L4-20mA | 
| 
E (RIA 
Kee e 
3 GE 
SE w- 


Fic. 5 TEMPERATURE CONTROL Loop FOR OIL LINE 


IS 17082 : 2019 


TEMP, CONTROL LOOP 


(S-TYPE) | 
| 3 
< 

| 

| 


RATIO CONTROL LOOP 
(AIR PRIMARY CONTROL) 


COMB. AIR 


3 VALVE 
MANIFOLD 


GAS 


VYWOZ—+ 


Fic. 6 TEMPERATURE CONTROL Loop FOR GAS LINE 


16 


IS 17082 : 2019 


COMB. AIR 
Toon? 
( FROM BLOWER ) 


TO BURNER 


HOT AIR BLEED 


Ge EE 
SE GE 


o 


I 
< 

| | | $ | 
v 

DILUTION | me + | 

AIR | | 
| 

| | 
Am | © = 
DILUTION AIR CONTROL l HOT AIR BLEED CONTROL 
L- Ref drog. no. P-2614 RE 


Fic. 7 P AND I DIAGRAM — TEMPERATURE CONTROL OF PREHEAT COMBUSTION AIR 


FURNACE PRESS. CONTROL LOOP 
OPEN TO 
ATMOSPHERE 


M 


FLUE 


FLUE DAMPER 


Fic. 8 FURNACE PRESSURE CONTROL Loop 


17 


IS 17082 : 2019 


The panel doors shall be two leaf hinged type at both 
front and rear of panel. The panel shall be painted 
inside and outside light grey (Shade no.631 of IS 5). 


One non-redundant type Programmable Logic 
Controller (PLC) for the furnace will be provided for 
interlocking and sequential control and for furnace 
process control like temperature etc. The PLC would 
be complete with one control processor, one power 
supply module, and required digital input/output cards, 
analog card, T/C card etc. The unit would be located in 
an air-conditioned electrical control room in a dust and 
vermin proof enclosure. 


In addition to process and sequence control through 
PLC, following features will be available through PC 
based system on monitor screen in various pages, 


a) Temperature and pressure data logging and 
trending, 


b) Overview of furnace, and 
c) Fault annunciation page and alarm logging 


Alarm conditions will include the following fault points 
for safety: 


a) High gas pressure : 1 point 
b) Low gas pressure : 1 point 
c) Low oil pressure : 1 point 
d) Low combustion air pressure : 1 point 
e) Low atomizing pressure : 1 point 


f) High zone temperature : as required 


g) High combustion air 


temperature after recuperator : 1 point 
h) High waste gas entry 

temperature to recuperator : 1 point 
j) High furnace pressure : 1 Point 


k) Spares : as required 


Besides this, the PLC-PC based instrumentation shall 
log the data as detailed below: 


a) Shift-wise, daily, monthly, yearly report with 
process values/production figures and other 
process data. However, same shall be finalized 
during detailed engineering process; 


b) Logging and reports of events; and 
c) Historical data storage and trending. 


The PC shall have limited storage capacity. As 
and when the hard disk capacity space reduces 
substantially due to storage of data, the same is to be 
stored in floppys/CDs for future and hard disk space 
is to be restored. 


16.6 Work Stations — PC and Printer 


One set common grade PC consisting of pentium-4 
processor with 17" colour monitor, CD Rom, 
compatible key-board, mouse, one (1) No. colour inkjet 
printer. UPS should be provided as power supply utility. 


18 


16.7 Programmable Logic Controller (PLC) for 
Sequential Operation 


A common Programmable Logic Control Panel (PLC) 
indicated above will also be suitable for interlocking 
and sequential control of operation of charge rollers, 
charge pusher, discharge doors, discharge ejector, pull- 
out roll and charge doors. 


The common panel shall also control the entire 
sequential operation of the furnace and its allied 
equipment which are provided along with process 
control as described above. 


17 SAFETY IN THE 


FURNACE 


INTERLOCKING 


The safety against various abnormal conditions like 
excess zonal temperature, excess furnace pressure, low 
oil pressure, high/low gas pressure, low combustion air 
pressure, shall be interlocked in such a way so that in 
the event of occurrence of such faults, respective safety 
devices (control/alarm) will be activated to prevent any 
adverse situation in the furnace. 


The furnace will be provided with following safety 
interlocks for safe operation; 


a) Air temperature control instruments with broken 
thermocouple safety protection (upscale); 


b) To cut-off zone burner firing with the help of oil 
safety solenoid valves and On/OFF gas control 
valves in the event of excess temperature; and 


c) Necessary limit switches as required will be 
provided to ensure safe operation of the furnace. 


18 ELECTRICAL 


18.1 Motor Control Centre 


The furnace will be provided with one dust and vermin 
proof, 2mm thick sheet steel, floor mounted type totally 
enclosed non-compartmentalized/compartmentalized 
and non-draw out type motor control centre for the 
operation of various motors and heaters. Cable entry 
shall be from bottom of panel through 3 mm thick gland 
plate at bottom of panel. MCC panel, Junction Boxes 
etc., shall be :painted — Inside and Outside : Light Grey, 
Shade No.631 of IS 5. 


In addition to the above, two control desks, adequate 
number of control stations and local push button 
stations are required to be located at charging and 
discharging end for operation. 


18.2 Power and Control Cables 


All power and control cables including cable laying 
accessories from MCC panel and Instrument panel to 
various motors/heaters and field instruments are to be 
decided on the basis of cable routing layout and kW 
ratings. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and guality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enguiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MTD 26 (5011). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


