**************** 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 


Mazdoor  Kisan  Shakti  Sangathan 
"The  Right  to  Information,  The  Right  to  Live'' 


IS  11056  (1984) :  Method  for  determination  of  air 
permeability  of  fabrics  [TXD  1:  Physical  Methods  of  Tests] 


Jawaharlal  Nehru 
'Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New" 


aj^&vi  iJii^s:y>K^  isb^^ni^seg 


:<>5&i|  mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 


K^^^iXSVCd^ 


Satyanarayan  Gangaram  Pitroda 
Invent  a  New  India  Using  Knowledge 


Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge  is  such  a  treasure  which  cannot  be  stolen" 


^'^^^r 


k 


BLANK  PAGE 


^*-^^^ 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


Indian  Standard 


15:11056 -1fl04 

( Reaffirmed  2006 ) 


METHOD  FOR  DETERMINATION  OF 
AIR  PERMEABILITY  OF  FABRICS 


UDC     677064  :  677  017622 


®  CopyrSjfhi  I9B5 

INDIAN    STANDARDS    INSTITUTION 

MjWJAK    iHAVAN,    9    BAIi^VDUR    SHAH    ZAtAlt    MARG 

NEW  u£LH]  iioona 
Gr  2  J&fuiary  1985 


IS  :  11056  -  1984 

Indian  Standard 

METHOD  FOR  DETERMINATION  OF 
AIR  PERMEABILITY  OF  FABRICS 

Physical  Methods  of  Test  Sectional  Committee,  TDG  1 

Chairman  Representing 

Db  V.  SuNDARAM  Cotton      Technological      Research      Laboratory 

(  IGAR),  Bombay 

Members 
Db  V.  G.  MuNSHi  (  Alternate  to 
Dr  V.  Sundaram  ) 
AQEicULTURAii      Marketing     Directorate  of  Marketing  &  Inspection  (  Ministry 
Adviser   to   the   Government  of  Agriculture  ),  Faridabad 

OF  India 
Dr.  B.  L.  Banebjee  Indian  Jute    Industries*     Research    Association, 

Calcutta 
Dr  U.  Mukhopadhay  ( Alternate  ) 
Shri  a.  T.  Basak  Directorate    General    of    Supplies    &     Disposals 

(  Inspection  Wing  ) ,  New  Delhi 
Shri  D.  K.  Nandy  (  Alternate ) 
Shri  B.  N.  Basu  Office  of  the  Jute  Commissioner,  Calcutta 

Shri  C.  Bhattachabya  Indian  Petrochemicals  Corporation  Ltd,  Vadodara 

Shri  H.  C.  Bhatia  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  R.  Ghosh  Ministry  of  Defence  (  R&D  ) 

Shri  S.  S   Baoga  {Alternate  ) 
Dr  V.  G.  Kamath  Nirlon  Synthetic  Fibres  &  Chemicals  Ltd,  Bombay 

Dr  a.  R.  Mukhebjee  (  Alternate  ) 
Shrimati  a.  Kaplesh  The  Silk  &  Art  Silk  Mills*  Research  Association, 

Bombay 
Shri  M.  K.  Mam  Ministry  of  Defence  (  DGI  ) 

Shri  P.  C.  Basu  (  Alternate) 
Dr  B.  R.  Manjunatha  Textiles  Committee,  Bombay 

Dr    (Shrimati)    G.    R. 
Phalgumani  (  Alternate  ) 
Shbi  K.  p.    Ramakishna    Pillay     The  South  India  Textile   Research    Association, 

Goimbatore 
Shbi  M,  Radhakrishnan  The     Bombay    Textile     Research     Association, 

Bombay 
Shri  A.  V.  Ravindranathan 
(  Alternate  ) 

(  Continued  on  page  2  } 


©  Copyright  1985 

INDIAN  STANDARDS  INSTITUTION 

This  publication    is  protected    under  the    Indian  Copyright  Act  (  XIV   of  1957  )   and 

reproduction  in  whole  or  in  part  by  any  means  except  with  written  permission  of  the 

publisher  shall  be  deemed  to  be  an  infringement  of  copyright  under  the  said  Act. 


IS  :  11056  -  1984 

(  Continued  from  page  1  ) 

Members  Representing 

Shrimati  G.  p.  Rane  Wool  Research  Associatioiij  Bombay 

Shri  a.  G.  Shah  The  National  Rayon  Gorporation  Ltd,  Bombay 

Shri  D.  S.  Nadkabni  (  Alternate ) 
Dr  G.  S.  Singh  The  Raymond  Woollen  Mills  Limited,  Thane 

Shri  J.  K.  Banerjee  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  T,  N.  Sonwalkar  Gentral  Silk  Board,  Bangalore 

Dr  T.  V.  K.  Srivastava  Office  of  the  Textile  Gommissioner,  Bombay 

Shri  S.  P,  Ghosal  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  T,  A.  Subramaitian  Ahmedabad  Textile  Industry's  Research  Associa- 

tion, Ahmadabad 
Shri  M.  G.  Thanawala  M.  Best  Gotton  Rope  Mfg  Co,  Bombay 

Shei  J.  N.  Vohra  Punjab    State   Hosiery   and   Knitwear    Develop- 

ment Corporation  Ltd,  Chandigarh 

Shri  P.  T.  Banerji  {Alternate  ) 
Shri  R.  L  Midha,  Director  General,  ISI  (  Ex-qfficio  Member  ) 


Director  (  Tex  ) 


Secretary 

Shbi  D.  R,  Kohli 

Senior  Deputy  Director  (  Tex  ),  ISI 


IS:  11056- 1984 

Indian  Standard 

METHOD  FOR  DETERMINATION  OF 
AIR  PERMEABILITY  OF  FABRICS 

0.     FOREWORD 

0.1  This  Indian  Standard  was  adopted  by  the  Indian  Standards  Institution 
on  31  August  1984,  after  the  draft  finalized  by  the  Physical  Methods  of 
Test  Sectional  Committee  had  been  approved  by  the  Textile  Division 
Council. 

0.2  Air  permeability  is  an  important  feature  for  fabrics  used  for  special 
technical  purposes  such  as  parachutes,  filter  cloths,  felts,  impregnated 
fabrics,  membranes,  packing  materials,  etc.  Air  permeability  may  also  be 
used  for  clothing  fabric  to  indicate  their  breathability. 

0.3  This  standard  is  based  on  extensive  tests  carried  out  by  various  textile 
laboratories  on  different  types  of  instruments  available  v^ith  them  covering 
a  wide  range  of  fabrics  from  light  to  heavy  constructions  like  cambric, 
lawn,  poplin,  dress  material,  cotton  and  blended  suitings,  etc,  and  the 
results  obtained  on  different  instruments  were  found  to  be  in  close 
agreement  with  each  other. 

0.4  For  the  purpose  of  deciding  whether  a  particular  requirement  of  this 
standard  is  complied  with,  the  final  value  observed  or  calculated 
expressing  the  result  of  a  test,  shall  be  rounded  off  in  accordance  with 
IS  :  2-1960*. 


1.  SCOPE 

1.1  This  standard  prescribes  a  method  for  measuring  the  permeability  of 
fabrics  to  air  and  is  applicable  to  industrial  fabrics  that  are  permeable  to 
air.     However,  this  standard  is  not  suitable  for  parachute  fabrics. 

2.  PRINCIPLE 

2.1  This  method  is  based  on  the  measurement  of  the  rate  of  flow  of  air 
through  a  given  area  of  fabric  by  a  given  pressur  e  drop  across  the  fabric. 


♦Rules  for  rounding  off  numerical  values  (  revised  ). 

3 


IS:  11056 -1984 

3.  TERMINOLOGY 

3.1  For  the  purpose  of  this  standard,  air  permeability  shall  mean  the 
volume  (  cm 3 )  of  air  passing  through  1  cm*  of  fabric  per  second  at  a 
pressure  difference  of  1  cm  head  of  water. 

4.  SAMPLING 

4.1  Samples  drawn  in  accordance  with  the  procedure  laid  down  in  material 
specification  for  the  fabric  or  as  agreed  to  between  the  parties  concerned 
shall  be  held  to  be  representative  of  the  lot. 

5.  ATMOSPHERIC    CONDITIONS    FOR    CONDITIONING    AND 
TESTING 

5.1  Prior  to  test,  the  samples  shall  be  conditioned  to  moisture  equilibrium 
in  the  standard  atmosphere  of  65  ±  2  percent  relative  humidity  and  27  J^  2*^0 
temperature  from  dry  side  as  laid  down  in  IS  :  6359-1971*.  The  test  shall 
be  carried  out  in  the  standard  atmosphere, 

6.  APPARATUS 

6.1  The  apparatus  shall  consist  of  the  following  arrangements: 

a)  Means  for  drawing  or  forcing  air  through  the  fabric  of  known 
area. 

b)  Circular  orifice  of  definite  known  area. 

c)  Provision  to  hold  the  fabric  so  that  there  is  no  peripheral  leakage 
of  air. 

d)  Means   for    adjusting   the    pressure   drop   across  the  fabric  to  a 
known  amount. 

e)  Means  for  measuring  the  rate  of  flow  of  air  through  the  fabric. 

f)  Means     for   checking   the    calibration     of    air    flowmeter    (  see 
Appendix  A  ) . 

6.1.1  It  is  desirable  that  the  apparatus  shall  be  capable  of  testing  large 
pieces  of  fabrics  v/ithout  cutting. 

7.  PROCEDURE 

7.1  Take  the  conditioned  specimen  and  mount  a  portion  between  the 
clamp  and  circular  orifice  with  sufficient  tension  to  eliminate  wrinkles,  if 
any,  taking  care  to  see  that  the  fabric  is  not  destorted  in  its  own  plane. 

7*2  Start  the  suction  fan  or  other  means  to  force  the  air  through  the 
fabric  and  adjust  the  rate  of  flow  of  air  till  pressure  drop  of  one  centimetre 
water  head  across  the  fabric  is  indicated. 

♦  Method  for  conditioning  of  textiles. 


IS:  11056 -1984 

7.3  Note  the  rate  of  flow  of  air  in  cm^/s. 

7-4  Repeat  the  test  at  other  different  places.    In  all,  at  least  10  tests  shall 
be  carried  out. 

8.  CALCULATION 

8.1  Calculate  the  rate  of  flow  of  air  per  cm*  of  fabric  in  cm°/s   by  the 
following  formula: 

A 

where 

R  =  rate  of  flow  of  air /cm*  of  fabric  in  cm^/s, 
r  =  mean  rate  of  flow  of  air  in  cm'/s,  and 
A  ^  area  cm^  of  fabric  under  test  in  cm*. 

9.  REPORT 

9.1  The  report  shall  include  the  following  information; 

a)  Type  of  fabric  tested, 

b)  Name  of  the  instrument  used, 

c)  Number  of  tests  recommended, 

d)  Average  air  permeability  value  (  cm^/cm^/s  ),  and 

e)  G.  V.  percent. 


APPENDIX    A 

[  Clause  6A{f)  ] 

CALIBRATION  OF  AIR  FLOW  INSTRUMENTS 

A-i.  GENERAL 

A-1.1  Air  flow  instruments  are  very  sensitive  instruments  and  therefore 
require  delicate  and  careful  handling  to  avoid  malfunctioning. 
Malfunctioning  of  the  instruments  can  be  caused  by  air  leakage,  physical 
dam.age  to  the  nozzle  or  test  plate,  wornout  condition  of  the  gasket  or  over 
flow  of  liquid  in  the  monometer,  etc. 


18:11056-1984 


A-2.  CALIBRATION 


A-2.1  Different  instruments  are  provided  with  different  means  and 
accessories  for  the  cahbration  and  checking  of  the  air  flow  instruments, 
like  steel  plates  with  holes  to  give  pre-determined  air  flow  values,  capillary 
resistances  having  pre-determined  air  flow  values  to  be  used  in  conjunction 
with  roto  meters,  set  of  nozzles  and  plates,  etc.  Before  using  the 
instruments,  check  and  calibrate  with  the  help  of  the  calibration 
accessories  provided  with  the  instruments  as  per  the  instructions  given  in 
the  Instrument  Manual. 


