is 13078 : 1881
( Reaffirmed 2002 )

Indian Standard : STEPPING MOTORS mi- SPECIFICATION
.I-

UDC 621'313'2

.

.

@ BIS 1991

BUREAU
.June 1991

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS
Price Group 8

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR M A R G NEW DELHI 110002

Rotating Machinery Sectional Committee, ETD 15

CONTENTS
PAGE

FOREWORD

1

SCOPE REFERENCES D EFINITIONS A B B R E V I A T I O N S , SYMBOLS T YPICAL M O D E S
LEAD

I

2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15

AND

U NITS

V ALUES TO BE I NDICATED BY THE M A N U F A C T U R E R IDENTIFICATION AND T E R M I N A L NUMBERING D IMENSIONS TESTS RATINQ PL A T E A NNEX A A NNEX B A NNEX C A NNEX D A NNEX E

1 1 3 3 4 4 4 4 9 10 10 10 12 15
,

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Rotating Machinery Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council. This standard has been prepared to standardize the terminology used in connection with stepping motors, for detailing the important performance parameters for which the manufacturers should indicate values and for the establishment of recognized test methods for checking these values. Annexes A, B, C and D are included giving respectively, typical presentation, typical basic performance curves and additional test methods for parameters for which the indication of values is not a requirement of this standard. Annex E includes the most common dimensions in metric units for mounting. The dimensions in inch ( FPS >, if required, may be agreed between the manufacturer and the user. The mounting dimensions are recommendatory and have been added to guide the future designers. This standard is adopted from BS 5000 : Part 60 : 1982 `Rotating Electrical Machines of Particular Types or for Particular Applications - Part 60 Stepping Motors', issued by the British Standards Institution ( UK >. For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )`. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

IS 13079 : 1991

Indiun Standard

STEPPINGMOTORS- SPECIFICATION
1 SCOPE 1.1 This standard covers the specific requirements for electromagnetic stepping motors. It defines the terminology used for this type of motor, lists of the items for which values are to bc indicated by the manufacturer and specifies the test methods to be adopted. Dimensions are specified for given frame sizes; however, this standard is also appliable to motors in frames having any other dimensions. 1.2 Hydraulic and `ratchet' type stepping motors are not included in this standard. 2 REFERENCES 2.1 `%he following Indian Standards are necessary adjuncts to this standard: IS No.
2223 : 1983 Title 3.3 Derd Range or Dead Band

The angle between the clockwise and counterclockwise limits under specified load conditions, within which the rotor of an energized stepping motor can stop. 3.4 Detent Position That portion where the rotor of a p:rmanent magnet or hybrid stepping motor corn::: to rest when unenergizzd acd unloaded. 3.5 Detent Torque The maximum steady torque that can b: applied to the shaft of an unenergized stepping motor without causing continuous rotation. 3.6 Direction of Rotation The direction of rotation of the shaft is the one observed ,when facing the shaft end associated with the mounting surfaces. Counter-clockwise rotatiot3 of the shaft is regard:d as positive and clockwise rotation as negative. 3.7 Drive Circuit A combination of the translator logic and a power amplifier that switches the phases of the stepping motor in a pre-determined mode.
NOTE - The available drive circuit configuratioas are defined in 3.7.1 to 3.7.5.

4029 : 1967

Dimensions of flange mounted ac induction motors (first revissfon ) Guide for testing three-phase induction motors

3 DEFINITIONS 3.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall apply. 3.1 Stepping Motor A reversible brushless dc motor, the rotor of which rotates in discrete angular increments when its stator windings are energized in a programmed manner. Rotation occurs because of the magnetic interaction between the rotor poles and the poles of the sequentially cnergit-d stator phases. The rotor has no electrical winding but rather salient or magnetized poles.
NOTE -Particulnr types of stepping motor are defined in 3.1.1, 3.1.2 and 3.1.3. 3.1.1 Permanent Magnet ( PM) Stepping Motor

3.7.1 Bipolar Drive A drive circuit in which the excitation applied is such that the torque generating current reverses in the windings. 3.7.2 Chopper Drive A drive circuit in which the form of excitation is an initial high voltage applied to th: phase winding until the current in that winding reach:s a prcdetcrmiEed value when the supply is swltched off. When the current has decayed to a second predetermined value, the voltage is rc-applied. 3.7.3 Constant Current Drive A driv: circuit that attempts to maintain a constant current in the windings irrtspectivc of motor sperd. 3.7.4 Multi-level Drive A drive circuit in which two or more levels of voltage are s~~quentially applied to a stepping motor wir.ding.
1

A stcppirg motor utilizing a rotor that has permanently magnetized ~012s. 3.1.2 Variable Reluctance ( VR ) Slepping Motor A strppirg motor utilizing a rotor that has salient ~01;s of low residual mngqetic material. 3.1.3 Hybrid ( HY) Stepping Motor A stepping motor utilizing R permanent m?gnet to polarize salient pole piLc:s of low rcsldual magnetic mat::rial on the rotor. 3.2 Damper A device for damping step osciil;tioEs.

3.7.5 Unipobr Drive A drive circuit in which the excitation js such that the torque generating, current in each windirg occurs in one direction only. 3.8 Holding Torque
I

3.;7 Over&&it or Transient Overshoot The amount the shaft of the stepping motor rotales b e y o n d t h e f i n a l commauded s t e p position. 3.18 Phase A part of the winding between a line and the centre tap or star point, or the winding between two lines if no centre tap or star point exists. 3.19 Positional Error The deviation from the theoregical final position after a sequence of steps, expressed as a percentage of basic step angle. 3.20 PaR-Iu Rnte The ( constant ) maximum pulse rate at which the energized stepping motor will start driving a specified load without missing steps, under specifird`drive conditions. 3.21 Pull-in Torque

The, maximum steady torque at a specified cu?rcafi,that cap be applied to the shaft of an energized stepping motor without causing continuous rotation. 3.9 Incremental Motion The. motion ,&u&d by a sirgle pulse or a programmc of steps. 3.10 Line A-&rmjral or wire of the motor `to which a Iugio 9function from the motor driver is applied. In the case of an electronic drive circuit, a power device will be connected to a line. 3.11 Load Angle
T$e

The, maximum torque at which an energized angle between the magnetic axis of,the:rotor stepRing motor will start driving a specified load and the stator magnetic : field. IQ practice, this, and run in synchronism without losing steps, on, is -the angle between the loaded and uuloaded application of a fixed pulse rate. positions of the rotor under otherwise identical conditions. ,3.22 Pull-Out Rate The ( constant ) maximum pulse rate at which the energized stepping motor can run, driving a Tbe maximum, pukrate. at which the unloaded specified load without missing steps, under stepping,motor is able to reverse and remain in specified drive conditions. synchronism under specified drive conditions. 3.23 Pull-Oat Torque 3.13 Maximum Safe Working Temperature The maximum torque that can be applied to the The maximum temperature of the stepping motor, rotating shaft of a stepping motor driven at a either continuously or intermittently rated, may given pulse rate under specified drive conditions, safely be allowed to achteve ( mtasured by the without missing steps. chauge of wirding resistance method ). This may bear little or no relation to the class of 3 24 Residual Torque insulaticn used in the construction of the motor but may be dictated Lby considerations such as In case of permanent magnet stepping motor, it is the non-energized detent torque due to the bearir g lubricant, etc. effects of the permanent magnet and bearing friction. 3.14 Maximum Slew Rate 3.12 Maximum ReversingdRate The maximum pulse rate at which the unloaded stepping motor can remain in synchronism under specified drive conditions. 3.15 Mini-Stepping The sub-division of motor's basic stop angle by partial energization of a phase or phases. 3.16 Nose or Step Sequence A particular sequence of excitation defined by the drive circuit which, when applied to a stepping motor, will energize certain wir.dings or phases. 2 3.25 Pulse Rate The rate at which the [successive F steps are initiated. 3.26 Resolution The reciprocal of the `number of steps per revolution of the motor shaft. 3.27 Resonant Rate A stepping rate at which the stepping motor will miss steps when operating below the pull-out torque curve, under specified load and drive conditions.

3.35 ptep, Position . . ,._a The range of pulse rates over which the motor

can start, stop or reverse without missing steps under specified load and driie conditions. 3.29 ,$alipat Pole A projecting pole on a rotor or stator. 3.30 Settling Time The total time from the application of the command signal until the motor shaft comes to rest. 3.31 Slew Range
The range of pulse rates over which the motor will not miss steps unidirectionally under ' specified l&d and"`drive *conditions;- but within which the motor cannot start, stop or reverse at a fixed pulse. rate. NOTE -This is illustrated ih Fig. 6. 3.32 Step

The angular position that tGe shaft of an unloaded stepping motor assumes when it is eneriized without causing continuous rotation. The step position is not necessarily the kme:as the detent position. 3.36 Stepping Rate The number of step angle through which the stepping motor shaft rotates in a specified time.
3.37 Synchronism

The state that exists when the stepping rate of the rotor equals the applied pulse rate.:
3.38 Torque Gradient

The average slopk of the torque displacement curve over a specified angle through tlie origin.
3.39 Translator Logic

The movement of the rotor from one energized position to the next ifi sequence. ' 3.33 Step Angle ( Basic ) . The angle thropgh._which the &aft. sf a? .udoaded stepping motor can be made to turn `when two adjacent phases are energized, singly in sequence. 3.34 Step Angle Error The maximum percentage deviation from the theoretical step angle.

The logic' that t2t'anslates the input pulse train into the selected made pattern to bd applied to : a stepping motor.
4 AI$B&,EVIATf.O,~S, SYMPLS ,$,ND UNITS 4 . 1 ' T h e ibbreviations, sy&dls a n d u n i t s i cotimonly used ark listed in Table 1.

5 TYPICAL MODES
5.1 There are three preferred sequences as excitation, mode A, mode B and mode A B .

Tyrjical modes for a three-phase motor are detailed in Annex A.

Table 1 List of Abbreviations, Symbols and Units

( Chuse 4.1 )
Term Abbreviation or Symbol Unit Unit Symbol

.

Detent torque Holding torque kffdihum slew range Fve:;hoot ( transient ) Positional error Pull-in rate Pull-ozt rate Pull-in torque Pull-out torque Pulse rate Resolution Resonant rate Response range Settling tiine Slew range Step angle Step angle error Stepping rate Torque gradient

Dead range

Th
4

Td

Degree Newton metre

Steps per second

Newton metre Degree

N:m '

N.m
0

A, B<r AB
Fpi FPQ Tpi Tpo
PPS

3

Percent basic step angle Steps per second Steps per second Newton metre Newton metre Pulses per second Steps per revolution Steps per second Steps per second S e c o n d Steps pzr second Degree Percent basic step angle Steps per second Newton metre per degree

4/o N.m N.m Hz ; N.m/"

IS 13079 : 1991 6 VALUBS TO BE INDICATED BY THE MANUFACTURER Table 2 Lead Identification and Terminal Numbering' ( Clauses 7.1, and 7.2 ) a) No Star Point or Common Connection

6.1 The manufacturer shall indicate values for parameters listed below. These shall be confirmed, where appropriate, by the tests specified in 9. Where the parameters are affected by the Phase Finish Colour Phase Phase Start Colonr I drive circuit or load, details of that drive circuit I 1 or load shall be included in the declaration. Brown/White The parameters are: Red/White Orange/White Orange a) Detent torque, Yellow/White Yellow Green/White b) Step angle ( basic >, Green Blue, White 6 Blue 4 Step angle error, 7 Lilac/White Like 8 Grey/White Grey 4 Steps per revolution, I 4 dc volts or amperes per phase, b) With Star Point or Common Connection f 1 Inductance per phase, d dc resistacce per phase, Terminal Number Phrre Colour I h) Holding torque, 3 Volts ( peak to peak ) per thousand Three-phase with Star Point revolutions per minute as generator ( where applicable ), k) Rotor inertia, Insulation class, and n) Maximum safe working temperature. Four-phase with Star Point 6.2 The manufacturer may give additional icformation in the literature accompanying the motor, the details of which are given in Annex B. The basic performance curves are given in Annex C. ,,.i.-.

fswn

m>

7 LEAD IDENTIFICATION AND TERMINAL NUMBERING

Four-phase with Common Connections Brown Orange Red Yellow Brown/Orange ( Black ) Red/Yellow ( White )

7.1 For motors with loose leads the colours of the leads ( or marlter sleeves fitted to the leads ) 1 shall be as given in Table 2. Colours in : parentheses are non-preferred alternatives. Motors with terminal boards or strips shall have Com4non the terminals identified by numbers as given in connec[ions Table 2. 7.2 Where bipolar drives are used in conjunction with eight-lead motors, it is necessary to connect the windings so that the torques associated with each winding are added, not subtracted; in compliance with Table 2, the winding connections will then be as shown in Fig. 1. 8 DIMENSIONS 8.1 The most common dimensions ( in mm ) for mounting the motor are given in Annex E. At present, the designs of stepping motors within the scope are mainly based on `inch' dimensions. This standard specifies the approximate `millimetre' conversions of the `inch' dimensions but these conversions are not exact. If the user desires the dimensions in `inch' units, the same should be agreed at the enquiry stage. For frames siles given in co1 1 of Tables 3 and 4, the dimensions shall be as given in those tables. For designs 4

having dimensions other than those given in Tables 3 and 4 the diniensions are not standardized. 9 TESTS 9.1 General 9.1.1 Confirmation of Values The manufacturer shall carry out the tests given in this clause to confirm the values which have been indicated in accordance with 6 and also a high voltage test in accordance with 9.5. The additional parameters and their test methods are given in Annex D. However, these do not form part of parameters to be checked for compliance with this standard. These are given

IS 13079 : 1991

R-W PARALLEL OPERATION SERIES

- Y-W

Y

OPERATION

FIG.

1 W INDING C O N N E C T I O N S PDR BIPOLAR D R I V E S

Table 3 Approximate Installation Dimensions for Standard Frame Sizes ( mm ) ( Clauses 8.1, E-l and E-3 )

05

12

12'70

-

---c___ 08 .I1 1'3 12 19.13 :;`:z 18.92 . -_ 1.14 -

11.18 - - 11.02 --p-___-1.70 1.45 3.48 3.23 P * z*:: -c 17'58 17.32 _ - ,' - - _ 20.70 -' 20.55 - -

_

27.05 25400 15,875 . 26.85 25.387. 15.863 :.:! --_ 36.58 33.325 22.222 1.14 36.37 33.312 22.212 l-89 - __I-_ 44'53 39.675 23.813

--

15 l8

13 13 -ui

3.48 41.35 -31.83 - 2.11 - 2.49 1*15 41'20 1'85 31.67 3.23 4 4 . 3 2 3 9 . 6 6 2 23.800 0.89 2.24 ---yP__P----20 12

33.45 2.11 2.49 ;;I;; 33.20 1.85 2.24 _---____ -7

249 47.75 - - 51.05 3.30 44.50 6'73 47.50 - - 2.24 50.55 44.40 3.05 5.97 --y-_P__--P_~ 23 23 14 13 5 7 . 1 5 50.80 ;;N; 57.02 50.77 ' -57`99 Man 38.15 1.70 145 1.96 5.21 4.95 _ 5.03 33';: ' 57.23 - - Max - -p--- 57.99 47.27 2.67 2.41 52'53 iwax

34 14

4.52 Max 47.02 38'05 1.19 - --_P____---_I__ 8Ga, z 73.08 72'97
55.58 55'17

4'95

5.46

69.47 Max 4.32 - Max -_ _I_P~-~~.F~42 12 gx x 1.70 1.45 -76.33 76.07

3'30

-

5.33

-

-

86

69.72

5.41 -

5.92

6.86 89.03 88.77 Mitl I -e

for the purpose of standardization of test procedure when agreed between the manufacturer and the purchaser. 9.1.2 Type Tests

NOTE -These tests are not normally to be repeated except by special agreement between the

n~anufnciurzr and the purchaser.

Where tests are indicated as type tests, these shall be made on motors as produced by a or, as appropriate, during manufacture. specific manufacturer before that manufacturer NOTE - These tests may also b-, used as acceptsupplies, on a general basis, motors designed to ante tests by agreement bctwccn the nunufncturer and the purchaser. .comply with the requirements of this standard, 5

9.1.3 Routine Tests Where tests are indicated as routiue tests, these shall be made on all motors in the finished state

IS 13079 : 1991 Table 4 Approximate Shaft Dimensions for Standard Frame Sizes ( mm ) , ( Clauses 8. I, E-l and E-4 ) where I is the moment of inertia ( in g.cms ), m is the mass ( in g ), and r is the radius ( in cm ). 9.2.2 Single Wire Hanging Method
-08 11 13 9.78 9.27 9T8 `9.27 3'167 3.142 13 120 -

12
-

3'167 3.142 --

Where the rotor has salient poles, direct calculation is more complex. It is permissible to use the following formulae in conjunction with a `hanging wire' on which the rotor is hung. Compare the period of oscillation ( rotating about the axis of the shaft ) to that of a known slug. The moment of inertia is then given by the formula: where 1, = moment of inertia of rotor ( in g.cm* ), Ik 3 moment of inertia of known slug ( in

-

-

-

-

g.cm2 1,

TU = period of rotor ( in s ), and Tk = period of known slug ( in s ). If the difference in mass between the reference slug and the rotor is so wide that different wires have to used to be obtain straightness and reasonable periods of oscillation, then use an intermediate slug. Measure the period of oscillation of this intermediate slug on each wire and calculate the moment of inertia of the test rotor from the following formula:

42 42

12 14

35.69 34.16 35.81 34.29

12,700 12'687 15.875 15.862

-

- - -

-

9.1.4 Stabilized Test Conditions

where Twl = period of intermediate slug on wire used for 6, and TV = period of intermediate slug on wire used for L The moment of inertia of the intermediate slug is not required.

Before carrying out tests, the motor shall be 9.2.3 Two Wire Hunging Method temperature stabilized in accordance with the Hang the rotor by two slender steel wires, as manufacturer's instructions. illustrated in Fig. 2, and apply torsional vibration with the centre line CL as the axis. 9.1.5 Magnet Stabilization Measure the period T of torsional vibration and For motors containing a permanent magnet, calculate the moment of inertia from the before performance tests are carried out, the following formula: magnet shall be stabilized in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. 9.2 Rotor Inertia ( Type Test ) 9.2.1 Calculation Method Where a rotor is cylindrical, calculate the moment of inertia about its axis from the formula: where I = moment of inertia ( in g.cma ), T = time of one cycle oftorsional (ins), a = one-half the distance between wires on the measured object ( b = one-half the distance between wires at fixed point ( in cm ), 6

vibration the steel in cm >, the steel

IS 13079 : 1991
9.3.1 Inductance Bridge Method

Use a bridge having a test frequency of 1 000 Hz or less. Align the stepping motor rotor and stator by the application of the rated current to the winding under test and then clamp the shaft relative to the motor body, de-energize the stator and measure the inductance ( using a test voltage of approximately 1 Vrms ). Then turn the rotor through an angle equal to half its tooth or pole pitch ( the point of minimum reluctance ) and repeat the measurement. These measurements are the incremental unenergized aligned and unaligned inductances are the minimum requirements to be indicated in accordance with 6. Additional useful information c-n be obtained by injecting current into the windings when measuring the inductance. Three levels of bias current are desirable, namely, 0 percent, 50 percent and 100 percent of the motor's rating. This then requires six measurements, three with the rotor and stator in the aligned position and three with the rotor and stator in the aligned position and three with the rotor and stator out of line. When 4 bias current is applied to a winding, the inductance measuring device will be affected by the impedance of the biasing supply, and it is for this reason that a high impedance source is required. A typical circuit is shown in gig. 3. 9.3.2 Current Discharge Method Fra. 2 Two WIRE H ANGING M ETHOD DETERMINE ROTOR INERTIA Align the stepping motor rotor and stator and clamp the rotor as described in 9.3.1. Energize the winding for sufficient time to stabilize the current to a figure 10 percent above the motor rating. Close a switch, short-circuiting the winding and monitor the resulting current decay on an oscilloscope connected across a resistor placed in series with the winding ( see Fig. 4 ). Record the resulting curve. Repeat this procedure with the rotor in the unaligned position. Calculate the inductance of the winding for any part of the curve ( any current area ) from the following formula:
I,=

TO

h = y,;gicnz )distance of measured object , m = mass of measured object ( in g ), and

gn = standard gravitational = 981 cm/s2.

acceleration

The test wire or wires shall be at least 3 m long and screened from draught. Take care that each wire is firmly attached at its upper end and any adaptors or fastenings at its lower end are secure. Do not allow any movement at the anchorage points. The wire shall be substantially straight and free from kinks, It is important that both rotor and slug are seen to rotate concentrically. When checking magnetic rotors, take care to ensure that no magnetic materials ( for example, radiators on cabinets ) are near. 9.3 Inductance ( Type Test ) The inductaace of a stepping motor winding varies both with rotor position and with excitat.ion current. Measurements can also be affected by the rate of change of current, thus when a figure for inductance is given, the conditions under which the measurements were taken shall be quoted.

4% In I
_~_

i

where
L = inductance ( in H ),

Z = initial current ( in A ), i = current after time T ( in A 1, R = total circuit resistance including winding ( in ohms ), T = time between Z and i ( in s ), and In = natural ( Napierian ) logarithm. Alternatively, If T is in ms then f, is in mH. 9.3.2.1 Give the two curves ( aligned and nonaligned together with the above formula or give a table of inductances at different currents. 9.3.2.2 Any values given shall be accompanied by the relevant circuit constants.

INDUCTANCE BRIDGE

I

FIQ. 3 T Y P I C A L C IRCUIT

FOR

M E A S U R I N G I NDUCTANCE BY AN I N D U C T A N C E B R I D G E

.

LIMITING

POWER %PP Ly

MOTOR WINDING `1 R =

r1 . r2

F I G. 4

C IRCUIT

FOR

MBASURING INDUCTANCE

BY THE

C URRENT D ISCHARGE M E T H O D

9.4 dc Resistance ( Routine Test ) Measure the dc resistance of each winding with the stepping motor at room temperature. If this is other than 2O"C, correct the resistance accordingly. 9.5 High Voltage Test ( Routine Test )
Carry out the high

9.6 The Motor as a Generator ( Type Test ) This test applies to permanent magnet and hybrid motors only. 9.6.1 Drive the shaft at 1 000 r/min f 5 percent and measure the peak to peak voltage appearing across one of the phases with a device whose impedance is sufficiently high that the measured voltage is substantially unaffected. Take care that all other winding teminations are isolated so that the open circuit conditions are monitored. The measured value of volts per 1 000 r/min is the figure to be indicated. NOTE - For reference purposes, it is advisable to
record the output voltage curve driving the shaft from 0 to 3 000 r. min.

voltage test in accordance with the method given in IS 4029 : 1967, but with the test voltage given in Table 5. Table 5 Test Voltage for High Voltage Test
Frame Size up to11 Above 11 and up to 42 Above 42 and up to 100 Test Voltage (rms) 250 V 500 v 500 V plus twice the rated voltage 1 OOtJ,tyu~ twice the rated

9.7 Step Angle Error ( Type Test )

Above 100

`

9.7.1 General Measure the step angle error by any convenient means available, provided that the measuring 8

IS 13079 : 1991 device has the desired accuracy and is of sufficiently low friction that the accuracy is unaffected. The methods given in 9.7.2,9.7.3 and 9.7.4 are provided as a guide, but are not obligatory. at operating temperature has been specified. For current operated motors apply the rated current to the winding or windings required and keep this constant throughout the test. For voltage operated motors apply the rated voltage to the 9.7.2 Encoder Method winding or windings required, note the current and keep this constant throughout the test. An optical encoder can provide a very satisfac- Apply a load to the motor shaft by any contory research and production tool for stepping venient means ( for example, weights added to motor step angle error measurements that are a scale pan suspended from a pullev or balance quick and unambiguous. However, it is necessary arm ). Increase the load until continuous to take some care in the selection of a suitable rotation just commences. The maximum load encoder. For a large angle stepping motor an achieved before continuous rotation is the absolute device is suitable, bul for small angle holding torque. Take all readings as quickly ( 1'8" ) stepping motors it will be found that an as possible, even with a constant current supply. ncremental encoder will provide greater resolu- the torque may fall due to increasing tomiion. When using an incremental encoder perature. ctonsider the following points. The count speed of an incremental encoder is limited, and so the NOTES angular velocity the motor shaft achieves between steps is limited. Add viscous damping 1 It should be noted that the angle through which the shaft rotates for no load to peak load varies or add inertia to the shaft, but take care that the according to the design of the machine. and allowainertia is sufficiently well balanced that the nce should be made for the torque loading device to An encoder is motor accuracy is not impaired. make a sufficient rotation without impairing the accuracy of the reading. generally accurate ,only to a half count and the read-out facility to f 1 digit; this then for a 2 It i# often of value to quote the peak holding given encoder resolution will limit the accuracy. torque at various Supply levels. The measuring technique is the same as above, but measurements are taken at 25 percent, 50 percent, 75 percent and ' 9.7.3 Synchro M e t h o d 100 percent of rated supply and the results normally
presented as a curve.

An accuracy similar to that of the incremental encoder can be obtained with a synchro without the risk of losing track of position since the synchro is basically an absolute device. It requires, however, special supplies and read-out facilities. 9.7.4 Dividing Head Method This method is not considered suitable for production checks, but gives a more accurate result for development purposes. Carefully secure the motor body in the chuck of a dividing head, aligning up the motor shaft axis with the dividing head axis. With the required phase or phases energized, focus the optics on to a scribed line on the shaft or on a drum on the shaft. With the next phase or phases energized, turn the chuck until the. scribed mark a gain appears within the graticule and note the angular reading. If it is desired to determine the maximum positional error, use the midpoint between the two extremes of positional error as the zero postion. 9.8 Detent Torque ( Type Test ) Energize the stepping motor momentarily to determine the step position for a particular step. Remove the energizing source and determine the detent torque in a similar way to that of the holding torque ( see 9.9 >. 9.9 Holding Torque ( Routine Test ) Measure the holding torque with the stepping motor at room temperature unless measurement
9

10 RATING PLATE 10.1 The motor rating plate shall contain the
following information: a) Reference to this standard IS 13079 : 1991; b) Indication of the source of manufacturer; c) Type indication, if appropriate ( for example, PM, VR or HY ); d) c;;zufacturer's serial number and/or date > e) Nominal voltage or peak current; and f) Number of phases.
10.1.1 If it is possible to include additional information, it is recommended that the following should be given, otherwise the literature ( see Annex B ) giving the information should be enclosed:

a>
b)

Resistance per phase, Modification state, angle ( basic ),

4 Number of steps per revolution or step 4 Winding configuration, and e) Diagram of lead colours.
The Stepping Motors may also bc marked with the Standard Mark.

IS 13079 : 1991

ANNEX A ( Foreword and Ckmse 5.1 )
TYPICAL MODES FOR A THREE-PHASE STEPPING MOTOR A-l Table 6 shows the three preferred sequences of excitation, mode A, mode B and mode AB, for a three-phase motor. Where a three-phase rotor is being driven, the sequence designation can be prefixed by the digit 3 and, if four-phase, by the digit 4 ( that is, a three-phase motor driven in mode B would have the drive circuit designated mode 3B, and for a four-phase motor mode 4B ).
Table 6 Typical Modes for a Three-Phase Stepping Motor
MODE A MODE B Step

I

Ph8se 1

Phase 2

Phase 3

I

MODE AB

I

I

step .

I

I

-.
Plmse 1 1

Phase 2

Phase 3

l-----l
0

step

I

I
!

Phase 1
I

Phase 2
,

Phase 3

x
1 1
0

:

i

.

I

I

NOTE - Logic 1 represents phase energized. Logic 0 represents phase uneaergized. Sequence can be extended for any number of phases.

ANNEX B ( Foreword and Clauses 6.2 and 10.1.1 )
B-l CATALOGUE PRESENTATION ,

B-l.1 It is recommended that for uniformity of presentation and ease of comparison, the following information should be given in manufacturers' catalogues, as far as reasonably possible: a) The values to be indicated bv the manufacturer in accordance with 6, _

b) The appropriate information as illustrated in Fig. 5, c) Maximum permissible axial thrust, d) Maximum permissible overhung load ( at a specified position ). and e) Mass of the motor.

ANNEX C ( Foreword and Clause 6.2 )
C-l BASIC PERFORMANCE CURVES

might affect the pzrformanc: should b: quoted in order that the curves are of use. The major C-l.1 The curves in Fig. 6 show the basic resonant areas but, since the curves are f o r dynamic characteristics of a given stepping guidance only, it is not anticipated that ,all motor relate to each other. The drive circuit resonant areas will be defined. and any inertia load, for example, pulley, that

10

PULSE RATE TO BE GIVEN: INERTIA OF LOAD TYPE OF ORIVE C I R C U I T

PULL-IN RATE TO BE G I V E N : DETAILS OF EXTERN A L LOA D (IF ANY) eg. FRICTION OF DRIVEN, DEVICE

f0 BE G I V E N :
INERTIA OF LOAD T Y P E O F DRIVE_ ClRCUlT

OPFRATION (INDUCTANCERESISTANCE DRIVE 1

PERMITTED AREAS OF

PULL-IN RATE / LOAD. I N E R TI A

ONE STEP RESPONSE

DISPLACEMENT 10 `8E G I V E N : TORQUE REQUIRED FOR OISPLACEMENT AGAIN-ST DETENT TORQUE OR HOLDING TORQUE (PARTIALLY ENERGIZED I

CURRENT TO BE GIVEN: HOLOIN TORQUE AS A FUNCTION OF CURRENT T o BE GIVEN : SEQUENCE FOR COUylERCLOCKWISE ROTATION

?

TORQUE /DISPLACEMENT

CURVE

HOLDING TORQUE / C U R R E N T

CURVE

PHASE-OPERATING SEQUENCE
BROWN

70 B E G I V E N : F R A M E SIZE (IF S T A N D A R D A S T A B L E 5 ) O R P R I N C I P A L O U T L I N E OIMENSIONS

TO BE GIVEN: WINDING CONNECTIONS t. EAtI C O L O U R S

OUTLINE DIMENSIONS
F I G. 5 IL L U S T R A T IO N S OF VALUES
TO BE

CONNECTION DIAGRAM
THE

G IVEN BY

M ANUFACTURER W HERE A P P R O P R I A T E

11

IS 13079 : 1991

TORQUE RESONANT RATES MAX. PULL-OUT 1 TORQUE MAX. PULL- IN TORQUE

I

IMAX. REVERSING RATE FIG. 6

IMAX. PULL-

IN

RATE

PULSE FATE

B ASIC P ERFORMANCE C URVES

ANNEX D ( Foreword and Clause 9.1.1 )
ADDITIONAL TEST METHODS D-l GENERAL These additional test methods cover tests for parameters which are not specified as requirements of this standard. but for which it is neverthel ss though desirable that methods of test shoul % be standardized. D-2 MEASUREMENT OF WINDING TEMPERATURE RISE Where possible, the change of winding resistance should be used to measure the temperature rise of a stepping motor. Mount the motor, away from heat conducting surfaces and draughts, and attach to heat sink where appropriate. When the motor stabilizes at ambient temperature, record the motor temperature -i- 1 and the winding resistance RI. Energize the relevant wi.ndings on the appropriate duty cycle until the motor attains a stable temperature. For voltage driven motors energize one or more phases as required, but at zero pulse rate, that is, the phases specified are energized continuously, the others bzing open-circuited. Use one of the energized phases for the temperature rise measurements. Current driven motors at a speed such that the maximum power input is achieved ( shaft unloaded ). This will generally be the maximum pull-in rate. A maximum temperature is then achieved. Where it is not possible to run the motor in this condition ( at its maximum pull-in rate >, choose a pulse rate and quote this along with the temperature rise and the drive circuit used. When the temperature has stabilized, rapidly transfer the motor connections to a resistance bridge and take the new resistance reading, Ra, as quickly as possible. The temperature-rise is `then given by the formula: t = ( &--RI) (k+t,) R1 and the final temperature by the formula:
t2 =

$ ( tl+k)-k

where t = temperiture-rise ( in K ); tl = initial temperature ~( in "C ); t2 = final temperature ( in "C ); Rx = resistance at tl ( in Q ); RP = resistance at t, ( in Q ); and k = the constant for winding conductor material and is the reciprocal of the temperature coefficient of the material at 0�C ( for copper, k = 235 and for aluminium, k = 228 ). 12

IS 13079 : 1991 D-3 TORQUE DISPLACEMENT CURVE Apply the rated current or voltage as described in 9.9. Measure the torque by adding weights to a torque arm, but when the peak holding torque is attamed use a spring balance to prevent the arm from rotating uncontrollably, when obtaining figures on the nagative portion of the curve. In order for measurements to be stable it is necessary for the spring balance stiffness to be greater than that due to the motor, which may mean that a high rate balance has to be used and that accuracy of reading will be poor. Monitor the shaft angle on large angle steppmg motors with a protactor and pointer. For small angle motors it will be necessary to use more sophisticated test gear. Where the motor has shaft extensions at each end use an optical encoder to monitor the angle, and a torque transducer to monitor the torque applied. The load may then be applied by hand via a load arm and the readings obtained from the encoder and torque transducer are directly plotted on a chart using an X Y plotter. Where the motor has one shaft only, apply the load by a combination of weights and spring balance or a load arm as described for large angle stepping motors and again monitor the angle with an encoder. D-4 ONE STEP RESPONSE, NATURAL FREQIJENCY AND SETTLING TIME Couple a continuously rotating potentiometer to the motor output shaft and apply a voltage to the ends of the potentiometer track. Connect a detecting device such as an ultraviolet recorder from the potentiometer wiping contact to one side of the supply. When the motor is stepped to one step at a time, the resulting trace will show the one step response. Take care to ensure that the inertia of the potentiometer is small compared with that of the motor rotor and that friction is very small compared with the motor torque. For large motors, it may be possible to monitor shaft position with an optical encoder as in the torque displacement curve measurements. The natural frequency is the inverse of the period of oscillation as observed on the curve of the one step response. The time taken for the rotor to remain within 1 percent ( for otherwise agreed ) of its final position should be taken as the settling lime. This is derived from the one step response curve. D-5 MAXIMUM SLEW RATE Apply a pulse train to the motor a: describec in D-6. Slowly increase the pulse rate from a low pulse rate ( before the pull-in rate ) to the rate just before the rotor loses synchronism. The re: ulting pulse rate is the maximum slew rate. Repeat this test for the opposite direction of rotation. Take care to avoid resonances. which will cause the drive circuit to energize the next motor winding or windings in sequence. Additionally, the pulse train should be of the correct duration and not altered by `switch on'. Apply a load to the shaft of the stepping motor such that the torque applied to the shaft is substantially constant with varying shaft speed. This may be achieved in several ways. For large motors, it is convenient to use a particle brake to supply the load, since the torque .is approximately proportional to the supply current. Because of the high inertia it is not possible to use a particle brake for small motors ( size 34 and smaller ) and other devices such as a prony brake may be used. If a cast iron drum of low inertia is mounted on the motor shaft and hardwood blocks or pads brought to bear on the surface, then provided the surfaces are clean, a fairly low stiction which is comparable to running torque can be obtained ( see Fig. 7 ). The torque will depend upon the force between the pads and the drum and should be precalibrated. Becsuse of the difficulty in setting the torque, it is more convenient to alter the driewrequency and the procedure is then as
.

I

Set the prony brake to a low value of torque ( 10 percent of holding torque ). Set the pulse rate to a low value ( for example, 20 pps ). Initiate the pulse train and see whether the motor pulls into speed without hesitation. Turn off the pulse train, increase its rates, initiate it again and observe the motor. Stop the pulse train. If the motor had pulled into synchronism again without hesitation repeat the procedure until it do:s not. When the motor fails to respond correctly reduce the pulse rate slightly and reinitiate. By increasing and reducing and again increasing the pulse rate, a fairly accurate figure of pull-in rate for the' applied torque can be determined. It is important to ch:ck the prony brake torque after this test. Then increase the torque to a higher value and repeat the test. Eventually plot a curve of pull-in rate versus torque. It is necessary to quote the moment of inertia of the load ( drum ) along with the curve. When using a particle: brake, it may be preferable to change the brake current and, therefore, mctor load instezd of the pulse rate. D-7 PULL-IN RATE WITH INERTIA If it is required to quote the pull-in rate versus inertia or the pull-in rate with inertia versus load, proceed as in D-6; for the former, omit the load and add various known incrtias to the shaft and, for the latter, add known inert& and load.

D-8 PULL-OUT TORQUE As in D-6, the inertia of the test apparatus affects the results and EO the.particle brake and D-6 PULL-IN RATE dynamometer methods should bc used only forThe drive circuit should b- such that the motor the larger motors aud cord/spring balance can be started by application of the pulse train combination for the smaller motors (size 34 and 13

YS" 13079 : 1991 smaller ). A schematic diagram of a particle values of pulse rate until-the, *motor will rmno brake and torque transducer arrangement is faster. It will be necessary to start at a lower shown in Fig. 8 and of a reaction dynamometer frequency and ramp up for the higher speeds in Fig. 9. If the particle brake is removed and when the motor is running in its sIew mode. finger pressure applied to the torque transducer shaft, the inertia is lowered so that smaller Two methods using cord and spring balance are motors may be tested depending upon the shown in Fig. 10 and 11, the results for each being similar. The system ( Fig. 10 ) using inertia of the torque transducer.
WARDWOOD

FIG. 7 M ETHOD
MOTOR , c

OF

A PPLYIN G

A

T ORQUE

TO A

S MALL M OTOR CARTICCE B R A K E

FIG. 8 Tf!.ST RIG

POR

P ULL- OUT T ORQUE M EASUREMENT U SING T ORQUE T RANSDUCER AND P ARTICLE B RAKE LOAD TRANSDUCER DYNAMOMETER

L f FIG. 9 TEST RIG
FOR

PULL-Our TORQUE M EASUREMENT
only

U SING DYNAMOMETER

Set a low pulse train rate as in D-4 and start the motor. Increase the load until the motor falls out of synchronism. Make a note of the load applied just before synchronism is lost. With the load removed, restart the motor and increase the pulse rate. Then re-apply the load and increase this until the motor again loses synchronism and note the load again just before loss of synchronism. Repeat this for several 14

one spring balance requires a cord loop and a pulley mounted on a raiseable arm. As the arm is raised, the cord tension is increased and the torque applied is also increased; the torque is then the product of motor pulley radius and the balance reading. The system shown in Fig. 11 requires the reading of both balance simultaneously; the torque is then the product of the difference in balance readings and

IS 33079 : 199&,

F IG. 10 METHOD OF P ULL- OUT T ORQUE MEASYREMENT USING C ORD AND SPRING B ALANCE the pulley radius. Include the diameter of the cord in the calculation only if it has not been possible to choose a cord sufi3ciently small to make this unnecessary. In all cases the moment of inertia of the test load should be quoted.
D-9 MAXIMUM REVERSING RATE Having determined the pull-in rate as in D-6, set the pulse rate with the motor unloaded, so that the motor is running with a pulse rate less than half the maximum pull-in rate. Reverse the motor normally by a change in logic level input to the drive circuit, taking care that the final pulse in one direction and the initial pulse in the other direction are not foreshortened,. Increase the pulse rate until the motor ceases to respond correctly ( loses or gains steps ). Then lower again until the motor functions correctly. This value of pulse rate is the maximum reversing rate. It is often the case that motor hesitation ( incorrect response ) can be observed visually, but it is recommended that a more positive indication of lost steps should be made. If the rotor is driven a certain number of steps in each

FIG. 11 METHOD OF PULL -OUT TORQUE MEASUREM@NT USING CORD AND Two SPRING

BALANCES direction, any lost or gained steps will result in a variation of the final position of the shaft. This can be observed much more easily than motor hesitation. If a shaft position monitoring device ( for example, as mentioned in D-4 ) is used, take care to ensure that the inertia is low enough not to affect the response unduly.
D-10 RESPONSE

Ap ly a pulse train to the motor as described in D-6 and raise the pulse rate slowly until the motor loses synchronism. Note the pulse rate, Starting from a slightly lower pulse rate ( at which the motor runs satisfactorily ) and, rapidly but smoothly transversing the previously noted pulse rate, again raise the pulse rate slowly until the rotor again loses synchronism. Repeat this procedure to locate all resonant rates until the motor will no longer run. Reverse the procedure ( decreasing pulse rate ) to find the upper thresholds of the resonant areas. An alternative method of starting the stepping motor is to turn the shaft at a speed above the desired synchronous speed and to allow the rotor to fall into synchronism, continuing the test as before.

ANNEX E ( Clause 8.1 )
DIMENSIONS E-l Tables 3 and 4 give approximate installation

illustrated in Fig. 12, 13 and 14. dimensions of standard frame sizes in metric units ( see 8 ). R-3 In Table 3, where no values arc given for R-2 The meanings of the letter symbols are dimension 0. these are not standardized. 15

IS 13079 : 1991 e--f

x
FIG. 12 M OUNTING DIMENSIONS APPLEABLE
TO

FRAME Szes 05, 08, 20

AND

42

F L A MOUNTING FACES FIG. 13

N

G

E

-

W

1 ,
_`a 8
0 PC/
TO

M OUNTING DIMENSIONS A PPLICABLE

FRAME SIZES 11, 15, 18

AND

23

FIG. 14

MOUNTINQ DIMENSIONS APPLICABLE 16

TO

FRAME SIZES 23, 34

AND

42

IS 13079 : 1991 The fixing holes in Fig. 12 and Fig. 13 are tapped, but the threads are not standardized. The run-out of squareness of the flange mounting faces to the shaft extension, measured by the method given in IS 2223 :, 1983, shall not E-4 In Table 4, where there are no entries in exceed the following: the `number of teeth' and `diametral pitch' Frame size O5 0'03 mm full indicator columns, a plain shaft is signified. measurement E-S The run-out of the mounting spigots with F rame sizes 08, 1 I, 0'05 mm full indicator the shaft extension. measured by the method 15, 18 and 20 measurement given in IS 2223 : 1983 shall not exceed the Frame sizes 23, 34 0'08 mm full indicator following: measurement and 42 Frame sizes 05,08, 0'03 mm full indicator The maximum shaft extension run-out, measured 11, 15, 18 and 20 measurement by the method given in IS 2223 :, 1983, but at a distance of 6'5 mm from the bearing, shall not Frame sizes 23, 34 0'08 mm full indicator and 42 measurement exceed 0'2 mm.

17

Standard Mark I

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Acf, 2986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

' Bore811 of Indian Standards

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau oflndfan Standard3 Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.
Copyright

BIS has the copyright of all its publication&. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writ'i+ng of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publication ), BIS. Bcrlsion of Indian Standards Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they aro in possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following reference : Dot : No. ETD 15 ( 2756 ) Amendments Issaed Since Publication Amen'd No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bshadur Shah Z-afar Marg, New Delhi 110OO2 Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) 1 BOMBAY 400093 Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. Telegrams : Manaksanstlm ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone 331 01 31 331 13 73 37 86 62 53 38 43 2350216 6 32 92 93

Printed at

Swatantra Bharat

Press, Delhi. lndla

