( Reaffirmed 2004 )

IS

I

9703

l

1980

Indian Standard
GLOSSARY OF TERMS FOR ANIMAL FEEDS AND FEEDINGSTUFFS
Animal Chairman DR B. K. SON1 Members Ministry of Agriculture & Irrigation ( Department of Food ) DR K. KRISENAMURTHY ( Alternate ) Directorate of Marketing & Inspection ( Ministry A~RWULTURAL MARKETEW ADof Agriculture & Irrigation ), Faridabad VISEI~ TO THE GOVERNMENT OP INDIA SHRI S. JAYARAMAN ( Alternate ) Godrej Soaps Limited, Bombay DR S. L. ANAOKAR DR G. F. MITEUJI ( Alternate- ) CSAM$i;;;ity of Agriculture & Technology, DR G. S. BARSAUL DR N. S. AQARWAL
SERI N. BHOWMIK

Feeds

Sectional

Committee,

AFDC

15

Representing Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi

.

DE K. M. SEARMA ( Alternate )

Directorate General New Delhi

of

Technical

Development,

&RI D. K. RAY ( Alternate ) BRIQ B. S. DAHIYA

DR DR DR DR DR

Directorate of Military Farms, Army Headquarters ( Ministry of Defence ) SHRI R. K. TRIPATHI ( Alternate ) The Compound Livestock Feeds Manufacturers' N. S. DRONAWAT Association of India, Bombay SH~I V~NEET VIRMANI ( Alternata ) Animal Husbandry Commissioner ( Ministry of A. N. GEOSH Agriculture & Irrigation ) SHRI S, S. CH~IBBER ( Alternate ) Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana J. S. ICEHPONANI DE G. N. LODEI ( Alternate ) G. B. Pant University of Agriculture and M. G. JACKSON Technolopv. _I, Pantnagar _ C , Distt Nainital 1 DR M. L. VERMA ( Alternate ) Kaira District Co-operative Milk Producers' Union GEORGE KUNJU Limited, Anand DR A. S. DAVE ( Alternate )

( Conlinucd on page 2 ) @ Copyriglrt 1981 STANDARDS INSTITUTION

INDIAN

This publication is protected under the In&an Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 9703 - 1980
( Continued from pagt 1 ) Reprrstnting National Dairy Research Institute ( ICAR ( Haryana ) All India Cottonseed Crushers' Association, Directorate of Animal Husbandry, Maharashtra. Pune Shaw Wallace & C6mpany Limited, ), Karnal Bombay of

Members Da V. D. MUDQAL DR B. N. GUPTA ( Altsmatc ) DR S. M. PATEL SHRI K. M. PAI ( Altsrnatr ) DR S. P. PEADKE
DR B. SAHAI ( Altcrnatr ) DR D. V. R. PRAKASH RAO DR R. GANESH ( Altrrnatc ) DR N. S. RAJAQOPAL

Government Calcutta

DE G. V. RAMAMURTFIY DEPUTY COMMISSIONER ( OILSEEDS ) ( Altcrnatr ) DR D. V. RANQNEKAR DR A. L. JOSHI ( Alternate ) Da S. K. RANJHAN

Directorate of Vanaspati, Vegetable Oils (t Fats ( Ministry of Agriculture & Irrigation ) Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation ( Department of Agriculture ) Agro-Industries Bhartiya Kanchan CPune ) Foundation, Urul i

Indian Veterinary Research Institute ( ICAR ), Iza tnagar DR V. R. SADAQOPAN ( Alternate ) SERI M. K. PANDURANGA SETTY Roller Flour Millers' Federation of India, New Delhi SHRI K. B. TEIA~ARAJAN ( Alternate ) The Tata Oil Mills Company Limited, Bombay DB N. SATAPATHY DR S. S. CHHABRA ( Altcrnats ) Institute of Agriculture. Anand DR P. C. SEUKLA The Maharashtra Agro-Industries Development SHRI T. S. TAMBOLIA Corporation Limited, Bombay DR S. M. SONALKAR ( Altrrnatr ) Solvent Extractors' Association of India, Bombay SXIRXL. J. TANNA Hindustan Lever Limited, Bombay DR P. J. THOMAE DR S. YAMDAQNI ( Alttrnatc ) Jawala Flour Mills, New Delhi SHRI VINEET VIRMANI SHRI ANAND VIRMANI ( Alternate ) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-o&o Member ) SRRI T. PURNANANDAW Director ( Agri & Food )

Deputy

SHRI LAJINI)ER SINIXH Director ( Agri & Food ), IS1

1s : 9703 - 1980

Indian Standard
GLOSSARY OF TERMS FOR ANIMAL FEEDS AND FEEDINGSTUFFS
0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian StandardsInstitution on 15 December 1980, after the draft finalized by the Animal Feeds Sectional Committee had been approved by the Agricultural and Food Products Division Council. 0.2 In the field of animal feeds manufacturing industry a large number of feedingstuffs ( ingredients ) are utilized, which may be by-products of other industries and also subjected to certain processing before utilization. It has been observed that different names are attributed to the same feedingstuff in different parts of the country resulting in confusion and misunderstanding amongst different interests. Therefore, with a view to familiarizing all interests with correct terms, this It is expected that this standard when issued standard is being issued. would help in removing any ambiguities and facilitate understanding and adoption of the correct terms.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This

standard and feedingstuffs.
2. TERMINOLOGY

lists the terms

and definitions

of various

animal

feeds

2.1 Additive - An ingredient or combination of ingredients added to the basic feed mix or pa?ts thereof to fullil a specific need. Usually used in micro quantities and requires careful handling and mixing.

2.2 Alfalfa ( Lucerne ) Leaf Meal - The dried ground product consisting chiefly of leaves separated from alfalfa ( Lucerne ) plant. It shall be reasonably free from other crop plants and weeds and shall contain not less than 20 percent crude protein and not more than 18 percent of crude fibre. 2.3 Alfalfa ( Lucerne ) Meal - Consists aerial portion of the alfalfa ( luccrne ) plant separated. 3 of dry and finely ground from which leaves have been

IS : 9703 - 1980 2.4 Alfalfa ( Lucerne ) Stem Meal - The ground meal obtained from drying and grinding the aerial portion of the alfalfa ( Lucerne ) plant, reasonably free from other crop plants and weeds. - A class of drug. 2.5 Antibiotics a living micro-organism and in proper of other micro-organisms. These are usually synthesized by concentration inhibit the growth

2.6 Balanced - A term that may be applied to a diet, ration, or feed having all known required nutrients in proper amount and proportion based upon recommendations of recognized authorities in the field of animal nutrition for a given set of physiological requirements of The species for which it is intended and the functions such as animals. maintenance or maintenance and production ( growth, foetus, fat, milk, eggs, wool, feathers ) or work shall be specified. resulting fromy'the manu2.7 Barley Feed - The entire by-product This consists of the hulls and facture of pearl barley from clean barley. the outercoats of the kernels. residue 2.8 Barley Feed, Mixed - The entire barley flour from clean barley, and is composed barley middlings. 2.9 Barley Hulls C?uter covering of the barley from the milling of of barley hulls and grains.

of the manufacture 2.10 Beet Molasses - A thick viscous by-product of beet sugar from sugar beets and shall contain 48 percent or more of total sugars, expressed as invert sugar. Dry matter shall be between 70 to 75 percent. 2.11 Beet ,Pulp -, nature. 2.12 2.13 air. Blood Bone Meal Ash By-product Ground, of beet sugar industry dried blood. by burning bones with free access to which is fibrous in

Ash obtained

2.14 Bone Charcoal ( Bone bones in closed retorts.

Black ) -

Product

obtained

by charring unde-

2.15 Bone Meal, Raw - Dried and ground meal obtained from composed bones which have been cooked without steam pressure.

2.16 Bone Meal, Steamed - Product obtained from bones, dried and ground and sterilized by cooking undecomposed bones with steam under pressure. 4

IS : 9703 - 1980 2.17 Brewers' Grain, Dried - The dried, extracted residue of barley malt alone or in mixture with other cereal grain or grain products resulting from the manufacture of beer and may contain pulverized dried spent hops. 2.18 Brewers' Yeast, Dried - Dried non-fermentive, yeast obtained as a by-product in the process of brewing contain not less than 40 percent protein. 2.19 Buttermilk, water from clean Dried buttermilk. The product resulting from non-extracted beer. It shall the removal It of

- An acceptable 2.20 Calcite contain not less than 36 percent

source of calcium of calcium.

carbonate.

shall

- The thick, viscous by-product resulting during 2.21 Cane Molasses manufacture of cane sugar. It shall contain not less than 48 percent Dry matter shall be 70 expressed as invert sugar. of total sugars, to 80 percent. consisting of 2.22 Chuni-.DaZ - Product endosperm, including germ and a portion preparation of DAL for human consumption. fine broken pieces of the of husks, as obtained in the

2.23 Citrus Pulp, Dried - The ground peel, residue of the inside portions and occasional cull fruits of the citrus family which have been dried, producing a coarse, flaky product. 2.24 Coconut Oilcake - Residue which remains after removal from dried coconuts kernels by a mechanical extraction process. 2.23 Coconut Oilcake, Solvent Extracted which remains after removal of most of the oil cocount by a solvent extraction process. of oil

The ground residue from dried meal of

2.26 Complete Feed - A nutritionally adequate feed for animals by specific formula is compoucded to be fed as the sole ration and is capable of maintaining life and/or promoting production without any additional substance being consumed except water. 2.27 Concentrate - A feed intended to be diluted with other ingredients to produce complete feed of optimum nutrient balance. 2.28 Cottonseed the cottonseed. Hulls Consists primarily of the outer
covering

feed

of

2.29 Cottonseed Oilcake, Decorticated - The product obtained by mechanical passing of clean cottonseed, composed principally of the kernel with such unavoidable portions of the hull and fibre as may be left in course of expression of oil. 5

Is : 9703 - 1980 2.30 Cottonseed Oilcake, Undecorticated - The product clean, delinted and by mechanical pressing of sound, mature, cottonseed and from which most of the oil has been removed. obtained unhulled

2.31 Cottonseed Oilcake, Solvent Extracted - The finely ground product which remains after removal of most of the oil by a solvent extraction process, from either cottonseed oilcake, decorticated or undecorticated or from cottonseed kernels after certain pre-processing. 2.32 Distillers' manufacture of wheat. Grain, alcohol Dried - The dried residue obtained and distilled liquors from maize or in the rye or

`2.33 Distillers' Grain with Solubles, Dried grains which contain the major portion of the stillage dried therewith. Only alcohol is distilled mass is fermented.

The distillers' dried condensed screened off when the whole

2.34 Distillers' Solubles, Semi-Solid - The product obtained in the manufacture of alcohol and distilled liquors from grain or molasses by condensing to a syrupy consistency, the screened stillage obtained therefrom. When the source is indicated it shall correspond thereto. 2.35 Fat, qnimal and/or poultry. Fat rendered or extracted from tissues of mammals

2.36 Feather Meal - Product resulting from the treatment under pressure of clean, undecomposed feathers from slaughtered poultry, free of additives, and/or accelerators. Not less than 75 percent of the crude protein content shall be digestible. obtained 2.37 Fish Meal - Product posed whoie fish or fish cuttings, extraction of part of the oil. 2.38 Fish Oil waste fish. Oil obtained from by cooking clean, dried, undecomeither or both, with or without rendering whole fish or cannery

2.39 Fish Scrap - Consists of the skeletal remains of fish which have been gutted, filleted and includes the head, the entire fish skeleton and its adhering proteinaceous tissues. obtained during the production of fish 2.40 Fish Solubles - Product meal, by concentrating the ` stickwater ' or clarified liquor, which consists of 95 percent water and 5 percent solids. The solid portion consists of dissolved, dispersed and finely suspended fish proteins, minerals, B complex vitamins, and unknown growth factors. 2.41 Flax Seed, Ground mercially pure flax seed. The product 6 obtained by grinding com-

IS I 9703 - 1980
2.42 Grain Screenings foreign materials having grain by a screen. Small imperfect grains, weed seeds and other feeding value, that are separated in cleaning

2.43 Groundnut Oilcake tion of oil from decorticated

-

The product after groundnut kernels.

the mechanical

extrac-

2.44 Groundnut Oilcake, Solvent Extracted - A finely ground product obtained after extraction of most of the oil by solvent extraction process from groundnut oilcake or from hulled, clean groundnut kernels. outer skin covering of the 2.45 Groundnut Skins -The kernel, exclusive of hulls. It may contain broken groundnut groundnut kernels.

2.46 Guar Meal - A by-product obtained during the manufacture of guar gum, by removal of most of the endosperm from whole guar beans. 2.47 Hatchery By-Product ( Poultry ) - A mixture of egg shells, infertile and unhatched eggs, and culled chicks which have been cooked, dried and ground, with or without removal of part of the fat. of the maize bran, germ and 2.48 Hominy Feed - Mixture part of maize as produced in the manufacture of pearl hominy, grit or table meal. 2.49 Husks Outer covering of kernels/seeds. A fairly satisfactory source of calcium starchy hominy

2.50 Limestone supplement.

Dolomitic

2.51 Limestone, Ground - An acceptable source of calcium It shall contain not less than 36 percent calcium.

carbonate.

obtained after extrac2.52 Linseed Oilcake - The residual product tion of oil by mechanical means from commercially pure linseed. 2.53 Linseed Oilcake, obtained after extraction 2.54 Liver slaughtered Meal animals. Solvent Extracted linseed cake, chips, obtained - A finely ground or flakes. and grinding product

Product

by drying

liver from

7

IS : 9703 - 1980 2.55 Liver Meal, Glandular - Products obtained by drying and grinding liver and other glandular tissues from slaughtered animals. At least 50 percent of the dry mass of the product must be derived from liver. 2.56 Maize Bran - The outer coating of the maize or none of the starchy part of the germ. kernel, with little

2.57 Maize Feed, Meal - The fine siftings obtained after cracked maize with or without its aspiration products added.

screening,

2.58 Maize Germ ( Meal ) - The residual product after solvent extraction of oil from maize germ cake as separated in the wet milling process of manufacture of maize starch, maize syrup and other maize producls. 2.59 Maize Germ, Cake - Consists of maize germs with other parts of maize kernel from which part of the oil has been processed, and is the product obtained in the dry milling process of manufacture of maize meal, maize grits, hominy feed and other maize products. 2.60 Maize Gluten, Feed - That that remains after the extracrion of germ by the process employed in the of maize starch or syrup. It may or tractives or maize germ meal. part of commercial shelled maize the larger part of the starch and wet milling process of manufacture may not contain either maize ex-

2.61 Maize Gluten, Meal - That part of commercial shalled maize that remains after the extraction of the larger part of the starch and germ, and the separation of the bran by the processes employed in the wet milling process of manlrfacture of maize starch or syrup. It may or may not contain either maize solubles or maize oilcake. Crude protein content shall be above 40 percellt. 2.62 Maize Grit portion of ground 2.63 Maize or Hominy Grit - The medium sized hard flinty maize containing little or none of the bran or germ. Maize germ cake.

Oilcake

2.64 Malt Sprouts - The product obtained by the removal of sprouts from malted barley together with the malt hulls, other parts ofmalt and Sprouts derived from any other cereal shall be foreign material. designated by the name of that Cereal, for example, rye malt sprouts. 8

IS 8 9703 - 1980

product 2.65 Meat-cum-Bone, Meal - Dry rendered tissues, exclusive of hair, hoof, horn, hide trimmings, stomach contents, except in such amounts as may occur good factory practice. It shall contain phosphorus 4.5 percent. It shall not contain more than 14 percent tible residues. The crude protein shall be not less than shall not contain added blood meal. 2.66 Meat Meal exclusive of hair, contents, except factory practice. out of which not shall not contain

from mammal manure and unavoidably in not less than pepsin indiges40 percent. It

- The dry rendered product from mammal tissues bones, hoof, horn, hide trimmings, manure and stomach in such amounts as may occur unavoidably in good It shall not contain less than 60 percent crude protein more than 11 percent shall be pepsin indigestible. It added blood meal. Dried -

2.67 Milk Skimmed, clean skimmed milk.

The

product

resulting after

from

drying ext=ction

of

product 2.68 Mustard Oilcake -Residual of oil from whole mustard and rape seeds.
2.69 Mustard Oilcake, Solvent Extracted

mechanical

-

hy grinding the cake which remains after removal and removing most of mechanical extraction, solvent extraction.
2.70 Oat Groats ( Hulled Oats ) -

The product obtained of some of the oil by the remaining oil by

Cleaned

oats with hulls

removed.

primarily of the outer coverings of oats, 2.71 Oat Hulls - Consists obtained in the milling of table cereals or in the groating of oats from clean oats. 2.72 Oat Meal or Rolled Oats Feed - Obtained in of rolled oat goats or rolled oats and consists of broken of oat groats, oat groat clips, and floury portions quantity of finely ground oat hulls as is unavoidable in of commercial milling. It shall not contain more than fibre. the manufacture rolled oat groats, with only such the usual process 4 percent crude carbo-

source of calcium 2.73 Oyster Shell, Flour - An acceptable nate. It shall not contain less than 36 percent calcium. 2.74 Phosphate Deflourinated precipitated calcium phosphate.
-

It

Includes either shall contain

calcined, not more

fused or than one

9

IS:9703-1980 part of fluorine to 100 parts of phosphorus. The minimum percent as calcium and phosphorus and maximum percent of fluorine shall be stated on the lable. 2.75 Poultry Manure, Meal - Dehydrated, poultry manure, free of other foreign materials. than 4 percent nuturients as additivies. sterilized and ground It shall not contain less

and 2.76 Premix - A uniform mixture of one or more nutrients additivies diluent and/or carrier. Premixes are used to facilitate uniform dispersion of the nutrients and additives in a large mix. 2.77 Ration - The amount of the total feed which is provided to one animal over a 24 hour period. 2.78 Rice Bran - The pericarp or bran layer and germ of rice, with only such quantity of hull fragments and chipped or broken rice as is unavoidable in the regular milling of edible rice. 2.79 Rice Bran, Solvent Extracted - Product obtained by removing oil from rice bran by the solvent extraction process. 2.80 Rice Chipped ( Broken Rice ) - Small fragments of rice kernels that have been separated from the larger kernels of milled rice. 2.81 Rice Polish - Finely powdered material obtained rice kernels, after the hulls and bran have been removed. in polishing

2.82 Safflower Oilcake - Residue obtained after extracting from whole safflower seed by mechanical extraction process.

the

oil

2.85 Safflower Oilcake, Solvent Extracted - Ground residue obtained after extracting the oil from whole safflower seed or safflower oilcake by a solvent extraction process. 2.84 Sal Seed Oilcake, Solvent Extracted - The product obtained by extracting of oil from decorticated and flaked or pelletized sal seed kernels, by the solvent extraction process. 2.85 Salt, Iodized - It is a common salt containing to 15 parts per million, uniformly distributed. iodine between 10

2.86 Shrimp ( Prawn ) Meal - Undecomposed ground dried waste of shrimps ( prawns ) and contains parts and/or whole shrimp ( prawns ). 10

IS t 9703 - 1980 2.87 Silk Worm Pupae, Dried - The product pupae obtained by boiling cocoons after reeling; chitinous covering and washing. 2.88 Soyabean Oilcake - The residue product cal extraction of oil from soyabeans decorticated comprising removing dried other

obtained after mechanior undecorticated.

2.89 Soyabean Oilcake, Solvent Extracted - A product obtained after the extraction of most of the oil by the process of solvent extraction from soyabean oilcake or from soyabeans, decorticated or undecorticated. 2.90 Tapioca
2.91 Tapioca Chips -

Dried- thin sliced The product

pieces of tapioca by grinding

tubers. dried tapioca has been skins,

Flour -

obtained

chips/tubers. 2.92 Tapioca Pulp, Spent - By-product extracted from tapioca tubers/chips. 2.93 Tomato, Pomace, pulp, and crushed seeds.
Dried A

obtained dried

after starch

mixture

of tomato

yeast of 2.94 Torula,_ Yeast, Dried - Is the dried, non-fermentative the botanical classification Toruloj~ which has been separated from the It shall not contain less than 40 percent medium in which propogated. crude protein. urea but may contain 2.95 Urea - Is predommantly nitrogen compounds which are present as by-products mercial~ synthesis and processing of urea. 2.96 Wheat Bran - The separated from the cleaned commercial milling. other from non-toxic the comas of

coarse outer covering of the wheat kernel and scoured wheat in the usual process Consists chiefly of wheat of shorts. It shall contain

2.97 Wheat Germ Meal with some bran and middlings 25 percent crude protein.

germ together not less than

of fine particles of wheat bran, 2.98 Wheat Middlings - Consists wheat shorts, wheat germ, wheat flour and some of the offal from the may be either coarse of fine. ` tail of the mill `. Wheat middlings
2.99 Wheat Shorts - Consists of fine particles of wheat bran, flour and the offal from the ` tail of the mill `._ 11

wheat

germ,

wheat

IS t 9703 - 1980 2.100 Whey, Dried cheese or casein. The dried by-product from the manufacture of

2.101 Yeast Irridiated, Dried - Dried non-fermentative has been subjected to ultra-violet rays in order to produce potency.

yeast which anti-rachitic

12

