**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 4567 (1968) : Pliers Terminal Device, Quick-grip, for 
Artificial Limbs [MHD 10: Medical Laboratory Instruments] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



15:4567- 1960 

( Reaffirmed 2006 ) 



Indian Standard ne ?* 



SPECIFICATION FOR 

PLIERS TERMINAL DEVICE, QUICK-GRIP, 

FOR ARTIFICIAL LIMBS 



VDC 615 4772 




© Copyright 1968 
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK tJHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI I 



•■^lU Iff*!* 




Gr. 2 



IS: 4567 -1968 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

PLIERS TERMINAL DEVICE, QUICK-GRIP, 

FOR ARTIFICIAL LIMBS 

Artificial Limbs Sectional Committee, CPDC 20 

Chairman Representing 

Col L. K. Ananthanarayanan Directorate General of Armed Forces Medical Services 

( Ministry of Defence ) 

Members 
Shri B. L. Arora India Medico Instruments, Delhi 

Shbi A. K. Aitroba ( Alternate ) 
Shri C. S. Bhatnagar CIBA of India Ltd, Bombay 

Dr S. S. Bhatnagar National Metallurgical Laboratory ( CSIR ), 

Jamshedpur 
Chief Medical Officer Northern Railway, Ministry of Railways ( Medical 

Department ) 
Divisional Medical Officer 
( Alternate ) 
Dr P. K. Duraiswamy Directorate General of Health Services ( Ministry of 

Health, Family Planning & Urban Development ) 
Shri V. Krishnamoorthy Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 
Col D. C. Sachdeva Directorate General of Armed Forces Medical Services 

( Ministry of Defence ) 
Dr M. V. Sant All India Institute of Physical Medicine & Rehabili- 

tation, Bombay 
Shri S. N. Sharma Forest Research Institute & Colleges, Dehra Dun 

Ma J Sohan Singh Ministry of Defence ( DGI ), New Delhi 

Shri K. L. Talwar ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. S. Venkatachalam Central Leather Research Institute (CSIR), Madras 

Dr T. S. Ranganathan ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. B. Rao, Director General, ISI ( Ex-qfficio Member ) 

Director ( Consr Prod ) 

Secretary 

Shri N. B. Rindani 

Assistant Director (Consr Prod), ISI 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 1 



IS: 4567 -1968 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Prosthetic and Orthotic Appliance^ Subcommittee, CPDC 20 : 1 



Representing 

Directorate General of Armed Forces Medical Services 
( Ministry of Defence ) 
Members 

Col L. K. Ananthanarayanan Directorate General of Armed Forces Medical Services 

( Ministry of Defence ) 

Directorate General of Armed Forces Medical Services 
( Ministry of Defence ) 

All India Institute o^ Physical Medicine & Rehabili- 
tation, Bombay 



Convener 
Col D. C. Sachdeva 



Maj S. P. Chaudhui 
Dr M. V. Sant 



IS: 4567 -1968 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

PLIERS TERMINAL DEVICE, QUICK-GRIP, 

FOR ARTIFICIAL LIMBS 

0. FOREWORD 

0*1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 23 April 1968, after the draft finalized by the Artificial Limbs Sectional 
Committee had been approved by the Consumer Products Division 
Council. 

0.2 Formulation of Indian Standards on artificial limbs, prosthetic and 
orthotic appliances and rehabilitation equipment has been taken up at 
the instance of the Advisory Committee for Development of Surgical 
Instruments, Equipment and Appliances, Government of India. 

0.3 Terminal devices for artificial limbs are working accessories to be fitted 
into the dress or working arm of an amputee of the upper extremity. 
These devices aid the amputee to perform some of the normal functions 
of the hand. 

0.4 This standard is one of a series of Indian Standards on terminal devices 
for artificial limbs. Other specifications in the series are: 

IS: 4534-1968 Adapter for terminal devices, artificial limbs 

IS: 4535-1968 Saw-grip terminal device for artificial limbs 

IS: 4554-1968 Hammers terminal devices, ball pein and claw, for 
artificial limbs 

IS : 4555-1968 Biprong terminal device, draughtsman, for artificial 
limbs 

IS: 4556-1968 Typing finger terminal device for artificial limbs 

IS : 4557-1968 Appliance, office, flat adjustable, for artificial limbs 

IS : 4577-1968 Spade-grip terminal device for artificial limbs 

0.5 This standard is a necessary adjunct to IS : 4534-1968*. 

0.6 This standard contains a clause 8.1 which calls for an agreement 
between the purchaser and the supplier. 



*Specification for adapter for terminal devices, artificial limbs. 

3 



IS: 4567 -1968 

0*7 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS:2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard specifies the requirements pertaining to materials, shape, 
dimensions, manufacture, workmanship, finish and performance for quick- 
grip pliers terminal device. 

2. MATERIAL 

2.1 Quick-grip pliers shall be manufactured from carbon steel conforming to 
Designations T65, T70 or T75 of Schedule VI of IS: 1570-1961f. The 
rivet and pins for the joints shall be manufactured from steel conforming to 
IS : 1 148-1964J. The strip used for making spring shall conform to Grade 4 
of Table 1 of IS: 2507-1 965§. 

3. SHAPE AND DIMENSIONS 

3.1 The general shape and dimensions of the pliers shall be as given in 
Fig. 1. 

4. MANUFACTURE, WORKMANSHIP AND FINISH 

4.1 The arms of pliers shall be solid-forged to shape. The rivet shall be 
firm in one of the arms and free in the other. The jaws shall be properly 
hardened and tempered. The serrations shall be neatly cut to provide 
a firm grip. The pliers shall be free from pits, cracks, scale, searns, fins and 
other defects. They shall be finished smooth all over and sharp edges shall 
be removed. The pliers shall work freely without any play or undue stiff- 
ness at the joints. The jaws of the pliers shall be in perfect alignment with 
each other and shall meet completely and evenly in the closed position 
except at the openings. The pliers except the spring, shall be plated chro- 
mium over nickel. The plating shall conform to Grade C of IS : 1068-1 958 1|. 

5. HARDNESS 

5.1 The pliers shall be hardened and tempered to give a hardness of 350 to 
400 HV at the jaws. 



*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). 

fSchedules for wrought steels for general engineering purposes. 

J Specification for rivet bars for structural purposes ( revised ) . 

^Specification for cold rolled steel strip for springs. 

[(Specification for copper, nickel and chromium electroplated coatings. 




NON-TRUNCATED 
SERRATIONS 

PITCH W5 
DEPTH 0*625 



♦See IS : 3642-1966 General requirements for surgical instruments. 

tSee IS : 4534-1968 Specification for adapter for terminal devices, artificial limbs. 

All dimensions in millimetres. 

Fig. 1 Pliers Terminal Device, Quick-Grip, for Artificial Limbs 






IS: 4567 -1968 

6. TESTS 

6.1 Tube Gripping Test — Apiece of mild steel pipe of 15 mm nominal 
diameter shall be held in a vice securely and gripped with the pliers at the 
pipe grip. The pliers shall then be rotated as though attempting to turn 
the pipe in the vice. The pipe shall not rotate but shall get marked fairly 
uniformly by the jaw serrations and the latter shall not be damaged. 

6.2 Shock Test — The pliers shall be capable of withstanding, without sign 
of injury or deterioration, the test of having the nose struck with normal 
manual force against a mild steel block while being held manually by the 
adapter-end. 

7. MARKING 

7.1 The pliers shall be clearly and legibly stamped with the manufacturer's 
name, initials or recognized trade-mark. 

7.1.1 The pliers may also be marked with the ISI Certification Mark. 

Note — The use of the ISI Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of the 
Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act, and the Rules and Regulations 
made thereunder. Presence of this mark on products covered by an Indian Standard 
conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of 
that standard, under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and quality control 
during production. This system, which is devised and supervised by ISI and operated by 
the producer, has the further safeguard that the products as actually marketed are 
continuously checked by ISI for conformity to the standard. Details of conditions, 
under which a licence for the use of the ISI Certification Mark may be granted to manu- 
facturers or processors, may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution. 

8. PACKING 

8,1 The pliers shall be packed in the manner as agreed to between the 
purchaser and the supplier. 



PUBLICATIONS OF INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

INDIAN STANDARDS 

Abaiif * 500 Indian Standards, broadly classified under tftefoNgwina main fronds, 
lidve been Issued to Jar; 



Agriculture & Food 

Chemical 

Civil Engine Orion 

Consumer Product! 



Eicctro tech meal 
Mechdnicat Engineering 
Structural A Metals 
Textile 



Of these, I he standards ta longing I a the Consumer Products Group, at pro sent. 
all under the following categories,: 



Coir and Coir Pioducts 
Domestic Hardware 

Mfldjcal instruments and Hospital 

Equipment 
O.I and GqA Burning Appliances 
Safety Matches 



Sports Goods and Gymnasium 

Equipment 
Urr-bbrell-as 

Utensils and Cutk- ry 
Wriling Aiu* 



OTHIR PUBLICATIONS 



ISI Bulletin ( Published Every Month ) 
Single Cop j ., r ■*+ 

Annual Subscription 

Annual Reports ( Tram 1948-49 Onwards ) 

Handhonk of ISI Puh1icfllions P 19S7 



Rs 

%rta 

isoo 



Available from 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

Mamk Bhivtn, 9 Bahadur Sha-h Zafar Marg, H*« Oalhi I 



Telephones 17 SB 1 - 20 



T el-grans ^arit-ESnaltia 



flrjK/) Offices 



Tclc-grairta Wflniikiflnllbft 

»l Sat dar V a I la h h b ha 1 Pal* I ft sad Bam bay ? 

5 dhowrirtftliF*"? Approach Calcutta I J 

Inclg&lnaJ Es*it* AdminillrElNvg Hyderabad IK 
QuiMinrv, Siinitnaaar 

117 tlH B SaFuodaya Nanar Kanpur 

$4 General Pattern Rend Mackaa £ 



Tplenhonr- 15 G9 44 

2*41 ZJ 

3 9ZZI 

f p 3 TB » 

*727i 



Printed at the ArCM Pf^ss, Ntw Dtlul/lnaiil 



