(Reaffirmed 1999) xxxx 2009

IS : 2559 - 1978

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR GARDEN RAKE

( First Revision )
Horticultural Chairman DR G. S. RANDHAWA Members A~RICULTIJRAL ENQINEER DR G. S. B~WEJA DR T. K. BOSE of Agriculture, Department Government of Himachal Pradesh? Simla Directorate of Extenston, Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation, New Delhi BidhFadIyhandra Krishi Viswa Vidyalaya, Dist _ Equipment

Sectional

Committee,
Representing

AFDC

44

Central Public Works Department,

New Delhi

Pocha Seeds Pvt Ltd, Pune SHRI V. G. BROKER SHRI ASHOK KADAKIA ( Aftsrnale ) Division of Horticulture, Central Public Works SHRI J. L. CHOPRA Department, New Delhi Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation ( Department DIRECTOR ( A~RI IMP ) of Agriculture ) ID~PLEMENTS SPECIALIST ( Alternate ) Forest Research Institute & Colleges, Dehra Dun FOn,ZSTIPY DIRECTOR ox RESEARCH ASSISTANT SILVICUI~TURIST( A&m& ) Premier Corporation, New Delhi SHRI G. B. GOSWAMI A o R I 0 u L T u R A L Indian Agricultural Research Institute ( ICAR ), HEED New Delhi ENQINEERIN~ Division of Horticulture, New Delhi Municipal SHI~I T. A. JOHN Committee Department of Agriculture, Government of Jammu SHRI MOHD SAYEED & Kashmir, Srinagar Mudhar Allied Traders, Delhi SHRI PARAMJIT SIN~H MUDHAR SHRI G. S. MUDHAR ( Alternate ) Mysore Implements Factory, Hassan SHRI G. NAQARAJU SHRI N. S. VENEAT~~HA ( Alternate ) Passi Mechanical Works, Ludhiana SHRI SARBAQ SINQH Pass1 National Agricultural Co-operative Marketing SHRI M. S. PRADHAN Federation of India Ltd, New Delhi SHRI D. S. RATHORE ( Alternate ) ( Continued on page 2 ) @ Copyrigk STANDARDS 1978 INSTITUTION

INDIAN

This publication is protected under the Indian Copytight Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the aaid Act.

I

IS : 2559 - 1978
( Continued from page 1 ) Members SHRIRANJIT SINGH DH VISHNU SWARUP SHRI G. S. SANDEU SFIRI S~RJIT SEWH Rtpesenting Horticultural Society of India, New Delhi ( Alternate ) G. S. Sandhu & Company, Jullundur Horticulture Department, Delhi Municipal Corporation Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi SHRI C. S. SRIDEA~AN Kay Bee Industries ( India ) Private Limited, SHRI S. C. VIRMANI New Delhi SHRI S. K. JAIN ( Alternate ) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-oj%io Member ) SHRI T. PUR ANANDAM, 7 ector ( Agri & Food ) Deputy D1 Sccrctary SHRI R. N. SHARMA Deputy Director ( Agri & Food ), JSI

2

IS : 2559 - 1978

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR GARDEN RAKE

( First Revision )
0.
0.1 This Indian

FOREWORD

Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 29 September 1978, after the draft finalized by the Horticultural Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Agricultural and Food Products Division Council. 0.2 Garden rake is used for collecting uprooted weeds, and to some extent levelling of seed-beds in the gardens. breaking clods

0.3 This standard was first published in 1963. A need was felt to revise this standard to incorporate latest technological developments and to include strength tests. 0.4 The figures included in illustration of the components of any standard design. the standard are only given as typical and should not be considered as suggestive

0.5 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard garden rake.
2. TYPES specifies material, sizes and other requirements for

2.1 The garden
a) b) One-piece ~________
*Rules

rakes shall be of following type ( see Fig. type ( see Fig. 2 ).
off numerical

two types:

Forged-spike

1 ), and

for rounding

values ( revised ).

3

IS : 2559 - 1978

RIVETED

7

ENLARGED RIVETED SPIKES

SECTION

XX

ENLARGED

SECTKIN

YY

SPIKES

WELDED

u

TO

BAR

DLE

d

WORKING

WIDTH SPIKES WELDED

c ENLARGED TO ANGLE

SECTION

ZZ

Fm.

1

FORGED-SPIKETYPE GARDEN RAKE 4

IS:2559

- 1978

FIG.

2

ONE-PIECE

TYPE

GARDEN

RAKE

3. MATERIAL 3.1 Frame 3.2
ment

.
Mild steel ( see IS : 226-1975* ) shall be used. the require3601-

Spikes specified

The steel used shall enable in 8.

the rakes to meet

3.3 Ferrule - Mild steel sheet ( seeIS : 1079-19731_ ), tube ( see IS: 1968: ) or brass ( see IS : 410-19675 ) shall be used. 3.4 Handle shall be used. 4. HARDNESS 4.1 The spikes shall be In by the purchaser. hardness not less than 15 to 35 mm from free
*Specification tspecification *Specification bspecification ilspecification

Timber

( see Appendix

D of IS : 620-197511 ) or bamboo

of unhardened or hardened condition as specified case of hardened condition, these shall have a 25 HRC when measured at a distance between end of the spikes.

for structural steel ( standard quality ) (j.01 revision ). for hot rolled carbon steel sheet and strip ( third revision ). for steel tubes for mechanical and general engineering purposes. for rolled brass plate, sheet, strip and foil ( second r&ion ). for general requirements for wooden tool handles ( third r&rion ).

5

IS : 2559 - 1978 5. SIZES 5.1 The size of the rake shall be expressed
which is the distance from the centre centre of extreme spike at other end. be as given below:

by its working width in mm, of extreme spike at one end to the The size and number of spikes shall

/~o.ofqikpr~
~5 mm Size 1

8
210

( /

10 270

/ )

12
330

( 1

14 330

/ 1

16
450 1

1

6. OTHER

REQUIREMENTS

6.1 In case of the forged-spike

type rakes, the spikes shall be welded or riveted to the frame and in case of one-piece type rakes, the spikes shall be formed by pressing or forging the sheets. 6.2 The centre to centre distance of the spikes variation shall not exceed & 1 mm. shall be uniform. The

In case of 6.3 The spikes shall be slightly curved at their louver ends. forged-spike type rakes the spikes shall be so curved that the angle formed with the frame be in the range of 45 to 60" ( see u in Fig. 1 ). 6.4 The ferrule shall be rigidly attached with the frame in case of the forged-spike type rake and with the shoulder in case of the one-piece In case of the one-piece type, the shoulder may be extended to type* form the ferrule. The minimum thickness of the ferrule shall be 1.5 mm. The ferrule may be cylindrical or conical. The diameter of rivet used for fixing the ferrule and handle shall be 3 to 6 mm. 6.5 The height or depth of the spikes ( see Fig. 1 and 2 ) shall be in the However in a rake only oue selected height or range of 50 to 80 mm. The variation in declared height or depth shall be depth shall be used. not more than f2 mm. 6.6 The handle shall be rigidly attached to the ferrule with the help of The length and diameter of the handle shall be minimum two rivets. in the range of 1.5 to 1.75 m and 25 to 35 mm respectively. The wooden handle shall comply with the requirements specified for class 4 handles of IS : 620-1975*. 7. WORKMANSHIP

AND

FINISH

7.1 The

welding and riveting of the various parts of the garden rake shall be satisfactory. The welds shall not be porous. The welded joints shall be well dressed and smoothly finished. *Specification for general
requirements for wooden tool handles ( :hird revision ).

6

IS:255901978 7.2 The defects.
7.3 components shall be free from smooth. cracks, splits, burrs and other

The handle

shall be finished

7.3.1 The bamboo, if used, shall be free from beetle attack, any kind of decay, splits, cuts or objectionable cracks. The cavity of the bamboo shall not exceed one-third of the diameter at the thin end of the bamboo. The nedal portion of the bamboo shall be finished smoothly. 7.3.2 The wood, if used, shall be well-seasoned and shall be free from centre heart ( pitch ), any kind of decay ( rot ), cracks, shakes, splits ( except hair splits ), borer holes, warp and any other defects excepting those permitted in the finished handle ( SCG 8 of IS : 620-1975* ) which are likely to reduce the life or strength or affect the utility of handles. 7.4 The metallic parts of the rake shall be painted with the suitable rust preventive paint. The wooden handle may be given a coat of varnish. 8. STRENGTH

TESTS

Impact Test - Extreme end of the handle shall be attached to a wood base and loosely pivoted at surface level with a flat horizontal steel plate. The head should be elevated to a height of one metre acd dropped with spikes point falling on the steel plate. This should be The spikes and other portions shall not flatten, repeated for four times. chip, crack, fracture or deform as a result of this test.

8.1 Drop

8.2 Pull Test - The frame or shoulder shall be secured in a stationary fixture and the ferrule ofthe rake shall be kept vertical. A 35 kg mass shall be attached to the centre of any one spike and suspended for As a result of this test, the spike tested shall not show 2 minutes. deformation or permanent set after the removal of the mass.

9. MARKING 9.1 Each
rake shall be marked with the following particulars: if any;

a) Manufacturer's b)
C)

name and registered

trade-mark,

Size;

H, if hardened;

and

d) Batch

or code number.

*Specification for general requirements for wooden tool handles ( third revision ).

7

IS : 2559 - 1978

9.1.1 Each Mark.

rake

may

also

be

marked

with

the

ISI

Certification

NOTE - The use of the ISI Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of the Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The IS1 Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by IS1 and operated by the producer. IS1 marked products are also continuously checked by IS1 for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the ISI Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers or processors, may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution.

10. SAMPLING

FOR LOT

ACCEPTANCE and the supplier, shall be done in for

10.1 Unless otherwise agreed to between the purchaser the sampling and criteria for conformity of rakes accordance with 3 of IS : 7201-1974*.

10.1.1 The classification of different requirements of this standard the purpose of testing for lot acceptance is given below for guidance: a) Dimensional and visual requirements - See 5, 6, 7 and 9.1. b) Other than dimensional and visual requirements - See 4 and 8.

*Method

of sampling

of agricultural

machinery

and tractors.

8

