**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 12240-1 (1988) : Methods of test for polyvinyl chloride 
boots^ Part 1: Measurement of thickness [CHD 19: Footwear] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC685-315-41 [678-743'22j : 531*717 



IS: 12240 (Parti )-l988 



# J- o. ^ J ( Reaffirmed 2002 ) 

Indian Standard 

METHODS OF TEST FOR POLYVINYL CHLORIDE BOOTS 

PART 1 MEASUREMENT OF THICKNESS 



1. Scope — This standard (Part 1 ) prescribes the test procedures for checking the thickness of 
components for polyvinyl chloride boots. 



2. Terminology 

2.1 For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given in 
terms', shall apply, 

3, Preparation of Boots for Measurements of Thickness 



15:2050-1967 'Glossary of footwear 



3,1 Preparation for Measurement of Insole and Outsole — Cut the boot longitudinally and per- 
pendicular to the surface, through the centre of the sole on a line drawn from the centre of the toe 
cap to the centre of the heel. 

Locate the centre line illustrated in Fig. 1, by placing the boot on a horizontal surface and 
against a vertical plane so that it touches the edge of the sole at points yA and 5 on the inner 
side of the boot. Construct two further vertical planes at right angles to the first vertical plane so that 
they meet the sole at points X and /, the toe point and the heel point, respectively. Draw aline 
through X and /. This line shall constitute the centre line for the forepart of the boot. 




FIG, 1 CENTRE LINE OF THE BOOT 

3.2 Preparation for Measurement of Foxing Strip — Cut horizontally through the foxing strip right 
round the upper at a distance of 13 mm above the top surface of the insole adjacent to the upper. 

4. Apparatus 

4.1 Thickness dial gauge calibrated in O'l mm or an equivalent apparatus may be used for the 
determination of thickness in the routine course. Graduated eyepiece with O'l mm scale spacing of 
travelling microscope or screw gauge shall be used wherever necessary/applicable. 

5. Procedure 

5.1 Boot Upper — Take four measurements of the combined thickness of PVC and the fabric 
symmetrically round the top of the boot not less than 3 mm and not more than 1 5 mm below the top 
binding. Measure the thickness of the coating on the upper from the coating surface to the 'penks' 
of the fabric weave structure which are nearest to this surface. 

5.2 Foxing Strip at tiie Toe — Measure the combined thickness of PVC and the fabric, excluding 
pattern if any on the cut section, within 6 mm of the centre line of the boot at the toe. 



Adopted 1 January 1988 



@ May 1988. B|S 



Gr2 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 



IS : 12240 (Part 1 )-1988 

Wt en a protective toe cap is incorporated in the boot, measure the combined thickness of the 
PVC and if fabric, excluding pattern If any, from the outside surface of the protective toe cap. 

b3 Foxing Strip at the Heel — Measure the combined thickness of PVC and the fabric, excluding 
pattern, if any on the cut section, vvithjn 6 mm of the centre line of the heel. 

5.4 Foxing Strip in Other Areas — idke \oux xr\ediSu\evc\er\\^ 0^ the combined thickness of PVC and 
the fabric, excluding pattern, if any, on the cut section, at points symmetrically round the boot in 
the foxing strip area but not in either the heel or the toe areas. 

5.5 Full Thickness of the Boot Bottom — Measure the thickness of the boot bottom on the cut 
section from the upper surface of the insole to the outer surface of the outsole. Take the measure- 
ments both over and between the cleats, including pattern, if any, at three separated points in the 
tread region. Exclude any sock that may be inserted after the boot is moulded. 

5.6 Outsole — Measure the thickness of the outsole on the cut section, both over and between the 
cleats, including pattern, if any, from the lower surface of the insole, filler or midsole ( whichever is 
the lowermost ) to the outer surface of the outsole. Take three measurements at different points in 
the tread region. 

5.7 /Yee/— Measure the full heel thickness D£, as illustrated in Fig. 2, on the cut section over any 
cleat or pattern, if any, perpendicularly from the upper surface, CD, of the insole and the filler, the 
insole line CD is 10 mm in length from point C which is at the top of the back edge of the heel 
on the outside. 




FIG. 2 MEASUREMENT OF THE HEEL THICKNESS 

Where there is a filler block present, measure the thickness from the underside of the block to 
the surface of the heel. Take the measurements both over and between the cleats, at three 
positions for each, or as many as the heel design will allow if less than three, 

6. Test Report 

6.1 The report shall include the following: 

a) Identification of test piece; and 

b) Results obtained for thickness, as individual values. 



EXP LAN ATOR Y NOTE 



Components from upper, foxing strip, sole and heel may have to be checked as separated 
components, even if the boots are known to have been made by a single or double injection 
moulding process. 



IS: 12240 (Parti )-1988 

In the preparation of this standard, considerable assistance has been derived from the draft 
revision of BS6159 (Parti) : 1981 'Polyvinyl chloride boots — Parti Specification for general 
industrial lined or unlined', issued by the British Standards Institution. 

IS : 12240 - 1988 Methods of test for polyvinyl chloride boots has been published in various 
parts as follows: 

Parti Measurement of thickness, 

Part 2 Determination of durometer hardness Shore A, 

Part 3 Determination of relative density. 

Part 4 Determination of volatility. 

Part 5 Determination of lead content. 

Part 6 Determination of tensile strength and elongation at break, 

Part 7 Flexing test resistance to cut growth for soling material, and 

Part 8 Resistance to flexing for polyvinyl chloride upper material. 



Printed at Swatantra Bharat Press, Delhi, India 



