INA qr IS 4156 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


Susa T Qar aart 


( TETT TRUAT ) 


Sampling of Barytes — Methods 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 77.120 
© BIS 2023 
nc gier Sat 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
AMF WM, 9 geet Me AH AM, Ag ferett - 110002 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


VE 


August 2023 Price Group 7 


Ores and Feedstock for Iron and Steel Industry Sectional Committee, MTD 13 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by Ores 
and Feed Stock for Iron and Steel Industry Sectional Committee had been approved by the Metallurgical 
Engineering Division Council. 


This standard was first published in 1967. This revision has been brought out to bring the standard in the latest 
style and format of the Indian Standards. It also incorporates 1 amendment issued to the last version of the 
standard. 


In addition, the following changes have been made: 


a) Classification of ores is placed in 3.1; and 
b) Fig. 1 and Fig. 2 were reintroduced for clear indication and reading. 


Barytes is an important mineral which is used in large quantities in oil-well drilling and in paints and rubber 
industries as a pigment. It is a starting raw material for the manufacture of barium chemicals which are now being 
produced in India. With the opening of more oil-wells in the country, the consumption of barytes is likely to 
increase steadily. It is also being exported to overseas countries. This standard is intended to fulfil the need for 
proper methods of sampling which become very important for sound and satisfactory evaluation of quality. 


For obtaining reliable conclusions it has been recommended that as far as possible, barytes be sampled when in 
motion, that is, during loading or unloading. When sampling of stationary ores, for example, from stock piles 
becomes inevitable, the ‘sectional’ or the ‘trench’ sampling method may be used for stock piles up to a maximum 
height of 1.5 m but the representativeness of the samples drawn in this manner and hence the reliability of the 
conclusions are not assured. 


Barytes is generally offered for sale in the following three forms: 
a) Bulk as run-of-mine up to 200 mm size; 


b) Bulk as small ore up to 50 mm size (known as pebble ore in the trade); and 
c) Crushed and ground form up to 0.05 mm size, generally packed in bags. 


The methods for sampling of crushed and ground barytes corresponding to form (c) have been laid down in the 
respective material specifications required for different industries. This standard, therefore, deals only with 
sampling of barytes in bulk in the forms (a) and (b). 


Taking into consideration the views of producers, testing authorities and consumers, the Committee felt that it 
should be related to the sampling procedures generally followed in this country for barytes as also for other ores 
in bulk. 


This standard is one of a series of Indian Standards on sampling of ores and aggregates; other standards on methods 
of sampling in this series are: 


IS 1405: 2010 ` Iron ores — Sampling and sample preparation — Manual method (third revision) 
IS 1449: 2010 Methods of sampling of manganese ores (second revision) 

IS 1811:1984 Methods of sampling foundry sand (first revision) 

IS 1999: 1987 Method of sampling bauxite (first revision) 

IS 2109: 1982 Methods of sampling dolomite, limestone and other allied materials (first revision) 
IS 2245: 1962 Methods of sampling quartzite 

IS 2246 : 2023 Methods of sampling fluorspar (fluorite) (first revision) 

IS 4166: 1967 Methods for sampling of ilmenite and rutile 


This standard is intended chiefly to cover the technical provisions relating to the sampling of barytes, and it does 
not include all the necessary provisions of a contract. 


(Continued on third cover) 


IS 4156 : 2023 


Indian Standard 
SAMPLING OF BARYTES — METHODS 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard lays down the procedure to be 
followed in collecting and preparing samples from a 
lot in order to determine size distribution, moisture 
content and chemical composition of barytes in bulk. 


1.2 It does not cover barytes in crushed and ground 
form for which sampling procedures have been laid 
down in the respective material specifications. 


1.3 Sampling of barytes in railway wagons or trucks, 
ship's holds and stock piles have been considered 
separately. 


1.4 This standard also includes a method for 
reporting the quality of bulk of the ore sampled. 


2 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply: 


2.1 Lot — The quantity of barytes offered by the 
supplier for inspection at one time. A lot may consist 
of the whole or a part of the quantity ordered for. 


2.2 Sub-lot — The quantity of barytes representing 
each part or portion into which a lot is divided for 
the purpose of sampling. 


2.3 Increment — The quantity of barytes obtained 
by the sampling device at one time from a lot or 
sub-plot. 


2.4 Gross Sample — The quantity of barytes 
obtained by mixing together all the increments 
collected from a sub-lot. 


2.5 Composite Sample — The sample obtained by 
mixing the weighted quantities of gross samples or 
laboratory samples of different sub-lots to constitute 
the sample representing an entire lot. 


2.6 Size Sample — A sample taken for the 
determination of the size distribution of the lot or 
sub-lot. 


2.7 Laboratory Sample — The quantity of barytes 
obtained by reducing the gross sample or composite 
sample following a specified procedure and intended 
for laboratory testing for chemical analysis only. 


2.8 Moisture Sample — A sample to be used 
exclusively for the purpose of determining moisture 
content. 


3 GENERAL RULES OF SAMPLING 
3.1 Classification 


Barytes is generally offered for sale in the following 
three forms: 


a) Bulk as run-of-mine up to 200 mm size; 

b) Bulk as small ore up to 50 mm size (known 
as pebble ore in the trade); and 

c) Crushed and ground form up to 0.05 mm 
size, generally packed in bags. 


3.2 The increments shall be collected only with the 
sampling scoop and should not be picked up by 
hand. 


3.3 The containers and equipment used for 
collecting, preserving and preparing the samples 
should be sufficiently clean as to avoid 
contamination of the samples. If gunny bags are 
used, these should be clean and of close texture to 
avoid loss of fines in the samples. Particular care 
must be taken to avoid contamination with iron since 
there is often a very rigid limit on this impurity in 
barytes. 


3.4 The samples should be always kept in a place 
sufficiently protected to avoid changes in its quality, 
particularly in respect of moisture. 


3.5 A gross sample may be used for the combined 
purpose of determining size, moisture and chemical 
composition. In such a case, the size determination 
should be carried out first before preparing the 
sample for moisture and chemical composition. 


3.6 When moisture content is required for the lot and 
the same gross sample is to be used for preparation 
of moisture sample and laboratory sample the gross 
sample should be processed as quickly as possible 
after collection up to the stage where moisture 
sample is collection in order to avoid changes in 
moisture by long storage. 


3.7 Moisture samples should always be collected in 
airtight containers to avoid changes in moisture 
content and these should be sent to the laboratory for 
testing without delay. 


4 INCREMENTS 


4.1 Increments should be taken with the sampling 
scoop the design of which is shown in Fig. 1. 


IS 4156 : 2023 


4.2 The size of sampling scoop to be selected 
depends on the maximum lump size of the ore as 
shown in Table 1. 


43 The increments taken should be of 


approximately uniform weights. 


4.4 Where big lumps exceeding the weight of 
increment to be taken are encountered at the point 
selected for samplings the entire lump shall be 
collected if the sample is to be used for size 
determination also. Otherwise, the lump may be 
broken and the required weight of increment 
collected from pieces. 


5 SUB-LOTS 


For the purpose of sampling, a lot may be divided 
into a number of sub-lots of approximately equal 
weights as specified in Table 2. 


NOTES 


1 When it is not practicable to have sub-lots of approximately 
equal weights, sub-lots of varying weights may also be 
permitted. 


2 The object of dividing a lot into a number of sub-lots is only 
to facilitate the drawing of a representative gross sample 
rather than to indicate its physical division. 


Fic. 1 SAMPLING SCOOP 


Table 1 Dimensions of Sampling Scoop 


(Clause 4.2, 7.3, 8.2, 9.2.3, 


9.3.3.3 and Fig. 1) 


SINo. Capacity Maximum Dimensions 
of Scoop Lump Size A A N 
A B C D E F G 
ke mm mm mm mm mm mm mm mm 
d) 2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (8) (9) (10) 
i) 8 200 200 200 100 175 115 440 40 
ii) 2 50 175 100 100 150 65 330 30 


NOTE — Dimension A to D should be exact and E to G are optional, given only for guidance. 


Table 2 Number of Sub-Lots into which a Lot is to be Divided 
(Clause 5.1, 7.1, 8.1, 9.2.1, 9.3.2.1 and 9.3.3.1) 


SI No. Weight of the Lot Tonnes 
(l) (2) 
i) Up to 2 000 
ii) 2 001 to 5 000 
iii) 5 001 to 10 000 
iv) 10 001 to 25 000 
v) 25 001 and above 


Number of Sub-Lots 


OI 
2 


Nn + O 


6 NUMBER OF INCREMENTS 


The number of increments to be taken from a sub-lot 
shall be as given below: 


SI No. Category of Ore 
—— n 
Run of Small 
mine 
(l) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Weight of gross 300 100 
sample, kg, Min 
ii) Weight of 8 2 
increment, kg, 
approx 
iii) Numter of 38 50 


increments, Min 


7 SAMPLING FROM WAGONS OR TRUCKS 


7.1 For the purpose of sampling, all the wagons or 
trucks in a lot shall be divided into a suitable number 
of sub-lots of approximately equal weight as 
specified in Table 2. 


7.2 The samples shall be drawn when the ore is being 
loaded into or unloaded from wagons or trucks. 


7.3 The size of increment and sampling scoop shall 
be decided as specified in Table 1. 


7.4 The minimum number of increments for each 
sub-lot shall be 38 for run of mine and 50 for small 
ore. 


7.5 A minimum of 25 percent of the wagons or 
trucks shall be selected at random from the sub-lot. 
From each of the wagons or trucks so chosen, an 
approximately equal number of increments shall be 
collected so as to obtain the specified minimum 
number of increments from the sub-lot. The 
increments shall be drawn with the help of a suitable 
sampling scoop (see Fig. 1) at regular intervals at the 
time of loading or unloading of the wagons or trucks. 


7.6 The points in a wagon or truck at which the 
increments are to be drawn shall be suitably varied 
so as to cover different locations and depths. 


7.7 Combine the increments in a sub-lot to form the 
gross sample. 


7.8 Sampling from loaded wagons or trucks is not 
generally recommended. If, however, this becomes 
unavoidable, then the gross sample shall be made up 
of unit samples as given below: 


IS 4156 : 2023 


SINo. Category of Ore Minimum Number of 


Unit Samples 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Run-of-mine 7 
ii) Small 5 


For collecting these unit samples, an equal number 
of points shall be located at random on the entire ore 
surface of all the wagons or trucks in a sub-lot. At 
every selected point a unit sample shall be collected 
by sectional sampling method (see 9.3.2). 


8 SAMPLING FROM SHIPS 


8.1 For the purpose of sampling, the quantity of ore 
loaded into or unloaded from a ship shall be divided 
into a suitable number of sub-lots of approximately 
equal weight as specified in Table 2. 


NOTE — In case it becomes desirable to sample each batch 
in hold of the shop separately the quantity of ore in each of 
the batches which are treated as sub-lots should be 
ascertained beforehand. 


8.2 The size of increment and sampling scoop 
shall be decided as specified in Table 1. 


8.3 The minimum number of increments for each 
subplot shall be 38 for run of mine and 50 for small 
ore. 


8.4 The increments should be uniformly spread over 
the total quantity in each sub-lot. Thus, the interval 
of sampling should be approximately equal and this 
will be equal to the total quantity in each sub-lot 
divided by the number of increments to be collected. 


8.5 The increments may be collected either from the 
loading device which may be baskets, skips, grab, 
bucket, belt, etc, or if possible, it may be collected 
actually from the hatch of the ship where the ore is 
discharged by the loading device. 


8.6 Combine the increments in a sub-lot to form the 
gross sample. 


9 SAMPLING FROM STACKS OR STOCK 
PILES 


9.1 Samples shall be drawn when the stack or stock 
pile is cleared for loading into wagons or trucks. 
However, since sale of barytes is often effected on 
the basis of stack sampling, procedure has also been 
laid down for sampling from stationary stacks. 


9.2 Sampling during Clearance of Stack or Stock 
Pile 


9.2.1 The total quantity to be sampled should be 


IS 4156 : 2023 


divided into suitable number of sub-lots as specified 
in Table 2. 


9.2.2 If the stock pile is in a regular rectangular form 
with levelled top surface, the sub-lots can be clearly 
marked out in the stock pile. If this is not possible 
due to uneven shape of stock pile, the formation of 
sub-lots may be decided from the total quantity of 
the material loaded. 


9.2.3 The size of increment and sampling scoop to 
be used is decided from the maximum lump size of 
ore as specified in Table 1. 


9.2.4 The minimum number of increments to be 
drawn shall be 38 for run of mine and 50 for small 
ore. 


9.2.5 The specified number of increments arc spread 
over the entire sub-lot uniformly with a random start 
so that increments are taken at fixed quantity 
intervals. 


9.2.6 The increments taken for each subplot are 
mixed together to form the gross sample. 


9.3 Sampling from Stationary Stacks or Stock 
Piles 


9.3.1 In sampling stationary stacks, the following 
points should be taken into consideration: 


a) Since it is not possible to draw increments 
uniformly spread over the total quantity in 
a subplot, samples should be drawn from 
maximum possible number of points; and 


b) Two methods, namely, sectional sampling 
and trench sampling have been specified. 
These may be applicable only in cases of 
stock piles of height less than 1.5 m. 


9.3.2 Sectional Sampling 


9.3.2.1 The lot is divided into the requisite number 
of sub-lots as specified in Table 2. Each sub-lot 
should be properly marked out in the stock pile. 


9.3.2.2 The gross sample is made up of the number 
of unit samples specified in 7.8. For collecting these, 
the required number of points should be marked out 
at random over the surface of the ore in the sub-lot. 


9.3.2.3 At every selected point, unit sample shall be 
collected by taking the entire cross-section of the ore 
from top to bottom over the area of a circle of 
200 mm diameter. For doing this, the ore from the 
surface up to a depth of approximately 250 mm shall 
be collected first. The bottom of the hole so formed 
shall be then covered with a plate and the ore lying 
on the sides of the hole shall be removed up to the 
level of the plate. The plate is then removed and the 
hole dug further to collect the sample. The process 
is repeated till the bottom is reached. 


9.3.3 Trench Sampling 


9.3.3.1 The lot is divided into requisite number of 
sub-lots as specified in Table 2. Each sub-lot shall 
be properly marked out. 


9.3.3.2 Each sub-lot (sub-stack) shall be trenched in 
the following manner: 


a) The direction and pattern of trenches 
should be at random without following 
definite pattern. The pattern should be 
changed from sub-lot to sub-lot; 

b) The trench should extend right up to the 
bottom of the stack until the ground level is 
exposed; and 

c) In addition to the trenches, the sides of the 
stack should be opened to expose the ore 
inside the stack at places where the trench 
does not expose the ore inside. 


9.3.3.3 The size of increment and sampling scoop to 
be used shall be decided from the maximum lump 
size as given in Table 1. 


9.3.3.4 The minimum number of increments to be 
drawn shall be 38 for run of mine and 50 for small 
ore. These increments shall be uniformly spread 
over the entire sub-lot. They shall also be taken 
uniformly from the entire cross-section of the 
exposed sides of trenches from top to bottom. 


9.3.3.5 Combine all the increments to form the gross 
sample. 


10 DETERMINATION OF ORE SIZES 


10.1 Determination of ore sizes shall be carried out 
before the gross sample is taken up for sample 
preparation for moisture and chemical analysis, in 
case a common sample is drawn for size and quality. 


10.2 The sizes of screens to be used shall be decided 
as required by the parties concerned. The normal 
sizes required are as follows: 

a) Over 200 mm; 

b) Over 50 mm and up to 200 mm; and 

c) 50 mm and below. 


10.3 The total gross sample should first be weighed 
to ascertain its total weight. 


10.4 The gross sample shall be screened 
progressively from largest size screen to the smallest 
one. 


10.5 The different size groups obtained shall be kept 
separate and weighed separately. 


10.6 Calculations 


10.6.1 The percentage of each size in a sub-lot 
(on weight basis) is calculated as follows: 


weight of each size group 


Size percentage = x 100 


total weight of gross sample 
10.6.2 When the percentage of each size group in the 
entire lot is required, this shall be calculated as 
follows: 


<: < + KEE 
Percentage in each size group = ——— 
Mekka 
x 100 
where 
aao, ...... are the corresponding weights of the 


respective size group in each of the sub-lots; and 


Wi, W........ are the weights of different gross 
samples of sub-lots. 


11 REDUCTION OF GROSS SAMPLE 


11.1 Each gross sample shall be reduced separately. 
If, however, separate analysis of each sub-lot is not 
required, the gross samples of each sub-lot shall be 
crushed up to 5 mm size as shown in Fig. 2. After 
this the gross samples shall be mixed in proportion 
of the quantities represented by their respective 
sub-lots to form a composite sample which shall 
then be reduced as shown in Fig. 2. 


11.2 Crushing and grinding shall be done with either 
mechanical equipment like jaw crusher, cone 
crusher, roll crusher, disc grinder, etc, or manually 
with steel plate and hammer or mortar and pestle. 


11.3 The equipment required for crushing, 
reduction, screening, storing and handling, etc, of 
the samples shall be cleaned sufficiently to avoid 
any contamination of the sample. Particular care 
should be taken to remove the remnants of the 
previous sample processed in the equipment. 


11.4 The gross sample after being subjected to the 
size test, if necessary, shall be crushed to pass 
completely through 10 mm screen. It shall then be 
reduced by coning and quartering, riffle divider, 
sample splitter, rotary divider or increment 
reduction method to a quantity not less than 50 kg. 


IS 4156 : 2023 


11.5 Reduction Methods 
11.5.1 Coning and Quartering 


The crushed ore shall be well mixed and then 
scooped into a cone-shaped pile. Care shall be taken 
to drop each scoopful exactly over the apex of the 
cone to avoid uneven distribution of lumps and 
fines. The cone thus formed shall be flattened by 
pressing the top of the cone with a smooth flat 
surface. The cone is then divided into 4 quarters by 
2 lines intersecting at right angles at the centre of the 
cone. Any 2 diagonally opposite quarters are 
rejected. The other two quarters form the reduced 
sample which may be further reduced by the same 
procedure, if necessary, or taken for further 
crushing. In rejecting the two opposite quarters, care 
shall be taken to brush away and reject the fine 
powder remaining at the bottom on the plate, canvas, 
etc, used for reduction. 


11.5.2 Riffle Divider 


The crushed material shall be well mixed and then 
poured uniformly into the riffle divider. The sample 
collected on one side of the divider shall be taken 
and that on 'the other side rejected. In order to avoid 
any errors due to fabrication of the divider, the side 
which is taken for rejecting the sample, shall be 
changed alternately. The dividers of different sizes 
according to the size of crushed ore shall be used. 


11.5.2.1 While the design and dimensions of the 
riffle dividers is not standardized, the following 
important requirements should be satisfied by the 
dividers used: 


a) The total number of riffles should be even, 
normally 16; and 

b) The width of riffles should he uniform in 
all the riffles and this should be at least 
twice the size of the maximum particle size 
of the crushed material. 


IS 4156 : 2023 


GROSS SAMPLE 


SIZE DETERMINATION 


CRUSHED TO 10 mm, MIXED AND REDUCED TO 50 kg 


20 kg - 10mm REJECTED PORTION 


CRUSHED TO 5mm AND MIXED 
MOISTURE SAMPLE 


(1 TO 2 kg) 
SUB-LOT1 SUB-LOT2..... SUB-LOTn 


WEIGH QUANTITIES PROPORTIONATE 
TO SUB - LOT WEIGHTS 


MIXED AND REDUCED TO 10 kg - 5mm 


CRUSHED TO 1.7 mm AND MIXED 


| 


5kg 5kg 
REJECT | 


CRUSHED TO 0.7 mm AND MIXED 


' 


2.5 kg 


2.5 kg 
REJECT 


CRUSHED TO 0.4 mm AND MIXED 


1.25 kg 
REJECT 


FiG.2 REDUCTION OF A GROSS SAMPLE 


PULVERISED TO PASS 
0.15mm SCREEN 


LABORATORY SAMPLE 
FOR CHEMICAL ANALYSIS 


11.5.3 Other Mechanical Dividers 


Mechanically operated dividers like rotary divider 
may be used provided their efficiency has been 
tested. 


11.5.4 Increment Reduction 


The crushed ore shall be mixed and spread on a 
smooth non- absorbent surface to form a uniform flat 
rectangle with the thickness specified in Table 3. 
The rectangle shall be divided into 20 equal parts, 
5 lengthwise and 4 breadthwise. From each of the 
20 parts so formed, equal quantities of ore shall be 
taken with a scoop, the capacity of which shall be as 
shown in Table 3. The 20 increments taken are 
combined to form the reduced sample. 


Table 3 Increment Reduction 
(Clause 11.5.4) 


SINo. Sizeof Thickness Quantity of 


Ore of Layer Increment 
taken from 
Each Part 
mm mm g 
UI (2) (3) (4) 
i) 10 30 to 40 55 
ii) 5 25 to 35 250 
iii) 1.7 15 to 25 100 
iv) 0.7 10 to 15 50 
v) 0.4 5 to 10 25 
vi) 0.15 5 to 10 10 


11.6 Moisture Sample — from the rejected portion 
of the gross sample at 10 mm stage, a moisture 
sample of kg 1 to 2 kg shall be taken after proper 
mixing of the rejected sample. This sample shall be 
transferred immediately to a container like bottle or 
polythene jar with an air-tight moisture-proof cap. 
Separate moisture sample for each sub-lot shall be 
collected. These shall be sent immediately to the 
laboratory and the moisture test carried out without 
delay in order to avoid changes in moisture content. 


11.7 Laboratory Sample 


The laboratory sample after being reduced and 
crushed to pass through 150 micron IS Sieve, as 
given in Fig. 2, shall be muted and divided into 3 or 
more (if necessary) equal parts. These shall be 
preserved in clean and dry, well stoppered bottles 
and labelled with full particulars, such as source, 
supplier’s name, purchaser’s name, date and place of 
sampling, total quantity, name of steamer, if any, 
and any other relevant details. 


IS 4156 : 2023 


12 NUMBER OF TESTS 


12.1 Moisture Samples 


All the moisture samples k presenting a lot shall be 
tested individually for moisture content. From the 
quantities represented by the individual sub-lots, the 
composite moisture for the entire lot shall be 
calculated as given in formula in 13.3.2 and 
reported. 


12.2 Laboratory Samples 


When the variation in quality of individual sub-lots 
is required or when required by the parties 
concerned, each gross sample shall be individually 
tested for important characteristics, namely, barium 
sulphate, silica and iron. When, however, only the 
average quality of the lot is required, the composite 
sample prepared as shown in Fig. 2, shall be tested 
for all the chemical characteristics required by the 
parties concerned. 


13 REPORTING 
13.1 Size Test 


The percentages of different size groups for the 
entire lot shall be reported (see 10.6.2) unless 
otherwise required by the parties concerned in which 
case the results for each sub-lot may be reported. 


13.2 Moisture Test 


The average moisture content for the entire lot shall 
be reported unless otherwise required by the parties 
concerned, in which case the results of each sub-lot 
shall be reported. 


13.3 Chemical Analysis 


13.3.1 When only the composite sample has been 
tested, only one test result will be available for each 
characteristic and that result shall be reported as the 
value of the characteristic for the lot. 


13.3.2 When two or more laboratory samples have 
been tested individually for a lot, the individual 
results of each characteristic shall be reported to 
give an indication of the variation in quality. In 
addition be also calculated from the following 
formula: 


(Hat Wat Xt Wate eect XnxWn) 
Average (x) = ——— 
w 
where 
XI, X2,.........Xn are the individual results of n 


gross samples for the particular characteristic; 


Wi, W2,......... Wn are the weights of individual 
sub-lots; and 


W is the total weight of the lot (= wi, w2, 


IS 4156 : 2023 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Ores and Feedstock for Iron and Steel Industry Sectional Committee, MTD 13 


Organization 


National Mineral Development Corporation Ltd, 
Hyderabad 


Agni Steel Private Limited, Erode 


Alex Stewart International (India) Private Limited, 
Visakhapatnam 


Arcelor Mittal and Nippon Steel India Ltd, 
Visakhapatnam 


Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 
Centre for Engineering and Technology 
(SAIL/CET), Ranchi 


CSIR - Institute of Minerals & Materials 
Technology, Bhubaneswar 


CSIR - National Metallurgical Laboratory, 
Jamshedpur 


Federation of Indian Mining and Mineral Industries, 
New Delhi 


Fomento Resources Private Limited, Panaji 


Geological Survey of India, Kolkata 


Indian Bureau of Mines, Nagpur 


Indian Ferro Alloy Producers Association, Mumbai 


Jai Balaji Group, Kolkata 


Jindal Stainless Ltd, Hissar 


JSW Steel Ltd, Bellary 


KIOCL Limited, Bengaluru 


Manganese Ore (India) Ltd, Nagpur 


Representative(s) 


SHRI RAJAN KUMAR (Chairperson) 


SHRI A. RAJASEKARAN 


SHRI DEBASISH PAL 
SHRIS. BALAJI (Alternate) 


DR ATANU RANJAN OJHA 
SHRI CH. V. S. ND. HARIPRASAD (Alternate) 


DR SANJIB MAJUMDAR 
DR ABHISHEK MUKHERJEE (Alternate) 


SHRI BRAJESH KUMAR 
SHRI D. K. JAGANI (Alternate) 


DR ASHOK SAHU 
DR S. P. DAS (Alternate) 


DR MANOJ KUMAR MOHANTA 
SHRI B. K. BHATIA 
SHRI MAHENDRA MANGUESH RAMANI 
SHRI ABHIJIT PEDNEKAR RAMANI (Alternate) 


DR UTPAL ROY CHOUDHURY 


SHRI L. B. TOAL 
SHRI SANTOSH PANI (Alternate) 


SHRI TANMAYA KUMAR PATTNAIK 
SHRI SITA RAM (Alternate) 


SHRI D. SAHOO 


SHRI ASHISH GOYAL 
SHRI SUYASH TRIVEDI (Alternate) 


SHRI P. C. MAHAPATRA 
SHRI C. R. PRAMOD KUMAR (Alternate I) 
SHRI N. SAI RAM KRISHNA (Alternate II) 


SHRI M. A. SALAM 
SHRI P. PALANI (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJESH BHATTACHARYA 
SHRIMATI SNEHA TIWAR (Alternate) 


Organization 


Mineral Exploration Corpn Ltd, Nagpur 


Mitra S.K. Pvt Ltd, Kolkata 


M.N. Dastur & Co Ltd, Kolkata 


National Institute of Secondary Steel Technology, 
Mandi, Gobindgarh 


National Mineral Development Corporation Ltd, 
Hyderabad 


Pellet Manufacturer's Association of India, New Delhi 


Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited, Visakhapatnam 


SAIL - RDCIS, Ranchi 


Sponge Iron Manufacturers Association, New Delhi 


Tata Steel, Jamshedpur 


Tata Steel Long Products Limited, Jamshedpur 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 4156 : 2023 


Representative(s) 
SHRI P. RAVINDRAN 
SHRI SANTOSH KUMAR SATAPATHY (Alternate) 


SHRI SAJAL MITRA 
SHRI P. L. BOSE (Alternate) 


SHRI AVIJIT PODDAR 


SHRI SHRI RAJIB KUMAR PAUL 
SHRI SANDEEP PAL SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI VIBHUTI ROSHAN 


SHRI DEEPAK BHATNAGAR 


SHRI T. GOUTHAM 
SHRI RANJAN MOHANTY (Alternate) 


SHRI V. DAYAL 
SHRI S. ACHARYA (Alternate) 


SHRI D. KASHIVA 


DR A. K. MUKHERJEE 


SHRI MANIKANTA NAIK 
SHRI GYANARANIJAN POTHAL (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJIV MAINI, SCIENTIST ‘F’/SENIOR DIRECTOR 
AND HEAD (METALLURGICAL ENGINEERING) 
[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI RAM SAI KUMAR GEDELA 
SCIENTIST ‘B’/ASSISTANT DIRECTOR 
(METALLURGICAL ENGINEERING), BIS 


(Continued from second cover) 


The composition of the Committee responsible for formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, is to be rounded off, it shall be 
done in accordance with IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of 
significant places retained in the rounded off value should be same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MTD 13 (22090). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8™ Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.L.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri | 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


