**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 8795 (1978) : Method for determining case depth of 
carburized steel by fracture test [MTD 22: Metallography 
and Heat Treatment] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



isitm.im 

(Reaffirmed 2003) 



Indian Standard 



METHOD FOR 

DETERMINING CASE DEPTH OF 

CARBURIZED STEEL BY FRACTURE TEST 



UPC 669-14-155-4 j 620'] 7*1" 152*341 




1$ Copjrighi 1978 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

HAN AIL MIA VAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAS MAB.0 

N1W DELHI L 10002 

Qt * aetata 1973 




IS: 8795-197$ 

Indian Standard 

METHOD FOR 

DETERMINING CASE DEPTH OF 

CARBURIZED STEEL BY FRACTURE TEST 

Metallography and Heat Treatment Sectional Committee, SMDG 27 

Chairman Represen ting 

Dr S» K. Chatterjee Guest, Keen, Williams Ltd, Howrah 

Members 

Shri S. K. Basu ( Alternate to 
DrS. K. Chatterjee) 
Dr S. S. Bhatnagar National Metallurgical Laboratory (CSIR ), 

Jamshedpur 
Dr D, J. Chakravarty ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. G. Biswas National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri Dasaratha The Visvesvaraya Iron and Steel Ltd, Bhadravat i 

Shri B. Haridasachar ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. M. Davar Premier Automobiles Ltd, Bombay 

Shri A. T. Borate ( Alternate) 
Dr A. Y. Decani Mukand Iron & Steel Works Ltd , Bombay 

Shri C. R. Ghosh ( Alternate ) 
Deputy Director ( Met )-2, Ministry of Railways 
RDSO, Lucknow 
Chemist & Metallurgist, 
Northern Railway, Lucknow 
( Alternate ) 
Shri S. P. Dey Hindustan Motors Ltd, Uttarpara 

Shri M. B. Dutt Indian Aluminium Go Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri A. K. Ghosh ( Alternate ) 
Shri E. R. Gonda Ahmadabad Advance Mills Ltd, Navsari 

Dr L. K. Singhal ( Alternate) 
Shri A. K. Guha Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals ( Ins- 

pection Wing ), New Delhi 
Shri K. M. Taneja ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. L. Katyal Bajaj Auto Ltd, Pune 

Dr D. M. Lakhiani Indian Iron & Steel Co Ltd, Burnpur 

Shri D. R. Dasgupta ( Alternate ) 
Shri J. S. Lotay Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Hardwar 

Shri Laxaman Mishra Directorate General of Technical Development, New 

Delhi 
Shri V. D. Sharma ( Alternate ) 

{Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1978 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS: 8795 -1978 



( Continued from page 1 ) 
Members 



Representing 
Hindustan Steel Ltd, Ranchi 



Dr G. Mukherjee 

Shri D. K. Bagche ( Alternate ) 
Dr T. Mukherjee Tata Iron & Steel Go, Jamshedpur 

Shri J. Naobsh Bhatt Indian Telephone Industries Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri D. Lakshmanna (Alternate) 



Ashok Leyland Ltd, Madras 
Kamani Metals & Alloys Ltd, Bombay 
Tata Engin eering & Locomot ive 
Jamshedpur 

Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 



Shri A. Padmanaban 
Shri H. S. Parghi 
Dr P. S. Pattihal 

Shri J. G. Kapoor ( Alternate ) 
Shri V- Ramaswamy 

Shri B. N. Ray ( Alternate ) 
Dr V. Ramaswamy Hindustan Steel Ltd, Ranchi 

Dr K. V. Subba Rao ( Alternate ) 
Shri A, R. Ranadive Mahindra & Mahindra Ltd, Bombay 

Shri M. K. Khandke ( Alternate) 
Shri S. G. Rastogi Heavy Engineering Corporation Ltd, Ranchi 

Shri P. G. Mulye ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. G. Saha Ministry of Defence ( R&D ) 

Shri J. N. Agrawal ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. A. Shanbhag Special Steels Ltd, Bombay 

Shri A. D. Hajare ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. Sivaramakrishnan Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri D. K. De ( Alternate ) 
Shri H. K. Taneja 

Shri V. N. Pandey ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. L. Tondon 
Shri Surendra Verma 

Shri'Sudhir Kumar ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. R. Rama Rao, 
Director ( Struc & Met ) 



Co Ltd, 



Indian Register of Shipping, Bombay 

Ministry of Defence ( DGOF ) 

All India Metal Forging Association, New Delhi 

Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 



Secretary 

Shri B. Mukherji 

Deputy Director (Metals ), ISI 



IS: 8795- 1978 

Indian Standard 

METHOD FOR 

DETERMINING CASE DEPTH OF 

CARBURIZED STEEL BY FRACTURE TEST 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 25 May 1978, after the draft finalized by the Metallography and Heat 
Treatment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Structural and 
Metals Division Council. 

0.2 Carburizing of steel is generally carried out to obtain a hard, wear- 
resistant surface, and by choosing the base steels with relatively low carbon 
or suitable alloy content, adequate toughness in the case/core composite is 
ensured. Methods of measuring the case-depth in carburized steels has 
been specified in IS : 6416-1971*. Recognizing the need for a quick 
shop-floor test, this standard has been prepared to provide a guide for 
procedure to be adopted for rapid determination of case-depth in carburized 
steels. The method described in this standard is in vogue as a useful tool 
for process control. However, this method shall not be used as a referee 
method. 

0.3 In reporting the results of a test made in accordance with this 
standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it 
shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960f. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard prescribes a method of measuring case depth of 
carburized steel by fracture test for routine process control purposes. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.1 For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given in IS: 1956 
( Part I )-1976{ shall apply. 



♦Methods of measuring case depth of steel. 
tRules for rounding off numerical values (revised). 

^Glossary of terms relating to iron and steel: Part I General metallurgy, heat treatment 
and testing (first revision ). 

3 



IS: 8795 -1978 



3, PROCEDURE 



3.1 Notched test bars ( notched up to about half of dia ) with a diameter 
of at least five times the desired case-depth, of adequate length and made 
from the same batch of steel as the articles to be carburized, should be 
carburized with the work. As soon as the time specified for carburizing 
has elapsed, one test bar shall be withdrawn from the carburizing medium, 
quenched in water and fractured by a hammer. 

The fractured surface should be etched in a solution of 20 percent 
nitric acid in water for a time established to develop maximum contrast 
between the core and the case and then rinsed in water. The width of the 
case shall then be measured by means of a fine-point divider and a 
graduated scale. 

3.1.1 If required, a correlation may be established between the method 
described in 3.1 and the microscopic method of case-depth measurement 
as follows: 

Pilot samples, selected from the batch of steel to be carburized, 
should be subjected to carburizing treatment. Samples should be 
quenched in water after withdrawing from the carburizing media. 
The quenched sample should be cut by a metal! ographic or other 
abrasive cut-off saw under coolant. The cut-off face, if necessary, 
should be polished on emery papers, and then etched in 3-5 percent 
Nital solution for 15-30 seconds. The carburized layer will become 
visible as greyish black skirt in the periphery. The width of the skirt 
should be measured with a graduated scale and a fine point divider 
and also by the microscopic method as described in IS : 6416-1971*. 
The two sets of readings, should be compared for establishing the 
correlation between the two methods of measurement. 



•Methods of measuring case deptk of steeL 

4 



