UDC

622'233'055:622'23912

(

First Reorint

DECEMBER

1986 )

IS : 7209

- I974

El
1 I

Indian

Standard

( Reaffirmed 2001 )

GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR BLAST HOLE DRILLING RIGS
for blast hole drilling rigs.

.

Scope -

Covers the gelreral roquirements and Constructional Details

I. Functions

&
u

!.I The drill is used to drill small diameter shallow holes for purposes of blasting. The holes will rot be cased and as soon as the required number of holes are drilled at the specified spacing pattern, Scavenging of cuttings may be either by mud flush pumping or by high llasting will be carried out. 17 xessure air delivered by a suitable air compressor. !.2 The functions and the constructional details of the various~units are furnished below :hey are intended to be typical only and do not constitute a specific recommendation guideline for the manufacturer and the user of the drilling rig. ( see Fig. 1 ). but are only a

t i

FIG. 1

BLAST

HOLE DRILLING

RIG

Adopted 26 February 1974 I

@ July 1974. ISI

I

Or 3

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION MANAK MAVAN, a ~AHMXIR SHAH ~AFAR MARG NEW DELHI 110002

IS :7209 - 1974
2.2.1 Mad - Mast shall be constructed either of steel tubing or structural steel conforming to either IS : 266-l 969 `Specification for steel tubes for structural purposes (second revision ) ' or IS : II 61-I 968 ' Specification for structural steel ( standard quality ) ( fourth revision ) `. The material shall be capable of handling the maximum desired load without distortion, the factor of safety being not less than 2.2 in any case. The mast shall be made up of horizontal sections with cross-bars tied to the sections at an interval of not more than 3 to 3.5 metres. They shall be properly welded with no cracks in welding. The final shape of the mast shall be correct to the requirement with clear working height to handle the drilling string and with sufficient width to accommodate handling of drilting -bits and casing pipes. The mast shall be actuated by one or more double acting hydraulic cylinders with safety -checks, to It either raise or lower i;. A mechanical lock shall be provided to hold the mast in vertical position. shatl be so designed that the drill may be readily positioned to drill vertical holes or holes at limited The mast shall accommodate the magazine specified angles with requisite increments in the angle. and travel head. The rig shall be capable of being shifted from one hole to the other ( which are near ) with-the mast in erected position. 2.2.2 Rotary fable - Traveilrng rotary box-operated hydraulic motor or by any other suitable method with variable speeds shall be provided to obtain the right speed for every job. Quick changeover to different speeds shall be possible to ~meet changing conditions. Alternately, rotary drive may be provided through conventional right-angle drive case with a drive shaft and travelling head, In either case a suitable water swivel shall be provided in units employing the mud slush principle to ensure The swivel hose shall be of the high pressure leakproof, trouble-free operation and easy repair works. flexible rubber type having the required diameter and adequate length and shall have adequate abrasive resistance to ensure reasonably long life. 2.2.3 Transmission - Transmission shall have sufficient range of forward speeds and reverse speeds to give variable rotational .speeds to the drilling string for different strata conditions and different hoisting speeds for different loads. Transmission may be either of the conventional type of gear shift through linkages or power shift type. 2.2.4 Pump or compressor 2.2.4.1 In the case of mud drilling, the mud pump shall be capable of quickly scavenging the cuttings to obtain maximum drilling rate. The pump shall be designed to deliver the maximum discharge of the mud fluid at the desired pressure to have good results. It shall either be a conventional reciprocating pump or of any other suitable design with suitable drive; from either the main power unit or from a separate power source. There shall be an independent control for the pump and shall be provided with suction hose, pipe lines and delivery hoses. A suitable water swivel shall be provided. All the suction There shall .also be a pressure-relief valve to release the excessive pressure if produced. hoses used in drilling rigs shall be of such a material as to withstand the abrasive action of the circulating tluid. 2.2.4.2 In the case of dry drilling with compressed air, a suitable compressor unit to supply The compressor shall adequate quantity of high pressure air to remove the cuttings shall be provided. A suitable control to operate the be fitted in the rig itself and be driven by its own power unit. compressor, valves and air tine pipes and hoses shall be provided. 2.2.5 Power unit - Power to drive the different units, namely, track box drive, mud pump, etc, shall be made available either from a single unit with hydraulic motors coupled to it to drive individual units or separate power units for each -drive with independent controls. Industrial type diesel engine or In the case of diesel engines of continuous rating or electric motor or motors may be suitably fitted. engines necessary starting arrangements with self-starter and battery system and suitable lubricating Necessary gauges to indicate the speed, lubricating oil and cooling arrangements shall be provided. ~pressure, battery charging, etc, shall be provided at convenient locations. A fuel tank of suitable In the case of electric motor or motors, they shall be totally enclosed fancapacity shall be provided. cooled types, continuously,rated, with starters and switch gears. The whole system shall be enclosed The motor or motors shall be suitable to be driven from 400 V acmains. in a heather-proof cabin. In all the cases they should There may be two motors for the tracks, and one for the mud pump. develop adequate power to drive the units efficiently and economically. Alternatively, the electric motors shall drive a hydraulic pump which in turn will drive the hydraulic track motors for movement of the machine. 2.2.8 Controls The controls should be-provided:

a) to start the power unit, b) for erection of the main supporting c) for raising and lowering d) for hoisting e) for hoisting and lowering and lowering of mast, the main line, of the sand line, 2 jacks,

IS:7209f) to give rotary drive to the drilling string,

1974

g) to drive the mud slush pump or the compressor, h) to move the rig from one place to another, j) for lighting system, and

k) to drive the msgazine. 2.2.6.1 All the above controls and any other controls that are required shall be grouped together in a convenient place and shall be located within the reach of the operator. The controls shall have provision for easy and quick operation and the entire operation shall be visible to the operator from his cabin. 2.2.7 Lighting syslemGenerally drilling operations are carried out during day and night. To In the case of the rig enable round-the-clock operation, the entire rig shall be adequately illuminated. equipped with diesel engine or engines, the power for lighting shall either be from the main engine or from any auxiliary equipment. In the other case where the electric power is available and the rig equipped with electrical motors, the power for the lights shall be tapped from the electrical main and in the case of rigs supplied to mines, the voltage shall be either 110 or 24 V. Panel lights for the gauges may also be provided Suitable control switches shall be provided. 2.2.8 lMounling-The rig platform shall be made up of welded structural steel and shall provide extra margin of strength to take up all vibrations and shocks while drilling and shifting of the drill. Two types of mounting are recommended as follows. 2.2.8.1 Crawler mounted

a) Diesel

driven-The rig platform shall be mounted on crawlers, self-propelled and diesel Power to the tracks' may be ob:ained from the main power unit through hydraulic driven. motors by reduction gears with chain drive. They shall be controlled by valves and shall be capable of independent movement. on crawlers, the tracks shall be actuated by either the main Electric driven -Mounted power unit through ~hydraulic motors and vatves or by separate motor/motors driven through friction clutches or chain driven or by hydraulic motors. truck with pneumatic wheels with an

b)

2.2.8.2 Truck mounted - Mounted on a self-propelled independent power unit to drive the rig.

2.2.8.3 In either case all the different units shall be grouped together systematically in the platform and shah provide sufficient working space for inspection and repairs. All the moving parts shall have adequate lubricating arrangements. 2.2.9 Magazine - There shall be a drill pipe magazine made out of an all steel welded structure of robust construction mounted on the mast. It shall accommodate sufficient number of requisite length of drill pipes and shall be readily available for adding to the drill string. The magazine shall ~move and position the drill pipes over the whole for adding to the drill string. The drive to the magazine shall be through hydraulic motors of adequate capacity. . 2.2.10 Pull down -There shall be a dpull down of requisite maximum pressure to drive the bit down the hole to obtain maximum feed and thus higher drilling rate. It may be a positive wire rope hydraulic pull down or a chain pull down, or otherwise suitably driven, for maximum efficiency. The operator shall be able to apply the right pressure according to the need. 2.2.11 Driller's cabin -An enclosed all weather metal cab, equipped with clear view windows to have a complete vision of all the operations shall be mounted on the rig at a convenient place. All the controls shall be grouped together and positioned at the driller's~place within his reach for easy end quick operation. Suitable lighting arrangement shall also be made at the cabin. 2.2.12 Levelling - Levelling of the machine shall be done hydraulically jacks mounted at the front and rear and shall have independent controls. -by means of tnree levelling

2.2.13 Tools and accessories -The drilling rig shall be provided with the complete set of all operating equipments and small hand tools for carrying out repairs to both power units and other equipments. The following tools and accessories that are ordinarily to be supplied along with the drill shall be included but this is variable according to the need of the user of the drilling rig: a) Drill bits of various b) Sufficient numbers sizes and types to drill through the different soil formations;

of drill rods to cover the rated capacity 3

of the drill;

IS :7209-1974
c) Drill rod hoisting d) ~Drill rod slip; e) Spirit level; f) Chain wrenches; g) Adjustable h) Set~of filesj) Cold chisel; k) Centre punch; m) Hammer; n) Pliers; p) Screw driver; spanner: spanners; wrench; flat, round, half-round, etc (rough and smooth ): flange;

q) Adjustable

r) Set of double-ended s) Set of ring spanners; t) Set of box spanners; u) Grease-gun; v) Oil can; w) Steel tape; frame with keys.

y) Hacksaw

blades; and

z) Set of ailen 3. Information

to be Supplied or ordering history, formation

by the Purchaser drilling rigs, the user shall furnish the following information:

3.1 When enquiring

a) Geographical b) Anticipated c) Maximum

in general, of the location

of sites where holes are to be drilled;

of strata where the holes are to be drilled;

depth and diameter to be drilled; and the wire string capacity capacity and maximum and thelr dimensions, if so desired;

d) The mast height e) f) Pump delivery Mobility

discharge pressure; truck-); electric power is available or not;

for the entire unit (.crawler, todrive

g) The available~power h) Mlaximum

the rig, that his, whether

power output

of the power unit/units

and speed: and

j) The type of explosives

to be used on the holes for blasting and the method of blasting;

k) Any other special features that are required. 4. Information 4.1 The following to be Furnished information by the Supplier by the supplier:

shall be furnished

a) The performance 1) Maximum

of the rig in respect of the following:

diameter and depth that can be drilled; rate of drilling under normal specified discharge conditions:

2) The approximate

3) The pump capacity,~namely 4) Any-special features

the maximum

and pressu,re of the pump; and hard soil conditions; capacity;

in the construction capacity,

to drill through

b) The maximum load handling c) (1)

its constructional and

details and clear lifting

The draw works type and its full capacity,

2) Factor of safety on wire rope at full load; 4

IS :7209.- 1974
The capacity of the main iine and sand line brakes; rotational and hoisting speeds;

The number of variable

The number and capacity The hydraulic Mobility effecting

of the mast raising cyunders;

system deteils and the motor capacity: rig with reference of the rig; to alternative ratios; of different units; and and construction .1 which shall arrangements that can be made whi e

of tha delivery

1) The prime k) Complete

mover and irs transmission literature with illustrations

ml Any other Special features that are incorporated
give increased performance 5. Testing characteristics

in the design to the drilling rig.

5.1 Object -The object of testing the drilling rig is to determine the efficiency of the drill in terms of the maximum diameter and depth of drilling and rate of penetration under specified soil conditions. This shall be subject to agreement between the supplier and the purchaser. ~~~u~;rafion of Test The duration of the test shall be sufficient to obtain accurate and consistent

5.3 Dbservafions During the Test made in regard to the following:

During

the entire

t careful observation shall be period of the tes.,

a) Easy and quick movement of the rig even when the mast is in the erected position;

b)

The quickness time;

inerection

of drill

and commencing

the drilling

operations

without

iOSS Qf

cl The ease of its accessibility

and quick operation

of the controls;

d) e)

Quick addition

of string; and its depth; formations. be noted and the relative time taken

The diameter of the hole drilled through

f) The rate of drilling

different

The depths at an interval of at least 15 minutes shall shall be observed for every unit of depth;

9) The capacity of the mast and the draw works;

W The j) k)

capacity of the pump to the extent and discharge; Undue shock, hammering, Lubrication vibrations

of its quick

clearance

of the cuttings,

the pressure

or other mechanical

defects;

of all the units; and suitability and the controls.

m) Operational

EXPLANATORY

NOTE by

The blast holes are used for blasting purposes to loosen the over burden for easy removal other means. These rigs are used in hard areas, namely, rock, soft rock or sandstone.

This standard has been prepared to provide guidance to both the manufacturer and the users of blast hole drilling rigs. This standard is not intended to be restrictive in character and is subject to agreement between the manufacturer and the user. Sane of the requirements of this standard may either be modified or made more etaborate. In this standard certain minimum techtlical requirements are specified for Satisfactory performance of the rigs. Among the various requirements covered in the standard are those pertaining to the constructional details of the drill in general anI with relation to the condition of the soil. 5
RePmduced by RePrography Unit. ISI New Delhi

----

