атт Ah IS 16172 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


Фе тач Seda irat en aita 
ddaa Eq ae mrs — {ӘТ 


(TETI FRAT ) 


Reinforcement Couplers for 
Mechanical Splices of Steel Bars in 
Concrete — Specification 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 77.140.15 


© BIS 2023 


тї нч э] 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
ee тч чач, 9 FRIST ITE srt AMT, 4$ Reed - 110002 


MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


November 2023 Price Group 9 


Concrete Reinforcement Sectional Committee, CED 54 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Concrete Reinforcement Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 


Various method of reinforcement splicing that are in use include lapping, welding and by mechanical means. 
Lapping of reinforcement bars using binding wires has been the conventional method and is still widely used in 
construction projects. 


Mechanical means of splicing of reinforcement bars involve joining of two reinforcement bars end to end using a 
reinforcement coupler and is a relatively new method being adopted in various projects. Mechanical splices may 
be reliable under conditions of cyclic loading into the inelastic range and may also be advantageous at locations 
where inelastic yielding may occur. Mechanical splicing of large diameter bars are often advantageous as this 
results in less congestion during concreting and faster construction. However, the condition and quality of the 
concrete and minimum clear cover requirements are to be ensured even in case of mechanical splicing of bars. 
Further, the material of the reinforcement coupler should be compatible with the material of the reinforcement bar 
to be spliced and as well as with the concrete. 


With increased use of mechanical splicing systems and reinforcement couplers in construction, this standard was 
first formulated in 2014 so as to cover the requirements for reinforcement couplers for use with reinforcing bars 
conforming to IS 1786 : 2008 ‘High strength deformed steel bars and wires for concrete reinforcement 
(second revision)’. In this version of the standard, the requirements for couplers were based on the properties of 
reinforcing bars of grade Fe 550D of IS 1786. It was so done because the product was new, and the need was felt 
to rationalize varieties so as to avoid difficulty in storing/stacking; for ease of identification by users (including 
construction workers); and to avoid inadvertent wrong use of couplers at construction sites. It was therefore 
decided by the committee to restrict the standard to cover couplers corresponding to the highest commonly used 
grade, that is Fe 550D. It was, however, also provided then, that for specific projects which may require use of 
reinforcement bars of grades lower than Fe 550D only, the requirements for such couplers may be as agreed 
between the purchaser and the manufacturer or as specified by the engineer-in-charge of the project, subject to 
meeting the minimum requirements specified in the standard. Similarly, in view of limited production and use of 
reinforcement bars of Fe 600 grade at that time, requirements of couplers to be used with such bars were also not 
covered, and their specifications were also to be mutually agreed. 


With the further increased use of couplers in various projects and experience gained over the years, the 
committee now decided that the standard should cover reinforcement couplers corresponding to each of the 
grades covered in IS 1786, for appropriate use by the concerned stakeholders. 


Accordingly, in this revision of the standard the following major changes have been incorporated: 


a) The title of the standard has been modified from ‘Reinforcement couplers for mechanical splices of bars 
in concrete — Specification’ to ‘Reinforcement couplers for mechanical splices of steel bars in concrete 
— Specification’. 

b) The scope of the standard has been extended to cover reinforcement couplers corresponding to all the 
grades covered in IS 1786. 


c) Definitions of some terms have been modified for more clarity and new terms and their definitions have 
also been added. 


d) Hybrid couplers have been included. 
e) Provisions on reducer/transition couplers have been added. 
f) Disengagement test for threaded couplers has been incorporated. 


g) The provisions on tensile strength, cyclic test, high cycle fatigue test have been modified to cover 
requirements for various grades of couplers. 


h) Slip test requirements have been modified to address swaged coupling sleeves, grout/steel filled coupling 
sleeve, etc, having length more than 100 mm. 


j) Provisions on information to be provided in the test report of static tensile test have been modified, for 
clarity. 
k) Provisions on packing of couplers have been added. 


m) The frequency of sampling and criteria for conformity for acceptance test has been modified considering 
the requests received from the industry as well as keeping in view the provisions for the same in the 
international standard. The sampling plan has been based on consignment sizes normally encountered and 
in accordance with IS 2500 (Part 1) : 2000/ISO 2589-1 : 1999 ‘Sampling procedure for inspection by 
attributes: Part 1 Sampling schemes indexed by acceptance quality limit (AQL) for lot-by-lot inspection 
(third revision)’. 

n) The validity period of various type tests has also been modified in view of practical considerations. 


p) Quality control checks to be practiced during mechanical splicing of reinforcing bars using couplers have 
been included for guidance. 


This standard covers requirements that apply to reinforcement couplers only. This standard does not cover the 
performance requirements of mechanically spliced joints in the field. Information on commonly used 
reinforcement couplers are given in Annex A. Users may ascertain the limitations associated with use of different 
types of reinforcement couplers and are encouraged to follow minimum precautionary installation measures, as 
applicable. Quality control checks to be practiced at construction site during mechanical splicing of reinforcing 
bars using couplers covered by this standard have been covered in Annex G for guidance. 


Users are also encouraged to carry out corrosion test in the coupler-bar connections exposed to marine or severe 
environmental conditions to rule out any risk of galvanic corrosion. Specialist literature may be referred to in such 
cases. 


The provisions on splicing of reinforcement bars are covered in IS 456 : 2000 ‘Plain and reinforced concrete — 
Code of practice (fourth revision)’. 


Assistance has been derived from the following International Standards in the formulation of this standard: 


International Standard Title 


ISO 15835-1 : 2018 Steels for the reinforcement of concrete — Reinforcement couplers for mechanical 
splices of bars — Part 1: Requirements 


ISO 15835-2 : 2018 Steels for the reinforcement of concrete — Reinforcement couplers for mechanical 
splices of bars — Part 2: Test methods 


ISO 15835-3 : 2018 Steels for the reinforcement of concrete — Reinforcement couplers for mechanical 
splices of bars — Part 3: Conformity assessment scheme 


Keeping in consideration the design principles applicable for reinforced concrete, construction practices 
followed, installation techniques and equipment used in field and the skill level of construction workers, 
deviations have been made in this standard from the International Standards. The major deviations are: 


a) Requirements have been aligned for use of couplers with reinforcement bars conforming to IS 1786; 


b) Varieties as covered in the previous version of IS 16172, that is, Class L and Class H have been retained, 
unlike the ISO standard which now covers three varieties, namely, basic, fatigue and seismic. As most 
parts of the country is earthquake prone, low cycle fatigue test requirement has been specified for all 
classes of couplers; 


c) Changes have been made in the requirement of low cycle fatigue test, considering the earthquake 
vulnerability of India and relevant testing facilities available in the country; 


d) A cyclic test of 100 cycles in tension has been specified which simulate to loading experienced in tall and 
stack like structures; and 


e) Standard temperature conditions prevailing in the country have been adopted in the test methods. 


The technical committee responsible for the formulation of this standard has opined that use of reinforcement 
couplers conforming to the requirements given in this standard is very important for ensuring structural safety of 
structures wherein they are adopted. 


The composition of the Committee and the Working Group responsible for formulation of this standard 
is given in Annex H. 
For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 


observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places 


retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 16172 : 2023 


Indian Standard 


REINFORCEMENT COUPLERS FOR MECHANICAL SPLICES 
OF STEEL BARS IN CONCRETE — SPECIFICATION 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard covers the requirements and tests 
applicable to reinforcement couplers to be used in 
reinforced concrete constructions for mechanical 
splicing of reinforcement bars conforming to 
IS 1786. 


1.2 The provisions of this standard applies to tension 
and tension-compression couplers subject to 
satisfying the performance criteria of this standard. 


1.3 This standard does not cover compression-only 
couplers such as end bearing sleeves and coupling 
sleeve and wedge. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards given below contain provisions 
which, through reference in this text, constitute 
provision of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the editions indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revision, and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged 
to investigate the possibility of applying the most 
recent editions of these standards: 


IS No. Title 
IS 1608 (Part 1) : 2022 Metallic materials — 
/ISO 6892-1 : 2019 Tensile testing: Part 1 
Method of test at room 
temperature (fifih revision) 


IS 1786 : 2008 High strength deformed 
steel bars and wires 
for concrete reinforcement 
— Specification (fourth 
revision) 


IS 1828 (Part 1): 2022 Metallic materials — 
/ISO 7500-1: 2018 Calibration and verification 
of static uniaxial testing 
machines: Part 1 Tension/ 
Compression testing 
machines — Calibration 
and verification of the 
force-measuring system 
(fifth revision) 


Random sampling and 
randomization procedures 
(first revision) 


IS 4905 : 2015 
/ISO 24153 : 2009 


IS No. Title 


IS 12872 : 2021 Metallic materials — 
ASO 9513 :2012 Calibration of extensometer 
systems used in uniaxial 

testing (second revision) 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the terms and 
definitions given in IS 1786 and the following shall 


apply. 


3.1 Mechanical Splice — Complete assembly of a 
coupler including any additional intervening 
material or other components providing a splice of 
two reinforcing bars. 


3.2 Reinforcement Coupler — Coupling sleeve or 
threaded coupler or hybrid coupler for mechanical 
splices of reinforcement bars (see Annex A) for the 
purpose of providing transfer of axial tensile force 
and compressive force from one bar to the other. 


3.3 Coupler Length — Actual length of the 
reinforcement coupler including all load transferring 
parts, if more than one, and including lock nuts, if 
any. 


3.4 Length of Mechanical Splice — Length of 
reinforcement coupler plus two times the nominal 
bar diameter at both ends of the coupler 
(see Fig. 1). 


NOTE — This is a conventionally accepted definition to 
take into account the affected zone in an approximate way. 


3.5 Slip — The permanent extension of a 
mechanical splice after being loaded to a defined 
load level. 


3.6 Slip Measurement Device — The assembly 
constituted by the extensometer and any system used 
to fix it to the mechanical splice. 


3.7 Tests 


3.7. Type Tests — Tests carried out to prove 
conformity with the standard. These are intended for 
product/type approval and are carried out whenever 
a change is made in the type of the reinforcement 
coupler or manufacturing process/conditions or 
crimping method or forging or threading machine. 


IS 16172 : 2023 


3.7.2 Acceptance Tests — Tests carried out on 
samples taken from a lot passing type tests for the 
purpose of acceptance of the lot. 


4 TYPES OF REINFORCEMENT COUPLERS 


There are various types of reinforcement couplers 
used in mechanical splicing of bars in reinforced 
concrete constructions. Some of the commonly used 
mechanical splicing systems based on the type of 
reinforcement coupler used in them have been 
described in Annex A. 


5 CLASSIFICATION 


5.1 Reinforcement couplers supplied in accordance 
with this standard shall be classified into the 
following classes: 


a) Class H; and 
b) Class L. 


5.1.1 Couplers which meet both low cycle fatigue 
test and high cycle fatigue test requirements of 9.5.1 
and 9.5.2 respectively shall be classified and 
designated as class H coupler. 


5.1.2 All other couplers which meet only low cycle 
fatigue test requirement of 9.5.1 shall be classified 
and designated as class L coupler. 
NOTE — Class H couplers are recommended for use in 
concrete structures which are subjected to high cycle of 


fatigue like road bridges, railway bridges, machine 
foundations, tall buildings, slender structures like stack, etc. 


6 MANUFACTURE 


Reinforcement couplers shall have adequate 
strength, length and internal threads (in case of 
threaded couplers) as per manufacturer’s design to 
be able to meet the performance requirements of this 
standard. 


7 WORKMANSHIP AND FINISH 


7.1 All reinforcement couplers shall be finished 
smooth and shall be free from burrs, cracks and other 
manufacturing defects. The threads of threaded 
couplers and hybrid coupler (wherever applicable) 
shall be cleanly formed and shall be free from 
imperfections. 


7.2 The thread quality of the coupler, wherever 
applicable shall be verified after manufacturing, 
with the help of suitable ‘GO’ and ‘NO GO’ gauge 
duly calibrated. The test frequency shall be 1 piece 
at production start-up and 5 pieces per hour of 
manufacturing per diameter of the same cast of the 
raw material. Whenever desired by the purchaser, 
the records of these tests shall be made available to 
them by the manufacturer. 


8 NOMINAL SIZES 


The nominal sizes of reinforcement couplers based 
on their internal diameter shall correspond to the 
nominal sizes of bars covered under IS 1786. 


9 PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS 


9.1 All reinforcement couplers shall meet the 
performance requirements of 9.2, 9.3, 9.4 and 9.5.1. 
Class H couplers in addition to above, shall also 
meet the requirements of 9.5.2. 


9.1.1 The requirements apply to the reinforcement 
coupler even though the above tests on the coupler 
are carried out on a mechanical splice that has been 
installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s 
written instructions. 


9.2 Static Tensile Test 
9.2.1 Tensile Strength 


The tensile strength of the mechanical splice when 
tested in accordance with the details given in Annex 
B shall meet either of the following requirements: 


a) It shall not be less than 130 percent of fy 
(where, f, = specified minimum yield stress 
or 0.2 percent proof stress given in IS 1786 
for the grade of reinforcement bar to be 
spliced) irrespective of the location of 
failure; or 

b) If it is less than 130 percent of f, (where, 
fy= specified minimum yield stress or 
0.2 percent proof stress given in IS 1786 for 
the grade of reinforcement bar to be 
spliced), the failure shall occur in the bar 
outside the length of the mechanical splice 
(see 3.4). 


In case of reducer/transition coupler which are used 
for splicing reinforcement bars of two different 
sizes, the above criteria as in SI No. (a) or (b) shall 
be measured with respect to lower size bar. 


9.2.1.1 Disengagement test for threaded couplers 


The safety margin in threading of reinforcing bar 
and coupler design shall be such that required 
performance for static tensile test as per Annex B is 
ensured even if 15 percent of the total thread’s 
length, equally distributed on both sides (7.5 percent 
on both sides), are out of coupler. 


9.2.2 Percentage Elongation 


The minimum percentage elongation at maximum 
force (also termed as uniform elongation) when 
measured in accordance with the method given in 
Annex B in the reinforcing bar outside the length of 
the mechanical splice shall be minimum 3 percent 
before the failure of the test piece. 


9.3 Slip Test 


The total slip value, AL, when measured in 
accordance with the test procedure described in 
Annex C shall be as given below: 


a) AL, € 0.10 mm for coupler length < 100 mm; 


b) AL; < 0.20 mm for coupler length 
2 300 mm; and 

с) Slip value shall be interpolated for coupler 
lengths between 100 mm and 300 mm (see 
Note below). 


NOTE — This standard applies to tension and 
tension-compression couplers such as threaded 
couplers, swaged coupling sleeves, grout/steel 
filled coupling sleeve, etc. Length of threaded 
coupler used for splicing of reinforcement bars in 
civil construction is less than 100 mm. Swaged 
coupling sleeves, grout/steel filled coupling 
sleeves are more than 100 mm in length, where 
higher slip value can be permitted. Longer the 
coupler length, larger the volume of concrete 
through which the coupler slip will dissipate. 


9.4 Cyclic Tensile Test 


The mechanical splice shall withstand 100 cycles of 
the stress variation from 5 percent to 90 percent of 
fy (where, fy = specified minimum yield stress or 
0.2 percent proof stress given in IS 1786 for the 
grade of reinforcement bar to be spliced) when 
tested in accordance with the details given in 
Annex D without loss of static tensile strength 
capacity when compared with like specimen. The 
static tensile strength capacity of the test piece shall 
be determined by testing it statically to failure in 
accordance with the procedure given in Annex B 
after subjecting it to stress cycles. 


9.5 Fatigue Test 

There are two types of fatigue tests namely low 
cycle fatigue test and high cycle fatigue test. All 
reinforcement couplers shall satisfy the requirement 
for low cycle fatigue test as specified in 9.5.1. 
Couplers of class H in addition to above shall also 
meet the high cycle fatigue test requirement as 
specified in 9.5.2. 


9.5.1 Low Cycle Fatigue Test 
The mechanical splice shall withstand 10 000 
cycles of alternating tension and compression load 


when tested in accordance with the method given in 
Annex E. 


9.5.2 High Cycle Fatigue Test for Class H 
Reinforcement Coupler Only 

The mechanical splice, when tested in accordance 
with the method given in Annex E, shall withstand 
2 000 000 cycles of varying axial tensile load with a 
stress range, 20,, of 60 MPa without failure. The 
upper stress, O yy,» in the test shall be 0.6f,, where 
J, specified minimum yield stress ог 0.2 percent 
proof stress given in IS 1786 for the grade of 
reinforcement bar to be spliced. 


IS 16172 : 2023 


10 TESTS 


10.1 Classification of Tests 


10.1.1 The static tensile test shall constitute 
acceptance test. 


10.1.2 The following shall constitute type tests: 


a) Static tensile test; 

b) Slip test; 

c) Cyclic tensile test; 

d) Low cycle fatigue test; and 

e) High cycle fatigue test for class H couplers 
only. 


10.2 Selection and Preparation of Test Sample 
for Performance Tests 


10.2.1 All tests specified under 10.1.1 and 10.1.2 
and described in Annex B to Annex E shall be 
carried out on mechanical splices assembled in the 
manner as they are prepared for normal use, with a 
reinforcement bar conforming to minimum yield 
stress or 0.2 proof stress in IS 1786 for the grade of 
reinforcement bar to be spliced. The above tests 
shall be conducted on selected sample to ensure 
conformity with the performance requirements laid 
down in 9.2 to 9.5. 


NOTE — Assembled and prepared for normal use implies 
to carry out the assembling according to the manufacturer's 
installation instructions. 


10.2.2 A reference bar from the same heat and 
conforming to the grade of IS 1786 for which the 
coupler is intended, shall be tested to determine its 
actual mechanical properties. The performance of 
some types of mechanical splices is dependent on 
the rib geometry of the steel reinforcing bar. The 
specified rib geometry shall be provided by the 
supplier and recorded with the test results, however, 
this requirement shall not apply to threaded 
couplers. 


10.2.3 The test pieces shall be prepared according to 
the installation instructions provided by the 
manufacturer. The coupler shall be positioned in the 
middle of the test piece. 


11 SAMPLING AND CRITERIA FOR 
CONFORMITY 


11.1 The sampling procedure and the criteria for 
conformity shall be as given in Annex F. 


11.2 Where at a project site, reinforcement coupler 
is used for splicing of two different sizes of 
reinforcing bars (referred as reducer or transition 
coupler), as the weaker section will be the lower 
diameter, type test reports of higher diameter bar 
coupler shall be acceptable. 


IS 16172 : 2023 


12 PACKING 


All couplers shall be protected against rust by 
application of rust prevention methods/measures or 
by packing in volatile corrosion inhibitor (VCI) 
bags. The couplers shall be packed in stackable 
wooden boxes for delivery to site as per 
manufacturer's delivery lot size. 


13 INSTALLATION INSTRUCTIONS 


The manufacturer/supplier shall provide written 
installation instructions. The installation 
instructions shall be clear and understandable. The 
described installation procedure of the 
reinforcement coupler shall be repeatable and able 
to achieve its performance under different job site 
circumstances. 


14 QUALITY CONTROL AT SITE 


The quality control checks to be practiced at project 
site during mechanical splicing of reinforcing bars 
using couplers covered by this standard, are given in 
Annex G for guidance. 


15 IDENTIFICATION AND MARKING 
15.1 Each reinforcement coupler container shall be 


indelibly and clearly marked indicating the class 
designation of the coupler and the nominal size and 
the highest grade of reinforcing bar for which it is 
intended. 


15.2 Each reinforcement coupler shall be indelibly 
and clearly marked by the manufacturer or supplier 
with its nominal size and batch number from which 
the original cast of the raw material and the date of 
manufacturing can be traced. Every facility shall be 
given to the purchaser or his authorized 
representative for tracing the reinforcement couplers 
to the cast from which they were made. Each coupler 
shall be identifiable by marks/brands which indicate 
the name of the manufacturer or their brand name. 


15.3 BIS Certification Marking 


The reinforcement coupler conforming to the 
requirements of this standard may be certified as per 
the conformity assessment schemes under the 
provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 
2016 and the Rules and Regulations framed 
thereunder, and the reinforcement coupler may be 
marked with the Standard Mark. 


IS 16172 : 2023 


ANNEX A 


(Foreword and Clause 4) 


DIFFERENT MECHANICAL SPLICING SYSTEMS BASED ON TYPE OF 
REINFORCEMENT COUPLER USED 


A-1 MECHANICAL SPLICING SYSTEMS 
BASED ON THREADED COUPLER 


A-1.1 In these types of mechanical splicing systems, 
the threaded ends of the reinforcing bar are joined 
together using internally threaded coupler and with 
appropriate tightening (see A-1.1.1, A-1.1.2 and 
A-1.1.3). 


A-1.1.1 Mechanical Splicing Systems with Parallel 
Threaded Couplers 


A mechanical splice system with parallel threaded 
couplers is one in which the ends of the 
reinforcement bars are sawn square and a parallel 
thread is formed on the ends, which are then 
connected by a coupler having matching internal 
parallel threads. 


NOTE — The occurrence and impact of play between the 
reinforcement bars and the coupler should be kept in 
consideration when using such splicing systems. The effect 
of reduction in bar diameter at the ends due to threading, on 
strength capacity of the reinforcement bars should also be 
considered. 


A-1.1.2 Mechanical Splicing Systems with Upset 
Parallel Threaded Couplers 


A mechanical splice system with upset parallel 
threaded coupler is one in which the ends of the 
reinforcement bars are sawn square and then 
hydraulically enlarged by cold forging, such that 
the core diameter of the bar is increased to a pre- 
determined diameter. A parallel thread is cut or 
formed onto the upsized/enlarged end of the 
reinforcing bars, which are then connected by a 
coupler having matching internal parallel threads. 


NOTE — The occurrence and impact of play between the 
reinforcement bars and the coupler should be kept in 
consideration when using such splicing systems. 


A-1.1.3 Mechanical Splicing Systems with Tapered 
Threaded Couplers 


A mechanical splice system with tapered threaded 
coupler is one in which the ends of reinforcement 
bars are sawn square and a tapered thread is formed 
onto the bar to suit the taper threads inside the 
coupler. The reinforcement bars are then connected 
by the coupler having matching internal threads. The 


thread length is not through and through and the 
middle portion of the coupler is solid. 
NOTE — The effect of reduction in bar diameter at the ends 
due to threading, on strength capacity of the reinforcement 
bars should be kept in consideration when using such 
splicing systems. 
A-2 MECHANICAL SPLICING SYSTEMS 
BASED ON COUPLING SLEEVE 


A-2.1 Mechanical Splicing Systems with a 
Crimped Sleeve 


Use of mechanical splicing systems with a crimped 
sleeve is applicable to all deformed reinforcing bars. 
It consists of the introduction of the bars to be 
spliced into a sleeve which is crimped by means of 
a hydraulic crimping tool onto the deformed bars in 
order to fill the voids between them and the inner 
surface of the sleeve. The deformations on the bar 
penetrate into the relatively softer steel of the sleeve 
and the deformations work in shear. 

NOTE — The impact of lengthening of the sleeve during 

crimping should be kept in consideration while using such 

splicing systems. 
A-2.2 Mechanical Splicing Systems with Injected 
Sleeves 


In these mechanical splicing systems, the space 
between the reinforcing bars and the sleeve is 
filled/injected with special molten metal or grout or 
epoxy resin, which forms a rigid interlocking layer 
between the bar deformations surface and the 
preformed frictional surface inside the sleeve. 


A-3 MECHANICAL SPLICING SYSTEMS 
BASED ON SHEAR BOLTING 


In these mechanical splicing systems, the sleeve 
contains high-strength radially-arranged shear bolts 
of appropriate sizes which are tightened by using 
appropriate torque to provide an interlocking 
mechanism between the reinforcing bar 
deformations and the interior surface of the sleeve. 


A-4 MECHANICAL SPLICING SYSTEMS 
BASED ON HYBRID CONNECTIONS 


A-4.1 In this mechanical splicing systems, the rebars 
are connected with combination of any of the 
systems specified in A-1, A-2 and A-3. 


IS 16172 : 2023 


ANNEX B 


(Clauses 9.2.1, 9.2.1.1, 9.2.2, 9.4, 10.2.1, D-3.2 and E-3.1) 
METHOD OF STATIC TENSILE TEST 


B-1 PREPARATION OF TEST PIECE 


The test piece for the tensile test shall be prepared in 
accordance with 10.2. It shall be sufficiently long to 
ensure a free length between the grips of the testing 
machine to allow determination of percentage 
elongation at maximum force. The minimum 
sufficient free length of the test piece for the tensile 
test (L3) in millimeters shall be 400 + L, where L is 
the length of the mechanical splice (see 3.4 and 
Fig. 1). 


B-2 TESTING EQUIPMENT 

The testing equipment shall conform to IS 1608 
(Part 1). 

B-3 TEST PROCEDURE 

B-3.1 Tensile Strength 


The tensile strength shall be determined by means of 
test carried out in accordance with IS 1608 (Part 1). 
A tensile test on an un-spliced specimen from the 


Ve4444d4.[444£5414 
SOON 


same bar used for the preparation of spliced 
specimen shall be performed to establish actual 
tensile strength of the reinforcing bar. 


For the calculation of stresses, the effective cross- 
sectional area of the reinforcing bar shall be used. 


B-3.2 Percentage Elongation at Maximum Force 


The gauge length for determining percentage 
elongation at maximum force for both spliced and 
un-spliced specimens shall be the same. In spliced 
specimens, it shall be located outside the length of 
the mechanical splice in both the bars (see Fig. 1). 


The percentage elongation at maximum force shall 
be tested and measured according to IS 1608 (Part 1) 
outside the length of the mechanical splice on both 
sides of the connection. Both values shall be 
recorded and the largest shall be used to assess 
conformity. 


М\\М\\\\\\\\\\ 
VZV 


A ja uu Li 


Key 


Applied force 


F 
L Length of the mechanical splice (as defined in 3.4) 
L 


, Coupler length 


L, 2d where dis the nominal diameter of the reinforcing bar 


L, Minimum free length for the measurment of percentage elongation at maximum force/slip 


L, Gauge length for the measurement of slip 


FIG. 1 DEFINITION OF LENGTHS FOR MEASURING ELONGATION AND SLIP OF THE MECHANICAL SPLICE 


B-4 Test Report 


B-4.1 Each individual test report on both the spliced 
and un-spliced specimens shall include at least the 
following information: 


IS 16172 : 2023 


c) Load-extension curve to the smaller of 
2 percent strain or the strain at 
specified tensile strength of the 
reinforcing bar; and 


a) Tensile strength; d) Location of failure for spliced 
b) Total percentage elongation at specimen. 
maximum force; 
ANNEX C 
(Clause 9.3) 
METHOD OF SLIP TEST 


C-1 PRINCIPLE 


The slip (AL;) across the mechanical splice shall be 
found as the difference between the measured gauge 
length after unloading the mechanical splice from a 
load level of at least 0.6 f, (where 
fy = specified minimum yield stress or 0.2 percent 
proof stress in IS 1786 for the grade of 
reinforcement bar to be spliced) and the gauge 
length prior to loading: 


AL=L, Ex 
where 
Lj = gauge length measured after releasing the 
load; and 
Lg, = gauge length measured after gripping the 
sample in the tensile testing machine and 
prior to loading. 


C-2 PREPARATION OF TEST PIECE 
The test piece shall be prepared in accordance with 


РРРРРРРРРРРРРРРРРРГРГРРИ. 
CANNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNAN 


CELLLLLALA 
ANNANANNNY 


10.2. The gauge length of the extensometers shall be 
between (Lı + 2d) and (Т + ба), as close to (Li + 2d) 
as possible. The minimum sufficient free length of 
the test piece for the slip test (L3) in millimeters shall 
be 250 + L, where L is the length of mechanical 
splice (see 3.4 and Fig. 1). 

NOTE — Some types of extensometers have a fixed gauge 

length, which may not be equal to the length of the 


mechanical splice (see 3.4). In case of choice, a shorter 
gauge length is preferable. 


C-3 TESTING EQUIPMENT 


C-3.1 The tensile testing machine to be used shall 
conform to IS 1608 (Part 1). 


C-3.2 The extensometer used shall be of Class 1 or 
better and shall be in accordance with IS 12872. The 
extensometer used to determine the slip shall be at 
least a two-point (averaging) type, but preferably a 
three-point (averaging) type (see Fig. 2). 


М 

2 
NZ 
NZ 
NZ 
NZ 
Y 
NG 


CLLILLALLA AAD ALD LADD ADL ATS YD 
ANNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNN ELT 


FIG. 2 PRINCIPLE OF SLIP MEASUREMENT 


7 


IS 16172 : 2023 


C-3.3 The slip measurement device shall be rigid 
enough, and fixed securely, so that the slip can be 
measured with an accuracy of not less than 0.01 mm. 


C-3.3.1 The accuracy of slip measurement device 
should be checked periodically (for example, 
annually and always, if there is a change in the 
testing conditions) by performing the test on a 
control bar with the same gauge length. The 
measurement accuracy is computed as the sum of 
the accuracy of the extensometer (as stated by its 
manufacturer) plus the error that could be generated 
by the fixing devices. The measurement accuracy is 
the reading after the load is returned to zero. 


C-4 TEST PROCEDURE 


a) The test piece shall be gripped in the tensile 
testing equipment in such a way that the load 
is transmitted axially and as much as 
possible free of any bending moment on the 
whole length of the test piece. 


b 


— 


The slip measurement device shall then be 
attached such that the dial indicators are 
180° apart in case of two-point 
extensometers and 120? apart in case of 
three-point extensometers. Zero them out. 


c) The slip measurement shall be conducted 
with the minimum possible pre-load applied 
to the test piece. Any load applied to the 
sample during gripping shall not exceed 
10 MPa. 


NOTE — Preloading of the test piece will 
normally take most of the slip out. A preloading 
does not normally occur for spliced bars in a 


structure. 


d) The gauges shall be set to zero after closure 
of the jaws of the tensile testing machine. 


e) An axial tensile load shall be applied such 
that the tensile stress in the reinforcing bar 
equals 0.6 f, (where f, = specified minimum 
yield stress or 0.2 percent proof stress in 
IS 1786 for the grade of reinforcement bar to 
be spliced). The force to be applied shall be 
determined using the nominal cross-sectional 
area of the reinforcing bar. The load shall be 
maintained until a steady reading is obtained 
on both dial indicators, and shall not deviate 
from the theoretical load by more than 
+ 3 percent. The recommended maximum 
speed of loading is 500 MPa/min. 


f) The load shall then be reduced to 10 MPa 
and the readings of the  two/three 
extensometers, as applicable shall be taken. 


g) Sum the value of the readings and divide the 
resultant sum by two or three as the case 
may be. The result shall be reported as total 
slip. 


h 


= 


The slip measurement device shall then be 
removed and an axial tensile load sufficient 
to cause failure of the test piece shall be 
applied to it. 


j The load shall be recorded and the type and 
location of failure and any necking of the bar 
shall be noted. The maximum load attained 
shall be recorded as maximum test load. 


ANNEX D 
(Clause 9.4) 
METHOD OF CYCLIC TENSILE TEST 


D-1 PREPARATION OF TEST PIECE 


The test piece shall be prepared in accordance with 
B-1. 

D-2 TESTING EQUIPMENT 

The testing equipment shall conform to IS 1608 
(Part 1). 

D-3 TEST PROCEDURE 


D-3.1 The test specimen shall be subjected to 100 
cycles of stress variation specified in 9.4. One cycle 


is defined as an increase from the lower load to 
higher load and return. The load shall vary cyclically 
according to a wave-form of constant frequency. 
The frequency shall be 0.5 Hz for bar sizes > 36 mm 
and 0.7 Hz for bars of smaller size. 


D-3.2 If the specimen does not fail at the end of 
100 cycles, the axial tensile load shall be increased 
statically to cause failure in the specimen and its 
static tensile strength capacity shall be determined in 
accordance with Annex B. 


IS 16172 : 2023 


ANNEX E 
(Clauses 9.5.1 and 9.5.2) 
METHOD OF FATIGUE TEST 


E-1 The purpose of fatigue testing of mechanical 
splices for steel reinforcing bars is to determine the 
fatigue strength of the mechanical splice. The 
fatigue performance of a mechanically spliced bar 
will normally be lower than that of the un-spliced 
bar. 


E-2 PREPARATION OF TEST PIECE 


The test piece for the fatigue test shall be prepared 
in accordance with 10.2 and shall be sufficiently 
long to ensure a free length between the grips of the 
testing machine, which is larger than the length of 
the mechanical splice. 


E-3 LOW CYCLE FATIGUE TEST 
E-3.1 Test Procedure 


The fatigue test shall be conducted on the sample 
by loading it to + 173 MPa to - 173 MPa for 10 000 
cycles. The load shall vary cyclically according to a 
waveform of constant frequency. The frequency 
shall be 0.5 Hz for bars of size > 36 mm and 
0.35 Hz for bars size « 36 mm. If the specimen 
does not fail at the end of 10 000 cycles, the axial 
tensile load shall be increased statically to cause 
failure in the specimen and its static tensile strength 
capacity shall be determined in accordance with 
Annex B. 


E-4 HIGH CYCLE FATIGUE TEST 

E-4.1 Principle 

In the high cycle fatigue test, the test piece is 
subjected to an axial tensile load which varies 
cyclically according to a sinusoidal waveform of 
constant frequency in the elastic range. 

E-4.2 Testing Equipment 


The fatigue test shall be carried out by means of 
a hydraulic ram under load control. The fatigue 


UPPER STRESS |. 
LEVEL 


STRESS 


LOWER STRESS 
LEVEL 


}—— LOAD CYCLE 


testing machine shall be calibrated as per IS 1828 
(Part 1) and the accuracy shall be € 1 percent or 
better and the machine shall be capable of 


maintaining the upper stress level, O,,, , within 
+ 2 percent of the specified value and the lower 
of the 


stress level, О, within +2 percent 
specified value. 


E-4.3 Test Procedure 


a) The test piece shall be gripped in the testing 
equipment in such a way that the load is 
transmitted axially and as much as possible 
free of any bending moment on the whole 
test piece. 


b 


= 


The temperature in the testing laboratory 
should be 27 °C + 2 °C. 

The test piece shall be subjected to 
sinusoidally varying axial tensile load with a 
stress range, 20a, of 60 MPa. The upper 
Stress, OMax, in thatest shall be asspecified in 
9.5.2 (see Fig. 3). 

The frequency of load cycles shall be 
constant during the test and shall be between 
1 Hz and 200 Hz. 


NOTE — A frequency of less than 60 Hz 
normally gives an acceptable temperature of the 
samples throughout the test. 


с 


ме 


а 


М7 


е) The test is terminated upon fracture of the 
test piece or upon reaching the specified 
number of cycles (2 000 000 cycles) without 
fracture. 


f) If the test piece fails in the gripping zone, 
and the mechanical splice is still intact, the 
test may be continued after re-gripping the 
test piece. 


_ _ STRESS 
RANGE (2 о») 


TIME ———» 


FIG. 3 LOAD CYCLE DIAGRAM FOR HIGH CYCLE FATIGUE TEST 


9 


IS 16172 : 2023 


ANNEX F 
(Clause 11) 


SAMPLING AND CRITERIA FOR CONFORMITY 


F-1 ACCEPTANCE TESTS 


F-1.1 Acceptance tests are carried out on samples 
selected from a lot for the purpose of acceptance of 
the lot. 


F-1.2 Lot 


In any consignment, all the reinforcement couplers 
of the same size, type, grade, class, material 
traceable to the same cast and manufactured under 
similar conditions of production shall be grouped 
together to constitute a lot. A lot shall represent a 
maximum number of 10 000 couplers. 


F-1.3 For ascertaining the conformity of the lot to 
the requirements of the standard, samples shall be 
tested from each lot separately. The number of 
couplers to be selected from the lot shall depend on 
the size of the lot and shall be according to Table 1. 


F-1.4 The couplers shall be selected at random from 
the lot and in order to ensure the randomness of 
selection, random number table shall be used. For 
guidance and use of random number tables, IS 4905 
may be referred to. 


F-1.4.1 Static Tensile Test 


For the purpose of static tensile test, the number of 
samples given for the first sample in col (4) of 
Table 1 shall be taken from the lot and subjected to 
this test. A coupler failing to satisfy the requirements 
given in 9.2.1, 9.2.1.1 (wherever applicable) or 9.2.2 
shall be considered as defective. The lot shall be 
deemed to have satisfied the requirement if the 
number of defectives found in the first sample is less 
than or equal to the corresponding acceptance 
number given in col (6). The lot shall be deemed not 
to have met these requirements, if the number of 
defectives found in the first sample is greater 
than or equal to the corresponding rejection 
number given in col (7). If, however, the number of 


defectives found in the first sample lies between the 
corresponding acceptance and rejection numbers 
given in col (6) and (7), a second sample of the size 
given in col (4) shall be taken and examined for 
these requirements. The lot shall be considered to 
have satisfied these requirements if the number of 
defectives found in the cumulative sample is less 
than or equal to the corresponding acceptance 
number given in col (6), otherwise not. 


F-2 TYPE TESTS 


F-2.1 Type tests are intended to prove the suitability 
and performance of a new type of coupler or a new 
manufacturing process. Such tests therefore need to 
be applied only when a change is made in the type 
of the coupler or in manufacturing process 
conditions or crimping method or forging or 
threading machine. 


F-2.1.1 Slip Test 


For this type test, the manufacturer or the supplier 
shall furnish to the testing authority a minimum of 
three samples of coupler of all sizes, grades, types 
and classes (selected preferably from a regular 
production lot). 


F-2.1.1.1 The samples so selected shall be tested for 
compliance with requirements of slip test as given in 
9.3. 


F-2.1.1.2 If all the samples pass the requirements of 
slip test, the type of coupler or the change under 
consideration shall be considered to be eligible for 
type approval which shall be normally valid for a 
period of one year. 


F-2.1.1.3 At the end of the validity period (normally 
one year) or earlier, if necessary, the testing 
authority may call for fresh samples for type test 
for the purpose of type approval. 


Table 1 Scale of Sampling and Criteria for Conformity 
(Clauses F-1.3 and F-1.4.1) 


SI No. of Couplers Sample Sample Size Cumulative Acceptance Rejection 
No. in the Lot Number Sample Size Number Number 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 
i) Up to 500 First 5 5 0 2 
Second 5 10 1 2 
ii) 501 to 3 200 First 8 8 0 2 
Second 8 16 1 2 
iii) 32011010000 First 13 13 0 2 
Second 13 26 1 2 


F-2.1.2 100 Cycle Test 


For this type test, the manufacturer or the supplier 
shall furnish to the testing authority a minimum of 
three samples of coupler of the largest size, three 
samples of the medium size and three samples of the 
smallest size of each grade (selected preferably from 
a regular production lot). 


F-2.1.2.1 The samples so selected shall be tested for 
compliance with requirements of 100 cycle test as 
given in 9.4. 


F-2.1.2.2 If all the samples pass the requirements of 
100 cycle test, the type of coupler or the change 
under consideration shall be considered to be 
eligible for type approval which shall be normally 
valid for a period of five years. 


F-2.1.2.3 At the end of the validity period (normally 
five years) or earlier, if necessary, the testing 
authority may call for fresh samples for type test for 
the purpose of type approval. 


F-2.1.3 Low Cycle Fatigue Test 


For this type test, the manufacturer or the supplier 
shall furnish to the testing authority a minimum of 
three samples of coupler of the largest size, three 
samples of the medium size and three samples of the 
smallest size of each grade (selected preferably from 
a regular production lot). 


F-2.1.3.1 The samples so selected shall be tested for 
compliance with requirements of low cycle fatigue 
test as given in 9.5.1. 


IS 16172 : 2023 


F-2.1.3.2 If all the samples pass the requirements of 
low cycle fatigue test, the type of coupler or the 
change under consideration shall be considered to be 
eligible for type approval which shall be normally 
valid for a period of five years. 


F-2.1.3.3 At the end of the validity period (normally 
five years) or earlier, if necessary, the testing 
authority may call for fresh samples for type test for 
the purpose of type approval. 


F-2.1.4 High Cycle Fatigue Test (for Class H 
Coupler only) 


For this type test, the manufacturer or the supplier 
shall furnish to the testing authority a minimum of 
three samples of coupler of the largest size, three 
samples of the medium size and three samples of the 
smallest size of each grade (selected preferably from 
a regular production lot). 


F-2.1.4.1 The samples so selected shall be tested for 
compliance with requirements of high cycle fatigue 
test as given in 9.5.2. 


F-2.1.4.2 If all the samples pass the requirements of 
high cycle fatigue test, the type of coupler or the 
change under consideration shall be considered to be 
eligible for type approval which shall be normally 
valid for a period of five years. 


F-2.1.4.3 At the end of the validity period (normally 
five years) or earlier, if necessary, the testing 
authority may call for fresh samples for type test for 
the purpose of type approval. 


IS 16172 : 2023 


ANNEX G 
(Clause 13) 
QUALITY CONTROL CHECKS AT SITE 


G-1 The quality control checks as given in G-2 to 
G-6 shall be followed for mechanical splicing 
systems with different types of couplers. 


G-2 QUALITY CHECKS FOR THREADING 
OF REINFORCING BARS AT SITE 


The following shall be the minimum process 
requirement for threading of reinforcing bars at site. 
Each manufacturer may stipulate additional 
processes that should also be followed. 


a) Cutting — The ends of reinforcement bars 
shall be sawn cut or square cut by suitable 
cutting machine to get a perfect plain end 
surface, perpendicular to the axis of the bar. 
The tolerance to perpendicular axis cutting 
to be as per manufacturer’s design and 
recommendation. Disc-cutting or gas 
cutting is not permitted as these raise 
quality risks due to over-heating of rebars 
and non-perpendicular cut. 


NOTE — The tolerance to perpendicularity 
is generally maintained within + 3 degrees. 


b 


— 


Cold forging (wherever applicable) — 
After cutting, the ends of the bar shall be 
hydraulically enlarged by cold forging so 
that the area of cross-section after threading 
shall not be less than the area of cross- 
section of the parent bar. The length of cold 
forging shall be adequate for proposed 
thread length as per manufacturer's design. 
In case ribs of reinforcing bar are too big, 
these can be smoothened before the cold- 
forging activity so as to ensure uniform 
geometry throughout the required length, as 
per manufacturer's recommendation. 


Double cold forging of bars is not permitted. 
In case of improper cold forging, the end of 
the bar shall be square or sawn cut and fresh 
cold forging shall be undertaken. A visual 
inspection shall be carried out after cold 
forging to ensure that there is no obvious 
cracking of the rebar. 


с 


— 


Threading process to create the required 
profile on the end of the reinforcing bar — 
The threads in bars shall be parallel type in 
case of parallel threaded couplers and 
tapered in case of taper threaded couplers 
as per manufacturer's design and 
recommendations. The thread length and 
depth shall also be as per manufacturer's 
design. 


The major diameter of threads on parallel 
threaded reinforcing bars shall be checked 


by ‘GO’ and ‘NO GO’ gauges. Threads that 
failed the control shall be cut-off and the 
rebars shall be reprocessed. 


d) Proof load check of threaded reinforcing 
bars — Every threaded reinforcing bar end 
shall undergo a load test prior to actual use. 
The minimum test loading shall be 
equivalent to 80 percent of the minimum 
specified yield strength/proof strength of 
reinforcing bar. The proof load test 
equipment shall have digital display for 
automatic setting and control of pressure 
and proof load imparted to each reinforcing 
bar. The equipment shall be managed in 
automatic mode with display of setting 
pressure and actual pressure applied, and 
shall be accepted if applied pressure is equal 
to or higher than setting pressure. A positive 
indication shall be punched on the 
reinforcing bar by the load testing machine 
to indicate that this operation has been 
carried out and the bar end has qualified for 
specified strength. No manual punching of 
the bars shall be permitted. 


e 


wm 


Disengagement test — Disengagement test 
as given in 9.2 shall be carried out as per the 
frequency given in Annex F. 


f) After threading is completed, the threaded 
length of the bars shall be protected by 
providing plastic caps before taking the bars 
out of the fabrication shop. This cap shall be 
removed only when next bar is to be 
attached and then cleaned before joining the 
next bar. 


G-3 SWAGING OF THE REINFORCING 
BARS WITH SWAGED COUPLER 


G-3.1 Swaging of reinforcing bars shall be done at 
site. The various stages involved in swaging shall be 
as given below: 


a) Straighten and clean the rebars to be swaged. 


b) Each rebar end to be marked at a distance 
equal to half the length of swaging coupler. 


C) Swaging to be done from centre towards 
the end of the coupler. The hydraulic jack 
used for swaging operation should 
have adequate dies and preparation as per 


manufacturer’s design and recommendation. 
The pressure to be applied for swaging shall 
be as per manufacturer’s design and 
recommendation. 


G-4 SPLICING OF THE REINFORCING 
BARS WITH BOLTED COUPLER 


The bolted coupler’s dimensions, number of bolts, 
etc, shall be as per manufacturer’s design. The 
coupler shall be provided with suitable arrangement 
inside the coupler to ensure that the connecting 
reinforcing bars are at centre. This is particularly 
important to ensure proper tightening and 
connection. The first rebar to be inserted in the 
bolted coupler shall be pushed inside the coupler 
until the centre of the coupler. The tightening of the 
bolts shall then to be carried out in accordance with 
the manufacturer’s installation instruction. 


In case the reinforcing bars inside the fixed coupler 
are not straight or the bolts do not shear-off, it is 
recommended to gas cut the reinforcing bar and 
replace the coupler. In case some bolt heads do not 
shear-off, but the recommended torque specified by 
manufacturer’s design is achieved, it is acceptable to 
install the coupler. 


G-5 SPLICING OF REINFORCING BARS 
WITH GROUTED COUPLERS 


The manufacturer’s installation instructions shall be 


IS 16172 : 2023 


followed including the specification and 
preparation of the non-shrink grout to be used. 
Alternative grouts, even with the same 
compressive strength, may not provide equivalent 
performance, and therefore shall not be permitted. 
The location of the starter bars and the couplers 
shall be carefully controlled using templates to 
ensure the position and alignment. Prior to 
installation of the grouted coupler, the grout 
material’s quality checks including compressive 
strength shall be carried out. Also, the length of 
the starter bar should be verified to ensure 
sufficient engagement. A visual check on the 
inside of the grout coupler shall also be carried 
out to ensure absence of foreign materials. 
Formwork and seals may be necessary to ensure 
that the grout is confined in the areas where it is 
intended to be used. Temporary supports for the 
elements shall be left in place until the minimum 
grout strength is achieved, as per manufacturer's 
recommendations. 


G-6 SPLICING OF REINFORCING BARS 
WITH HYBRID COUPLERS 


The installation instructions shall be in accordance 
with the combination of two respective splice 
methods, given in G-2 to G-5. 


IS 16172 : 2023 


ANNEX H 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Concrete Reinforcement Sectional Committee, CED 54 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity (No. 17, Nalanda Apartments, 
D-Block, Vikaspuri, New Delhi 110018) 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Central Water Commission, New Delhi 


Construction 
New Delhi 


Industry Development Council, 


CSIR - Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


CSIR - Central Electrochemical Research Institute, 
Karaikudi 


CSIR - Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 


CSIR - National Metallurgical Laboratory, Jamshedpur 


CSIR - Structural 
Chennai 


Engineering Research Centre, 


Delhi Development Authority, New Delhi 


Delhi Metro Rail Corporation, New Delhi 
Delhi Tourism and Transportation Development 
Corporation Ltd, New Delhi 


Dextra India Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


Gammon Engineers and Contractors Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


Hindustan Construction Company, Mumbai 


Representative(s) 


SHRI С. SHARAN (Chairperson) 


SHRI A. K. RAJDEV 
SHRI SAUROBH KUMAR (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR (HCD-NW&S) 
DIRECTOR (HCD-N&W) (Alternate) 


SHRI SUNIL MAHAJAN 
SHRI O. P. GUPTA (Alternate) 


DR S. R. KARADE 
DR R. SIVA CHIDAMBARAM (Alternate) 


SHRI К. SARAVANAN 
DR J. DANIEL RONALD JOSEPH (Alternate I) 
DR M. ASHOK (Alternate II) 


DR RAJEEV GOEL 
SHRI S. S. GAHARWAR (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


DR B. H. BHARATH KUMAR 
DR SMITHA GOPINATH (Alternate) 


CHIEF ENGINEER (DESIGN) 
SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER (DESIGN) II/ 
CDO (Alternate) 


SHRINAVNEET KUMAR KOTHARI 
SHRI SANJEEV KUMAR GARG (Alternate) 


SHRI SHISHIR BANSAL 


SHRI SUNIL DESAI 
SHRI JITENDRA H. PATHAK (Alternate) 


SHRI ANURAG SINHA 
SHRI DEEPAK AGRAWAL (Alternate I) 
SHRI VISHAL KUMAR (Alternate II) 


SHRI ANIRWAN SENGUPTA 
SHRI GIRISH JOSHI (Alternate) 


SHRI MUKESH VALECHA 


Organization 


Indian Association of Structural 


New Delhi 


Engineers, 


Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad, Hyderabad 


Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 


Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 


Indian Stainless Steel Development Association, 
New Delhi 


Institute of Steel Development and Growth 


(INSDAG), Kolkata 
IRCON Ltd, New Delhi 


Jindal Steel and Power Ltd, New Delhi 


JSW Steel Ltd, Raigad 


Larsen and Toubro Ltd (ECC Construction Division), 
Chennai 


Military Engineer Services, Engineer-in-Chief's 
Branch, Integrated HQ of MOD (Army), 
New Delhi 


Ministry of Road Transport & Highways, New Delhi 


Ministry of Steel (Govt of India), New Delhi 


National Council for Cement and Building Materials, 
Ballabgarh 


National Highways and Infrastructure Development 
Corporation Ltd, New Delhi 


National Highways Authority of India, New Delhi 


National Institute of Secondary Steel Technology, 
Mandi Gobindgarh 


NBCC (India) Ltd, New Delhi 


Nirma University, Ahmedabad 


IS 16172 : 2023 


Representative(s) 
SHRIHARI OM GUPTA 
SHRI MANOJ K. MITTAL (Alternate) 


DR DIPTI RANJAN SAHOO 
PROF B. BHATTACHARJEE (Alternate) 


DR SURIYA PRAKASH 
DR MEENAKSHI SHARMA (Alternate) 


DR RADHAKRISHNA С. PILLAI 
DR RUPEN GOSWAMI (Alternate) 


PROF PRAMOD KUMAR GUPTA 
PROF AKHIL UPADHYAY (Alternate) 


SHRIROHIT KUMAR 
SHRI KARAN KUMAR PAHUJA (Alternate) 


SHRI LAKSHMANA RAO PYDI 
SHRI SAJAL KUMAR GHORAI (Alternate) 


SHRI ROHIT KHANNA 
SHRI NRIPENDRA KUMAR ROY (Alternate) 


SHRI AJAY AGARWAL 
SHRIS. K. PRADHAN (Alternate) 


SHRI PRATAP К. PATRA 


SHRIS. KANAPPAN 
SHRI STHALADIPTI SAHA (Alternate) 


SHRIP. K. JAIN 
SHRI SOMESH KUMAR (Alternate) 


DR S. K. VERMA 
DR SANJAY WAKCHAURE (Alternate) 


SHRIS. K. BHATNAGER 
SHRI ANIL KUMAR MISHRA (Alternate) 


SHRIP. N. OJHA 
SHRI AMIT TRIVEDI (Alternate I) 
SHRI BRUESH SINGH (Alternate II) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
SHRIR. K. PANDEY 
SHRIS. K. MISHRA (Alternate) 


SHRI КАЛВ KUMAR PAUL 
SHRI SANDEEP PAL SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI ARUN KUMAR SHARMA 
SHRI PRANAY JAIN (Alternate) 


DR URMIL V. DAVE 


IS 16172 : 2023 


Organization 


NTPC Limited, Noida 


Nuclear Power Corporation India Limited, Mumbai 


P.S.L. Limited, Mumbai 


Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Ltd, Visakhapatnam 


Research Design and Standards 
Ministry of Railways, Lucknow 


Organization, 


Steel Authority of India Limited, Durgapur Steel Plant, 
Durgapur 


Steel Authority of India Limited, R&D Centre for Iron 
and Steel, Ranchi 


Steel Re-Rolling Mills Association of India, Kolkata 


STUP Consultants Pvt Limited, Mumbai 


Sunflag Iron and Steel Co Ltd, New Delhi 


Tata Steel Limited, Jamshedpur 


Tata Steel Global Wires, Mumbai 


Weldmesh Manufacturer’s Association, Mumbai 


In Personal Capacity (House No. 131, Sector 11D, 
Faridabad - 121006) 


In Personal Capacity (CJ-331 Salt Lake City, Kolkata 
- 700091) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 
SHRIS. KHADANGA 
SHRI A. P. SRIVASTAVA (Alternate) 


SHRI Y. T. PRAVEENCHANDRA 
SHRI R. N. SARANGI (Alternate) 


SHRI R. RADHAKRISHNAN 
SHRI RAMNATH BHAT (Alternate) 


SHRIC. H. SRINIVASA RAO 
SHRI G. RAJA LINGAM (Alternate) 


SHRIMAHENDRA PRATAP SINGH 
SHRI ASHOK KUMAR PANDEY (Alternate) 


SHRI A. N. BANARJEE 
SHRI ABHIJIT DATTA (Alternate) 


DR V. KUMAR 
DR P. SARAVANAN (Alternate) 


SHRI B. M. BERIWALA 
SHRI SWAPAN KUMAR CHAKRAVORTY (Alternate) 
SHRI AMIT KUMAR CHAKRABORTY 


SHRI ANIRBAN SENGUPTA (Alternate) 


SHRI R. K. MALHOTRA 
SHRI JAGANNATHAN SOMU (Alternate) 


SHRI BISWAJIT GHOSH 
DR ANUP KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI SHISHIR V. DESAI 
SHRI SURESH MAHAJAN (Alternate) 


SHRI VIJAY LACHMANDAS DODEJA 
SHRI ZAKIR NISSAR AHMED (Alternate I) 
SHRI BIPIN KEDIA (Alternate IT) 


SHRI V. V. ARORA 


DR ANIL K. KAR 


SHRI ARUNKUMAR S., SCIENTIST 'E/DIRECTOR AND 
HEAD (CIVIL ENGINEERING) [REPRESENTING 
DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRIMATI MADHURIMA MADHAV 
SCIENTIST ‘D’/JOINT DIRECTOR 
(CIVIL ENGINEERING), BIS 


IS 16172 : 2023 


Working Group for Review of IS 16172, CED 54/WG 4 


Organization Representative(s) 

Nuclear Power Corporation of India Limited, SHRI Y. T. PRAVEENCHANDRA (Convener) 

Mumbai 
CSIR - Central Building Research Institute, DR SUKHDEO R. KARADE 

Roorkee DR R. SHIVA CHIDAMBARAM (Alternate) 
Dextra India Private Limited, Mumbai SHRI JITENDRA H. PATHAK 
HCC Limited, Mumbai SHRI MUKESH VALECHA 
Leviat India Pvt Ltd, Thane SHRI SACHET PAWAR 

SHRI ANIL VISHE (Alternate) 

National Council for Cement and Building SHRI P. N. OJHA 

Materials, Ballabgarh SHRI AMIT TRIVEDI (Alternate T) 


SHRI BRIJESH SINGH (Alternate П) 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 54 (18834). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8% Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


