( Reaffirmed 2004 )

IS : 11214- 1984

Indian Standard
GUIDE FOR REPAIR OF PRINTED WlRING BOARDS AND ASSEMBLIES
Circuits Sectional Committee, LTDC 17

Printed
Chairman DR J. VAID Members

Representing Peico Electronics & Electricals Ltd, Bombay

Shri J. Vaid ) SHRI R. K. CHAKXAVARTI
SHRIK.C.~HHABRA

SHRI M. A. GODBOLE

( Alternate to

Department of Electronics, New Delhi Ministry of Defence ( R&D ) Hindnstan Aeronautics Ltd, Hyderabad SHRI J. DEW-AN SERI VENKATESWARA RAO ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi SJXRI P. D. KHANNA SHRI H. S. GREWAL ( Alternate ) Bakelite Hylam Ltd, Hyderabad DR M. KRISHNAN Directorate General of Posts & Telegraphs, SHRI VIJAY KUI~AR New Delhi Srmr VINAY TOPA ( Alternate ) Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) LT-COL G. R. MALHAN SHRI S. C. ADKA~ ( Alternate ) Partap Rajasthan Copper Foils and Laminates SEIRI N. S. MATHUR Ltd, Jaipur DR U. K. RATHI ( Alternate ) Micropack Ltd, Bangalore; and Electronic ComSHRI VED~ MITTIZR ponent Industries Association ( ELCINA ), New Delhi SHRI A. P. VASUDEVAN ( Alternate) Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore SHRI K. NAUESH SHRI J. SREE RAMACHANDRA MURTHY ( Alternate) The Bombay Burmah Trading Corporation Ltd, SHRI S. W. PATWARDHAN Pune SHRI V. RANOANATBAN ( Alternate ) Research Designs & Standard Organization, REPRESENTATIVE Lucknow Electronics Test & Development Crntre, SERI M. K. SHARMA Chandigarh Electronics Corporation of India Ltd, Hyderabad SARI R. K. SIN~H SHRI V. SIJBRAMO~IAN ( Alternate ) ( Continued on page 2 ) 0 INDIAN Copyright 1985 INSTITUTION

STANDARDS

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyri& Act ( XIV of 1957) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS: 11214-1984
( Continued from page 1 ) Members SHRIP. K. SHUELA SHRI K. NAQE~HAPPA ( Alternate SHRI G. SIJBBA~AXAN SERI R. CHBLLAPPA ( Alternate ) SERI A.P.VA~UDEVAN SHRI K. P. KARNATH ( Alterrzade SHRI S. N. VYAS SBRI N. SRINIVASAN, Director ( Electronics ) Representing Ministry of Defence ( LCSO ) ) Indian Telephone Industries Ltd, Bangalore Hegde & Golay Ltd, Bangalore ) Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay Director General, ISI ( Ex-oficio Member )

Secretary SHRI A. S. RAWAT Deputy Director ( Electronics

), ISI

2

IS:11214 - 1984

lndian Standard
GUIDE FOR REPAIR OF PRINTED WIRING BOARDS AND ASSEMBLIES
0.
0.1 This

FOREWORD
by Indian Standards Institution finalized by the Printed Circuits by the Electronics and Telecomm-

Indian Standard was adopted on 14 December 1984 after the draft Sectional Committee had been approved unication Division Council.

0.2 This standard recommends good principles and practices which should be applied to printed wiring boards which need to be repaired in the normal course of component assembly and test prior to release to the user. In certain instances the techniques described would also be suitable for use on repairs carried out in other circumstances. 0.3 The repair of printed wiring boards or other of the following categories: covered in this guide fall into one

a) Corrective touch-up carried out as part of the normal production and inspection procedures and used where minor defects occur, b) Corrective action on more defects that in themselves would be cause for rejection, c) Modifications requested by the customer, and d) Rectification of prescribed defects. 0.4 All the techniques described are applicable to printed wiring boards for which the base material is metal clad/epoxy glass, epoxy paper, or phenolic paper laminates. 0.5 Throughout this standard, the word `REPAIR' MODIFICATIONS, or RECTIFICATIONS. is used also to cover

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard
and rectifications, 2.

provides guidance for repair, of printed wiring boards.

including

modifications

TERMINOLOGY
the following as given in IS: are used in this standard.
Part 6 Printed circuits

2.0 In addition to the terms and definitions
1978*,
*Electrotechnical vocabulary:

1885

( Part 6 )-

(jirsl revision ).

IS i El214 - 1984

2.1 Rework - Rectification of defects occurring during manufacture of the printed board. Rework is carried out by the board manufacturer before delivering the printed boards to the user.
2.2 Repair, Printed Board - Rectification of defects occuring acceptance of the printed board by the user, that is during assembly use. Repair is normally carried out by the user. after and

2.3 Repair, Printed Board Assembly - Rectification of defects occuring after assembly, that is, during testing and use, mainly replacement of defect components. Repair is normally carried out by the user. 2.4 Modification assembly including 3. GENERAL 3.0 For unassembled printrd wiring boards the techniques described in this standard may be used subject to the requirements of the relevant procurement specification. It would be remembered that the defects on the unassembled printed wiring board fall into two categories: a) Those defects that may be repaired and . b) Those before defects that reworking. require without customer notification; and approval - Change to the printed board deletion and addition of components or printed board and conductors.

customer

notification

3.0.1 It is an essential requirement in both groups that the methods of repair are limited to those not affected by soldering temperatures so that boards may be processed in the normal way. Typical examples of such methods are those involving welding, conductive compounds and plating. Some of the techniques involve considerable amount of operator time, and due regard should be given to their cost-effectiveness. 3.1 With the exception of the techniques stated for the repair of short or near short circuits on the surface laminate ( see 14 ) additional work, on printed wiring boards, of any type, should only be performed with the full agreement of the customer. 3.2 With the exception of the techniques stated for multilayer repair ( see 15 ) all of the repair methods have proved to be practical in operation and acceptable in service. Multilayer repairs require a very high degree of skill and specialized equipment and should therefore be a matter of negotiation with the customer and be clearly defined in any repair contract or agreement. 3.3 It is recommended that the number of repairs carried out to an assembled printed wiring board should not exceed 2. In the case of high value

4

IS : 11214 - 1984
printed wiring boards individual basis.
NOTE -

exceptions

to

the norm

should

be treated

on an

The listing of techniques

( see 5 ) should not be considered exclusive.

3.4 In many cases, alternative be influenced by the assembly

methods method.

are quoted,

and

the choice

may

3.5 The repair should be carried out by trained and competent operators who have been nominated for this work and equipped with all the appropriate facilities. A detailed Operator's Procedure/Capability Manual, based upon the techniques in this standard, may be prepared for the type of repair to be carried out. not suitable for printed wiring 3.6 The techniques listed are, in general, boards with conductor widths/spacings of less than 0.25 mm. The conductor pattern may be critical in some assemblies, and this should be taken into account when assessing and agreeing the feasibility of the proposed repair. 3.7 A cleai indication should be contract or agreement, of the accept. Any method considered It should be borne in mind that obtained from the customer, in a repair extent of repairs that he is prepared to to be inapplicable shall be clearly stated. the customer may not accept any repairs.

NOTE - Repair should bc permitted only when the cause of failure is understood, as a fault could bc indicative of latent weaknesses elsewhere in the board(s), or in the production method.

3.8 If it is intended to use a material not agreement of the customer should be obtained.

described

in this guide

the a

3.9 All repaired printed wiring boards should be clearly identified with distinctive indelible marking. The marking should be non-conductive.
NOTE - Component deemed as repairs. 3.10 Repairs changest hat cause no damage to the basic board

are not

and conductor

should not reduce the conductor current carrying spacings below the original allowed tolerance.

capability

3.11 Where an original surface coating is removed, either completely or locally during the application of a method from this standard, it should be restored on completion of the work. In the event of the original coating being unobtainable or its use being impracticable, a substitute acceptable to the customer should be employed. 3.12 On completion of the work, the printed wiring board(s) should be visually inspected at a suitable magnification. Other tests that may be required in order to meet the customer's specification should also be applied.

IS:11214-

1984
may contain between the or degrade

3.13 Assembled printed wiring boards offered for repair electrostatic sensitive devices. Electorstatic charges occurring leads of the device can cause total component failure reliability.

3.13.1 Printed wiring boards containing electrostatic sensitive comd ponents will generally be identified by a warning label on part of the board and by the use of special packing materials. 3.13.2 When carrying out component charges/repairs to boards containing electrostatic sensitive devices it is essential that protection against static electricity be taken. Guidance may be taken from IS : 10087-1981;. 4. SAFETY

4.1 It should be noted that

some of the techniques used to effect repairs could be considered as hazards if used by untrained personnel, furthermore, some chemicals used may be harmful to the skin and eyes, or instructions regarding the use dangerous if taken orally. Manufacturers' of potentially hazardous material should be strictly observed, and at all times, strict hygiene must be observed and full use made of protective measures such as barrier creams, gloves, eye protection etc. Personal hygiene on completion of such operations is essential. NOTE- The use of barrier creams can cause contamination surfaces that are subsequently to be bonded or soldered.
problems on board

5. REPAIR METHODS 5.1 Techniques for the repair of printed boards are listed under the following headings: a) Component b) Defective removal and replacement ( see 6 ), boards (see 7 ), conductors-Single and double-sided

c) Lifted conductors ( see 8 ), d) Lifted and defective lands ( see 9 ), e) Eyelets and tubular pin defects ( see 10 ), boards ( sde 11 ), f) Plated through hole defects-Double-sided g) Base board material defects ( see 12 ), h) Inclusions ( see I3 ), ( see 14 ), wiring boards layers of muhilayer printed

j ) Short or near short circuits on the surface laminate
k) Repair of inner ( see 15), m) Repair of printed n) Protective coating p) Modification
*Code

edge connectors ( see I6 ), removed ( see 17 ), printed wiring boards ( see 19 >.
sensitive devices.

of assembled

( see 18 ), and

q) Guide to suitable

tools and materials

of practice for handling of electrostatic

6

LS : 11214 I) 191u 6. COMPONENT REMOVAL AND REPLACEMENT

6.1 Where components are to be removed from printed boards to allow access or to be replaced because they are defective they need to be removed with great care to prevent damage to the printed board or other components. This could be caused by excessive heat, improper tool use, rough handling, or static electricity. Protective printed wiring board coating may also need to be removed ( see 17 ). WARNING Printed boards offered for repair may contain electrostatic sensitive devices. Normal handling may completely destroy these devices ( see 3.13 ). the

6.2 Removal of Components with Leads Accessible from Component Side - For typical components see Fig. 1 and 2.
POSIIIONS \

FIQ. 1 COMPONENTS OF THE RESISTOR,CAPACITOR TYPE WITHTWO
AXIAL LEAD OUT WIRES

CUT WIRE

LEAD DEBRIS

TO

REMOVE THEN USING REMOVE A

COMPONENT SOLDERING

IRON

Fro. 2

COMPONENTS WITHMULTI-LEWDOUT WIRESOF THE 0D18 AND OD19 TYPE TRANSISTORS 7

,IS t It214 - 1984 6.2.1 The recommended removal method for components such as resistors and capacitors with two axial leads transistors of the 0D18 and OD19 type where the lead out wires are accessible from the component side of the board, is to cut the component wire. ( see Fig. 1 and 2 ). 6.2.2 Apply a temperature controlled soldering iron to the soldered joint and quickly remove the remaining wire and solder, If any solder remains in the hole it should be removed using a desoldering tool. Before fitting a new component the land/hole should be examined for signs of damage. For the repair of damaged base board material refer to 12. The new component should be fitted in the usual way and any removed board coatings should be repaired. 6.3 Removal of components of the OD18 and OD19 transistor type where lead outs are not accessible from the component side or where the component must be salvaged ( for typical components see Fig. 3 ).

FIG. 3

COMPONENTS

WITH LEAD OUT WIRES THE LEADS ARE INACCESSIBLE FROM THE COMPONENT SIDE

6.3.1 Using a desoldering tool, preferably of the vacuum pump type, remove all the solder from the lead areas. If the component lead outs are bent down use a soldering iron to remelt the solder around one lead at a time and bend the lead vertical to the printed wiring board using a dentist's probe while the solder is still liquid. The component should then be free to separate from the board if not, repeat the above. Before fitting a new component, the land/hole should be examined for signs of damage and the holes free from solder. For repair of damaged base board refer to 12. Any removed board coatings should be redone. 6.4 Removal of the Dual-in-Line Component Board - For a typical component see Fig. 4. 8
Mounted Through the

IS : 11214 - 1984

FIG. 4 DUAL-IN-LINE PACKAGES 6.4.1 of skill. The removal of components

MOUNTED THROUGH THE BOARD of this type requires a high degree

It is recommended that removals of this type are only attempted using a desoldering system with a suitable vacuum pump. Using a desoldering system, remove the solder from all the components. The component repeat the operation, ing holes. may now be free to remove from the board, if not ensuring that the solder is removed from the offend-

6.4.2 Where the component has bent down leads, using a soldering iron remelt the solder around the lead and straighten with a dentist's probe or scalpel while the solder is still liquid, and proceed as above. Before fitting a new component in the normal way, inspect the lands and holes for damage. Holes should also be free from solder. On the repair of damage refer to the appropriate clause. Any removed printed wiring board coatings should be redone. 6.5 Removal of Surface Mounted typical component see Fig 5. Dual-in-line Components For a

Fro. 5

DUAL-IN-LINK PACKAGS9

SURFACE MOUNTEII

IS:11214

-1984

6.5.1 This method assumes that the components are soldered and not welded and that the component body is not afixed to the board with component assembly techniques may include the adhesive. Original fitting of surface mounted components using built reflow machines that reflow all terminations in one operation. These methods of component removal are not recommended for isolated repairs, they require careful of accessibility on a fully ` setting up ' and usually present problems assembled board. They may however, be used if preferred. Component removal and replacement should, if required, from part of their process manual.
6.5.2 To remove surface mounted dual-in-line components use a soldering iron to melt the solder from around each lead in turn and lift from the board using a special probe. Care should be taken to apply the soldering iron for sufficient time only to enable the lead to be freed. With a soldering tool, remove any excess solder from the lands. Examine lands for damage, if damaged repair as defined in the appropriate clause. The replacement coniponents lead should be tinned. 6.5.2.1 Position the component and resolder each lead with only sufficient heat to effect a successful joint, Use a flat probe to hold lead in position until the reflowed solder has solidified. Any removed coatings should be restored. 7. DEFECTIVE

BOARDS
Defective a) b)

CONDUCTORS

-

SINGLE

AND

DOUBLE-SIDED
of:

7.1

conductors break,

are conductors

that show evidence continuity;

a complete

that is, no electrical

scratches, nicks or pinholes, sectional area of the conductor rance as illustrated in Fig. 6.

which reduce the effective crossbeyond the specified design tole-

7.1.2 Where the surface scratch is capable of being filled with solder, the solder shall flow over the conductor surface for not less than 3 mm either side of the scratch. These are not considered to be repairs. Beep Scratches or surface scratches that are not capable of being filled with solder should be repaired to a method selected from Table 1.
NOTE 1 - Where solder resist etc has to be removed, by the careful use of a sharp instrument such as a scalpel, fibre brush, suitable solvent or similar devices. NOTE 2 this should be achieved fine abrasive paper, glass

It should be noted that glass fibre debris may impair solderability.

7.2 Applicability of Techniques for the Repair of Defective Conductors - Table 1 lists the suggested constraints on the distance to be bridged when reworking defective conductors. Where soldering is usrd, :I good fillet should be produced which is bright and smooth in appearallc c'. 10

1S:11214-1984 When the work is complete, either by the original method the surface or compatible protection coating. should be restored

be achieved

Where

the defective conductor needs to be removed, by a scalpel or similar instrument.

removal should

6A Defective
SCRATCH SOLDER PENETRATING ONLY

Conductor

6B Scratches FIG.

to the Conductor

Surface

6 SURFACE DEFECTS TO CONDUCTORS

7.3 Copper Foil Connections -- This method is preferred for the repari of scratches, pinholes and breaks, but where the track widths are less than 0.5 mm the foil strips become difficult to handle and the repair may have to be carried out with a suitable thickness of tinned copper wire, as described in 7.4. 7.4 A piece of pre-tinned copper foil of similar width should be soldered on to the conductor with a minimum overlap of 3 mm on either side of the defect. The thickness of the foil should be between 0.035 mm and 0.070 mm for conductors ofO.035 mm thickness and proportionately thinner The part of the foil which bridges the or thicker for other conductors. dei`ect in the conductor should be bonded to the exposed part of the board,

11

IS:

11214 - 1984

irrespective Fig. 7.

of the size of the conductor.

This method is illustrated

m

FIG. 7 COPPER FOIL CONNECTIONS

7.5 Tinned Copper Wire Connections - Where the distance to be bridged is less than 20 mm, the break should be bridged by means of bare tinned copper wire soldered to the tracks.

.
min. OVERLAP 3 mm

r-

TINNED

CDPPER CONDUCTOR

WIRE

SOLDER

FILLET

BASE

MATCRIAL

FIG, 8 TINNED

COPPER WIRE CONNECTIONS

12

IS : 11214 - 1984 7.5.1 A length of bare tinned copper wire should be soldered to the conductor on either side of the defect, with a minimum overlapping joint size of 3 mm. The appropriate wire diameter is determined by the conductor width. The bridging wire should be centered on and in line with the original conductor. The metod is illustrated in Fig. 8.
NOTE - The wire may be bonded to the printed wiring board to provide tional strength and to fill the gap between the wire and the board. addi-

TABLE

1

APPLICABILITY OF TECHNIQUES DEFECTIVE CONDUCfORS ( Clauses 7.1.2 and 7.2 )

FOR REPAIR

OF

TECHNIQUE

DISTANCE TO BE BRIDQED (in mm ) ---h----------4 C-----Over 4d 0 to 10 10 to 20 20 to 40 (2) Suitable (3) Unsuitable (4) Unsuitable (5) Unsuitable

COMMENT

(1) S o 1d e r e d copper foil Tinned copper wire I n s u 1 at e d wire Insulated wire and holes

(`3)
Not recommended prior to mass soldering. Not recommended prior to mass soldering. Not recommended prior to mass soldering. Alternative to above ( insulated not recowire ) mmended prior to mass soldering. *Unsuitable unlpss supported by tack bonding with adhesive epoxy over the entire length of tYPei foil. *Unsuitable unless supported by tack bonding with adhesive epoxy along the enrire lcngtt1 of the tape/fnil. suitable Not prior to mass soldering.

Suitable

Suitable

Unsuitable

Unsuitable

Suitable

Suitable

Suitable

Suitable

Suitable

Suitable

Suitable

Suitable

WzLd;o:,

tape

Suitable

Suitable

Unsuitable*

Unsuitable*

Welded tape or foil with insulation

Suitable

Suitable

Unsuitable*

Unsuitable*

13

IS I 11214 - 1984 7.6 Insulated Wire Connections - Where the distance to be bridged exceeds 20 mm the repair should be carried out as under 7.5 but insulated or sleeved wire should be used. This method is illustrated in Fig. 9. It is recommended that the insulated portion of the wire be secured to the board with a suitable adhesive.
NOTE -

Insulated wire method may be used for distances less than 20 mm.

3mm OVERLAP INSULATED WIRE 7 I I

rnin

,-CONDUCTOR

SOLDER

FILLET

BASE

MATERIAL

FIG. 9 INSULATED WIRE CONNECTIONS 7.7 Insulated Wire and Using Drilled Hole Connections - This repair method is similar to that described in 7.5 except that the wires should be run on the opposite side of the board via holes drilled in the laminate. The wire should be secured using an epoxy adhesive. at appropriate intervals along its length

NOTE - Extreme care should be exercised when selecting the hole positions on double sided boards to prevent damage to possible underside tracks. This technique is not suitable for track widths of less than 1.5 mm.

7.7.1 The ends of a length of insulated wire should be fed through 0.8 mm holes drilled on either side of the break in the conductor at a minimum distance of 0.5 mm from the broken ends. The bare ends of the wire should then be soldered to the conductor with a minimum overlap (11 3 mm. This method is illustrated in Fig. 10. 14

IS : 11214 - 1984
DAMAGED CONDUCTOR

--\

FIG. 10 INSULATED WIRE USINCIDRILLED HOLE CONNECTIONS 7.8 Repair Using
Parallel Gap Welding Techniques 7.8.1 Description of Process - The parallel gap welding process is a series resistance welding method with precise controls of the welding machine variables. The welding current is passed form one electrode, through the region of the joint, and back through the adjacent electrode. Roth of the closely spaced electrodes bear independently on the conductor material. The printed wiring board is supported against the force of the electrode by a platen.

7.8.2 Process Requirements - The conductor under repair should be either weldable or capable of being converted to a weldable condition. The repair medium is normally nickel alloy tape or suitable equivalent of width 0.251 mm to 0.330 mm and thickness O-076 mm to 0.127 mm with a nickle flash followed by gold flash. 7.8.3 Straight Conductor Repair - The repair shouId be carried out as shown in Fig. 11. The tape should be approximately parallel to, and centered upon, the conductor. NOTE - For bridging distances in excess of 20 mm, the tape may be insulated
and secured to the board with a suitable adhesive.
CONDUCTOR

FIG. 1I
7.8.4

PARALLEL

GAP WELDING .- STRAIGHT CONDUCTOR REPAIR -

shown in Fig. 12.

Corner Rebair

Defective conductor corners may be `reworked' as

15

WELDED CORNER BRIDGE

REPAIR USING OF TAPE

TO CONDUCTOR PRE-CONSTRUCTED

12A

TAPE CONDUCTOR7

12c FIG. 12 PARALLELGAP WELDING 8. LIFTED CONDUCTORS CORNERREPAIRS

8.1 A lifted conductor is detached from the base laminate but not broken ( see Fig. 13 ).

IS : 11214 - 1984

LIFTED PART OF THE CONDUCTOR

BOARD

FIG.

13 LIFTED CONDUCTORS

8.1.1 The repair permitted by the following methods is limited to the lifted portions of conductors which are not greater than half the length of the conductor measured between the two terminal lands, and does not exceed 12 mm in length. Where the lifted portion exceeds the above dimensional limits the track should be considered to be broken and repaired accordingly. 9.1.2 The bond between the conductor ed using the following procedure: and the laminate may be restor-

4

If any coating is present, it should be removed from the affected area. The underside of the lifted conductor and the area of board directly beneath the lifted conductor should be cleaned with a solvent cleaner applied with a fine hair brush, removing all contaminates from both surfaces, and then allowed to dry; approved entire length The conductor printed wiring adhesive should be carefully of the lifted conductor; distributed under the

b) An
4 4 e) f)

sholild then be firmly pressed into contact board; should be removed; removed,

with the

All excess adhesive

The adhesive should be allowed to cure; and If the original protective coating has been then be restored.

it should

9. LIFTED 9.1 Defective
damaged. NOTE-

AND DEFECTIVE Land A

LANDS
land is any land which has been

defective

These procedures should not be applied to plated-through holes. the adhesion of the land is satisfactory by not more than 25 percent, the land 17

9.1.1 Over!aid Lands - Where and the area has been reduced

IS : 11214- 1984 may be overlaid with a second land which may be obtained from another board or repair foil. Where the damage is in excess of 25 percent the land shall be considered to be missing and repaired accordingly. This method is illustrated in Fig. 14. OAMAGED LAND LESS THAN 25.1.

lbA FIG. 14 OVERLAID LANDS

1L 6

9.1.1.1 The underside of the land should be cleaned with fine abrasive paper, and after removal of all debris, `tinned' with solder using a small iron. A non-solderable pin inserted in the hole should be used to align the lands. The land should be soldered over the existing land and conductor, so that at least 5 mm of conductor is overlapped. 9.1.2 Replacement of Damaged Lands - The repair may be affected by bonding a replacement land to the laminate by means of suitable adhesive ( see Fig. 15 ) after having carefully cut away the remains of the damaged land.

15 A FIG. 15 REPLACEMENT BONDED LANDS 9.1.2.1 The replacement land should have sufficient length of conductor attached to it to enable an overlap at least 5 mm to be soldered to the existing conductor. The distance between the end of the existing 18

IS : 11214 - 1984
conductor and new land should not be greater than 5.0 mm. The following procedure should then be followed: a) First clean and tin the affected conductor on the board and only the overlapping portion ofthe replacement conductor. The replacement land should then be oositioned over the existing hole. using a non-solderable pin in order to maintain alignmkt of'holesy Solder the tail of the replacement land to the conductor, ensuring that an overlap of at least 5 mm is maintained. Do not tin the underside of the replacement land, since adhesion of the adhesive to tinned surfaces is not as effective as that to copper.

b)

The underside of the replacement /conductor land and the topside of the board area to be repaired should be completely freed of flux and dirt by cleaning with a solvent cleaner applied with a fine hair brush. These areas should be allowed to dry before proceeding with the next operation. Cl The replacement land/conductor should be lifted just enough SO that a thin smear of adhesive can be applied to the underside of the land, and also to the top of the board. Under no circumstances must adhesive be allowed on the upper surface of the replacement land. The land should then be pressed down with a blunt instrument and any excess adhesive removed. The adhesive allowed to cure. Where an original coating has been removed, it should be restored.
Lands -

4 4 f)

9.2 Lifted

plated hole lands.

These techniques

shall not be applied to through-

9.2.1 When part of the conductor lifts as well as the land ( Fig. 16 ), the loose area may be removed by the use of a sharp instrument, and the repair may be carried out as given in 9.1.2 or by the following method.

LIFTED

PART

I+ja. 16

LIFTEU LANDS AND CONDUCTOR 19

f3 : 11214- 1984 9.2.2 The bond between the lifted land and the laminate may be restored by the use of a suitable adhesive. The following procedure should be used: a) The land should be raised carefully and the underside of the land and topside of the board should be cleaned by a solvent cleaner applied with a fine brush and then allowed to dry. b) A suitable adhesive should then be applied to the underside the land and the topside of the board with a clean spatula. c) The land should then be pressed down. d) Any surplus adhesive should be removed. e) The adhesive allowed to cure. f) Where the restored. original coating has been removed it should be of

9.3 Missing Lands - This repair method of through-plated holes.

is not suitable for the repair

FIG.

17 MISSING LANDS

9.3.1 The repair may be affected by bonding a replacement land to the laminate by means of a suitable adhesive ( see Fig 17 ). The repiacement land should have sufficient length of conductor to enable an overlap of at least 5 mm to be soldered to the existing conductor.
NOTE This method is not suitable for the repair of plated through holes.

9.3.2

The following procedure should then be followed : a) First clean and tin the affected conductor on the board and only the overlapping portion of the replacement conductor. The replacement land should then be positioned over the existing hole, using a non-solderable pin in order to maintain alignment of holes. Solder the tail of the replacement land to the conductor, ensuring that an overlap of at least 5 mm is maintained. Do not 20

IS : 11214 - 1984

tin the underside of the replacement land, since adhesion of the adhesive to tinned surface is not as effective as that to copper.

b)

The underside of the replacement/conductor land, and the topside of the borad area to be repaired should be completely freed of flux and dirt by cleaning with a solvent applied with a fine hair brush. These areas should be allowed to dry before proceeding with the next operation. replacement land/conductor should be lifted just enough so that a thin smear of adhesive can be applied to the underside of the land, and also to the top of the board. Under no circumstances must adhesive be allowed on the upper surface of the replacement land.

C>The

The land should then be pressed down with a blunt instrument and any excess adhesive removed. The adhesive should be allowed to cure. 1 Where an original coating has been removed, it should be restored. 10. EYELETS AND TUBULAR PINS DEFECTS ( see Fig. 18 )

4

e> f

18 A,

186

-

FIG.18 EYELETDEPECTS,TUBULAR PINSAND SIMILARITEMS
10.1 Eyelets Damaged, ing an Unsatisfactory Improperly Inserted, Through Connection Defective or Produc-

10.1.1 An eyelet, which otherwise appears satisfactory, but which constitutes an unsatisfactory through connection, may be resoldered after thoroughly cleaning around the flanges on both sides of the printed wiring board. After resoldering, all residues should be removed with a suitable solvent cleaner and a fine hair brush. Where an original coating has been removed, it should be restored. 10.1.2 An eyelet which is incomplete, too small, or has a deformed barrel, may be carefully drilled out and a new eyelet inserted using an approved eyelet insertion tool.

21

IS I 11214 - 1984

10.1.3 An eyelet which is solely used as a through
defective, approved

connection, and is should be carefully drilled out and a new eyelet fitted using an eyelet insertion tool.

11. PLATED BOARDS

THROUGH ( see Fig. 19)

HOLE

DEFECTS

-

DOUBLE.SIDED

HOLE
OPEN ClRCUl T -FIBRE GLASS BOARD

FIG. 19 OPEN CIRCUIT PLATED THROUGH HOLE

11.0 Methods described in 11.1 and 11.3 can be used only where a component lead is NOT required to be soldered into the plated through hole. Where the hole is used for a component lead the hole should be drilled out and an eyelet fitted as 11.2.
11.1 Wire Link Method - A length of tinned copper wire should be inserted through the hole. The ends of the wires should be clenched such that they extend for 1 mm to 3 mm along the lands' conductor on each side of the printed wiring board ( see Fig. 20 ).
DAMAGE0 THROUGH PLATED HOLE

WIRE

LINK

FIG. 20. DEFECTIVE PLATED THROUGH HOLE 11.2 Eyelet Method by inserting a suitable

WIRE LINK METHOD sides may be restored

-- Electrical
eyelet.

contact

between

The hole may be drilled out to tal;e the eyelet and the eyelet should be soldered to the lands on either side of the board. Commercially available eyelets of the solder fused type may be used ( see Fig. 21 ). 22

IS:11214-

1984

FIG. 21 DEFECTIVE PLATED THROUGH HOLE -EYELET 11.3 Repairs to Plated Techniques a) Description c) Through Holes Using Parallel

METHOD Gap Welding

of the process

( see7.8.1 ),

b) Process requirements

( see 7.8.2 ), and

Through connection repair - The repair should be carried out by the parallel gap welding method as shown in Fig. 22 and 23. The tape should overlap the conductor by a minimum of 3 mm and sharp corners on bends in the tape should be avoided.
WELDED TAPE

CONDUCTOR BASE MATERIAL

DEFECTIVE

HOLE

FIG. 22 DEFECTIVE PLATED T~IROUGH HOLES PARALLEL GAP WELDING METHOD 1

WEI

DED

TAPk

/CONDUCTOR BASE MATERIAL

FIG. 23 DEFECTIVE PLATED THROUGH HOLESPARALLEL GAP WELDING METHOD 2 ( Suitable for via holes only 23 ),

IS : 11214 - 1984 12. BASE
epoxy-glass

BOARD
laminate

MATERIAL
).

DEFECTS

( For example,

defects

in

12.0 Damaged Base Board Materials - It is the intention method to give guidance for the possible repair of minor damage value printed wiring boards ( see Fig. 24 ).

of this to high

L

AREA OF BURN OR BLISTER ON THE COMPONENT SIOE OF THE BOARD

L

CHIP

SPLIT OR FRACTURE 15mm OR LESS ~

Fxa.

24

DAMAGED BASE BOARD MATERIALS to be blisters, burns, splits, chips

Damage in this case is considered and fractures to the base laminate.

a) Damage of minor nature to high value boards in which the serviceability and reliability of the boards is unimpaired, may be repaired as stated below. For repairs to printed edge connectors see 16. b) Any damage to low value boards or damage stated in ( a ) renders the board unacceptable. greater than that

Where defects are found in the basic board material, the methods given in 12.1 to 12.4 may be used, Typical defects are burns, blisters, splits, minor chips and delaminations. It is recommended that a burn or blister be 12.1 Burns and Blisters repaired providing the burn or blister is not deeper than 50 percent of the board thickness and providing that the damage does not encroach on to any adjacent land area. Where a printed conductor runs over the area of damage, the printed conductor shall be cut for at least 5 mm each side of the cavity. The method of repair is as follows: a) Cut out the charred or burnt board b) c) Trim material,

Apply epoxy resin to fill the cavity and allow to cure, any surplus resin and clean area of del.)ris,

24

IS : 11214 - l984 d) Where a printed conductor has been removed, one of the methods given in 7 may be used to replace the disconnection, and e) Where an original restored. coating has been removed it should be

12.2 Splits and Fractures - Splits that run under printed conductors or lands and are more than 15 mm in length are not recommended as suitable subjects for repair. It is necessary to prevent a repairable split from running further. This can be achieved by drilling a 1 mm hole at the extreme end of the split. The method of repair is as follows:

a) Clean the area thoroughly and force epoxy resin between the faces of the split. Penetration of the epoxy resin into the split can be improved by gently flexing the edge to be filled, b) Clamp the two surfaces together coating and allow the resin to and be removed cure, c) Trim any surplus resin and clean the area of debris, has been

d) Where an original restored.

it should

12.3 Chips and Delaminations - These may include minor delaminations or breaking caused by mechanical impact. Chips and delaminations that run under printed conductors are not suitable subjects for repair. a) Minor chi@s 1) Clean the edges to be repaired for the epoxy resin filler, 2) Fill the mould with epoxy delamination is penetrated, 4) Trim to original board. b) Minor delaminations 1) Remove all loose material with a glass fibre brush, into the edges of delamination the delaminated area to its 2) Force an epoxy resin adhesive ( damaged area ), 3) Using a suitable original shape, shape and make a mould or support filler and ensure that and of the any

resin

3) Allow the epoxy resin to cure and remove

the mould, surfaces

the edges and both

clamp compress

NOTE - It is desirable agent to prevent clamp

to lightly coat the clamp faces with a releasing adhesion to the printed wiring board surface.

25

I8:11214-

1984 4) Allow the epoxy resin to cure, and 5) After removing the clamps clean the edges of the printed wiring board to restore the original printed wiring board contour.

13. INCLUSIONS 13.1 Removal of Inclusions - An inclusion is defined as any foreign body contained within the bare copper clad material or prepreg, or introduced between the bare material during processing. All inclusions should be considered electrically conductive. 13.1.1 An inclusion is detrimental when it either:

a) reduces the specified insulation gap between conductors; or b) has any dimensions exceeding 0.75 mm. Hair-like and non-conspicuous inclusions situated in a non-functional area are not detrimental and need not be removed. 13.1.2 Inclusions may be removed using the following method:

a) Using a viewer and air pencil fitted with a suitable dentist burr, remove inclusion and surrounding substrate material exercising great care, particularly if the inclusion lies across lands and/or conductors, b) Remove all debris from the cavity and heat dry the printed wiring board, c) Whilst still warm, fill the cavity with an approved resin and allow to cure, d) When the resin has cured, trim away any surplus, and e) Where an original coating has been removed, it should be restored. 14. SHORT OR NEAR SHQRT CIRCUITS THE LAMINATE ON THE SURFACE OF

14.1 A short circuit is an electrical conductive path bridging together non-common external conductors on the surface of a circuit board. A short circuit may be removed by either cutting away the offending conducting path using a scalpel or similar instrument. 14.1.1 After establishing discontinuity, the worked area may be coated with a varnish OS resin which is compatible with existing or subsequent c'oating material. 26

fS:11214-1984 15. REPAIR WIRING OF INNER BOARDS LAYERS OF MULTILAYER PRINTED

15.0 It is considered that repairs to inner layers of multilayer printed boards requires a very high degree of skill and the use of specialized equipment. Any such repair technique should therefore be a matter of negotiation with the customer and should be clearly defined. Any proposed repair technique should not adversely affect the board design parameters and/or its electrical and mechanical properties. 15.1 Internal Short Circuit ( Multilayer Board only ) - An internal circuit is considered to be an electrical conductive path bridging to gether non-common conductors on the internal layer of multilayer printed wiring board. The method of removal is as follows:

Using a viewer and high speed drill with a suitable dentists, burr, carefully remove substrate from around the defect and establish the nature of the defect.

b) 4 4 e)

Remove the defect taking great care not to damage adjacent lands or conductors. Remove all loose particles and place board in an oven for 15 min at 55 f 5�C. Remove board from oven and whilst still hot, fill the cavity resin, and allow to cure. After cooling, surface. Where an restored. trim away coating surplus has resin been flush with the with board be

original

removed After

it should

15.2 Open Circuit on Internal Conductors ( Multilayer Printed Wiring Boards only ) The method of repair is as follows: of the open circuit should The exact location a> commencing.

Lamination

be identified

before

b)

Using a high speed drill and dentists, burr, remove substrate material fron- above the fault until the conductor is exposed for a distance of at least 1 mm either side of the break. It is important that the copper surface is electrically conductive, and all debris removed, Carefully fill the cavity with conductive for 10 min, followed by oven curing. 27 compound and air cure

4

IS t 11214 - 1984
d) After cooling, use the high speed drill and dentists, burr and remachine the now filled aperture back below the substrate surface leaving cured compound in the break. e) Electrically check the repair by: 60 seconds, and either side of the repair,

I) passing a current
2) applying a voltage without insulation f)

of 3 A for approximately to the conductor breakdown.

Using a selective plating system and copper solution, locally plate the repair for the required thickness, wash reworked area in water and oven dry.

g) Finally, fill the aperture with resin after heating board for 15 min in the oven and cure. After cooling, trim resin flush with the surface. h) Where an original be restored. 16. surface coating has been removed, it should

REPAIRS

TO PRlNTED

EDGE

CONNECTORS

16.0 Repairs to printed edge connectors are not generally recommended. However, isolated recovery of high value printed boards with damaged printed edge contacts may be permitted, subject to the agreement of the customer, using methods described in this clause.
16.1 Defective Edge Contacts ( Surface Damage damage to the gold plating only has occurred, it may following way: a) Mask tape. the board around the damaged

Only ) be reworked

Where in the masking

area using plating

b) Remove the gold plating from the contacts to be reworked using a Carborundum stick, ensuring that no particles remain and that the under plate is undamaged. c) Swab the area with degreasing solvent and using precipitated chalk and water. Finally, water for 30 seconds. Immerse the contact area in a solution surface, and then place in cold running 6 minutes before plating. then lightly clean rinse in running

d)

to activate the contact's water for a maximum of

e)

Using a selective plating system with a suitable gold solution, and whilst the board is still wet, quickly gold flash all exposed underplate and then plate each individual contact to the required thickness.

28

IS t 11214 - 1984

f 1 When complete,
the masking

rinse in running water for 30 seconds, remove tape and clean off adhesive residues with solvent. 2 min and dry the panel using a hot

EdRinse

the panel for a further air system.

NOTE 1 - This technique should not be used if the under plating or base copper is damaged, pitted or missing. is highly recommended that repairs which involve the use of NOTE 2 -It plating apparatus are more appropriate to a plating laboratory. 16.2 Defective Edge Contacts for complete contact replacement - Same procedure shall be followed as described in 16.3 below. as

16.3 Complete Contact Replacement - Where a contact is damaged beyond the limit reworkable by the method given in 16.1 the only method of replacement is as follows: a) Using a machine tool adapted for high speed cutting, with a dentists burr, machine away the defective contact for approximately half the depth of the substrate and remove at least 1 mm of the contact tail ( see Fig. 25 ).

I mm

min.

Fro. 25 PRINTED EDGE CONNECTOR-

CONTACT REPLACEMENT METHOD

b) From a suitable scrap board, machine cut tab which dimensionally will just fit into the aperture machined into the defective board. Ensure that the contact surface will be flush with the rest of the contacts. tab into position using a suitable adhesive, c) Bond the replacement and cure. It is essential to ensure that the contact surface is free from adhesive. d) After curing, remake the electrical method, detailed in 7. 29 contact by selective a suitable

IS:11214

- 1984
that this technique requires specialized equipment

NOTE 1 - It is emphasiied and a high degree of skill.

NOTE 2 - Printed wiring boards with edge connectors have directly opposite contacts replaced.

on both sides should not

17. PROTECTIVE

COATING

REMOVAL

17.1 Where the boards requiring rework have a surface coating, this needs to be removed from the local rework area. Coating removal can be achieved using the following methods:
a) A suitable solvent can be used. Typical solvents ( depending upon the coating material ), are xylene trichloroethane, methylene chloride. Care should be taken when using solvents to ensure that boards, components and the operator are adequately protected from the hazards associated with the use of these materials. b) Abrasive removal can be achieved ture rotary powered methods. using either manual or minia-

Stiff nylon bristle or glass fibre brushes are commonly used, or -impregnated rubber tools may prove suitable alternatives. Whichever system is chosen, thorough removal of debris is a prerequisite to the production of a satisfactory repair. 17.1.1 restored. After completion of the repair the surface coating should be

18. MODIFICATION

OF ASSEMBLED

PRINTED

BOARDS

to printed wiring boards usually involves the addition of conductors and components. These are generally and/or removal modifications to the design and should, therefore, be defined on an engineering drawing by the designer. To ensure that alternations and modifications conform to good practice it is recommended that the designer follows the recommendations and methods of this guide.
NOTE Some techniques suggested arc not suitable prior to mass soldering.

18.0 Modification

18.1 Permitted Wiring Board
specification

Providing the number does not infringe any customer there need be no limit to the number per board. should be given to the are carried out. overall appearance when hand

-

Number

of Alterations

Modifications

Per Printed

Consideration wired modifications

Modifications/alterations to the printed edge connector of the gold plated plug area are not recommended, 30

in the vicinity

IS:11214-1984 18.2 Removal 18.3 Removal of Unwanted of Unwanted Components Conductors ( see 6 )

26 A

26 B

FIG. 26 REMOVAL OF UNWANTED CONDUCTORS 18.3.1 The circuit may be broken by cutting with a scalpel or similar instrument removing approximately 5 mm from the conductor at the mid or any convenient point and the cut ends sealed with an epoxy adhesive. 18.3.2 Where there is a need for the printed pattern to simulate the conductor pattern of the modified artwork, the conductor may be removed to the nearest remaining lands, (see dimensions in Fig. 26). The ends of the conductor should then be sealed with an expoxy adhesive. Removal of conductors should only be made where there requirement to simulate the new artwork pattern. 18.4 Fitting of Additional Components and/or Wires is a design

ADDITIONAL TERMINALS

TUBULAR

PIN TYPE

Fro. 27 FITTINGOF ADDITIONAL COMPONENTS AND/ORWIRES 18.4.1 This method covers the addition of two or three lead components of the resistor capacitor, diode type and transistors ( see Fig. 27 ). 31

IS 8 11214-1984 18.4.2 Where there are vacant lands in the correct circuit position that have holes that will accommodate the additional component/wire without the need to enlarge the hole, the component/wire may be assembled in the normal way.

18.4.3 Multi-lead components such as integrated circuits. Dual-in-line packages etc should be added by a socket mounted to a sub-board than hand wired provided they do not exceed the condition of 18.X.
Gap

additions to the circuit may be achieved using parallel welding techniques. The principles applied will be similar to the requirements of repairs using parallel gap welding ( see 7 ).
Welding

18.5 The Addition

of Connections Techniques - The

to the

Circuit

Using

Parallel

18.6 Modifications to Printed Edge the printed edge connector fingers should to outgoing connections may however be conductors to the appropriate printed circuit ( see Fig. 28 ).

Connectors - Modification of not be permitted. Modifications achieved by attaching additional wiring pattern elsewhere in the

Care must be taken to ensure that pins do not form an undesirable connection between two sides of a printed board.
ADDITIONAL CONNECTION CONNECTIONS TO THE EDGE CONTACT FINGER (GOLD PLATED PORTION1 ARE ND1 PERMITTEO

FIG. 28 MODIFICATIONTO PRINTED EDGE CONNECTORS
19. GUlDE TO SUITABLE TOOLS AND MATERIALS 19.1 The following list is a guide to suitable tools and materials which are recommended for use in the repair methods specified in this guide:

a) Soldering irons of the low voltage, low wattage and temperature controlled to approximately 280�C with suitable soldering bits are considered necessary. 32

IS : 11214- 1984
b) Desoldering tools with power operated, vacuum pumps when desoldering plated through holes or removing multi leg components of the dual-in-line circuit type, Hand loaded desoldering. c) e) Solder desoldering tools may be suitable for a single hole

flux cored.

d) Two part epoxy adhesive. side cutters, scalpels, dental probes, Small hand tools. Tweezers, spatulas, glass fibre or nylon bristle scratch brush, dental burrs, fine abrasive paper, Carborundum sticks, small clamps, etc. diameters Tinned copper wire. Various conductor current carrying capacitor. equivalent to original to the

f)

g) Insulated tinned copper wire. Various diameters original conductor current carrying capacitor.

equivalent

h) High speed hand held air drill with a range of suitable drills. j)

burrs and

High speed drilling machine with suitable drills burrs and three axis controlled table movement for the repair of multilayer boards. fluid. lacquer ( varnish parallel machine ). gap welding. of electrodes. repairs. Multilayer repairs. with a range niche1 tape gap welding controlled machine

k) Cleaning n) Weldable p) Parallel r) s) t) Constant Eyelet Terminal

m) Polyurethenc

q) Temperature

oven. Multilayer and eyelets.

power supply cable of 3 A output. insertion viewer tool and terminals.

insertion

u) Optical

x 10 magnification. of shapes and sizes for the reapair oflands and

v) Repair foils range conductors.

?3

INTERNATIONAL
Base Units Quantity Length Mass Time Electric current Thermodynamic temperature Luminous Amount intensity of substance Units

SYSTEM

OF UNITS

( SI UNITS)

Unit metre kilogram second ampere kelvin candela mole

Symbol m kg
S

A K cd mol

Supplementary Quantity Plane angle Solid angle Units

Unit radian steradlan

Symbol rad sr

Derived

Quantity Force Energy Power Flux Flux density Frequency Electric Pressure, conductance force stress Electromotive

Unit newton joule watt weber tesla hertz siemens volt Pascal

Symbol N J W Wb T Hz S V Pa 1 1

Definition N = J I kg.m/ss 1 N.m

1 W = 1 J/s 1 Wb = 1 V.s 1 1 1 T I 1 Wb/ms (s-1) 1 Hz = 1 c/s S = 1 A/V V = 7 W/A

1 Pa 5: 1 N/ms

