UDC 621'9'06

: 621-722

(

First Reprint

OCTOBER 1990)

IS:8593(Part2)-1988
( Reaffirmed 2003 )

Indian Standard

CENTRALIZED

RECOMMENDATIONS FOR LUBRICATION AS APPLIED TO PLANT AND MACHINERY
PART 2 GREASE LUBRICATION

Lays down 1. scopemachinery with respect and he*avy industries. 1 .`I This standard 2. Terminology

the recommendations for centralized grease lubrication system for plant and to installation practice, system pipe work and ancillary equipment for light

shall also cover grease like substances.

points 2.1 Centralized Lubrication System - A system in which two or more lubrication or group of machines are served with the same lubricant from a common source. 2.2 Pressure Drop-The medium having flowed difference in pressure of a medium through a length of pipe, valve etc. before and after and

on a machine

event,

that is, the

2.3 Shear Stress - The stress which is applied to the lubricant to induce flowing through a circular tube, the stress at the wall is given by: F-S where, F = Shear stress P = Pressure drop d = Tube bore L = Length 2.4 Shear Rate - The velocity expressed in per second. 2.5 Apparent Viscosity does not remain constant 2.6 Yield Stress gradient, in a moving fluid Pa Pa m m in a direction

flow.

When

grease is

perpendicular

to the velocity,

The ratio of shear stress to shear rate as defined above in cases where this with varying shear stress. This applies to non-newtonian fluids. stress required to produce flow. flow of medium by transferring it to a

The minimum

pump which creates 2.7 Positive Displacement Pump -The chamber followed by movement of one of the chamber walls. 2.8 Directional Valve The valve used to direct the flow

of fluid

into a pipe line as desired.

2.9 Feeder - The positive displacement device where controlled volumes of lubricant are allowed to 3ass to points of lubrication by transferring the lubricant to a chamber followed by wall movement.
Note Feeders are also known as distributors, metering valves and valve manifold.

3. Classification of Grease Lubrication Systems - Grease Lubrication Systems are always total ass systems where the grease used in the points of lubrication is not collected and returned to the peservoir for recirculation. Based on the working principle, the system is classsified into the iollowing types. 3.1 Dual Line End of Line System ( Fig. I ) -This Jvith in-built reciprocating plunger pump, reversing type of system basically consists of a reservoir valve, feeders, end pressure relay and pipings. equipment to be from the feeders

In this system, there are two main supply lines which are laid parallel to the Inlet to grease feeders are connected to these two lines and the outlet ubncated. sre connected through brass/steel tubes to points of lubrication. @ May 1989, BIS I
BUREAU
MANAK

Adopted 19 October

1988 OF
BHAVAN,

Gr 3 I

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

IS:8593(Psrt2)-1988

I

point Relief line Pressure line G Main line H Feed line J Changeover valve 4/2 N Two line metering device P End pressure relay D E FIG. 1 DUAL LINE END OF L!NE SYSTEM

8 Lubrication

A Pump with lubricant reservoir

The pump feeds grease alternately into the two main lines through the reversing valve. The end pressure relay is located at the farthest point from the pump which trips the pump motor and changes the position of the reversing valve as soon as a pre-set pressure is achieved in the line being pressurized. This completes the cycle. The next cycle is started through an adjustable timer.
A dual line system may have a working pressure of 15/40 MPa and can feed metered grease to about 1 000 lubrication points through a pipe line, maximum length of which shall not exceed 150 m on either side of the pump.

system is similar in design to that of dual line end 3.2 Due/ Line Loop Type System (Fig. 2) -This of line system except that the reversing valve in this system is operated hydraulically. To effect reversal of the valve against a set pressure to be achieved at the farthest end of main line, either system is laid out in a loop form or a small pipe line is drawn from the end of the main lines and connected to the reversing valve as shown in Fig. 2. ~"`_`_--_---_~~~-, t I I i ._...u- _J - -----1 I

Pump with lubricant reservoir Lubrication point Relief line Pressure lina Main line Feed line Changeover valve 4/2 Two line metering device FIG. 2 DUAL LINE LOOP TYPE SYSTEM

The advantage of the system is that it ensures positively a minimum set pressure at end of main line which is considered essential to ensure that all feeders have operated and that all points hgve been lubricated. 2

IS:8593(
3.3 Single Line Progressive along the equipment to be ,first point is lubricsted, There is no `Progressive'. pressure relay or loop type

Part 2)-1988

System ( Fig. 3 ) - In this type 0: system, tt,ere is only one line running The construction of feeders are such that until and unless lubricated. the second poir,t does not receive grease lubricant, hence the name reversing valve in the system and, hence the requirement of either end layout is not there.

A B G H K L

Pump with Lubrication Main line Feed line Secondary Progressive

lubricant reservoir point

feed line piuger metering device SYSTEM

FIG. 3 SINGLE LINE PROGRESSIVE

3.4 Single <Line Injector System ( Fig. 4) - In this type of system also there is only one line running along the equipment to be lubricated. The construction of injectors ( feeders ) is such that it operates on the principle of compression and decompression of a spring against the required pressure. This type of system is not very positive and hence equipment. can be adopted only for non-critical small

Pump with lubricant reservoir Lubrication point Matertng device with injectors Relief line Pressure line Relief valve Main line Feed line FIG. 4 SINGLE LINE INJECTOR SYSTEM

3.5 Multi- Line System ( Fig. 5 ) - In this type of system, there are number of plunger pumps Outlet from operated in sequence by a cam which may either be motor-driven or machine-driven. Due to its constructional constraints, each pump is directly connected to the point of lubrication. the maximum number of points to be lubricated is limited to 24. However, this type of system ia ideal for lubrication of equipment having small number of lubrication points and requiring lubrication only during the movement of the same, as for example, overhead cranes, etc. 3

IS:8593

(Part

2)-1988

A B

Pump with Lubrication

lubricant point

reservoir

H N

Feed .line Two line metering device FIG. 5 MULTI-LINE
SYSTEMS

4. Pumps 4.1 Method of Drive -The pumps may be operated by hand or may be driven by mechanical Alternately, pumps may be provided with pneumatic, hydraulic or electrical drive. The drive either rotary or reciprocating. means. may be

4.2 Mounting - The pumps may be mounted either inside or outside the reservoir. In either case, the pumps shall be readily accessible for maintenance. Lubrication pumps which are operated through mechanical linkage from the parent machines shall be mounted in such a way that neither the pump nor the drive is subjected to deflection loads. 4.3 Pump Name Plates 4.3.1 The name plates of pumps shall contain name and address, part/model and serial numbers, and the following:

a) Manufacturer's b) Manufacturer's c) Output

at rated pressure and R.P.M.

4.3.2 The supplier's name plate should not be removed by the user. If necessary, a second name plate with the salient information may be provided adjacent to the pump so that it can be easily read. This is important for maintenance and replacement purposes. of rotation should be clearly indicated 4.3.3 In the case of rotary pumps, the direction pump. The marking may be on the motor unit in the case of integral pump and motor unit. 5. Reservpir of this type of reservoir should be such that no 5.1 Permanent Type - The design and construction foreign matter, including splashed water can enter in it. It should be adequately protected against A suitable internal coating may be given to internal corrosion where this is likely to occur. minimise adhesion. 5.1.1 suitable 5.1.2 positive 5.i.3 Reservoirs, excepting the very small sizes, should have a bottom transfer pump the reservoir shall be filled through this connection. The reservoirs should priming of pump. Reservoirs incorporate a follower plate or scraper fill connection. Using a on the

arm and

scoop

to ensure

shall be fitted with should be

means for allowing with

air to escape during level indicatir

f,illing. the level of ,

5.1.4 The reservoirs contents within.

provided

a suitable

to indicate

4

IS : 8593 6.1.5 Large reservoirs shall be designed with adequate facilities
6.1.6 Reservoirs, which are to be filled from a distance with level indicating and controlling devices. 6. Instrumentation should for emptying be equipped,

( Part

2 )- 1988
cleaning.

and internal wherever

practicable,

6.1 Control - In automatic

systems, the cycle time, as well as the time for which the pump will run mechanical or electronic timer where in each cycle may be controlled by electrical, pneumatic, applicable. The method of automatic changeover in dual line systems is given in 3. Manual control shduld be possible in case of failure. 6.2 Monitoring - Different types of instrumentation are available for monitoring may be of indicating type like pressure gauge or may give audiovisual signals. 6.3 Fault Indication various system faults. 7. Different types of instrumentation pressure. Monitor

may be used to give audiovisual

signals

for

Pipe, Tube, Hose and Fittings
to IS : 6631-l 972 `Steel pipes for hydraulic purposes' is for centralised grease systems. be 25 MPa up to a size of 25 NB, and

7.1 Pipe - Seamless steel pipe conforming
recommended

7.1 .l Pressure rating - The maximum pressure rating should 15 MPa for sizes between 25 NB to 50 NB. 7.1.2 Pipe end shall be threaded in accordance where pressure tight joints are made on the threads

with IS : 554~1985 (third revision)`.

`Dimension

for pipe threads

7.2 Tube - Seamless steel ( cold tirawn ), copper, brass, nylon tube, etc, may be used depending upon the service conditions/applications. 7.3 Hose - Wire reinforced, rubber covered hydraulic hose conforming to IS : 7651-1979 `Wire reinforced rubber covered hydraulic hose ( first revision)' may be used. However, the bursting pressure is to be checked against the pressure requirements. 7.4 Fittings 7.4.1 Pipe fittings - Seamless steel fittings capable of withstanding a working pressure of 34 MPa, Min shall be used. These may be of bite type or any other type as agreed to between the supplier and the user. 7.4.2 Tube fittings Bite type fittings shall be used.

8. Pipe/Tube SizesThe selection of pipe sizes for a particular system is dependent upon the layout of the system, the spread of the system, the number of lubrication points connected to the system and system pressure selected. The feed pressure required at the inlet of a feeder varies depending on pressure drop acrrJss the feeder, pressure drop in the pipe line from the feeder to the point of lubrication and the resistance inside the point of lubrication. However, as a thumb rule, 4 MPa is considered adequate pressure at the inlet of feeders. The size of main line should be selected in such a way that the feeder located at the farthest end from the pump is assured of 4 MPa and the normal working pressure at the pump should not exceed its rated pressure. The pipe line loss depends upon size of pipe, type of grease used and the rate of flow of grease.

5

IS:8593(Part2)-1988 EXPLANATORY
This standard is one of the series in the series are: Part 1 Part 3 of Indian Standards

NOTE
on centralized lubrication. Other parts

Oil lubrication Aerosol lubrication

This standard is only a general guide and does not lay down the specific design requirements. It is, therefore, imperative that while designing new system consultation takes place between user, equipment designer and lubricant supplies. In preparing this specification assistance has been derived from the following as standards: to plant and

BS 4807 : 1972 `Recommendations machinery', issued by the British IS0 5170-l 977 `Machine tools tion for Standardization.

for centralized lubrication Standards Institution. Lubrication Systems' issued by

applied

the International

Organizafor technical

DIN 24271 ( Part 2)-l 982 `Centralized drawings', issued by the Deutsches

lubrication systems - Graphical symbols lnstitut Fur Normung (West Germany).

