RAT AAF IS 13942 (Part 1) : 2019 
Indian Standard 


maa Aled — ae wA 


art 1 UA 1 arga Ar Sut & fre 
maa send 


( TET JTÜ ) 


Automotive Vehicles — 
External Projection 


Part 1 Performance Requirements for 
M1 Category of Vehicles 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 43.100 


© BIS 2019 


anda AM sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Te TH AMT, ay fref — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


October 2019 Price Group 4 


Automotive Body, Chassis, Accessories, Garage Equipment, Springs and Suspension Systems Sectional 
Committee, TED 06 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 1) (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Automotive Body, Chassis, Accessories, Garage Equipment Springs and Suspension Systems 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Transport Engineering Division Council. 


This standard, originally published in 1994 for all category of vehicles. The Sectional Committee had decided to 
split the standard in two parts. 


The purpose of this standard is to reduce the risk of seriousness of body injury to a person hit by, the body work 
or crushing against it in the event of a collision. There is also likelihood of injury to the passenger if some parts 
are projected out more than specified, particularly while taking a turn or cornering. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 13942 (Part 1) : 2019 


Indian Standard 


AUTOMOTIVE VEHICLES — 
EXTERNAL PROJECTION 


PART 1 PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS FOR 
M1 CATEGORY OF VEHICLES 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard applies to external projections of 
category M1 vehicles as per IS 14272 as amended from 
time to time. It does not apply to exterior rear view 
mirrors or to the ball of towing devices. 


1.2 The purpose of this standard is to reduce the 
risk or seriousness of bodily injury to a person hit 
by the bodywork or brushing against it in the event 
of a collision. This is valid both when the vehicle is 
stationary and in motion. 


1.3 However, at the request of the vehicle manufacturer, 
vehicles of category N1 and M2 which are derived 
from M1 can be type approved as per this standard. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standard contains provisions which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standard: 


IS No. Title 
14272: 2011 Automotive vehicles — Types — 
Terminology 
3 TERMINOLOGIES 


3.1 Vehicle Type — A category of motor vehicles 
which do not differ in such essential respect as, shape 
or materials of the external surface. 


3.2 External Surface — The outside of the vehicle 
and including the bonnet, the lid of the luggage 
compartment, the doors, the wings, the roof, the 
lighting and light-signaling devices and the visible 
strengthening components. 


3.3 Floor Line — The floor line determined as 
follows: 


3.3.1 Successively position round a laden vehicle a 
cone with a vertical axis, the height of which is not 
defined, and with a half angles of 30 degree in such a 
way that it contacts, constantly and as low as possible, 
the external surface of the vehicle. The floor line is the 
geometric trace of these points of contact. 


3.3.2 In determining the floor line, the jacking points, 
exhaust pipes or wheels shall not be taken into 
consideration. 


The gaps of the wheel arches are assumed to be filled in 
by an imaginary surface forming a smooth continuation 
of the surrounding external surface. 


At both ends of the vehicle the bumper shall be taken 
into consideration when establishing the floor line. 
Dependent upon the particular vehicle the floor line 
trace may occur at the bumper section extremity or at 
the body panel below the bumper. Where two or more 
points of contact occur simultaneously, the lower point 
of contact shall be used to determine the floor line. 


3.4 Radius of Curvature — The radius of the arc of a 
circle which comes closest to the rounded form of the 
component under consideration. 


3.5 Laden Vehicle— The vehicle laden to the maximum 
permitted technical mass. Vehicles equipped with 
hydro-pneumatic, hydraulic or pneumatic suspension or 
a device for automatic leveling according to load shall 
be tested with the vehicle in the most adverse normal 
running condition specified by the manufacturer. 


3.6 Extreme Outer Edge — Extreme outer edge of the 
vehicle means, in relation to the sides of the vehicle, 
the plane parallel to the median longitudinal plane of 
the vehicle coinciding with its outer lateral edge, and, 
in relation to the front and rear ends, the perpendicular 
transverse plane of the vehicle coinciding with its outer 
front and rear edges, account not being taken of the 
projection: 

a) of tyres near their point of contact with the ground, 

and connections for tyre pressure gauges; 


b) of any anti-skid devices which may be mounted 
on the wheels; 


IS 13942 (Part 1) : 2019 


c) of rear-view mirrors; 


d) of side direction indicator lamps, end outline 
marker lamps, front and rear position (side) lamps 
and parking lamps; and 

e) in relation to the front and rear ends, of parts 
mounted on the bumpers, of towing devices and 
of exhaust pipes. 


3.7 The Dimension of the Projection — Of a 
component mounted on a panel, means the dimension 
determined by the method described in A-2 of 
Annex A. 


3.8 The Nominal Line of a Panel — The line passing 
through the two points represented by the position of 
the centre of a sphere when its surface makes its first 
and last contact with a component during the measuring 
procedure described in A-2.2 Annex A. 


3.9 Aerial — Any device used for transmitting and/or 
receiving electromagnetic signals. 


3.10 Bumper — The front or rear, lower, outer structure 
of a vehicle. It includes all structures that are intended 
to give protection to a vehicle when involved in a low 
speed frontal or rear collision and also any attachments 
to this structure. 


3.11 Bumper Cover —The non-rigid outer surface of 
a bumper, generally extending across the full width of 
the front or rear of a vehicle. 


4 APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL 


4.1 The application for approval of a vehicle type 
with regard to external projections shall be submitted 
by the vehicle manufacturer or by his duly accredited 
representative. 


4.2 Information to be submitted at the time of applying 
for type approval to this standard shall be as given in 
Annex B. 


4.3 The application shall be accompanied with requisite 
number of samples and/or test pieces. 


5 GENERAL SPECIFICATIONS 


5.1 The provisions of this standard shall not apply 
to those parts of the external surface which, with the 
vehicle in the laden condition, with all doors, windows 
and access lids, etc., in the closed position, are either: 


a) at a height of more than 2 meters, 
b) below the floor line, or 


c) so located that, in their static condition as well as 
when in operation, they cannot be contacted by a 
sphere 100 mm in diameter. 


5.2 The external surface of vehicles shall not exhibit, 
directed outwards, any pointed or sharp parts or any 


projections of such shape, dimensions, direction or 
hardness as to be likely to increase the risk or seriousness 
of bodily injury to a person hit by the external surface 
or brushing against it in the event of a collision. 


5.3 The external surface of vehicles shall not exhibit, 
directed outwards, any parts likely to catch on 
pedestrians, cyclists or motor cyclists. 


5.4 No protruding part of the external surface shall have 
aradius of curvature less than 2.5 mm. This requirement 
shall not apply to parts of the external surface which 
protrude less than 5 mm, but the outward facing angles 
of such parts shall be blunted, except where such parts 
protrude less than 1.5 mm. 


5.5 Protruding parts of the external surface, made of a 
material of hardness not exceeding 60 shore A, may have 
a radius of curvature less than 2.5 mm. The hardness 
measurement shall be taken with the component as 
installed on the vehicle. Where it is impossible to carry 
out a hardness measurement by the shore A procedure, 
comparable measurements shall be used for evaluation. 


5.6 The provisions of 5.1 to 5.5 shall apply in addition 
to the particular specifications of the following 6, 
except where these particular specifications expressly 
provide otherwise. 


6 PARTICULAR SPECIFICATIONS 


6.1 Ornaments 


6.1.1 Added ornaments which project more than 10 mm 
from their support shall retract, become detached or 
bend over under a force of 10 daN exerted at their most 
salient point in any direction in a plane approximately 
parallel to the surface of which they are mounted. These 
provisions shall not apply to ornaments on radiator 
grilles, to which only the general requirements of 5 
shall apply. To apply the 10 daN force a flat-ended ram 
of not more than 50 mm diameter shall be used. Where 
this is not possible, an equivalent method shall be used. 
After the ornaments are retracted, detached or bent 
over, the remaining projections shall not project more 
than 10 mm. These projections shall in any case satisfy 
the provisions of 5.2. If the ornament is mounted on a 
base, this base is regarded as belonging to the ornament 
and not to the supporting surface. 


6.1.2 Protective strips or shielding on the external 
surface shall not be subject to the requirements of 6.1.1, 
however, they shall be firmly secured to the vehicle. 


6.2 Headlights 


6.2.1 Projecting visors and rims shall be permitted on 
headlights, provided that their projections, as measured 
in relation to the external transparent surface of the 
headlight does not exceed 30 mm and their radius of 
curvature is at least 2.5 mm throughout. In the case of 


a headlamp mounted behind an additional transparent 
surface, the projection shall be measured from the 
outermost transparent surface. The projections shall 
be determined according to the method described 
in A-3 


6.2.2 Retracting headlights shall meet the provisions of 
6.2.1 in both the operative and retracted positions. 


6.2.3 The provisions of 6.2.1 do not apply to headlamps 
which are sunk into the bodywork or which are 
“overhung” by the bodywork, if the latter complies 
with the requirements of 6.9.1. 


6.3 Grilles and Gaps 


6.3.1 The requirements of 5.4 shall not apply to gaps 
between fixed or movable elements, including those 
forming part of air intake or outlet grilles and radiator 
grilles, provided that the distance between consecutive 
elements does not exceed 40 mm and provided that the 
grilles and gaps have a functional purpose. For gaps of 
between 40 mm and 25 mm the radii of curvature shall 
be of 1 mm or more. However, if the distance between 
two consecutive elements is equal to or less than 
25 mm, the radii of curvature of external faces of the 
elements shall not be less than 0.5 mm. The distance 
between two consecutive elements of grilles and gaps 
shall be determined according to the method described 
in A-4. 


6.3.2 The junction of the front with the side faces of 
each element forming a grille or gap shall be blunted. 


6.4 Windscreen Wipers 


6.4.1 The windscreen wiper fittings shall be such that the 
wiper shaft is furnished with a protective casing which 
has a radius of curvature meeting the requirements of 
5.4 and an end surface area of not less than 150 mm’. In 
the case of rounded covers, these shall have a minimum 
projected area of 150 mm? when measured not more 
than 6.5 mm from the point projecting furthest. These 
requirements shall also be met by rear window wipers 
and headlamp wipers. 


6.4.2 The requirements of Annex B shall not apply 
to the wiper blades or to any supporting members. 
However, these units shall be so made as to have no 
sharp angles or pointed or cutting parts. 


6.5 Bumpers 


6.5.1 The ends of the bumpers shall be turned in 
towards the external surface in order to minimize the 
risk of fouling. This requirement is considered to be 
satisfied if either the bumper is recessed or integrated 
within the bodywork or the end of the bumper is turned 
in so that it is not contactable by a 100 mm sphere and 
the gap between the bumper end and the surrounding 
bodywork does not exceed 20 mm. 


IS 13942 (Part 1) : 2019 


6.5.2 If the line of the bumper which corresponds to 
the outline contour of the car vertical projection is on a 
rigid surface, that surface shall have a minimum radius 
of curvature of 5 mm at all its points lying from the 
contour line to 20 mm inward, and a minimum radius 
of curvature of 2.5 mm in all other cases. This provision 
applies to that part of the zone lying from the contour 
line to 20 mm inward which is situated between and in 
front (or rear in case of the rear bumper) of tangential 
points with the contour line of two vertical planes each 
forming with the longitudinal plane of symmetry of the 
vehicle an angle of 15° (see Fig. 1). 


Fic. 1 BUMPER 


6.5.3 The requirement of 6.5.2 shall not apply to parts 
on or of the bumper or to bumper insets which have 
a projection of less than 5 mm, with special reference 
to joint covers and jets for headlamp washers; but the 
outward facing angles of such parts shall be blunted, 
save where such parts protrude less than 1.5 mm. 


6.5.4 The requirement of 6.5.2 above does not apply 
to the bumper cover. The provisions of 5 remain 
applicable. 


6.6 Handles, Hinges and Push-buttons of Doors, 
Luggage Compartments and Bonnets, Fuel Tank 
Filler Caps and Covers 


6.6.1 The projection shall not exceed 40 mm in the case 
of door or luggage compartment handles and 30 mm in 
all other cases. 


6.6.2 If lateral door handles rotate to operate, they shall 
meet one or other of the following requirements. 


IS 13942 (Part 1) : 2019 


6.6.2.1 In the case of handles which rotate parallel to 
the plane of the door, the open end of handles must be 
directed towards the rear. The end of such handles shall 
be turned back towards the plane of the door and fitted 
into a protective surround or be recessed. 


6.6.2.2 Handles which pivot outwards in any direction 
which is not parallel to the plane of the door shall, 
when in the closed position, be enclosed in a protective 
surround or be recessed. The open end shall face either 
rearwards or downwards. 


Nevertheless, handles which do not comply with this 
last condition may be accepted if: 


a) they have an independent return mechanism; 


b) should the return mechanism fail, they cannot 
project more than 15 mm; 


c) they comply, in such opened position, with the 
provisions of 5.4; and 


d) their end surface area, when measured not more 
than 6.5 mm from the point projecting furthest, is 
not less than 150 mm’. 


6.7 Wheels, Wheel Nuts, Hub Caps and Wheel Discs 
6.7.1 The requirements of 5.4 shall not apply. 


6.7.2 The wheels, wheel nuts, hub caps and wheel discs 
shall not exhibit any pointed or sharp projections that 
extend beyond the external plane of the wheel rim. 
Wing nuts shall not be allowed. 


6.7.3 When the vehicle is travelling in a straight line, 
no part of the wheels other than the tyres, situated 
above the horizontal plane passing through their axis 
of rotation shall project beyond the vertical projection, 
in a horizontal plane, of the external surface or 
structure. 


However, if functional requirements allow, wheel 
discs which cover wheel and hub nuts may project 
beyond the vertical projection of the external surface 
or structure on condition that the radius of curvature of 
the surface of the projecting part is not less than 30 mm 
and that the projection beyond the vertical projection 
of the external surface or structure in no case exceeds 
30 mm. 


6.8 Sheet-metal Edges 


Sheet-metal edges, such as gutter edges and the rails 
of sliding doors, shall not be permitted unless they 
are folded back or are fitted with a shield meeting 
the requirements of this standard which are applicable 
to it. 


An unprotected edge shall be considered to be folded 
back either if it is folded back by approximately 180°, 
or if it is folded towards the bodywork in such a 
manner that it cannot be contacted by a sphere having a 
diameter of 100 mm. 


The requirements of 5.4 shall not apply to the following 
sheet metal edges: 


a) rear edge of bonnet; and 
b) front edge of rear luggage boot. 


6.9 Body Panels 


Folds in body panels may have a radius of curvature 
of less than 2.5 mm, provided that it is not less than 
one-tenth of the height “H” of the projection, measured 
in accordance with the method described in A-1. 


6.10 Lateral Air or Rain Deflectors 


Lateral deflectors shall have a radius of curvature 
of at least 1 mm on edges capable of being directed 
outwards. 


6.11 Jacking Brackets and Exhaust Pipes 


The jacking brackets and exhaust pipe(s) shall not 
project more than a distance of 10 mm beyond the 
vertical projection of the floor line lying vertically 
above them. As an exception to this requirement, an 
exhaust pipe may project more than 10 mm beyond 
the vertical projection of the floor line, so long as it 
terminates in rounded edges, the minimum radius of 
curvature being 2.5 mm. 


6.12 Air Intake and Outlet Flaps 


Air intake and outlet flaps shall meet the requirements 
of 5.2, 5.3 and 5.4 in all positions of use. 


6.13 Roof 


6.13.1 Opening roofs shall be considered only in the 
closed position. 


6.13.2 Convertible vehicles shall be examined with the 
hood in both the raised and lowered positions. 


6.13.2.1 With the hood lowered, no examination shall 
be made of the vehicle inside an imaginary surface 
formed by the hood when in the raised position. 


6.13.2.2 Where a cover for the linkage of the hood 
when folded is provided as standard equipment, the 
examination shall be made with the cover in position. 
6.14 Windows 


Windows which move outwards from the external 
surface of the vehicle shall comply with the following 
provisions in all positions of use: 


a) No exposed edge shall face forwards; and 
b) No part of the window shall project beyond the 
extreme outer edge of the vehicle. 
6.15 Registration Plate Brackets 


Supporting brackets provided by the vehicle 
manufacturer for registration plates shall comply with 


the requirements of 5.4, if they are contactable by a 
100 mm diameter sphere when a registration plate is 
fitted in accordance with the vehicle manufacturer’s 
recommendation. 


6.16 Luggage Racks and Ski Racks 


6.16.1 Luggage racks and ski racks shall be so attached 
to the vehicle that positive locking exists in at least 
one direction and that horizontal, longitudinal and 
transverse forces can be transmitted which are at least 
equal to the vertical load-bearing capacity of the rack 
as specified by its manufacturer. For the test of the 
luggage rack or ski rack fixed to the vehicle according 
to the manufacturer’s instructions, the test loads shall 
not be applied at one point only. 


6.16.2 Surfaces which, after installation of the rack, can 
be contacted by a sphere of 165 mm diameter shall not 
have parts with a radius of curvature less than 2.5 mm, 
unless the provisions of 6.3 can be applied. 


6.16.3 Fastening elements, such as bolts that are 
tightened or loosened without tools shall not project 
more than 40 mm beyond the surfaces referred to in 
6.16.2., the projection being determined according to 
the method prescribed in A-2, but using a sphere of 
165 mm diameter in those cases where the method 
prescribed in A-2.2 is employed. 


6.17 Aerials 


6.17.1 Radio receiving and transmitting aerials shall 
be fitted to the vehicle in such a way that if their 
unattached end is less than 2 m from the road surface 
in any position of use specified by the manufacturer of 
the aerial, it shall be inside the zone bounded by the 
vertical planes which are 10 cm inside the extreme 
outer edge of the vehicle as defined in 3.6. 


6.17.2 Furthermore, aerials shall also be so fitted to 
the vehicle, and if necessary their unattached ends so 
restricted, that no part of the aerials protrude beyond 
the extreme outer edge of the vehicle as defined in 3.6. 


6.17.3 Shafts of aerials may have radii of curvature of 
less than 2.5 mm. However, the unattached ends shall 
be fitted with fixing cappings, the radii of curvature of 
which are not less than 2.5 mm. 


IS 13942 (Part 1) : 2019 


6.17.4 The bases of aerials shall not project more than 
40 mm when determined according to the procedure of 
A-2. 


6.17.4.1 In cases where by the absence ofa flexible shaft 
or part it is not possible to identify what the base is of 
an aerial this requirement is deemed to be met if, after 
a horizontal force of not more than 50 daN in forward 
and rearward direction is applied by a flat-ended ram of 
not more than 50 mm diameter at the most salient part 
of the aerial: 


a) The aerial bends towards the support and does not 
project more than 40 mm, or 


b) The aerial breaks off and the remaining part of the 
aerial does not show any sharp or dangerous part 
that can be contacted by the 100 mm sphere and 
does not project more than 40 mm. 


6.17.4.2 The requirement of 6.17.4 and 6.17.4.1 
shall not apply to aerials located behind the vertical 
transversal plane passing through the “R” point of the 
driver, provided that the maximum projection of the 
aerial including its housing does not exceed 70 mm 
when determined according to the procedure of A-2. 


If the aerial is located behind that vertical plane but 
projects more than 70 mm, 6.17.4.1 shall apply using a 
projection limit of 70 mm instead of 40 mm. 


7 EXTENSION OF APPROVALS 


7.1 Every modification pertaining to the information, 
even if the changes are not technical in nature declared 
in accordance with Annex B shall be intimated by the 
manufacturer to the testing agency. 


7.1.1 If the changes are in parameters not related to the 
provisions, no further action need be taken. 


7.1.2 If the changes are in parameters related to the 
provisions, the testing agency, which has issued the 
certificate of compliance, shall then consider, whether, 
the external projections with the changed specifications 
still complies with provisions. 


7.2 Any further verification is required to establish 
compliance. 


IS 13942 (Part 1) : 2019 


ANNEX A 
( Clauses 3.7 and 3.8 ) 


METHOD OF DETERMINING THE DIMENSIONS OF PROJECTIONS AND GAPS 


A-1 METHOD OF DETERMINING THE 
HEIGHT OF THE PROJECTION OF FOLDS 
IN BODY PANELS 


A-1.1 The height H, of a projection is determined 
graphically by reference to the circumference ofa 165 mm 
diameter circle, internally tangential to the external 
outline of the external surface at the section to be checked. 


A-1.2 His the maximum value of the distance, measured 
along a straight line passing through the centre of the 
165 mm diameter circle, between the circumference 
of the aforesaid circle and the external contour of the 
projection (see Fig. 2). 


Fic. 2 METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF HEIGHT ‘H’ By 
DRAWING A CIRCLE OF 165 MM 


A-1.3 In cases where it is not possible for a 165 mm 
diameter circle to contact externally part of the external 
outline of the external surface at the section under 
consideration, the surface outline in this area will be 
assumed to be that formed by the circumference of the 
100 mm diameter circle between its tangent points with 
the external outline (see Fig. 3). 


A-1.4 Drawings of the necessary sections through the 
external surface shall be provided by the manufacturer 


to allow the height of the projections referred to above 
to be measured. 


A-2 METHOD OF DETERMINING THE 
DIMENSION OF THE PROJECTION OF A 
COMPONENT MOUNTED ON THE EXTERNAL 
SURFACE 


A-2.1 The dimension of the projection of a component 
which is mounted on a convex surface may be 
determined either directly or by reference to a drawing 
of an appropriate section of this component in its 
installed condition. 


A-2.2 If the dimension of the projection of a component 
which is mounted on a surface other than convex cannot 
be determined by simple measurement, it shall be 
determined by the maximum variation of the distance 
of the centre of a 100 mm diameter sphere from the 
nominal line of the panel when the sphere is moved 
over and is in constant contact with that component. 
Figure 4 shows an example of the use of this procedure. 


“Assumed 
surface” 


Fic. 3 METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF HEIGHT ‘H’ By 
DrRaAwING A CircLe OF 165 MM AND 100 MM 


Fic. 4 METHOD OF DETERMINING THE DIMENSION OF THE PROJECTION OF A COMPONENT 
MOUNTED ON THE EXTERNAL SURFACE 


6 


A-3 METHOD OF DETERMINING THE 
PROJECTION OF HEADLAMP VISORS AND 
RIMS 


The projection from the external surface of the 
headlamp shall be measured horizontally from the 
point of contact of a 100 mm diameter sphere as shown 
in Fig. 5. 


Visor 


100 mm @ 


: 


IS 13942 (Part 1) : 2019 


A-4 METHOD OF DETERMINING THE 
DIMENSION OF A GAP OR THE SPACE 
BETWEEN ELEMENTS OF A GRILLE 


The dimension of a gap or space between elements of 
a grille shall be determined by the distance between 
two planes passing through the points of contact of 
the sphere and perpendicular to the line joining those 
points of contact. Figure 6 and 7 show examples of the 
use of this procedure. 


Measured projection 
(in horizontal direction) 


Headlamp glass 


Fic. 5 METHOD OF DETERMINING THE PROJECTION OF HEADLAMP VISORS AND RIMS 


Measured 


100 mm © 


Fic. 6 METHOD OF DETERMINING THE DIMENSION OF A GAP OR THE SPACE BETWEEN ELEMENTS OF A GRILLE 


Measured gap 


100 mm © 


Fic. 7 METHOD OF DETERMINING THE DIMENSION OF A GAP OR THE SPACE BETWEEN ELEMENTS OF A GRILLE 


IS 13942 (Part 1) : 2019 


ANNEX B 
( Clauses 4.2 and 7.1 ) 


B-1 TECHNICAL INFORMATION TO BE 
SUBMITTED BY VEHICLE MANUFACTURER 


B-1.1 Name and Address of the Manufacturer 
B-1.2 Manufacturing Plant and Address 
B-1.3 Telephone No. 

B-1.4 FAX No. 

B-1.5 E-mail Address 

B-1.6 Contact Person 

B-1.7 Model and its Variants 

B-1.8 Ornaments, mm 

B-1.9 Projection for Head Light, mm 


B-1.10 Radiator Grilles (applicable of on external 
surface), mm 


B-1.10.1 Gap Between Individual Elements, mm 


B-1.10.2 Radius of Curvature of Individual Element, 
mm 


B-1.11 Body Panel 


In case of radius of curvature of folds in body panels are 
less than 2.5 mm the scaled drawing of folds contour 
and h value as per annex a of this standard is required 
to be submitted. 


B-1.12 Radius of Curvature of Lateral Rain/Air 
Deflector, mm 


B-1.13 It Shall be Accompanied by the Following 
Documents in Triplicate 


B-1.13.1 Photographs of the front, rear and side parts of 
the vehicle taken at an angle 30° to 45° to the vertical 
longitudinal median plane of the vehicle; 


B-1.13.2 Drawings, with dimensions, of the bumpers 
and, where appropriate 


B-1.13.3 Drawings of certain external projections and 
if applicable drawings of certain sections of the external 
surface referred to in 6.9.1. 


B-1.13.4 For every type of any one of the devices 
referred to in 6.16 and 6.17. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TED 06 (12640). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


