атт Ah IS 19027 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


чта Stet Я етее HT ATT 2h. 
Peat ener — ГӘ 


Measurement and Control of 
Sediments in Natural Lakes — 
Guidelines 


ICS 93.160 


© BIS 2023 


т HA э] 
Ly BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
ee R чач, 9 FRIST BMS THK AMT, 4$ Reet - 110002 


MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


November 2023 Price Group 8 


Reservoirs and Lakes Sectional Committee, WRD 10 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Reservoirs 
and Lakes Sectional Committee had been approved by the Water Resources Division Council. 


Lakes receive a wide assortment of suspended materials from rivers, precipitation, catchment erosion, shoreline 
erosion, pollution sources and biological activities. These materials are referred to as sediments and are a very 
important factor in the life of a lake. 


Sedimentation is one of the serious problems of many lakes causing reduction in lake capacity and useful life of 
the lake. Sedimentation seriously affects the ecological behaviour of lakes and determines to a large extent; the 
water quality of lakes. The interaction of sediments with the lake water, both within the water column and at the 
bed of the lakes, controls the quality of the lake water. The chemical and biological activities of sediments produce 
heat, contributing to the heat budget of the lake. Sediments also determine the biological productivity of lakes. 
Although high concentration of suspended matter may result in low primary production because of restricted light 
penetration, supply of excess nutrients to lake through sediments increases its productivity. Sediments also contain 
biological life as they act as substrate for bacterial activity. The availability of dissolved oxygen in lakes may be 
limited due to high sediment oxygen demand by the bacterial activity. Sediments can destroy the fish when soil 
particles contain contaminants such as pesticides and toxic material. Excessive sediments can result in reduction 
in the diversity and abundance of aquatic life. Diversity and population size of fish species, mussels and benthic 
(bottom-dwelling) macro-invertebrates associated with coarse substrates can be greatly reduced if the substrates 
are covered with sand and silt. Sedimentary processes may also cause changes in the lake basin forms. Benthos 
and fish are affected not only by the suspended sediments but also by the modification of habitat caused by 
depositional sediments. As such, it is essential to control and manage the lake sedimentation. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 19027 : 2023 


Indian Standard 


MEASUREMENT AND CONTROL OF SEDIMENTS IN 
NATURAL LAKES — GUIDELINES 


1 SCOPE 


This standard lays down guidelines for measurement 
and control of sedimentation in natural lakes. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards given below contains provisions 
which, through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the editions indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revision and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most 
recent editions of the standards given below: 


IS No. Title 


IS 6339 : 2013 Hydrometry — Sediment in 


streams and canals — 
Determination of concentration, 
particle size distribution and 
relative density (first revision) 


IS 13665 : 2017/ Hydrometry — Methods for 
ISO 6421:2012 assessment of reservoir 
sedimentation (first revision) 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 


3.1 Artificial Lakes or Reservoirs — Artificial 
Lakes or reservoirs can be defined as man-made 
lakes constructed by damming a river valley or by 
artificial excavation. 


32 Natural Lake or Lake — А natural lake is an 
inland basin filled with water. It is formed because 
of some geological process like water fills any 
natural depression and they have a natural shoreline 
along its periphery. Because of the continuous action 
of the waves, this shoreline is generally barren. 


3.2.1 On the basis of their origin; lakes are divided 
into a number of categories and sub-categories. 
Some of the important classes are: tectonic lakes, 
volcanic lakes, glacial lakes, solution lakes; lakes 
formed by stream action, lakes formed by wind 
action, lakes formed by shoreline processes, lakes 
produced by landslides, lakes formed by organic 
accumulation, lakes formed by activity of higher 
organisms and lakes formed by impact of meteorites. 


Lakes whose origin is not known or cannot be 
covered under any of these categories are clubbed as 
lakes of unknown origin. 


3.2.2 On the basis of their thermal behaviour such as 
stratification, mixing and number of overturns per 
year, lakes are mainly classified as: 


3.2.2.1 Amictic lakes — These lakes are completely 
insulated from outside influences of water and other 
factors because of the permanent ice cover. There is 
no mixing of water. 


3.2.2.2 Holomictic lakes — These lakes are wholly 
mixed that is circulation is complete and extends up 
to bottom. 


NOTE — Holomictic lakes are further classified as dimictic 
lakes and monomictic lakes. Dimictic lakes undergo two 
overturns per year. In monomictic lakes, there is only one 
overturn per year. Monomictic lakes may be either cold 
monomictic (overturn in summer) or warm monomictic 
(overturn in winter). 


3.2.2.3 Meromictic lakes — These lakes are 
permanently stratified. They do not circulate 
completely throughout the year as stratified bottom 
never circulates. 


3.2.3 Trophic status describes the productivity status 
of lakes based on nutrient concentrations, algal 
population etc. Based on the trophic status, three 
major categories of lakes are identified. 


3.2.3.1 Oligotrophic lakes — Lakes with lowest 
trophic level, low level of nutrients and clean water. 


3.2.3.2  Mesotrophic lakes — Lakes with 
intermediate properties between those of 
oligotrophic to eutrophic lakes. 


3.2.3.3 Eutrophic lakes — Lakes with highest 
trophic level and high concentration of nutrients and 
plankton; water is murky. 


3.2.4 Based on the chemical nature of the lake water 
and calcium content, lakes have been variously 
classified. 


3.2.4.1 Based on the chemical nature of the lake 
water, lakes can be acid lakes, saline lakes or fresh 
water lakes. 


3.2.4.2 Based on the calcium carbonate contents, 
lakes are classified as soft water lakes, medium 


IS 19027 : 2023 


water lakes, hard water lakes and very hard water 
lakes. 


3.2.5 Based on the presence of outlets, lakes are 
classified as open lakes and closed lakes. 


3.2.5.1 Open lakes — These lakes are also called 
exorheric lakes. These are those lakes that have 
some form of outlet. 


3.2.5.2 Closed lakes — These lakes are also called 
endorheric lakes. They do not have any outlets. They 
lose water only by evaporation and do not have any 
significant seepage loss. 


3.2.6 Based on the nature of inflow, a lake can be 
classified as seepage lake or drainage lake. 


3.2.6.1 Seepage lake — A seepage lake is one which 
do not have any stream draining into it. Seepage 


lakes are recharged by ground water only. 


3.2.6.2 Drainage lakes — These lakes have surface 
water as the main input. 


3.3 Bed Load — Sediments that are in almost 
continuous contact with the lake bed, while carried 


4 
4 
© 
2 


NATURAL LAKE 


by rolling, sliding or hopping along the bed of the 
lake (see IS 6339). 


4 GENERAL 


4.1 Difference Between a Natural Lake or Lake 
and an Artificial Lake or Reservoir 


Natural lakes are formed because of some geological 
process, as water fills any natural depression, and 
they have a natural shoreline along their periphery. 
The reservoirs and tanks, on the other hand are 
artificially created, the reservoir is created by 
damming a river valley and the tanks are created by 
artificial excavation. 


There are other technical differences also. Output 
from the lakes is near the surface whereas outlet of 
a reservoir is at one of the several depths. Lower 
most depression in a lake can occur anywhere in its 
basin but the maximum depth of the reservoir is 
always near the dam. A reservoir bottom has a 
regular slope from head to tail, while in natural lakes 
the bottom slopes is not uniform. Reservoirs also 
have greater areal water load and shorter residence 
time than lakes. Fig. | shows a typical cross section 
of natural lakes and reservoirs. 


ius 


DAM/ WEIR 


ARTIFICIAL LAKE (RESERVOIR) 


P 


Maximum 
Depth 


FIG. 1 TYPICAL CROSS-SECTION OF NATURAL LAKE AND ARTIFICIAL LAKE 


4.2 Lake Sedimentation Process 


4.2.1 Lake sediments are comprised mainly of 
clastic material (sediment of clay, silt and sand 
sizes), organic debris, chemical precipitates, or 
combinations of these. The relative abundance of 
each depends upon the nature of the local drainage 
basin, the climate and the relative age of a lake. The 
sediments of a lake in a glaciated basin, for example, 
will first receive coarse clastics, then finer clastics, 
chemical precipitates and then increasingly large 
amounts of biological material, including peats and 
sedges. 


4.2.2 Lake sediments are an important and integral 
part of the lake ecosystem. They reflect changes in 
land-use, and lake characteristics, and are often 
regarded as an historical archive. They also affect 
the present structure and function of lake 
ecosystems. Suspended particulate matter (SPM) in 
lakes mainly emanate from tributaries 
(allochthonous matter), from living and dead matter 
produced in the lake (autochthonous matter), or from 
re-suspended materials. SPM regulates the transport 
of all types of water pollutants in dissolved and 
particulate phases; it regulates water clarity and the 
depth of the photic zone. 


4.2.3 Sedimentation is the flux from water to 
sediments. Re-suspension is the advective flux from 
sediments back to water. Diffusion is the flux from 
sediments back to water, triggered by concentration 
gradients. 


4.2.4 Lake sedimentation is the process in which 
particulate matter carried from its point of origin, by 
either natural or human-enhanced processes; is 
deposited in the lake. Nature of sediments coming to 
a lake depends upon the rock type in the drainage 
basin. Sedimentation rate for a lake is mainly 
dependent upon conditions in the drainage area like 
morphology, climate and land use. Deposition 
pattern depends upon morphological апа 
hydrodynamic factors related to the water body. 
Water and wind are the main natural agents which 
bring sediments into the lake. Organic matter 
produced in the lake is an internal source. 


4.2.5 The bed load brought by the 
river/stream/overland flow is initially deposited 
preferably on shallow water near the shores. Fine 
particles have low settling velocities and are kept in 
suspension by the water motion. Besides, there are 
also sediments that are re-suspended from the 
bottom, due to the influence of waves and currents. 
When the energy level is reduced due to decrease in 
the wind speed, then the sediments will settle to the 
bottom. Generally, they gather in the deeper areas. 
Consequently, the near shore areas will generally be 
void of fine sediments. Thus, the total sediment 


IS 19027 : 2023 


discharge includes the —suspended-sediment 
discharge and the bed load discharge. 


4.3 Lake Bottoms Based on Sedimentation 


4.3.1 A proper understanding of the bottom dynamic 
conditions (erosion, transportation and 
accumulation) in lakes is essential in most 
sedimentological contexts. Fine cohesive materials 
generally dominate the open water areas, whereas 
coarser deposits (sand and gravel) dominate shallow 
regions where erosion and transportation of fine 
materials prevail. There is no physical model 
available which describes the linkage between the 
energy content of the water-mass and the capacity 
for sediment entrainment in open water areas. 
Water-mass energy generally depends on wind 
direction, duration, velocity, fetch and the presence 
of a thermo-cline etc. Entrainment depends on 
density, compaction, water, organic content of the 
sediments and the number and type of bottom fauna 
etc. 


4.3.2 Four different methods are used to determine 
bottom dynamics, two are site specific and two other 
are lake specific. Site and lake specific methods each 
include one method based on collected field data, 
and one based on theoretical data. The cone 
apparatus is used to collect field data. It consists of 
two cones, one of which one has a narrow angle and 
the other has a wide angle, which are adjusted at zero 
at the sediment surface before releasing to penetrate 
the sediments. The differential cone penetration, 
referred as the penetration ratio, is used to indicate 
the degree of surficial sediment compaction. This 
instrument provides quantitative data on physical 
sediment characteristics which may be related to 
bottom dynamic conditions. 


4.3.3 The shallow bottoms from which fine loose 
material is stirred up at every storm and where there 
are no extended periods of deposition are called 
erosion bottoms. Transportation bottoms prevail 
where fine material is deposited but where erosion 
takes place only during severe storms. Areas where 
fine material is deposited and erosion never occurs 
are called accumulation bottom. In shallow lakes 
there are no accumulation bottoms where material 
can deposit. The bottom sediments close to the 
shores as well as in the central parts of such lakes are 
a mixture of fine and coarse material. 


5 METHODS FOR MEASUREMENT OF 
SEDIMENTATION 


5.1 Sediments play an important role in elemental 
cycling in the aquatic environment. For the purposes 
of aquatic monitoring, sediment can be classified as 
deposited or suspended. Deposited sediment is that 
which found on the bed of a river or lake. Suspended 


IS 19027 : 2023 


sediment is found in the water column from where it 
is being transported by water movements. 
Suspended sediment is also referred to as suspended 
matter, particulate matter or suspended solids. 
Generally, the term suspended solids refers to 
mineral plus organic solids, whereas suspended 
sediment should be restricted to the mineral fraction 
of the suspended solids load. 


5.2 Theoretically, both of the suspended-sediment 
discharge and the bed load discharge can be 
determined either by measuring the weight of 
sediment that passes a section in a given time or by 
combining the concentration, the area of flow and 
the velocity of the particles. However, in practice, 
the suspended sediment discharge is usually 
computed by the concentration method and the bed 
load discharge is usually computed by the weight 
method. Different methods are advised because 
suspended-sediment particles are transported for 
sustained periods of time at about the same velocity 
as that of the flow and bed load particles are usually 
transported intermittently at velocities less than that 
of the flow. Thus, suspended-sediment discharge 
can be computed from a concentration and a water 
discharge (the product of particle velocity and area 
of flow equals water discharge), whereas the bed 
load cannot. 


5.3 Measurement of Bed Load 


a) The simplest way to estimate bed load is to 
dig a hole in the stream bed, called bed load 
trap, just before it enters the lake, then 
remove and weigh the material that drops 
into it; 

b) Bed load is also measured with bed load 
samplers which are lowered to the stream 
bed for a measured time, then brought up 
for weighing the catch. However, bed load 
samplers disturb the flow and changes the 
hydraulic conditions at the entry into the 
sampler. To remain stable on the bed it has 
to be heavy and the resting bed surface has 
to be a reasonably smooth bed; 


c) Some of the popular bed load samplers in 
use are box or basket type sampler, pan or 


tray sampler, pressure difference samplers 
(for example, Arnhem sampler or Helley- 
Smith bed sampler), slot or pit samplers, 
pumping sampler, magnetic sampler, 
suction type sampler etc; 


d) The bed load samplers are to be placed near 
the mouth of the lake where the in flowing 
stream discharges into the lake; 


e) The number of sampling stations depends 
upon the width of the lake mouth (or 
stream). At least 20 equally spaced, 
transverse sampling stations are necessary 
to ensure that zones of both maximum and 
minimum transport are adequately 
sampled. The distance between two 
successive sampling stations should not be 
more than 15 m and less than 0.5 m; 


f) Generally, two transverse surveys are 
adequate. Time for sampling at each 
section should be about 60 s; and 


g) The mean bed load is estimated by taking 
average of bed load of the various 
transverse sections. 


5.3.1 Empirical Estimations 


The difficulty of obtaining reliable measurements of 
bed load has led to some attempts to calculate it from 
more easily measured parameters but these are not 
widely used. A very simple method based on 
knowing the suspended sediment concentration and 
the texture of both suspended material and bed 
material is given in Table 1. For Lakes situated in 
hilly region, concentration of rolling material may 
be calculated as 


Y = 0.299 x" 


where 


Y = corresponding rolling material (in PPM); 
and 


X = average sediment in suspension (in PPM). 


IS 19027: 2023 


Table 1 Maddock’s Classification for Estimation of the Bedload 
(Clause 5.3.1) 


SI No. Suspended River Bed Suspended Elements Bedload Discharge 
Sediment Material Texture Expressed as % of 
Concentration Suspended Sediment 
Parts Per Million Discharge 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) Less than 1 000 Sand Similar to the river bed 25 to 150 
il) Less than 1 000 Gravel, rocks and Low sand content 5 to 12 
hard clay 
Ш) 1 000 to 7 500 Ѕапа Similar to the river bed 10 to 35 
iv) 1 000 to 7 500 Gravel, rocks and 25 % sand or less 5 to 12 
hard clay 
v) More than 7 500 Sand Similar to the river bed 5 to 15 
vi) More than 7 500 Gravel, rocks and 25 % sand or less 2to8 


hard clay 


5.4 Measurement of Suspended Load 


a) 


b) 


с) 


d) 


е) 


Sample of suspended sediment сап be 
collected by dipping a bottle, bucket or 
other container into the stream (called grab 
sampler), preferably at a point where it will 
be well mixed, such as downstream from a 
weir or rock bar. The sediment contained in 
a measured volume of water is filtered, 
dried and weighed. This gives a measure of 
the concentration of sediment and when 
combined with the rate of flow, gives the 
rate of sediment discharge; 


If a single sample taken at any chosen 
depth, half the depth of flow is 
recommended for giving the best estimate 
of average sediment concentration; 


Where the sampling consists of samples on 
vertical sections at several points across the 
stream, the recommended pattern is to use 
six equally spaced sections; 


Various samplers which are in use includes 
depth integrating samplers, point 
integrating samplers, pumping samplers 
and automatic samplers; 


Depth integrating sampler gives a single 
sample combined from small sub-samples 
taken from different points; 


The point-integrating sampler remains at a 
fixed point in the inflowing stream and 
samples continuously during the time it 
takes for the bottle to fill. Opening and 
closing of valves of the sampler are 
controlled from the surface either 
electrically or by cables; 


g) An automatic pumping sampler can be 
programmed to take series of samples as 
required on a rising and falling flood to 
cope with rising and falling rates of flow 
and the variations of sediment 
concentration at different flow rates. They 
can pump a small sample into a series of 
bottles, either at predetermined times and 
intervals, or as triggered by predetermined 
flow conditions, usually depth; 


h) If it is required to take a series of samples 
as the river rises, then an array of automatic 
samplers can be set up in a vertical 
arrangement; and 


j) For continuous measurement of suspended 
sediment concentration, optical turbidity 
meter can be used. 


5.5 Measurement of Total Sediment Load 


Separate measurements of suspended load and bed 
load may Бе necessary only for detailed 
experimental investigations or modeling studies. 
However, for most of the practical purposes, 
separate measurements are not necessary. A method 
of avoiding separate estimates of suspended load 
and bed load is to mix up all the moving sediments 
and then take a single sample of the mixture. Such a 
sample can be taken using a slot sampler at the 
turbulence flume. The other method is estimation of 
the deposited sediments in the lake. 


5.6 Estimation of the Total Sediments Deposited 
in the Lake 


The two important traditional methods are stream 
flow analysis and capacity survey. 


IS 19027 : 2023 


5.6.1 Stream Flow Analysis Method 


The method is the same for natural lakes and 
reservoirs. Description of the method is specified in 
IS 13665. 


5.6.2 Capacity Survey Method 
Under this category there are two methods: 


a) Range line method or cross-sectional area 
method; and 


b) Contour survey method. 


In most surveys, a combination of both the methods 
is used. Both these methods are the same for natural 
lakes and reservoirs. Description of the methods is 
specified in IS 13665. 


It is important that the procedures and techniques 
used in each capacity survey be accurately described 
and documented so that later surveys can be carried 
out in a similar manner and provides comparable 
data. 


5.7 Other Methods of Estimation 
5.7.1 Radio Dating Technique 


For lakes where no previous sediment surveys exist, 
the radio dating techniques may be used. Two 
environmental isotopes namely 7!°Pb and "Cs are 
mostly used for the purpose. ?'?Pb method provides 
estimates of sedimentation rates for the last 100 to 
150 years while "Cs gives estimates for the post 
1954 period. 


5.7.1.1 Cs Method 


A mean sediment accumulation rate since 1954 or 
1963 can be inferred from the age of the dated 
horizon and the thickness of sediment above it. The 
rates of sedimentation can be calculated from the 
depths of two principal time horizons that is 1954 
and 1964, in the "Cs concentration profile. This 
is suitable for recent sediments only (last 60 to 
70 years). 


5.7.1.2? 9 Pb method 


This method is widely used to characterize 
sediments on relatively short time scale (« 150 years). 
The dating method is based on the release of ??Rn 
gas (daughter of the ?SRa) from the soil to the 
atmosphere. The short-lived ??Rn (half-life 3.82 days) 
decays to 7!°Pb, that returns to earth surface or water 
reservoir within weeks as a solid fallout. The ?!?Pb 
activity is divided into two parts, the supported ?'?Pb 
produced in-situ by the natural decay of 22%а, and 
the unsupported ?'?Pb coming from the atmospheric 


fallout. The age of the sediment layer can be 
determined by means of the unsupported part. The 
method is reliable, particularly in stable environments 
with uniform sediment accumulation rates. 


5.7.2 Remote Sensing Techniques 


Aerial photographs or satellite images are used to 
trace turbidity plumes, which may help in defining 
the distribution of sedimentation. 


5.7.3 Laser Hydrography 


This is a comparatively new technique, which uses 
the airborne laser hydrographic technique wherein 
an aircraft mounted pulsed laser system collects a 
swath of discrete soundings along each flight line. It 
measures water depth exactly like a sonar using light 
instead of sound. It is suitable for large lakes. 


6 SEDIMENTATION RATE 


6.1 Estimation of Lake Sedimentation Volume 
(LSV) 


The amount of sedimentation in a lake is usually 
described as sediment volume deposited in the lake. 
The volume of sediment accumulation in a reservoir 
is determined as the loss in water storage capacity of 
the lake over a period of time. The volume of 
sediment will then be the difference between the 
original volume of the lake (or volume at the time of 
previous survey) and the volume of the lake at the 
time it is surveyed again. 


6.2 Rate of Sedimentation 


6.2.1 The annual rate of sedimentation (Rs) is given as: 


AS m? Нат 
At yr yr 


where 


AS = difference in storage capacity of the lake 
during the two surveys (in Mm?.cm or 
Ha. т and 1 m? = 1 Ha. т); and 


At = time lapse between the two surveys, (in 
year). 


Alternatively, amount of lake sediment may also be 
described as sediment mass as measured by the 
sediment tonnage. It is а measurement which is not 
dependent on the degree of compaction and is 
therefore, a parameter that can be used to assess the 
relative sediment accumulation in lakes. However, 
the weight of sediment in a lake indicates the rate of 
sediment inflow from the lake catchment and 
therefore, provides an estimate of the rate of erosion 
of the catchment soils. 


If the sedimentation rates are known for different 
parts of the lake, for example, in radio dating 
technique or range line surveys, the average 
sedimentation rate for the lake can be obtained by: 


n 
в, = > fif, 
i=1 
where 
R, = average or mean rate of sedimentation 
(em/yr); 
f = weighing factor for area (area covered 
under different sedimentation rates); 
К. = rate of sedimentation of each area 
(cm/yr); and 
i = number of sub-areas in which the lake 


bottom has been divided. 
6.2.2 Sediment Load and Stream Flow Discharge 


Annual sediment load is normally estimated from 
the annual sediment rating curve. The sediment 
rating curve expresses the relationship between the 
rates of sediment discharge to the corresponding 
flow discharge and it is usually presented 
graphically on a logarithmic scale. A sediment rating 
curve can be constructed from data obtained from 
incoming sediment load and stream flow discharge, 
usually measured at hydrometric gauging stations. 
The simplest method for obtaining an annual 
sediment rating curve is by adding all daily sediment 
loads and dividing the total by the number of days in 
the year for all years of available records. However, 
an alternative and a more practical method is based 
on estimating annual sediment loads using flow 
duration curves. An annual sediment rating curve 
can be constructed by simple regression of the 
annual average stream flow and annual average 
sediment loads. The annual rating curves at year t of 
suspended and bed load 0; may be represented as: 


login Qsst = а + dy login Qc 
log;o Qspe = а + b;log;o Qi 
where 


Qsst = annual average suspended sediment load; 


Ось, = annual average bed load; and 


Qe 


annual average stream flow discharge. 


ал, b4 and аз, bz are rating curves coefficients for 
annual average suspended sediment and bed loads 
respectively. The total annual (average) sediment 
inflow in year f is then given as: 

Q;T, = @ + Qspc 


where 


Q,T, = total annual (average) sediment inflow. 


IS 19027 : 2023 


6.2.3 Compaction of Deposited Sediment over Time 


The estimated average specific weight of the 
deposited sediment is used to convert the mass 
accumulated sediment in the lake into sedimentation 
volume. The accumulated lake sedimentation 
volume after t years can be estimated as: 


UE LSL; 
= су, 
where 
LSV, = estimated accumulated lake 
sedimentation volume; 
LSL, = estimated accumulated weight of the 
lake sediment; and 
Yt = specific weight of the deposited 


sediment at year f. 


The estimation of the specific weight is particularly 
important in this process because any uncertainty in 
this value directly translates into the corresponding 
uncertainty in the volume of the estimated sediment 
deposit. The unit weight of sediment will increase 
each year the sediment deposit remains in the 
reservoir due to compaction through time by its own 
weight and the weight of water. 


The most significant factors contributing towards 
the change of specific weight of deposited sediment 
are the size of the incoming sediment particles and 
the type or reservoir operation. Sediment deposition 
in a reservoir that is drawn down for considerable 
periods is subjected to exposure, consequently the 
sediment desiccates and become denser, thus 
increasing the unit weight. On the other hand, 
reservoir normally operating with a full pool would 
produce sediment with relatively lower unit weights. 
For a mixture of sediment, a weighted average of 
densities and consolidation constants must be used 
as follows: 


Y1 = 0.01 [Y1 (с)Рс + Y1 (т)Рт + YA(s)Ps] 
К = 0.01 [K(c)Pc + K(m)Pm + K(s)Ps] 


where 


Y1(c), Yl(m) = initial specific weight of clay, 


and V1(s) silt and sand respectively; 
K(c), K(m) = consolidation constants for slay, 
and K(s) silt and sand respectively; and 
Pc, Pm and = percentages of clay, silt and 
Ps sand respectively. 


Both УІ and K are functions of the type of lake 
operation and the size of sediment. The 
recommended values for Y1 and К for clay, silt and 


IS 19027 : 2023 


sand are 416 and 256, 1 120 and 91 and 1 500 and 0 
respectively. 


6.3 Uncertainty in Lake Sedimentation Estimation 


6.3.1 The following sections describe the possible 
sources of uncertainty and methods used for 
analyzing and quantifying the various uncertainties 
associated with lake sedimentation. The uncertainty 
of lake sedimentation estimation may arise from the 
variability of critical factors, called here the 
‘stochastic inputs’ such as sediment inflow into the 
lake, stream discharge, lake operation and type of 
incoming sediment. These factors contribute to the 
uncertainty in the amount of lake sedimentation 
volume (LSV). 


6.3.2 Sources of Uncertainty in Parameters 


From the empirical models employed to estimate 
lake sedimentation above, factors affecting lake 
sedimentation may be attributed to the annual 
sediment inflows such as variation in the values of 
annual average suspended sediment load (Qss:) and 
annual average bed load (Q;»). The uncertainty 
related to the type of incoming sediments can be 
represented as the various percentages of clay, silt and 
sand that is Pc, Pm and Ps, respectively. The different 
composition of incoming sediment would affect the 
estimated specific weight of the sediment, V1 . 


6.3.3 Uncertainty Associated with Incoming Sediment 


Qs, and Qs are inherently uncertain due to the nature 
of sedimentation process. Besides, their 
distributions are estimated from a limited sample of 
data. When data for О» and Qs» are not measured and 
need to be predicted from inflow, a generally 
adopted approach of sediment rating curve can be 
used. This approach, however, introduces extra 
uncertainties through the regression method. The 
particle size distribution of the bed load is used as 
the basis of estimating of the proportion of incoming 
bed load from the suspended data collected at the 
gauging station. 


6.3.4 Uncertainty Associated with Sediment 
Composition 


The sediment entering a lake is generally a mixture 
of clay, silt and sand. The fraction of each type of 
sediment namely, Pc, Pm and Ps, for clay, silt and 
sand respectively varies every year. 


7 ESTIMATION OF EXPECTED LIFE OF 
LAKE 


The computation of lake life provides an idea about 
the time period after which the lake will not be 
useful for water related activities. This may happen 


in two ways, that is, when the water of the lake is 
polluted up to an extent that it cannot be used for all 
practical purposes or the capacity of the lakes is 
reduced due to sedimentation up to an extent that it 
is not possible to meet out the water demand. This 
exercise should be done periodically to understand 
the lake environment and to plan the suitable 
measures timely for lake restoration, if the reduction 
of lake capacity is found at a higher rates or higher 
order of lake eutrophication is observed. The 
expected useful life of the lake is determined by 
dividing mean depth of the lake by weighted average 
rate of sedimentation. However, the validity of 
predicted lake life depends on the accuracy of mean 
depth of the lake. Although, the effect of 
compression of sediments by its weight is 
automatically included partly while estimating the 
rate of sedimentation, for an accurate estimate on the 
useful life of a lake, the effect of compression needs 
to be considered fully. Both 7!°Pb апа !Cs 
geochronological dating are powerful techniques for 
determining recent sediment accumulation rates in 
lakes and indirectly the useful life of them. The lake 
life is estimated taking into account the estimated 
sediment accumulation rates in the single zone and 
the present volume of the lake. The useful life of a 
natural lake is calculated as; 


» Dm X 100 
= R, 
where 


L = useful life of the lake, years; 
Dm = mean depth of the lake, m; and 


R; = rate of sedimentation, cm/year. 


Uncertainty in estimated life of the lake is calculated 
as: 


2 2 

0p OR 

2 = 12 x 100? х | —"4+— 
А es xj 


The mean depth, D is calculated as: 


Uncertainty in estimated mean depth of the lake is 
calculated as: 


2 2 
Oy Од 

Ohm = р2 «(9+3 :) 
S 


where 
Dm = mean depth of the lake, m; 
V = lake volume, m?; and 


А, = Average spread of the lake, m°’. 


8 CONTROL OF LAKE SEDIMENTATION 


The various sediment control methods in lakes can 
be divided into three categories: 


a) Control of sediment generation in the lake 
catchments; 


b) Control of sediment inflow to lakes; and 


c) Sediment removal from lakes. 


First category (a) consists of preventive measures 
while categories (b) and (c) are remedial measures. 
Preventive measures emphasize on reduction of 
sediment generation while controlling measures 
emphasize on reduction of sediment deposition in 
the water bodies. 


8.1 Control of Sediment Generation in Lake 
Catchments 


The primary objective of this method is to reduce 
generation of sediment within the lake catchment 
through control of soil erosion using soil 
conservation practices. Some of the important soil 
conservation practices are: 


8.1.1 Agronomic Practices 


a) Contour ploughing or contour farming; 
b) Terracing or terrace farming; 
c) Covercrops; 
d) Special cropping methods: 
1) Crop rotation, 
2) Strip cropping, 
3) High density cropping, 


4) Growing crops that provide maximum 
cover, 


5) Mixed cropping, and 
6) Inter cropping. 

e) Mulching; 

f) Windbreaks; and 


g) Soil management. 
8.1.2 Engineering Measures 


If the agronomic methods alone are not adequately 
effective, some mechanical measures, also called 
engineering measures may be needed to be adopted 
(one or more) to supplement them. These include: 


a) Basinlisting; 

b) Sub-soiling; 

c) Contour bunding; 

d) Graded bunding or channel terrace; and 


e) Bench terracing. 


IS 19027 : 2023 


8.1.3 Forestry Practices 


a) Rotational grazing; and 


b) Afforestation and reforestation. 


If the lake catchment is not very large, the effect of 
various soil conservation measures can be felt in 
short time. But if vast areas with poor natural 
conditions are involved, the soil conservation works 
can hardly be effective in a short period of time. 


8.2 Control of Sediment Inflow to Lakes 


If control of erosion in the lake catchment is not 
undertaken or fails to provide the requisite results, 
control of amount of sediment inflow to the lake is 
necessary. A large part of the finer particles can be 
prevented by the application of these techniques. 
These techniques include: 


8.2.1 Structural Measures 


In this method reduction of sediment inflow to lakes 
is achieved by constructing various types of 
structures in the catchment. Some of the structures 
are: 


8.2.1.1 Sediment basin 


A sediment basin is a temporary or permanent dam 
or basin or pond used to collect, trap and store 
sediment or as a flow detention facility for reducing 
peak runoff rates and thereby to settle out sediments. 
It is especially used to store sediment produced by 
construction activities. 


a) A temporary sediment basin used in 
combination with other control measures, 
such as mulching, is known to be effective 
for removing sediments; 


b) Sediment basin may not be practical in 
highly erodible soil types (0.01 inch and 
smaller soils, very fine sand, silt and clay) 
due to extremely large basin size 
requirements. In such cases, additional 
control measures such as filter cloth around 
the pond riser should be used to minimize 
release of fine silts; 

c) Iffilter cloth is used, regular inspection and 
replacement is required to deal with 
clogging; and 

d) A sediment basin should not be located in 
any active stream channel. 


8.2.1.2 Sediment trap 
A sediment trap is a temporary structure, basically 


an embankment built along a waterway or low-lying 
area, generally used on a construction site in the lake 


IS 19027 : 2023 


catchment, to capture eroded or disturbed soil that is 
washed off during rain storms. 


a) They are typically installed at the perimeter 
of a site and above storm drain inlets; 


b) They are commonly used оп small 
construction sites, where a sediment basin 
is not practical; 


c) They are installed before land disturbance 
(earth moving, grading) begins on a 
construction site; and 


d) They are often used in conjunction with 
erosion controls and other sediment control 
practices. 


8.2.1.3 Check dams or gully plugs 


A check dam, also called gully plug, is a small, 
sometimes temporary dam, constructed across a 
swale, drainage ditch, or waterway to reduce water 
flow velocity by flattening the gradient of the 
channel. Although, check dams do not primarily 
function as sediment trapping devices, some 
sedimentation may result behind the dam. 


a) They are generally used when other flow- 
control practices, such as lining the channel 
is impractical; 

b) They are commonly used in degrading 
temporary channels, in which permanent 
stabilization is impractical and infeasible, 
in terms of resource allocation and funding 
due to the short life period; 


c) They are used when construction delays 
and weather conditions prevent timely 
installation of other erosion control 
practices; 


d) They serve as temporary grade-control 
mechanisms along waterways until resolute 
stabilization is established or along 
permanent swales that need protection 
prior to installation of a non-erodible 
lining; 

e) They remove coarse and medium size 
sediment from runoff. However, most fine 
silt and clay particles will pass over or 
through the voids on these structures; 


f) Primarily, check dams diminish loads 
flowing out of the gully mouth. They raise 
the gully channels and flatten the gully 
bottom so that various types of erosion are 
weakened and checked; 


g) The size and shape of a drainage area, as 
well as the length and gradient of its slopes, 
have an effect on the run-off rate and 
amount of surface water. Therefore, all 
topographic characteristics should be 
studied in detail before gully-plugging 


work begins. There are several designs for 
how check dams should be constructed; 


h) The kind of gully plug that should be 
constructed depends on the local situation 
(what kind of material is available, slope 
gradient, is it a permanent solution, what 
tasks are intended); 


jp In general, woven-wire, brushwood, logs, 
loose stone and boulder are used in check 
dams to facilitate the growth of permanent 
vegetative cover; and 


k) Check dams are typically, though not 
always, implemented as a system of several 
check dams situated at regular intervals 
across the area of interest. In a series of 
check dams, the top centre of the 
downstream check dam should be at the 
same elevation as that of the bottom of the 
upstream check dam. 


The spacing between the two check dams can be 
calculated by multiplying the height of the check 
dam by the slope factor Н: V or by dividing by the 
slope percentage. 


Check dams require periodic repair and 
maintenance. Maintenance of check dams involves: 


a) Inspection of check dams and drainage 
ways for damage after each runoff event, 
correct all damages immediately; 


b) Ifsignificant erosion occurs between dams, 
additional protection may be required. This 
may include protective riprap liner in that 
portion of the channel or placing additional 
check dams; 


c) Remove sediment accumulated behind the 
dams to prevent damage to channel 
vegetation; and 


d) Add rock or remove rock as needed to 
maintain design height, cross section, and 
flow-through characteristics. 


8.2.2 Vegetative Screen 


This is a very effective method wherein vegetative 
screens are located immediately upstream of the lake 
to trap and prevent sediment from entering the lake. 
However, its disadvantages are that sediment 
deposited leads to progressive deposition of delta 
and increased vegetation is likely to increase the 
water consumption. The effectiveness of the method 
depends on the vegetation type and the length of the 
vegetation filter strip. While vegetation type affects 
the run-off reduction, the length of vegetation filter 
strip affects the sediment trapping performance. 


8.2.3 Bypassing of Heavily Sediment-Laden Flows 


This method involves construction of bypassing 
channels or conduits to bypass large part of the flow, 


before they enter the lake, when a great amount of 
sediment is carried by inflowing river/stream, 
particularly during flood periods. 


8.2.4 Measures within the Water Body to Control 
Sediment Inflow 


Besides the above structural measures which are 
undertaken outside the lake or within the 
catchments, certain measures are undertaken within 
the water body itself. These are: 


8.2.4.1 Revetments 


Revetments are used as stabilization structures to 
line the lake banks to absorb the energy of water and 
prevent erosion and subsequent sediment deposition 
in lakes. The materials used for this purpose include 
wooden piles, loose-piled boulders or concrete for 
more solid banks. 


a) Revetments are always made as sloping 
structures. Normally, 1 : 2 slope is used in 


revetments; 
b) Very often constructed as permeable 
structures to enhance wave energy 


absorption and minimizing reflection and 
wave run-up; 


c) Can also consist of different kinds of 
concrete slabs, some of them are permeable 
and have interlocking, to increase their 
functionality in terms of absorption and 
strength; 


d) Should not be used at locations, where the 
lake shore is used for recreation or fishing 
activities due to unsuitability of such slopes 
for the purpose; 


e) Ifrevetment is required on lake banks used 
for recreational use or for the landing or 
hauling of small fishing boats, a more 
gently sloping structure with a smooth 
surface is recommended; 


f) If revetments consist of  sand-filled 
geotextile fabric bags, mattresses and 
tubes, they must be protected against UV- 
light to avoid weathering of the fabric as 
the fabric is fragile against mechanical 
impact; and 

g) As far as possible, sand-bagging be used 
only as emergency protection as their 
appearance is not natural. 


8.2.4.2 Turbidity curtains 


A turbidity curtain, also called ‘turbidity barrier’ or 
‘silt curtain’, is a flexible, impermeable barrier used 
to trap sediment in water bodies. 


a) А turbidity curtain is generally used when 
construction activity occurs within a water 


11 


IS 19027 : 2023 


body or along its shoreline and is of short 
duration, generally less than one month; 


b) They are meant for use in calm water 
surfaces; 


c) This curtain is generally weighted at the 
bottom to ensure that sediment does not 
travel under the curtain. 


d) They work on the principle of settlement of 
suspended matter; 


e) They can fail when subjected to significant 
water flows or wave action; 


f) They cannot be used as a filter across the 
inflowing stream flow; 


g) They should be oriented parallel to the 
direction of flow; 


h) There is also some possible mobilization of 
fine sized settled particles after removal; 


j) For lakes/lake shores not subject to heavy 
wave action, the curtain height shall 
provide sufficient slack to allow the top of 
the curtain to rise to the maximum expected 
high-water level (including waves) while 
the bottom maintains continuous contact 
with the bottom of the water body; 


k) For lakes/lake shores subject to heavy wave 
action, the curtain height should provide 
sufficient slack to allow the top of the 
curtain to rise to the maximum expected 
high-water level (including waves) while 
the bottom remains one foot above the 
bottom, so that the curtain does not stir up 
sediment by repeatedly striking the bottom; 


m) The curtain should be constructed of 
nonwoven material of bright colours, so as 
to attract the attention of boaters or 
swimmers using areas near the curtain site; 


n) The various material used for fabrication of 
turbidity curtain include rope or cable with 
floats, pre-manufactured turbidity barrier 
(which generally consists of a woven 
geotextile with a polymer coat); and 


p) The turbidity curtain need to be inspected 
daily and repaired or replaced immediately, 
if so required. 


8.3 Sediment Removal 
This method is used if prevention of sediment flow 
does not yield desirable results. Two important 


methods in this category are: 


8.3.1 Lake Drawdown Followed by Bulldozer and 
Scraper Excavation 


This method needs that water must be pumped or 
drained from the lake sufficiently so that earth 


IS 19027 : 2023 


moving equipment can be operated successfully. It 
is generally suitable only for small lakes. 


8.3.2 Dredging 


Although commonly used as a synonym, desilting 
means the removal of silt from the lake while 
dredging refers to the technique employed for the 
purpose. The information on sediment deposit zones 
in lakes, if available, can be used for determining the 
areas of desilting of the lake. Depth of dredging 
depends upon the purpose of dredging. Dredging is 
considered as the most effective of all the sediment 
control methods. Modern dredging equipment are 
reasonably efficient at removing large volumes of 
sediment. lake filled with sediments and not suitable 
for boating, swimming, fishing etc, dredging can be 
only option to restore the lake. Size of the lake does 
not pose any constraint for dredging. However, cost 
benefit ratio and lifespan of benefits is likely to be 
more for large lakes with small catchment than for 
small lakes with large catchments. 


Since total cost of dredging project is generally 
calculated on the basis of sediment removal, it is 
necessary to estimate the amount and type of 
sediment contained in the lake basin using the 
hydrographic data. 


8.3.2.1 Types of Dredgers 


a) Mechanical dredgers — Most common are 
grab type dredgers. They must discharge in 
the immediate vicinity of the sediment 
removal area. They are normally limited to 
a reach of not more than 30 m to 40 m. 
They create uneven bottom and turbid 
water conditions. Turbidity curtains may be 
used to overcome the turbidity problem. 


b) Hydraulic dredgers — Several types of 
hydraulic dredgers are in use such as 
suction dredge, hopper, dustpan and the 
cutter head suction dredge. Their suitability 
varies as per use. For example, hopper 
dredges are impractical for small inland 
lakes. Cutter head suction dredge is most 
popular for use in inland lakes. 


Hydraulic dredgers are not confined in 
operation by limitation of cable reaches 
like the mechanical dredgers. They can be 
operated continuously. However, slurry 
removed by these dredgers contains only 
about 20 percent solids and rest is water 
which means that they require large 
disposal areas. 


c) Special purpose dredgers — They are used 
for removal of very fine sediments or 


contaminated sediment from lakes that 
have soft and, viscous sediments. They 
operate on the principle that sediment and 
water, under hydrostatic pressure, will be 
forced into pump body which is maintained 
at atmospheric pressure. Filling efficiency, 
therefore, increases with depth as 
hydrostatic pressure increases. However, at 
depth less than 10 m hydrostatics pressure 
is insufficient to operate the system. 


8.3.2.2 Disadvantages of dredging 


a) Costly; 
b) Can cause adverse impacts on aquatic 
ecosystems; 


c) Dredge spoils may contain toxic chemicals 
that may have an adverse effect on the 
disposal area; 


d) Dredging often dislodges chemicals 
residing in benthic substrates and injects 
them into the water column; 


e) Short term increases in turbidity due to 
resuspension of bottom sediment, which 
can affect aquatic species metabolism and 
interfere with spawning; and 


f) Problem of disposal of the dredged material. 
8.3.2.3 Selection of dredge 


Selection of dredge depends on several variables 
like availability, project time constraints, slurry 
transport distances, discharge head, and physical and 
chemical characteristics of the dredged material. 


8.3.2.4 Disposal of sediment 


The major problems associated with the disposal of 
dredged material are: 


a) Ensuring the availability of a sufficient 
disposal area for initial and future 
maintenance dredging within a reasonable 
(economically feasible) distance of the 
dredging operations; and 

b) Potential adverse environmental effects 
associated with the disposal of dredged 
material, including an increase in turbidity, 
the resuspension of contaminated sediment 
and a decrease in dissolved oxygen. 


Primary factor controlling the design of disposal 
area is the amount of dredged material that must be 
contained. Since there are lot of suspended 
sediments in the slurry, factors such as sediment 
grain size, specific gravity, plasticity and settling 
characteristics of the dredged material must also be 
considered in the design. 


IS 19027 : 2023 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Reservoirs and Lakes Sectional Committee, WRD 10 


Organization 


National Institute of Hydrology, Roorkee 
Bhakra Beas Management Board, Chandigarh 


Central Water and Power Research Station, Pune 


Central Water Commission, New Delhi 


Department of Water Resources, Government of 
Punjab 


Department of Water Resources, Government of 
Odisha 


Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee 


Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai 


Irrigation Research Institute, Roorkee 

J&K Lakes and Water Way Development Authority, 
Srinagar 

Maharashtra Engineering Research Institute, Nashik 


Narmada Water Resources, 
Kalpasar, Gandhinagar 


Water Supply & 


National Institute of Hydrology, Roorkee 


National Remote Sensing Centre, Hyderabad 


National Thermal Power Corporation Limited, 
New Delhi 


National Water Academy, Pune 


National Water Development Agency, New Delhi 


National Hydroelectric Power 


Faridabad 


Corporation, 


Representative(s) 


DR SUDHIR KUMAR DIRECTOR (Chairperson) 
ER HUSHAN LAL KAMBOJ 
DR NEENA ISAAC 

SHRI SRISHAILAM (Alternate I) 


DR V. M. PRABHAKAR (Alternate П) 


SHRI GOVERDHAN PRASAD 
SHRIS. S. BONAL (Alternate) 


SHRI PAWAN KAPOOR 
SHRI К. К. GUPTA (Alternate I) 
SHRIN. К. JAIN (Alternate II) 


CHIEF ENGINEER ( D & R) 
DIRECTOR (HEAD WORKS) (Alternate) 


PROF ARUN KUMAR 
PROF SUMIT SEN (Alternate) 


DR V. JOTHIPRAKASH 


SHRI DINESH CHANDRA 
SHRI SHANKAR KUMAR SAHA (Alternate) 


EXECUTIVE ENGINEER 


SHRI Y ASHAVANT RAO BHADANE 


SHRI R. M. PATEL 
SHRI D. N. PRADHAN (Alternate) 


DR M. K. GOEL 
DR S. D. KHOBRAGADE (Alternate) 


DR V. VENKATESHWAR RAO 
SHRI ABDUL HAKEEM (Alternate) 


SHRI RAKESH SHARMA 
DR A. К. SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHOK KUMAR KHARYA 
SHRI S. N. PANDE (Alternate) 


SHRI К. К. JAIN 
SHRI S. C. AWASTHI (Alternate) 


MS MANJUSHA MISHRA 
MS ANKUR SHARMA (Alternate I) 
SHRI PRAVEEN KUMAR JAIN (Alternate IT) 


IS 19027 : 2023 


Organization 


Water Resources Department, Government of 
Madhya Pradesh 

Sardar Sarovar Narmada Nigam Limited, 
Gandhinagar 


Satluj Jal Vidyut Nigam Limited, Shimla 


Tehri  Hydel Development 
Limited, Rishikesh 


Corporation India 


Water and Power Consultancy Services Limited, 
New Delhi 
of 


Water Resources Government 


Maharashtra 


Department, 

Water Resources Department, Government of Andhra 
Pradesh 

Wetlands International South Asia, New Delhi 

In Personal Capacity, (55/2 Amond Path, ПТ 
Roorkee Campus, Roorkee - 247667) 


In Personal Capacity (5/4, IVA, Paschimabad, 
Multistorey JNU, New Delhi - 110067) 


In Personal Capacity (Panya Sadana, 173, 3rd 
A Main D Block, Vijay Nagar 3rd Stage Mysore 
- 570030) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


SHRI B. C. PURANDARE 
SHRIS. R. UIKEY (Alternate) 


SHRIC. V. NADPARA 
SHRI К. С. KANOONGO (Alternate) 


SHRI VINAY GULERIA 
SHRIMATI SUDHA DEVI (Alternate) 


SHRI VIRENDRA SINGH 
SHRI ATUL KUMAR SINGH (Alternate) 


DR A. K. SHARMA 
SHRI A. STEPHEN LEO (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJESH M. MORE 
SHRI A. P. KOHIKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI A. SURI BABU 
DR RITESH KUMAR DIRECTOR 

SHRI HARSH GANAPATHI (Alternate) 
PROF M. L. KANSAL 


DR A. L. RAMANATHAN 


PROF JAGANNATHA V. 


SHRIR. BHANU PRAKASH, SCIENTIST ‘E’/DIRECTOR 
AND HEAD (WATER RESOURCES) [REPRESENTING 
DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI NAVDEEP YADAV 
SCIENTIST ‘B’/ASSISTANT DIRECTOR 
(WATER RESOURCES), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: WRD 10 (16243). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8% Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


