( Reaffirmed 2001 )

IS :10473-1983

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR C-LOUD SEARCHLIGHT

Meteorological
Chairman SHRI S. K. DAS Members

Instruments

Sectonal

Committee,
Representing

EDC

69

India Meteorological

Department,

New Delhi

DR G. P. SRIVASTAVA ( Alternate to Shri S. K. Das) National Instruments Ltd. Calcutta SHRI S.N. CHATTOPADHYAY SHRI BISWANATH MITRA ( Alternate ) Associated Manufacturers & Suppliers, Ahmadabad SBRI NARES~ DALWADI SHRI KIRIT M. DESAI ( Alternate ) DEPUTY DIRECTOR ( METEORO- Indian Navy LOaY ) Designs & Standards Organization JOINT DIRECTOR, RESEARCE (B&F) Research ( Ministry of Railways ), Lucknow DEPUTY DIRECTOR, RESEARCH (B&F) ( Alternate ) AIR CMDE S. LAKSHMINARAYANAN Indian Air Force Wa CDR R. K. PALIWAL ( Alternate ) Instruments Organization Central Scientific SHRI S. K. MACO ( CSIR ), Chandigarh SHRI R. K. JAIN ( Alternate ) Lawrence & Mayo ( India ) Pvt Ltd, Bombay SHRI J. M~NDONSA SHRI R. RAJAQOPALAN ( Alternate ) National Environmental -Engineering Research SHRI V. S. S. BHASXARAMURTY Institute, Nagpur SHRI M. K. Rxnov ( Alternate) Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi SHRI R. NARASIMEAN All Indie Instrument Manufacturers and Dealers SHRI H. C. VERMA Association, Bombay SHRI J. MENDONSA ( Alternate ) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-o$cio Member ) SHRI S. CHANDRASEERARAN, Director ( Mech Engg ) Secretary SHRI S. P. ABBEY Deputy Director ( Mech Engg ), IS1

Q Copyright 1983 INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Ad ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS :10473 - 1983

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR CLOUD SEARCHLIGHT
0. FOREWORD
the Indian Standards draft finalized by the had been approved by

0.1 This Tndian Standard was adopted by Institution on 24 February 1983, after the Meteorological Instruments Sectional Committee the Mechanical Engineering Division Council.

0.2 The accurate measurement of the height of cloud base is of very great importance in meteorological practice, as well as in aviation agriculture, shipping and in many other fields. The simplest and most common method of measuring this parameter is either (a) by letting off ceiling balloons with an assumed fixed rate of ascent and determining the time interval between the let off of the balloon and its disappearance into the cloud aloft, or (b) by means of a cloud searchlight, focussing a vertical beam of light to the base of the cloud and measuring the angle subtended by the patch of light where it intercepts the cloud base, with a clinometer assuming that the searchlight and the clinometer are at the ends of a The latter method is meant for use base line whose length is known. during nights while the former is generally used during day time. 0.3 Cloud searchlights are in use at some important meteorological stations and specially at most of the national aeronautical mateorological With the increasing, use and manufacture of this instrument in stations. the country, the formulation of this Indian Standard has been considered This standard has, therefore, been prepared in the interest of necessary. accuracy in the measurement of the height of base of cloud and of standardization in the manufacture of the cloud searchlight. 0.4 In the formulation of this standard, due considerationhas been given to the requirements laid down by the World Meteorological Organization, Geneva, in addition to the special requirements obtained in this country. 0.5 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this or calculated, standard is complied with, the final value, observed expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in The number of significant places retained accordance with IS : 2-1960*. in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.
*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised).

.

2

IS : 10473 - 1983 1. SCOPE 1.1 This
complete holder. standard specifies the requirements for the cloud mirror and electric with the parabolic reflecting searchlight, bulb with

2. DESCRIPTION 2.1 The cloud searchlight
consists of a substantial horizontal base plate of cast aluminium, fitted with levellinp screws and a circular spirit level. A parabolic glass mirror is fixed in an aluminium ring which can be A projecting platform on one side suitably mounted on the base plate. of the base plate supports a projector lamp horizontally over the centre of the mirror. Fine adjustment of the position of the lamp in three mutually perpendicular directions is provided by means of the lamp focussing gear. A case made of mild steel sheet protects the lamp and mirror and is The top of the case has a sloping glass bolted down to the base plate. cover which drains away any water falling on it. The projecting platform on one side is covered on all sides and encloses the focussing gear It is provided with a cover to facilitate adjustments and cleaning without A series of concentric metal rings set removal of the main circular case. over the mirror and lamp on supporting arms serve to intercept light inclined at more than 4" to the axis of the mirror.

3. TYPE 3.1 The cloud searchlight 4. MATERIAL 4.1 The base plate, the mirror frame, the main components of the lamp focussing gear, the three shoes for the adjustable feet, the frame for the cover glass, the inspection box and its cover shall all be made from good quality aluminium.
4.2 The main case shall be made from mild steel. shall also be made from thicker mild steel sheet. 4.3 The parabolic reflector shall be of silvered cover glass shall be made of armoured glass. Similarly the top ring shall generally be of the type shown in Fig. 1.

glass or metal

while the

4.4 All studs, screws, clamps, washers and also some of the components of the lamp focussing gear such as vertical and horizontal guides, vertical and lateral columns, lamp focussing clamp, adjusting nuts, etc ( sea Fig. 2 ) shall-be of hard brass or gun metal. The cylindrical tubes with the three supporting arms ( see Fig. 3 ) shall also be of brass. 3

IS : 10473- 1983
lower packing rings for the reflector and the bottom packing pieces for the armoured glass cover shall be made of asbestos, while the top packing pieces of the reflector and the top packing ring of the armoured glassPcover shall be made of rubber. 5. DIMENSIONS 5.1 The general cloud searchlight 6. GENERAL 6.1 Base Plate arrangement, nomenclature shall be as shown in Fig. REQUIREMENTS ( see Fig. 1 ). and main 1, 2 and 3. dimensions of the

4.5 The

6.1.1 The base plate shall be a substantial aluminium casting suitably ribbed for strength. Three adjustable feet with hexagons and hexagon The feet shall rest on a flat cap locknuts shall be fitted to it for levelling. surface and shall be held down by three shoes which shall be bolted to a Three studs shall be concrete platform with three foundation bolts each. provided in the base plate for supporting the mirror frame which shall rest on three springs and allow for adjusting the levelling of the mirror. The surface meant for the case to sit on, shall be machined and provided with suitable packing for the case to seat on. The packing shall be fitted on to the base plate by means of 36 grooved studs. 6.1.2 Two holes, one large and another small, shall be provided on the projecting portion of the base plate to accommodate the vertical -pillars of the lamp focussing gear. These holes shall be accurately spaced and positioned with the space surrounding them machined smooth and level. 6.1.3 circular 6.1.4 Two holes in the projecting shelf and six forked lugs in the portion shall be provided for fitting the case on to the base plate. All the upper surfaced Assembly parts shall be in one plane.

6.2 Mirror

( see Fig.

1 ).

6.2.1 The mirror or reflector shall be parabolic and optically ground It shall be silvered from clear colourless glass free from optical defects. The material of the glass on the back and lead backed for protection. shall be of the very best quality. 6.2.1.1 Alternatively the reflector may also be of high quality aluminium coated with a highly polished reflecting metal surface having shall be The shape, however, reflectivity similar to the glass mirror. strictly parabolic. 6.2.2 The reflector, either glass or metal, shall have a focal length of 200 mm & 2 mm; overall diameter of 425 mm and thickness of 6.3 mm. 4

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

ADJUSTING LATERAL 1 RAVELLING H ADJUSTING IZONTAL GUIDE

4

i

_.
I

All dimensions in millimetres.

FIG. 2

DIMENSIONSAND ASSEMBLY OF

LAMP FOCUSSING GEAR FOR

CLOUD

SEARCHLIGHT

5; G

IS:10473 - 1983

INDRICAL

TUEE

I-A

All dimensions in millimetres. FIG. 3 DIMENSIONSFOR CYLINDRICAL TUBES FOR CLOUD SEARCHLIGHT

n

IS : 10473 - 1983 When assembled inside the searchlight on the mirror frame and mirror clamps, the effective diameter of the reflector shall be very close to 400 mm. The optical axis of the reflector shall be adjusted to be vertical when the bubble of the spirit level on the base plate is in the central pasition. 6.2.3 The reflector ( mirror) shall rest on a flange in an aluminium ring with a ring of asbestos packing in between. The ring shall be cast from aluminium and finished to such a dimension as to take the mirror snugly without any strain whatsoever. Six clamps bent up from hard brass strip shall be screwed to the mirror frame for holding the mirror in position. Six soft rubber strips of minimum necessary size shall be placed between the clamps and the reflector. The aluminium ring shall carry three lugs to fit over the three studs in the base. Three springs made from stainlesq steel wire shall be provided for supporting the weight of the mirror and to facilitate its levelling. 6.3 Lamp Focussing Gear ( see Fig. 2 ).

'

6.3.1 The main components of the lamp focussing gear shall be cast from aluminium. It shall consist of two vertical columns carrying a vertical travelling head. One of the columns shall be hollow and threaded externally. The other, acting as the vertical guide, shall be plain. A pair of nuts, one above and one beloti the head, shall be provided to allow for a minimum of 30 mm adjustment and for locking it in position after the adjustment. 6.3.2 The vertical travelling head shall carry a screwed stem and plain guide along which shall travel the lateral travelling head. The position of the lateral travelling head shall be capable of at least 30 mm adjustment and locked after adjustment by means of two nuts. 6.3.3 The lateral travelling head shall in turn carry a screwed stem and plain guide along which one more travelling head ismounted. A face plate shall be carried on this travelling head movable to a minimum distance of 30 mm. The face plate, on to which is fitted the lamp holder shall be capable of being rotated and fixed by means of a clamp. 6.3.4 vertical 6.4 The distance between the axis of the travelling head shall be 305.5 mm. and aolder mirror and the axis of the

Lamp

6.4.1 The lamp holder shall be screwed to the face plate which shall be capable of being adjusted in three mutually perpendicular directions. The lamp holder shall be suitable to the bulb being provided, 9

IS:10473-

1983 with a screw in shape.

6.4.2 The bulb shall be incandescent, 24 volts, 500 Watt, cap and small filament. Its main portion shall be spherical

6.4.3 The leads to the lamp shall pass through the hollow centre of the face plate and screwed stem and then through the hollow vertical column to the outside of the case in order to ensure proper protection to the leads. Good quality PVC cable capable of carrying 500 W load shall be used from the transformer secondary to the lamp. 6.5 Case

6.5.1 The case shall be constructed of minimum 2 mm thick mild steel plate with welded joint or of a minimum 3 mm thick single pi&ce aluminium moulding. A portion of the case shall be cut away at one side and the hole covered by a cast aluminium inspection box with removable cover. The top surface of the case shall be inclined at 20" to the horizontal. 6.5.2 The lower edge of the steel case shall be stiffened with a strip of steel rivetted on to it. The complete bottom surface shall then be suitably finished. The case shall be held down by six threaded eye bolts fixed to its outer surface which shall be locked inside the forked lugs of the base plate through wing nuts. The case shall also sit~on two brass studs fixed in bosses in the aluminium inspection box. 6.6 Cylindrical Tubes ( see Fig. 3 ).

6.6.1 A set of five cylindrical tubes mounted on three supporting arms shall be provided over the bulb of the lamp. The supporting arms shall be screwed to the inner surface of the case. When assembled and fitted, the tubes shall be truly vertical and the inner set of tubes shall be at a height of about 285 mm from the base of the case. 6.6.2 The outer and inner surfaces arms shall be painted black. 6.7 Cover Glass and Top Ring of the tubes as well as the supporting

( see Fig.

1 ).

6.7.1 The cover glass, suitable soft a steel ring steel ring.

case shall support at top a circular piece of armoured plate The glass shall have 460 mm in diameter and 6 mm thick. rubber packing at its top and asbestos at its bottom, between machined to fit inside the top of the case and an L-shaped in a circle above the

6.7.2 The cover glass is located by a ring of studs arranged over the elliptical sloping surface of the steel ring. The packing 10

1s : iO473 - 1983
glass cover as well as the L-shaped steel ring on top shall leave a clear gap in the lower portion to drain away any water from the surface of the cover glass. 7. WORKMANSHIP AND FINISH

7.1 The workmanship of the cloud searchlight shall be such that when assembled and connected up to a 230 V ac mains through a 24 volts transformer, and adjusted properly, the instrument throws up a sharp, bright and truly vertical beam of light that is capable of illuminating any patch of cloud that is present above it clearly and sharply. 7.2 The beam of light shall be sharp, intense and not d&used, with the width of the beam not much greater than the diameter of the reflector. 7.3 The external metal parts shall have two coats of good quality and light battleship grey finishing paint. 7.4 The inside of the case, and all internal black matt finish paint over primer. 8. SETTING 8.1 The adjusted optical axis of the parabolic mirror shall be capable to be truly vertical by proper levelling of the mirror. of being metal fittings primer

shall have dull

8.2 The filament of the lamp shall be on the axis of the mirror at the principal focus. This shall be ensured by suitable adjustments of the lamp focussing gear. 8.3 The verticality of the beam of light as checked by a theodolite other suitable instrument, shall be within f lo of true vertical. 9. ACCURACY 9.1 For a base line of 300 metres, the error in the height for an error of 1" in the angle of elevation is of the order of 5'3 metres at low heights, rising to 10.7 metres when the height is about 300 metres and to 137 metres The cloud searchlight shall not when the height is about 1 500 metres. cause inaccuracies greater than the above. or any

10. MARKING 10.1 Marking 10.1.1 Each
neatly

AND

PACKING

searchlight shall bear the following inscriptions engraved and legibly on a metal plate screwed on to the case in front: of the instrument, viz., " Clound 11 searchlight ";

a) Name

IS:10473-1983
b) Serial number 1981 "; and c) Manufacturer's mark. and year of manufacture name or recognised may for example if any. " No. 123-

trade-mark,

10.1.2 The

instrument

also be marked

with the IS1 Certification

NOTE - The use of the IS1 Certification Mark is eoverned bv the nrovisions of the Indian Standards Institution (Certification Marks) Act and the' Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The IS1 Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by ISI and operated by the producer. IS1 marked products are also continuously checked by ISI for conformity Details of conditions under which a licence to that standard as a further safeguard. for the use of the ISI Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers or processors, may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution.

10.2 Packing 10.2.1 The instrument shall be packed very carefully after removing the The reflector and lamp being very delicate and reflector and the lamp. breakable, shall be packed separately with sufficient soft packing material, to withstand all normal transit risks.
10.2.2 The searchlight along with the 2 packages containing the mirror and the lamp shall be packed securedly inside a strong wooden box with sufficient supports and packing material, both at top and on all sides. 10.2.3 Alternatively, reflector and the lamp, and the manufacturer. the instrument may be packed with the delicate components, the as agreed between the purchaser

11. TESTING

AND

INSPECTION
individually for conformity to all

11.1 Each instrument shall be tested the requirements of this specification.

_

12

