**************** 



-k t^^ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 10466 (1983) : Guide for care and maintenance of carpets 
[TXD 4: Wool and Wool Products] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS : 10486 - 19S3 

Indian Standard 

GUIDE FOR 
CARE AND MAINTENANCE OF CARPETS 



UDC 077-643-00I-5 




© Copyright ISB'^ 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADl'R SHAH MFAR MARG 
NEW DEI.m 1I00O2 

Gr 3 July 1983 



AMENDMENT NO. 1 JUNE 2003 

TO 

IS 10466:1983 GUIDE FOR CARE AND 

MAINTENANCE OF CARPETS 

(Page 4, douse 3J,4, line 4 ) - Substitute "dry floor' for *diy grass'. 
(Page 4, clause 3*4, line 6 ) — Substitute *Iatex/rubbcrV<>'' 'rubber*. 
(Page 5, clause 4X line i) — Substitute 'spilt V^'' *split'. 



(TX04) 



Repittgfiphy Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 



IS 1 10466 - lfB3 

Indian Standard 

GUIDE FOR 
CARE AND MAINTENANCE OF CARPETS 

Textile Floor Coverings Sectional Committee, TDC 36 

Chairman Representing 

Sh&i Shihomanx Sharma Ministry of Commerce 

Members 
Shrimati Rathi VinayJha ( Alternate to 
Shrt Shiromani Sharma ) 
Shbi a. T. Basak Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals 

( Inspection Wing ), New Delhi 
Shri p. K. Basu ( Alternate ) 
Shri a. M. BiSATi Modern Carpet Co, Srinagar 

SuBi G. R. DttABOO Industries & Commerce Directorate, Government 

of Jummu & Kashiiur 
Shri R. N. Gupta Bharat Carpets Limited, New Delhi 

Shri Sniv Dayal Kapoor Krishna Kapoor & Co, Amritsar 

Shri J. K. Kuanna All India Carpet Manufacturers' Association, 

Bhadohi, Uttar Pradesh 
Shri B. B. Kumau Obeetco Private Ltd, Mirzapur 

Shri C. K. Mehrotua Export Inspection Council of India, Calcutta 

Shri S. S. Naidu E. Hill & Company Pvt Ltd, Mirzapur 

Shri K. L. Pruthi India Tourism Development Corporation Ltd, 

New Delhi 
Repre8»ntativb The Handicrafts & Handlooms Export 

Corporation of India Ltd, New Delhi 
Shri S. S. Sharma Office of the Development Commissioner for 

Handicrafts, New Delhi 
Shri M, V. Shivananua Directorate of Industries, Government of Uttar 

Pradesh, Kanpur 
Shri S. P. Dhaudiyal ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. M. Chakrabohty, Director General, LSI ( Ex-officw Member ) 

Director ( Tex ) 

Secretary 

SlIKI S, Bankkji 

Deputy Director ( Trx ), ISI 



© Copyright 1983 
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication ii protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to bean infringement of copyright under the said Act 



IS 1 10466 - 1983 

Indian Standard 

GUIDE FOR 
CARE AND MAINTENANCE OF CARPETS 

0. FO R E W O R D 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 15 March 1983, after the draft finalized by the Textile Floor 
Coverings Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textile 
Division Council. 

0.2 Carpets may be expensive or inexpensive in their initial cost, 
nevertheless, these are expected to look well and wear evenly. Carpets 
are subjected to much harsher conditions of use than other textile 
materials. Proper care enhances their useful life. The carpets, if 
properly maintained, would continue to be graceful and bright for a long 
period. This standard therefore expected to be of great help to the 
ultimate users of carpets. Some important hints for care of carpets in the 
form of "DO'S" and ** DON'TS " from this standard are given in 
Appendix A, which, if followed, would ensure better serviceability of 
carpets. 

0,3 In the preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from 
*The Care of Carpets', issued by the Federation of British Carpet 
Manufacturers (1960) and the British Carpet Centre. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard gives guidance on carpet laying, care and maintenance 
and removal of stains in Sections 1, II and III respectively, which, if 
observed, would help in increasing the useful life of the carpet. 



SECTION 1 



2. CARPET LAYING 



2.1 The carpets should be laid on flat and level surface, otherwise undue 
wear in certain places would result. Uneven surfaces, carpet turned 
under ( that is, folded ) or electrical cable laying under the carpet would 
cause rapid wear on carpet surface above such portions. 



IS : 10466 - 1983 

2.2 If old wooden floors are very uneven, these should be levelled off. 
The loose floor boards should be properly fixed and the protruding nails 
should be pulled out or hammered flat before laying the carpet: 

2.3 It is preferable to use an underlay before laying the carpet oi^ any 
surface. This prolongs the life of the carpets, which would be more 
evident in case of finer carpets having shorter pile. A good qunlity 
underlay helps to retain warmth and gives added resilience. The underlay 
also helps in minimising the eflfects of an uneven surface. 

2.3.1 While laying the underlay care should be exercised to spread it 
evenly. When it is laid side by side no gaps should be left nor the 
overlappings or creasings in the carpet should occur. The pile 
immediately adjacent to the seams of a sewn carpet is usually the first 
place to show wear and the underlay helps to reduce this effect. 

2.4 It is advisable to change the position of the carpet now and then to 
equalise the wearing. To obtain maximum durability, the wear should 
be spread over as equally as possible over the entire area of the carpet in 
use. A square carpet can be turned four times through 90 degrees while 
a rectangular carpet can be changed end for end. If heavy furniture like 
sofas, heavy tables, etc are placed over the carpet, a rearrangement will 
prevent excessive wear and tear. 

2.5 The laying of the carpets at such a place where there is dampness or 
receives bright sunlight continuously should be avoided. When the carpet 
is not in use, it is advisable to clean, dry and roll it up neatly. It should 
never be folded. 

2.6 While laying the carpet on stairs, care be exercised that the direction 
of the pile is downwards. It is advisable to buy an extra length of carpet 
so that it can be moved .up or down at intervals to equalise the wear. 

2.6.1 The staircases should have well rounded and not sharp nosings to 
the stairs. It is preferable to have a fitting that grips the carpet across 
its full width rather than clips which merely hold the carpet at the edges. 

2.6.2 Always lay stair carpets with good underlay in the form of 
runners or individual stair pads. 

SECTION II 

3. CARE AND MAINTENANCE 

3.1 The frequency of cleaning of a carpet would depend upon thiR type 
and extent of traffic to which it is subjected and also the rate of deposit 
from the environments. Dust and dirt^ if allowed to remain, become 



IS s 10466 -1983 

embedded in the tufts where it acts as an abrasive and thereby causes a 
gradual disintegration of the pile yarn. The use of carpet in a damp 
condition considerably accelerates this action as wool is less resistant to 
wear in a moist state and also becomes degraded by bacterial action. 

3.2 Periodical use of disinfectant on underlays and carpets also helps in 
protecting carpet from damage. 

3.3 Daily Cleaning 

3.3.1 Dust, dirt, threads, crumbs and other dry litter should be removed 
regularly both to minimise damage to the carpet and also to maintain its 
appearance. A broom or brush or carpet sweeper is reasonably effective, 
but the brush in particular raises dust most of which resettles on the 
carpet. Damping the carpets for laying the dust is not desirable as the 
colours of the carpet can be adversely affected. The brushes should be 
kept clean and not allowed to become matted with threads, hair, etc 
which is likely to have a detrimental effect on a carpet. 

3.3.2 For cleaning the carpets with broom, brush or carpet sweeper, 
apply the stroke only towards the direction of pile. 

3.3.3 A vacuum cleaner in addition to removing dust, dirt and other 
litter also agitates and thereby raises the pile. A vacuum cleaner should 
always be operated at a slow speed as it is so designed that it gives 
maximum efficiency with a slow movement. 

3.3.4 The carpets should not be beaten or shaken severely. The use 
of a vacuum cleaner and carpet sweeper is best for small carpets with 
occasional beating. For beating the carpets these should be laid flat upon 
dry grass with face downwards. 

3.3.5 The carpets should be lifted occasionally and the reverse side 
cleaned thoroughly. It would be preferable to keep the carpet for some 
time in open air in daylight. 

3.4 Periodic Gleaning — Many carpets receive severe treatment and 
despite with the regular cleaning are likely to become soiled. Therefore, 
these should be taken up occasionally and beaten. If necessary, the 
carpets should be sent to the commercial establishments specialising in 
carpet cleaning. The carpets are thoroughly cleaned and dust and dirt 
extracted before resorting to dry cleaning. In case of carpets with rubber 
backing the commercial solvents for dry cleaning should not be used as 
these are likely to afiect the rubber and hence may spoil the carpet. 



IS s 10466 - 1983 
SECTION m 
4. REMOVAL OF STAINS 

4.1 Carpets in every day use sooner or later become marked or stained. 
Prompt and correct treatment removes many stains. Some general 
information on rpethods for removal of common stains is given in 
Appendix B. Since wrong treatment may only serve to increase the 
damage it would be advisable to seek skilled assistance in cases of doubt 
and severe damage. 

4.2 The substance split on the carpet should be removed quickly before it 
penetrates the pile of the carpet. In many cases where quick action has 
been taken, little penetration may have occurred and in such instances a 
wiping with a clean damp cloth leaving the pile sloping correctly is 
sufficient. 

4.3 A clean absorbent undyed cotton cloth or blotting paper should be 
used to remove as much of the spilt liquid as possible. Semisolids or 
greasy substances should be removed using a spoon or the back of a 
knife. 

4.4 The treatment should be as thorough as possible without disturbing 
the pile unduly. If the pile has been penetrated, place absorbent 
material under the carpet. 

4.5 In case the furniture is lying on the carpet while it is still damp, 
the carpet should be protected from rust or stains by placing grease proof 
paper in between. If possible, it will be preferable to remove the 
furniture away from the damp place. 

4.6 List of a few chemicals required for different kinds of stain removals 
are given in Appendix G for ready reference. 

APPENDIX A 

( Clause 0.2 ) 

DO*S AND DONTS FOR MAINTENANCE OF CARPET 

A-1. DO»S 

A-1.1 Always lay the carpet on a flat and even surface. 

A'1.2 Change the position of the carpet now and then. Shift the position 
of the furniture lying on the carpet occasionally. This would help in 
equalising the wear and tear. 



IS : 10466 - 1983 

A-1.3 It is preferable to use underlay. This will not only increase the 
life of a carpet but also helps in retaining the warmth and increasing 
resilience. 

A<-1«4 Remove the dust, dirt and stains as soon as they are noticed. 

A-1.5 Lift the carpet and clean the reverse side occasionally. 

A*1.6 Shake the carpet occasionally, and remove the dust and dirt by a 
duster, in case of hanging carpets. 

A.2. DON'TS 

A-2«l Do not place the carpet where there is dampness or receives bright 
sunlight continuously. 

A-2.2 Do not fold the carpet; when not in use, roll it neatly. 

A-2.3 Do not beat the carpets against hard surface, as it may harm the 
texture. 

A-2.4 Do not shake the carpets vigorously, as it may loosen the hem or 
fringes. 

A**2*5 Do not use any ordinary soap, washing soda, ammonia or alkaline 
solution on the carpets. 

A-2.6 In case of hanging carpet : 

i) Do not keep the carpet coincide with the wall. At least a gap 
of 2 cm may be kept between the wall and the carpet, 

ii) Do not use any underlay, and 

iii) Do not hang the carpet by fringes. 



APPENDIX B 

( Clause 4A ) 

GENERAL INFORMATION ON METHODS FOR 
REMOVAL OF STAINS 

B«0* General — Many of the methods of stain removal given employ 
the two types of cleaning treatments — one, using drycleaning solvents, 
for example, carbon tetrachloride or trichloroethylene ( Method A ) and 
the other using synthetic detergents ( Method B )• 



IS ; 10466 - 1983 

B-1. Method A — Apply the liquid with an absorbent cloth. 
Commencing at the outer edge of the stain rub gently and work 
gradually towards the centre. The surface of the absorbent cloth should 
be changed frequently and remoistened with the cleaning liquid. Mop or 
blot well between each application and when the staining is heavy, it 
may be necessary to place absorbent material under the carpet. 

B-2. Method B — Prepare a cold or lukewarm solution of foam 
according to the manufacturer's instructions. Add one tea spoonful of 
white vinegar in half litre of detergent solution. Apply this solution. 
or foam to the stain with a sponge or absorbent cloth and mop or blot off. 
If the method appears to be effective, repeat this procedure until the 
stain is removed or there is no further beneficial action. Finally treat with 
lukewarm water in a similar manner and leave pile slopping correctly. 
Support the wetted portion above the floor and assist drying by the aid 
of fans, etc. Dry in the open air if circumstances permit. The carpet 
in no case should be put into service again until it is fully dry. 

3-3. COMMON STAINS 

B-'3.1 Alcoholic Liquids ( Beer, Wine and Spirits ) — Mop 

thoroughly and apply Method B. Old stains present difficulties, but 
sponging with methylated spirit reduces the stain. 

B-3.2 Battery Acids ( Strong Acid ) — This strong solution of sulphuric 
acid if allowed to penetration, quickly attacks the backing yarns, therefore, 
prompt action is necessary to prevent serious damage. Soak with a 
saturated solution of sodium bicarbonate or baking powder. If these are 
not available, apply borax, ammonia or washing soda using about one 
table-spoonful in half litre of water. The latter treatments may effect the 
colours but save the carpet. 

B-3.3 ( Beverages Cocoa, GofiPee, Tea, Milk and Soft Drinks) — 

Apply Method B followed by Method A. 

B-3.4 Blood — Dab with ammonical sodium perborate or hydijogen 
peroxide solution and allow to act for sometime, followed by MethcJd B. 

B-3.5 Burns — In case of wool carpets remove the blackened wool 
( burnt wool ) with scissors and then apply Method B. Man-diade 
fibres react differently to burns. It may need expert attention invsuch 
cases as well as for extensive burns. 

B-3«6 Eggs — Mop thoroughly and apply Method B. 

B-3J Fruit Stains — Apply Method B, followed by alcohol or methy- 
lated spirit if required. 



IS 1 10466 * 1983 

B*3.8 Grass Stains — Mop with alcohol or methylated spirit followed by 
Method B. 

B-3.9 Ice Cream — Apply Method B followed by Method A. 

B-3.10 Ink Stains 

B-3.104 In case of writing ink, fresh stains may be satisfactorily 
removed by Method B, in many cases. When necessary, treat with a 
warm solution of oxalic acid and follow by repeatedly rinsing and 
mopping with water, since oxalic acid can damage the carpet backing. 
"Old stains may present difficulties and professional assistance may be 
required. 

B*3«10.2 In case of copying ink and red ink, treat with methylated 
spirit, preferably with a small addition of acetic acid or white vinegar. 
Apply with an absorbent cloth and quickly blot to avoid spreading. 
Persist with the treatment and finally use Method B. 

B-3.10.3 In case of ball-point ink, dabbing with alcohol helps to 
remove the stain. 

B*3*ll Lipstick — Degrecse with trichloroethylene or benzene. Dab 
with formic acid on woollen carpets. 

B-3J2 Nail Varnish/Polish — Mop or blot [thoroughly, followed by 
dabbing with acetone. 

B-3.13 Oil and Grease — Mop or blot thoroughly or scrape off grease, 
etc. Follow Method A and finisK with Method B. Bad staining may 
redevelop later and require a further treatment. For car grease 
{see B-3.21 ). 

B-3.14 Paint and Varnish — 1 reat as for * Oil and Grease * 
{see B-3,13 ). Since the paints vary widely in their composition, 
professional assistance may be required. 

B-3.15 Rust — Apply Method B, followed by a warm strong solution of 
oxalic acid. Finish by repeatedly rinsing and mopping with water. Old 
stains are difficult to remove and may require professional assistance. 

B-3.16 Saline Liquids — Mop and blot, followed by Method B with the 
addition of about 100 ml of white vinegar per litre of detergent* Rinse 
and mop several times with water. 

B-3.17 Salt — Powdered salt should be thoroughly removed preferably 
by a vacuum cleaner. Salt, if allowed to remain, may affect the colours 
and attract moisture which leads to increased dirt retention. 

8 



IS : 10466 - 1983 

B-3.18 Shoe Polish — Scrape off as much as possible^ mop and blot. 
Then use Method B. 

B-3.19 Soot — Vacuum lightly and gently, followed by Meihods B and 
A if required, 

B-3.20 Starchy Foods — Scrape and follow with Method B. 

B-3.21 Tar — Treat as for * Oil and Grease ' ( seeB'-SAS ). Or soak in 
turpentine and wash out with ether or benzene. This method can also 
be utilized for car grease. 

B-3.22 Urine — Treat as for ^Saline Liquids' ( see B-3.16 ). 

B-3.23 Vinegar — Treat with diluted ammonia. 

B-3.24 Vomit — Remove all solids and then treat with carpet shampoo 
solution or baby shampoo. 

B-3.25 Water — Where the wetting is not extensive and the water is 
comparatively clean, mop thoroughly and dry as quickly as possible. 
Support the wetted portion above the floor and assist drying by the aid 
of room heaters, fans, etc. Dry in the open air if circumstances permit. 
If water is known to be slightly alkaline, it is advisable to sponge with a 
weak solution of white or ordinary vinegar ( 50 cc in about 5 litres of 
water ). 

B-3.25.1 Carpets saturated with water following bursts or leakages 
should be well mopplfcd. Water from roof leakages is usually 
contaminated with rust, etc, while the drinking water supply may be 
slightly alkaline in character. Such cases when dealt with are liable to 
result in discolouration, bleeding of colours, shrinkage and mildew. Hence 
professional assistance should be obtained and the carpets should be sent 
to commercial cleaners as quickly as possible, informing them of derails 
of the mishap. 

B-3.26 Wax — Scrape off as much as possible. Next hold a hot iron a 
few centimetres above the mark to melt away the wax. Finally 'use 
Method A. 



iSsl04M-1983 

APPENDIX C 

{Clause 4.6) 
CHEMICALS REQjUIRED FOR STAIN REMOVAL 

1) Acetic acid 

2) Acetone 

3) Alcohol 

4) Ammonia 

5) Ammoniacal sodium perborate 

6) Borax 

7) Ether or benzene 

8) Hydrogen peroxide 

9) Methylated spirit 

10) Ordinary vinegar 

11) Oxalic acid 

12) Sodium bicarbonate 

13) Turpentine 

14) Washing soda 

15) White vinegar 



10 



INTERNATIONAL SVS lEM OF UNITS ( SI UNITS) 



Ba»e Vtdt% 

Q\ ANtnY 

Lcugih 

Mais 

Tiif» c 

Ele» trie curreut 

rh^rrtiodyramic 

Amount of kubatunoi" 
tkuppl^MSXent^ry Vnits 

QuAKriTT 

FUne angU 
SoHd angle 

Derived UiuH» 

Quantity 
Force 
Energy 
PewtT 
Flux 

Fltix density 
Fr<quenry 

Electric conductance 
Electromotive force 
TfiMur^^ itre«s 



Vvit 


Symbol 








metre 


m 








ki5(»gfArri 


kS 








f^corid 


1 








ampTe 


^ 








kelvio 


K 








candeU 


rd 








rnole 


rno) 








Unit 


Symbol 








fkdmn 


rad 








steradiat) 


tr 








Unit 


SVMJIOL 


0»ifiNin N 


uewton 


N 


I N 


^ 


i kg ni/»' 


joule 


J 


I i 


^, 


1 N rn 


watt 


W 


I \v 


li* 


1 J'. 


web* r 


Wb 


t Wb 


•« 


1 V* 


ietU 


T 


1 T 


Ka> 


I Wb/m« 


beiu 


Ha 


1 Uz 


^ 


I c/» (»-M 


iiMUen* 


S> 


I S 


^ 


( A/Y 


voh 


V 


1 V 


•u 


1 W/A 


p»9Cttl 


P;i 


I Pa 


«* 


1 N/m» 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

ManaK Bhavan, Babadur Shah Zafar Marg. NtW 

Telephones : 2i 60 21, 27 01 31 

Hegionaf Offlcei 

Western : Novelty Chambera, Grant Road 

Eastern : 5 Chowringhee Approach 

Southern : C I T Campus 

Northern i B69, Phasa VH 



DELHI 11U00? 

Telegrams : Manaksanutha 

Tetophone 
BOMBAY 400007 89 66 28 

CALCUTTA 700072 27 60 9C 

MADRAS b00113 41 24 i2 

S A.S NAGAR 8 78 J?e 

(MOHALI) 160051 



Britnch Offlceit 

*Pushpak\ Nurmohamed ShalHh Marg, Khanpur 
P* 8locK» Unity Bldg, Naraslmhara)a Square 



GangoiD Complex, Bhadbhada Road 

t%t Kalpana Area 

5-8-56C L. N. Gupta Marg 

R 14 Yudhlstof Marg. C Schema 

117/418 B Sarvodaya Nagar 

Patliputra InduBlriai Eatata 

Hentex BIdg ( tf^^ Floor ), Rly Station Road 



AMMADABAD iftOOOl ^ 03 91 

BANGALORE 560002 22 48 05 

T T Nagar BHOPAL 482003 8 27 \t 
BHUBANFSHWAR 751014 5 36 27 

HYDERABAD 500001 5^2 10 88 

JAIPUR 302005 6 96 3; 

KANPUR 908005 4 72 92 

PATNA 800013 9 28 OO 

TRIVANDRUM 695001 82 27 



Prh^tad at Arcae Press, Nsw Dsthl. ladle 



