KATI AAR IS 15883 (Part 12) : 2016 
Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2021) 


Frater URASA water — 
fastest 


UM 12 Gas Wat 


Construction Project 
Management — Guidelines 


Part 12 Integration Management 


ICS 03.100.30 


© BIS 2016 


ada AM SR 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
AM FA, 9 FERNS AHL AM, ae feeet-110002 
Velo” MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in _www.standardsbis.in 


December 2016 Price Group 7 


Construction Management (Including Safety in Construction) Sectional Committee, CED 29 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 12) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the 
Construction Management (Including Safety in Construction) Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Civil Engineering Division Council. 


A construction project is an endeavour undertaken by a project team on behalf of owner/client to create a built 
facility suited to the defined functional objectives. From inception to commissioning, the project goes through 
various distinct stages leading to progressive achievement of project objectives. Each stage involves specific 
inputs, processes (both technical and managerial) and deliverables. Typically, the life cycle of a project from 
commencement to completion involves the following stages: 


a) Project appraisal — Inception, feasibility and strategic planning; 


b) Project development — Project brief development, planning and design, finalization of proposals, 
procurement strategy, construction documentation including tender drawings, construction drawings, 
specifications, cost estimates, bills of quantities, procurement documents; 


c) Planning for construction — Sequencing of project components, planning tools, resource planning and 
time cost trade off; 


d) Tender action — Open competitive bidding/pre-qualification of agencies, issue of tender documents, 
evaluation of bids, negotiation if required and award of work; 


e) Construction — Execution, monitoring, control, work acceptance; and 


f) Commissioning and handing over — Contractual closeout, financial closeout, defect liability 
commencement, facility handing over. 


The distinct features of a construction project include the temporary nature of the project team involved, the 
evolutionary process of project deliverables during project development stages and the unique output as the built 
facility. As a result of these features, unless there is efficient and effective project management, a construction project 
is faced with challenges of uncertainties leading to time over-runs, cost over-runs, changes in project parameters, 
loss of quality and inability to meet the functional objectives. While technical soundness of a proposal is an 
important aspect of a construction project, the management aspects, which involve techno-legal, financial and other 
issues, have also a significant role in the success of a project. Therefore, management functions and technical 
processes in a construction project need to be integrated towards achieving project objectives. Top management 
commitment plays an important role in harmoniously achieving these project objectives. In some of the public 
domain projects, it may be necessary to share relevant information with public at large through appropriate means. 


To provide necessary guidance on effective construction project management, a series of standards are being 
developed as part of IS 15883 ‘Guidelines for construction project management’ Part 1 General, of the standard 
since published as IS 15883 (Part 1) : 2009, covers general aspects of overall construction project management. 
This has been followed by publication of other parts as follows: 


Part 2 : 2013 on Time management 

Part 3 : 2015 on Cost management 

Part 4 : 2015 on Quality management 

Part 5 : 2013 on Health and safety management 
Part 6 : 2015 on Scope management 


Part 8 : 2015 on Risk management 


(Continued on third cover page) 


IS 15883 (Part 12) : 2016 


Indian Standard 


CONSTRUCTION PROJECT MANAGEMENT — 
GUIDELINES 


PART 12 INTEGRATION MANAGEMENT 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard (Part 12) covers guidelines for 
integration of all the management functions of 
construction project. 


1.2 The scope of this standard covers the stages 
subsequent to the stage of approval (when a decision 
to implement the project including its financing is taken) 
till commissioning and handing over of the project. 


1.3 The provisions of this standard are to be read in 
conjunction with IS 15883 (Part 1). 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards given below contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 


IS No. Title 
7337 : 2010 Glossary of terms in project 
management (second revision) 
10400 : 2013 Glossary of terms in inventory 
management (second revision) 
15198 : 2014 Glossary of terms in human resource 
development (first revision) 
15883 Construction project management — 
(Part 1):2009 Guidelines general 
(Part2):2013 Time management 
(Part3):2015 Cost management 
(Part4):2015 Quality management 
(PartS):2013 Health and safety management 
(Part6):2015 Scope management 
(Part 7) Procurement management (under 
preparation) 
(Part 8):2015 Risk management 
(Part 9) Communication management (under 
preparation) 
(Part 10) Human resource management (under 
preparation) 
(Part 11) Sustainability management (under 


preparation) 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given 
in IS 7337, IS 10400 and IS 15198 shall apply. 


4 NEED FOR INTEGRATION MANAGEMENT 
AND BENEFITS 


4.1 Need for Integration Management 


The primary objective of integration management is to 
ensure conflict free performance conditions for various 
stakeholders towards achievement of objectives of the 
project with optimal utilization of resources. For achieving 
the project objectives efficiently, transparent information 
exchange and synchronization must take place between 
various disciplines along with integration of various 
project management functions like scope, time, cost, 
quality, safety, procurement, communication and risk 
management [See IS 15883 (Parts | to 11)]. Acommon 
platform for the project team to work as a single unit is 
provided in integration management. 


The need for integration in a project is as listed below: 


a) For providing technical and organizational 
interfaces. 

b) For achieving the coordination between 
different disciplines in a project. 

c) To facilitate timely availability and sharing of 
requisite information across the project team 
and stakeholders. 

d) Toavoid conflicts and dealing with competing 
interests amongst project team members in 
accordance to the agreed terms. 

e) To facilitate optimal utilization of resources 
and to avoid rework. 

f) To facilitate identification of potential 
problems and solutions early. 

g) To leverage available expert knowledge and 
organization learnings from past for the 
project benefit. 

h) For synchronization of the various 
management functions. 


The need for project integration management is evident 
in situations where different disciplines and functions 
of the project interface (see Fig. 1). For example, a time 


IS 15883 (Part 12) : 2016 


delay in performing a particular construction activity, 
may impact the cost aspects of not only that activity 
but other associated activities involving different 
functions and disciplines; any rescheduling may affect 
the succeeding activities and coordination amongst 
groups performing them. Similarly, any decision on a 
change in scope in a project will require due 
consideration of all the potential impact on various 
disciplines and functions of project in terms of quantum 
of works, cost, time, quality, safety, risks, etc. Project 
integration management is needed to manage the 
project in a well-documented and structured manner to 
ensure consistency and smooth project delivery. 


4.2 Benefits of Integration Management 


The integration management function facilitates the 
coordination amongst all the project stakeholders 
(particularly the different disciplines such as 
architecture, civil, electrical, services, etc) to 
successfully achieve the project objective. This 
coordination is essentially achieved through joint 
meetings and collaborations amongst the stakeholders. 
The project core team can systematically approach the 
task of coordination amongst the functions and 
disciplines during various stages of project like project 
development, planning for construction, tender action, 
construction, completion and handing over through 
an integrated project management plan. 


Some of the generic benefits of integration management 
are as follows: 


ON & À 


[Procurement | (nes) 
VE" ka 


Cost 


\ Management; 
Å 
“ 7 
p 


> 
Quality k 
wi a ee 


aa Risk \ —— = 


en ent E 
M 


munication’ 


wi 


Human \ as 
| resources | À 
Management (safety & Heath) [Sustainability | 
—— | manapemenej | Management | 
N A Ne A 
— m 


Various Project Disciplines 
Integration Management 


b) 


c) 


h) 


An integrated project management plan with 
input details from management functions like 
time, cost, quality, procurement, risk, etc, will 
bring in clarity and minimize ambiguity to the 
management approach to the project. 
Stakeholders from different disciplines like 
civil, mechanical, electrical, architecture, etc, 
arrive at a common understanding about the 
required internal prioritization of their activities 
and their sequencing to support the 
successful project delivery. 

Enhanced communication amongst project 
stakeholders with clarity, simplicity and 
uniformity. 

Enhanced stakeholder engagement, mutual 
understanding and satisfaction. 

Clearer forecast of quality/risk issues and 
effective conflict resolution and management. 
Reliability and ownership in project planning 
and control. 

Cost optimization through better handling of 
resources and resource levelling. 

Integrated change control in the project to 
minimize changes and correct assessment of 
the consequence on associated cost, time, etc, 
by the affected stakeholders in case of 
introduction of an approved change. 


Project Development 
Stage 


Planning for 
Construction Stage 


Tender Action Stage 


Construction Stage 


Completion and 
Handing Over Stage 


Fic. | INTEGRATION MANAGEMENT OVERVIEW 


2 


5 ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE FOR 
INTEGRATION MANAGEMENT 


The project integration management is an important 
function to be lead and controlled by a project manager 
supported by the team of competent and skilled 
personnel. This team may comprise of nodal persons 
identified from each disciplines of the project. They 
may have to interact across disciplines and with internal 
and external stake holders during different stages of 
project. They will use the expertise and knowledge 
available from the past to integrate and synergize the 
project activities. 


5.1 During Preparation of Project Brief 


At the beginning of the project, a project brief 
document is prepared and issued by the project initiator. 
The brief spells out the project purpose or justification, 
the assumptions and constraints, the macro level 
deliverable requirements, boundaries, risks, budget etc. 
During preparation of project brief, the organization 
structure predominantly comprises of project sponsor, 
contract experts, key stakeholders /consultants who 
will ensure integration of all the information compiled 
to include in the brief. Once the project manager is 
identified, he will take a lead in forth coming stages of 
the project. 


5.2 During Pre-Construction Stage 


During preparation of estimates and project details, the 
organization structure for integration may comprise of 
group of team members lead by project manager. The 
project integration team assisting the project manager 
may be a part of the planning team from different 
disciplines and functions who are competent to 
understand the complexities of interfaces in the project. 
The size of integration and control team shall depend 
on the criticality and complexity of the project. 


5.3 During Stages of Project Construction up to 
Handing Over 


At every stage of construction, the project manager 
and his integration team have to continuously interact 
with multiple disciplines, internal and external 
stakeholders. As the project goes through various 
stages, project participants’ composition may 
dynamically change through introduction of new 
contractors, vendors and suppliers and exit of some of 
the existing ones. Therefore the integration 
management team will get accordingly restructured as 
per need of the project. 


During construction stage when the physical progress 
happens in a project, the team members for collaboration 
and integration may include representatives from 
construction experts, change management team 


IS 15883 (Part 12) : 2016 


[see Table 1 of IS 15883 (Part 6)], quality control/ 
assurance, monitoring and control team, safety experts, 
etc. During closing stage of the project, the team 
members for integration and collaboration may include 
representatives from handing over team, sponsor and 
other stakeholders. 


6 METHODS AND PROCESS 
INTEGRATION MANAGEMENT 


6.1 A project typically comprises of activities from 
various disciplines like civil, mechanical, architectural 
and electrical, etc, and in all these disciplines the 
functions like design, procurement, and quality control 
have to be carried out through teams from various 
contractors and consultants, etc, who are specialized 
in their respective areas. In order to plan and implement 
the various activities of the project, these teams would 
require many inputs. These inputs may be as listed 
below: 


FOR 


a) Design related input, 

b) Procurement related input, 

c) Size and specification details of various 
components, 

d) Storage space availability, 

e) As built dimensions and work space 
availability, 

f) Inputs for shop drawing preparation, 

g) Construction methodology of other activities 
going on in parallel, 

h) Work front availability, 

j) Sequence of dependent activities, 

k) Safety and quality related interfaces, and 

m) Change in scope. 


Some of these inputs may be available at the time of 
planning or may be specified clearly in the project 
tender documents like conditions of contract or project 
specification, etc. However, there will also be other 
category of inputs or parameters which can only be 
estimated in a macro level during early stages of the 
project and the same may get elaborated during the 
subsequent stages. For example the exact construction 
methodology to be adopted by a specialist sub- 
contractor who will come on board on a future date. In 
such cases some parameters need to be considered based 
on experience and organizations historical data bank 
similar to analogous estimation [see 6.2.1 of IS 15883 
(Part 3)] before proceeding with planning of these 
activities. As these activities or their dependent 
activities progresses, the considered parameters will 
get revalidated and the necessary arrangements have 
to be incorporated in the work plan of the activities as 
per the actual site conditions. This has been 
schematically represented in Fig. 2 for building projects 
and Fig. 3 for road projects. 


Considered Parameters 


ion 


lidat 


requiring reva 


Structural 


Construction 
Procurement 


Shop Drawings 


Detailed Design E Commissioning 
Issue of GFC 


Drawings 


Pre-construction . Handing Over 
(Initiation Design, Planning Stage) Construction Stage Stage 


Project Progress SS ee 


Fic. 2 PROJECT INTEGRATION MANAGEMENT - BUILDING PROJECT FLOW CHART 


(TI Wed) ESSST SI 


. 
. 


9107 


Considered Parameters 


reguiring revalidation 


Detailed 
Design & GFC 
(Pavements ) 


Scheme 
Design 
(Pavements, Drainages, 
Culverts & Bridges) 


Procurement 


Detailed Design 
& GFC 
(Drainages, Culverts 
& Bridges) 


Pre-construction 
(Initiation Design, Planning Stage) 


UG Cabling 
Works 


Soil 
Strengthening 
Works 


UG Drainage 
Works 


Drainage works 


Median & 
Shoulder 
Works 


Construction Stage 


Surface Seal 
Coat 


Pavement 
Works 
Culvert, 
Bridges & Road Marking 


Project Progress — ———————_____ > 


Fic. 3 PROJECT INTEGRATION MANAGEMENT — ROAD PROJECT FLOW CHART 


Commissioning 


Handing Over 
Stage 


(ZT Wed) E88ST SI 


. 
. 


9107 


IS 15883 (Part 12) : 2016 


6.2 The following table will depict the integration points 6.3 The project manager along with the integration 


across various functions in a project: team performs coordination of various functions like 


(1) (2) (3) (4) 


i) |Scope management a) Project brief a) Scope statement 
b) Stakeholder requirements b) WBS 
c) Input from design c) Bill of quantities 
d) GFC drawings 


ii) |Procurement management a) Scope statement a) Procurement plan 
b) Specifications b) Updated schedule 
c) Construction methodology c) Procurement management 
d) Cost baseline plan 
e) Time baseline 


iii) |Time management a) Scope statement a) Time baseline 
b) WBS b) Updated schedule 
c) Resource estimates c) Project resource plan 
d) Lead time 
e) Construction sequence and 
methodology 


iv) |Cost management a) Scope statement a) Cost baseline 
b) Bill of quantities b) Updated cost budget 
c) Time baseline c) Cash-flow 
d) Resource estimates 


e) Construction methodology 
f) Schedule updates 


v) |Quality management a) Scope statement a) Quality management plan 
b) Design input b) Change request 
c) Project resource plan c) Quality assurance plan 
d) Specifications 
e) Procurement of materials 


vi) |Risk management a) Scope statement a) Risk register 
b) Updated schedules b) Updated risk list 
c) Updated cost budget c) Risk mitigation strategy 
d) Stakeholder requirements d) Hindrance register 
e) Change requests 


vil) |Communication management |a) Organization structure a) Stakeholder register 
b) Communication protocol b) Monthly/weekly reports 
c) Communication frequency c) Organization chart 
d) Stakeholder matrix 


viii) |Human resource management |a) Resource estimates a) Resource deployment plan 
b) Organization structure b) Updated schedule 


ix) |Health, safety and a) Construction methodology a) Project safety manual 
environment management b) Resource estimates b) Organizational safety records 
c) Work front availability 


design, procurement and construction in a progressive 
manner to achieve synergy. Coordination amongst 
various functions and disciplines would require 
exchange of different information between various 
project participants. For example, the design of air 
conditioning system in a building would require heat 
load information from other systems and building 
usage characteristics. Similarly, procurement activity 
needs to have input from design for specification, 
material required date from time schedule and quality 
specifications from quality plan. To achieve seamless 
information sharing across various stages of the 
project, tools and techniques like design basis reports, 
collection of vendor quotes, product brochures and 
material samples, work authorization methods, project 
planning methods, interface activity extraction from 
integrated project schedule etc, may be used. These 
methods for achieving integration may be through any 
of the following: 


a) Issuing questionnaires and instructions to 
assimilate information and setting directions; 

b) Structured design workshops and regular 
stakeholder meetings; 

c) Using different techniques like interface 
matrix, 3D modelling, etc; 

d) Site logistic and phasing plan; 

e) Regular progress review meetings with 
updated work plan; and 

f) Risk review meetings and risk workshops. 


7 INTEGRATION DURING DIFFERENT STAGES 
OF PROJECT 


See IS 15883 (Part 1) for various stages of construction 
projects. 


7.1 Initiation, Planning and Design Stage 


During the initiation phase, the project brief is prepared, 
which lists the initial scope of the project, resource 
requirements, initial assumptions and constraints and 
the other project elements such as deliverables, 
milestones, etc. The project brief preparation would 
require compilation of information, requirements and 
needs from different stakeholders which are then 
integrated and refined for consistency. Therefore the 
process of project integration management commence 
right at this stage where consistency of the project 
brief with assumptions in feasibility analysis will be 
ensured. 


Next major step is to decide on the project delivery 
model and procedure to be adopted for integration of 
various project management functions in the project. 
In order to carry out the integration management in a 
structured manner, the procedure has to be 


IS 15883 (Part 12) : 2016 


documented for easy updating and reference. The 
procedure is finalized by thoroughly integrating 
various information from scope management, schedule 
management, cost management, quality management, 
etc. Further in the integration functions the 
construction methodologies are frozen, sequencing 
of activities are defined, interface points are identified 
and various progress milestones of the project are 
derived. 


The approach for managing the project with seamless 
integration may be clearly documented as project 
management plan (PMP) (see Annex A). The project 
integration team will interact and communicate with all 
stakeholders, namely, contract experts, planning and 
scheduling professional, procurement specialist, 
quantity surveyor, technical and engineering experts, 
risk specialist, sponsor, etc, for finalizing this project 
management plan (PMP) to get it approved by the 
project manager. 


The specifications and detailing of the various 
systems of the project shall be coordinated and 
integrated during the Engineering/Design stage of the 
project. Technical integration amongst the systems 
shall ensure consistency in the technical parameters 
and data inputs shared amongst the various systems. 
For example, specification of ventilation system in a 
tunnel project may be one of the inputs for electrical 
system load calculations. Integration in physical 
detailing would require space planning and 
coordination of various physical dimensions of the 
equipment or system components in the drawing 
preparation stage. 


Integration during design stage may be achieved 
through methods like, prototype scaled model 
preparation, virtual three dimensional model (3D) 
preparation using different computer software, etc. 
These 3D models can be designed to illustrate important 
interfaces and physical dependencies between various 
disciplines like civil, architectural, mechanical and 
electrical services. Such 3D models and computer based 
analysis are effective method for preparing coordinated 
construction drawings. The computer based techniques 
can minimize design clashes and discrepancies in a 
project to reduce reworks and wastages. A brief 
description of 3D modelling and computer based 
analysis is included in Annex B. 


7.2 Tendering Stage 


During tendering stage of the project the role of 
Integration management function is to furnish upfront 
the interface data to the bidders in the request for 
proposal documents to ensure clear contractually 
binding inputs to the participants in the project. These 
interface data are collated from various disciplines and 


IS 15883 (Part 12) : 2016 


functions by the project integration team. Reguest for 
proposal document may clearly specify the following 
indicative items but not limited to; 


a) conditions of contract with key milestone 
dates/events. 


b) available float from the baseline schedule 
attributed to the package being procured. 


c) sequence of work and prioritization in the 
deliverables. 


d) minimum quality and safety standards. 


e) communication protocol across various 
stakeholders, etc. 


7.3 Construction Stage 


7.3.1 During the construction stage, actual product 
gets developed in the project with the start of physical 
works at site. If the actual conditions at site are in 
variance with the parameters considered originally 
during planning and engineering phase, the achieved 
progress of project may vary widely from expected plan. 
Therefore some of these critical originally considered 
parameters would require close monitoring during 
construction stage. 


7.3.2 Following are some of the indicative parameters 
which are usually considered based on prior experience: 


a) Timely availability of encumbrance free work 
front; 


b) Availability of statutory clearances, if any; 
c) Engineering drawings; 


d) Resources planned like material, manpower, 
machinery, etc; 


e) Weather conditions; and 


f) Cash-flow and running-bill payments 
assumed, etc. 


During this stage the project experiences many dynamic 
changes which need to be constantly monitored, 
analyzed and coordinated and integrated. 


7.3.3 Integration management during construction stage 
involves constant compilation and analysis of the actual 
performance, compared against baselines of all project 
functions — time, cost and quality, etc. Any variance at 
this stage entails immediate re-sequencing, re-working 
of resource like equipment and skilled manpower and re- 
planning of methodology of succeeding construction 


activities. This stage requires the following: 


a) General management skill to keep the project 
team motivated to the objectives, 


b) Checklist for availability of adequate funds, 

c) Quality and quantity of equipment and skilled 
resources, 

d) Integrated permit authorization to take up work 
as per schedule sequence at site, and 

e) System of continuous feedback and 
performance measurement. 


7.3.4 During construction stage, the project manager 
is expected to continuously review and monitor the 
work progress with the project integration team and 
initiate corrective action and change control as 
necessary. During this stage it is essential for the project 
integration team to share the updated pertinent 
information with all relevant stakeholders in a timely 
manner. 


7.4 Handing Over Stage 


During handing over stage of the project the project 
integration team facilitates the scope verification and 
validation process like performance testing of various 
components/deliverables [see 6.4 of IS 15883 (Part 6)]. 


The completed services by various agencies gets tested 
and verified for their intended functional performance. 
The testing will be carried out on stand-alone and 
integrated basis with all allied systems in the project. 
In case of any deviation or variance in performance, 
the integration team will initiate corrective action and 
change control. Further, the project integration team 
shall coordinate the availability of the operation and 
maintenance manual of the project/product, as built 
drawings and all other documentation formalities of 
the project. 


8 DOCUMENTATION AND UPDATES 


During project closure stage the integration team 
prepares a detailed project completion report to record 
the formal closure of project along with all open 
procurement activities and accounts and administrative 
closure. The report may include performance of various 
project parameters throughout the project life cycle, 
resource and communication management documents, 
operation and maintenance manual, list of issues and 
risks mitigated. It may also carry lessons learned during 
the project, post project tasks, operational and 
maintenance details, if any and project closure 
recommendations. 


IS 15883 (Part 12) : 2016 


ANNEXA 
(Clause 6.1) 
PROJECT MANAGEMENT PLAN— BRIEF 


A-1 The project management plan (PMP) is necessary 
to guide the project through its life cycle. It will have 
compiled list of all the initial parameters, some of which 
will be considered based on prior experience in a similar 
project. It also provides the details of the procedure to 
be followed for any decision making during various 
stages of the project. The PMP facilitates the 
communication process throughout the life-cycle of 
the project. The PMP defines the role of key 
management personnel, provides details of intermediate 
progress milestones and baseline benchmarks for 
monitoring and control. 


The effectiveness of a PMP depends on many factors 
including how well the plan embeds the organization’s 
culture, policies, procedures, constraints and 
assumptions. The PMP needs to be grounded in a 
sound methodology, project execution skills and 
knowledge. 


A project management plan (PMP) is a planning 
document, capturing the entire project end-to-end, 
covering all project phases, from initiation through 
planning, execution and closure. 


A PMP covers the followings areas and components 
along with inter-disciplinary and inter functional 
interface points: 


a) Overview — Why the project is being 
conducted and its primary objectives. 
b) Scope — Business needs, requirements, 


deliverables, constraints and work breakdown 
structure [see IS 15883 (Part 6)]. 


c) Schedule — Activities schedule and project 
milestones [see IS 15883 (Part 2)]. 


d) Costs — Project budget and its funding 
approach [see IS 15883 (Part 3)]. 


e) Quality — Quality measurement and control 
approach [see IS 15883 (Part 4)]. 


f) Safety — Health and safety approach [see 
IS 15883 (Part 5)]. 


g) Project team — The people working on the 
project, their roles and responsibilities. 


h) Communication — Communication type, 
channels and the reporting approach 
[see IS 15883 (Part 9)]. 


j) Risks — Risk index, methods to identify and 


evaluate risks, risk mitigation and contingency 
planning [see IS 15883 (Part 8)]. 


k) Procurements — Required procurements and 
purchase processes [see IS 15883 (Part 7)]. 


m) Closure — Closure approach, including the 
deliverables and handing-over protocol. 


n) Changes — Procedures used to track changes 
in the project [see IS 15883 (Part 6)]. 


p) Baselines — Scope, schedule and budget 
baselines. 


The project management plan content will vary 
depending upon the application area and complexity 
of the project. The project management plan is 
developed and kept updated through a series of 
integrated functions and disciplines until project 
closure. This results in a project management plan that 
is progressively elaborated by updates and controlled 
and approved through the integrated change control 
functions [see 6.2.2 of IS 15883 (Part 6)]. 


Due to changes in project plan and sequence of works 
resulting from dynamic nature of the project progress, 
the integration team alters the interface points keeping 
in mind the critical path, float availability and risk 
mitigation strategies. The project management plan 
needs to be updated and revised at regular intervals. 
Before every revision, the changes in interface points 
will be communicated to the appropriate stakeholders 
to adjust their execution strategy and resource leveling. 
The same will be shared back with the Integration team. 


Once the revised plan is accepted by all stakeholders, 
the integration team will revise the project management 
plan to set up revised bench mark to enable monitoring 
the progress. 


The project management plan consists the following: 


a) Three baselines — Cost, schedule and scope. 


b) Nine management plans — Scope, schedule, 
cost, quality, safety, risk, change, 
procurement, and communications. 


An ideal project management plan will have the 
following table of contents: 


1) Introduction. 
2) Project management approach. 
3) Project scope. 
4) Milestone list. 


IS 15883 (Part 12) : 2016 


5) Project scope management plan. 12) Change management plan. 
6) Schedule baseline and work breakdown 13) Risk management plan. 
Structure. 14) Communications management plan. 
7) Resource calendar. 15) Quality baseline. 
8) Schedule management plan. 16) Quality management plan. 
9) Cost baseline. 17) Safety management plan. 
10) Cost management plan. 18) Staffing management plan. 
11) Procurement management plan. 19) Sponsor acceptance. 
ANNEX B 


(Clause 6.1) 
BUILDING INFORMATION MODELLING (BIM) 


B-13D MODELS AND BIM 


Conventional CAD drawing is based on 2D drawing 
elements and has evolved to 3D whereas BIM involves 
modeling in 3D with intelligent data parameters being 
assigned to individual members. BIM encompasses 
more than a 3D computer-rendered model of a building. 
In addition to architectural information, the complete 
BIM contains all of the building’s information, from 
wall systems, structural systems, electrical systems, 
HVAC equipment, plumbing fixtures, door and window 
schedules, and finishes, right down to the manufacturer, 
supplier, and square footage of every material specified 
on the project. In other words BIM is an Intelligent 3D 
Model’. 


The principal difference between BIM technology and 
conventional 3D CAD is that the latter describes a 
building by independent 3D views such as plans, 
sections and elevations. Editing one of these views 
requires that all other views must be checked and 
updated, an error-prone process that is one of the major 
causes of poor documentation. In addition, data in 
these 3D drawings are graphical entities only, such as 
lines, arcs and circles, in contrast to the intelligent 
contextual semantic of BIM models, where objects are 
defined in terms of building elements and systems such 
as spaces, walls, beams and columns. A building 
information model carries all information related to the 
building, including its physical and functional 
characteristics and project life cycle information, in a 
series of ‘smart objects’. For example, an air 
conditioning unit within a BIM would also contain data 
about its supplier, operation and maintenance 
procedures, flow rates and clearance requirements. 


A BIM object is a combination of many things: 


a) Information content that defines a product. 

b) Product properties, such as thermal 
performance. 

c) Geometry representing the product’s physical 
characteristics. 

d) Visualization data giving the object a 
recognizable appearance. 

e) Functional data, such as detection zones, that 


enables the object to be positioned and behave 
in the same manner as the product itself. 


The application of BIM extends beyond design 
coordination stage to construction and operations 
stage (see Fig. 4). It carries GFC and BIM data during 
design coordination stage, material and supplier data 
during procurement stage, WBS and work packages 
information during construction stage and as built 
models during facility management stage. 


The as built information, construction pour sequence, 
quality conformances, cost and resources related 
information, etc, can be embedded in the BIM of the 
project to make it a powerful integration and project 
management tool. 


Some of the key benefits of BIM include the following: 


1) Improve coordination between architects, 
engineers, contractors and sub-contractors 
enabling quick decision making; 

2) Check completeness of drawings before 
starting construction eliminating the 
subsequent request for information (RFI) and 
delays; 


IS 15883 (Part 12) : 2016 


Procurement Construction Operation 
Stage Stage Stage 


DIGITAL PROCESS PROJECT FACILITY 
MOCKUP SIMULATIO MANAGEMENT MANAGEMENT 


WBS and As Built Models 
Work Packages and Maintenance 


Material and 
Supplier Datg 


GFC and BIM 
Data 


Fic. 4 BIM COLLABORATION DURING VARIOUS STAGES OF THE PROJECT 


5) Accurate material quantity take-offs. thus 
reducing waste; 

6) Construction scheduling and monitoring of 
the project; 

7) Create a field sequencing clash detection; 

8) Add as built and in field model information; 

9) Use of BIM for check/punch lists; and 

10) Prepare the model for project close out. 


3) Coordination and interference checks 
between architectural, structural, MEP, fire 
protection and other services; 

4) Production of accurate construction 
documents and shop drawings enabling the 
use of pre-fabricated material, thus improving 
quality and reducing costs and time; 


11 


IS 15883 (Part 12) : 2016 


ANNEX C 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Construction Management (Including Safety in Construction) Sectional Committee, CED 29 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity (103, Charak Sadan, Vikaspuri, 
New Delhi) 

AECOM India Private Limited, Noida 

Airports Authority of India, New Delhi 

Builders’ Association of India, Mumbai 

Building Materials and Technology Promotion Council, 
New Delhi 

CSIR—Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 

Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Construction Industry Development Council, New Delhi 


Construction Skill Development Council, New Delhi 


Creative Design Consultants and Engineers (P) Ltd, Ghaziabad 


Cushman & Wakefield India Pvt Ltd, Gurgaon 
Delhi Development Authority, New Delhi 


Delhi Metro Railway Corporation, New Delhi 


Delhi Tourism and Transportation Development 
Corporation, New Delhi 


EH and S Cares, New Delhi 
Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


Hindustan Construction Company Limited, New Delhi 


Hindustan Prefab Limited, New Delhi 


Indian Buildings Congress, New Delhi 
Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi 


Kaleidoscope, New Delhi 


Larsen and Toubro Limited, Chennai 


M. N. Dastur and Company (P) Limited, Kolkata 


Military Engineer Services, Engineer-in-Chief’s 
Branch, Army Headquarters, New Delhi 


Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation, 
New Delhi 


National Buildings Construction Corporation Limited, 
New Delhi 


12 


Representative(s) 


Suri P. KrisHNAN (Chairman) 


SHRI PAWAN JAIPURIYAR 
SHRI ARVIND AGARWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI PRADEEP KUMAR 
SHRI S. SREEKUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI H. S. PASRICHA 
Suri SANJAY Soni (Alternate) 


DR SHAILESH KUMAR AGRAWAL 
Suri Pankas Gupta (Alternate) 


Dr Acha K. MITTAL 
Suri Asay CHAuRASIA (Alternate) 


CHIEF ENGINEER (CSQ) 
Suri SANJEEV Rastoc! (Alternate) 


Suri P. R. Swarup 
Suri O P Gupta (Alternate) 


CoL ANIL KUMAR POKHRIYAL 
SHRI Aman DEEP 
SHRI HARLEEN OBEROI 


ENGINEER MEMBER 
Cuter ENGINEER (Desicn) (Alternate) 


SHRI DALJEET SINGH 
Suet Pramit Kumar GARG (Alternate) 


Suri VIVEK BANSAL 


SHRI A. K. TRIPATHI 


Suri T. K. SEN 
SHRI S. N. BHATNAGAR (Alternate) 


SHRI AVINASH HARDE 
SHRI RAJENDRA SAWHNI (Alternate) 


CHAIRMAN AND MANAGING DIRECTOR 
Suri S. K. Jain (Alternate) 


SHRI DEEPAK NARAYAN 


Dr K. C. IYER 
Dr K. N. Jua (Alternate I) 
Dr J. Uma Mauesuwart (Alternate II) 


SHRI AMOR Kooi 


Suri M. P. Narpu 
SHRI R. SHANKAR NARAYANAN (Alternate) 


Suri S. K. GUHA 
Sarı GOBINDA PaL CHoupuury (Alternate) 


Bric MANoJ KUMAR 
CoL M. K. Prasan (Alternate) 


DR DEVENDRA VERMA 
Dr D. Sai Basa (Alternate) 


Suri Hem Ras 
Sarı H. K. Dhawan (Alternate) 


Organization 


National Institute of Construction Management and 
Research, Mumbai 


NTPC Ltd, New Delhi 
NITI Aayog, New Delhi 


PMI Organization Centre Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


RITES Ltd, Gurgaon 


School of Planning and Architecture, New Delhi 
Shelter Consulting Engineers, Noida 
The Institution of Engineers (India), Kolkata 


In personal capacity (204, Sector A, Pocket-C, Vasant Kunj, 


New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (4/1, Technology Apartments, 
Patparganj, Delhi) 


In personal capacity (7A, Autumn Hue, Seasons, PPD 
Apartments, Kuravankonam, Kowdiar, Trivandrum) 


In personal capacity (4/1, Sector A, Pocket-C, Vasant Kunj, 


New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (Flat No. 125, Ankur Apartments, 
Patparganj, Delhi) 


In personal capacity (Flat No. 220, Ankur Apartments, 
Patparganj, Delhi) 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 15883 (Part 12) : 2016 
Representative(s) 


Dr ANIL AGARWAL 
Dr ARUN CHANDRAMOHAN (Alternate) 


SHRI ANIL Kapoor 


SHRI SHATRUGHAN LAL 
Suri SANJAY Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI LEENA GUPTE SAMANT 
Suri TEJAS Sura (Alternate) 


SHRI PAWAN CHOUDHARY 
Suri M. D. Josui (Alternate) 


Dr V. K. Paul 


SHRI Manos KUMAR MITTAL 
SHRI S. A. REDDI 


Sarı Birin CHAND (Alternate) 
DR VANITA AHUJA 
SHRI R. P. LAHIRI 
SHRI JOSE KURIAN 
SHRI KRISHNA Kant 
Suri A. K. SHARMA 


DR V. THIRUVENGADAM 


Suri B. K. Sinna, Scientist ‘ʻE’ and Head (Civil Engg) 
[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI ABHISHEK PAL 
Scientist ‘B?’ (Civil Engg), BIS 


Panel for Construction Project Management, CED 29/P1 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity (103, Charak Sadan, 
Vikaspuri, New Delhi) 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Creative Design Consultants and Engineers (P) Ltd, 
Ghaziabad 


Delhi Tourism and Transportation Development 
Corporation, New Delhi 


EH and S Cares, New Delhi 
Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi 


Larsen and Toubro Ltd, Chennai 


NTPC Ltd, New Delhi 


School of Planning and Architecture, New Delhi 


Shelter Consulting Engineers, Noida 


In personal capacity (204, Sector A, Pocket-C, Vasant Kunj, 


New Delhi) 


Representative(s) 


Suri P. KrisHNAN (Convener) 


CHIEF ENGINEER (CSQ) 
Suri SANJEEV Rastoc! (Alternate) 


SHRI AMAN DEEP 


SHRI SHISHIR BANSAL 


SHRI A. K. TRIPATHI 


SHRI A. K. MISHRA 
Sarı D. Jana (Alternate) 


Dr K. C. IYER 


Suri M. P. Narpu 
SHRI R. SHANKAR NARAYANAN (Alternate) 


SHRI SATISH UPADHYAY 
SHRI Amit TRIVEDI (Alternate) 


Dr V. K. PAUL 
SHRI Manos KUMAR MITTAL 


DR VANITA AHUJA 


IS 15883 (Part 12) : 2016 


Organization 


In personal capacity (E-9, Gaur Green Avenue, Abhay Khand-II, 
Indirapuram, Ghaziabad) 

In personal capacity (C-2/2324, Vasant Kunj, New Delhi) 

Ir 


5 


personal capacity (411, Sector A, Pocket-C, Vasant 
Kunj, New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (608, Technology Apartment, 
I. P. Extension, Delhi) 


In personal capacity (Flat No. 125, Ankur Apartments, 
Patparganj, Delhi) 

In personal capacity (Flat No. 220, Ankur Apartments, 
Patparganj, Delhi) 


In personal capacity (7A, Autumn Hue, Seasons, PPD 
Apartments, Kuravankonam, Kowdiar, Trivandrum) 


Representative(s) 


SHRI IFTIKHAR A. DRABU 


SHRI CHANDRA PAL 


Suri KrisHNA KANT 


Dr S. N. MANDAL 


Suri A. K. SHARMA 


Dr V. THIRUVENGADAM 


Suri JOSE KURIAN 


Working Group on Integration Management, CED 29/P1/WG 12 


Organization 
Larsen and Turbo Ltd, Chennai 
Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 
Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 
NTPC Ltd, New Delhi 
PMI Organization Centre Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 
In personal capacity (C-2/2324, Vasant Kunj, New Delhi) 


14 


Representative(s) 
Suri R. SHANKAR NARAYANAN (Convener) 
SHRI A. K. Gupta 
Dr ASHWIN MAHALINGAM 
Suri S. N. BHATNAGAR 
SHRI SATISH UPADHYAY 
SHRI TEJAS SURA 


SHRI CHANDRA PAL 


(Continued from second cover page) 


The other parts of the standard are under formulation which will cover functions such as procurement management, 
communication management, human resource management and sustainability management. 


In a construction project different teams or organizations come together to carryout various processes of the 
project and these teams may have competing interests. Integration management aims to provide processes necessary 
for coordination among all the project stakeholders. It ensures organizational teams perform in an integrated 
manner with their actions coordinated to the mutual interest towards the project goal. 


This standard (Part 12) has been formulated to cover aspects on integration management function and aims to 
provide processes necessary for coordination among all the project stakeholders. This function facilitates 
coordination among various disciplines like civil, architecture, mechanical and electrical in the project and also 
amongst various other functions of the project like scope management, time management, cost management, 
quality management and procurement management. 


The guidelines may be applicable in general to all construction projects. However, for smaller projects, the 
applicability of various provisions may be decided appropriately by the parties concerned. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for formulation of this standard is given in Annex C. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and guality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enguiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 29 (8062). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 10002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VI M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 26 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


