( Reaffirmed 2001 )

Indian Standard
METHODS FOR MEASUREMENT OF SUSPENDED SEDIMENT IN OPEN CHANNELS
Fluid Flow Measurement Sectional Committee, BriC
Chairman DR A. N. KHOSL~ 15, Jangpura `B', New Delhi Vice-Chairman N-111, Members SHRI N. D. GULHATI Pancha Shila Colony, New Delhi

17

Representing

SHRI BALESHWAR NATH Ministry of Irrigation & Power SHRI V. N. NAGARAJA (Alternate ) DR BHARAT SINGH University of Roorkee SHRI D. R. BHISE Bombay Municipal Corporation SHRI V. D. DE~AI I Alternate 1 ' Central Water & Power Commission, New Delhi CHIEF ENGINEER ( FI &s T ) CHEF ENGINEER,PWD Public Works Department. Government of Mysore SHRI D. DODDIAH ( A1temat-s ) DIRECZOR Andhra Pradesh Engineering Research Laboratory, Hyderabad DIREDTOR Central Water & Power Research Station, Poona DIRECCOR Land Reclamation, Irrigation & Power Research Institute, Amntsar DIRECZOR( CSM ) Central Water, Power Commission, New Delhi DIRE-R ( IRRIGATION RESEARCH Irrig;&;;eshDepartment, Government of Uttar INSTIZTJTE ) Sxnr K. K. FRAMJI In personal capacity [ Rendal Palmer d Tritfon ( India ) Ltd, .New Delhi] SHRI 0. P. GARG Ganga Discharge Circle, Ministry of Irrigation 8s Power SHRI N. K. Geosxi National Instruments ( Private ) Ltd, Calcutta PROF N. S. G~VINDA RAO Central Board of Irrigation & Power Central Board of Irrigation & Power SHRI S. N. GUPTA Designs and Standards Organization JOINT DIRECTOR Research? ( Rarlway Board ) SHRI KANWAR SAIN In personal capacity ( C/o ECAFE, Bangkok ) All India Instrument Manufacturers and Dealers SHRI A. N. KRMINASWAMY Association, Bombay SHIUB. MA~IXA River Research Institute, Government of West Bengal DSPUTY DIRECTOR ( Alternate ) Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi DB R. C. MALHOTRA Central Water 4%Power Commission MEM~ER(D&R) Meteorological Department, Ministry of Tourism & METE~R~L~~C~T Civil Aviation ( Continued on page 2 )

INDIAN
MANAK

STANDARDS
BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR
NEW DELHI

INSTITUTION
SHAH ZAFAR MARG
llOftO2

IS: 4890- 1968
( Cbhaedfrom #age 1) Rejresenting Members` Roads Wing, Ministry of Transport SKShipping &RI B. B. RAO Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore PROPK. SEETHARA~UII SUPERINTE~~~NO% N G I N E air Irrigation Department, Government of Madras ( DEEZGN ) EXIUXJTI~E ENGINEER ( RESEARCH ) ( Alternate ) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-o$%io Mtibn) SHRIR. NAOARAJAN, Director ( Civ Engg ) Secretav SHRIK. RA~HAVEKDRAN Deputy Director ( Civ Engg ), IS1 Stream Convener SHRIK. K. FRAMJI Gauging

Methods

Subcommittee,

BDC 17 : 5

In personal capacity `[ Rendal Palmer & Tritton ( India ) Ltd, New Delhi]

Members Ministry of Irrigation & Power SHRI BALESHWAR NATH SHRIV. N. NAGARAJA (Alternate ) Central Water & Power Research Station, Poona SH~.S. V. CHITALE Central Water & Power Commission DIRECTOR(H&S) _ Public Works Department, Governmentof Myaore DIRECTOR Ex~currve ENGINZ!ER ( Alternate ) Ganga Discharge Circle, Ministry of Irrigation St SHRI 0. P. GARG Power Ministry of Irrigation & Power SHRI M. L. MADAN &RI S. K. SACHDEV ( Alternate) River Research Institute, Government of West SHRIB. MAITRA Bengal SHRIH. R. PRAMANIK ( Alternate) Commissioner for the Port of Calcutta DR S. K. NAG --_ Central Water & Power Commission SHRIN. C. RAWA; Central Gauging Circle, Central Water & Power SUPEP&~JDZNG ENQINEER Commission

Panel for the Study and Preparation of Preliminary Sediment .Flow, 17 : 5 /Pl
SHRI0. P. GARG

Draft on

GanrowTischarge Alternate)

Circle, Ministry of Irrigation &

SHRI M. L. MADAN ' SHRIS. K. SACHDEV (

Ministry of Irrigation & Power Commissioner for the Port of Calcutta

DR S. K. NAG

2

ls:4890-1968

Indian Standard
METHODS FOR MEASUREMENT OF SUSPENDED SEDIMENT IN OPEN CHANNELS 0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 23 July 1968, after the draft finalized by the Fluid Flow Measurement Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 0.2 Sediment has been defined generally as solid particles which are It creates numemoved or might have been moved by flow in a channel. `rous problems for the engineer, the agriculturist and the forester all along It raises the stream bed which increases the flood heights the channel. and inundation; it. piles up large quantities of sediment behind dams, thereby reducing their capacities and function; it causes the rivers to meander and often to leave their original courses and flow along a new course, devastating vast areas of land; it silts up irrigation and navigation The forester is confronted with the channels making them less efficient. soil erosion and has to devise measures for effective soil conservation. 0.3 When considering a river system as a whole, it can be said that the sediment problem starts at the very source of sediment supply in the upper most drainage area and ends at the river outlet into the sea. However, in certain instances ( for example, when the sea is shallow and the current is not able to carry away the sediment discharged by the river ) the problem does not end even after the sediment load reaches the sea. 0.4 Therefore for a thorough understanding of the individual problems, a comprehensive knowledge of sediment movements and the methods. of estimation of sediment load is absolutely essential. 0.5 In the formulation of this standard due weightage has been given to international co-ordination among the standards and practices prevailing in different countries in addition to relating it to the practices in the field in this country. 0.6 This standard is one of a series of Indian of liouird and sediment flow in open channels. so for in the series are: Standards on measurement Other standards published of flow of

*IS : 1191-1959 Glossary of terms used in measurement water in open channels
*Since revised.

3

ls:4890-1968
IS : 1192-1959 Velocity-area water in open channels methods for measurement of flow of

IS : 1193- 1959 Methods for measurement of flow of water in open channels using notches, weirs and flumes IS : 1194-1960 Forms for recording measurement of flow of water in open channels IS : 2912-1964 Recommendation for liquid flow measurement in open channels by slope-area method ( approximate ~method ) IS : 2913-1964 channels Recommendation for determination of flow in tidal by

IS : 2914-1964 Recommendations for estimation of discharges establishing stage-discharge relation in open channels

IS : 2915-1964 Instructions for collection of data for the determina, tion of error in measurement of flow by velocity area methods 0.7 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing tht result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard covers the methods and techniques of measurement and the instruments used in the estimation of suspended sediment load in open channels, where the flow is uni-directional. This excludes the direct methods of measurement ( for which special instruments are necessary ) and they will be covered in a separate standard. 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions and those specified in IS : 1191-1959t shall apply.

2.1 Sediment Load - It is the total of the sediments that move either in . suspension or in contact with the bed. It is the sum of suspended load and bed load. Alternatively, it is the total of ` bed material load ' and the wash load. ___*Rules for roundingoff numerical values ( reuiscd ). `_C!ossary of terms used ill measurementof flow of water in open channels (Since revised) .
4

~S:4SBo-1968 2.2 Bed Load -The sediment in almost continuous contact with the b ctd while carried by rolling, sliding or hopping along the bed of the strearrr. Bed load is also divided into contact load and saltation load. 2.2.1 Contact Load - The sediment that is rolling or sliding along the bed of the stream in substantially continuous contact with the bed. 2.2.2 Saltation Load - The sediment bouncing and hopping along the bed of the stream or moved directly or indirectly by the impact of the bouncing particles. 2.3 Bed Material - Bed material denotes the material, the particle sizes of which are found in appreciable quantities in the shifting portions of the bed. 2C4 Bed Material Load -The coarser part of the sediment load which cousists of particle sizes represented in the bed ( that is bed material ) and which is limited in its rate of movement by the transporting capacity of the channel. That part of the sediment load of a stream 2.5 Suspended Loadwhich remains in suspension in the flowing water for considerable periods of time without contact with the stream bed, being kept up by the upward component -of the turbulence or by colloidal suspension and which moves practically with the same velocity as that of flowing water. 2.6 Wash Load - That part of the suspended load which is composed of particle sizes smaller than those found in appreciable quantities in the shifting' portions of the stream bed. It is in near permanent suspension and is transported entirely through the stream without deposition. The discharge of the wash load through a reach depends only on the rate with which these particles become available in the catchment and not on the transport capacity of flow. 2.7 Sediment Concentration-The ratio of dry weight of sediment in a water-sediment mixture to the total weight of a suspension. It is generally expressed in grams per litre or parts per million ( by weight ). 2.8 Mean Static Concentration of Suspended Load-The concentration which when multiplied by the volume of a reach gives the total weight of suspended load in the reach. 2.8 Mean Concentration of Suspended Load in Motion -The concentration which when multiplied by the discharge of water through a cross-section gives the discharge of the suspended load through the cross-section. 2.10 Sediment Discharge - The weight of sediment transported through a channel per unit time. It is generally expressed as tonnes per day. 5 -

2.11 Sediment Hydrograph - The graphical representation variation of sediment concentration or discharge with time.

showing

2.12 Terminal Velocity - The limiting velocity reached asymptotically -by a particle falling under the action of gravity in a still liquid of infinite extent, at a specified temperature. 3. SEDIMENT AND SEDIMENT MOTION CHARACTERISTICS

3.1 Sources of Sediment -Erosion is csused by water, wind, ice and human activities like cultivation, etc. Clods and aggregates of soil in the catchment area are broken down into small particles which are thrown into suspension and carried away as sediment. Not all the eroded materials get into the stream channel. The total amount of eroded material which travels from source to a downstream measuring point is te?med as the ` sediment yield `. 3.2 Rate of Sediment Production - The sediment yield of a catchment The significant is dependent on a complex of hydro-physical conditions. physical features are the size and slopes of the catchment area, land use, pattern of channelization and erodibility of the soil. The significant hydrologic parameters are rainfall and run off, particularly the peak values of run off. Sediment yield data is reduced for purposes of comparison to the yield per unit of the catchment area and referred to as the ` Sediment Production Rate ' expressed in tonnes or cubic metre of sediment per square kilometre of the catchment area per year. 3.3 Sediment Motion and Sediment Load - For a proper comprehension of sediment movement and related terms, the flow of water over an artificially flattened bed of sediment may be considered. From no movement of sediment at very low velocities, some particles begin to move with the increase of velocity by sliding along the bed ( contact load ) and then by making short jumps ( saltation load ); at still higher velocities particles are thrown into suspension and prevented from coming into contact with the bed by the upward component of the turbulence or by colloidal suspension ( suspended load ). ' Contact load `, ` saltation load ' and ` suspendedpd ' may occur simultaneously and the border lines between these are not well defined. This difficulty is avoided in practice by dividing the ` total load ' into `suspended load-' and ` bed load `. The ` bed load ' moves at a lower velocity than the layer of water through which it is travelling, the traction on it being exercised through the fluid drag. The total load may also be divided into ` bed material load ' and ` wash load ' the former constituting the coarser part of the sediment load moved by the transporting capacity 6

ls:48!m-

1968

bf the channel which may settle and the latter the fine suspended material which does not settle in the existing conditions of flow. 3.4 Bed Co+uration~The corresponding bed configuration with increasing velocity are ri@~les ( at the early stage of sediment motion ) which move downstream at velocities smaller than the flow velocity; then with increasing Froude number and boundary shear stress, the ripples change into dunes, which disappear at some higher velocity and the abed becomes fiat; at still higher velocities, sand waves ( anti-dunes ) form which usually move upstream and are accompanied by waves on the water surface. 3.5 Properties of Sediment - The transportation of sediment depends as much upon the properties of the sediment as upon the hydraulic characteristics of flow. The properties of sediment are defined by individual particle characteristics and bulk characteristics. 3.5.1 Properties of Individual Particles-The sediment size is the most commonly used parameter to designate the properties of individual particles. While the size of sediment and its packing directly affect the roughness of the bed, the terminal velocity of the particle directly characterises its reaction to flow and governs the movement of sediment. This in turn depends upon the specific weight, shape and the size of the particle. 3.5.1.1 Since natural sediment particles are of irregular shape a single length or diameter to characterize the size shall be chosen. Four such diameters as defined below are used for different particles' size or purposes [for example, (a) for coarse and medium size particles, and (d) for the fine particles which cannot be separated by sieves 1. The nominal diameter has little significance in sediment transport, but is useful in the study of sedimentary deposit.

4 b) 4 4

Sieve diameter -

The length of the side of the smallest square opening through which the particle will just pass. Projected diameter-The diameter of a circle which just encloses the projected image of the particle when viewed in :he plane of maximum stability. Nominal diameter -The diameter of a sphere of the same volume as the given particle. Sedimentation diameter -The diamete; of a sphere of the same specific weight and the same terminal settling velocity as the given particle in the same sedimentation fluid.

3.5.2 Bulk Characteristics -As sediments consist of large number of particles differing in size, shape, specific gravity, terminal velocity, etc, it is essential to find some parameters that can represent the characteristics of the group of particles as a whole. Therefore, a sample of sediment is usually divided into certain class intervals according to the characteristics ( like size, terminal velocity, etc ) and the percentage of the total in each

7

._ IS:48!30-1968 class by weight for the particular characteristic is determined and the frequency distribution curves a& drawn SUXI their parameters ( mean, standard -deviation, etc ) are derermined. 4. MEASUREMENT OB SUSPENDED SED&BAD

4.1 Principles of Measurement 4.1.1 The conaentpation of suspended sediment ( cf ) and the current velocity ( ui ) are measured practically simultaneously at a large number ( m ) of points in the sampling area of a cross-section. Each concentration and velocity is representative df ti small area ( at ) of a ,samplii~g cross' section. The sum of all the areas ( ai ) is the sampling area ( A ); The average static concentration C, is given by: IS! ci The mean. concentration given by: of suspended sediment load in mmtion &,, is Zci vi at i I
CCd Vi ai

c))l=I;aor=--

Q

where Q = Zai vi, is the discharge in the sampling area. The, suspended sediment load through the sampling area is the pryduct of the mean concentration in motion and the discharged,thtit is, 2, x 0. Thus, for one year the total weight of solids transported. is
365 I;

suspended sediment sampler cannot take samples nw the bed of the channel where the concentration is luite high, the suspended sediment load is determined for, and applicable only to, tne ` sampled zone ' of the channel.

tim - Asa

1 Gni Q,

_&Jk$easurement - The concentration of suspended sediment `is expressed iti g/f ( Kg/m3 )__p parts.per.?_illion ( by weight ). ;_ 4.3,,&ect;on of Site - Since k&me& `&ii& obtained as a product of mean_ concentration of the sediment load in r&ion and the correspqnding /,&charge iA the river, the site for silt cbservation should normally be the same as that for discharge observations and should satisfy the conditions laid down in IS : 119%1959*. `/ 7 Weiccity-area metho& for"me&xu&entoftlow of water in open channels.

Is:4890~19s8 4.4 Measurement of Discharge - For the purpose of this standard the discharge measurements shall be made in accordance with IS : 1192-19X)*. 4.5 Requirements for Sampling of Suspended Load

4.5.1 The concentration ofsuspended load not only changes from point to point in a cross-section but also fluctuates from moment to moment at a fixed point. The kind of sampler and the technique of sampling used will depend on a large ~number of factors. The discharge of sediment load per unit width at a vertical in a cross-section can be determined either by integrating over the depth the products of the concentration of the suspended load and the velocity measured simultaneously at each of a number of points in the vertical or by using an integrating depth sampler which automatically takes a sample in which the concentration of suspended load is the mean concentration in motion ( see 4.6 ). The suspended sediment concentration as well as the grade of sediment in a flowing stream increases from top to bottom and it also varies transversely across the section. The variation depends upon the size and shape of the cross-section, the stage of flow and other channel characteristics. Hence a preli;ninary investigation has to be made to select the sampling points on a vertical and also the number and location of the sampling verticals, taking into consideration the accuracy desired and the resources available. A comparative summaryof the sampling methods and their reliability is given in Table 1 and the methods are described in 4.6. Both for measurements and the determination of the point of mean concentration of sediment, sediment concentration should be determined at several points in a vertical like @l, 0.2, 0.3, O-4, O-5, 0.6, O-7, O-8 and O-9 depth ( or the lowest practicable point ). 4.5.2 The procedures for obtaining the mean sediment~discharge per unit area and the mean sediment concentration in motion at the vertical are:

4 b) 4

Draw the velocity -distribution and sediment concentration curves as in Fig. 1A and 1B. The -curves shall be drawn up to the sampled zone. Find the products of c (concentration ) x u ( velocity ) at corresponding points and draw the rate of sediment discharge curve as in Fig. 1C. Assuming unit width, find the areas of Fig. 1A ( qw ) and Fig. 10 ( q8 ). This may be done graphically by planimetering or numeritally by a rule such as the trapezdidal rule. These areas directly give the water and sediment discharges.

*Velocity-area methods for measutiment

offlow
9

of water in open channels.

ls : 48!ML

1968

d). The mean sediment concentration in motion at the vertical and _ the mean sedigent discharge per unit area at the vertical are 9s 2, =where D is. the `depth (tip to {and @, 7 $especnvely, 4w sampled `zone ) .
NOTE I- This`method is more laborious than would ordinarily be justified for routine sediment measurement. However, for preliminary investigation for determining the point of mean concentration such experiments shoulQ_e repeated for various stages of flow. , NOTE 2 - The fine sediment ( below 0.075 mm diameter) is uniformly distributed throughout the vertical and a single sample to bc sufficient for determining its concentration.

I

vWATER SURFACE

c-

cxv d

C

I A $elocity

Distribution

IS Sediment Concentration Distribution SEDIMENTDISCHARGE

t$Z Sediment&charge Distribution

\ , -_ i B
-'
I

Fm.

1

COMPUTATION

4.5.3 Selection of Verticals - For the determination of the %inimum number of verticals representing the sediment distribution -across the :tream, one of the following two procedures should be followed:

4

The section should be divided into as large a number of equally spaced segments as practicable to be completed in one observation. The mean concentration in motion in each vertical in the centre of the segment [ 4.5.2 ( d ) ] should be obtained and weighted with respect to the stream discharge in the-~respective segment. This wiI1 give an indication of the distribution of sediment in the entire section for the particular stage of flow. The stream section is divided into a large number of segments of approximately equal discharge and sediment samples. are taken at the centroid vertical of each equal discharge segments. This 10

b)

TABLE
hhtOD AND

i

Ml?TDOD

OF SRJZCTIN /

G~S&,PLING

PGINTSIN

A VERMCAI: TBhpxL ~NSIIWUTION

DIBCUSU~N
I-

rtlyicm
, Concentration

DXSCRWTION

( ckrutc 4:5.1 ) A& A~&x H)R 4 Cun~_~etigon Only*

and

,

NtMUUtOFSAMPi.ESAND hALYSE3 PXR VRRTIOAL

(1) 9

(2)
Sra&-fiinf A single sample secured at the surface

(3)

(4)

(5)
Not at all reliable or accurate

(6)
Simplestorall present meth`-ods, rapid and easy to use. Readily ada@ed for use by unskilled observers. Requires previous, more exact sampling for justification

(7) One sample and laboratory analysis one

ii) Sing&-point A single sample secured at any point in the vertical other than the surface

Arbitrary method unlcjs Not reliable or necessarily accurate even vjhen a coetlicients have heen ~c~&rt has been deterdetermined from precomplete vious,_ more samphng, and then it is somewhat empirical Arbitrary method unless coeibcients have been determined from precomplete vious, more sampling, and then it is somewhat empirical. A common arbitrary p-int has been O-6 depth Arbitrary method with no rational justification

iii) Two-@inf Two points selected arbitrarily for convenience and e;taae; to the skill of iv) Threa?+oint

Generally not reliable ur Not reliable or accurate accurate even when a coefficient haa been determined, but more so than a single surface sample. Thoroughness of preliminary investigations willdetermine, somewhat, the reliabihty and accuracy Generally not reliable or accurate for all conditions of a given stream Not necessarily reliable or accurate for all stream conditions *mzt; not reliable or

Simple, rapid, and easy- to use, but fractional de th measurements make it Pess adaptable to use by unskill: ed olmmvers than single surface method. Requires previous, more exact sampling for justification Fairly simple, rapid, and easy to use. May be used by dependable observers even though inexperienced Sampling at surface, middepth, and bottom is the most simple and easiest to uge of all methods requiring mom than two samples may be used t& dependable observers even though inexperienced Sampling at surface,- middepth, and bottom is the simplest and the easiest to use of all methods requiring more than two samples. May be used by dependable observers even though inexperienced

One sample and laboratory -analysis

one

Two sampies may be combined If of equal volume for a single analysis ~~ Three samples may be combined if of equal volume for a single analysis

Arkbary

selection of points at surface? mid depth and bottom with equal weights

Points located arbitrarily

Not necessarily accurate

reliable

or

v) Thm+oint Arbitrary selection of points at surthce, mid-depth, and bottom wnh w3ghts of 1, 2, and & applied, respectively

Basis of method is the that the assumption :3:Zf-$+cF;: sent upper-half of discharge and average of mid-depth and bottom represents lower-half

Not necessarily reliable or accurate for all stream condition

Not necessarily reliable or accurate, but more so than three ints, surface mid-depth, and t ttom with equal heights

bottom' samples Mayo be combined for single analysis

5

vi) Pn?ciss

A relatively large number of int samples at known p" ocations in each vertical, simultaneous with velocity measurements

*Fur ~lethda +vhere coe&ients

AccuRational method for use Reliable and accurate. Ac< Reliable and accurate. Not adapted to routine sam- Minimum of four or five curacy depends upon the racy depends'upon curvature pling because of the exsampia all .to ba analyaed primarily in special inve+ curvature of the velocity ofpartick distribution. curves, Number of separately cessive work required~ Its and sediment distribution and number of samples. :z$izg points de@ends The use is limited to research or curves and number of most accurate -method in use upon depth of stream, the preliminary investigations. samples. The most accuvelocity and sediment at present Laboratory work ex rate method ,in use at ~tri~i~d~.gasallsamplesmust ces% pracnt a=WedrepprptelY are used9 comments apply only to individ+ observations or &ort period invatigations, as over long periods, totals may have a f&r degree of-

li

.c fz%dpd)

ISr4890-1968
1 METHOD OF SELEGTlNG ~MIUFUNG~MAVERTICAL-C~C~~~~ PRAcncAL

TABLE

St No.

METHODAND DIWXIPTION

&lCDllION

CUIlIDERATION
Concentration Only* Concentration and Particle Size (5) Theoretically not sound if sediment distnbution is cusyilinear, but, practically, one of the most reliable methods

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4) Accuracy and reliability depends almost entirely upon the agreement ofthe actual to tbe asmaned sediment and velocity, In most cases quite reliable

(6)
Field work relatively siinple for &ill& observer but adaptable also to dependable observers, even though inexperienced

(7) Two samples and two analyses

.vii) Sfraub Sampling at 0.2 and 0.8 Rational method, best depth, applying coefficient adapted for use where obtained by mathematical the vertical sediment disderivation for both linear tribution curve approxiand curvilinear sediment mates a straight line distribution for linear disand the velocity distributribution values weighted tion isfairly constant 518 and 318 for 0.2 and O-8 depth, respectively viii) Luby Sampling points selected at the middle of increments of depth representing equal portions of stream discharge Rational methzbb," a of sufficient samples are collected. The samples if of equal volume, may be combined and the composite is representative of the mean concentration and composition in the vertical. Number of points with respect to depth depends primarily upon curvature of sediment distribution curve; to a lesser extent, generally, upon curvature of vertical velocity curve Rational method only it sample is collected proportional to velocity

Reliable and accurate if a sufficient number of samples are collected. One of the most reliab_& and accurate, of the IHaCnt methods except tbe psecise

Fairly reliable and accurate if a sufficient number of samples are collected. One of the most reliable and accurate of the present methods except the Enough samples $Z?l!l'be taken so that one will be close to the stream bed

Requires either an assumed velocity distribution or previous velocity measurements. Too complicated for use except by trained hydrographen. &cause of sampling more points a better representation of the actual sediment distribution will probably be obtained than with the Straub method

Minimum of five sample+. Mav be combined if of equal volume for a single analysis

ix) Depth-integration Single sample collected from all points in the vertical usually obtained by lowering and raising a slow filling sampler at constant rate. Tllese usually consist of ordinary milk bottle types or specially designed slowfilling samplers

Relatively reliable under usual conditions but its accuracy Varies as most of the present equipment does not sample pmportional to the veloqity and many samplers do n04 ap preach close enough ta the bottom. As used, acc&acy depends upon depth of stream and type of sampler

Relatively reliable under usual conditions but its accuracy varies as most of the present equipment does not sample pro rtional to the velocity anBomany samplesa do no; approach dose enough to the bottom. As used, accuracy depends upon depth of stream and type of sampler

uiedwith um' p!e slow-Wing samplers tbii method is simple, rapid, easy to use, and well adapted to dependable ovsesven, even though inexperienced. No previous measurements necessary
As commonly

O~ynple

and

one

*For methods where coefficients are used, comments apply only to individual observavrtldnsor short period investigations, as over long periods, totals may have a fair degree of aecuarey.

I

12

IS:4890-

x968

gives the required sediment distribution across the stream for the particular stage of flow. There is no firm relationship between the stage and the location of the point of mean concentration in motion. Therefore, the above observations shall be made for different stages of flow. It is desirable to have larger frequency of observations on a limited number of verticals at the high flood stages; and the endeavour should be to ensure measurements at least `once a weak during high Rood stages and once during the highest floods or during the occurrence of a flashy spate. The mare frequent the observations the better the overall estimate is likely to be and, wherever possible, sediment observations should be made as frequently as discharge observations are made eon perennial streams.
NOTE I - When the investigation experiments, Table 2 may be used as their approximate location across the able amount of preliminary work has justifies it to assume a relationship and velocity. Now 2 - For ting segments of concentration in ments shall be than 3. NOTE 3 -The channels. is not important enough to merit preliminary a guide for locating the number of verticals and Section. It is not always correct unless a considerbeen done at a given sampling cross-section which between distribution of concentration in motion

routine observations, a few verticals either equally spaced or represenequal discharge which will give almost the same mean ~sediment motion, as the greater number of verticals in the preliminary experiselected. The number of verticals chosen shall preferably be not less method (b) can be used in practice only in canals or non erodiig

TABLE 2

SELECTION OF VERTICALS ( Chue~.5.3, Jvote1 )
LOCATION OF VERTICALS IN STREAMS OFUNIFORM I)EPTHAND VELoClTY

SL No.

WIDTHOF THE RIVER

NUMBEROF VERTICALS

LOCATION OF VERTICALS IN NORMALSECPION WITH SLOPING SIDE.3

(1) i) ii) iii)

(2) Less than 30 m 30 3C0 m

(3)
3 5 7

(4)
25, 50 and 75 percent of the wiiith 20, 35, 50, 65 and 80 percent of the width 15, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70 and 85 percent of the width

(5)
17, 50 and 83 percent of the width 10, 30, 50, 70 and 90 percent of the width 7, 21, 36, 50, 64, 79 and Y3 percent of the width

Over 300 m

NOTE - These are suggested for tentative adoption in natural and artificial channels until by experimentation more suitable location and spacing of verticals are determined.

13

IS: 4890 - 1968 4.6 Methods for Routine t$ampling 4.6.1 The best known method is that for the determination of the point of mean concentration in motion ( 4.5.2 ). A number of other commonly used methods ( such as Straub, Luby, Depth integration ) have been developed for determining the average sediment concentration in motion in a vertical. In general, these methods are based upon analysis of factors which influence the movement of sediment loads in streams and are therefore to be preferred to the one-point and two-point methods. 4.6.2 One-Point MethodIn this method the sampler shall be immersed to the point of -mean sediment concentration in motion as determined from the preliminary experiments in 4.5.2. The depth from the surface h;, at which to take the water sediment sample corresponding to the mean concentration in motion I, may be obtained from Fig. 1. The sediment concentration of the sample taken at this depth, /Q~ is multiplied, by qw ( that is, water discharge per unit width in the vertical ) to get the suspended sediment discharge per unit width in the vertical qs. The mean suspended sediment discharge per unit area is obtained by dividing q, by D, the depth of the sampled zone. 4.6.2.1 If the sample is taken at one point only of a single vertical at the centre of the stream the position in the vertical at which the sample is taken should be that at which the concentration of suspended load is the mean concentration of suspended load in motion for the whole cross-section. If this is not known, then the sample is taken at the position on the central vertic 1 where the concentration is ihe mean concentration of suspended load m motion in that vertical. This concentration is multiplied by the discharge ~of the stream to give the total suspended sediment load. 4.6.2.2 More correctly the value of the concentration should be multiplied by the discharge of the sampled area of the stream but since this is usually not known, the concentration is multiplied by the total discharge, as an approximation. 4.6.2.3 Since the sediment concentration distribution curve is different for different size ranges, a sample taken at the mean sediment concentration point ( for the sample as a whole ) will not generally give the true size distribution. Only a composite representative sample taken either by a depth integrating sampler or made up of point samples taken at more than `one point on the vertical and weighted in proportion to velocity can give the overall average concentration and size distribution of the sediment load in motion. If the point sampling method is used it is better to make a size analysis on each sample and to plot the product of the velocity and the concentration of particles in a given size range against the depth. 4.6.2.4 In the absence of previous experiments, a common practice has been to sample at O-5 or Cl.6 depths, but this method will give only approximate results for the overall mean concentration. Size distribution may not be obtained by this method. 14

1s:48!)0=19M 4.6.2.5 At -times, were sampling at ~the position of mean concentration. of sediment in motion is-not possible (for example, in hilly or boulder streams flowing at thigh velocity ) the samples are collected from a point~near the surface and their values multiplied by an appropriate factor ( if any ), determined from preliminary experiments for converting the concentration at the surface to approximate mean concentratibn in motion. This conversion factor can be strictly' applied only to the particular stage of flow and the channel and sediment conditions under which it has been obtained. However, size distribution cannot be obtained by this method. 4.6.3 Multi-@oint Method 4.6.3.1 Samples should be taken at 2, 3 or more points in the vertical and if weighted in proportion to the corresponding current velocities, the concentration of the weighted sample can be taken as the mean concentration in motion. However, for simplicity as an approximation ( particularly where it is difficult to determine the corresponding velocities ), samples are taken at 2 or 3 or more points along the vertical and their average taken as the mean static concentration, and this is multiplied by the average velocity to give the mean concentration in motion. In general, the greater the number of sampling points the greater will be the accuracy of results. 4.6.3.2 In the two-point method, two samples shall be taken, one below the surface undulation and the other near the bottom ( for example, @9 depth or the lowest practicable depth ) of equal volume. A single `analysis shall be made of the combined sample. 4.6.3.3 In the three-point method, samples shall be taken below the surface undulation, mid-depth and near the bottom ( for example, 0.9 depth or the lowest practicable depth ) with the mid-depth sample given twice the weight of the others. A composite sample made up of two samples from mid-depth and one each from surface and bottom, all of equal volume, shall be used ,for both concentration and size analysis, NOTE-If preliminaryexp' riments as described in 4.5.2 have been cond&ted,
correction factors based on the 4J8me shall be applkd.

4.6.4 Other Methodr for Determining Average Sediment Concentration 4.6.4.1 Straub method - In this method, samples are taken at O-2 depth and O-8 depth and the values are weighted 518 and 318 respectively as given below: c+n= # &&I~+ 8
CO-,,

The method is satisfactory for determining~the~sediment concentration in motion over a considerable range of conditions, but not reliable for sediment size distribution. 4.6.4.2 Luby method -+n the Luby method the samples are obtained fkom areas of equal x&charge. To obtain samples representing equal 15 '

IS:4890-1968 portion of the water discharge the area under the vertical velocity curve IS divided into equal parts and the sampling points are to be lpcated at the Equal volumes of the samples should be combincentroids of these areas. ed and the composite sample used to determine both the mean sediment concentration in motion and the particle size distribution in the vertical. 4.6.4.3 Depth integration method - This method of sampling is based on the premise that the sampler designed specifically for the purpose fills at a rate proportional to the velocity of the approaching flow and that by traversing ~the depth of the stream at a uniform speed the sampler will receive at every point in the vertical a sample of the water sediment mixture, at a rate which will be proportional to instantaneous velocity. Only a slow-filling type of sampler shall be used for depth integration. The sampler shall be lowered to the bottom of the stream at a uniform rate and shal.1 be raised again without pausing at the bottom to the surface at a uniform but not necessarily at the same rate, sampling continuously during both periods of transit, or it may be designad to sample at a uniform rate one way only. However, if the sampler is opened at the bottom of the vertical and is integrated on the ascending trip only, a speci_ally designed sampler should be used where the air pressure in the container at the time of opening is balanced by the hydrostatic pressure surrounding the sampler. The depth integration method of sampling requires only one sample from each vertical and gives fairly reliable average of the size distribution of the particles of the stream. This method offers easier field procedure for computation of suspended sediment loads. Use of the depth integrating sampler is only possible if the sampler can be lowered to the bottom and raised again to the surface before the sample container fills with water. The depth of water in which it may be used varies inversely as the product of the velocity and the size of the,sampling nozzle. Under favourable circumstances it may be used to sample in depths up to 6 m. 4.7 Computation of Suspended Sediment Load 4.7.1 For computation of sediment load passing down a cross-scciion it is assumed that the average sediment discharge per unit area between two verticals is equal to the mean of the sediment discharge rates observed at each vertical. The product of this mean and the area between the verticals $ves the sediment discharge for the area. The total sediment load passmg the cross-section is obtained by totalling the sediment and the discharges passing through each of these segmental areas into which the cross-section has been divided by the verticals.
NOTE -Allowance

bctwrcn

where necessary should be made for the svdimcnt the two end-verticals and the banks by closer spaced verticals.

load carried

4.7.2 In the equal-discharge-increments (ED1 ) method, a measurement of water discharge is made from which the spacing of verticals so as 16

lS:4888-1968
to divide the water discharge into equal segments is determined. Then the sampler is lowered and raised hm top to bottom and back at the centroid vertical of each equal discharge zone. The quantity in each centroid sample should be proportional to the water discharge in the segmental section, however, if the location of verticals has been precisely determined equal volumes of sediment sample should be taken. The composite sample represents the mean concentration in motion at the stream section. 4.7.3 If equally spaced verticals are used, the mean concentration of These concensediment load in motion is determined for each vertical. trations are multiplied by the partial discharge in the two half segments on either side of the vertical and the products are added to give the total The computation of sediment load with equally sediment discharge. spaced verticals is facilitated if a depth integrating sampler is used. Since the sampler is designed~to admit water sediment mixture at a rate nearly proportional to the local velocity of the stream at the sampler intake, the samples from each vertical in this equal transit rate ( ETR method ) is The composite of all the samples automatically weighted by discharge. This is a nearly correct sample of the whole stream concentration. concentration multiplied by the discharge yields the total suspended sediment discharge.
NOTE - If, during use, the integrating point sampler is lowered and raised, at a constant velocity in each of the verticals and if at no vertical does the sample bottle become completely full, then the whole of each of the samples may be mixed and the concentration of the mixture will be the mean concentration of sediment in motion at If the velocity with which the sampler traverses the vertical is not the cross-section. the same at all verticals, then the mixture of the samples except in proportion to the mean velocity in the corresponding vertical will not give a valid average sample.

4.7.4

A form for computation

of suspended load is shown in Table 3.

4.8 Samplers 4.8.1 In order that samples taken by a sampler should be truly representative, of the sediment concentration of a stream at the point of sampling the ideal samplers should fulfil the following technical requirements: a) The sampler should be stream-lined the sediment flow; so as to avoid disturbance in

b) The velocity of inflow at the mouth of the sampler should be equal to the velocity of stream flow; c) The mouth of the sampler should always face the direction current; of

d) The mouth should be outside the zone of disturbance of flow set up by the body of the sampler and its operating gear; e) Filling arrangement should be sudden in rush or gulping; 17 very smooth without causing

ISt4890- 1968
f) The container should be easily removed, readily capped and transported to a laboratory without loss of contents; g) The sampler should be able to collect samples at the desired depth (from surface down to O-3 metre from the bed ) without disturbing or contaminating the water sediment mixture at other points while the sampler is being raised or lowered; h) The sampler should- be portable but sufficiently heavy to minimize deflection from the vertical due to current drag; j ) It should be robust and simple in design and construction require minimum care for maintenance and repair; and and

k) The volume of the sample should be sufficient for determination of concentration and size analysis. None of the samplers at present in use may satisfy all the requirements. Some of the samplers approaching the ideal conditions are unfortunately very costly and cumbersome for use in the field. 4.8.2 Various types of suspended sediment load samplers have been designed with a view to complying with most of the above requirements and a Few of these types are: a) Vertical, b) Instantaneous vertical, c) Instantaneous horizontal, d) Bottle, e) Bottle ( modified ), f ) Point integrating, g) Depth integrating, and h) Pump. The characteristics and drawbacks been briefly described in Table 4of each of these samplers have

18

Division Site Reduced Level of Zero of Gauge TWAL ku~m Moor R-

g/l

Hectare MC_ (6)

Percentage (7)

g/l

(1) 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(8)

(9)

(IO?

(11)

(12)

(13)

(14)

(15)

(16)

(17)

(16)

(19)

11 12 13 14 l5 16 17 18 19 20 I TOt8l Mem 21 22 23 24 23 26 21 28 29 30 31 Total

F K

-fincssxiltNtiug/l muldp@tg hctm lix
I

hydrometer

19

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

Isr4&4-I968

,

TYPZ iit.

D-h

Ilrrrrucama' OF S%YZ

SANPLXNO ACITON

FXXLDHANDUNO

ADAPTrramTo vARcotmFkam

canomonr
(8)

(1)

(23
pipe

i) traticrrl

ii) I.nstantancous
vertical

iii) InstantaneoiU horizontal iv) Bottle

(3) With a vertical cylinder or pipe forming the container. When the sampler id lowered to the d&r&i depth, water sediment mixture flOWi through the container. VaiXY either end close and trap the sample A vertical sampler with arrangement to open the sampler for the instantancoua ( rapid ) intake of sam@ at the desired time and depth ! With a horizontal cylinder quipped with end valves which Can be closed suddenly to trap instantaneous samplea at any desired time and depth Consisting of a standard container held in a &UC with device for lowering and opening at the sampling point. The mouth ia kept open for the minimum time required to fill up the bottle Consisting of a litrc capacity containa fitted in a case with device for lowering or raising and opening at the sampling point. Provided also with separate water intake and air exhaust device foi equalking pressure inside and outside the container Designed to fill continuously at a givm point over an interval of time and hence is provided with an opening and closing mechanism and a well with a ~~~~q_~~scr to minimisc initial Designed to fill continuously d ' lowering from surface to hcd ( as uruY we I ontherctumtri fkombcdtorurface). The samplcn 8. a~gncd to fill during lowering only are provided with a foot trigger which closes both inlet and exhaust upon contact with the bed

(3) G&rally Bive cxca-

(6)
Instantaneour

(7) YzlEy in: another container

O&n

considerable reaktancc to cur&t. Not sati&ctory wbal clwc to strcambcd

EtTect not cvduatcd

None

ItMtantatlCotU

Nccauary to trandkr into another con-

Not dttfrctority

`lincdoradatedfauq nearstream Eal

#team-

Tcndencica minimi8ed effects not &luated Exvcessixssi&&kctnot

Slight po&bility

$iziY in:
Bubbling or slow-fillingaftcrinitialru&

AllOWS88I@OgVayChC to streambed. Adaptable
to any strumor
d@

l!!axdvc, if not

another contaitler Container with
sample movable

ifiz!icd d0Appreciable. Effect not evaluated

re-

v) Bottle ( modified )

Slow-filling; no initial inrush present

i2ontainer with sample dctachablc

Not capable of sampling do&e to bed of stream. Haapthighdkicncyin @= pdc EEz an&the c&icncyialcaswithtbe~ ase m grade Not capable of sampling `closetothertrcambcd

vi) Point integrating

Tender&a minimised but not evaluated

Some extent, if not opened and cl& at rite

Smooth filling, minimum initial inrush

Conpainer with sample r!Y movable

vii) Depth integrating

Excasive

viii) Pump

The

through a pipe or hose, the intake of which is laced at the desired umpling point. !y regulaa tbe intake velocity, an undistw 8ample can be obtained

scdimcnt mixture

is

auckcd

in

Tcndcncia minimized with proper control of intake tube and vdocitia

Although the sampled filament will enter the intake nozzle at an angle, provisions cxi8t for making inlet velocity CSlUntially equal to the local velocity of the stream Tit&integrated

Smooth filling.

Container with sample removable

Capabie of Mmplii
tothebd

dae of the rtrcam

Coo.hpr movable

with re-

Pteacnt design not portable. Somewhat limited inuscductoraistancoto currqlt. Huvy*acdiment StLP?p lmc maY

21

AMENOMENTNO.l DECEH6ER1979
TO Is:4890-1968 METHODS FOR KASUREMENT OF SUSPENDED SEDIMENT IN OPEN CHANNELS Addendm ---(Page 13, czuauw 4.5.3) - Add the follouing~new clause after 4.5.3: "4.5.3.1 pie selectionof verticalson the basis of equally spaced segments [according to the procedure given in 4.5.3(a)] will be easy in field pnrctice, whilst the selecfion,of-verticals on the basis of segments of equal discharge[according to the procedure. given in 4.5.3(b)] will involve.practical difficulty since the verticalsin this case will be changingwith for the prefstages. In order to get the mean sample. erred method [4,5.3(a)] the samplesshouldbe mixed in proportionto the dischargesin case of equally spaced segments.
In practicathe number of samples for laboratory analysiswith method given in $.5.3(s)is large aud creates difficulties. Therefore, in field practicea suspendedsedimentsample is collectedfrom each of a large number of equally spaced verticals. These samples are grouped in 5 to 7 sepents taking into consideration the quantityof discharge passing throughthe differentsegments,so that each sement nearly represents equal discharges. The samplesof each-ofthe groups are mixed togetherand aualysedfor working out the mean concentration of the segment. The mean concentration of : the stream is the mean of the concentrations of the segments.*

m

17)

Reprography Unit, ISI, Rew Delhi

