( Reaffirmed 2002 )

IS : 8238 - 1976

Indian Standard
GUIDE FOR USE OF VARIABLE CAPACITORS IN ELECTRONIC EQUIPMENT
Capacitors and Resistors for Electronic Sectional Committee, LTDC Equipment 6

Chairmcui SHEI U. VENKATEEWABLU
SEXU S. P. AXBEICAB Da P. B. PASUZKH ( A&m& SEW H. K. L. ARORA SHSI R. G. Kmw~m
( Bombay 1

Rc~esmting
Central Electronics Ltd, New Delhi Philips India Ltd, Bombay ) All India Radio St Electronics Association

,
J

( AIREA ), Bombay

( Akam

SERI Aaup CHAUDEUFU ( Alllmak ) ( Calcutta ) SERI L. S. V. EASWAR ( A&mute ) ASSISTANTD~ECTOR ( ELE~TBICALNaval Headquarters, New Delhi ENQINEEBINQ MATEEIAL ) STAFF OFFICEIL, NAVAL DESIG.N( ELECTRICAL ) ( Al&mufe ) National Phvsical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi Da V. N. BJXDAL Ministry of Defence Sam S. DEBIKAMANI The National Radio & Electronics @I Ltd, Bombay; SEBI P. P. FERNANDES and Radio Electronics and Television emufacturexs' Association ( RETMA ), Bombay SERI D. D. MAINI ( Afkmate) Posts & Telegraphs Department; New Delhi SERI JOHN FRA~PCIS National Test House, Calcutta SHRI B. P. GHOSH Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangaldre SERI K. GURURAJA SERI R. SOMASEKEARA ( Altemutc ) STANDABDSMinistry of Railways JOINT DIRECTOB, (S&T)`RE DEPUTY D~ECTOR, STANDARDS ( S & T ) RE ( Al&mate ) Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi SHRI M. S. KRISBNAX S-1 K. V. RAO ( Altemafe)

(ad-)

( Continuedon page 2 )

@ G&right 1977
INDIAN STANDARDS INSmUTIgN Thir publication is protected under the In&m Cofqn'g$ ,& ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except w:th written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright undqr the said_ Act.

.. J

Mmbcrs SEBICG.LELE SmP.R. MGLWANDANI
SHBI E. G. F~AGAEAJAN SZUZIR. C. PANDE ( Ahmute

Representing
Baroda Electronics Industries Pvt Ltd, Vadodara Bush India Ltd, Bombay; and Electronic Component Industries Association ( ELCC\TA ), New Delhi Directorate of Technical Development & Production ( Air 1, Ministry of Defencc

Sm

Rescon _Manufacturing Co Pvt Ltd, Ptmc SEJU H. S. PRASAZVNA SXm P. G. E~RKAR ( Alternate ) Radio and Electricals Manufacturing Co Ltd, S-I Y. N. RAJASEKEA~APPA Bangalore Indian Telephone Industries Ltd, Bangalore S~nr P. V. RAO Snnr B. V~RE~~~ALI~G.Q~( Alternate) Directorate General 0% Technical Development, Srtnr K. N. RAXASwA~ New Delhi SHRI R. G. DEODHAR ( Altcmate ) Directorate General of Supplies St Disposals SEXI M. S-GA= ( Inspection Wing ) SXXI P. T. &USXXAXACIiAn ( Afternak ) Electronics tkporation of India Ltd, Hydaabad Ssrn~S. SRIXXYASAN SXmuC. SATYANARAYANA( Ahmats) Director General, ISI ( J&-&tie Member ) SERI N. SRUUVASAN, Director ( Elcctronies )

) Asian Electronics Ltd, Bombay B. K. NAR~KESMU SXxuK. RAGEUNATEAN( AItemate)

SHRI S. C. G~A Assistant Director ( Electronics

), IS1

ISr8238-1976

Indian Standard
GUIDE F'OR USE OF VARIABLE CAPACITORS IN ELECTRONIC EQUIPMENT
0. FOREWORD

0.1This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 29 October 1976, after the draft finalized by the Capacitors and Resistors for Electronic Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electronics and Telecommunications Division Council.
0.2 This standard outlines the methods which should be followed by the equipment designer and those handling or using variable capacitors. The guidance given in this guide will enable the user of variable capacitors to extend the useful and accurate life of component by ensuring that it is used and handled correctly during the equipment production processes and during the subsequent life of the capacitor. 0.3 The variable capacitor is a component which, because of its robust construction, is probably misused more than any other electronic compoIt is hoped that the aspects covered in this standard will assist in nent. some measure to maintain the quality and durability of variable capacitors 1 by emphasizing a few of the many misuses which occur in the use of this component. 0.4 In the preparation of this standard assistance has been derived from IEC document 40 A ( Sectt) 39 `Guide to the use of variable capacitors in electronic equipment' issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission. 0.5 This standard is one of a series of Indian Standards on capacitors and resistors used in telecommunication and electronic equipment.

0.6 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a tset, shall be rounded off in accordance The number of significant places retained in rounded' with IS : 2-1960*. off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. i' *Rules for rounding off numerical value ( rwistd ). - `f ' 3
l

-11

-

IS I S23S- 1976 1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard outlines the methods that should be-followed by the equipment designer and those handling or using variable capacitors.

2. PACKAGING

AND

STORAGE

21 During the various stages of packing, unpacking, storing, transporting, and assembly, including unpacking and packing for storage 01 inspection, care shall be taken to ensure that:

4

b) 4 4 4 f)

the rotor vanes of capacitors are at the maximum capacitance position or completely enmeshed with the stator vanes. In this way, the danger of fingers or other extraneous objects touching and damaging the vanes is minimized; trays of capacitors are not stacked on.top of each other by being supported on other capacitors; capacitors are stored in such a way that they are separated from each other and protected from dust and dirt; storage conditions are within the limits implied in IS: 7748 ( Part I )-1975* preferably in normal atmospheric conditions as specified in XS : 589-1961t; in the event of capacitors being returned to the suppliers they should be properly packed to prevent damage; and the capacitors should not be dropped during mounting in equipment assembly in storing. AND

3. MOUNTING

ASSEMBLY

3.1 Care shall be taken to ensure that the capacitor is not mounted on an uneven surface, for this may cause distortion of the frame assembly and a subsequent capacitance change due to variation in the air gaps between rotor and stator vanes. It has been known for example, that the mounting surface is sometimes made uneven by the insertion of connecting wire or perhaps washers under one of the mounting feet. This practice should be avoided. 3.2 If the mounting is suspect, the .maximum capacitance should b measured before and after mounting in the equipment or test fixture. If any change is detected after mounting, then the method of fixing is suspect and may need modification. By mutual agreement, a small change may be tolerated provided that the test fixtures used by the user and supplier are identical.
*Specification for variable capacitors: Part I Tests an$gcneral requirements. tBasic climatic and mechanical durability tests for_wtronic components ( rev&d).

4

.

.1.

-

Is : 8238- 1976 3.3 When assembling control knobs or any other parts on to capacitor spindles, the forces applied should not exceed those which are applied during the approval testing of the component. 3.4 When assembling capacitors on a chassis or printed circuit board with power driven tools it is imperative not to use the capacitor as a bearing point during the process. 4. SOLDERING AND CONNECTING LEADS

4.1 When connections are made to variable capacitors, it is important that the solder tag or any other part of the capacitor is not overheated and that the physical strain imposed on the capacitor by the connecting leads or by injudicious use of pliers, etc, is minimized. 4.3 In any case, the strains imposed should not exceed those which are stipulated in the appropriate tests specified in IS : 7748 ( Part I )-1975*. 5. ADJUSTMENT 5.1 Rotor contacts are carefully adjusted to the correct pressure by the manufacturer and subsequent adjustment should not be allowed, for it may introduce other complications, for example, crackles, noise, etc. 5.3 The practice of bending the adjuster vanes to change the capacitance value when the capacitor is assembled in the equipment should be forbidden. 6. LUBRICATION 6.1 Unless instructions are given to the contrary, it is inadvisable to provide any additional lubrication for the rotor bearings or for any other moving parts., Capacitors are lubricated during manufacture and the lubricants used are carefully chosen to satisfy certain conditions of humidity, temperature and conductivity throughout the life of the Cleaning by use of the solvents should not be permitted. capacitor. 7. MISCELLANEOUS CAUSES OF DAMAGE 7.1 Equipment designers are inclined to use the variable capacitor as an anchoring point for other items in the apparatus, a procedure which often entails, drilling and tapping holes in the frame of the capacitor. This practice is very strongly. deprecated, for apart from the strains which are inevitably set up by drillmg and tapping holes, there is a possibility that the frame will be weakened causing mechanical instability. When holes are provided in the frame of the capacitor, which are intended to be used for anchoring brackets, em, it is important that the brackets or other items are made from a thin material which will not introduce . strains in the capacitor frame. _S'! *Specification for variable capacitors: Part I Tcs~ and'general requirements. . -L&1 5

Is : 9239-1976
7.2 Metal stamps should not be used for cutting identifying numbers or letters on the metal parts of capacitors. This will cause permanent distortion of the frame and render the capacitor useless. 73 It is bad engineering practice to use any part of the rotor or stator vane systems as an end stop. If necessary, equipment designers should incorporate properly designed end stops in the drive mechanism. 7.4 Subsequent machining operations on the rotor spindle, such as the drilling of cross holes, re-shaping and sawing, will inevitably cause damage to the rotor bearings and should not be permitted under any circumstances. 7.5 Damage to rotor and stator vanes is often caused by fixing screws which protrude too far into the capacitor. It is essential for this to borne in mind when the length of capacitor fixing screws is being specified. 8. MEASUREMENTS 8.1 When capacitance measurements are made on variable capacitors, it is important that the accuracy of the dividing head used for determining the angle of rotation is not nullified by play in mechanical couplings, grub screws, etc. 8.2 The decision whether or not a capacitor lies within the limits of the specification shall be governed by the capacitance, measuring accuracy as defined in IS : 7748 ( Part I)-1975*.

*Sp&fkation for variablecapacitors:PartI Testsand gene+ requirements.

