INATA Ah IS 8010 (Part 1) : 2023 
Indian Standard 


death Rare dan at & fea 
fesmtaest 
aT IEC E ESO LE EC LER C JESA rare 
(TECH JARAT ) 


Guidelines for Preparation of 
Technical Reports 
Part 1 Research and Development 
Reports 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 37.100.99 


© BIS 2023 


ARG AH OT 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Se EECA HM, 9 FTL ME AHL AM, AS Feet - 110002 


MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


July 2023 Price Group 6 


Publication & Graphic Technology, MSD 06 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 1) (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Publication & Graphic Technology Sectional Committee had been approved by the Management 
and Systems Division Council. 


Research and development (R&D) reports have emerged as a distinctive form of technical literature brought out 
by various technical institutions and agencies. These reports contribute to the rapid and effective communication 
of information on specific topics. They introduce the results of research and development into the common fund of 
knowledge and permit their use as a basis for action. The effectiveness of R&D reports greatly depends on the 
clarity and completeness of their contents and on their presentation. At present there is no uniformity either in 
regard to the sequence of various elements of information in the reports or in the presentation of their content. 
Guidelines on these and other aspects of R & D reports will simplify their preparation and presentation and enhance 
their utility. 


The standard was first published in 1976. This revision has been brought out to bring the standard in the latest style 
and format of the Indian Standard. 


This standard (Part 1) is a part of IS 8010 series of standards under the general title “Guidelines for preparation of 
technical reports’. Other parts in this series are: 


Part 2 Feasibility reports 
Part 3 Industrial potential survey reports 


The composition of the Committee responsible for formulation of the standard is given in Annex B. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 8010 (Part 1) : 2023 


Indian Standard 
GUIDELINES FOR PREPARATION OF TECHNICAL REPORTS 
PART 1 RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT REPORTS 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard (Part 1) provides guidelines for the 
presentation and production aspects of research 
and development reports. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standard listed in Annex A contain provisions 
which, through reference in this text, constitute 
provision of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the editions indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revision, and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most 
recent editions of these standards. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


3.1 For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definition shall apply. 


3.2 Research and Development Report — A 
document which states the results of, or progress 
made with, a research and development 
investigation. 


4 SECTIONS OF RESEARCH AND 
DEPLOPMENT REPORT 


4.1 The sections of a research and development 
report should preferably be arranged in the 
following order: 


a) Front Corner 
b) Preliminary Pages 
1) Title page; 
2) Summary; 
3) Foreword; 
4) Table of contents; 
5) Abbreviations*; and 


6) Sign and Symbols*. 


c) Body of the Report 


1) Introduction; 

2) Theory; 

3) Experimental part; 
4) Discussion; and 


5) Conclusions and recommendations. 
d) End Matter 


1) Acknowledgement; 
2) References; 
3) Appendices; 


4) Table*; 

5) Illustrations*; 

6) Graphs*; 

7) Bibliography; and 
8) Index. 


e) Abstract Sheets with Key Words 
f) Back Cover 


4.2 This standard recommends the traditional 
practice of presenting conclusions and conclusions 
after experimental procedure, results and 
discussion. However, for forts intended especially 
for management, it is advantageous to place the 
conclusions and recommendations immediately 
after the introduction. 


4.2.1 This alternative arrangement may be 
followed if the sponsoring organizations consider it 
more appropriate. 


4.2.2 The normal features of a research and 
development report are as given in 3.1, though not 
all for these items find a place in a research and 
development report always. 


4.3 Front Cover 


The front cover should give the following: 


a) Report number; 

b) Title and sub-title in full; 

c) Author’s name; 

d) Corporate source, that is, the name of the 
organization responsible for the report, its 
monogram and acronym; and 

e) The year and month in which the completed 
document is approved for reproduction. 


4.3.1 Typical examples of report numbers are 
given below: 


*If not included in the body of the report. 


IS 8010 (Part 1) : 2023 


Example 1 and 2: 


An alphanumeric designation established by 
the organization producing the report: 


Cement Research Institute of India 

Research Bulletin No. 2, 2014, appears as: 
CRI-RB-2-14 

Indian Space Research Organization — Vikram 
Sarabhai Space Centre Technical Memorandum 
No. 155, 2015, appears as: 


ISRO-VSSC-TM- 155.15 
Example 3: 


An alphanumeric Designation established by 
the organization disseminating the report: 


A report prepared in 2014 under contract, to the 
Department of Science and Technology, 
designated Technical Report No. 154 by the 
Indian National Scientific Documentation Centre 
(INSDOC) appears as: 


INSDOC-TR- 154-14 
Example 4: 


An alphanumeric designation derived from the 
contract, grant or agreement number of the 
sponsoring body: 

A report prepared in 2014 under contract to the 
Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, designated as 
a BARC Extra-Mural Research Progress Report 
under contract number 1743 appears as: 
BARC-EMR-PR- 1743-14 


4.3.1.1 The number of characters in the report 
number, including conventional signs and spaces 
shall be kept to a minimum and shall not exceed 32. 
This is to facilitate computer processing. 


4.3.1.2 The report number shall be printed 
horizontally in the top right-hand corner of the front 
cover. It shall also be printed vertically at the top 
left-hand corner and vertically in the bottom right- 
hand corner and may be suitably coloured to 
facilitate identification. 


4.4 Title-Page 
The title page shall include the following: 


a) Report Number; 

b) Title and sub-title; 

c) Author’s name; 

d) Approving authority, if any; 
e) Corporate source; 

f) Year and month of the report; 


g) Price, if any, and the sales point if different 
from the corporate source; and 


h) Security classification, if any. 


4.4.1 Back of the Title Pride 


Any special notices required sponsoring authority 
shall be given on the jack of the title page, for 
example, limitations on reproductions, security, 
legal information, safely precautions, and disposal 
instructions. Organizations issuing reports to which 
restrictions apply shall, if possible, indicate the 
period for which the restrictions remain in force. 


4.4.2 Information given on both the front cover and 
the title-page shall appear, as far as possible, in 
similar positions. 


4.4.3 The title should be concise and should 
indicate clearly the subject of the report. 


4.4.4 The title of a progress report shall specify the 
period covered. 


4.5 Summary 


The summary should be an informative precis of the 
entire work. A concise description of the methods, 
results and significance of the work should be 
included. A mere expansion of the title should be 
avoided. The emphasis to be placed on various 
aspects will depend on the nature of the work being 
reported. Particular attention should be paid to the 
writing of the summary as it is one of the most 
important elements of the report. 


The summary should normally appear on the page 
following the title-page. 


4.6 Foreword 


A foreword designed to define and emphasize the 
background of the study may be given on the page 
immediately following the summary page, and 
before the table of contents. 


4.7 Table of Contents 


The table of contents shall follow the foreword and 
shall begin on the succeeding page. The principal 
headings shall be listed verbatim and in the order in 
which they appear in the report with the page 
number on which each of them begins. 


4.7.1 Where two or more parts of a multi-section 
report are produced simultaneously, the complete 
table of contents shall appear in the first part. The 
second and Subsequent parts shall contain a table of 
contents specific to that particular volume. 


4.7.2 Each section of a multi-section report shall 
contain a statement of the plan of the whole work 
and the intended total number of sections and scope 
of each, as well as a table of contents specific to that 
particular section. The final volume shall contain a 
complete contents list for the whole series. Where a 
multi-section report is produced in parts at intervals 
of time a full table of contents should be included as 


an addendum to the final volume. 


4.8 Introduction 


Every report shall have an introduction which 
should include in the first paragraph a succinct 
statement of the objective and the scope of the work 
reported. The introduction should relate the work 
described to the historical background with salient 
features in a concise manner. It should avoid a 
detailed discussion of the results as a repetition of 
the discussion section, nor should it be a sample 
repetition of the contents of the summary. 


4.9 Theory 


In certain cases, the report may be primarily of a 
theoretical rather than an experimental nature. In 
such cases, theory should be substituted for 
experimental procedure and results. Where results 
embrace a detailed theoretical treatise in addition to 
the experimental work, theory shall precede 
experimental procedure and results. 


4.10 Experimental Part 


This section concerns the manner in which the work 
was carried out and the results obtained. Emphasis 
should be given to anything new only very brief 
details of standard apparatus and techniques should 
be presented. If it is desired to bring out 
experimental aspects in greater detail, these should 
be given in an appendix. 


4.10.1 As a general guide, details should be just 
sufficient to enable an adequately skilled or 
knowledgeable worker in the field to retrace the 
steps of the investigation without undue difficulty. 


4.10.2 Normally the experimental section will 
embrace a number of subsections for clear 
presentation of the subject matter. 


4.10.3 The results should form the ultimate 
subsections. 


4.11 Discussion 


The discussion is the interpretation of, and/or 
commentary on, the results and the reasoning on 
which the conclusions are founded. It may also 
attempt to shed light on the work in terms of new or 
extended principles or theories in the field covered. 
A separate section should be formed wherever it is 
practicable even though it may be difficult to 
separate discussion from the preceding 
experimental procedure and results. 


4.12 Conclusions and Recommendations 


Conclusions and recommendations should be clear 
and precise. 


4.12.1 Conclusions represent a clear and orderly 


IS 8010 (Part 1) : 2023 


presentation of the deductions made after full 
consideration of the results of the work. 
Quantitative data are not inappropriate but the 
details of an involved argument or result should not 
be included. 


4.12.2 Recommendations are concise statements of 
further action considered necessary as a result of the 
conclusions reached. They arise directly from the 
conclusions and should be fully justified by the 
work covered in the report. 


4.13 Acknowledgements 


Acknowledgements of help given in carrying out the 
reported work or in preparing the report should be 
made in a section succeeding the discussion. 


4.14 References 


References shall be provided for works mentioned in 
the text and shall be listed and numbered in the order 
in which they first appear in the text. The 
bibliographical form shall conform to IS 2381 : 2014. 
Where an original source is quoted from an 
intermediary source, both shall be cited, with the 
intermediary preceded by the words ‘Quoted in’. To 
avoid ambiguity, it is recommended that titles of 
periodicals should be abbreviated in accordance with 
IS 18 : 1999. 


4.15 Appendices 


Appendices give detailed explanations of methods 
and techniques summarized in the main text 
together with supplementary matter which it would 
not be appropriate to include in the main body of the 
report. 


4.16 Tables and Illustrations 


Tables and illustrations should preferably appear at 
the appropriate places in the body of the text, but 
where space considerations or reprographic 
techniques preclude this, they may be put together 
to form an appendix. Tables shall conform to the 
recommendations given in IS 4731 : 2009 and 
IS 6660 : 1972. 


4.17 Bibliography 


This is a list of references in addition to those cited 
in the text of the report. If included, the bibliography 
should indicate whether it is comprehensive or 
selective. 


4.18 Abbreviations 


If a list of abbreviations is included it shall be at the 
position indicated in 4.1 (b). The list should contain 
only those abbreviations which are not in common 
usage. At the first instance of their use in the text, 
abbreviations, especially acronyms, should be 
accompanied by an explanation of their meaning. 


IS 8010 (Part 1) : 2023 


4.19 Signs and Symbols 


Signs and symbols used in the report should comply 
with the relevant Indian Standards on the subjects or 
other generally accepted systems of nomenclature. 
A list of these should be given along with the units 
of measurement, arranged in alphabetical order at 
the position indicated in 4.1 (b). Greek symbols 
should be arranged separately. 


4.20 Index 


A lengthy report should have an index complying 
with IS 1275 : 2018. 


4.21 Abstract 


The abstract of the report shall follow the index. It 
should preferably be given on a separate perforated 
sheet and shall conform to IS 795 : 2013. 


4.22 Back Cover 


The back cover should not contain any material 
necessary to the understanding of the report. 


5 PAGINATION AND NUMBERING 


5.1 Page Number 


Pages shall be numbered in international form of 
numerals consecutively throughout the report. If 
sheets are printed on both sides, blank pages shall 
be avoided wherever possible, but if they occur they 
shall be counted in the page numbering. 


5.2 Section Number 


Sections shall be numbered throughout the main 
body of the text and appendices. The numbering of 
sections in appendices shall not repeat that of the 
main text. International form of numerals shall be 
used for section numbering. If necessary, the 
alphabet or roman numerals may be used for 
appendices. 


5.3 Reference Number 


Identification numbers, letters or marks for 
literature reference shall be printed as superscripts 
or, if on the line, in parentheses (round brackets) 
immediately following the relevant word or phrase 
in the text. Different sequences shall be used for 
foot-notes and bibliographical references, for 


example, letters or marks for foot-notes and 
numbers for bibliographical references. 


5.4 Other Material 


Tables, illustrations, drawings and graphs shall be 
numbered in international form of numerals. 


6 PRODUCTION 
6.1 Type 


Typefaces, inter word spacing and the line spacing 
shall be so chosen as to facilitate reading. 


6.2 Non Textual Matter 


General engineering drawings shall conform to the 
requirements of SP 46 : 2003 and architectural and 
building drawings to IS 962 : 1989]. 


6.3 Sizes 


The page and cover shall be in A4 (210 x 297 mm) 
or A5 (148 x 210 mm) as may be convenient 


6.4 Margins 


The margins for printed reports of A4 and A3 sizes 
are given in Table 1. 


6.5 Columns 


For printed reports in A5 size, text is usually 
presented in a single column. The left-hand margin 
shall be aligned. The right-hand margin, if 
unjustified, shall not display excessive differences 
of line length in continuous text, normally 
+ 5 percent of the notional line length. For printed 
reports in A4 size, two columns may be used if it is 
necessary to present a substantial amount of 
material. 


6.6 Covers 


Cover papers should be of sufficient strength to 
protect the contents for a reasonable period. 


6.7 Binding 


Any style of binding, giving a substantial or 
permanent anchorage down the left-hand side of the 
report is acceptable, provided it allows the text of 
the report to lie reasonably flat without damage to 
the spine. 


IS 8010 (Part 1) : 2023 


Table 1 Recommended Margins for Technical Reports 


(Clause 6.4) 
SI No. Position Minimum Margins 
A4 Size AS Size 
() (2) (3) (4) 

i) Back 25 mm (6 ems) 15 mm (3 1⁄2 ems) 
il) Head 29 mm (7 ems) 19 mm (4 1⁄2 ems) 
iii) Fore-edge 34 mm (8 ems) 23 mm (5 1⁄2 ems) 
iv) Tail 38 mm (9 ems) 27 mm (6 % ems) 


NOTES 

1 In the case of A4 size, if the report is centre-stitched or section-sewn the margin as recommended may be given. If it is 
side-stitched then the back margin should be increased by 5 mm. 

2 In the case of A5 size report, the margins exclude document number and page number. 


IS 8010 (Part 1) : 2023 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 2) 
LIST OF REFERRED STANDARDS 


IS No. Title IS No. Title 
IS 18: 1999 Information and documentation — IS 2381 : Information and documentation — 
Rules for the abbreviation of title 2014 Guidelines for bibliographic 
words and titles of publications references and citations to 
(third revision) information resources (third 
IS 795: 2013 Guide for perparation of abstracts revision) 
(second revision) IS 4731 : Guide for preparation of manuscript 
i ; 2009 of an article in a learned periodical 
IS 962:1989 Code of practice for architectural 
and building drawings (second IS 6660 : Guide for illustrations in books 
revision) 1972 
IS 1275 : Information and documentation — SP 46: 2003 Engineering drawing practice for 
2018 Guidelines for the content, schools and colleges 


organization and presentation of 
indexes (second revision) 


IS 8010 (Part 1) : 2023 


ANNEX B 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Publication & Graphic Technology, MSD 06 


Organization 


Guru Jambheshwar University, Hissar 

Authentication Solution Providers Association (ASPA) 
Former Hologram Manufacturers Association of 
India, New Delhi 


Avantika Printers Private Limited, New Delhi 


Central Pulp and Paper Research Institute (CPPRI), 
Saharanpur 


Delhi Printers Association, New Delhi 


Department of Printing Technology, Anna University, 
Chennai 


Department of Printing Technology, 
University, Kolkata 


Jadavpur 


Directorate General of Quality Assurance (DGQA), 
Bengaluru 


Directorate General of Quality Assurance (DGQA), 
Ministry of Defence, New Delhi 


Future Schoolz 


Government Institute of Printing Technology, Mumbai 


Indian Printing Packaging and Allied Machinery 
Manufacturers Association IPAMA), Noida 


IPP Services, Training and Research Private Limited 
(IPPSTAR), Noida 


Joy D-Zign Engineers Private Limited, New Delhi 
Kumar Printers Private Limited, Palwal 


Manipal University, College of Printing, Manipal 


Representative(s) 


DR ANJAN KUMAR BARAL (Chairperson) 


SHRI CHANDER SHEKHAR JEENA 
SHRI NITYANAND SHENOY (Alternate) 


SHRI MUKTNATH PANDEY 


SHRI SANJAY TYAGI 
SHRI R. D. GODIYAL (Alternate) 


SHRI B. D. MENDIRATTA 
SHRI SUNIL JAIN (Alternate) 


PROF N. RAJESWARI 


DR ARPITAM CHATTERJEE 


DR N. K. MURTHY 


COL M. MURALIDHARAN 
SHRI JANARDHAN K. (Alternate) 


SHRI KULAKKADA PRADEEP 
SHRI JOSE THOMAS (Alternate) 


SHRI SAMEER DESHPANDE 
SHRI S. DAYAKAR REDDY 


SHRI PRASHANT VATS (Alternate I) 
SHRI NAVEEN GUPTA (Alternate II) 


SHRI NARESH KHANNA 


SHRI N. S. MANKU 
SHRI SANDEEP BHARGAVA 


SHRI AMRUTHARAJ H. KRISHNAN 
SHRI RAMNATH SHENOY (Alternate) 


IS 8010 (Part 1) : 2023 


Organization 


Map Printing Division, Survey of India, New Delhi 


Pressman Solutions, Chennai 

Principal, AGPC, Shivakasi 

Printing Technology, COET, Pune 

Production Manager, Sheetfed Module, ITC, Chennai 
RSG Solutions, New Delhi 


The Department of Printing Technology, Anna 


University, Chennai 


The Regional Institute of Printing Technology, Jadavpur, 
Kolkata 


Trigon Digipack Private Limited, Mumbai 
In Personal Capacity (Plot 12, Cross Road 2, 


Lokhandwala Complex, Andheri West, Mumbai — 
400053) 


Representative(s) 


SHRI B. K. GUPTA 
SHRI EQUERAR AHMAD (Alternate) 


SHRI K. PANTHALA SELVAN 
DR M. NANDAKUMAR 
PROF MADHURA MAHAJAN 
ER K. NATARAJAN 

SHRI ISHANT KALKAL 


DR K. SENTHIL VADIVU 


PROF SHANKHYA DEBNATH 


SHRI ASHOKAN KRISHNAMOORTHY 


PROF KIRAN PRAYAGI 


SHRI ANUJ SWARUP BHATNAGAR, SCIENTIST ‘F’/SENIOR 
DIRECTOR AND HEAD (MANAGEMENT AND SYSTEMS) 
[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


BIS Directorate General 


Member Secretary 
SHRI ASHISH V. UREWAR 
SCIENTIST ‘C’/DEPUTY DIRECTOR 
(MANAGEMENT AND SYSTEMS), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MSD 06 (20755). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, l 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8™ Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.L.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


