IS 13675( Part1 ).1993 ISO/IEC 9072-l : 1989

( Reaffirmed 2003 )

Indian

Standard

REMOTE OPERATIONS IN TEXT COMMUNICATION FOR INFORMATION PROCESSING SYSTEMS PART 1
MODEL, NOTATION AND SERVICE DEFINITION

UDC

681'327'8'01

@ BIS 1993

BUREAU OF MANAK BHAVAN,

INDIAN
9 NEW BAHADUR DELHI

STANDARDS
SHAH 110002 Price Group 12 ZAFAR MARG

May

1993

Computer

Systems and Interconnection

Sectional

Committee,

LTD 36

NATIONAL

FOREWORD

This Indian Standard which is identical with lSO/IEC 9072-I : 1989 `Information processing systems - Text communication - Remote operations - Part 1 : Model, notation and service definition', issued by the International Organization for Standardization ( IS0 ), was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation of the Computer Systems and Interconnection Sectional Committee ( LTD 36 ) and approval of the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. ln the adopted standard, certain terminology and conventions are however not identical those used in Indian Standards. Attention is particularly drawn to the following: Wherever the words `International should be read as `Indian Standard'. In this Indian Standard, the following respective place the following:
International Standard

to they

Standard'

appear standards

referring

to

this standard, to.

international

are referred
Standard

Read in their

Indian

IS0 7498 : 1984 Information processing systems - Open systems interconnection - Basic reference model IS0 8649 : 1988 Information processing systems - Open systems interconnection - Service definition for the association control service element IS0 8650 : 1988 Information processing systems - Open systems rnterconnection - Protocol specification for the asscciation control service element IS0 8822 : 1988 Information processing systems - Open systems interconnection - Connection oriented presentation service definition ISO/IEC 9066-l : 1989 Information processing systems - Text communication Reliable transfer - Part 1 : Model and s~r,~ice definition : 1989 ing systems - Text transfer Reliable specification fSO/IEC 9072-2 : 1989 ing systems - Text Remote operations specification
ISO/IEC 9066-2

IS 12373 ( Part 1 ) : 1987 Basic reference model of open systems interconnection for information processing systems, Part 1 ( Identical ) IS 13615 : 1993 Service definition for the association control service element in open systems interconnection for information processing systems ( Identical ) IS 13706 : 1993 Protocol specification for the association control service element in open sgstems interconnetion for information processing systems ( Identical ) Dot LTD 36. ( 1636 ) PI Connection oriented presentation service definition in open systems interconnection for information processing systems ( under preparation ) ( Identical) IS 13707 ( Part 1 ) : 1993 Reliable transfer in text communication for information processing systems : Part 1 Model and service defintion ( identical ) IS 13707 ( Part 2 ) : 1993 Reliable transfer in text communication for information processing systems : Part 2 Protocol specification ( Identical ) IS 13675 ( Part 2 ) : 1993 Remote operations in text communication for information processing : Part 2 Protocol systems specification ( Identical ) of this standard has reviewed the that they are acceptable for use in Open systems interconnection -

Information processcommunication - Part 2 : Protocol Information processcommunication - Part 2 : Protocol

The technical committee responsible for the preparation provisions of the following IS0 Standards and has decided conjunction with this standard: ISO/TR 8509 : 1987 information Service conventions lSO 8824 : 1987 Information fication of abstract syntax ISO 8825 : 1987 Information fication of basic encoding Only the English language it in this standard. processing system -

processing systems - Open systems interconnection notation one ( ASN. 1 ) processing systems - Open systems interconnection rules for abstract syntax notation one ( ASN. 1 ) Standard has been retained while

Speci. Speci-

text in the International

adopting

IS 13675 (Part 1) : 1993 ISO/lEC 9072-l : 1989

Indian

Standard

REMOTE OPERATIONS IN TEXT COMMUNICATION FOR INFORMATION PROCESSING SYSTEMS
PART 1 MODEL, NOTATlON AND SERVICE DEFINITION

1

Scope

This part of ISO/IEC 9072 defines a Remote Operation (RO-1 notation for defining the services provided to interactive applications. This part of ISO/IEC 9072 also defines the services provided by the Remote Operation Service Element (ROSE) services. The ROSE services are provided by the use of the ROSE protocol (part 2 of ISO/IEC 9072) in conjunction with the Association Control Service Element (ACSE) services (IS0 8649) and the ACSE protocol US0 86501, optionally the Reliable Transfer Service Element (RTSE) services (ISO/IEC 9066-l) and the RTSI: protocol (ISO/IEC 9066-21, and the presentation-service (IS0 8822). No requirement part of ISO/IEC is made 9072. for conformance to this

IS0 8650: 1988, Information processing systems Open Systems Interconnection - Protocol specification for the Association Control Service Element. IS0 8822. 1988, Information processing systems Open Systems Interconnection - Connection oriented presentation service definition. -

IS0 8824: 1987, Information processing systems Open Systems Interconnection - Speciftcatton of Abstract Syntax Notation One (ASN.1). IS0 8825: 1987, Information processing systems Open Systems Interconnection - Specification of basic encoding rules for Abstract Syntax Notution One (ASN.1). ISO/IEC 9066-l: 1989, Information processing systems - Text communication - Reliable Transfer - Part 1: Model and service definition. ISO/IEC 9066-2: 1989, Information processing systems - Text communication - Reliable Transfer - Part 2: Protocol specification. ISO/IEC 9072-2: 1989, Information processing communication - Remote systems - Text Operations 7Part 2: Protocol specification.

2

Normative

references

The following standards contain provisions which, through reference in this text, constitute provisions of t.his part of ISO/IEC 9072. At the time of publication, the editions were valid. All Standards at-e subject to revision, and parties to agreement based on this part of ISO/IEC 9072 are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent editions of the standards listed below. Members of IS0 and IEC maintain Registers of currently valid International Standards. IS0 7498: 1984, Information processing systems Open Systems Interconnection - Basic Reference Model. ISO/TR 8509: 1987, Information processing systems - Open Systems Interconnection - Service Conventions. IS0 8649: 1988, Information processing systems Open Systems Interconnection - Service definition for the Association Control Service Element.

3
3.1

Definitions
Reference Model definitions

This part of ISO/IEC 9072 is based on the concepts developed in IS0 7498 and makes use of the following terms defined in it: a) b) c) d) e) f) g) Application Layer;

application-process; application-entity; application-service-element; application-protocol-data-unit; application-protocol-control-information; Presentation Layer;

1.

IS rssm ( Part 1) : 1993 ISO/lEC 9072-l : 1999

h) i) - j) k) 1) m) 3.2

presentation-service; presentation-connection; session-service; session-connection transfer syntax; and

3.5

Reliable Transfer

definitions

This part of ISO/IEC 9072 makes use of the following terms defined in ISO/IEC 9066-l:
a)

Reliable Transfer ROSE definitions

Service Element.

3.6

user-element.

Service conventions

definitions

For the purpose of this part of ISO/IEC 9072 the following definitions apply:
3.6.1

This part of ISO/IEC 9072, makes use of the Mowing terms defined in ISO/TR 8509:

a)
b)
Cl 4 e) 0 B) h)

service-provider; service-user; confirmed service; service; service; primitive;

association-initiating-applicationentity; associatiqn-initiator: The applicationentity that initiates the application-association. 3.6.2 association-responding-applicationentity; association-responder: The applicationentity that responds to the initiation of an application-association by another AE. 3.6.3 invoking-application-entity; The application-entity that invokes Operation. invoker: the Remote

non-confirmed provider-initiated service-primitive;

request (primitive); indication (primitive); and

i1 j) 93

response (primitive); co&rm (primitive).

3.6.4 per,forming-application-entity; performer: The application-entity that performs a Remote -Operation invoked by the other application-entity. 316.5 requestor: The part of an applicationentity that issues a request primitive for a particular ROSE service. 3.6.6 acceptor: The part of an applicationentity that receives the indication primitive for a particular ROSE service. 3.6.7 linked-operations: `A set of operations formed by one parent-operation and one or more child-operations. use of the 3.6.8 parent-operation: An operation during the execution of which the performer may invoke linked child-operations to be performed by the invoker of the parent-operation. 3.6.9 child-operation: An operation might be invoked by the performer of the parent-operation during the execution parent-operation, and which is performed invoker of the parent-operation. which linked of the by the

Prasentation

service definitions use of the

This part of ISO/IEC 9072 makes following terms defined in IS0 8822: , a). abstract syntax; by
Cl

abstract syntax name; transfer sptax'name; presentation context. Association control definitions

d) 3.4

This part of ISO/IEC 9072 makes following terms defined in IS0 8649: a) b) CJ application-association; application `Association context;

association;

Control Service Element.

IS 13675 ( Part 1) : 1993 ISO/lEC 9072-l : 1969

3.6.10

Remote

Operations:

services element

(Remote Operations) in RO-notation.

available

to the user

(1) A concept and notation supporting the specification of interactive communication between application-entities. This includes the Remote'Operation Service Element and the mapping of the notation onto the service primitives of used application-service-elements. (2) The set of bind-operations, and operations. unbind-operations

4
AE ACSE

Abbreviations
application-entity Association Element Control Service

ASE APDU

application-service-element application-protocol-data-unit Open Systems Remote Remote Element Reliable Reliable Interconnection

3.6.11 RO-notation: The notation specification of Remote Operations, part of ISO/IEC 9072.

used for the defined in this

OS1 RO (or ROS) ROSE

Operations Operations Service

3.6.12 ACSE-user: The application-specific function that performs the mapping of the bindoperation and unbind-operation of the ROnotation onto ACSE. 3.6.13 Remote Operation The application-service-element part of ISO/IEC 9072. 3.6.14 Remote ServiFe Element: defined in this

RT (or RTS) RTSE

Transfer Transfer Service Element

5

Conventions

ROSE-provider: The provider of the Operations Serb-ice Element services.

3.6.15 ROSE-user: The application-specific function that performs the mapping of the operations and errors of the RO-notation onto ROSE. 3.6.16 RTSE-user: The application-specific function that performs the mapping of the bindoperation and unbind-operation of the ROnotation onto RTSE. 3.6.17 operation-interface: within an application entity element and the application defined as a set of application The interface between the user service elements, service element

This part of ISO/IEC 9072 defines services for the ROSE following the descriptive conventions defined in ISO/TR 8509. In clause 10, the definition of each ROSE service includes a table that lists the parameters of its primitives. For a given primitive, the presence of each parameter is described by one of the following values. blank M U C 0 not applicable mandatory user option conditional presence option is an ROSE service-provider

In addition, the notation (=) parameter value is semantically value to its left in the table.

indicates equal

that a to the

3

IS 13675 (Part 1 ) : 1993 lSO/lEC 9072-l : 1969

6

Remote Operations

Model
-

reply is returned unsuccessful);
or not at all (neither

if the

operation

is

In the OS1 environment, communication between application processes is represented in terms of communication between a pair of application entities (AEs) using the presentation service. Communication between some applicationentities are inherently interactive. Typically, one entity requests that a particular operation be performed; the other entity attempts to perform the operation and then reports the outcome of the attempt. This clause introduces the concept of Remote Operations as a vehicle for supporting interactive applications. The generic structure of an operation is an elementary requestireply interaction. Operations are carried out within the context of an application-association. Figure 1 models this view.

a result nor an error reply is returned, whether the operation was successful or not).

Operations may also be classified according to two possible operation modes: synchronous, in which the invoker requires a reply from the performer before invoking another operation; and asynchronous, in which t.he invoker may continue to invoke further operations without awaiting a reply. The following Operation Classes are defined: reporting

OperationClass 1: Synchronous, success or failure (result or error). Operation Class 2: Asynchronous, success or failure (result or error). Operation Class 3: Asynchronous, failure (error) only, if any. Operation Class 4: Asynchronous, success (result) only Operation Class not reported. 5: Asynchronous,

reporting

reporting

Operations invoked by one AE (the invoker) are performed by the other AE (the performer). Operations may be classified according to `.: hether the performer of an operation is expected to report its outcome: in case of success or failure (a result reply is returned if the operation is successful, an error reply is returned if the operation is unsuccessful); in case of failure only (no reply is returned if the operation is successful, an error reply is returned if the operation is unsuccessful); in case returned of success only it' the operation (a result reply is is successful, no

reporting

outcome

The Operation Class of each operation has to be agreed between application entities (e.g in an Application Protocol International Standard). In some cases it is useful to group operations into a set of linked-operations which is formed by one and one or more childparent-operat.ion operations. The performer of the parent operation may invoke none, one, or more child-operations

-

-

I

I
I I

application-association

request

I
I

I

I

I

c
AE
4

AE

reply --,---A
Figure 1 . Remote Operations Model

LI---~lr_-~-__------------

I I I I I I I I

IS 13675 ( Part 1) : 1993 ISO/lEC 9072-l : 198

during the execution of the parent-operation. The invoker of the parent-operation is the performer of the child-operations. A child-operation may be a parent-operation of another set of linkedoperations in a recursive manner. Figure 2 models this concept. An application-association defines the relationship between a pair of AEs, and is formed by the exchange of application-protocol-controlinformation through the use of presentationservices. The AE that initiates an applicationassociation is called the association-initiating AE, or the association-initiator, while the AE that responds to the initiation of an applicationassociation by another AE is called the association-responding AE, or the associationresponder. Only the association-initiating AE may release an established applicationassociation. Application-associations are classified by tihich application-entity is allowed to invoke operations: Association initiating operations. Association responding operations. Association initiating application Class 1: application Only the associationentity can invoke

Linked-operations

require

Association

Class

g

The Association Class has to be agreed between application-entities (e.g. in an Application Protocol International Standard). The functionality of an AE is factored into one user-element and a set of application-serviceelements (ASEs). Each ASE may itself be factored into a set of (more primitive) ASEs. The interaction between AEs is described in terms of their use of AS&. The specific combination of a user-element the set of ASEs which comprise an AE defines applicat.ion-context. and the

Class 2, application

Only the entity

associationcan invoke

Class 3. Both the associationand the association-responding entities can invoke operations.

Figure 3 illustrates an example of an application-context involving the Remote Operations Service Element (ROSE). Note that this figure-is not meant to imply that the applicatiotGs~ymme.tric. Interactive applications are often inherently asymmetric, that is, either one or both AEs may be permitted to invoke operations, and the operations that either AE may invoke may be different. The rules governing which AE may invoke operations, and which operations an AE may invoke, is defined using the RO-notation in an Application Protocol International Standard, and determines the application-context. The set of ASEs available to the user element of the AE at the operation-interface is defined using

r
I I I I I I I

-~~-----1---------11-----~-~--~~

1

application-association invocation of parent-operation invocation of child-operation
l

I ; I :1 I I I li performer of parent-operation b execution parentoperation AE

I

AE

t-

of

I
I I 4 performer of linked child-operations
-~-~1------11~~-------~~---~~

* . invocation of child-operation

i
I I
L--m-

I I I I I I I I I I I I I

Figure 2 -Linked-operations

IS13675(Part1):1993 lSO/lEC9072-1:196

the Remote Operations (RO-1 notation. The ROnotation is based on the macro concept defined in IS0 8824. The complexity of a particular set of ASEs is dependent upon the needs of the application, and is not limited by the Remote Operations concept. An important characteristic of Remote Operations is that they provide applications with independence from OS1 communication services. Since the notation is based on established objectoriented programming principles, automatic tools can be developed to bind Remote Operations into the execution environment of applications. The ASEs available to the user-element require communication over an application-association. The control of that application-association (establishment, release, abort) is performed either by the Association Control Service Element (ACSE) defined in IS0 8649, or the Reliable Transfer Service Element defined in ISO/IEC 9066-l and the Association Control Service Element (ACSE). Communication over the application-association is performed by the

Remote. Operations Service Element defined in this part of ISO/IEC 9072.

(ROSE)

An application-specific function performs the mapping of the operations available to the user-element onto either the ACSE services, or the RTSE services; and the ROSE services. The mapping is defined in this part of ISO/IEC 9072. The function that performs the mapping of the operations onto the ACSE services, or the RTSE services, and the ROSE services is said to be the user of ACSE, RTSE and ROSE, or the ACSEuser, the RTSE-user, and the ROSE-user. the If the RTSE is included in application-context, the mapping function is an RTSE-user and a ROSE-user, the ROSE is an RTSE-user, the RTSE is an ACSE-user and a presentation service-user, and the ACSE is a presentation service-user. If the RTSE is excluded from the application-context, the mapping function is an ACSE-user and a ROSE-user, the ROSE is a presentation service-user, and the ACSE is a presentation service-user.

6

Application Layer application-entity operation-interface _______ (defined as a set of ASEs using the RO-notation)
I

application-entity user-element

user-element

application-service-element and mapping onto ROSE, and eventually onto ACSE or RTSE Application Protocol over application-association

-

application-service-element and mapping onto ROSE, and eventually onto ACSE or RTSE

m[;E;/r;;r

.

Presentation Layer
Figure 3 - Model of an rppkicath

preeentation-connection

contextinvolving

Remoh

Opwatione

IS13675(Part1):1993 ISO/lEC 9072-1:196

7
7.1

Overview
Notation

of notation

and service

Overview

This part of ISO/IEC 9072 defines the RO-notation for the specification of an application-context and the related abstract syntax component of the presentation context. The functionality of an application-context is provided to the user-element by means of Remote Operations and errors which form the operation-interface. The following types of Remote operation interface: a bind-operation application-association; Operations form an

The type notation of the OPERATION macro enables the specification of an operation and user data types to be exchanged for a request and a positive reply. In addition , the type notation enables the specification of a list of valid negative reply situations. If the operation is a parentoperation, the type notation enables the specification of the list of linked child-operations. The value notation of the OPERATION macro enables the specification of the identifier of an operation. The type notation of the ERROR macro enables the specification of user data types exchanged in a negative reply situation. The' value notation of the ERROR macro enables the specification of the identifier of an error. Additional specification application 7.2 macros supporting the notation of application-service-elemen contexts are defined in annex A. overview 9072 defines the following

to

establish

an

-

a set of operations and, operation, a list of error reply) situations; an unbind-operation application-association.

for each (negative

-

to release

an

Service

The abstract syntax notation of IS0 8824 for the definition of the following macros: al b) cl dl BIND; UNBIND; OPERATION; ERROR. and

is used

This part of ISO/IEC ROSE services: a) bl cl dl e) RO-INVOKE RO-RESU RO-ERROR

LT

RO-REJECT-U RO-REdECT-P

These macros value notation

provide both a type notation and a for Remote Operations and errors.

The RO-INVOKE: service enables an invoking AE to request an operation to be performed by the performing AE. The RO-RESULT service enables the performmg AE to return the positive reply of a successfully performed operation to the invoking AE. The RO-ERROR AE to return unsuccessfully invoking AE. service enables the performing the negative reply of an performed operation to the

The type notation of the BIND macro enables the specification of a bind-operation type and the types for user data values (if any) to be exchanged in the establishment phase of an applicationassociation. The value notation of the BIND macro enables the specification of user data values (if any) to be exchanged in the establishment phase of an application-association. The type notation of the UNBIND macro enables the specification of an unbind-operation type and types for user data values (if any) to be exchanged in the release phase of an application-associaticn. The value notation of the UNBIND macro enables the, specification of user data values (if any) to be exchanged in the release phase of an applicationassociation.

The RO-REJECT-U service enables one AE to reject the request or reply of the other AE if the ROSE-user has detected a problem. The RO-REJECT-P user to be informed the ROSE-provider. service enables about a problem the ROSEdetected by

8

IS 13675 ( Part 1) : 1993 lSO/iEC 9074-l : 196

7.3

Mapping

of notation

on to services

Note that the function that performs the mapping of the OPERATION macros and ERROR macros of the RO-notation onto ROSE services is said to be the ROSE-user. While the function that performs the mapping of the BIND and UKBISD macros of the RO-notation onto ACSE services or RTSE services respectively is said to be the ACSE-user or RTSE-user respectively. The specification of the mapping of the ROnotation onto the used services of ACSE, RTSE, and ROSE is given in clause 11. Therefore International Standards using the RO-notation for the protocol specification need not to specify the mapping onto these used services. 8

syntax. defined APDUs syntax.

If multiple named abstract syntaxes are for operations and errors, the ROSE are included in each named abstract

If a named abstract syntax specifies a bindoperation, the APDUs specified by the value notation of the BIND macro are included in that named abstract syntax. If the RTSE is included in the application context, the APDUs for the bindoperation share a single named abstract syntax with the RTSE APDUs defined in ISO/IEC 9066-2. If a named operation, notation of that named abstract syntax specifies an unbindthe APDUs specified by the value the UXBIXD macro are included in abstract syntax.

Relationship with other and lower layer services
Other applicatiod-service-elements

ASEs

8.1

The APDUs resulting from the specification of a bind-operation, an unbind-operation, operations and errors and the RTSE APDUs may share a single named abstract syntax. 8.2 Presentation-servide context including RTSE and ROSE services do not use the

The ROSE is intended to be used with other ASEs in order to support specific interactive information processing tasks. Therefore it is expected that the ROSE will be included in a large number of application-context specifications. The collection of the ROSE and other ASEs included in an application context are required to use the facilities of the presentation-service in a co-ordinated manner among themselves. The ROSE requires association controlled an existing by ACSE. application-

If an application ROSE is defined, presentation-service.

If an application context including ROSE but excluding RTSE is defined, the ROSE services require access to the P-DATA service and require the use of the duplex functional unit of the presentation-service. The ROSE services neither use, nor constrain the use of, any other presentation service. A named compatible Presentation context. The object
encoding(l)}

For some application context specifications Reliable Transfer Service Element (RTSE) included.

a is

abstract transfer Layer)

syntax associated with a syntax (negotiated by the constitutes a presentation

An ROSE-user protocol specification uses the ROnotation. It defines one or more abstract syntaxes and provides unique abstract syntax names of type object identifier for each abstract syntax. If a named abstract syntax specifies operations and'errors, the ROSE APDUs defined in ISO/IEC 9072-2 are included in that named abstract

identifier value fioint-iso-ccitt awl(l) basicspecified in IS0 8825 may be used as a transfer syntax name. In this case the ROSE-user protocol specification need not to name and specify a transfer syntax.

9

IS 13675 ( Part 1 ) : 1993 tSO/lEC 9072-l : 196

9
9.1

Remote Operations
General

notation

The notation used in this part of ISO/IEC 9072 defined as follows: the data syntax no_tation and notation are defined in IS0 8824;

is

to it are specified. If the bind-operation reports failure, the keyword BIND-ERROR and the type of the error-information it reports and the reference name optionally assigned to it are specified. The value notation for a bind-operation is either an argument value, or a result value or an error value. The value notation for an argument value (if any) is the key word ARGUMENT followed by a value of the argument type. The value notation for a result value (if any) is the key work RESULT followed by a value of the result type. The value notation for an error value (if any) is the key word ERROR followed by a value of the error type. 9.3 Specification of unbind-operations

macro

the Remote Operation macros are defined in 9.2 of this part of ISO/IEC 9072.

A bind-operation defines where an object binding (establishment of an application-association) begins. If such a binding is established, operations may be invoked. An unbind-operation defines where an object binding is released. An interactive protocol is specified using the Remote Operation and error data types. This clause defines those types. It also explains the notational definitions of a particular Remote Operation, and of the particular errors it can report. The notation is defined by means of the macro facility defined in IS0 8824. This macro definition allows a generalized specification of the mapping onto various execution environments. The macros enabling the specification of bindoperations, unbind-operations, operations and errors are listed in figure 4. 9.2 Specification of bind-operations

A single data value, the argument of the unbindoperation, may accompany the request to release the application-a-ssociation. Some unbindoperations report their outcome, whether success (i.e the normal outcome) or failure (i.e. the exceptional outcome). Other unbind-operations report their outcome only if they fail, and still others never at all. A single data value, the result of the unbind-operation, or a single data value, the unbind-error of the unbind-operation, may accompany the response. The notation for an unbind-operation type is the keyword UNBIND, optionally followed by the keyword ARGUMENT and the type of the unbindoperation's tirgument, the reference name optionally assigned to it, `and the nature of the unbind-operation's outcome reporting (if any). If the unbind-operation reports success, the keyword RESULT and the type of its result and the reference name optionally assigned to it are specified. If the Unbind-operation reports ~failure, the keyword UNBIND-ERROR and the type of the error-information it reports and the, reference name optionally assigned to it are specified. The value notation for an unbind-operation is either an argument value, or a result value or an error value. The value notation for an argument value (if any) is the keyword ARGUMENT followed by a value of the argument type. The value notation for a result value (if any) is the keyword RESULT followed by a value of the result type. The value notation for an error value (if any) is the keyword ERROR followed by a value of the error type.

A single data value, the argument of the bindoperation, may accompany the request to establish the application-association. Some bindoperations report their outcome, whether success (i.e the normal outcome) or failure (i.e. the exceptional outcome). Other bind-operations report their outcome only if they fail, and still others never at all. A single data value, the result of the bind-operation, may accompany the positive response. A single data value, the bind-error of the bind-operation, may accompany the negative response. The notation for a bind-operation type is the keyword BIND, optionally followed -by the keyword ARGUMENT and the type of the bind-operation's argument, the reference name optionally assigned to it, and the nature of the operation's outcome tieporting (if any). If the bind-operation reports success, the keyword RESULT and the typeof its result and the reference name optionally assigned

10

IS 13675 ( Part 1 ) : 1993 ISO/lEC 9072-l : 1989

Remote-Operation-Notation OEFINITIONS :: = BEGIN

( joint-iso-ccitt remote-operations(4)

notation (0))

EXPORTS BIND, UNBIND, OPERATION, ERROR; --

macro definition for bind-operations
:: =

BIND MACRO BEGIN

TYPE NOTATION VALUE NOTATION Argument

: : = Argument Result Error :: = Argument-value 1 Result-value 1Error-value
:: = empty

1"ARGUMENT" Name type (Argument-type)
--

Expects any ASN.1 type and assigns it to the variable Argument

-- type
Result :: I empty

1"RESULT" Name type (Result-type)
--

Expects any AS,XL' I ty,oe andussigr~s it to the variable Result-type

Error

:: = empty

1"BIND-ERROR" Name type (Error-type)
--

Expects any AS,%`. I type and assigns it to the variable Error-type 1identifier

Name Argument-value

:: = empty

:: = empty 1"ARGUMENT" value (Arg-value Argument-type)
--Expects

a valw for the type in Argument-type,

and assigns it to the

_- variable Arg-~w1u.c~
<VALUE [16] EXPLICIT Argumentetype -Result-value :: = empty :: = Arg-value>

Returns the final value as explicitly tagged lype

1"RESULT" value (Res-value Result-type)
--Expects

a value for the type in Result-type

andassigns

it to the

__ variable Res-ualue
<VALUE -Error-value :: = empty [17] EXPLICITResult-type :: = Res-value>

Returns the final value as explicitly lagged type

1"ERROR" value (Err-value Error-type)
--Expects

a value for the type in Error-type,

and assigns it lo the

__ variable Err-value
<VALUE --Returns END __ [la] EXPLICIT Error-type :: = Err-value>

Ihe final value as explicitly tagged type

Remote Operations

Notation continued

Figure 4 (Part

1 of 3)

- Formal definition

of Remote

Operations

data types

IS 13675 ( Part 1) : 1993 ISO/lEC 9072-l : 198

-- Remote Operations Notation continued __ macro definition for unbind-operations
UNBIND MACRO BEGIN TYPE NOTATION VALUE NOTATION Argument :: = Argument Result Errors :: =

:: = Argument-value :: = empty

1Result-value \ Error-value

1"ARGUMENT" Name type (Argument-type)
--

Expects any ASN.l

type and assigns it to the variable Argument-

-- type
Result :: = empty -Error :: = empty -Name Argument-value

1"RESULT" Name type (Result-type) Expects any ASN .l type and assigns it to the variable Result-type ( "UNBIND-ERROR" Name type (Error-type) Expects any ASN.1 type and assigns it to the variable Error-type

: : = empty (identifier
:: = empty

1"ARGUMENT" value (Arg-value Argument-type)
__ Expects

a value for the type.in Argument-type,

and assigns it to the

__ variable Arg-value
<VALUE [19] EXPLICiT Argument-type -Result-value :: = empty :: = Arg-value>

Returns the final value as explicitly tagged type

1"RESULT" value.(Res-value Result-type)
--Expects

a value for the type in Result-type

and assigns it to the

__ variable Res-value
<VALUE -Error-value :: = empty [20] EXPLICIT Result-type

: : = Res-value >

Returns the final value as explicitly tagged type
Error-type)

1"ERROR" value(Err-value
--

Expects a value for the type in Error-type,

and assigns it to the

__ variable Err-value
`<VALUE -END -[21] EXPLICIT Error-type :: = Err-value>

Returns the final value as explicitly tagged type

Remote Operations

Notation continued

Figure 4 (Part 2 of 3) -~Formal definition

of Remote Operations

data types

12

. IS 13675 (Part 1) : 1993 ISO/lEC 9072-l : 1969

9.4

Specification

of operations

A data value of type operation represents the identifier for an operation that a ROSE-user in one open system may request to be performed by a peer ROSE-user in another open system. A single data value, the argument of the operation, may accompany the request. Some operations report their outcome, whether success (i.e the normal outcome) or failure (i.e. the exceptional outcome). Other operations report their outcome only if they fail, and still others never at all. A single data value, the result of the operation, accompanies a report of success; a report of failure identifies the exceptional condition that was encountered. for an operation type is the keyword optionally followed by the keyword ARGUMENT and the type of the operation's argument, the reference name optionally assigned to it, and the nature of the operation's outcome reporting (if any). If the operation reports success, the keyword RESULT and optionally the type of its result and the reference name optionally assigned to it are specified. If the operation reports failure, the keyword ERRORS and the reference names of the error values or error types it reports are specified. If the operation is the parent-operation of a set of linked-operations, the keyword LINKEDOPERATIONS and the reference names of the linked child-operation values or child-operation types are specified. The reference to error values or childoperation values is preferred, however the references to types shall be used if the values are defined elsewhere (see 9.61.
OPERATION,

local values. restricted.
9.5

The

use of global

values

is not

Specification

of errors

Adata value of type error represents the identifier for an exception condition that a ROSE-user in one open system may report to a peer ROSE-user in another open system, where the exception condition is reporting an exceptional outcome of a previously requested operation. A single data value, the parameter of the error, may accompany the report. The notation for an error type is the keyword ERROR, optionally followed by the keyword PARAMETER and the type of the error's parameter and the reference name optionally assigned to it. The notation for an error value is the error's identifier. If a locally unique identifier (local value) is sufficient, the identifier is of type INTEGER. If a globally unique identifier (global value) is required to allow the unique identification of errors used in several abstract syntaxes, the identifier is of type OBJECTIDENTIFIER.
9.6 Export errors and import of operations and

The notation

Operation values and error values have to be unique within a named abstract syntax. If operations and errors are specified in several ASS.1 modules and are imported to a module specifying a specific named abstract syntax, one of the following rules apply: a) If local values are used and exported, it is in the responsibi1it.y of the designer of the importing module to ensure uniqueness. A module may specify and export operation types and error types. The operation values and error values are assigned in the module importing the types. A single value shall be assigned for each operation type or error type. If global values are assigned and exported, uniqueness is ensured. might

The notation for an operation value is the operation's identifier. If a locally unique identifier (local value) is sufficient, the identifier is of type INTEGER. If a globally unique identifier (global value) is required to allow the unique identification of operations used in several abstract syntaxes, the identifier is of type OBJECT
IDENTIFIER.

bl

Child-operations and errors referenced by a specific operation shall share a single named abstract syntax (see 8.1) with that operation, if the child-operations or errors are identified by

c)

However different named abstract syntaxes be used for conflicting local values.

13

l

IS 13675 ( Part 1) : 1993 ISO/lEC 9072-l : 196

__ Remote Operations Notation continued _- macro definition for operations
OPERATION MACRO BEGIN TYPE NOTATION VALUE NOTATION :: z Argument Result Errors LinkedOperations :: = value (VALUE CHOICE( localvalue globalValue INTEGER, OBJECT IDENTIFIER}) :: =

Argument Result Resultfype Errors LinkedOperations ErrorNamer ErrorList Error

:: re "ARGUMENT"

NamedType

1empty

:: = "RESULT"ResultType :: I NamedType

] empty

1empty 1empty
`I)"

:: = "ERRORS" "1" ErrorNames "}"

::

s

"LINKED"

u(" LinkedOperationNames

1empty

:: =

ErrorList) empty Error value

:: =

1ErrorList "," Error ( ERROR ) -- shall reference an error value -- shall reference an error type if no error value is specified 1empty

:: =

ltyw
LinkedOperationNames OperationList Operation
:: =

OperationList Operation

:: =

JOperationList "," Operation ) -- shall reference an operation value -- shall reference an operation lype if no operation value is __ specified 1type

:: =

value (OPERATION

lwe

NamedType END

:: = identifier type

__macro definition for operations errors
ERROR MACRO BEGiN TYPE NOTATION VALUE NOTATION :: = Parameter :: = value(VALUE CHOICE( localValue globalvalue Parameter NamedType END :: = "PARAMETER " NamedType :: = identifier type INTEGER, OBJECT IDENTIFIER}) :: =

1empty

I type

END

--

end of Remote Operations

Notation

Figure

4 (Part 3 of 3) - Formal

definition

of Remote

Operations

data

types

14

IS 13675 ( Part 1) : 1993 ISO/lEC 9072-l : 1969

10

,Service definition

The ROSE services are listed in table 1.

This parameter is the identifier of the operation to be invoked. The value has to be agreed between the ROSE-users. This parameter has to be supplied by the requestor of the service.

Table

1 - ROSE services Table 2

- RO-INVOKE

parameters

I Service
RO-INVOKE RO-RESULT RO-ERROR RO-REJECT-U RO-REJECT-P

I Type
Non-confirmed Non-confirmed Non-confirmed Non-confirmed Provider-initiated

Parameter

name

I Req

Ind &I(=)

Operation-value `Operation-class Argument Invoke-ID Linked-ID Priority

M U u M U u

C(=) M(=) C(=)

Identification of the named abstract syntax in use is assumed for all ROSE services, however this is a local matter and outside the scope of this part of JSO/IEC 9072.
10.1 RO-INVOKE service

10.1.1.2

Operation-class

The RO-INVOKE service is used by one ROSEuser (the invoker) to cause the invocation of an operation to be performed by the other ROSE-user (the performer). This service is an non-confirmed service. The related service structure service-primitiv-es, as illustrated consists of two in figure 5.
ROSE-user

This parameter defines whether a synchronous or an asynchronous reply is expected and the nature of the expected reply, i.e. result and/or error or none (see clause 6). This parameter has to be supplied by the requestor of the service. This parameter is used solely to optimize the turn management (see 8.1.1 of part 2 of ISO/IEC 9072).
10.1.1.3 Argument

ROSE-user

!

ROSEprovider

This parameter is the argument of the invoked operation. The type has to be agreed between the ROSE-users. This parameter has to be supplied by the requestor of the service.
10.1.1.4 Invoke-ID

RO-INVOKE

request *
RO-INVOKE

This parameter identifies the request of a ROINVOKE service and is used to correlate this request with the corresponding replies (RORESULT, RO-ERROR, RO-REJECT-U, and ROREJECT-P services) or the invocation of linked child-operations (RO-INVOKE). This parameter has to be supplied by the requestor of the service. This parameter distinguishes several requests of the service the requestor may have in progress (asynchronous operations). The, requestor may begin to reuse Invoke-ID values whenever it chooses, subject to the constraint that it may not reuse an Invoke-ID value that WT.S previously assigned to a request of the service for which it expects, but has not yet received, a reply or the invocation of a linked child-operation.

Figure

5

- RO-INVOKE

service-primitives

10.1.1

RO-INVOKE

parameters

Table 2 lists the RO-INVOKE
10.1.1.1 Operation-value

service parameters.

15

IS 13675 (Part 1) : 1993 ISO/lEC 9072-l : 198

The ROSE-user to which an RO-INVOKE indication is issued, assumes that an Invoke-ID value violating the above rule is a duplicate; and therefore, it does not perform the invoked operation. Instead, it rejects the duplicate invocation. If'Operation Classes 3, 4 or 5 are requestor of this service may reuse an value after a reasonably long period of the reply is carried by other means (e.g. have-you-finished operation). used, the Invoke-ID time, or if result of a

10.2

RO-RESULT service

The RO-RESULT service is used by a ROSE-user to reply to a previous RO-INVOKE indication in the case of a successfully performed operation. This service is an non-confirmed service. The related service structure service-primitives, as illustrated consists of two in figure 6.

ROSE-user

ROSEprovider

HOSE-user

In some application contexts peer ROSE-users may communicate Invoke-ID values. To support this the type of the Invoke-ID parameter is exported by the module defining the abstract syntax of Remote Operations in clause 9 of part 2 of ISO/IEC 9072. 10.1.1.5 Linked-ID

RO-RESULT request *

If this parameter is present, the invoked operation is a child-operation and the parameter identifies the invocation of the linked parent-operation. This parameter has to be supplied !~y the requestor of the service. The value is that of the invoke-ID parameter of the RO-INVOKE indication primitive of the parent-operation. 10.1.1.6 Priority

Figure

6. RO-RESULT

ser\-ice-primitives

10.2.1

RO-RESULT parameters service parameters.

Table 3 lists the RO-RESULT

Table

3

- RO-RESULT

parameter5

This parameter defines the priority assigned to the transfer of the corresponding APDC with respect to the other APDUs to be exchanged between the AEs. The lower the value, the higher the priority. If several APDUs with the same priority are awaiting transfer, they are transferred "first in, first out"
NOTES

Parameter name Operation-value Result Invoke-ID Priority

Req U U ?uI U

Ind CC=) C(=l &I(=)

10.2.1.1
parameter association has an effect in the case of a twoin that it prioritizes the sending

Operation-value

1

The Priority way alternate

of APDKJs, and may be used to determine the Turn also have to send a local APDUs. effect The Priority in the case

when to request parameter may

of a two-way

simultaneous

association.

This parameter is the identifier of an invoked and successfully performed operation. This parameter has to be supplied by the requestor of the service. The value is that of the corresponding ROINVOKE indication primitive. This parameter shall be present only if the Result parameter is present.

2

The Priority

of a reply should

(RO-RESULT, normally

RO-ERROR, (lower

and in

RO-REJECT-UJ value)

be higher

than the priority

of the corresponding

invocation.

16

IS13675(Partl):l993 ISO/lEC 9072-l : 1989

10.2.1.2

Result

10.3-l Table

RO-ERROR

parameters service parameters

This parameter is the result of an invoked and successfully performed operation. The type has to be agreed between the ROSE users. This parameter has to be supplied by the requestor of the service. 10.2.1.3 Invoke-ID

4 lists the RO-ERROR

Table 4

_RO-ERROR

parameters

IParameter
Error-value Error-parameter Invoke-ID Priority

name

I Req I M U M U

Ind M(=) C(=) &I(=)

This parameter identifies the corresponding invocation (see 10.1.1.4). `l'his parameter has to be supplied by the requestor of the service. The value is that of the corresponding RO-INVOKE indication primitive. 10.2.1.4 Priority assigned to APDU (see

10.3.1.1

Error-value

This parameter defines the priority the transfer of the corresponding 10.1.1.6). 10.3 RO-ERROR service

This parameter identifies the error that occurred during execution of the operation. The value has to be agreed between the ROSE-users. This parameter has to be supplied by the requestor of the service. 10.3.1.2 Error-parameter

The RO-ERROR service is used by a ROSE-user to reply to a previous RO-INVOKE indication in the case of an unsuccessfully performed operation. This service is an non-confirmed service. The related service structure service-primitives as illustrated consists
in Figure

of two 7.

This parameter provides additional information about the error. The type (if any) has to be agreed between the ROSE-users. This parameter has to be supplied by the requestor of the service. 10.3.1.3 Invoke-ID

ROSE-user

ROSEprovider

ROSE-user

RO-ERROR

request *
RO-EKROR

This parameter identifies the corresponding invocation (see 10.1.1.4). This parameter has io be supplied by the requestor of the service. The value is that of the corresponding RO-INVOKE indication primitive. 10.3.1.4 Priority assigned to APDU (see

indication b

This parameter defines the priority the transfer of the corresponding 10 1.1'.6).

Figure 7

- RO-ERROR

sewice-primitives

17

IS 13675 ( Part 1) : 1993 lSO/IEC 9072-l : 1989

10.4

RO-REJECT-U

The RO-REJECT-U service is used by a ROSEuser to reject a request (RO-INVOKE indication) of the other ROSE-user if it has detected a problem. The RO-REJECT-U service may also be used by a ROSE-user to reject a reply (RORESULT indication, RO-ERROR indication) from the other ROSE-user. However, to avoid violating the sequencing rules of other ASEs in some application contexts, a ROSE-user may choose not to use the RO-REJECT-U service to reject replies. This service is an non-confirmed service. The related service structure service-primitives, as illustrated consists of two in figure 8.

This parameter as follows: a)

specifies

the reason for rejection

Invoke-problem: user-reject of an ROINVOKE indication primitive with values: duplicate-invocation: signifies that the invoke-ID parameter violates the assignment rules of 10.1.1.4; unrecognized-operation: signifies operation is not one of those between the ROSE-users; that the agreed

-

-

mistyped-argument: signifies that the type of the operation argument supplied is not that agreed between the ROSE-users resource-limitation: the performing ROSE-user is not able to perform the invoked operation du-e to resource limitation; initiator-releasing: the initiator is not willing to invoked operation because attempt to release the association; associationperform the it is about to application-

-

ROSE-user

ROSE-user

RO-REJECT-U request * RO-REJECT-U indication

-

unrecognized-linked-ID: signifies that there is no operation in progress with an invoke-ID equal to the specified linked-ID; linked-response-unexpected: signifies that the invoked operation referred to by the linked-ID is not a parent-operation unexpected-child-operation. signifies that the invoked child-operation is not one that the invoked parent-operation referred to by the linked-ID allows. indication user-reject primitive of an with

Figure 8

- RO-REJECT-L'

service-primitives

10.4.1

RO-REJECT-U th-e

parameters service

-

Table 5 lists parameters.

RO-REJECT-U

b) Return-result-problem:
Table 5

- RO-REJECT-L

parameters

RO-RESULT values: -

unrecognized-invocation: signifies that no operation with the specified invoke-ID is in progress; result-response-unexpected: signifies that the invoked.operation does not report a result; mistyped-result: signifies that the type of the result parameter supplied is not that agreed between the ROSE-users.

-

10.4.1.1

Reject-reason

-

18

IS13676(Part1):1993

lSO/IEC 9072-1:1989

cl

Return-error-problem. user-reject of an ROERROR indication primitive with values: unrecognized-invocation: signifies that no operation with the specified Invoke-ID is in progress; error-response-unexpected: the invoked operation failure; signifies that does not report
ROSE-user ROSEprovider ROSE. user

-

RO-REJECT-P indication

-

unrecognized-error: signifies that the reported error is not one of those agreed between the ROSE-users; unexpected-error: signifies that the reported error is not one that the invoked operation may report; mistyped-parameter: signifies that the type of the error parameter supplied is not that agreed between the ROSE-user. to be supplied by the

Figure

9. RO-REJECT-P

service-primitive

-

10.5.1

RO-REJECT-P the

parameters RO-REJECT-P service

Table 6 lists parameters.

-

Table 6 - RO-REJECT-P

parameters

This parameter has requestor of the service.
10.4.1.2

Invoke-ID

This parameter identifies the corresponding invocation (see 10.1.1.4). This parameter has to be supplied by the requestor of the service. The value is that of the rejected RO-INVOKE indication, RO-RESULT indication, or RO-ERROR indication primitive. 10.4.1.3 Priority assigned to APDU (see

10.5.1.1

Invoke-ID

This parameter defines the priority the transfer of the corresponding 10.1.1.6). 10.5 RO-REJECT-P

This ,parameter identifies the corresponding invocation (see 10.1.1.4). This parameter is supplied by the ROSE-provider. The value is that ROof the rejected RO-INVOKE request, RESULT request, RO-EKROR request or ROREJECT-U request primitives. This parameter may be omitted if an invoke-ID is not available. 10.5.1.2 Returned-parameters

The RO-REJECT-P service is used to advise a ROSE-user of a problem detected by the ROSEprovider. This service is a provider-initiated service. The related service structure consists of a single service-primitive, as illustrated in figure 9.

This parameter contains the parameters of the RO-ISVOKE request, RO-RESULT request, ROERROR request or RO-REJECT-U request primitives, if the corresponding APDC could not be transferred by the ROSE-provider. This parameter and the parameter reject-reason are mutually exclusive.

19

IS 13675 ( Part 1 ) : 1993 ISO/IEC 9072-l : 1989

10.5.1.3

Reject-reason specifies the reason for rejection

-

This parameter as follows: d)

mistyped-APDU: signifies that the structure of the APDU does not conform to ISO/IEC 9072-2; badly-structured-APDU: signifies that the structure of the APDU does not conform to the standard notation and encoding, defined in IS0 8824 and IS0 8825.

General-problem: with values: -

provider-reject

of an APIIU

-

unrecognized-APDU: signifies that the type of the APDC, as evidenced by it.s type identifier, is not one of the four dtxfint:d by ISO/IEC 9072-2;

This parameter is supplied by the ROSE-provider. This parameter and the parameter returnedparameters are mutually exclusive.

20

IS13675(Part1):1993

lSO/lEC

9072-l : 1989

11
11.1

Mapping
Application

of notation
context

on service

11.2.1.1.1

Invocation

of a bind-operation is mapped on A-ASSOCIATE

and operations

This clause describes how an application-context is specified by means of the notation provided the macros defined in clause 9. Such an application-context of a) b) c) d) specification

The invocation of a bind-operation the A-ASSOCIATE request and indication service primitives. by The argument value of the mapped on the user information service primitives.
11.2.1.1.2Reply

bind-operation parameter

is of the

consists

a bind-operation specified BIND macro, and an unbind-operation the UNBIND macro,

by means

of the

of a bind-operation

specified and

by means

of

The reply of a bind-operation is mapped on the AASSOCIATE response and A-ASSOCIATE confirm service primitives. If the bind-operation was successfully performed, the result parameter of the service primitives is and the result value of the bind"accepted", operation is mapped on the user information parameter of the service primitives. If the bind-operation was not successfully performed, the result parameter value of the service primitives is "rejected (permanent)", and the error value of the bind-operation is mapped on the user information parameter of the service primitives.
11.2.1.2

a set of operations specified the OPEKATION macro, and

by means

of

a set of errors related to operations and specified by mean& of the ERROR macro. bind-operation, may be invoked

The Remote Operations (i.e. unbind-operation and operations) by the user-element.

An association-initiating user-element establishes an application-association by invoking a bind-operation If the application-association is established, operations may be invoked by the user-element. When the association-initiating release user-element wishes to the application-association, it invokes an unbindoperation. 11.2 Mapping of Remote Operations ACSE services. RTSE services, ROSE services on and

Mapping

of an unbind-operation is mapped on the A-

An unbind-dperation RELEASE: serxice.
11.2.1.2.1 Invocation

of an unbind-operation

The bind-operation and, the unbind-operation are mapped either on ACSE services, or the RTSE services. The operations
11.2.1

The invocation of an unbind-operation is mapped on the A-RELEASE request and the A-RELEASE indication service primitives. The argument value of the unbind-operation is mapped on the user information parameter of the service primitives. The reason parameter value of the service primitives is "normal" 11.2.1.2.2 Reply of an unbind-operation

are mapped

on the ROSE services. services A-

Mapping

on ACSE

The bind-operation is ASSOCIATE service and mapped on the A-RELEASE
11.2.1.1

mapped on the the unbind-operation service.

The reply of an unbind-operation is mapped on the A-RELEASE response and A-RELEASE confirm service primitives. If the unbind-operation was successfully performed, the reason parameter value of the service primitives is "normal", the result value of the unbind-operation is mapped on the user information parameter of the service primitives, and the result parameter of the service primitives

Mapping

of a bind-operation is mapped on the A-

A bind-operation ASSOCIATE service.

21

IS13675 (Partl): 1993 ISO/lEC9072-1:1989

is "affirmative", If the unbind-operation was not successfully performed, the reason parameter value of the service primitives is "not finished," the error value of the unbind-operation is mapped on the user information parameter of the service primitives, and the result parameter of the service primitives is "affirmative".
11.2.2

11.2.2.2.1 Invocation

of an unbind-operation

The invocation of an unbind-operation is mapped on the RT-CLOSE request and the RT-CLOSE indication service primitives. The argument value of the unbind-operation is mapped on the user-data parameter of the service primitives. The reason parameter value of the service primitives is "normal" 11.2.2.2.2 Reply ofan unbind-operation The reply of an unbind-operation is mapped on the RT-CLOSE response and RT-CLOSE confirm service primitives. If the unbind-operation was successfully performed, the reason parameter value of the service primitives is "normal", and the result value of the unbind-operation is mapped on the user-data parameter of the service primitives. If the unbind-operation was not successfully performed, the reason parameter value of the service, primitives is "not finished", and the error value of the unbind-operation is mapped on the user-data parameter of the service primitives. 11.2.3 Mapping on ROSE services

Mapping

on RTSE services

The bind-operation is mapped on the RT-OPEN service and the unbind-operation mapped on the RT-CLOSE service. 11.2.2.1 Mapping of a bind-operation is mapped on the RT-OPEN

A bind-operation service.

11.2.2.1.1 Invocation

of a bind-operation

The invocation of a bind-operation is mapped on the RT-OPEN request and RT-OPEN indication service primitives. The argument value of the bind-operation is mapped on the user-data parameter of the service primitives. The.dialogue-mode parameter value is "two-way-alternate". 11.2.2.1.2 Reply of a bind-operation The reply of a bind-operation is mapped on the RT-OPEN response and RT-OPEN confirm service primitives. If the bind-operation was successfully performed, the result parameter of the service primitives is "accepted", and the result value of the bindoperation is mapped on the user-data parameter of the service primitives. If the bind-operation was not successfully performed, the result parameter value of the service primitives is "rejected (permanent)", and the error value of the bind-operation is mapped on the user-data parameter of the service primitives. 11.2.2.2 Mapping of an unbind-operation is mapped on the RT-CLOSE

An operation

is mapped on the ROSE services. of an operation is mapped on the

I 1.2.3.1 Invocation

The invocation af an operation RO-INVOKE service.

The value assigned to the operation is mapped on the operation-value parameter of that service. The value of the Named-Type in the ARGUMENT clause of the OPERATION macro is mapped on the argument parameter of that service.. 11.2.3.2 Reply of an operation the

If an operation was successfully performed, reply is mapped on the RO-RESULT service.

The value of the Named-Type in the RESULT clause of the OPERATION macro is mapped on the result parameter of that service. If an operation .was not successfully performed, the reply is mapped on the RO-ERROR service. In this case one of the errors in the Identifier List of Error Names in the ERROR clause of the

An unbind-operation service.

IS 13675 ( Part 1) : 1993 ISO/lE;C 9072-l : 196

OPERATION macro may be applied, The value assigned to the applied error is mapped on the error-value parameter of that service. The value of the Named-Type in the PARAMETER clause of the ERROR macro of the applied error is mapped on the error-parameter parameter of that service.

12.1.2.2

Disrupted

Remote

Operations

An unbind-operation does not disrupt Remote Operations in the case of Association Class 1 and Operation Class 1 or 2 operations. In all other cases an unbind-operation may disrupt, operations. However if in a specific application-context Operation Classes 3, 4 or 5 &&or Association Class 2 or 3 are used, it is assumed that either the disruption is acceptable or the application-context provides operations to avoid the disruption. 12.1.2.3 Disrupting Remote Operations Remote Operations.

12

Sequencing

information

This clause defines the interaction among the Remote Operations, and the i~nteraction among the ACSE services and the ROSE -services. 12.1 12.1.1 12.1.1.1 Sequencing Onerations * information for Remote

Bind-operation Usage restrictions

There are no disrupting 12.1.2.4 Collisions

A bind-operation is not used on an establ,ished application-association. A successfully performed bind-operation establishes an applicationassociation. 12,1.1.2 Disrupted Remote Operation does not disrupt any Remote

Because only the association-initiator release the application-association, there collision. 12.1.3 12.1.3.1 Operations Usage restrictions used

may is no

The bind-operation Operation. 12.L.1.3 Disrupting

Operations are only application-association. 12.1.3.2 Disrupted

on an established

Remote Operations

Remote Operations

There are no disrupting Remote Operations. 12.1.1.4 Collisions

Operations do not disrupt any Remote Operations. 12.1.3.3 Disrupting Remote Operations by an unbind-

A bind-operation collision results when the user-elements in both AI% simultaneously invoke a bind-operation on each other. In this case two independent application-associations are established. 12.1.2 12.1.2.1 Unbind-operatian Usage restrictions

Operations may be disrupted operation (see 12.1.2.2). 12.1.3.4 Collisions

There are no collisions of operations. 12.1.4 Further sequencing information at the may be

-An u~nbind-operation is only used on an established application-association. It is only used by the user-element which invoked the bindoperation, It is only used when no replies from Operation Class 1 or 2 operations are outstanding. The application-association ceases to be established no matter whether the unbitidoperation is performed successfully or not,

Pisrupting services are not visible operation-interface. However operations disrupted by services (see 12.2).

Bind-operations and unbind-operations are disrupted by the A-ABORT, A-P-ABORT, RT-U-ABORT and RT-P-ABORT services. Operations are disrupted by the A-ABORT, A-PRT-U-ABORT, RT-P-ABORT, ABORT, RO-REJWT-U and RO-REJECT-P services.

IS 13675 (Part 1) : 1993 lSO/lEC 9072-l : 1969

In addition an operation may be disrupted by the A-RELEASE service. But this reflects only the disruption of an operation by an unbindoperation.The disrupted operations are not considered in the disrupted services of 12.2. Because all Remote Operations are mapped on services, and disrupting Remote Operations (unbind-operation) are'represented by services, no disrupting Remote Operations are considered in the disrupting services subclauses of 12.2. 12.2 12.2.1 Sequencing information for services

12.2.3.1

RO-INVOKE

service

12.2.3.1.1 Type of Service

The RO-INVOKE service.

service

is an non-confirmed

12.2.3.1.2 Usage restriction The RO-INVOKE service is only established application-association. 12.2.3.1.3 Disrupted The RO-INVOKE services. services does not disrupt any used on an

service

ACSE services is is

The sequencing information for ACSE services described in IS0 8649. Additional information provided in this subclause. 12.2.1.1 Disrupted ROSE services

12.2.3.1.4 Disrupting

services by the RO-

Tbe RO-INVOKE service is disrupted REJECT-P service. 12.2.3.1.5 Collision There are service. 12.2.3.2 no collisions of the

.In addition to the disrupted services defined in IS0 8649 all ROSE services except the ROREJECT-P service are disrupted by the A-ABORT and A-P-ABORT services and may be disrupted by the A-RELEASE service (see 12.2.3 6). 12.2.1.2 Disrupting ROSE services ROSE services.

RO-INVOKE

RO-RESULT

12.2.3.2.1 Type of service There are no disrupting 12.2.2 RTSE services The RO-RESULT service. service is an non-confirmed

12.2.3.2.2 Usage restriction The RO-RESULT service is only used on an established application-association and in reply to an RO-INVOKE service.
12.2.3.2.3 Disrupted services

The sequencing information for RTSE services is described in ISO/IEC 9066-l. Additional information is provided in this subclause. 12.2.2.1 Disrupted ROSE services

In addition to the disrupted services defined in ISO/IEC 90661 all ROSE services except the ROREJECT-P service are disrupted by the RT-UABORT, RT-P-ABORT and the negative RT-TRANSFER confirm services. 12.2.2.2 Disrupting ROSE services ROSE services.

The RO-RESULT services.

service

does not disrupt

any

12.2.3.2.4Disrupting

services by the RO-

The RO-RESULT service is disrupted REJECT-P service. 12.2.3.2.5 Collisions There are service. 12.2.3.3 no collisions of the

There are no disrupting 12.2.3

ROSE services

RO-RESULT

This subclause describes the interaction ,among the ROSE services. Interactions with ACSE services are described in 12.2.1, and interactions with RTSE services are described in subclause 12.2.2.

RO-ERROR

12.2.3.3.1 Type of service The RO-ERROR service. service is an non-confirmed

24

IS 13675 (Part 1): 1993 ISO/lEC 9072-l : 1969

12.2.3.3.2

Usage restriction

The RO-ERROR service is only used on an established application-association and in reply to an RO-INVOKE service. 12.2.3.3.3 Disrupted The RO-ERROR service. 12.2.3.3,4 services does not disrupt any

There are no collisions service. 12.2.3.5 HO-REJECT-P

of the RO-REJECT-U

12.2.3.5.1 Type of service service The RO-REJECT-P service. 12.2.3.5.2 Disrupting services is disrupted by the RO12.2.3.5.3 Disrupted services service disrupts all other The RO-REJECT-P ROSE services. of the RO-ERROR service. 12.2.3.5.4 12.2.3.4 RO-REJECT-U 12.2.3.4.1 Type of service The RO-REJECT-U service. 12.2.3.4.2 service is an non-confirmed Disrupting services by any The RO-REJECT-P other service. 12.2.3.5.5 Collision If the ACSt? service or an RTSE service causes an abort or the release of an applicationassociation, it is a local matter to inform the service-user about outstanding RO-REJECT-P services for Returned~parameters. 12.2.3.6 Additional Sequencing Information service is not disrupted The RO-ERROR service REJECT-P service. 12.2.3.3.5 Collisions There are no collisions service is a provider initiated

Usage restriction

Not applicable.

Usage restriction

The RO-REJECT-U service is only used on an established application-association and in reply to RO-INVOKE, RO-RESULT and RO-ERROR services. 12.2.3.4.3 Disrupted services service does not disrupt any

The RO-REJECT-U service. 12.2.3.4.4 Disrupting

services is disrupted by the

The usage restrictions for unbind-operations (12.1.2.1) and the mapping of unbind-operation on to the A-RELEASE service prevent the disruption of ROSE services, if only Association Class 1 and Operation Classes 1 and 2 are used. If Association Classes 2 or 3, or Operation Class 3, 4 or 5 are used, the A-RELEASE service may disrupt ROSE services. In this case it is the responsibility of the application-context designer, either to accept this disruption or to provide means (e.g. operations) to prepare for the release of an application-association.

The RO-REJECT-U service RO-REJECT-P service. 12.2.3.4.5 Collisions

25

IS 13675 (Part 1) : 1993 ISO/IEC 9072-l : 198

Annex A
(normative)

Notation supporting the specification of application-service-elements and application-contexts
This annex provides a notation supporting the specification of application-service-elements and application contexts which are specified by means of the RO-notation. The RO-notation may be used to specify the bind-operation and the unbindoperation of an application context. Additionally the RO-notation may be used to specify operation types and error types of several applicationservice-elements (ROSE-user ASEsL If the ROnotation is combined with other notations, other specification tools defined elsewhere might be used. This annex defines two macros supporting the specification of application-service-elements and application contexts. The formal Jefinition of these macros is shown in figure A. 1. bl invoked by the supplier functionality
of the terms intuitive. One "supplier" might and

of the information-processing
NOTE A particular "consumer" consider its user however, arbitrary. allocation is often a file system, to be called the

naturally and

e.g. to be called a consumer.

a supplier

Strictly two

speaking, terms is

assignment

of the

A.1

Application-service-elements
supports th.e unique identification of

If an ASE uses the concept of linked-operations, a specific operation type may be invoked as a childoperation. The invoker of the child-operation is the performer of the linked parent-operation. Operation types solely invoked as child-operations shall not be included in the ASE specification, they are listed in the type specification of their parent-operations. The error types the operations may report are not included in the ASE specification, they are listed in the type specification of the operations. The set of the remaining operations (operations not solely invoked as child-operations), and who is allowed to invoke this operations may be reflected by a formal notation specifying the ROSE-user ASE.
A-1.1 Specification service-element of an application-

The notation an ASE.

If an ASE is an ROSE-user, the notation additionally supports the specification of the characteristics of the ASE. The operationinterface and the protocol of an ROSE-user ASE are specified by a set of operation types and a set of error types. The protocol inherently: a) b) specified or for a specific ASE may be

symmetric, asymmetric

An ASE may be specified by a formal notation APPLICATION-SERVICE-ELEMENT supported by the macro (see figure A. 1). may invoke The type
ELEMENT

In the symmetric case both ASE-users the same set of operation types.

In the ~asymmetric case one ASE-user (called supplier in the context. of this annex) provides some information-processing functionality which is used by the peer ASE-user (called consumer in the context cif this annex). In this case a specific _operationmtype may be a) invoked by the consumer, and/or

notation of the APPLICATION-SERVICEmac~ro enables the specification of an ASE. The value notation of the APPLICATION-SERVICEELEMENT macro enables the specification of an unique identifier for the ASE. for an ASE type is the keyword optionally followed by the specification of operations.
APPLICATION-SERVICE-ELEMENT

The notation

26

IS13675( Part 1):1993 ISO/IEC 9072.1:1989

Remote-Operations-Notation-extension DEFINITIONS BEGIN EXPORTS IMPORTS :: =

( joint-iso-ccitt remote-operationr(4)

notation-extension

(2) }

APPLICATION-SERVICE-ELEMENT, OPERATION, BIND, UNBIND FROM

APPLICATION-CONTEXT,

aCSE;

Remote-Operation-Notation

( joint-iso-ccitt remote-operations(4)
__

notation(O)};

macro definition for ASEs
MACRO :: P

APPLICATION-SERVICE-ELEMENT BEGIN TYPE NOTATION VALUE NOTATION SymmetricAse Consumerlnvokes Supplierlnvokes OperationList Operation END

:: = SymmetricAse

1Consumerlnvokes
"{" OperationList

Supplierlnvokes

1empty

:: = value (VALUE OBJECT IDENTIFIER) :: = "OPERATIONS" :: = "CONSUMER :: = "SUPPLIER `}" ")" ")"

INVOKES " "(" OperationList "(" OperationList ",I' Operation

1empty 1empty

INVOKES"

: : = Operation / OperationList
:: = vahe(OPERATION)

0
:: = ( joint-iso-ccitt remote-operations(4) areID-ACSE (4))

aCSE APPLICATION-SERVICE-ELEMENT __

Remote Operations Notation

extension continued

Figure

A.l.(Part

1 of 2)

- Formal definition

of ASE and'appliration-context

data types

If the protocol specified for the ASE is symmetric, the keyword OPERATIONS and the reference names of the operations are specified. If the protocol specified asymmetric, the keywords for
CONSUMER

the reference names of the operations the consumer may invoke, and/or the keywords SUPPLIER INVOKES and the reference names of the operations the supplier may invoke, are specified.

the

ASE

INVOKES

is and

27

IS 13675 ( Part 1) : 1993 ISO/lEC 9072-l : 1989

A.2

Application

contexts
an application context

In the context of this annex explicitly identifies: a) b) c) a bind-operation, an unbind-operation,

and

a set of application-service-elements one or more identified abstract-

and requires syntaxes.

The notation for an application context type is the keyword APPLICATION-CONTEXT, followed by the keywords APPLICATION SERVICE ELEMENTS and the reference names of ASEs not using the ROnotation, followed by the keyword BIND and the reference name of the bind-operation type, followed by the keyword UNBIND and the reference name of the unbind-operation type, optionally followed by the specification of ASEs using operations, followed by the keywords ABSTRACT SYNTAXES and the reference names of the abstract syntaxes. If the application context contains ROSE-user ASEs, the keywords REMOTE OPERATIONS and the reference name of the ROSE, followed by the specification of ASEs with a symmetrical protocol, and/or the specification of ASEs with an asymmetrical protocol are used. The specification of ASEs with a symmetrical protocol is the keywords OPERATIONS OF and the reference names of that ASEs. The specification of ASEs with an asymmetrical protocol is the keywords INITIATOR CONSUMER OF and the reference names of ASEs the consumer of which is the association-initiator, and/or the keywords RESPONDER CONSUMER OF and the reference names of ASEs the consumer of which is the association-responder. A.2.2 Mapping of notation on to service

The set of application-service-elements __ a)

contains

ASEs not using the RO-notation, i.e the ACSE, optionally the RTSE, and optionally others; and optionally ASEs . the ROSE and ROSE-user

b)

If the application context contains ROSE-user ASEs with an asymmetrical protocol, the notation supports the specification whether the association-initiator or the association-responder is the consumer of such an ASE. The identification of the bind-operation, the unbind-operation, the application-serviceelements, and the abstract-syntaxes may be reflected by a formal notation specifying the application context. A.2.1 Specification context of an application

The application abstract syntax

An application context may be specified by a formal notation supported by the APPLICATIONCONTEXT macro (see figure A. 1 1. The type notation of the APPLICATION-CONTEXT macro enables the specification of the application context. The value notation of the APPLICATIONCONTEXT macro enables the specification of an unique identifier for the application context.

context identifier and the list of names specified by means of the APPLICATION-CONTEXT macro are mapped either on the RT-OPEN services of RTSE, if RTSE is included in the application context; or else on the A-ASSOCIATE services of ACSE. The application context value is mapped on to the Application Context Name parameter of the RTOPEK or A-ASSOCIATE services. The abstract syntax names are mapped on to the Presentation Context Definition List parameter and the Presentation Context Definition Result List of the RT-OPEN or A-ASSOCIATE services.

28

IS 13675 (Part 1) : 1993 lSO/lEC 9072-l : 1999

\ __ Remote Operations Notation extension continued _- macro definition for application contexts
APPLICATION-CONTEXT BEGIN TYPE NOTATION VALUE NOTATION NonROelements Binding :: = NonROelements Binding ROelements AbstractSyntaxes MACRO :: =

:: I value (VALUE OBJECT IDENTIFIER) :: = "APPLICATION :: = "BIND" "UNBIND" SERVICE ELEMENTS" type type OPERATIONS" --"{" AseList ")"

shall reference a bind-operation type shall reference an unbind-operation type
--

ROelements

:: = "REMOTE

"(" AselD "}"

identifying

ROSE

SymmetricAses SymmetricAses AsymmetricAses InitiatorConsumerOf ResponderConsumerOf AbstractSyntaxes AseList AselD AbstractSyntaxList AbstractSyntax END END __ end :: = "OPERATIONS

AsymmetricAses OF " "1" AseList ")"

1empty 1empty

:: = InitiatorConsumerOf :: z "INITIATOR

ResponderConsumerOf OF" "(" AseList "1" OF" "(" AseLirt

CONSUMER CONSUMER

1empty 1empty
"}"

: : = "RESPONDER
:: = "ABSTRACT :: = AselD

"1"

SYNTAXES""{"

AbstractSyntaxList

1 AseList "," AselD

:: = value ( APPLICATION-SERVICE-ELEMENT) :: = AbstractSyntax

1AbstractSyntaxList

"," AbstractSyntax

:: = value (OBJECT IDENTIFIER)--

identifying

abstract syntax

of Remote Operations Notation

extension

Figure

A.1 (Part

2 of 2)

- Formal

definition

of ASE and application-context

data types

29

IS 13675 1 Part 1) : 1993 lSO/lEC 9072-l : 1989

Annex B
(informative)

Guidelines for application protocol designers on the use of ROSE
This annex application provides protocol examples designers and guidelines for on the use of ROSE.
operationExample ARGUMENT RESULT :: 3 3 OPERATION ArgumentType ResultType

B.l

Examples errors

for operations

and
for the

This subclause provides examples definition ofoperations and errors. B.l.l Operation classes

This subclause provides definition of operationsof 5.

examples for Operation classes

the 1 to

and operationExample The operat'ions operationExample of Operation Class 5 (see example below) reports no outcome. The argument of the operation operationExample is of operation the ArgumentTypel, type
operationExample the operation has no argument. The value value of of operationExample operationExample is 4, the is 5.

the operation

The operation operationExample classes 1 or 2 (see example below) (reSUk of type ArgumentTypel2) or errorExample or errorExample2). The operation operationExamplel2 ArgumentType12. The value of
operationExamplel2 is 1,

of Operation reports success failure (errors argument of the is of type the operation

operationExample ARGUMENT :: = 4

OPERATION ArgumentType

operationExample :: = 5

OPERATION

operationExamplel2 ARGUMENT RESULT ERROR :: r 1

OPERATION ArgumentType ~ResultTypel2 (errorExample1. errorExample2)

B.1.2

Linked-operations.

The example'below shows the definition of a set of linked-operations consisting of the parentoperation parent-opl2 and the child-operations
operationExample5l_and operationExample

The operation operationExample of Operation 3 (see example below) reports failure errorExample1) only, if any. The argument
OperatiOn operationExample iS Of type

Class
(error

parent-opt2

OPERATION ArgumentType ResultType 12 {errorExamplel,errorExample2) { operationExample51, operationExample )

ARGUMENT RESULT ERROR LINKED :: = 6

of the is 2.

ArgumentType3.

The value

of the operation

operationExample

operationExample ARGUMENT TERROR :: = 2

OPERATION ArgumentType {errorExamplel}

B-1.3 Errors reports

Errors

The operationExample operation of Operation Class 4 (see example below) reports success (result of type ResultType4) only. The argument of the Operation operationExample is of type ArgumentType4. The value of the operation operationExample is 3.

(see errorExample and errorExample below) failure. The parameter of the error errorExample is of type ParameterTypel, the error errorExample has no parameter. The value of the error errorExample is 1, the value of the error
errorExample is 2.

30

IS 13675 ( Part 1) : 1903

ISO/lEC 9072-l : 1999

errorExample

ERROR ParameterType

PARAMETER

:: r 1
errorExample :: = 2 ERROR

of the bind-operation BindExample to establish an application-association nor the response to the application-association establishment are accompanied by any user data.
BindExample :: = BIND

B.2

Examples for bind-operations and unbind-operations
for the unbind-

B.2.2

Unbina-operations

Unbind-operations application-association. The request

are

used

to release

an

This subclause provides examples definition of bind-operations and operations. B.2.1 Bind-operations used

Bind-operations are application-association'.

to establish

an

of the unbind-operation to release an applicationassociation is accompanied by the argument of type UnbindArgumentTypel. The response to the application-association release is accompanied either by the result of type UnbindResultTypel or by the unbind-error of type UnbindErrorTypel.
UnbiodExamplel UnbindExample :: = UNBIND UnbindArgumentTypel UnbindResultTypel UnbindErrorTypel

The request of the bind-operation BindExample to establish an application-association is accompanied by the argument of type BindArgumentTypel. The positive response to the application-association establishment is accompanied by the result of type BindResultTypel. The negative response to the applicationassociation establishment is accompanied by the bind-error of type BindErrorTypel.
BindExample :: = BIND BindArgumentTypel BindResultTypel BindErrorTypel

ARGUMENT RESULT UNBIND-ERROR

'

ARGUMENT RESULT BIND-ERROR

the unbind-oper.ation release an applicationassociation is accompanied by the argument of type UhbindArgumentTypel. The response to the application-association release is optionally accompanied by the unbi,nd-error of type UnbindErrorTypel. The request
UnbindExample to UnbindExample :: = UNBIND UnbindArgumentTypel UnbindErrorTypel

of

The request of the bind-operation BindExample to establish an application-association is accompanied by the argument of type BindArgumentTypel. The positive response. to the application-association establishment is not accompanied by any user data. The negative response to the application-association establishment is accompanied by the bind-error of type BindErrorTypel
BindExample :: = BIND EindArgumentTypel BindErrorTypel

ARGUMENT UNBIND-ERROR

Note that argument, result and unbind-error of an unbind-operation are optional. Neither the request of the bind-operation UnbindExample to release an application-association nor the response to the application-association release are accompanied by any user data.
UnbindExample

:: =

UNBIND

ARGUMENT BIND-ERROR

Note that argument, result bind-operation are optional.

and bind-error of a Neither the request

31

IS 13675 ( Part 1) : 1993 ISO/lEC 9072-l : 1969

B.3

Export ahd import of operations and errors
examples of how to export and errors. shows how The operation10
and

This clause gives import operations The example operations and
have local values.

and

below errors.

to
and

export
error10 are

OperationTypeA

ErrorTypeA

types, and specific values have to be assigned in the importing modules. The operation1 1 and error1 1
have globally unique values.

The example below shows how to import operations and errors. The operation10 and error10 have local values defined in the exporting module. The designer of the importing module is responsible for the uniqueness of these values within the abstract syntax. The operation operation13 is of type OperationTypeA and has the value 13 assigned. The errqr error13 is of type ErrorTypeA and has the value 13 assigned. The operation11 and error11 have globally unique values defined in the exporting module.
ImportingModule { objectidentifier ) DEFINITIONS

:: =
1,

ExportingModule BEGIN

(objectidentifierl

} DEFINITIONS :: =

BEGIN IMPORTS operationlo, OperationTypeA, operation1

EXPORTSoperationlO,

OperationTypeA, error1 1;

operation1 1,

errorlo, FROM

ErrorTypeA. error1 1 ExportingModule objectidentifierl { };

errorlO, ErrorTypeA,

IMPORTS OPERATION, ERROR,BIND,UNBIND FROM Remote-Operation-Notation

( joint-iso-ccitt remoteoperations(d) operation10 OPERATION ArgumentType ResultType (errorlo} notation(O)}; END

opera tion13 error13

OperationTypeA

: : = 13
:: = 13

ErrorTypeA

ARGUMENT RESULT ERROR ::= 10 :: =

H.4

Definition of Applicationservice-elements

OperationTypeA

OPERATION ARGUMENT RESULT ArgumentTypeA ResultTypeA

This clause gives examples on how to define application-service-elements. The examples refer to the operations and errors defined in the examples of clause B. 1. The application--service-element element1 includes operationExamplel2 the operations and operationExample and the errors errorExample and errorExample2. Note, the errors are included indirectly by the definition of the operations. The application-service-element element1 is symmetric, i.e. both user-elements may invoke the operations
operationExamplel2 and operationExampk3.

operation1 1

OPERATION ArgumentType ResultType (error1 1) 11 I 1 1

ARGUMENT RESULT ERROR

:: = ( objectidentifier2component

error1 0

ERROR PARAMETER :: = 10 ParameterType

elementl APPLICATlON-SERVICE-ELEMENT ErrorTypeA ERROR PARAMETER ParameterTypeA :: = OPERATIONS [operdtionExample12, operationExample3) :: = { objectidentifierOfElement1 }

error1 1

ERROR PARAMETER ParameterType 1 12) :: = (objectidentifier2component

END

32

IS 13675

lSO/lEC

(Part 1) : 1993 9072-l : 1989

The application-service-element element2 includes operations operationExample and the operaiionExample4 and the error errorExample1. The application-service-element element2 is asymmetric, i.e. only one user-element (that in the consumer role) may invoke the operations operationExample and operationExample4.
element2APPLlCATION-SERVICE-ELEMENT CONSUMER INVOKES (operationExample3, operationExample4) :: = ( objectidentifierOfElement2 )

as a child-operation, or outside operations (as a non-child-operation).
elementSAPPLICATION-SERVICEYELEMENT

a set

of linked-

CONSUMER INVOKES (parent-opl2

)

SUPPLIER INVOKES (operationExample52) :: = { objectidentifierOfElement5)

8.5

Definition contexts

of application

The the

application-service-eleulent operations

element3

includes and

operationExamplel2

operationExample errorExample2. element3 (that in operations The

and

the errors
i.e. only

errorExample one may user7!lemcnt invoke

and

application-service-element

This clause gives examples of how to define application contexts for several Association Classes. The examples refer to the applicationservice-elements defined in the examples of clause H.4, and the bind-operations and unbindoperations defined in the examples of clause R.2. The application context context1 includes the application-service-elements ACSE, RTSE, ROSE, and element2; the bind-operation and the unbind-operation BindExample UnbindExample3. The association-initiator may invoke the operations operationExample and operationExample The association-responder is not allowed to invoke any operation (Association Class 1).
context1 APPLICATION-CONTEXT BindExample UnbindExample (rOSE} (element2)

is asymmetric, the supplier

role)

the

operationExamplel2

and operationExample51.

element3APPLICATION-SERVICE-ELEMENT SUPPLIER INVOKES {operationExamplel2, operationExample } )

:: = ( objectidentifierOfElement3

The application-service-element element4 includes the operations parent-opl2, operationExample and operationExample and the errors errorExample and errorExample2. Note, the child-operations operationExample and operationExample are included indirectly by the definition of the parentoperation parent-opl2 The application-serviceelement element4 is asymmetric, i.e. only one userelement (that in the consumer role) may invoke the operation parent-opi2 and only the other userelement (that in the supplier role) may invoke the and of the child-operations operationExample parent-operation operationExample during parent-op12 the execution

APPLICATION SERVICE ELEMENTS (aCSE, rTSE) BIND UNBIND REMOTE OPERATIONS INITIATOR CONSUMER OF ABSTRACT SYNTAXES {{joint-iso-ccitt abstractSyntax(1) associatiorwontrol(2) apdur(0) versioni(l )

objectidentifierOfAbstractSyntax1) :: = (objectidentifierOfContext1

element4APPLICATION-SERVICE-ELEMENT CONSUMERINVOKES (parent-opl2)

:: = { objectidentifierOfElement4)

The application context context2 includes the application-service-elements ACSE, ROSE, and elements; the bind-aperation element2, and the unbind-operation BindExamplel;
UnbindExample

invoke The application-service-element element5 includes the same operations and errors as the applicationservice-element element4. The only difference being, that the user-element in the supplier role may invoke the operation operationExample either

the

The association-responder operations operationExample3,
operationExamplel2

may
and

operationExample4, operationExample51.

allowed Class 2).

The association-initiator is not to invoke any operation (Association

33

lSO/lEC 9072-l

IS 13675 ( Part 1) : 1993 : 1959

context2 APPLICATION-CONTEXT APPLICATION BIND UNBIND REMOTE INITIATOR RESPONDER ABSTRACT OPERATIONS CONSUMER CONSUMER SYNTAXES association-control(2) apdus(0) versionlC1)). } OF OF SERVICE ELEMENTS {aCSE) BindExample UnbindExample {rOSE) lelement3) {elementZ}

context4 APPLICATION-CONTEXT APPLICATION BIND UNBIND REMOTE ABSTRACT OPERATIONS OF SYNTAXES OPERATIONS SERVICE ELEMENTS {aCSE} BindExample UnbindExampke3 {rOSE) {elementl)

{objectidentifierOfAbstractSyntaxO) :: = (objectidekifierOfContext4)

((joint-iso-cciti

abstractSyntax(1)

objectidentifierOfAbstractSyntax2) :: = { objectidentifierOfContext2

The last two examples abstract syntax.

assume

a single

named

The application context context3 includes the application-service-elements ACSE, RTSE, ROSE, and eIement2; the bind-operation BindExamplel; and the unbind-operation UnbindExample3. The association-responder may invoke the operations operationExample and operationExample4. The association-initiator is not. allowed to invoke any operation (Association Class 2).
context3 APPLICATION-CONTEXT APPLICATION BIND UNBIND REMOTE ABSTRACT OPERATIONS CONSUMER SYNTAXES ) OF RESPONDER SL'RVICE ELEMENTS (aCSE, rTSE} BindExample UnbindExample (rOSE) {element2)

B.6
B.6.1

Releasing applicationassociations In an orderly
Introduction

way

This part of ISO/IEC 9072 defines five Operation Classes based upon the outcome they report, and three Association Classes based upon whether the association-initiator, the association-responder, or both may invoke operations. This subclause defines the rules that ensure orderly release of application-associations and the, Operation Classes invoked over it. B.6.2 Objectives

(objectidentifierOfAbstractSyntax3) :: 3 { objectidentifierOfContext3

The rules of this subclause are intended to achieve one of the following two objectives, depending upon the situation:

a) The Exactly-Once

The application context context4 includes the application-service-elements ACSE, ROSE, and element2; the bind-operation BindExample3; and the unbind-operation UnbindExample3. The application context context3 is symmetric, i.e. both the association-initiator and the associationinvoke the operations responder may operationExample operationExamplel2 and (Association Class 3).

Objective: Ideally an application entity should be able to count on the invocation of an operation causing that operation to be performed only once. Objective: In some circumstances the Exactly-Once Objective cannot be achieved. A lesser but still useful'objective is that invoking an operation which will cause that operation to be performed once or not at all.

b) The At-Most-Once

34

IS 13675 ( Part 1) : 1993 ISO/lEC 9072-l : 198

B.6.3

Definition

of rules rules apply in all

bl

The fillowing circumstances:

general

Application-associations classes 2 and 3: For

of Association

Gl.The performer shall report the result or error of each confirmed operation over the same application-association by means of which the operation was invoked. G2The initiator shall not application-association operations it invoked confirmed. The following circumstances: specific rules release until have the all been

operations of Operation Classes 1 and 2, specific rules S3 and S4 apply. (Any invocation issued by the association-responder after the association-initiator has issued a release are lost. Response-rejects may be lost as well). For operations of Operation classes 3,4, and 5, specific rules Sl; S2, S3 and S4 apply.

apply

in certain

For protocols containing only operations of Operation Classes 1 or 2, the only constraint upon the values of the Invoke-IDs the invoker supplies to the RO-INVOKE- service is that they be distinct over the life of the application-association. Application-entities make Invoke-IDS unique to an invoker and across consecutive applicationassociations by exchanging presentationaddresses at applicatlsn-association establishment time and, for each presentationaddress, making Invoke-IDS integers that increase monotonically over some reasonable long period of time. To ensure that an operation of Operation Classes 3, 4, or 5 has been performed exactly once, an application-entity shall elicit the duplicateinvocation Reject-reason by invoking the operation twice (or more) with the same InvokeID. Other&e, the At-Most-Once Objective is all that is assured, suggesting that, on average, the invoker does not care whether an non-confirmed operation is performed. B.6.5 Observations Classes 1 or 2 is

Sl. Each time it exercises the RO-INVOKE the invoker shall supply a service, different Invoke-ID (unless reattempting an invocation1 even across a succession of application-associations. This enables the performer to achieve the At-Most-Once Objective by suppressing duplicates. a duplicate s2. If the performer encounters Invoke-ID in the RO-INVOKE service, it shall exercise the HO-REJECT-U service with duplicate-invocation as the Rejectreason. This helps to achieve the ExactlyOnce Objective. shall reject any s3. The association-initiator invocations it has not performed before releasing the application-association. shall respond to s4. The association-initiator any invocations it has performed before releasing the application-association. B.6.4 .Application of rules

The general rules always apply. The specific rules govern application-associations of particular Association Classes, and operations (invoked by means of such associations) of particular Operation Classes, as follotis: a)
Application-associations Class I: For operations of Association

Every operation of Operation performed exactly once.

of Operation Classes 1 and 2, no specific rules apply. For operations of Operation classes 3, 4, and 5, specific rules Sl and 52 apply.

The usefulness of non-confirmed operations or conditionally confirmed operations may depend on the specific application. Protocol designers are recommendetto define only operations of Operation Classes 1 or 2 unless some very specialized requirements exist.

35

Rimed

at Jhe Kay Phen.

kw

Delhi, India

Standard Mark The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Marl, on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS anC operated by the producer, Standard marked products are also continuously cheked b) BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers 01 producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Lhreau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. Revision of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indin Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards Monthly Additions'. Comments on this lndian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following reference: Dot : No. LTD 36 ( 1563 ) Amendments Issued Since Pablication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN Headquarters:

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 11002 Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Regional Ofices Central Eastern
:

Telegrams Common

: Manaksanstha

to

all

Offices )

Telephone { 331 01 31 331 13 75 f37 84 99, 1 37 56 26, f53 33 43, 153 23 84 37 85 61 37 86 62 53 16 40

: Manak Bhavan,

9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 CALCUTTA 700054 160036

: l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola

Northern Southern Western

: SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH

: C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113
: Manakalaya,

235 02 16, 235 04 42 235 15 19, 235 23 15 632 92 95, 632 78,91, 632 78 58 632 78 92

E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) BOMBAY 400093

Branch : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FAKIDABAD. GHAZIABAD, GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.
Printed at Printwell Printers, Ahgarh,
lndla

