NAT Alan IS 11293 : 2018 
Indian Standard 


yec att renter SA, Haat Sa AR 
ehe ara ae & Urs) us 
fesse & A ELE] 


Guidelines for the Design of Grout 
Curtains for Earth and Rock Fill 
Dams, Masonry Dams and 
Concrete Gravity Dams 


ICS 93.020 


© BIS 2018 


anda AM St 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Tea TH HM, ay freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


September 2018 Price Group 2 


Foundation and Foundation Treatment Sectional Committee, WRD 08 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Foundation 
and Foundation Treatment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Water Resources Division Council. 


There are various measures for seepage control which are given in IS 8414 : 2014, one of which is grout 
curtain. This standard covers the design of grout curtain for earth and rockfill dams, masonry dams and concrete 
gravity dams. 


Design requirements for a grout curtain depend on its function, for example, when the grout curtain is designed 
to function as the principal measure of seepage control and it constitutes the main seepage barrier, it shall be of 
adequate depth and width and the permeability within the grouted zone shall be reduced to acceptable limits. 
On the other hand the grout curtain may be considered as a complementary measure of other seepage control 
measures. In such cases the curtain is essentially an exploratory line of closely spaced holes aimed at sealing the 
wider and more open cracks and voids so that the efficacy ofthe system is not impaired by excessive concentrated 
seepage along the major cracks joints and voids. The method of grouting is covered in IS 6066 : 1994. 


This standard covers design of grout curtain for earth and rockfill dams, masonry dams and concrete gravity dams. 


In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or 
calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical 
values (revised y. 


IS 11293 : 2018 


Indian Standard 


GUIDELINES FOR THE DESIGN OF 
GROUT CURTAINS FOR EARTH AND 
ROCKFILL DAMS, MASONRY DAMS 

AND CONCRETE GRAVITY DAMS 


[First Revision, amalgamating Part I and Part 2] 


1 SCOPE 
This Indian Standard provides the following: 


a) Guidelines for the design of grout curtains in 
alluvium and rock when used as principal measure 
of seepage control; and 


b) Guidelines for the design of grout curtains which 
are used as principal measure of seepage control 
for masonry and concrete dams founded on 
rock mass. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standard 
indicated below: 


IS No. 
IS 8414 : 2014 


Title 


Guidelines for design of under- 
seepage control measures for 
earth and rock fill dams (first 


revision) 

IS 6066 : 1994 Pressure grouting of rock 
foundation in river valley 
projects — Recommendations 


(second revision) 


3 GROUT CURTAINS IN ALLUVIUM 


3.1 Choice of Number of Rows of Grout Holes 


In alluvium and other type of pervious soils, multiple 
rows of holes are necessary for effective sealing when 
the curtain constitutes the principal seepage barrier. 
The choice of numbers of rows of holes is governed by 
the following considerations: 


a) In heterogeneous formations effective sealing 
may be achieved on the central row or rows, the 
outer rows being employed primarily to block the 


open passage and seal the larger voids so that over 
travel ofthe more fluid grout injected through the 
central rows is prevented; and 


b) The curtain width should be adequate to ensure 
adequate resistance to leaching and internal 
erosion. 


3.2 Resistance of Grout to Internal Erosion and 
Leaching 


3.2.1 The ratio of the width of the curtain to the 
hydraulic head across the curtain depends on the 
nature of the grout material and the formation treated 
by the grout. Clay cement and bentonite cement grout 
injected into coarse sand and gravel are known to 
have withstood hydraulic gradients as high as 7 : 1. 
Prolonged laboratory tests of one year duration have 
indicated virtual permanence of the clay-cement- 
bentonite grout for specimens of grouted sand and 
gravel subjected to gradients as high as 20. On the 
other hand the softer bentonite silicate grouts used for 
treatment of medium sand may be eroded at gradients 
of the order of 10. For permanent curtains hydraulic 
gradient for bentonite silicate grout have been 
restricted to 3 : 1. Bentonite silicate grouts should be 
used with caution since their behaviour is very much 
dependent on the nature of bentonite, and its reaction 
with the fluidifier and salts in the soil. 


3.2.2 Silicate aluminate gels are known to be stable 
and are known to withstand hydraulic gradients of 
4: 1 or even higher. Data presently available indicate 
that acrylamide grout are permanent. The permanence 
of other types of grouts need to be investigated, and 
their application is not advised for important and 
permanent curtains. For permanent curtains choice 
of grout materials is generally limited to clay cement, 
bentonite and silicate aluminate grouts. 


3.3 Curtain Width 


The curtain width should be chosen on the basis of 
following criteria: 


a) The curtain width at the core contact should match 
the core base, usually width in the range of 1/3 to 
1/5 head is provided (see Fig. 1); 


IS 11293 : 2018 


FULL RESERVOIR LEVEL (FRL) 


TOP BUND LEVEL (TBL) 


Rock Toe 
e <7 MINIMUM TAIL WATER LEVEL 


GROUND LEVEL (GL) 


Impervious stratum 


A= Depth from bottom of C.O.T. to impervious stratum 
Recommended Maximum Curtain Width 
W.=H/3 to H/5 & W2=H/7 for suitable grouts viz. clay cement, bentonite cement, sodium silicate - aluminate, acrylamide 


Fic. 1 GROUT CURTAINS IN PERVIOUS SOILS 


b) The main curtain should extend to rock or 
impervious stratum and the width should be 
reduced from the width at core contact to the 
main curtain width. Usually this is achieved in a 
zone of about one fourth the depth of the pervious 
alluvium; 


The main curtain should have two or more rows 
depending upon the requirements of strata. For 
clay cement silicate aluminate grouting the main 
curtain should have a width of 1/7 head; and 


The residual head, downstream of the curtain 
measured as excess head with regard to tail water 
should be 20 percent or lower of the total head 
from tail water to head water. This reduction 
in head is achieved by appropriate choice of 
curtain width and by bringing about sufficient 
of permeability in the curtain width. Usually 
grouting is effective when the post-grouting 
permeability values are brought down to one 
hundredth of initial values. 


c 


wa 


d 


wa 


4 GROUT CURTAINS IN ROCK 


4.1 Curtain Width 


4.1.1 For effective control of seepage in large zones 
of fractured and jointed rocks it is necessary to treat 
the contact of the core and rock foundation by blanket 
grouting. The depth of blanket grouting hole should be 
at least 6 m. 


4.1.2 The normal practice of splitting the spacing starting 
with an initial spacing of 6 to 12 m is recommended for 
each of the rows. The final spacing would be related 


to the spacing of joints and normally 3 metres spacing 
may be necessary, but special geological condition may 
require closer spacing. 


4.1.3 The main curtain would consist of one or more 
rows of holes. In the first row grouting operations are 
carried out by split spacing method. If the permeability 
can be brought down to 5 lugeon with a final spacing 
of 3 m or larger, a single line curtain would be 
adequate. If further drilling and grouting of holes at 
closer spacing is required, two line curtains should be 
preferred. 


4.2 Types of Grout in Rock 


Normally for grout curtains in rock, neat cement grout 
should be used and if admixtures are used to reduce 
cement consumption, only non-colloidal fillers such as 
fine sand, fly ash may be used. For grout curtains in 
rock colloidal admixtures such as bentonite would not 
be normally permitted since the addition of bentonite/ 
clay would reduce the resistance of grout to internal 
erosion and leaching. Use of such admixtures should 
be combined with sand in small quantities, about 
2 percent by weight of cement, to obtain a more 
pumpable grout mix. 


4.3 Depth of Curtain 


4.3.1 The depth of the curtain shall be related to 
the design of the drainage system and the depth to 
an essentially impervious and non-erodible rock 
formation. In stratified rock and in massive igneous or 
crystalline metamorphic rock an impervious formation 
may often be established at shallow depth below rock 


surface and 3 metres would be sufficient penetration of 
the grout curtain into such formations. 


4.3.2 Grouting cannot be relied upon to prevent internal 
erosion in clayey or silty gauged zones and solution 
cavities filled by heterogeneous mixture of clay, silt, 
sand and rock fragments. 


4.3.3 In such cases, it is essential to excavate and backfill 
seems in the entire core contact zone and blanket if 
necessary special care is needed when material filling 
seams consists of silt and dispersive clay vulnerable to 
erosion. 


4.3.4 The grout curtain should normally extend to 
relatively impervious rock of permeability 3 lugeon or 
less. When this cannot be realized due to deep pervious 
formations the curtain should extend to a depth ranging 
from H/3 to H with reference to the core and core 
rock contact. The greater depth may be necessary up 
to reservoir head when the rock contains seams and 
defects vulnerable to internal erosion. 


5 DESIGN CONSIDERATION FOR MASONRY 
AND CONCRETE GRAVITY DAMS 


5.1 Geological Considerations 


5.1.1 The data already obtained from the exploration 
of the foundation should be analysed to assess the 
characteristics of foundation rocks and the location and 
orientation of faults, seams, cavities, joints and bedding 
planes and discontinuities. 


5.1.2 The permeability values of foundation strata at 
various depths should be used for the design since the 
stages and spacing of the holes for grouting should be 
based on this data. 


5.2 Drilling of Grout Holes 


Percussion drills can be used for drilling the grout 
holes, provided the foundation rock is of a type that 
will produce granular cuttings, rather than slimes. 
In case of rocks having weaknesses such as faults 
and seams it is recommended that at least one hole 
should be bored with suitable boring machines which 
are capable of recovery of rock cores and which will 
facilitate inspection of bore hole walls. Diamond 
core drilling permits the examination of cores and 
the location of seams by means of a TV borehole 
camera. 


IS 11293 : 2018 


5.3 Inclination of Grout Holes 


The holes may be either vertical or inclined. The 
orientation, plan and inclination of grout holes depend 
upon the type of joints and other discontinuities in the 
foundation rock. The most common practice is to drill 
holes inclined towards upstream at 5 to 10 degrees with 
the vertical. 


5.4 Spacing of Grout Holes 


Single line grout curtains are generally used. The usual 
practice is to try a widely spaced system of primary 
holes at a spacing of 6 to 8 m, followed by secondary 
and tertiary holes at a progressively smaller spacing till 
the desired results are obtained. However, hole spacing 
less than one meter should be avoided. 


5.5 Depth of the Grout Curtain 


The depth of the grout curtain depends upon the type 
and conditions of the rock mass with respect to its 
permeability. The following empirical criteria may be 
used as a guide which is based on going practice: 


D=2/3H+8 
where, 
D = Depth of the grout curtain, in m; and 
H = Height of reservoir water, in m. 


6 GROUT PROCEDURE 


6.1 The procedure for grouting as laid down in IS 6066, 
should be followed. 


6.2 Curtain grouting is normally done from the 
foundation cum drainage gallery after masonry/ 
concrete is laid up to half of the design height or 
20 m from the bottom of the gallery, whichever is 
earlier. However in special cases an additional grout 
curtain can also be provided at the heel of the dam. 


6.3 Drainage holes should be drilled in the foundation 
gallery. Drainage holes should, however, not be 
drilled in the foundation gallery till curtain grouting 
is completed within 30 m from the location of the 
drainage holes. 


6.4 Efficacy of Grout Curtain 


This should be evaluated by results of permeability 
tests during drilling of secondary/tertiary holes as given 
in IS 6066. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part ofthese publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: WRD 08 (00659). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


