NAT Ta IS 9841 : 2022 
Indian Standard 


TATH SANT Ch SALTS е ене sik 
fuer & feu mss 


( Teel JAQ ) 


Guide for Treatment and Disposal of 
Effluents of Fertilizer Industry 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 13.060.30 


© BIS 2022 


anda AM эъ 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR чая, 9 serere TH AMT, +ç вее — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR МАКС 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


April 2022 Price Group 10 


Environment Protection Sectional Committee, CHD 32 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft finalized by 
the Environment Protection Sectional Committee, had been approved by the Chemical Division Council. 


The fertilizer industry made a humble beginning in 1906, when the first manufacturing unit of single super 
phosphate (SSP) was set up in Ranipet near Chennai with an annual capacity of 6 000 MT. The Fertilizer and 
Chemicals Travancore of India Ltd. (FACT) at Kochi in Kerala and the Fertilizers Corporation of India (FCI) in 
Sindri in Bihar (now Jharkhand) were the first large sized fertilizers plants set up in the 40's and 50's with a view 
to manufacture fertilizers to increase food-grains production. Subsequently, green revolution in the late 60's gave 
an impetus to the growth of fertilizer industry in India. There was rapid expansion to capacity in the decades of 
1970s, 80s and 90s to fulfil requirement of fertilizers for Indian Agriculture. 


The fertilizer industry in India is one of the eight core sectors of Indian economy. India is the third largest producer 
and the second largest consumer of chemical fertilizers in the world. The Department of Fertilizers, under Ministry 
of Chemicals and Fertilizers, is responsible for adequate and timely availability of fertilizers at affordable prices 
for maximizing agricultural production in the country. It is categorised as one of the most polluting industries 
under 17 red categories of industries by the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change (MOEF & CC), 
Government of India. 


Fertilizer industries consumes quite large quantities of water. With increased production of fertilizer in the 
country over last 40-50 years, there 15 increasing problem in availability of fresh water. The water consumed in 
the manufacturing process gets polluted and is either being recycled, reuse or discharged into the streams after 
suitable treatment to conform the prescribed standards by State/Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) and 
Ministry of Environment Forests and Climate Change (MOEF&CC), Government of India. 


This standard was first published in 1981. The fertilizer industry was under the phase of development in 1980s. 
Since then there has been considerable increase in the capacity of the nitrogenous and phosphatic fertilizers in the 
country. 


During last 30 years, there have been significant improvement in water management in fertilizer industries through 
process modifications, recycle and reuse of treated effluent water, thus reducing specific water consumption per 
tonne of product and minimizing the effluent discharged. 


There have been developments in the treatment of raw water, cooling water treatment, boiler feed water treatment 
and effluent treatments. The fertilizer industry stopped use of chromate based chemicals for water treatment since 
last two decades. Use of arsenic in CO, removal process was also stopped, eliminating this water pollutant as well. 
Thus, there is change in characteristic of effluent and hence, the treatment technologies. 


The guidelines for use of waste water for irrigation purpose have been issued by the CPCB. The MoEF & CC has 
revised the standards for quantity and quality of waste water discharge from fertilizer plants. The key parameters 
like pH, nitrate nitrogen, and phosphate in effluent are being monitored through online monitoring system. 
References of tolerance limits for industrial effluents under IS standards in the earlier Guide have been omitted 
and prevalent discharge limits prescribed by MoEF&CC have been included. 


The plants have also adopted zero liquid discharge technologies like reverse osmosis, ultra filtration and membrane 
bio reactor. The revised edition of the guide covers the technological developments in treatment of waste water 
from fertilizer plants. 


A list of relevant references 1s given in Annex A. 
The composition of technical committee responsible for formulation of this standard is given in Annex B. 


IS 9841 : 2022 


Indian Standard 


GUIDE FOR TREATMENT AND DISPOSAL OF 
EFFLUENTS OF FERTILIZER INDUSTRY 


( First Revision ) 


1SCOPE 


The guidelines on treatment of effluents in fertilizer 
industries includes the brief manufacturing processes, 
methods of treatment, recycling, reuse and disposal 
of treated trade liquid effluents from nitrogenous 
and phosphatic fertilizer industries. It also includes 
various available data, information on the sources, 
characteristics, quantities and environmental impacts 
of effluents to the surrounding water bodies. 


2 NITROGENOUS FERTILIZERS 


2.1 Manufacturing Process 


2.1.4 The straight nitrogenous fertilizers include 
urea, ammonium sulphate, calcium ammonium 
nitrate and ammonium chloride. Urea accounts for 
82 percent of nitrogen consumption in the country. 
Ammonium sulphate is mainly obtained as by-product 
of caprolactam and steel plants. Ammonium chloride is 
obtained as by-product of soda ash plant. The share of 
ammoniumsulphate and ammonium chloride in nitrogen 
consumption is only 1.2 percent and rest of nitrogen is 
derived from complex fertilizer plants. Production of 
calcium ammonium nitrate 1s stopped since 2014-15 
due to safety and security reasons. Therefore, the guide 
will cover details of effluent management in urea plants 
under category of nitrogenous fertilizers. 


2.1.2. Nitrogen in any fertilizer 1s derived from 
ammonia. To produce urea major intermediates are 
ammonia and carbon di-oxide. The basic raw materials 
for production of ammonia are fossil fuels, such as 
natural gas or naphtha or fuel oil. Carbon di-oxide is 
generated during reforming of natural gas or naphtha 
or partial oxidation/gasification of fuel oil during the 
production of ammonia. In India, all pants based on 
naphtha and fuel oil have been converted into natural 
gas-based plants. 


2.1.3 The process of production of ammonia and carbon 
di-oxide is summarized as follows: 


a) Ammonia Plant — Ammonia 15 produced from a 
mixture of hydrogen and nitrogen in the ratio of 
3:1. The source of H, is hydrocarbons in the form 
of natural gas or desulphurized naphtha or Fuel 
Oil whereas the source of N, is the atmospheric 
air. 


2.1.3.1 The various processes which are necessary for 
producing ammonia are as follows: 


a) Hydrodesulphurization — АП Ве first hydrocarbon 
feed is desulphurized in the desulphurization unit. 
This unit consists of three vessels, one containing 
the hydrogenation catalyst and two containing 
H,S absorption mass. Organic sulphur compounds 
get converted into sulphur free hydrocarbons in 
the presence of hydrogen over the hydrogenation 
catalyst at a temperature of 380-400 ?C, leaving 
hydrogen sulphide which 15 finally absorbed by 
zinc oxide in the absorption vessels. 


H,S Absorption — After hydrogenation, the 
process gas passes through ZnO  absorbers. 
Zinc oxide catalyst (put in the absorption 
vessels) having normal operating temperature as 
350-400 ?C, reacts with hydrogen sulphide and 
carbonyl sulphide to form zinc sulphide: 


ZnO + H,S-«— ——» ZnS + H, 
ZnO + COS «— ——» ZnS + CO, 
b) Reforming — In the reforming section, the gas 
containing necessary gas mixtures for preparation 
of ammonia synthesis gas is produced by catalytic 


reforming of a mixture of hydrocarbon with steam 
and air. Reactions involved are: 


CnHm + n H,O 4— ——» n CO + (n + m/2) H, - heat 
CH, + H,O 4— —— CO + ЗН, - heat 
CO + H,O 4— ——» CO, + H, + heat 


The conventional steam reforming takes place in two 
steps. An additional pre-reforming step 1s used in some 
plants depending on the feedstock. 


c) Primary Reforming — The primary reformer 
is a radiant furnace where raw natural gas and 
recycle H, from ammonia synthesis loop is mixed 
with reforming steam to achieve steam to carbon 
ratio as 3.0-3.3 (to avoid carbon formation on the 
catalyst) and heated to a temperature of about 
500 °C. The natural gas steam mixture is then 
passed through vertical primary reformer tubes 
filled with nickel based catalyst. The partially 
reformed gases then directly pass to secondary 
reformer. 


d 


— 


Secondary Reforming — The partially reformed 
gas at 700-800 °C from primary reformer is mixed 


IS 9841 : 2022 


е 


) 


with process air and the mixture then passes over 
a bed of nickel-based catalyst in the secondary 
reformer. Process air feed required for fixing 
hydrogen/nitrogen ratio of 3 to 1 in secondary 
reformer at 33 kg/cm? of pressure is supplied by 
centrifugal process air compressor. 


The necessary heat input to the primary and 
secondary reformer is supplied in different ways. 
In the primary reformer, heat is supplied as indirect 
heat by firing whereas in secondary reformer, heat 
is supplied as direct heat by mixing air into the 
gas. The burning gas provides heat for the rest of 
the reforming. 


Gas Purification — The purpose of gas purification 
is to prepare a synthesis gas containing hydrogen 
andnitrogen in the ratio 3 to | and besides this only 
inert gases, such as argon in as low a concentration 
as possible. 


f) Shift Conversion — Carbon monoxide is converted 


в 


wa 


to CO, and H, with steam in order to increase the 
H, yield, in the two shift converters namely, high 
temperature (HT)/medium temperature (MT) 
CO conversion and low temperature (LT) CO 
conversion. Following reaction takes place in 
reactors: 


CO + H,O 4— — CO, + H, + heat 


HT/MT shift and LT shift converter contains shift 
catalyst consisting of specially prepared copper, 
zine and aluminium oxides (having much higher 
activity) in a single bed. Because of very high 
activity of shift catalyst, it is possible to operate 
LTS in the low temperature range of 180-250 °C 
and low steam to dry gas ratio. 


Carbon dioxide (CO,) Removal — The gaseous 
mixture coming out of the shift converters 
contains about 0.25 mole to 0.5 mole percent CO. 
The reacted part of CO increases the H, yield with 
simultaneous formation of CO,. After cooling of 
the gas and condensation of most of the water 
content, CO, is removed in the CO, removal unit, 
leaving less than 0.1 percent mole in the process 
gas. 


Carbon dioxide removal process can be based on 
chemical process or physical process depending 
on the process licensor. In chemical absorption, 
carbon dioxide is removed by absorption in CO, 
absorber which a column is containing stainless 
steel packing material distributed in number of 
beds. In case of potassium carbonate based CO, 
removal system, the gas flows upwards in the 
absorber against a descending steam of hot aqueous 
potassium carbonate solution (which contains 
25 percent potash by weight partly converted into 
bicarbonate, DEA and glycine as an activator and 


vanadium penta oxide as corrosion inhibitor). The 
solution is kept hot so as to: 


1) increase the rate of absorption; 
2) keep the bicarbonate in solution; and 
3) toavoid heating of the solution before regeneration. 


A number of plants also use amine based system 
(MDEA or a MDEA) for CO, removal. There 
are physical absorption methods available which 
are more suitable for by partial oxidation or 
gasification plants. 


h) Methanation — After removal of CO,, remaining 
traces of CO and CO, are removed in a methanator 
as even the small amounts of CO and CO, are 
severely poisonous to ammonia synthesis catalyst. 
The reactions involved in the reverse of reforming 
are: 


CO + 3H, «+-> CH, + НО + heat 
CO, + 4H, +-> CH, + 2H,O + heat 


Thus, resulting in formation of methane at the 
expense of hydrogen. The methanator contains 
nickel catalyst on a ceramic base having the same 
characteristics as that of reforming one. Methane 
formation is favoured by low temperature, high 
pressure, and low steam content of the process 
to the methanator resulting in а significant 
temperature rise, needs lower inlet temperature 
and also requires the catalyst to be very active at 
such lower temperature. 


j) Ammonia Synthesis — In the synthesis section, 
the purified gas that is, Н, and N, in ratio 3 : 1 is 
converted into ammonia by a catalytic exothermic 
reaction after compression to a pressure of about 
135-200 kg/cm? g at an optimum temperature. A 
considerable amount of heat is liberated (about 
92.4 kJ/mole of produced ammonia) by the 
synthesis reaction. 


ЗН, +N, ——— 2 NH, + heat 


Nearly all this heat is utilised for production of HP 
steam and preheating of HP boiler feed water. 


In synthesis loop approx. 29~35 percent of H, and 
N, are converted to ammonia (per pass) depending 
upon the loop configuration, so it is necessary 
to recycle the unconverted synthesis gas. It is 
accomplished by a synthesis loop comprising 
equipment for HP steam production, boiler feed 
water preheating, cooling of synthesis effluent gas 
and condensation and separation of ammonia. 


In the synthesis loop make up gas is introduced 
between the 2™ cold heat exchanger and 3" 
ammonia chiller. At this point, a considerable 
part of ammonia produced in the converters has 
been condensed. The mixture of synthesis gas and 


liquid ammonia goes to ammonia separator where 
liquid ammonia is separated. 


k) Refrigeration and Ammonia Recovery — The 
purpose of the refrigeration circuit is to condense 
the ammonia produced in the two converters in 
addition to cool the make-up gas and inert gas. The 
circuit consists of a compressor unit, a condenser, 
an accumulator and a number of chillers operating 
at three different temperatures. The ammonia 
recovery section removes and recovers the major 
part of the ammonia contained in the purge gas 
from the synthesis loop and the off gas from the 
refrigeration section. Purge gas from the synthesis 
loop is washed in 1* absorber leaving only 
0.1 mole percent ammonia whereas the combined 
stream of let-down gas and inert vent gas from the 
refrigeration section is made to wash in the 274 
absorber. Liquid ammonia thus formed is either 
directly sent to Urea plant or to the Ammonia 
storage tanks. 


2.1.4 Urea Manufacturing Process 


Urea, the ultimate desired product is produced by 
synthesis from liquid ammonia and gaseous carbon 
dioxide at a pressure of around 160 kg/cm’g and a 
temperature of 188-190 °С. The process are as follows. 


2.1.4.1 Urea synthesis 


In the high-pressure urea reactor, ammonia and carbon 
dioxide react to form ammonium carbamate, a portion 
of which dehydrates to form urea and water. The 
reactions are as follows: 


2NH,+ СО, <———» NH,COONH, 
ammonia carbon ammonium carbamate 
dioxide 


NH,COONH, —— NH,CONH, + H,O 


ammonium carbamate urea water 


The fraction of ammonium carbamate that dehydrates 
is determined by the ratio of various reactants, the 
operating temperature and the residence time in the 
reactor. The mole ratio of ammonia to carbon dioxide 
is around 3.3 to 3.6 : 1. 


The carbon dioxide coming directly from ammonia 
plant is compressed in a compressor. The liquid 
ammonia coming from the battery limit maintains the 
level in the ammonia receiver from where it is drawn and 
pumped to about 22 to 24 kg/cm?g by booster pumps. 
A part of this ammonia goes to a medium pressure 
absorber and remaining ammonia is pumped to about 
250 kg/cm?g pressure, preheated hot condensate and 
is used as driving fluid in the carbamate ejector. The 
liquid mixture of ammonia and carbamate reacts with 
carbon dioxide inside the reactor. 


A small controlled quantity of air is added along 
with CO, at the compressor in order to passivate the 


IS 9841 : 2022 


stainless-steel surfaces to protect them from corrosion 
due to reagents and reaction products. 


The condensing of the gaseous stream permits 
production of steam at 4.5 kg/cm?g in carbamate 
condenser. The un-condensable gases from the top of 
the carbamate separator/scrubber, consisting mainly 
of inert gas with a small quantity of NH, and CO, are 
passed under pressure control to the medium pressure 
section. 


In the urea reactor, the reaction is complete by 
60-65 percent and due to recycling of unconverted 
reactants, urea concentration in the product coming out 
of reactor is 30-35 percent. 


The unconverted reactants are separated out from 
urea solution by reducing pressure and supplying 
external heat by steam, usually accomplished in the 
three stages namely, synthesis pressure, medium 
pressure 16 to 18 kg/cm’g and low pressure 2.5 to 
3.5 kg/cm’g. The vapours so generated are condensed 
to obtain carbamate solution and the process is highly 
exothermic. Utilization of heat of condensation of 
carbamate vapours is the genesis of improving thermal 
efficiency of urea process. 


The reactant product leaving the reactor are decomposed 
in stripper which operates at the same pressure as reactor. 
The urea, ammonia, carbon dioxide and ammonium 
carbamate mixture pass through the stripper tubes 
in the form of liquid film from the top, which excess 
ammonia or carbon dioxide (as per process technology) 
carries out the stripping. The overhead vapours from 
the stripper are recovered as ammonium carbamate in 
the condenser which also operates at reactor pressure. 
The heat of condensation in Ше carbamate condenser is 
recovered in the form of LP (4 to 5.5 kg/cm?g) steam. 


2.1.4.2 Urea purification and low-pressure recoveries 


Urea purification takes place in three stages at 
decreasing pressure as follows: 


1) I* Purification and Recovery Stage at Medium 
Pressure 


The solution with a low residual CO, content, 
leaving the bottom of the stripper is expanded 
at the Medium Pressure (MP) and enters the 
falling film type decomposer. MP decomposer 
consists of a flash vessel to recover flashed 
gases and a decomposition section where the 
residual carbamate 15 decomposed by indirect 
heating The NH, and CO, rich vapours from 
top flash separator are sent to MP absorber 
where they are absorbed with aqueous 
carbamate solution coming from LP recovery 
section. Bottom solution from the MP absorber 
is recycled back to synthesis section. 


MP pre-decomposer has been introduced as a 
revamp measures in some plants. The MP pre 
decomposer provides an initial decomposition 


IS 9841 : 2022 


of carbamate flowing from the Stripper bottom 
before entering the existing M.P. decomposer. 


2) 2 Purification and Recovery Stage at Low 
Pressure 


The urea solution leaving the MP decomposer 
18 expanded at low pressure and enters the 
falling film type LP decomposer. The LP 
decomposer consists of a top separator to flash 
off gases and the solution enters the tubes of 
the decomposer section where the last traces 
of residual carbamate is decomposed by 
means of heat supplied by steam. The gases 
leaving the top separator are first sent to the LP 
absorber/ condenser where they are absorbed 
in one aqueous carbamate solution coming 
from process condensate treatment section. 
Inert gases, washed in the low pressure inerts 
washing tower, are collected to vent stack 
practically free from ammonia. 


3) 3⁄4 Purification and Recovery Stage а! 
0.35 Қо/ст?а Pressure 


The solution leaving the bottom of 
low-pressure decomposer is expanded at 
0.35 kg/cm?a and enters the falling film type 
vacuum pre-concentrator. It consists of a top 
separator, where the released flash gases are 
removed before the solution enters the tube 
bundle and decomposition section where the 
last residual carbamate is decomposed and the 
required heat is supplied by the condensation of 
the gases coming from the MP decomposer. A 
number of plants have added pre-concentrator 
as a part of revamp. 


2.1.4.3 Urea concentration 


To concentrate the urea solution, two stage vacuum 
system has been provided. The solution leaving the 
pre concentrator/low pressure decomposer bottom is 
sent to the first vacuum concentrator. The mixed phase 
coming out of it enters the first vacuum separator. 
Here, the remaining ammonia, CO, and mainly water 
are separated from top of the separator and sent to 
vacuum surface condenser. 95 percent urea solution 
from first vacuum separator enters the second vacuum 
concentrator. The mixed phase coming out of second 
vacuum concentrator enters the 274 vacuum separator. 
Here 99.7 percent urea solution is sent to Prilling 
bucket. 


2.1.4.4 Urea prilling 


The melted urea leaving the second vacuum separator 
is sent to the prilling bucket by means of urea melt 
pumps. The urea coming out of the bucket in the form 
of drops falls along the prilling tower and encounters 
a cold air flow which causes its solidification. The 
heated air with a few ppm of urea dust comes out of the 


prilling tower top to atmosphere. The solid prills falling 
to the bottom of the prilling tower are sent to the belt 
conveyor for packaging in the packaging plant. 


2.2 Effluent Generation and Treatment Guidelines 
in Nitrogenous (Urea) Fertilizer Plants 


2.2.1 Source of Effluent Generation 


2.2.1.1 Ammonia-urea plants 


The major potential liquid pollutants generated from 
the ammonia and urea plants are process condensates, 
regeneration water, water treatment plant, cooling tower 
blow down and boiler blow down (steam generation 
plant). Various categories of effluents generated in the 
nitrogenous fertilizer complex and broadly classified as 
below: 


a) Non-treated effluents — Effluents generated but 
not treated at source: 


1) Rain water/storm water generated from non- 
polluting areas; 


2) Boiler blows down water (steam generation 
plant/captive power plant); and 


3) Cooling tower blow down from ammonia and 
urea cooling towers. 


b) Effluent generated and treated ш the individual 
plant battery limits: 


1) Raw water pre-treatment plant/DM plant 
regeneration effluents; 


2) Ammonia plant process condensate; 

3) Urea plant process condensate; 

4) Turbine steam condensate; and 

5) Oil leakages/spillages from ammonia, urea 
and other plants. 

c) Effluent treated in effluent treatment plant: 

1) Ammonia and urea process condensates in 
case of process upsets; 

2) Floor washings/process drains from ammonia 
and urea plants; 

3) Oil leakages/spillages from ammonia and urea 
plants; and 


4) Sanitary waste from industry and associated 
township. 


2.2.2 Treatment Schemes 


2.2.2.1 Raw water pre-treatment 


Where source of water is surface water, a pre-treatment 
scheme 15 provided to remove impurities like suspended 
solids, microbiological organisms and also to reduce 
the total dissolve solids, permanent hardness etc. 


A clarifier of suitable capacity is installed near the 
source of surface water or at the manufacturing site to 
remove the undesirable impurities. 


Before the water enters the clarifier, coagulation 
and flocculation reagents, such as polyelectrolytes and 
Ferric/non-ferric alum can be added. These reagents 
cause finely suspended particles to clump together and 
form larger and denser particles, called flocs that settle 
more quickly and stably. This allows the separation of 
the solids in the clarifier to occur more efficiently and 
easily; aiding in the conservation of energy. Isolating 
the particle components first using these processes 
may reduce the volume of downstream water 
treatment processes like filtration. The clear water 
with reduced turbidity is collected as overflow channel 
into a clear water storage tank and the settled sludge 
18 separated from the bottom periodically. The clear 
water further sent to water pre-treatment plant to 
reduce the permanent hardness through lime treatment 
if required or to the demineralization plant (DM) for 
further treatment. The bottom sludge is periodically 
removed from clari-flocculator and dried sludge is 
removed through vacuum drying while separated water 
is recycled in the process. Table 1 provides typical 
characteristic of raw water before and after clarifier. 


Table 1 Typical Characteristic of Raw Water 
Before and After Clarifier 


( Clause 2.2.2.1) 


SI Sample pH Turbidity Free Chlorine 
No. Source 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) Clarifier 7.0-8.5 10-1000 NTU NIL 
inlet 
i) Clarifier 6.5-8.5 5-10 NTU 0.10 — 0.30 ppm 
outlet 


2.2.2.2 Demineralization plant 


Demineralization of raw water 1s needed to produce 
polish water which is used as boiler feed water. The 
demineralization plant (DM Plant) is designed on the 
basis of cationic and anionic load of raw water and 
consists of numbers of each of weak acid cation (МАС) 
and strong acid cation (SAC) exchangers in series, 
weak base anion (WBA) and strong base anion (SBA) 
exchangers in series and mixed bed (MB) units. After 
a cycle of operation these resin beds are regenerated 
to remove all salts exchanged by resin through ion 
exchange process. The weak acidic and alkaline 
effluents thus coming out are collected in separate acidic 
and alkaline pits respectively. The quality and quantity 
of effluents depends upon the total dissolved solids 
in the raw water which controls the ion exchanger’s 
ionic loads and through puts. These acidic and alkaline 
effluents are mixed proportionately and neutralized in 
a neutralization pit. After proper neutralization that is, 
pH is obtained between 6.5-8.5 and TDS as high as 
] 500 — 3 000 ppm depending upon the TDS in raw 
water and the design of DM plant. 


Filter beds (sand filters and activated carbon filters) are 
provided in upstream of DM plant to treat raw water 


IS 9841 : 2022 


and other streams of treated effluents being recycled 
from process plants to remove traces of suspended 
solids and organic matters (for example, methanol in 
ammonia process condensates). These filter beds are 
back washed after a cycle of operation and the effluent 
during the back wash is collected in the neutralization 
pit. 

The effluent from neutralization pit is pumped to 
effluent pond (guard pond) via settling chamber or 
alternately stored in the effluent storage pond. An on- 
line pH meter is provided at the discharge line to ensure 
pH in the range of 6.5 to 8.5. Table 2 gives the typical 
waste water characteristics in acidic, alkaline and 
neutralization pits. 


Table 2 Typical Waste Water Characteristic in 
Acidic, Alkaline and Neutralization Pits 


( Clause 2.2.2.2) 
SI No. Sample source pH TDS 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Acidic pit 0-7.0 2210 mg/L 
ii) Alkaline pit 7.0 14 1316 mg/L 
iii) Neutralization pit 6.5 – 8.5 1500 — 3000 mg/L 


2.2.2.3 Ammonia plant process condensate (APC) 


In the steam reformation process, steam excess 
than stoichiometric requirement 15 supplied in the 
primary/secondary reformer. After reforming and shift 
reactions in CO shift converter section, the excess steam 
in the process gas along with some of the pollutants 
like methanol, ammonia and water formed during 
methanation is separated by cooling the process gas. 
The condensate coming out after cooling the process 
gas contains impurities such as ammonia and methanol. 
In addition to this, in the carbon dioxide recovery 
section, though the absorption towers are operated 
in closed circuit, some absorbent chemical find their 
way out in the cooler concentrate and this condensate 
contains dissolved CO,. 


The polluted process condensates contain about 
100-500 ppm of ammonia, 400-600 ppm of dissolved 
CO, and 500-1000 ppm of Methanol (Table 3). 


All combined process condensates are fed to CO, 
stripper and then to steam stripper where ammonia, 
methanol and CO, are recovered as top products and 
recycled back to the system (Fig. 1). The stripped 
condensate is cooled to about 50 *C prior to delivery to 
the DM unit to make it boiler feed water quality. The 
quantity of stripped bottom product depends upon the 
plant capacity and the operation load. 


The treated condensates contain less than 10 ppm of 
ammonia, 10 ppm of CO, and 20 ppm of methanol. 
The treated condensates after minor treatment through 
activated carbon beds to remove trace impurities 15 
further polished through ion exchange to use it as boiler 
feed water. 


IS 9841 : 2022 


Table 3 Typical Characteristic of APC at Inlet and Outlet of Steam Stripper 


( Clause 2.2.2.3 ) 
SI No. Sample Source Total Ammonia as NH, Methanol As CH,OH Carbon Di-oxide as CO, (dissolved) 
(ppm) (ppm) (ppm) 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
1) Steam stripper Inlet 100-500 500-1000 400-600 
ii) Steam stripper outlet « 10.0 « 20.0 « 10.0 


Process Condensate Stripperin 
Ammonia Plant 


Етс. | AMMONIA PROCESS CONDENSATE STRIPPER 


2.2.2.4 Urea process condensate (UPC) 


The process condensates generated from different 
sections of the urea plant contains various impurities 
like NH,-4.5 to 5.0 percent, CO,-1.90 to 2.0 percent 
and urea-0.80 to 1.0 percent. Quantity of such polluted 
process condensates depends upon the plant load. 


2.2.2.4.1 Treatment at source (within urea plant) 


Waste water containing ammonia, carbon dioxide 
and urea coming out from 1* and 2"% vacuum system 
18 collected in tanks, solution is preheated and fed to 
distillation tower upper part (Fig. 2). After stripping 
in upper part of the distillation tower, the solution is 


preheated and fed to urea hydrolyser, where urea is 
decomposed at high pressure and temperature into 
ammonia and CO, and stripped off from the solution. 
Solution, practically free from urea is again fed to 
bottom part of distillation tower to remove ammonia 
and CO, present in the solution. In the distillation 
column where ammonia and carbon dioxide are 
stripped by means of saturated steam. The vapours 
(ammonia, carbon dioxide and water) coming from the 
top of the tower is condensed in overhead condenser 
and collected in a carbamate solution accumulator. A 
part of this solution is recycled back to the top of the 
distillation tower as reflux and the remaining is sent to 
the urea plant. 


IS 9841 : 2022 


Fic. 2 HYDROLYSER AND DISTILLATION TOWER 


The bottom product coming out from the distillation 
tower contains a maximum 5 ppm of ammonia and 
5.0 ppm of urea each. This condensate is sent to DM 
plant for minor treatment and polishing to make it 
suitable for the boiler feed as per Table 4. 


In hydrolyser the urea is hydrolysed into ammonia and 
carbon di-oxide: 


NH,CONH, + H,ONH,+ СО 


Urea Steam Ammonia Carbon di-oxide 


2 


Provision of on-line analyser for Ammonia and 
Urea is made available to ensure the treated process 
condensate quality conforms to the demineralization 
plant requirements 


Table 4 Typical Characteristic of UPC at Inlet and 
Outlet of Waste Water Section 


( Clause 2.2.2.4.1 ) 
SI Sample Source Ammonia as Urea as 
No. NH NH,-CO-NH, 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 


i) Process condensate  4.5— 5.0 percent 0.80 -1.0 percent 
distillation tower vol by wt 
inlet 


ii) Process condensate 
distillation tower 
outlet 


5.0 ppm (Max) 5.0 mg/L (Мах) 


2.2.2.5 Steam and turbine condensate from ammonia and 
urea plants 


Steam used in the ammonia and urea plants for the 
purpose of maintaining temperatures get condensed after 
the use and normally does not get contaminated with any 
process materials. Similarly, the steam used for driving 
the turbines in the process plants are condensed after use 
and this also do not get contaminated with any process 
materials. Both these condensates are as good as DM 
water and recycled in process as boiler feed water after 
minor treatment in activated carbon filter and basket 
strainer to remove foreign particles in DM plant (Fig. 3). 


2.2.2.6 Effluent treatment at ETP 


Process condensates treatment during process 
upsets in ammonia/urea plants. In case the quality of 
condensate from ammonia and urea plants is off specs 
to be sent to DM plant for polishing due to temporary 
process disturbances, a provision is made to store the 
condensate into ammonia and urea process condensate 
tanks either within plant or in ETP area. Provisions 
are also made to transfer it back to respective plants’ 
steam stripper/distillation tower (Fig. 4) for treatment 
and recycling in the process. Alternatively, when the 
contamination (ammonia) in the condensate is high 
(50—500 ppm) it can be stripped in steam stripper at ETP, 
and the stripped condensate is then pumped directly to 
the treated effluent pond or via available treated effluent 
tank. Table 5 presents typical waste water quality at 
inlet and outlet of steam stripper in ETP plant. 


IS 9841 : 2022 


Turbine 
Condensate 
from 
Ammonia 
Plant 


| 
| 

Activated 
| Carbon filter 


) DM Water to 
Ammonia Plant 


Fic. 3 TURBINE CONDENSATE TREATMENT SCHEME FROM AMMONIA PLANT 


Table 5 Typical Quality of Waste Water at Inlet and 
Outlet of Steam Stripper in ETP Plant 


( Clause 2.2.2.6 ) 


SI Sample Total pH Free 
No. Source Ammonia as Ammonia As 
NH, (ppm) NH, (ppm) 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) ETP steam 50-500 8.5-9.5 7.5-250 
stripper inlet 
ii) ETP steam <50 7.0-8.5 < 9 


stripper outlet 


2.2.2.7 Floor washings/process drains in ammonia and 
urea plants 


Floor washing of the plant area is carried out to 
remove spills and leakages from processes, however, 
the quantity of floor washing water is quite low. A few 
plants are practicing dry cleaning of shop floors in 
bagging plants to reduce waste water generation and 
load on ETP. 


Floor washings of ammonia plant and urea plants are 
stored in the floor washing pit of the respective plant, if 
the quality of effluent is good (total ammonical nitrogen 
is less than 50 ppm and total Kjheldahl nitrogen (TKN) 
less than 75 ppm) then it is discharged to the guard pond 
directly without any treatment, 1f the quality of effluent 
is not good and concentration of ammonia is very high 
(50 - 500 ppm) and TKN more than 75 ppm, it 15 then 
sent to effluent treatment plant and stored in untreated 
tanks. Contaminated effluent from these tanks 15 sent to 
ETP steam stripper for removal of ammonia from the 
top and the bottom treated effluent containing « 50 ppm 
of total ammonical nitrogen (TAN) is discharged to the 
treated effluent guard pond (GP) (Table 6). 


In case of accidental leakages/drains of GV solution 
(comprising 26-28 percent K,CO,, 5-6 percent KHCO,, 


0.5 percent glycine, 0.5 percent di-ethanol amine and 
0.5 percent vanadium) a lined neutralization pit is 
provided with a facility of dosing of acidic FeSO, to 
reduce pentavalent vanadium to trivalent. Such treated 
effluent is sent to guard pond in a controlled manner to 
ensure that quality of final treated effluent (guard pond 
outlet) conform to the prescribed standards. 


Table 6 Typical Characteristics of Waste Water 
Before and After Steam Stripper Outlet 


( Clause 2.2.2.7 ) 
SI Sample Source TotalAmmonia Free Ammonia 
No. as NH, (ppm) as NH, (ppm) 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Floor washing pit « 100 < 15 
ammonia/urea plant 
il) Steam stripper « 50.0 «5 


outlet (ETP) 


2.2.2.8 Ойу leakages/spillages from ammonia and urea 
plant 


The run-off water from compressor house, pump 
houses, inter-stage separators of compressors is 
normally polluted with oily water along with oil 
spillage from refrigeration systems. Waste water 
containing TSS as 300 ppm, ammonia 50-100 ppm and 
oil as 1 000 ppm is separately collected in an oily water 
pit provided both in ammonia and urea plants and is 
pumped to oil separator in ETP for removal of oil and 
suspended solids. The oil and emulsified suspended 
solids are removed through an oil skimming process, 
where removed oil from the top surface 15 stored in 
containers. Clear water containing less than 10 ppm 
oil and grease is further treated in steam stripper for 
removal of contaminant like ammonia, and 15 pumped 
to treated effluent pond (GP). 


IS 9841 : 2022 


Fic. 4 VIEW ОЕ DISTILLATION TOWER FOR TREATING UREA PROCESS CONDENSATES 


IS 9841 : 2022 


Fic. 5 Оп, WATER TREATMENT PLANT 


10 


2.2.2.9 Oil separator (ETP) treatment system 


Oily water from the oily water pits in ammonia and urea 
plants is pumped to oil separators where oil removal is 
done by an oil skimmer (Fig. 5). It is a rotary drum 
placed axially parallel to the surface of water in the pit. 
The level ofthe effluent in the pit is maintained by under 
flow weirs in such a way that the drum is always slightly 
immersed in the effluent. As the drum rotates, oil sticks 
to its surface which is coated with special features to 
adsorb oil and is then scraped away by a rubber scraper. 
The separated oil is collected in the oil pit and treated 
effluent 15 sent to collection pit from where it can either 
be stored in a tank if it contains total ammonia more 
than 50 ppm or directly sent to effluent guard pond if it 
contains less than 50 ppm total ammonia (Table 7). The 
skimmed oil is transferred to oil drums by pump. Spent 
oil drums from oil separation area are sent to spent lube 
oil storage yard (hazardous waste storage yard), from 
where it is sold to the authorized venders registered 
with applicable statutory authority. 


Table 7 Typical Quality of Waste Water Before and 
After Oil Skimmer 


( Clause 2.2.2.9 ) 


SI No. Sample Source Oil and Total Suspended 
Grease mg/L Solids mg/L 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
1) Oily water 10-100 10-300 
treatment inlet 
ii) Oily water « 10.0 « 50.0 


treatment outlet 


2.2.2.10 Cooling water blow down and filter backwash 


Cooling water is used in the ammonia, urea and captive 
power plants to cool the process gas and other fluids to 
meet the process requirements. Cooling water requires 
chemical and micro-biological treatment to control 
corrosion in pipe lines and the process heat exchangers. 
These cooling towers are operated with specific number 
of cycles to ensure that total dissolved solids and other 
parameters remain within design range of parameters. 
To maintain parameters within specific range a 
continuous blow down is necessary and the waste water 
coming out from the blow down is discharged to the 
treated effluent guard pond. 


IS 9841 : 2022 


The characteristic of cooling tower blow down water is 
given in Table 8. 


Table 8 Typical Characteristic of Cooling Tower 
Blow-Down Water 


( Clause 2.2.2.10 ) 


SI No. Parameters Value 
(mg/L except pH) 

(1) Q) (з) 
1) pH 6.7-7.8 
ii) Total dissolved solids (TDS) 1500-3000 
iii) Total Suspended Solids (TSS) 20-100 
iv) Zinc as Zn 2.0 (Max.) 
v) Phosphate as P 5-10 
vi) Nitrate nitrogen as N 5-10 
vii) Free chorine as Cl 0.5 (Max.) 
ix) Biological oxygen demand (BOD) 5-30 
x) Chemical oxygen demand (COD) 10-100 


Value of these parameters may vary depending upon 
cooling tower make up water quality and number of 
cycles. 


The blow down water is mixed with other streams of 
effluents coming from the plants and equalized in the 
guard pond for some time before finally discharged on 
land for irrigation or to water streams/water bodies or 
subjected for further treatment in ZLD plant. 


Part of circulation water is also subjected to filtration 
through filter beds to remove impurities, such as 
suspended solids including organic matters. These 
filters are also back washed after a cycle of operation 
and the effluent coming out during the back wash 15 
settled in settling pits before discharging to the guard 
pond. 


2.2.2.11 Boiler water blow down 


To maintain specific quality of boiler water a continuous 
blow down is maintained in steam generation plant and 
waste heat boilers. А typical characteristic is given in 
Table 9. 


This water is sent to DM plant neutralization pit for 
final discharge to guard pond or may be recycled as 
cooling tower make up water. 


Table 9 Typical Characteristic of Boiler Blow Down Water 
( Clause 2.2.2.11 ) 


SI No. Parameter Value 
(1) (2) (3) 
1) pH 9.5 — 10.5 
ii) Silica as SiO, 1.0 — 1.5 ppm 
iii) Phosphate as P 6.0 — 10.0 ppm 
iv) Total ammonical nitrogen (TAN) as N < 5.0 ppm 
v) Total dissolved solids (TDS) < 10 ppm 


IS 9841 : 2022 


2.2.2.12 Guard pond 


Guard pond is RCC structure with light density 
polyethylene blanket over the foundation soil rich 
in clay patches to ensure that pollutants do not leach 
underground over a period of storage and contaminate 
the ground water (Fig. 6). Provision of two or more 
guard ponds is made so that one is receiving the 
effluents from plants and ETP while other is used for 
the conditioning of the treated effluents for about one 
day. Treated effluent 15 also subjected to aeration to 
provide more oxygen and to control biological oxygen 
requirement, Eutrophication due to rich in nutrients 
like phosphates and nitrates etc. Continuous on-line 
pH meter and ammonia analyser is provided at the 
discharge of treated effluent to ensure that it conforms 
to the prescribed standards. 


Provision of emergency pond may be considered for 
the storage of contaminated effluents in case of process 
upsets are for longer time and effluent quantity is more 
than the untreated effluent tanks capacity provided in 
the plants/ETP. 


As the treated effluent from guard pond is ultimately 
discharged into the water streams or on land for 
irrigation, samples of treated effluent from guard pond 
15 analysed for relevant parameters and as prescribed by 
statutory authorities like SPCB, CPCB and MOEFCC 
like pH, total ammonia, free ammonia, total Kjeldahl 
nitrogen, nitrate nitrogen, oil and grease, vanadium, 
total dissolved solids, total suspended solids, zinc, 
phosphate, BOD, COD etc. 


A typical characteristic of final treated effluent discharge 
from GP is given in Table 10. 


= A + 

— < EX — 5 
T == ш 
p 


xc 


Table 10 Typical Characteristics of Treated Effluent 
from Guard Pond Discharge 


( Clause 2.2.2.10 ) 


SI No. Parameters Value, in mg/L 
except pH 
Q) Q) (3) 
1) pH 6.5 – 8.5 
ii) Total ammonical nitrogen as N 50.0 Max. 
iii) Free Ammonical Nitrogen as N 2.0 Max. 
iv) Total Kjehldals nitrogen as N 75.0 Max. 
v) Nitrate nitrogen as N 10.0 Max. 
vi) Phosphate as P 5.0 Max. 
vii Zinc as Zn 5.0 Max. 
viii) Total suspended solids 100.0 Max. 
ix) Chemical oxygen demand 250.0 Max. 
x) Biological oxygen demand 30.0 Max. 
xi) Cyanide as CN 0.10 Max. 
xii) Oil and grease 10.0 Max. 


2.2.2.13 Total recycle and zero effluent discharge 
(ZLD) plant 


Considering the water scarcity and issues related 
with the discharge of treated effluent on land or water 
streams/water bodies, provision of total recycling of 
effluents is made through reverse osmosis (RO) plant. 


2.2.2.14 Typical process of RO-ZLD in fertilizer plant 


The effluent from fertilizer plants is pumped to the 
stilling chamber with oil and grease trap. A slotted 
pipe skimmer is provided to remove the floated oil 


Fic. 6 A TYPICAL VIEW OF THE GUARD POND 


12 


layer. Sodium hypochlorite dosing is done at the inlet 
of oil and grease trap. Effluent from stilling chamber 
outlet is entered in the flash mixing chamber; here 
lime/dolomite solution, soda ash and coagulant are 
dosed for silica and hardness reduction. The solids 
formed during the chemical reaction are separated in 
the clarification zone of downstream high rate solids 
contact clarifier (HRSCC). Polyelectrolyte (РЕ) 
solution with suitable concentration is dosed at the inlet 
chamber of HRSCC. The clarified water from the outlet 
of HRSCC is collected in the clarified water tank and 
pumped to the dual media filters and activated carbon 
filter followed by ultrafiltration for further treatment. 


Separate backwash pumps are provided for backwash 
of the dual media filter (DMF). Activated carbon filter 
(ACF) is backwashed with feed water. Ultrafiltration 
(UF) permeate water is used for DMF backwash 
purpose. The DMF and ACF backwash waste is routed 
to waste recycle tank. Common air scour blower 
is provided to air-scour the filter media before the 
backwash and sludge pit. 


The settled sludge from HRSCC is periodically drained 
to the sludge pit. Sludge from sludge pit is pumped to 
a centrifuge for further sludge dewatering. Centrate 
from centrifuge is led to flash mixing chamber. The 
dewatered sludge from centrifuge outlet is disposed to 
treatment storage and disposal facility (TSDF). 


Filtered water from the ACF is fed to ultra filtration (UF) 
unit to reduce the fine suspended/colloidal impurities. 
Provision of FeCl3 dosing prior to basket strainer 
inlet is made. UF unit is back flushed automatically 
based on pre-set frequency. The UF membranes are 
back-flushed by UF permeate water. Permeate from the 
ultra-filtration system is collected in UF permeate tank. 
During the backwash of the UF stream, the feed water 
to DMF is re-circulated to clarified water tank through 
DMF feed pump. The UF normal backwash waste 
along with continuous reject is routed to the waste 
recycle tank. UF chemical enhance back wash (CEB) 
waste water is routed to UF CEB waste collection 
Tank. The waste from UF chemical enhance backwash 
(CEB) waste collection tank is pumped to flash mixing 
chamber after neutralization as required. 


UF permeate from UF permeate tank is passed through 
the micron cartridge filter of 5 micron nominal rating 
for further fine (micron) filtration prior to RO inlet. 


Provision of sodium meta bi-sulphite dosing prior 
to cartridge filter is made for de-chlorination. Also 
provision for dosing of antiscalent and Hydrochloric 
acid is made prior to cartridge filter. The cartridge 
filtered water is pumped to the RO-I block using HP 
pumps. A low pressure switch is provided at the suction 
of high pressure pump to avoid dry running. Also 


13 


IS 9841 : 2022 


a high pressure switch 15 provided at the discharge 
of HP pump to avoid over pressurization. These 
interlocks are provided to help tripping of the system 
in case of occurrence of any of the above mentioned 
abnormalities. Permeate from RO-I is collected to 
common RO Permeate tank. RO-I reject is then led 
to RO-I reject tank and passed through RO-II skid by 
reject RO-II feed pump. 


RO-I reject is passed through the micron cartridge filter 
of 5 micron nominal rating for further fine (micron) 
filtration. 


Permeate from RO-II is collected to RO permeate tank. 
This permeate is used as cooling tower make up. 


RO reject from RO-II is concentrated in five effect 
evaporator (multi) followed by pusher centrifuge. Feed 
15 flow in forward feed manner in evaporators. АП 
effects are forced dirculation type. Whole plant runs 
under vacuum. 


RO reject from multi effect evaporator (MEE) feed 
tank is transferred by MEE feed pumps. The feed 15 
preheated by series of pre heaters. First the feed enters 
the preheater-1 where the feed is heated by process 
condensate. 


From preheater-I feed enters to next preheater-2 where 
the feed is heated by the partial vapors from calendria 
-5 and so on. 


After preheater-6 the feed enters into the first effect 
in duct of vapor liquid separator for effect-1. When 
the desired level in VLS-1 is reached than RO reject 
is kept in recirculation by starting pump to maintain 
tube side velocity and to achieve desired heat transfer 
coefficient. The same pump is used for recirculation 
and to transfer RO reject to next effect. Similarly when 
the desired level in VLS-2 is reached the RO reject 
shall be transferred to next stage up to 5^ stage. 


Finally, RO reject is collected in Thickener tank, where 
pusher centrifuge is separate out salts and mother liquor. 
Mother liquor is recycling back to 5th stage VLS. 


Dry saturated steam of 3.0 kg/cm? (g) is fed to the inlet 
of TVR as a motive fluid. Partial vapors from Effect-1 
is sucked by TVR to mix up with live steam which is 
given to shell side of Ist effect calendria. The effluent 
mass which is in recirculation through calendria 1 is 
flashed in vapor liquid separator-1. 


The vapors generated in vapor liquid separator-l is 
go for next calendria-2 and so on. Finally vapor from 
VLS-5 15 entering in surface condenser where vapor 
is condensed by cooling water and is mixed up with 
process condensate of calendria 5. This is final product 
of ZLD plant. A typical inlet and reject quality at RO-1 
and RO-2 is given in Table 11. 


IS 9841 : 2022 


CEB Waste 
Dolomite 
Hypo Lime 
Dosing Еесз Soda Ash Antiscalant 
MBS 
PE REC. Acid 
92% 
OL & FM ШЕ 
ЕТР treated GREASE HRSCC >| CLARIFIED mE АСЕ p|1x100% > PERM. > 
кеп Masa эе MATIS 2/15 2w +15) ТАК 
Е TALE Quas) (2и +15) 
Cross flow 
Es | 
BW WASTE [© } 
WATER COLL. 
TANK 
- CEB WASTE 
T Super To Flash Mixing « COLL. TANK 
Chamber 
< Provision for Blending 
ki СЕ 
2w no. Y 
25% Sludge 
Cooling Tower RO PERMEATE 
и 
Маке Up STORAGE TANK 
REC. 
60% 
вол RO-I REJECT 
— TANK 
1x 100% 
RO Reject to MEE 
MEE FEED 
TANK 


Ес. 7 BLOCK FLOW DIAGRAM OF RO PLANT 


Fic. 8 OVERVIEW OF RO PLANT 


14 


IS 9841 : 2022 


Table 11 Quality of Inlet and Treated Water of RO Plant 
( Clause 2.2.2.14) 


SI No. Parameters Unit Inlet Quality — RO-1 RO-2 RO-1 Reject  Ro-2 Reject 
a) Q) (3) (4) (5) (6) C) (8) 
1) RO permeate flow m?/hr 200 87 26.1 21.15 17.4 
п) РН 8.4 6.8 7.0 8.4 8.7 
iii) Phosphate as PO4 mg/L 5.0 0.003 0.006 1.5 3.7 
iv) Zinc as Zn mg/L 1.0 
v) Total suspended Solids mg/L 100 
vi) Turbidity NTU 60 
vii) Total dissolved solids mg/L 2600 68.94 138.85 14906 37111 
уш) Total hardness as CaCO3 mg/L 905 2113 5284 
ix) Total alkalinity as CaCO3 mg/L 126 
x) Chloride as Cl mg/L 637 25.251 50.784 3325 8247 
xi) Sulphates as SO4 mg/L 1250 11.7 23.863 6225 15547 
xii) Sodium as Na mg/L 600 21.965 44.278 4066 10112 
xiii) Potassium as K mg/L 50 1.653 3.322 244 606 
xiv) Iron as Fe mg/L 0.4 
ху) Oil and grease (free and floating) mg/L «10 
xvi) Free chlorine mg/L Nil 
xvii) Reactive silica as 5102 mg/L 60 0.517 0.885 98 244 
xvii) COD mg/L 100 


The concentrated sludge generated from RO and ZLD 
is sent to CPCB/ SPCB approved treatment facility 
(TSDF). 


Block flow diagram of RO and ZLD plants are presented 
in Fig. 7 and 9 respectively. Photographs of RO and 
ZLD plants are shown in Fig. 8 and 10 respectively. 


2.2.2.15 Sanitary waste water 


Sanitary waste comes from the associated township 
and industrial premises. Sanitary waste from the plant 
and associated township is collected in pits at different 
locations within the plant and township area and 
pumped to the STP plant. 


The treatment system requires removal of solids and 
other sanitary material from the effluent. For this 
purpose, a grit chamber is provided at the inlet of 
STP plant. Mostly for such industrial and associated 
township domestic sewage, an extended aeration with 
aerobic process is used. In this process, aerobic bacteria 
digest the pollutants. To establish an aerobic bacterial 
colony, it is necessary to provide air for the bacteria to 
breathe. In a sewage treatment plant, air is continuously 
supplied to the Biozone either by direct surface aeration 
using impellers propelled by pumps which whisk the 
surface of the liquid with air, or by submerged diffused 
aeration using blowers for air supply through bubble 
diffusers at the bottom of the tank. Aerobic conditions 
lead to an aerobic bacterial colony being established. 
These achieve almost complete oxidation and digestion 
of organic matter and organic pollutants to carbon 


dioxide, water and nitrogen, thus eliminating the odour 
and pollution problem. The effluent produced by this 
process is non-polluting and can be discharged to a 
watercourse or can be re-used in industrial process 
subject to quality compliance and with minor treatment 
such as chlorination. 


After treatment in STP, treated effluent contains BOD 
less than 30 ppm, COD less than 250 ppm and TSS less 
than 100 mg/L. 


The effluent generation and treatment scheme from an 
integrated ammonia-urea plant is depicted in Fig 11. 


3 PHOSPHATIC FERTILIZERS 


The phosphatic fertilizers can be categorized as 
straight phosphatic fertilizers having single nutrient 
P for example, SSP and TSP and Complex fertilizers 
having two or more nutrients. The basic raw materials 
used for production of phosphatic fertilizers are 
ammonia, sulphur, sulphuric acid, rock phosphate, 
phosphoric acid and nitric acid and muriate of potash 
(MOP). Single super phosphate is produced by reaction 
of rock phosphate with sulphuric acid. Triple super 
phosphate is produced as a reaction of rock phosphate 
with phosphoric acid. There is no production of TSP 
in the country. Complex fertilizer plants can follow 
two process routes namely, mixed acid route and 
nitro phosphate route. Mixed acid route is followed 
reaction of rock phosphate with phosphoric acid and in 
nitro-phosphate route rock phosphate reaction takes 
place with nitric acid. 


15 


IS 9841 : 2022 


Vapor 


Steam 


Evaporator-ll 
Preheater-IV 
Evaporator-lll 
Condenser 


Ргеһеатег-МІ 
Evaporator-| 

Preheater-V 
Preheater-lll 
Evaporator-IV. 
Preheater-ll 
Evaporator-V 
Preheater-| 


acuum Pump 


MEE Fee 


Condensate to 
Stage-l Stage-ll Stage-Ill 


Stage-IV Stage-V CT Make Up 


Mather Liquor 
аһ Гог Disposal | 6елігіше 


Ес. 9 BLOCK FLOW DIAGRAM OF ZLD PLANT 


) 


X 
ра 


ГУ. 


Fic. 10 OVERVIEW ОЕ ZLD PLANT 


16 


IS 9841 : 2022 


REGENERATION 
WASTE FROM 
RESIN BEDS 


pH - 0-14 


2 FILTER BACKWASH ——əÑ 
FROM DM PLANT NEUTRALIZATION PIT 


TDS/TSS 

EFFLUENT FROM oo 
LABORATORY | 

pH - 0-14 


FOR USE AS 


RAW WATER 


3i 


i BOILER 
4i BLOWDOWN 

E pH - 9.5-10.5 
PO4 - 5-10 ppm 


REVERSE 


OSMOSIS PLANT 


5i COOLING WATER 
FILTER BACKWASH 
TDS/TSS 


— COLLECTION SUMP 


| COOLING WATER 
e| BLOW DOWN 


RECYCLE AS BFW 


AMMONIA AMM. PROCESS 
PROCESS CONDENSATE 


ond. 
NH3 = 5 ppm (Max) 


TREATED 


CONDENSATE STRIPPER EFFLUENT EFFLUENT POND 
CH3OH = 10 ppm (Max) TREATMENT (Guard Pond ) 
PLANT 


Steam Stripper/ 
Oil separator/ 
Emergency 
Ammonia & 
Urea process 
Condensate 
storage 


TURBINE Е CARBON FILTER 
CONDENSATE DM Plant/ respective 
FROM AMMONIA plant 
/UREA 


D. M. PLANT 
for production 
of BFW 


Guard Pond 
(Emergency 
holding pond) 


UREA PROCESS UREA PROCESS 
CONDENSATE А HYDROLYSER/ VH3 -5 рртүмах) 
CONDEN. 
Urea - 0.8% STRIPPER Urea - 5 ppm (Max) 


UREA STEAM 
CONDENSATE 


FLOORWASHING 
/PROCESS DRAIN 
FROM AMMONIA 

PLANT 


FLOOR WASHING 
/PROCESS DRAIN 


FROM UREA PLANT 


OIL LEAKAGE / 
SPILLAGE FROM 
13 |АММ. / UREA PLANT Oil -1000 ppm (Max) 


Ammonia - 500 ppm (max) 


PROCESS DRAIN 
FROM 
14| GV SECTION (Only 
in plant upsets 
condition 


INTEGRATED 
SEWAGE FROM SEWAGE TREATMENT т MEN BELT | 
SANITARY WASTE BOD BOD - 430 ppm 


15 COD TSS- «400 ppm NH3 - « 50 ppm 
Oil - < 10 ppm 
TKN - «75 ppm 


VANADIUM REMOVAL 
FACILITY 


RECYCLE AS COOLING TOWER MAKE UP 


Fic 11 TvPICAL EFFLUENT GENERATION AND TREATMENT SCHEME 
IN A NITROGENOUS FERTILIZER (AMMONIA-UREA) PLANT 


17 


IS 9841 : 2022 


3.1 Manufacturing 


The plants can either produce acid at site or import. 


3.1.1 Manufacturing Process of Intermediate Acids 


There are three types of acid that are used as intermediate 
namely, sulphuric acid, phosphoric acid and nitric acid. 


a) Sulphuric Acid — Sulphuric acid may be produced 
from elemental sulphur, pyrites (sulphide of iron), 
hydrogen sulphide as contained in sour gas from 
petroleum refineries, waste gas from burning of 
fuels and smelting operations, such as pyrites of 
copper, iron, zinc and lead. Elemental sulphur 
and, pyrites and sulphides are basic raw materials 
for sulphuric acid production. 


Sulphur dioxide is first obtained by the burning of the 
molten sulphur in presence of air. Sulphur dioxide is then 
converted to sulphur trioxide in presence of vanadium 
pentoxide catalyst. The sulphur trioxide thus obtained 
Is absorbed in recycling concentrated sulphuric acid in 
an absorption tower. The plants installed earlier and 
the smaller units of sulphuric acid plants use a single 
absorption process which has conversion efficiency of 
96—98 percent. New large sulphuric acid production 
plants now-a-days utilize double conversion double 
absorption (DCDA) process. DCDA process can realize 
above 99 percent conversion efficiency. 


S + O, — — SO, (sulphur di-oxide) 


250, + O, VO, catalyst 2SO, (sulphur tri oxide) 
— > 


SO, + H,O — —» H,SO, (sulphuric acid) 


b) Phosphoric Acid — A high-grade rock phosphate 
and sulphuric acid are the raw materials for the 
production of phosphoric acid. There are two 
technologies which are used namely the wet 
process and the furnace process. Wet process is 
more viable commercially for a large plant. 


Acidulation of finely ground rock phosphate with 
sulphuric acid to form phosphoric acid and gypsum. 
The gypsum 15 separated from the acid by filtration and 
acid is purified through removal of residual gypsum. 


Concentration of phosphoric acid is done by evaporation 
to the desired concentration. Counter current washing 
of gypsum is employed to recover as much phosphoric 
acid as possible without acid dilution of acid. Dilute 
acid is recycled through the extraction step. By product 
gypsum is disposed of in dry or slurry form to gypsum 
ponds. 

There are different processes of manufacturing of 


phosphoric acid namely, the di-hydrate process and the 
hemihydrate process. There is a difference of number 


of water molecule in gypsum. Quality of gypsum 
crystal determines the efficiency of filtration and loss 
of phosphate with gypsum. The other processes are 
combination of hemihydrate and dehydrate processes. 


с) Nitric Acid Essentially all the nitric 
acid ^ produced 15 manufactured by 
oxidation of ammonia over a noble catalyst 
(platinum-rhodium). The ammonia is oxidized in 
presence of catalyst to form nitric oxide which 
further 1s oxidized into nitrogen di-oxide with 
excess air. 


Liquid ammonia is evaporated, superheated and 
sent with compressed air to converter, containing 
platinum-rhodium catalyst gauges where ammonia 
oxidation takes place at a temperature of 850 deg. To 
950 deg.C. In the converter ammonia is converted in 
to nitric oxide, which is then converted to nitrogen 
di-oxide in oxidation vessel with the help of secondary 
air. The process water absorbs nitrogen di-oxide to 
form nitric acid while running in counter flow to the 
rising nitrogen di-oxide in absorption column. 


4 NH, + 50, ——~» 4МО + 6H,O 

ammonia oxygen 
2NO + O, — —e 2NO, 

3NO, + H,O — —» NO + 2HNO, (nitric acid) 


nitric oxide 


3.1.2 Single Super Phosphate 


Single superphosphate (SSP) is the most important 
single nutrient phosphatic fertilizer produced in India. 
It contains about 16 percent P,O, in water soluble 
form. Raw materials required to produce SSP are rock 
phosphate and sulphuric acid. Imported as well as 
indigenous rock phosphate is used for SSP manufacture. 


Rock phosphate (90 per cent passing through 
100 mesh) of 30-35 per cent Р,О, content is mixed 
with sulphuric acid (65-70 per cent strength) in a 
specially designed mixer. The reaction is exothermic 
and proceeds in two steps. First, the sulphuric acid 
reacts with part of the rock forming phosphoric acid. 
Then the phosphoric acid formed reacts with more rock 
forming mono calcium phosphate. The two reactions 
take place concurrently but the first stage 15 completed 
rapidly while the second stage continues for several 
days or weeks. The fluid material from the mixer goes 
to a den where it solidifies. The solidification results 
from continued reaction and crystallization of mono 
calcium phosphate. In SSP production, phosphoric acid 
15 found only as an intermediate. The super phosphate 
15 excavated from the den after 30 min to 4 h. At this 
time, Ше superphosphate 15 still somewhat plastic and 
the temperature is around 100 deg. C. This product 


Са (PO) F, + 10 H,SO, + 20 H,O ——> 6H,PO, + 10 (CaSO,.2H,O) + 2HF 


rock water 


phosphate 


sulphuric 
acid 


18 


phosphoric 
acid 


hydrogen 
fluoride 


gypsum 


Са „Е, 
rock sulphuric water 
phosphate acid 


is removed from the den and conveyed to storage for 
final curing which requires 2-6 weeks depending on the 
nature and proportion of raw material and condition of 
manufacture. The cured product 1s reclaimed, milled, 
screened and either bagged for marketing or sent for 
granulation. 


Granulation is done in the presence of steam in a drum 
or pan granulator and finished product is further send 
for packaging. 


3.1.3 Manufacturing of Complex Fertilizers 


(Di-Ammonium Phosphate) 


Compound or complex fertiliser means a fertiliser 
containing two or more nutrients during the production 
of which chemical reaction takes place. There are 
various grades of complex fertilizers depending on the 
nitrogen and phosphorus content in the product. DAP is 
the most common product and its production is discussed 
here. Other complex fertilizers are manufactured in 
similar way with different mole ratio of ammonia and 
phosphoric acid. Potassium is incorporated as third 
nutrient in form of MOP. As discussed earlier, complex 
fertilisers are produced by two different ways namely, 
mixed route and the nitro phosphate route. 


a) The Mixed Acid Route — DAP is manufactured by 
reacting two moles of ammonia with one mole of 
phosphoric acid. Wet process phosphoric acid of 
about 40-42 per cent P,O, is partially neutralized 
(to about 89 per cent) by anhydrous ammonia. 


2NH, + H,PO, —— (NH,),HPO, 
ammonia phosphoric di-ammonium 
Acid phosphate (DAP) 


The preliminary neutralizationis doneinapre-neutraliser 
and the mole ratio of NH,:H,PO, is maintained around 
1.4. The resultant slurry containing a mixture of DAP 
and MAP is metered into the ammoniator granulator. 
Fines from recycle system are also added into the 
ammoniator granulator. Ammonia is further added into 
the bed of granules through special spargers to increase 
the mole ratio of NH,:H,PO, to around 2. Urea is also 
added to bring up ammonia to 18 per cent. The heat 
of reaction aids in removal of water vapour from the 
slurry. Over half of the water introduced in the process 
is evaporated in the pre-neutraliser and more water is 
driven off in the ammoniator granulator. Any unreacted 
ammonia gas is then scrubbed with water and weak 
phosphoric acid, and returned to the pre-neutraliser. 
The granulator discharge is then dried, screened after 
thorough drying, cooled and conditioned by coating 
agent, if necessary, and then bagged. Oversize granules 


19 


IS 9841 : 2022 


(PO), + 7H,SO, + H,O ——> 3Ca (Н,РО,),Н,О + 7CaSO, + 2HF 


mono calcium hydrogen 
calcium sulphate fluoride 
phosphate 


are ground and recycled back to granulator along with 
fines. 


Final product is further processed for packaging in the 
packaging plant. 


b) Nitro-phosphate Route — Іп nitro-phosphate 
route, acidulation of rock takes place in presence 
of nitric acid in a series of reactors. The reaction 
mass contains calcium nitrate and phosphoric 
acid. The mixture can be converted into a solid 
granulated/prilled fertilizer by three or four 
important methods. Depending on the method 
adopted, the water soluble P,O, content and the 
N-P ratio in the final product varies significantly. 
Ca, F(PO), + 20 HNO, ——— 6H,PO, + 

10 Ca(NO,), + HF 


In ODDA process route, to acidulated mixture requisite 
quantity of DAP or MAP is added to get desired 30 
percent water soluble phosphate level. The reaction 
mass is ammoniated further to neutralization point 
resulting in formation of a slurry of ammonium nitrate, 
dicalcium phosphate and ammonium phosphate. 
Sufficient potassium is added to make the required 
grade. The reaction is further dried, granulated and 
screened. 


In modified ODDA process, the acidulated mixture 
containing calcium nitrate and phosphoric acid is filtered 
to remove impurities and cooled for crystallization 
calcium nitrate. The cryastaline calcium nitrate which 
is hygroscopic is separated in centrifuge. After the 
separation, the remaining process liquor is ammoniated 
to yield high water soluble (up to 60 percent or more) 
phosphate containing nitrophosphate. The mix now 
contains ammonium nitrate, ammonium phosphate 
and dicaleium phosphate. The quantity of calcium 
nitrate separated decided the water soluble P,O, in the 
product. To balance N:P,O, ratio DAP/phosphoric acid 
18 also added. 


3.2 Effluent Generation and Treatment Scheme in 
Phosphatic Fertilizer Industries 


3.2.1 Water Consumption and Effluent Generation in 
SSP Plants 


By and large all SSP plants are having zero effluent 
discharge. This is provided as part of consent to operate 
condition. The waste water generated in the process 
during scrubbing of off gases from den 15 stored in tank 
made of concrete above ground level. The waste water 
containing fluoride is used for scrubbing of gases in 
scrubber. 


IS 9841 : 2022 


3.2.2 Water Consumption and Effluent Generation 
Quantity in Complex Fertilizer Plants 


The quantity of raw water consumed in the complex 
phosphatic fertilizer plant with phosphoric acid plant is 
in between 7.5 to 12.0 M"/tonne of P,O, while complex 
fertilizer plant without acid plant water consumption 
varies between 0 to 0.9 M?/tonne of Р,О,. The plant 
consuming zero raw water use treated water from the 
integrated ammonia-urea plant. 


Quantity of treated effluent generated from complex 
fertilizer (with acid) plant varies between 0 to 0.90 
M*/tonne of P,O.. 


The main source of effluents in phosphatic fertilizers 
are from scrubber liquors from various unit operations 
involving scrubbing of off-gases. Other sources of 
effluents are from Gypsum pond and floor washings 
in the process plants where all spills and leakages are 
mixed with water and run through process plant drains. 


Waste water from complex fertilizer plants contains 
higher content of nutrients such as nitrates and 
phosphates. The entire wastewater generated from the 
complex fertilizer plant is reused in the scrubbers and 
process units. This helps in achieving zero process 
wastewater discharge operations. 


There is no special treatment given for removal of 
nitrogen bearing components in the effluent from mixed 
acid based complex fertilizer plants. 


Effluent from nitro phosphate based plants contains 
higher concentration of ammoniacal апа nitrate 
nitrogen. The liquid effluent from nitro phosphate 
plant is first sent to the equalizing tanks to avoid shock 
loading and then subjected to air stripping to remove 
ammoniacal nitrogen. Finally, the nitrate is removed 
from the effluent from biological denitrification. A 
source of organic carbon is provided in the reactor and 
specially cultured bacteria breaks nitrate and nitrite to 
nitrogen and oxygen which escapes to atmosphere. 


Main pollutants in phosphatic fertilizer plants are 
Phosphate and Fluorides. In effluent water fluorides 
are present as fluoro-silicic acid with small amounts of 
soluble salts as Sodium and Potassium fluorosilicates 
and hydrofluoric acid. Phosphorous is present as 
phosphoric acid with small amount of calcium 
phosphate. 


For the removal of fluorides and phosphates, two stage 
treatment with Calcium carbonate and lime or double 
lime treatment is used. 


3.2.3 Process Description for ETP 


The combined effluent from process units of various 
sections passes through the effluent drains and is being 


20 


collected locally in the central sump and pumped to 
effluent treatment plant (ETP). The effluent passes 
through an inlet chamber, bar screen, grit chamber and 
oil and grease trap prior to an equalization tank. The 
equalization tank is equipped with air diffusion system. 


One dedicated facility for lime solution preparation is 
available with screen chamber, hoppers, belt conveyor, 
bucket elevator, screw conveyor and slurry preparation 
in concentrated lime preparation tanks, lime dosing 
tanks, lime dosing pumps and control valves. Here the 
lime powder with 80 ~ 86percent Ca(OH), is being fed 
to the concentrated lime preparation tank and treated 
water added to make 20percent lime solution (approx.). 
This 20 percent lime solution is being taken to lime 
dosing tanks and it is diluted to 10 percent (approx.) by 
adding further quantity of treated water. 


Effluent from equalization tank is pumped to flash 
mixing tank-1 where 10 percent lime solution is being 
added to raise the pH to 7 along with polyelectrolyte as a 
coagulant then passes to clari-flocculator — 1. Supernatant 
of clarifier-1 is passes to flash mixing tank-2 for second 
stage of lime treatment and then passes to clari-flocculator 
— 2. Where pH is raised to 10.5 by dosing further quantity 
of lime solution through control valve-2. The final 
clarified overflow from clarifier — 2 15 being alkaline in 
nature with pH 10.5. pH of overflow water from clari- 
flocculator — 2 is corrected by adding sulphuric acid in 
pH correction tank where pH, phosphates, fluoride, TSS, 
TDS BOD, COD, oil and grease is achieved as per PCB 
norms. Treated water is used in ball mill of phosphoric 
acid plant. 


The sludge from clari-flocculator — 1 and 2 is drained to 
Thickener and the thickened sludge is pumped to filter 
press for dewatering. Sludge cakes from the filter press 
are discharged to sludge storage yard which is used in 
the complex fertilizers plant as a filler. Treated water 
quality is being monitored by online pH meters. 


3.2.4 Theory of Chemical Treatment 


Phosphates is removed from wastewater by precipitation 
as calcium salt using calcium usually added in the form 
of lime that is, Ca(OH),. The reaction occurs primarily 
as follows: 


3Ca® + 2(PO,)* ——» Ca(PO), (А) 


When lime is added to water it reacts with the 
phosphates to precipitate calcium phosphate Ca,(PO,).. 
This reaction (A) is expected to dominate in the first 
stage of treatment till рН 7.0 


However, the residual concentration of phosphates 
in water is higher than discharge limits due to partial 
solubility of calctum phosphate at neutral pH range. 
Therefore, second stage of phosphates removal at pH 


beyond 10 with lime is envisaged where calcium ions 
react with the residual phosphates to precipitate as 
hydroxylapatite Са (РО,) (OH), governed by reaction 
(B). 
10Са” + 6PO > + 20H — —» Са (РО,) (ОН), (B) 
(Hydroxylapatite) 


Chemistry of fluoride removal: 


Calcium salts, including Ca(OH),, CaSO,, and CaCl, 
are used to precipitate fluorides as insoluble CaF,. The 
precipitation of fluoride using lime occurs as follows: 


Ca(OH), + 2HF — —» CaF, | + 2H,0 


Stoichiometrically, the precipitation should affect the 
reduction of fluoride levels to the limit of solubility of 
fluoride in the CaF, system. But the equilibrium that 
affects the solubility of fluoride includes not only the 
CaF, itself but also the species HF and НЕ? as well 
as the ion-pair CaF*. This results in presence of traces 
of fluoride after initial precipitation meriting a second 
stage of fluoride removal. The second stage is affected 
by chemisorption of fluoride on calcium phosphate and 
by adsorption on hydroxylapatite. 


The presence of alkalinity and precipitable phosphates 
enhance the precipitation of fluoride in which the 
carbonate radical of the apatite complex, Ca(PO4),. 
CaCO,, is replaced by fluoride to form an insoluble 
fluorapatite: 
Ca(PO,),.CaCO, + 2F — —» Ca(PO,),.CaF, | + 
СО, (D) 
Ca(PO,), + 2CaF — —» Ca(PO,),.CaF, | (Е) 
(Fluorapatite) 
Since, the precipitation of phosphate is being carried 
out simultaneously the process of co precipitation takes 
over in the second stage of treatment resulting in highly 
efficient removal of fluorides from wastewater. Table 
12 provides the quality of effluent at the outlet of ETP. 


Table 12 Typical Quality of Final Outlet of ETP 
( Clause 3.2.4 ) 


SI No. Parameters ETP Outlet 

(1) (2) (3) 

i) pH 6.5 – 8.5 

ii) Fluoride as F 10 ppm Max. 
iii) Phosphate as P 20 ppm Max. 
ix) Oil and grease 10 mg/lit Max. 
v) Total suspended solids 100 mg/lit Max 
vi) Nitrate nitrogen as N 20 ppm Max. 
vii) Total ammonical nitrogen as М 50 ppm Max. 
vii) Total Kjheldahl nitrogen as М 75 ppm Max. 
ix) Free ammonical nitrogen 4.0ppm Max. 


21 


IS 9841 : 2022 


4 SAMPLING AND ANALYTICAL CONTROL 


In order to ensure that all effluent treatment facilities are 
performing to achieve the desired results, a sampling 
and testing plan is very important. An environmental 
monitoring laboratory is provided in the industry which 
sets up the sampling plan with optimum frequency and 
establishes standard sampling and testing procedures. 
Suitable instrumentation for testing of untreated and 
treated effluents are made available. 


Suitable automatic online continuous monitoring 
system of pollutants is installed to monitor parameters 
such as pH and ammonia and these are connected to 
the SPCB/CPCB through available software for proper 
monitoring by statutory authorities. 


5 GUIDELINES FOR UTILISATION OF 
TREATED EFFLUENT IN IRRIGATION 


The Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) has 
issued a guidelines for utilization of treated effluent in 
irrigation. The guidelines define the zero liquid discharge 
(ZLD) as “zero liquid discharge (ZLD) implies that the 
industries are not discharging any effluent, either on 
the land or in the water body or at any other place that 
is, recycling the same in the process entirely without 
releasing any effluent. ZLD accomplishment may 
need physical and chemical treatment, followed by 
biological system to remove organic load. The treated 
effluents can be then subjected for concentration and 
evaporation. The concentration method quite often 
involves the adoption of reverse osmosis (RO) and 
nano filtration (NF) methods. The evaporation methods 
involve drying/evaporation of effluent in multi effect 
evaporators (MEE). 


It was recognized that adopting ZLD practices may 
not be feasible in many cases in view of techno- 
economic reasons. However, the industries should 
still to be encouraged for recycling and reuse of waste 
water as far as practicable in order to minimize the 
fresh water consumption and discharge of waste water 
into the environment. The treated waste water of an 
industry may also be utilized for irrigation. This type 
of utilisation/application is considered an efficient 
approach for managing/conserving water resources, 
compensating water shortages caused by seasonality or 
the irregular availability of water sources for irrigation 
throughout the year. 


The possible risks of wastewater usage in agriculture 
may range from changes to physico-chemical and 
micro-biological properties of soils to impact on human 
health. In unfavorable economic conditions, the search 
for alternative irrigation sources, such as the use of 
untreated or inadequately treated wastewater may 
result in risk factors. Thus, it is necessary to ensure the 


IS 9841 : 2022 


beneficial aspects of this practice before application of 
treated wastewater in irrigation. 


The guidelines for utilisation of effluent in irrigation 
requires engagement of an agricultural scientist or 
tie-up with an agricultural university or institute for 
advice on the utilization or the rate of application 
of the effluent for irrigation considering the 
agro-climatic conditions. Industry is required to prepare 
a comprehensive irrigation management plan (IMP), in 
consultation with the agricultural scientist or agriculture 
university/institute and submit to SPCBs/PCCs which 
should verify the same while issuing Consent to the 
industry. 


The treated effluent should meet the norms prescribed 
for irrigation under Environment (Protection) Rules, 
1986/Consent. The effluent should also conform to 
total dissolved solid (TDS)- 2100 mg/L and sodium 
adsorption ratio (SAR)- preferably less than 18 but 
not more than 26, depending on soil/crop type, besides 
meeting any other parameters suggested by agricultural 
scientist or agricultural university/institute in the IMP. 


The utilization of treated waste water should also 
consider conditions such as crop type, climate, 


22 


irrigation type, soil condition, soil permeability and 
total salt concentration. The command area for effluent 
utilisation should be as near as feasible to the industry 
in order to facilitate easy monitoring and effective 
control. 


There are other requirements with respect to capacity 
of storage tank of treated effluent, distribution network 
of impervious conduits to cover the irrigated area, 
analysis of treated effluent periodically (15 days), 
analysis of soil under irrigation twice a year and 
monitoring of ground water quality twice a year from 
NABL/EPA/SPCBs/PCCs recognized/accredited 
laboratories. Reports regarding compliance of effluent 
quality standards and status of soil and ground water 
quality shall be submitted to SPCBs/PCCs twice in a 
year, in first week of January and July. 


In case of observation of any deterioration of the 
soil and groundwater quality parameters in the 
assessment by agricultural scientist or agricultural 
university/institute, the application of effluent should 
be stopped immediately and the industry should inform 
the SPCB, accordingly. The industry shall be solely 
responsible for reclaiming the soil and water quality at 
their cost in the affected area. 


1. 


2. 


АММЕХ А 
( Forward ) 
REFERENCES 


Handbook on Fertilizer Technology, 2016, 
Fertiliser Association of India. 


Fertiliser Statistics, 2018-19, Fertiliser 


Association of India 


. Kulkarni, Sunil M., Kulkarni, Vinod M. and 


Krishnappa, B, Effluent Water Recovery Plant, 
Indian Journal of Fertilisers, Vol, 7, No. 6, pp 
36-43, June 2011. 


23 


IS 9841 : 2022 


. Reducing Environmental Footprint at IFFCO 


Phulpur, Indian Journal of Fertilisers, Vol, 7, 
No. 6, pp 12-18, June 2011. 


. Guidelines for Utilization of Treated Effluent 


in Irrigation, Central Pollution Control Board, 
September, 2019. 


IS 9841 : 2022 


ANNEX B 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Environment Protection Sectional Committee, CHD 32 


Organization 


National Environmental Engg Research Institute, 
Nagpur 


Alkali Manufacturers’ Association of India, 
New Delhi 

Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 

Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited, Haridwar 

Central Institute of Mining and Fuel Research, 
Dhanbad 


Central Leather Research Institute, Chennai 


Cement Manufacturers Association, New Delhi 


Central Pollution Control Board, New Delhi 

Confederation of Indian Industry, New Delhi 

Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and 
Industry, New Delhi 


Hindustan Unilever Ltd, Mumbai 


Indian Chemical Council, Mumbai 

Indian Council for Agriculture Research, New Delhi 
Indian Institute of Toxicology Research, Lucknow 
Indian Oil Corporation Ltd, Faridabad 

Ministry of Defence, DRDO, Gol, New Delhi 
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change 
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, Gol, 


New Delhi 


Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, Gol, 
New Delhi 


National Council for Cement and Building Material, 
New Delhi 


Representative(s) 
Dr ATUL NARAYAN VAIDYA (Chairman) 
Dr Н. S. Das 


Dn (ӛнкіматі) С. С. PANDIT 
DR S. К. Sanu (Alternate) 


SHRI SHAILENDRA KUMAR 
SHRI AVINASH Kumar (Alternate) 


Dr RAMESH CHANDRA TRIPATHI 
SHRI NISHANT KUMAR SRIVASTAVA (A/ternate) 


SHRI K. SRI BALA KAMESWARI 
DR S. SwaRNALATHA (Alternate) 


SHRI ANIL KUMAR TRIVEDI 
SHRI P. SREENIVASA RAJU (Alternate I) 
DR RACHANA SHARMA (Alternate II) 


SHRI О. THIRUMURTHY 
DR C. S. SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI SHIKHAR JAIN 
Mrs PRIYANKA YADAV (Alternate) 


Miss ARCHANA DATTA 


SHRI SANJAY HARLAKA 


DR MRITUNJAY CHAUBEY 
Dn C. NANDI (Alternate) 


Dr К. C. PANDEY 
DR NaviNDU GUPTA (Alternate) 


ӛнкі S. С. BARMAN 

Dn Arrar HUSAIN KHAN (Alternate) 
SHRI RAVI PRAKASH GUPTA 

DR MANOJ Kumar (Alternate) 
SHRI J. C. KAPOOR 

SHRIMATI MEENAKSHI GUPTA (Alternate) 
SHRI VED PRAKASH MISHRA 

SHRI DINESH RUNIWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI VINOD KUMAR JAIN 


SHRI ROHIT KAKKAR 
SHRI SATHISH KUMAR (Alternate) 


Suri Р. М. OJHA 
SHRI ANUPAM (Alternate I) 
SHRI ANAND BoHna (Alternate П) 


24 


Organization 


National Environmental Engg Research Institute, 
Nagpur 


NTPC Ltd, New Delhi 

Steel Authority of India Ltd (A Govt of India 
Enterprise), New Delhi 

The Energy and Resources Institute, New Delhi 

The Fertilizer Association of India, New Delhi 

PHD Chamber of Commerce 


ICAR-CSSRI, Karnal 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 9841 : 2022 


Representative(s) 


Dr GIRISH R POPHALI 
Ms Rita SANDIP DHODAPKAR (Alternate I) 
Dr RIMA Biswas MONDAL (Alternate П) 


SHRI K. KARTHIKEYAN 

Suiv CHARAN MEENA (Alternate) 
SHRI INDERPAL DHULL 

Mrs RAKHI SEN (Alternate) 


Cor К. К. Јонк (RETD) 
Dr SUNEEL PANDEY (Alternate) 


FRESH NOMINATION AWAITED 

SHRI MANISH Goswami (Alternate) 
Mr SAURABH SANYAL 

Dr JATINDER SINGH (Alternate) 
DR A. К. Елі 

Dr Авнім Datta (Alternate) 


SHRI A. K. Lar, Scientist “Е” AND HEAD (CHD) 
| REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


SHRISHTI DIXIT 
SCIENTIST ‘D’ (CHD), BIS 


25 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CHD 32 (17680). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 


Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 


Regional Offices: Telephones 


Central : 601/A, Konnectus Tower-1, 6^ Floor, DMRC Building, 
Bhavbhuti Marg, New Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8" Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, 2367 0012 


| 2323 7617 
Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 | 2320 9474 


Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg 
Chandigarh 160019 


265 9930 


Southern : С.І.Т. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western У Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri (East), | 2821 8093 
Mumbai 400093 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


