**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



IS 9080-2-3 (1981) : Safety requirements in electro-heat 
installations, Part 2: Particular requirements for 
resistance heating equipment, Section 3: Protection in 
potassium and sodium nitrate and nitrite bath furnaces [ETD 
17: Industrial Electroheating Equipment] 



a^v j i imzzmn^a rafrg amsBs 



£«> \\ i %^sfi^^^>9i^: 



^^CVVVfa^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



"RE-AFFIRMEB 1 996** 
IS : 9080 { Part II Sec 3 ) - 1981 

r it g-, . . ( Reaffirmed 2001 ) 

Indian Standard 

SAFETY REQUIREMENTS IN 
ELECTRO-HEAT INSTALLATIONS 

PART IF PARTICULAR REQUIREMENTS FOR 
RESISTANCE HEATING EQUIPMENT 

Section 3 Protection in Potassium and Sodium Nitrate and 

Nitrite Bath Furnaces 



UDG 62 1'36$*3/'4; 621 -784*67: 614*825 




© Copyright J 98 1 
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MAMAft HHAVAN. 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZATAR *rf*RG 

NKW DELHI IIOOM 



' V '/ ^SSt r±~ O Mvrh 1^81 



N^Gr2 



IS : 9080 ( Part II/Sec 3 ) - 1981 

Indian Standard 

SAFETY REQUIREMENTS IN 
ELECTRO-HEAT INSTALLATIONS 

PART II PARTICULAR REQUIREMENTS FOR 
RESISTANCE HEATING EQUIPMENT 

Section 3 Protection in Potassium and Sodium Nitrate and 
Nitrite Bath Furnaces 

Industrial Electro-heating Equipment Sectional Committee, 

ETDG 61 

Chairman Representing 

Shri S. K. Mazumdeb Tata Iron and Steel Co Ltd, Jamshedpur 

Members 

Shri A. K. Biswas ( Alternate to 
Shri S- K. Mazumder ) 
Shri S. N. Agarwal Steel Furnace Association of India, New Delhi 

Shri S. K. Bhattacharji M. N. Dastur & Company ( P ) Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri T. K. Ghosh ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. M. Chandwani Hindustan Brown Boveri Ltd, Vadodara 

Shri P. S. Sharma ( Alternate ) 

Shri Kaushal Goel Engineering Projects ( India ) Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri M. M. Prasad ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. K.Jain Graphite India Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri J. K. Agarwal ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. L. Keswani Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 

Shri D. D. Rajden ( Alternate ) 
Shri O. N. Krishnan Metallurgical & Engineering Consultants (India) 

Ltd, Ranchi 
Shri J. C. Madan Steel Authority of India Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri A. K. Jain ( Alternate ) 
Shri H. T. Makhijani Westerwork Projects Ltd, Bombay 

Shri L. C. Chandi ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. K. Mukherjee National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri Sit jit Das ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. K. Mukhopaohya Bharat Machine Building Plant, Heavy Engineering 

Corporation, JRanchi 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1981 
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act, 



IS : 9080 ( Part H/Sec 3 ) - 1981 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri M. K. Nair Directorate General of Ordnance Factories 

( Ministry of Defence ), Calcutta 
Shri P. A. Patel Indian Furnace Company Ltd, Bombay 

Shri M. Purandhab ( Alternate ) 
Dr Ravindra Reddy Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Secunderabad 

Shri M. Shankralingam Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals, 

New Delhi 
Shri R. V. Narayanan ( Alternate ) 
Shri Y. P. Vatsa The General Electric Co^>f India Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri S. M. Banerjee ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. P. Saohdev, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director ( Elec tech ) 

Secretary 

Km G. M. Joseph 
Assistant Director ( Elec tech ) t ISI 



IS : 9080 ( Part II/Scc 3 ) -1981 

Indian Standard 

SAFETY REQUIREMENTS IN 
ELECTRO-HEAT INSTALLATIONS 

PART II PARTICULAR REQUIREMENTS FOR 
RESISTANCE HEATING EQUIPMENT 

Section 3 Protection in Potassium and Sodium Nitrate and 
Nitrite Bath Furnaces 

0- FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard (Part II/Sec 3) was adopted by the Indian 
Standards Institution on 12 January 1981, after the draft finalized by the 
Industrial Electroheating Equipment Sectional Gommittee had been 
approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council. 

0.2 This standard forms Section 3 of Part II covering the requirements 
for protection in potassium and sodium nitrate and nitrite bath furnaces. 
The other parts of the series are as follows: 

Part I General requirements 

Part II Particular requirements for resistance heating equipment 

Sec 1 Protection in direct resistance heating installations 

Sec 2 Protection in indirect resistance heating installations 

Sec 4 Protection in installations used for drying varnishes and 
other similar products 

Part III Particular requirements for mains and medium frequency 
induction furnace installations 

Part IV Particular requirements for arc furnace installations 

0.3 Nitrate and nitrite bath furnaces are salt-bath furnaces containing in 
metallic ladles or crucibles, potassium or sodium nitrate or nitrite baths 
or baths composed of a mixture of these salts. Even though this stan- 
dard allows bath temperatures up to 595°C ( see 3.1 ), precautions are 
required for temperatures exceeding 550°C. 

3 



IS : 9080 ( Part II/Sec 3 ) - 1981 

0*4 In preparing this standard considerable assistance has been derived 
from IEG Pub 519-2(1975) ' Safety in electro-heat installations: Part II 
Particular requirements for resistance heating equipment * issued by 
International Electrotechnical Commission. 

0.5 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in 
accordance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retain- 
ed in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified 
value in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard ( Part II/Sec 3 ) applies to potassium and sodium 
nitrate and nitrite baths used for heat treatment of metals and their 
alloys. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall 
apply. 

2.1 Internal Heating — When heating elements are arranged inside 
the salt bath ( immersed heating elements, electrodes ). 

2.2 External Heating — When heating elements are arranged outside 
the ladle or crucible. 

3. CONSTRUCTION AND INSTALLATION DETAILS 

3.1 Protective Devices — In order to control the temperature and to 
avoid overheating, the maximum admissible temperature shall be clearly 
indicated on the dial-plates of temperature indicators or controllers; in 
no case shall it exceed 595°C. When a temperature higher than 595°C 
is necessary in baths intended for steel, a clearly visible notice shall be 
placed in the vicinity, reading: 'Not applicable for light metals'. 

In the case of sodium and potassium nitrate and nitrite baths for 
heat treatment of steel, the temperature recording device may be 
omitted and at rated temperatures below 500°C, the temperature limiter 
can be omitted. 

3.2 Abnormal Operating Conditions — In order to avoid accidental 
overheating in the event of a fault in the temperature controlling system, 

♦Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). 



IS t 9080 ( Part Il/Sec 3 ) . 1981 

the temperature limiting device must automatically switch off the heat- 
ing by means of a special circuit breaker and, in addition, activate an 
alarm device. The switching off shall be total for all the feeding 
conductors and the position of the circuit breaker shall be clearly 
shown. 

3.3 Heating Elements 

3.3.1 In internally heated potassium and sodium nitrate and nitrite 
baths, the immersed heating elements or electrodes shall be arranged in 
such a manner that they remain remote from the slime formed during 
operation- In the case of baths of depth exceeding 1 '5 m if no other 
precautions are taken, to ensure heating up without hazard, heating 
devices shall be provided for the purpose of forming vertical channels in 
the solidified charge by melting. 

3.3.2 In externally heated sodium and potassium nitrate and nitrite 
baths, the heating elements shall be fixed only on the sidewalls. They 
shall be so arranged as to avoid any local overheating. 

4. OPERATION 

4.1 When sodium and potassium nitrate and nitrite baths are used for 
the thermal treatment of metal, it is necessary to comply with the Indian 
Standards if any, concerning prevention against accidents. 

4.2 Equipment should be provided with danger indicators, at least one 
of which shall be placed outside the immediate proximity of the 
dangerous zone. 

4.3 It is necessary to avoid overheating of the bath which can cause 
ignition or calcination in the case of iron components and explosions in 
the case of light metals; overheating can be due, in particular, to slime 
sediment. 

4.4 All necessary precautions shall be taken to avoid the introduction 
of water or of lubricants into the sodium and potassium nitrate and 
nitrite baths. 



INDIAN STANDARDS 

ON 

INDUSTRIAL ELECTRO-HEATING EQUIPMENT 

IS: 

1885 (Part Li/Sec 1 )-1979 Elcctrotcchnical vocabulary: Part LI Industrial electro- 
heating, Section 1 General terms 

1885 ( Part Li/Sec 2 )-1979 Electrotechnical vocabulary: Part LI Industrial electro- 
heating, Section 2 Resistance heating 

8992-1978 Test methods for induction furnaces with submerged channels 

9021-1978 General test conditions for industrial electro-heating equipment 

9029-1978 Methods of tests for batch furnaces with metallic heating resistors 

9050-1979 Nominal dimensions of cylindrical machined graphite electrodes with 
threaded sockets ^ind connecting pins for use in electric arc furnaces 

9080 ( Part I )-1979 Safety requirements in electro-heat installations: Part I General 
requirements 

9080 ( Part II/Sec 1 )-1979 Safety requirements in electro-heat installations: Part II 
Particular requirements for resistance heating equipment, Section 1 Protec- 
tion in direct resistance heating installations 

9080 ( Part III )-1979 Safety requirements in electro-heat installations: Part III Parti- 
cular requirements for mains and medium frequency induction furnace 
installations 



