**************** 



^ tOTH: 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 



Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
"Step Out From the Old to the New" ' 



SP 12 (1975): Handbook for Gas Welders [MTD 12: Welding 
Applications] 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 




Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 





BLANK PAGE 




^*-:gv 




^^35^* 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



HANDBOOK 

FOR 

GAS WELDERS 



SP : 12 - 1975 
(Reaffirmed 2003) 



HANDBOOK 

FOR 

GAS WELDERS 

(Fourth Reprint MARCH 2004) 
UDC 621 791 5 658 386 621791(026) 



© BIS 1976 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN. 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAH MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 

Gr 1 5 May 1 976 



Edition 1 - 1976 

(Fourth Reprint MARCH 2004) 
UDC 621 791 5 658 386 621 791 (026) 



SP : 12 - 1975 



© Copyright 1976 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act {X\^ of 1957) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act 



Printed in India by Prmtograpfi, New Delhi and 
Published by Bureau of Indian Standards, New Delhi 110002 



SP : 12 - 1975 
CO NTENTS 

I'AGE 

Foreword . . . ..7 

Section 1 Introduction . . 9 

Section 2 Production and Distribution oi Gams . 13 

Section 3 Oxy-Aceiyilne EquiPMFNT and Acci-ssories . 22 

Section V SArtTY in Welding 37 

Section 5 Welding Metallurgy .. 4 1 

Section 6 I iller Rods and Fluxf"; . 'j 1 

Section 7 Weldino Teciink;^! t and PRoctDURE S'! 

Section 8 Oxygen Cutting ul- 

Section 9 Inspection and Testing . 102 

Section 10 Estimating and Costing . 106 

Appendix A Definitions or Common Welding Terms .. Ill 

Appendix B Indian Standards on Welding . . 124 

Appendix G Technical CoMvimLES . 128 



SP 1 12- 1975 
FOREWORD 

At the instance of Planning Commission, Government of India, Indian 
Standards Institution (ISI) launched a Steel Economy Project in the early 
1950s. The object of this programme was to prepare n series of Indian Stand- 
ard specifications and codes of practices m the field of production and use of 
steel. 

One of the subjects under the Steel Economy Project is that pertaining 
to popularization of welding as a mode of fabrication. As a result of inten- 
sive study made during the last two decades and dclibcralious at numerous 
sittings of Technical Committees, a number of Indian Standards have bei.'n 
published in the field of welding. A complete list of Indian Standards on 
welding is given m Appendix B 

Production of sound and ei ononuc welds depends toalaigc extent on 
the welder himself. Thus, a trained welder with a fair amount of theoictical 
knowledge would be able to carry out weldmg jobs cdkirntly and economi- 
cally. It was, therefore, felt necessary that in addition to the publication of 
codes of practices and design standards the weldeis should be .systematically 
trained in this country and handbooks giving theoretical and piactical 
information in smiple language should also be made available to them for 
their reference purposes. 

With this object in view, Indian Standard codes of piactices for 
training of manual metal aic welders (IS: 817-1966) and gas welders 
( IS : 1393-1961 ) have been published. This handbook is the second in the 
series of handbooks, on welding, and deals with gas weldmg. The first 
handbook relates to manual metal-arc welding. A handbook for welding 
engineers is under prepartion. 

This handbook requires reference to the Carbide of Calcium Rules, 1937 
with its subsequent amendments issued by the Government of India. 

In the preparation of various sections of this Handbook, the Sectional 
Committee has derived valuable assistance from authors as mentioned below 
for the sections shown against them: 

Section Author 

1. Introduction Shri R. Ghosh 

2. Production and Distribution of Gasci Shri R. Ghosh 

3. Oxy-acetylene Equipment and Acces- Shri R. Purkayastha 
sories 

4. Safety in Welding Shri S. S Mazumdar 

5. Welding Metallurgy Shri V. R. Subramanian 

6. Filler Rods and Fluxes Shri R. Purkayastha 



SP : 12 - 1975 

Section Author 

7. Welding 'I'etliniqup and Procedure Sliri R. Purkayastha 

fi. Oxygen Chitting Shri J. C. Arharya 

'J. Inspection and Testing Shri V. R. Subramaniaii 

10. Estimating and Costing Shri J. C. Acharya 

This assistance was made available to IS I through the courtesy oT 
M/s Indian Oxygen Limited, Calcutta. 

This handbook, which has been processed by the Welding General 
Sectional Committee, SMDC 14, the composition of which is given in 
Appendix C, had been approved for publication by the Structural and 
Metals Division (Council of ISI. 

No handbook of this type can be made complete for all times to come 
at the very first attempt. During the course of use of this handbook it 
should be possible to make suggestions with regard to improving its utility. 
All such suggc.itions may be passed on to ISI who will receive them with 
appreciation and gratitude. These suggestions will be taken into consi- 
deration while revising the handbook. 



SP : 12 - 1975 

SECTION I 
INTRODUCTION 

1.1 General 

This handbook deals with gas welding and allird pioccsscs done by 
hand — the term allied processes in addition to gas welding means bra/.c weakl- 
ing, brazing, oxygen cutting and such similar processes needing the appliealion 
of a llame using a fuel gas and oxygen or air. This handbook deals in simple 
language with the various aspects of these processes which will be of practical 
utility to the wcld(;r. Some of the common welding terms which a welder 
is likely to come across are explained in AppencUx A. For complete list of 
welding terms reference should be made to IS : B12-1957 ' (Glossary of terms 
relating to welding and cutting of metals '. The important aspects covered in 
this handbook are welding gases, welding and cutting ccjuipmenl, w(-khng 
techniques and procedure, welding filler rods and fluxes and safety in welding. 
F>lements of welding metallurgy have also been explained to assist the welder 
to adopt suitable welding procedures. Method of inspection and testing 
of welds, and of estimating and costing of welds have also been included as 
knowledge of these will assist welders in p^roducing economical and quality 
welds. 

1.2 Definition 

Welding is a method of joining metal. The faces to be joined are healed 
locally, in case of gas welding with a gas flame, until the faces become 
sufficiently hot or plastic or liquid and the joint is effected either by the 
application of pressure or f)y the application of a filler rod or wire. Tlie 
process where the pressure is applied, is popularly known as ' forge welding ' 
or ' pressure welding '. When the faces to be joined are heated and rendered 
hquid, application of pressure not being necessary, the process is known as 
' fusion welding '; in this process some times additional metal is added to the 
joint by melting a metallic rod called fdlcr rod or wire or metal. 

1.3 Historical Development 

The art of joining metal is about 3 000 years old. In India, probably 
the oldest surviving piece of welding is in the Iron Pillar at Delhi which is 
about 1 500 years old. It was discovered a long time ago that by heating 
two peices of metal and then by hammering the heated ends together, the 
two pieces could be joined in one continuois piece. The Iron Pillar was 
probably made by this method. This discovery was the fore-runner of what 
is now known as the forge welding or blacksmith welding — a process which 
finds application from a village smithy to a large modern forge ajiop. 

The next discovery was the flame obtained by burning acetylene gas 
in air or oxygen; acetylene when burnt with air produces a flame having 



SP: 12 -1975 

tcmpcraturr of about 2 325° C and when burnt with oxygen a flame tempera 
tureof al)out 3 200°C IS nathcd VVhcrf aictyltnt is usf d with o\)g( n for gas 
welding U IS known as oxy-acetylcm v\rldinR Pht edges of tin nittal pieces 
to be )oiiud ar( placed adjacent to ( a( h othtr .md united together so as to 
foi m one {)]( < e alter roohng, filler inetal may be .leldcfl Ijy using fille r rod to 
give the uquncd bi/e and shape to the final joint 1 uel gases other than 
acetylene, namely, piopane, butane, hydiogeu, coke oven gas and coal gas 
have been usi d in (on)umtion witli e)xygen ( and in some cases with air ) 
to produce a llainc as heat source for application of proce sscs allied to gas 
welding su( li as oxygen < iitling, bia/ing, e tr In this tounti) acetylene is the 
more pcjpulai fut 1 gas loi gas vvi Iding and alhc d ptcjc e ss( s 

A I II nch c hemist A L Lavoisic t in his c spc rune nts f 1770-177") ) fust 
rerogm/c cl oxvgc n as an c Ic mi nt although I his \v is In ^t ptodiic rd m 1 772 bv 
K VV Sc hei Ic 1 he iiidusiriil use of owge n hid lo wail mam )iais till 
oxygen wis pioducid m some rommireial e]uantities by the Bi in I'loecss 
by lie.ilmg baiium mc)iu)\idt to jieioxide in c ompi ( ssc d ,iu iiid then i. using 
the tempc i.itiiM anel icducing the piessnic to biing alioul (Ik levcision of 
baiium elioxidc to the monoxide and c)x\gen I he Bun piorcss is now an 
obsolete process I he c liic I commercial souici ol owgt ii today is .itmos- 
phere wliu h c on I iins ibout 21 pc in nt ov^gc n m addition lo mtiogc n, xigoii, 
eatbou eUoxidc audcUhei idic g,W s Owmii is obti'iuel by h'\uiLution 
of an and liac lioiial clislillalion ol liquid xir I lie ])ioiiicisol tins piociss 
of oxygen ]irodLK (ion we le C laude and Lincle tow nils the e nd ol last eciitur\ 

Acetylene was eliscovcied and ideiitifieel in IH5f) bv Lelmond Deve\ 
It was not, liowevei, till 1892, until the discovery ol jnodiiction ol calcium 
carbide in elerti ic ai e furnac e by VVillson and More he.ici, (he produe tion and 
usage of acetylene bee iine a commercial reality Whilst the use e)f acetylene 
for illumination purpose s jju ceded the use of are tylc ne in conjunction with 
oxygen producing the hottest flame then known, the use of o\y-ac( tvlc ne flame 
for fusion welding and allied processes surpassed most other uses of acetylene 

In the year IBS'), a Russian scientist M V Be rn.idos discovered the pro- 
cess of elc rtiic arc welding emploving a eaibon electi ode In 1890 SlavinofF 
impioved the process developed by He rnados by leplacmg the carbon elec- 
trode with a metallic electrode Coated metallic electrode was first intro- 
duced by Oscar K)ellbeig of Sweden in 1907 and for the first time it enabled 
metal arc welding to be accomplished witli a stable arc and at the same time 
protected the inetal transfer and molten weld deposit fiom atmospheric 
contamination This method of welding is known today as shielded arc 
welding 

Many new developments have since taken place in the field of welding 
and today most of the ferrous and non-ferrous metals and even some of the 
non-metalsj such as thermoplastics, may be welded by difTerent welding 
processes. The chart showing derivation of the major welding methods that 
are commonly in use is given in Fig 1 1 

10 









SI 

£td 


P : 12 - 1975 




O 


H _ 






Q 




THERMI 

(Fusion 
Welding 






u 

^ 




0< 






^ 






W J 






o 






m 1 








in 




„ 


< 


1 


XtH 

















C5 1 


o 






Uh 




1 — . U ?^ 










1 ~~ \ 














O 








W 









a; 
< 







§ 




^ 


^^ ^ 


t) 








1-1 x 




b-4 


, 




t 


H 


o 


Q 








— CJ 

U 


3 









Um 


< 














> 


w 






J 





o 


O 


— — 


'tiD 

C 


< 
— h 

1^ 




o 

s 


Q 




1— ( u 




s 








1 
THEI 

:ssure 


td 






< 

u 






U 


V3 


b 




^ 






Oh 


















pH 








"^ 








u 
'4. 




— 


cq 

















C/3 


















— 




H 
— 





















CA3 


g 








J 






w 














w 






Q^ 






_.< 








>• 




! 


^ -I 








►>■ 






o ^ 








tu 






t-H 








fti 






i-^ 








D 
en 




o 


— u 








xn 


-§ 9^ 








oi 


£ ai 








1 


o- 












Cl^ 











II 



SP ! 12 - 1975 

1.4 General Principles 

Practically all gas welding today is done by the oxy-acetylene flame, 
although for brazing and some flame heating applications fuel gases other 
than acetylene are used. In this country, liquefied petroleum gas ( LPG ) 
is used for oxygen cutting in some areas where it is available in commercial 
quantities. LPG available in India contains a high percentage of butane 
consequently the thickness of steel that can be cut using LPG as a fuel gas 
is somewhat restricted. Coke-oven gas is also used as a fuel gas for oxygen 
cutting. 

In gas welding oxy-acetylene flame is mainly used and the temperature 
of this flame is about 3 200'C. This tremendous heat of the flame is concentrat- 
ed at about r5 mm away from the end of the inner cone of a neutral oxy- 
acetylene flame When this flame is applied to the surface or edge of a metal 
piece, the surface temperature of the part under the flame is raised and the 
flame ultimately melts a small pool of metal in the work. In case of fusion 
welding the filler rod is also melted by the heat of the oxy-acetylene flame 
and deposited in a molten state In most cases the molten metal in the pool 
is agitated by the action of the flame and by the filler rod, thus the base metal 
and the weld deposit arc thoroiighly mixed with the result that after cooling 
a sound union is formed. 

Steel in its molten state tends to combine with oxygen and nitrogen of 
the atmosphere and forms compounds called oxid<^s and nitrides. These 
compounds weaken it and make it brittle. In oxy-acetylene welding, the 
envelope or the outer-flame zone contains carbon monoxide and hydrogen. 
These are reducing gases and protect the molten steel from atmosphere and 
prevent formation of nitrides and oxides. 

Notwithstanding the protective atmoshpere of carbon monoxide and 
hydrogen in the outer zone of the oxy-acetylene flame, it becomes necessary 
to use fluxes when welding some metals and alloys for other metallurgical 
reasons for obtaining sound weld deposits. In the case of braze welding or 
brazing, it is not necessary to raise the parent metal mating faces to its melting 
point. 

The various sections in this handbook deal in detail the important 
aspects of gas welding, so that welders can appreciate the important techno- 
logical aspects of gas welding process and make sound welds at the most 
economical cost. 



SP: 12 -1975 

SECTION 2 
PRODUCTION AND DISTRIBUTION OF GASES 

2.1 General 

To produce the healing tlame it^quircd for gas welding, oxygen metal 
cutting, brazing and allied processes, a combustible or a tuel gas must be 
burnt in conjunction with oxygen or air, which is essential to siippoit (he 
combustion. 

2.2 Manufacture of Gases 

2.2.1 Oxygen- — Mo.*!! of the oxygen which is industrially used is obtained 
by extraction from atmospheie which contains appi oximately 21 peiccnt 
oxygen by the liquid-air process. Some amount ol oxygen is obtained as a 
by-product in the electrolysis of water — a process whii h also producci 
hydrogen along with oxygen. Hydrogen obtauutd by tiiis piocess is mainly 
used for hydrogenation of oil and fat and oxygen pioduced is soiiieliines 
compressed intocylmdeis for ludustnal applications. Howevci , the volume 
of oxygen obtained by this process is small and is not the economical method 
of oxygen production. 

In the liquid-air piocess, air i3 liquehed enabling the ox\gcn to be 
separated fiom the nitrogen by fraftional distillation method In the 
process illustrated in Fig. 2.1 gaseous oxygen is produced. 

The j)rocess air is drawn in by the multistage air compressor througii 
the low pressure (LP) caustic scrubber, where the catbon dioxide in the 
air is lenioved. The high piessure air ( 111' ) then passes tlnoiigh the vapori- 
zation cooler and then thiough the water separator where the hec inoisluie 
is lemoved. The high pressure air then pa.sscs through the drying battery 
where the air is rendered dry. I'he air then passes througii the precooler 
where it is cooled down by tlie product liquid oxygen and return waste 
nitrogct\. The, HP aii is further cooled down in the main heat cKchangcr 
by tiic ^vaste nitrogen ihe air expanded in a throttle valve enters the 
bottom of the double lectifit ation column. The rich liquid from the bottom 
of the lower column enters tiie acetylene absorber and then enters the upper 
column after it is expanded in a throttle valve. The product liquid oxygen 
from the bottom of upper column is sucked in by the pump and is dehvercd 
through the precooler wiicrc liquid oxygen evaporates. The gaseous 
oxygen is then filled in cylinders at a pressure of 120 kgf/cm^. 

In the other liquid air process illustrated in Fig. 2.2 both gaseous 
and liquid oxygen are produced. 

The process air is drawn in by the multiple stage air compressor 
hrough the air filter where any suspended dust particle in the air is 

13 



SP: 12- 1975 



OXYGEN 




AIR 

NITROGEN. 
RICH LIQUID 
OXVGEN 



1. 

2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
C 



Caustic scrubber 
Air compressor 
Vaporization cooler 
Water separator 
Alumina drier 
I'rccooler 



7. Main exchanger 

0. Poor liquid/waste nitrogen 

coolci 
9. Acetylene absorber 

10. Rectification column 

11. Pump 



Fig. 2.1 Lic^uid-Air Process of Producing Oxygen 



removed. The higli pressure air after the final stage of the com- 
pressor is passed tlirough freon cooler and then through water separator 
where free moisture in the air is separated. The high pressure air is then 
passed tlirough the absorber battery where the air is made dry and the 
carbon dioxide present in the air is removed. Tlie pure dry air enters the 
cold box and is cooled in the precooler by the return waste nitrogen. A 
portion of the precooled compressed air goes to the expansion engine 
which supplies relevant refrigeration for maintaining the plant at the 
required low temperature. The remaining portion of the high pressure 
air passes through the main exchanger where it is further cooled by the 
return waste nitrogen. The high pressure air is then expanded through a 
throttle valve and enters the bottom of the double rectification column 
along with expanded air from expansion engine. The rioh liquid from 
the bottom of the lower column enters the acetylene absorber where any 
hydrocarbon present is removed. It is then expanded to the upper 
column pressure. The product liquid oxygen from bottom of the upper 



14 



SP : 12 - 1975 



AIR 



?' 



NITROGEN 



[T 



L. 



\>^ 




AIR 
NITROGEN 



ITS 



1 



I 






GASEOUS 
OXYGEN 

LIQUID 
OXYGEN 



10 



\^ 



•^^ 



Y..J 






RICH LIQUID 

OXYGEN 

1. Air filter 

Air compressor 
rrcon cooler 
Walcr separator 
C.irbon dioxulc absorber 
Precookr 



7. Main exchanger 

}). Expansion engine 

9. Double lertifiLation column 

10 Acclylene absorber 

11. Poor liqunJ/waslc nitiogen cooler 

12. Cold box 



Fig. 2.2 Li(itTin-AiK Procfss of Producing Oxyoln, 
AN Alternative to Fig. 2.1 

rolumn is taken out to the liquid storac;e vessel continuously along with gase- 
ous oxygen from the top of the condenser. The gaseous oxygen is stored 
at a pressnic of 120 kgf/cin-. F'or large scale oxygen requirements often 
the supply is made as hquid oxygen which is stored at site in specially insulated 
storage vessel and evaporated and distributed through a pipeUne in the 
workshop for use. 

2.2.2 FueljCombuslible Gases 

Tlieic are several fuel or combustible gases which are commercially 
available, these vary in usefulness of application, mainly according to their 
heating capacity. The major fuel gases are as follows: 

a) Acetylene, 



15 



SP : 12 . 1975 

b) Hydrogen, 

c) Liquefied petroleum gases ( LPG ) — propane and butane, 

d) Coal gas, and 
c) Oven gai 

2.2.2.1 Acetylene — Industiial acetylene ib produced by the reaction 
of vvalci on calcium carbide, which is a compound of calcmin and carbon 
manulai turt-d by the fusion of limestone and coke m an electric lurnace 
{seel lo; 2 "^ ) Acetylene foi gas welding, oxygen cutting, bracing and allied 
pioccssts can be produced at site in a small or a medium size generator or it 
can 1)( pu)du( ed on a large scale, punhed and charged into tyliiidcrs filled 
n i()i poiow, Jiiasi and d( clone ( /« Fig 2 4) Ac<H\lcn.e rdled m a c\ lirider 
IS usuill) known as dissolved acetylene ' 

i he pioduction of acetylene for charging into cylmdcrs is shown in 
1 ig 2^) {see aUo 1 ig 3.1 ) Calcium caibidc is charged in tlie hopper of 
ili( g( nt laloi and is kd into the genciatoi lank at a pic delci mined rate by 
a 1r Ileal L()u\( >oi Ihe generator lank is kept full ol water and the w.itci 1( vcl 
is autnmaticaUy tonti oiled by a overhead Hushing lank whu h also dis( haig( ■> 
\\n spi nl Lakium hydroxide irom the bottom ol ihc gi ik ratoi tank liie 
ac( lylcne gas then passes through the hydiaulic mam and stoied in th( gas 
holcl( I Ihe acetylene compressor diavvs m gas thujugh the puiifiri and 
lilt Ll'diKi. llu puufici IS packed with puufying subslancc loi llic ilu- 
mi( al icmoval of impuiities After the gas is conipi esse cl in the comprtssoi 
il passes through the HP cooler and llie HPdiici unit foi leiiioval ol moistuu 
1 In gas IS then ihaig(>d in the cylinder-, at the chaigmg lark up lo a pus 
sun ol 21 atmospheres wiitie chilled watei is spia>cd on the (^Imcliis lo 
shoi t( II IJK chaigmg lime Ihe balance gas holdei ispiovidtd lo slop liie 
lompussoi motoi when sulheient acetylene is not passmu; ihiough the 
sNsleiii 1 h( ehilkd water needed for LP driei, HP cooler and (having 
i.u k 1-. dehvc i( d by the pump from the relrigeiation plant i Ju llashliaek 
aiusior will picvcnt any hre wluch may happen aecidentaily fioin pio- 
teechiig low aids the plant 

Pol site genet ation of acetylene, small type of acetylene gencratois are 
used which may be either carbide-to-water or water-to-carbide type 
{see \\g 2b) 

2 2.2.2 Hydrogen — There are two mam sources of availability oi 
hydrogen (a) obtained by electrolysis of water, and (b) by-pioduct from oil 
rehnctics — m the latter case, the gas is required to be puiificd to eliminate the 
unwanted gases Hydrogen is filled into cylinders at a picssure ol appioxi- 
matcly 120 kgf/cm* Unlike acetylene cvhnders, Indrogen e\lmdcrs are 
not filled in with anv porous mass 

16 



SP:12-197$ 



COKE OR 
ANTHRACITE 
+ 
LIMESTONE 




ELECTRICITY 



LIMESTONE AND COKE 
OR ANTHRACITE FUSED 
TOGCTHER IN ELECTRIC 
FURNACE 



-MOLTEN 
CAICIUM CARBIDE 
CAOT INTO INGOTS 




Fig. 2.3 Manufacturi or C'alcium Carbide 

-VALVE 




090U5 MASS 
SOAKED WITH 
ACETONE 



GAUZE 
FILTER 



-SAFETY PLUG 

Fig. 2.4 Typical DissoLVED-AcETyLENE Cylinder 



17 



SP J 12 -1975 




— ACETYLENE 

— CHILLED WATER 
■- REFRIGERENT 






— I 

-T I 

I I 

I I 

I I 

I I 

I I 

I I 

I ' 



! ! 



I 



I 

^ 



\ 


AcPtylcnr gmcntor 


a 


HP cooler 


2 


Hydraulic main 


9 


HP drier 


^ 


Tins liolilii 


10 


Charging rack 


^ 


I'urilu 1 


11 


Dissohul icctylfric c>liridei 


5 


LP dnii 


\l 


Rflngeration plant 


r, 


\t<l\lenp compressor 


13 


Chilled \v Iter circulating pump 


7 


Bil URc g-is holtii r 


14 


1 labhback arrtstor 



Tig 2 5 Production oi Acetylene 



2.2.2 3 Liquefied petroleum gases {ptopane and butane) — LPG is again a 
fuel gas oblaiiud as a bypiodurt fioni refining of petrolrum Rchncd gas 
IS compressed into (^lindeis in the form oi liquid but when the valve is 
opened the liquid gas cvapt)ralcs giving out fuel gas 

2.2.2.4 Coal Gaf— Coal gas is obtained fiom coal gas producing ovens 
Normallv, coal gas is not compressed into cyhndcrs as it deteriorates when 
compressed and stoiod for long period IJiis gas is usually supplied to the 
consuming points by pipehnes 



18 



SP: 12 -1973 





P WATER-TO-CARBIDE LOV/ PRESSURE 

GENERATORS 






CARBIDE-TO-WATER LOW PRESSURE 
GENERATORS 



G — Gas storage space 

L — Carbide container 

H — Diaphragm 

P — Pressure control springs 

S — Water pipe to carbide chamber, 
incorporating feed control device 
operated by gas volume 



W — Walei balance compartment 

— Gas outlet, usu.illy fiilid with a 
st(3p valve ■ ^.is passes to a puri- 
fier ( il (ill(d) and a back- 
pressure valve to the blowpipe 
or pipeline 

V — Carbide feed valve 



Fig. 2.6 Principles of Operation of the Main Types 
OF Acetylene Generators 

2.2.2.5 Oven gas — Oven gas similar lo the coal gas is ptoduced from 
coke ovens. This gas, like the coal gas, is supplied to the consuming points 
by pipelines. 

2.3 Distribution of Gases 

2.3.1 Oxygen — In workshops where the requirement of oxygen is somewhat 
small, the supply is usually drawn from a suitable si/c single cylinder fitted 
with a regulator for reducing the cylinder pressure to the operating pressure 
required for gas welding and allied processes ( see Fig. 2.7A and 2.7D ). 



19 



SP : 12 . 1975 

li", lu)\^^-vc^, l.iigi' volume oC ()x>gvii is required on a temporary basis, 
tv-vo oi- luoic (flinders arc coupled. When the demand is still larger, more 
cylinders are <oiJ])led together in a stationary manifold [see Fig. 2.7E). 
riiebe manifolds usually have two banks of cylinders, one bank is kept in 
reserve while (he other one is in use. The use of sue li manifolds very substan- 
tially reduces the i osl of handling of cylindei.s inside the workshop. These 
manifolds aie lilted with m.-^stcr regulators which reduce the cylinder pressure 
to about 1^) kgf/cnr lor feeding into a distribution pipe to the various 
consuming points. The consumuig jjoiius are fitted with outlet valves, stop 
valves and regulatois for individual piessuie control at site for gas welding 
or oxygen cutting ( sec I'lg. 2.7E ). 

When larger volume of o.xygen is required, particularly iftbeareaof 
operation is l.iii ly cone c-ntrated, oxygen is supplied as licpiid oxygen which 
is sloied at the opc-ialion site in suitable iiisni.itcd vessels and made to 
evajior.tU- at a c outiolli cl late and prc;ssure. I'or supplies to various con- 
suming points thiougli a pipeline, similai to tin- one in case of manifold 
supply system icTerred lo eailiei the consuming points again are provided 
with stop valves and oulicl points to which pressure controlled regulators 
arc- fitted for use with various welding c>r cutting eqt;iptnc-nl. 

Foi supply of oxygen lo veiy large consumjjlion, oxygen produced in 
the factoiy issomelimi^s diiec tly j)ipeil to the various consuming points. Such 
m.slallations, howevc^r, exi.t in this counliy in larger steel works. 

2.3.2 Aceljlenc Wlu-n using acet\ lenc- from cylindc-rs there are certain 
restrictions with legaid to the late at uhic h cylinders can be emptied or the 
rate at which gas can be diavvn from a filled acetylene cylinder. No cylinder 
should be emptied m Ic-ss than 'J hoiiis, that is, nol more than 20 percent of 
the capacity of the tylindcis should be diawn from the; cylinder in an hour, 
Tiieie arc, ho\\evc-i, applications which may rcquiie supply of a volume of 
acetylene iiioic ih.iii (hi . [lermissiblc limil, in such cases acetylene cylinders 
mils! be coupled if the usage point is only temporary. For permanent 
rcquucmenls it would be desirable to have a manifold of cylinders [see 
rig. 2.7E ) as in tlie case; of oxygen. Similar to the oxygen pipeline system, 
there exists acelylene pipeline system in which a number of acetylene 
c \ hndei J are manifolded with one bank in use and the other bank in reserve. 
The cyhiidcr prcssuic is, however, reduced at the manifold point to 
O'C kgf/c m'' through a rc-giilation system, the pipeline pressure being main- 
tained at this ptes.uie. Each outlet point of the manifold system has 
a flashback arrcstor, stop valve and outlet point for fitting a suitable 
legulator. 

For low pressuie system, larger generators can be made to supply 
acetylene generator at site through a pipeline ( see Fig. 2.7B ). In such cases 
however, outlet point is fitted with a hydraulic back pressure valve. 

20 



SP: 12 -1975 

2.3.3 Liqueffd Petroleum Cases - Similar to acetylene suppK system, the 
supply can be made from ail individual cylmdor or I'lom tylindcis i ouplcd 
together or from a stationaiy manifold and pipeline. 

2.3.4 Coal Gas and Oven Gas — Gav is drawn fiom pipelines at consumer 
points through a non-return valve ( see Fig. 2.7C ). 




3>=,- 



(A) 



^ — f 



GENERATOR 



(B) 



^°^ 




-NON-RETURN 
VALVE 
(C) 



(D> 



m 






kk 



K 



k 






K 



7:kk'^- 



u 



OXYGEN MANIFCLD 



FUrL GAS M;^^'IFOLD 



(E) 




K — Oxygen i emulator 
AR \rtl>lci)e K'l^ul ilor 
RM — M.tnilold regulator 

Fig. 2.7 Various Types ot \Vkldin(; and Cutiixo Installaiio' 



21 



SPtl2-1975 

SECTION 3 
OXY-ACETYLENE EQUIPMENT AND ACCESSORIES 

3.1 General 

Oxy-acetylene welding and cutting equipment are designed to provide 
the welder with means to contiol the welding flame accurately In choosing 
a welding outfit considerations should be given to the job requirements as 
well as the arrangements of gas supply with which the outfit is mtend d to be 
used A designer of welding equipment takes all these factors into account 
besides such other basic reqmrements as safety in use and convenience m 
handling. 

3.2 High Pressure and Low Pressure Equipment 

An oxy-acetylene plant can be either : (a) a high pressure plant if it 
utilizes dissolved a( etylene, that ib, acetylene from cylinders, or (b) a low 
pressure plant if it utilizes an acetylene generator for producing acetylene In 
either case oxygen compressed into high pressure cylinders will be used. 

Note — For large workshops piped oxygen and acetylene supplies are often used. 
Oxygen pipeline may be connected to manifold cylinder system or to a liquid oxygen 
supply system Acetylene pipeline may be connected to either a manifold dissolved 
acetylene cylinder system or to an acetylene generator 

It Will be seen that the terms ' high ' or ' low ' pressure equipment are 
based solely on the manner in wlmh the acetylene is provided When 
acetylene fiom a dissolved arctylcno cylindci is used the term 'high pressure' 
IS applicable When ac etylene is used dirce tly from a generator it is called 
a ' low pressure ' system. 

3.3 Acetylene Supply 

3.3.1 Dissolved Acetylene — Dissolved acetylene or D/A, as it is sometimes 
called, is supplied m cylinders whu h are filled with a porous substance 
The pores m the filling material divide the space into a number of small 
compartments which prevent sudden decomposition of acetylene throughout 
the whole mass, should it stai t inadvertently by lo( al heating The pores are 
completely filled with acetone in which the acetylene is dissolved under 
pressure At atmospheric pressure and temperature acetone will dissolve 
about 25 times its own volume of acetylene, and at 15 atmospheres this is 
increased to about 375 times its own volume It should be noted that 
acetylene cyhnders should never be discharged at a rate which will empty 
them in less than 5 hours as this will result m acetone coming out along with 
the gas The flame temperature will also come down If higher discharge 
rates are required, cylinders should be coupled together depending on the 
reqmrements, 

2? 



SP : 12 - 1975 



It should also be noted that an acetylene cylinder should always he 
stored and used in an upiiglit portion lo pievciil the < scape ol acetone uhen 
the gas is drawn off. 

3.3.2 Generated Acetylene — Aret-ylene genciators ran he divided nito 
two main types, namely, carbide-to-watei and Utiier-to-tailiidc Laii^e 
plants generally woik on the lii si system, and a tjpual sec lion ol sueli a 
generator is shown in Fig. 3. 1 ( see also Fig. 2 5 ) 



^r" 



CARBIDE DOOR 



CONVEYOR - 



CARBIDE HOPPER 




CONDENSER 



yjTO^GAS 

-IHholder 



Fig. 3.1 Typical Caui?ide-io-Watlr GfNERAioR 



The carbide, which is iisuallv spec ified by tlie maker of the E;enerator 
to pass a certain size mesh, i.s chaigcd into the taib/de hopper and led mto 
the lower chamber by some form ofeouveyoi at a late appiopriate to the 
requirement. The lower chamber ( oiitains a laige ijulk ol watei with which 
the carbide reacts. 

The smaller and poi table genet atois usually woik on tlie second 
system, in which the carbide is contained in a reseivoii sub-dividcd into a 
number of small compartments. Water controlled by a lloat valve is fed 
into the first compartment and the acetylene which is generated is collected 
in a gas bell which rises and thus cuts off the water supply. A section of such 
a generator is shown in Fig. 3.2 and it will be noted that the cat bide con- 
tainer is completely surrounded by water. This serves to absorb the heat 
generated by the reaction between the cat bide and the water and thus helps 



23 



SP 1 12.1975 

to keep the gas delivered cool and pure. As shown in Fig 3.2, carbide container 
should always be used half-full. 



RISING CAS 
BELL 



^a 



OUTLET PIPE- 



OAS COLLECTION 
PIPE. 



-FLOAT-ryPE 
WATER CONTROL 
VALVE 




■WATER SUPPiy 
PIPE TO CARBtOe 
CONTAINERS 



Fio. 3.2 Typical Water-to-Carhide Generator 



Acetylene from the generator sliould be drawn through a hydraulic 
back pressure valve. Figure 3.3 shows the an-angemcnt of a typical 
hydraulic valve. 



a A 



I5^c 



cfen 



^ 






FiO, 3.3 Hydraulic Back Pressure Valv» 
24 



SP: 12 -1975 

The gas fiom tlie generator after passing through a purifier enters the 
valve at A. The body ol llic valve is filled with wafer (o the level of the first 
water level cock B. When the blowpipe is fimclioning satisfactorily and the 
gas flowing normally tap C is opened and the gas passes direct from the entry 
pipe A through the bodv of the valve out through C. If lunvever, the nozzle 
of the blowpipe becomes obstructed or there is a backfire causing an increase 
in pressure in the acetylene hose that increase of pressure is communicated into 
the body of the valve thus foicing down ihe level of the water causing some of 
it to go up the entry pipe A, while the \'ent and filling pipe D is uncovered, 
allowing the results of any baikfiie to be exhausted to the atmospliere. As 
some water is displaced when a ba(kfiie occurs, the water level should be 
' topped up ' after a backfiie befoi e the valve is p\it into use again. The valve 
is no safeguard at all xmless it is piopeily filled with watei, and this should be 
attended to every morning as, apait honi bat kfiics, a water loss is sure to 
occur due to evaporation. The entry pipe A is usuall\ piovided with a valve 
and this should be sluil when the plant is not opciadiig. It must be shut 
also when the valve is being 'topped up' with water. 

3.4 Oxy-Acetylene Welding Outfits 

3.4.0 Generally o.Ky-aceUlenc outfit consists of ihe foUowitig: 
High Pressure Outfit ( see Fig. 3 4 ) Lmv Piessure Outjit ( see Fig. 3.5 ) 

a) Supply of oxygen ill ( ylindets. a) Sujjply of oxygen in cylinders. 

b) Supply of acetylene in cylinders. b) Supply of acetylene from gene- 

rating plants, 

c) Blowfpipe with nec{ ssary nozzles. c) Injector type blowpipes, with 

necessary welding heads complete. 

d) Oxygen pressure regulator. d) Oxygen pressure regulator. 

e) Acetylene pre.ssure regulator. e) Hydraulic back pressure valve. 

f) Two lengths of canvas-rubber f) Two lengths of canvas-rubber 
hose. hose. 

g) Set of spanners and spindle key. g) Set of spanners and spindle key. 

h) Welding goggles and spark lighter, h) Welding goggles and spark 

lighter. 

j) Welding rods. j) Welding rods, 

k) Welding fluxes. k) Welding fluxes, 

m) Trolley for accommodating com- 
plete equipment and cylinders. 

3.4.1 Welding Blowpipes — A welding blowpipe is of simple construction. 
It consists of the following: 

a) A handle with inlet connections for acetylene and oxygen and witl\ 
control valves to control the flow of gases, 

25 



SPtl2.l975 



OUTLET PRESSURE 
GAUGE 



CYLINDER 
PRESSURE GAUGE 



SAKETy VALVE 
VALVE 




INTERCHANGEABLE 
NOZZLE 



ACETYLENE 
CYLINDER 
(PMMED MAROON) 



OXYGEN 
CYLINDER 
(PAINTCD BLAtKl 



Fio. 3.4 High Prfssure Oxy-Acetylene Welding Outfit 

b) A device ( injector or mixer ) for mixing the gases m required pro- 
portions — • gases coming from the control valves get mixed in this 
device, and 

c) Neck fitted with nozzle — mixed gases pass through the neck, come 
out of the nozzle and are ignited to produce the flame 

There are two types of blowpipes {see also IS 7653-1975* ) — high 
pressure and low pressure The mam difference is that the low pressure 
blowpipe IS of the injector pattern while the high pressuie blowpipe is of the 
non-injector mixer pattern A low pressure blowpipe can be used with either a 
high pressure or a low pressure system, but the high pressure blowpipe can only be 
used with a high pressure system and must not under any circumstances be coupled to 
a low pressure system. 

The function of the injector in a low pressure blowpipe is to cause the 
oxygen passing through the blowpipe to suck a proportionate quantity of 

'Specification for manual blowpipes for welding and cutting. 



26 



SP 1 12.1975 




HVORAULIC SACK 
PRESSURE VALVE 



Fig. 3.5 Low Pressure Oxy-Acetylene Welding Outfit 



acetylene from the low pressure acetylene supply. In the case of high pressure 
blowpipe both gases arc supplied to the blowpipe from the pressure regulators 
at appropriate pressures. A mixer arrangement within the blowpipe 
ensures a thorougli mixing of the two gases before they arrive at the nozzle. 

In low pres^e system the size of the injector varies with the size of 
the nozzle. A ImV pressure blowpipe should, therefore, have a complete range 
of injector sizes corresponding to the range of nozzle sizes. In order to 
facilitate this and to avoid confusion, low pressure blowpipes are normally 
provided with a range of welding heads with nozzles on one and the 
corresponding injector at the other. The complete u elding head should be 
charged every time the flame size is dcsiied to be altered. In the case of high 
pressure blowpipes only nozzle oi tip, as it is sometimes called, is lequired to 
be charged. 

High or low pressure blowpipes are manufactured in a range of sizes 
to suit the various job requirements. A blowpipe when fitted with a parti- 
cular nozzle is required to be used at gas pressures recommended by the 
manufacturer. Pressure settings for oxygen and acetylene in case of high 
pressure blowpipe and oxygen in case of low pressure blowpipe should, there- 
fore, be made according to the recommendations of the manufacturers. 
In Fig. 3.6 has been shown the operating principles of high and low 
pressure blowpipes. 

27 



SP: 12 -1975 



-NfCK 



/. 



INJECTOR-' 

a) LOW PRESSURE BLOW PIPE 



=^ 



a— OXYGEN 
ftCEIVLEHE 




— OXVGEN 
■^ ACE T VLENE 



b) HIGH PRESSURE BLOW PIPE 



Fig. 3.6 Operating PRiNcirLE for J-ow and High Piie.ssure 

Blowpu'ES 



3.4.2 Pressure Regulators — Pressure rcgiilatdrs for oxygen and arctylene 
are similar in construction althongh the pressure control range will be 
different — acetylene being generally nsed at a considerably lower pressure 
than oxygen, i'he picssnre in a dissolved acetylene cylinder (16kgf/rm^ 
approx ) is generally one-eighth of the pressuie of the gas in an oxygen 
cylinder ( 136'4 kgf/cm- ). The principle of operation of a typical regulator 
is shown diagrammatically in Fig. 3.7. 




Fig. 3.7 Operating Principle of 
Automatic Pressure Regulator 



2R 



SP 1 12 ■ 1975 

High picssuie gas passes liom the conipiossod gas cyhnder outlet valve 
via the passage A to the vaKe //, which is connctud to the diaphragm 
C 'Jlic spring D can be compn sscd by tlic adjustiniJ sircw It The accu- 
mulation of gas prcssuic in the c lianib( i B tends to foue the valve on to its 
seat while piessuic on the spiiug D teivds to push the valve off the seat 
Therefore, the pressure of gas issuinir hoin ijie outlet connection J depends 
upon the pressure exerted by the spimg D in oidci lo overbalance the pres- 
sure on the /? side of the diaphiacjin, tlius causing the valve H to open corres- 
ponding to the (ompiession ol spnng D A stopjjage of gas at the outlet 
J, for instance, by shutting ofl the valve on the blowpipe causes pressure 
in the chambei B to accumulate until it ovcibalanccs the pressure exerted 
by the spnng D, thus closing the valve J J Tlie pressure of the gas m the 
compressed gas cylinder is leeordcd on gauge G and the working picssure 
on gauge F 

The diagi am shown in 1 ig 3 7 is si hcinaac only and shows the working 
principle of a ugulatoi Ihe mtdiial aiiangeinent of diflercnt type>^ of 
regulators will vaiy considciabl) {see also IS 69U1-1973* ) 

The legulatoi shown in Fig 3 7 lepitstnts what is known as single 
stage regulator Iheie is anothei type of ugulatoi called two-stage regu- 
lator which consists of two sets of diaphiagms, and piessure leduetion is 
affected in two stages The fiisl-sl.igc n dm lion is pre-sct by the regulator 
manufacturer and, thcrcioie, always lediucs to a ceilain non-variable pres- 
sure which passes iiom the fiist stage by a passage ic presented by the outlet 
connection J to the second stage, the pressure adjustnig seiew of which would 
be adjustable by the user in order to get the gas at the desii cd outlet pressure 
In comparison to single-stage regulator, a moic steady and accurate pressure 
control is obtainable from a two-stage rcgulatoi 

Besides regulators meant lor use on cylindeis, speeiai regulators are 
also available for use with piped supply ol gases As the pressure of the 
gases in the pipeline system is much lower than the compressed gas pressure 
m the cylinder, these regulatois arc designed to woik at lower inlet pressure. 

3.5 Assembly of Equipment 
3.5.1 High Pre'i^ure Equipment 

a) Stand both cylinders vertically Oxygen cylinders aie painted 
BLACK. Acetylene cylinders arc painted MAROON 

b) Care should be taken to see that all connections on the cyhnder 
valves and regulators are free from oil and grease 

c) Open the valve on oxygen cylinder mcjmentanly with a standard 
cyhnder key and then close This is called ' Smiting '. 1 his ope- 
ration IS necessary to dislodge any dirt or obstruction m the 
cylinder valve. 

♦Specification for pressure regulators for gas cylinders used in welding, cutting and 
related processes 

29 



8Pt 12-1975 

d) Repeat the same operation as in (c) for acetylene valve also. 

c) Connect oxygen regulator ( painted BLACK ) to the oxygen cylin- 
der valve remembering that the cylinder valve outlet and oxygen 
regulator connections have right-hand threads. 

f ) Acetylene regulator ( painted MAROON ) is then connected to the 

acetylene cylinder valve. The connections in this case have left- 
hand threads. 

Note — While tightening the regulator on to the cylinder valves the correct 
spanner supplied for this purpose should be used and no excessive force 
applied The joints must be tested with soap solution for gas-tightness. 

g) Connect the hoses, red hose for acetylene and black hose for oxygen, 
to regulator outlets using the correct spanner provided for this 
purpose without using undue force, but making sure that the joints 
are gas-tight. It should be remembered that oxygen connections 
are right-handed and acetylene connections are left-handed. 
Before attaching the hose to the regulator or blowpipe it should be 
blown for removing dust or dirt and to remove chalk when the hose 
is new. Oxygen shall not be used for this purpose. 

Connect the other ends of the two hoses to the blowpipe, the 
acetylene and oxygen hoses to their respective connections. 

Note — Before connecting the hoses to the regulator and the blowpipe, a hose 
connection consisting of a nut and nipple, is fitted to the end meant for con- 
nection to the regulator A hose clip of correct sue should be used to tighten 
this joint in order to make it leak-proof. The other end of the hose meant for 
connection to the blowpipe can also be fitted with nut and nipple connections, 
but it IS recommended that suitably designed backfire preventive devices are con- 
nected to this end. Such a device allows uninterrupted flow of gas from the 
hose to the blowpipe at the recommended working pressure, and also prevent 
the backflow from the blowpipe to the hose in case of backfire. Here again, a hose 
clip is used on the joint for making it leak-proof. Oxygen hoses are fitted with 
right-hand connection and nut and hose protector, whereas acetylene hoses are 
fitted with left-hand connection and nut and the nozzle of backfire protective 
device. 

h) Depending on the job requirement, appropriate size recommended 
by the manufacturer of blowpipe should be fitted to the blowpipe. 

j) Open the cylinder valves slowly using cylinder key giving a full 
one turn of the cylinder valve spindle. 

k) Open the oxygen control valve on the blowpipe and set the working 
pressure at the regulator by means of the pressure adjusting screw. 
The pressure setting should be according to recommendation of 
the manufacturer of the blowpipe. Close the oxygen control 
valve. 

m) Set the pressure for acetylene flow at the acetylene regulator in a 
similar manner. 

n) Test all connections for leaks with soap water. JVever test leaks 
with a lighted match. 

30 



8Pil2-ld75 

p) Open the acetylene control valve on the blowpipe, wait for a few 
seconds until the hoses are purged of all air and then light the gas 
mixture by means of a spark lighter. Never use match for lighting 
the gas. Reduce or increase the acetylene supply by means of the 
control valve on the blowpipe so that the flame just ceases to smoke. 

q) Turn on the oxygen by opening the blowpipe control valve and 
adjust it so that a neutral flame is obtained. 

The blowpipe is now adjusted for welding and work may be commenced. 
For certain jobs instead of a neutral flame, an oxydizing or a reducing flame 
may be required. For such jobs the flames should be correctly adjusted 
before the job is commenced. On completion of the job proceed as follows: 

a) Turn off the acetylene first by shutting the blowpipe control valve 
and then oxygen. 

b) Close the cylinder valves. 

c) To release the pressure in the hose, open oxygen valve and after 
the gas flows out, close it. Follow the same procedure for acety- 
lene valve also. 

d) After the pressure is released unscrew the pressure adjusting screws 
on the regulators. 

Note — In case of a backfire both oxygen and acetylene control valves on the blowpipe should be 
closed quickly — oxygen first and acetylene next. If necessary, pressure adjusting screws may be 
unscrewed and cyltnder valves closed remembering that this operation should be done quickly — oxygen 
first, acetylene next. 

Recommended operating conditions are provided by all manufacturers 
of blowpipes and these should be followed. Given below is a table showing 
the appropriate consumptions of gases for welding various steel thicknesses 
for a typical high pressure blowpipe: 



Mild Steel 


Approximate 


Mild Steel 


Approximate 


ate Thickness 


Consumption of 


Plate Thickness 


Consumption of 




Each Gas 




Each Gas 


mm 


1/h 


mm 


1/h 


0-80 


28 


6-3 


510 


J -25 


56 


8 


710 


1-6 


85 


10 


990 


2-5 


142 


12 


1 280 


3-15 


200 


20 


1 550 


4 


280 


25 


2 000 


5 


370 


Over 25 


2 550 



Note — A low pressure blowpipe can also be used with dissolved acetylene from 
cylinders. In this case the acetylene pressure should be set at about 0'14 kgf/cm'. 
Oxygen pressure should be as recommended by the maker of the blowpipe. 



31 



SPtl2.1975 

3.5.2 Low Pressure Equipment 

a) Make sure that the gracrator is charged with sufficient quantities 
of carbide and water. 

b) Fill the hydrauhr back pressure valve with water up to the desired 
level. 

c) Open the o.xygc ii cylinder valve momentarily and ' Snift ' it. 

d) Make sure that there is no oil and grease on the cylinder valves or 
regulator connections. 

e) Fit the r(-gulator on the oxyj^cn cylinder valve and attach a rubber 
hose lioin the regulator to the blowpipe as described in the case of 
high pressure equipment. 

f) Fit the hose from hydraulic valve to acetylene connection in the 

blowpipe. 

NorL - A l)l()vv|)i|]( 1(11 usLwilhaii atotylrnc generator should always be a low 
pussurc inn eioi tv|)i l)l()vs|)i|)i. High jncssure bloivpihc SHALL NOT BE used with 

an acetylene aoier ttor. 

g) Attach the injt-tloi licad of appropriate size to the blowpipe. Re- 
member that m case oflow-piessiire blowpipe the entire head com- 
prising of the injcctoi, the neck and the nozzle, is interchangeable. 

h) (-Hear the acetylem- system olT air by allowing acetylene from the 
generator to pass freely into llie atmosphere for several minutes. 
Where the generator is in an enclosed place, it is important that the 
discharge is outside the building in an open space away from flame, 
naked hghts, etc. 

j) Before opening the oxygen cylinder valve ascertain that the pressure 
regulating screw of the oxygen regulator is screwed full out, that is, 
to no pres-sure. Tlien open the cylinder valve slowly and adjust 
the regulating screw pressure in accordance with manufacturers' 
recommendations. 

k) Test all connections for leaks with soap water. 

m) Open the oxygen control valve on the blowpipe, then the acety- 
lene valve and ignite the gases with a spark lighter. Never use match 
sticks for the purpose. 

n) Adjust the flow of oxygen by means of the control valve to obtain 
the desired flame. 

Welding may now be commenced. On completion of the job proceed 
as follows*. 

a) Close the blowpipe acetylene control valve, then the oxygen valve. 

b) Close the oxygen cylinder valve, release pressure in hose by opening 
oxygen valve in the blowpi{}e, and unscrew the pressure regulating 
screw on the regulator. 

32 



SP : 12 - 1975 

c) Shut the outlet on the hydraulic back pressure valve and shut off 
the generator as instructed by the maker. 

The acetylene generators are normally automatic in action and do not 
need any shutting off when no further gas is required. 

3.5.3 Operating Conditions — The operating conditions for gas welding blow- 
pipes vary from manufacturer to manufacturer. Therefore, the data fur- 
nished by the manufacturer regarding nozzle sizes, working pressure, gas 
consumption, etc, for welding various thicknesses should always be strictly 
followed. 

3.5.4 The Cutting Blowpipe — A useful adjunct to any oxy-acetylene weld- 
ing plant is an oxy-acetylenc cutting blowpipe used for cutting steel and 
cast iron. Figuie 3.8 shows the operating principle of an oxygen cutter. 
A cutting blowpipe, like a welding blowpipe, utilizes oxygen and acetylene 
to produce heat but the heat is used to preheat the area adjacent to the line 
of cut. The nozzle is, therefore, so constructed as to obtain an annular 
flame. The cutting oxygen passes through an orifice in the centre of tlio 
nozzle. 



z 



OXYGEN 
ONLY 



■ CUTTING OXYGEN 
\ rONTROL 




MIXFD GASES 
FOR HFATING 
n AME 



•HEATING FLAME 
■ CUTTING OXYGEN 



^T> """" 



ACETYIENE 



Fig. 3.8 Operating Principll oI' OxY-AcE'rvi.r,NK Ciittino 

For oxygen cutting, besides acetylene, other fuel gases may also I:)c 
used. Liqucfiable petroleum gas, commonly known as LPG, is now avail- 
able in most of the places in India and is being increasingly used foi oxygen 
cutting. Cutting nozzles operating with LPG are different f^^). ■ the nozzles 
used with acetylene as fuel gas. 

3.5.5 Oxy-Acetylene Gouging Blowpipe — Oxy-acetylene gouging blowpipe 
resembles an ordinary cutting blowpipe but is provided with a nozzle which 
gives a low velocity central cutting jet. This jet can be used to remove 
defective welds in the preparation of plate edges for subsequent welding. 

3.5.6 Flame Cleaning Blowpipe — Oxy-acetylene flame cleaning blowpipe 
makes use of a high temperature brush like flame for descaling steel surfaces. 



33 



SP: 12 -1975 

3.5.7 Air-Acetylene Blowpipe -This cquipinpiU aliliouj^li not normally 
used for ucldiiig, is capabic ofpiodnnng an inteiiyl) hot (lame whu ii can 
be used foi soldt i int^, lead huining, hia/intr, etc I he an itecessarv for 
( oiTihnstion is ol)laincd 1)\ the iii)e(tor action of tli<' buruei Atet^lcne vs 
supplied Iroin a ( vlmdti usmq a icirulator in the usual mannei 

Air I>PG toidies are also being used for such applications as bia-iing, 
heating, oti 

3.5.8 Ox)gen-(Aillms, Machines — Owgen cutting nuuhuKS ate com- 
parable with inaflinie tools and aic capable ol niakiug high cjiialily i uts 
whu h olten lecpine no lut thei niadiniing 1 igiiic 3') lUustiales a j)oi table 
straight-hne (utliiig madmie wheie the tultd is mounttd on a luotoii/ed 
trat tor, thetiatloi usnallv moving on a tiack Sudi cutting machines are 
ad.iptable to automatu circle cutting also b) attaching a ladius bai A 
prohle c lit ting mac lune which c u*s intiu ate shc^pes is illusti ated m 1 ig '5 10 

3.5.9 Miscellaneous A((essorie<^ 1 he tollowinc: acccssoius aie noinially 
used with ox>-acetylenc eqiupmc nt 

a) Hose - Hosc^ are used for convening llu gas fiom (he cyhndeis and 
gc-neiatois to the blo\s[)ipe Iheieaie two spec ilic al ions lot weld- 
ing liosc s iiameh, IS r)72-10r)H'aiK] IS U7-l%«t Ihiec M/es 
ot lioses aie generally used 'i, i\ and 10 mm It is leconi- 
mendccl that hoses confoiming to Indian Standaid spec ideations 
aie used in connecting welding equipment 

b) //ore (lips —Use of clips is the safest wa\ ol fixing hoses to its 
connections It is dangeious to use wiie loi this puipose 1 wo 
si/es of hose clips aie geneiallv available, one- lo suit S nuu hose 
and the- othei for 8 and 10 mm hoses 

c) //off i onnectwns and \'ut I'oi coupling standaid lengths of hoses 
and for connecting hoses to icgulatois, suitable hose connections 
and nuts should be used Owgen nuts aie sctewcd right-handed 
and have plain facets, the .icet\lcne nuts ate sciewed left-handed 
and have notched facets Hose connections aie conveicd in 
IS ()01G- 19701 

d) Backfire Proteclue Device 'lliis is httcd at the- inlet connection of 
the blowpijx' This device is also kuouu as hose piotectoi, hose 
chec k valve, etc 

e) Spatineii and Spindle keys Regul.itoi sj)anner, spindle keys and 
out-fit spanneis should be as lecoininentlc-d bv the manufacturer 
for o\y-arelylene welding and cutting equipment 

•Spccifit.ition fot welding hose ol lublxr Willi bi.iickd tcxlilc reinforccmtnt [first rtvuwn ). 

tSpccification lor wc-lding hose of rubber with woven ttxUlc runforcemcnl [second 
revision ) 

J Specification for hose connections foi welding and cutting equipment. 

34 



SP : 12 - 1975 




1 l(j i ') ( U I I ING \I \( UlNh 




Fio. 3 10 Profile Cutting Machine 
35 



SP : 12 - 1975 



f ) Welders' Goggles — No welding or cutting operations shall be carried 
out without protecting the eyes with good quality goggles. The 
requirements for welders' goggles are specified in IS : 1179-1967*. 
The filters used in the goggles should be of good quality and pro- 
vide protection to the eyes against glare, injurious radiation or 
sparks oi hot particles of metals or a combination of these 
hazards. It is recommended that the goggles should conform to 
IS: 1179-1967* fitted wilh filters conforming to IS : 5983- 197 If. 
Shades 3, 4a, 5 and 5a are recommended for light gas cutting and 
wcldmg, while shades 6, 6a, and 7 are suitable for medium to 
heavy gas cutting mtludmg scraping and welding. 

g) Gloves — Use of leather gloves durmg welding is recommended for 
protecting wcldois' hands from heat and radiation. IS : 2573-1963J 
covets the requiiements of leather gloves for welders. 

h) Apron — Recommended for protection of the operator from heat, 
Hying sparks, molten metal, etc, during welding and cutting. 

j) Wne Drmh — Wire brush is a u'^eful accessory for cleaning the welds. 

k) Cylinder Trolley — Use of a suitably designed cylinder trolly is 
iccommcndcd for easy movement of cylinders and tools to the work 
site. It should be constructed to withstand hard wear and should 
accommodate one oxygen and one acetylene cylinder. 

m) Spark Lighter — Spark lightei is a safe and convenient tool for 
lighting an ox} -acetylene flame. 



•Specification for equipment for eye and face protection during welding {first revision ). 
fSpecification for piotectivc filters for welding, cutting and similar operations, 
{Specification for leather gauntlets for welders 

36 



IS : 12 - 1975 

SECTION 4 
SAFETY IN WELDING 



4.1 General 



In any sphcio ol" activily, it is necessary to know and inidcrstand thr 
sources of danger to oniurc safety. In welding and allied piocesscs there arc 
( ertain easily defined sources of danger which should be constantly borne 
in mind. 

In gas welding and cutting processes, combustible gas like acctylcnr, 
is used for obtaining high temperature fiame. Acetylene is obtamed commer- 
cially cither from cylinders in which gas is compressed and dissolved in 
acetone, or in generators on the spot by llie reaction of water on calcium 
carbide. 

The person liandhng the gas cyhnders, gas gcneialors and blowpipes 
should be completely familiar with the coned piotediiies lor handling the 
equipment safely Some of the essential precautions to be taken in the use 
of these equipments are given in the following paragraphs. Reference may 
be made to IS : 818-1968* for detailed rules and regulations. 

4.2 Storage and Handling of Gas Cylinders 
4.2.1 Storage of Cylinders 

4.2.1.1 All cylinders used foi storage and filling of (omi)rcsscd gases 
shall be constiuctcd and maintained in accordance with the requirements 
specified in the Gas Cylinder Rules, 19i0, issued by the Government of 
India. 

4.2.1.2 Compressed gas c^lindeis shall be painted as specified in 
IS : 4379-1967t. The following coloiir code for the more commonly used 
gases arc as follows: 

Gat Colour Coding According 

to IS: 4319-1967\ 

Oxygen Black 

Dissolved acetylene Maroon 

Hydrogen Red 

Coal gas Red 

Liquefiable petroleum gas Red 



*Code of practice for safety and health requirements in electric and gas welding and 
cutting operations {first revision ). 

fldentification of the contents of industrial gas cylinders. 

37 



SP » 12 - 1975 

These cylinders shall not be repainted with any other colour than 
those specified above cithci by the ustrs or the manufacturers 

4.2.1.3 'lo avoid intcrrhangeabihty of cylindet fittings, and the corres- 
ponding equipment, the screw threads used on combustible gas cylinders are 
left-handed and those on non-combustible gas cyhnders arc right-handed. 

4.2.1.4 The place used foi storing of gas cylinders shall be well ventilated 
and the cylinders shall be pi otet t( d from direct exposure from extreme cold 
or heat, frost, diiect sun's rays, space heaters, etc 

4.2.1.5 Gas cylinders should not be stored on wet soil to prevent rusting 

4.2.1.6 Empty cylinders should be marked 'empty' or ' MT ' and 
segregated from full cylinders They should be icturncd to the supplier 
with valve protection ( aps in place All vaKes should be closed 

4.2.1.7 In stoi ing or in use, dissolved acetvlene cyhnders should 
always be kept upright ( the vaKe pointing .upu aids ) 

4.2.1.8 Oxygen cylindeis ma\ be sloicd hoii7ontally but the stock 
should not be inoic than foui high 

4.2.2 Handling of Cyhnders 

4.2.2.1 If cylindei s ai e accidentallv exposed to heat the gas content will 
increase in pressuic and dangeious (ondition ina\ aiisc Foi safety, there- 
fore, cyliiidt is should be kept a\sa\ fiom soMKcs of lieat such as furnace, 
stoves, boilets, radiatois and also away fiom combustible material and 
blowpipe flames 

4.2.2.2 Oil or grease should not be used with any gas cylinder or equip- 
ment fittings used foi s^as welding or cutting operations Oil or grease 
ignites violentK in the piesence of oxygen, and vvhcn the gas is under pres- 
sure, an explosion may occui 

4.2.2.3 Dirt, gut and loose soil should not be allowed to enter the 
cylinder valves 

4.2.2.4 In case of a tight fitting equipment, tlie lyhnder valve should 
not b( lubricaled with oil oi giease A little soap solution ( free from oil or 
g[rease ) in water may solve the problem 

4.2.2.5 Cylindeis should not be allowed to drop from a height or Collide 
violently with each other In ferrying cylindeis across the shop floor, magnetic 
chuck ( rancs should not be used A better method is to use a cradle or a 
propel ly fitted rope sling 

4.2.2.6 Oxygen has no smell and it supports combustion Clothing 
soaked m oil or grease will c att h fite even fiom sparks and should this come in 
contact with oxygen, the seventy of the combustion will mtensify. 

3£| 



SP: 12. 1975 

Dissolved acetylene and liquefiable petroleum gas have their charac- 
teristic smells and will ignite even Irom a spark 

4.2.2.7 In the event of a dissolved acetylene cyhnder catching fire, 
the fbllowmg safety measures should be taken 

a) Shut valve, detach regulatoi or other fitting, take cyhnder out of 
door into open space immediately 

b) Immerse the cylinder in water or "-pray water continuously on the 
cylinder and simultaneously open the lylinder valve spindle and 
let the fire die out, and 

c) Inform supplier immediately 

4.2.2.8 The cylindci valve spindles of all gas cylinders should be opened 
slowly 

4.3 Handling of Acetylene Generators 

4.3.1 Acetylene generators propeily designed and incorporating all 
safety devices should be used ( foi fui thci details, see Section J ) 

4.3.2 Large size stationary geneiatois should be housed in well- 
ventilated generator houses constructed of non-combustible material 
Generator house shall be open to authorized persons only 

4.3.3 Installations ofgcnciatois inside buildings shall be restricted to build- 
ings not exceeding one stoicy in height and they shall be enclosed in a sepa- 
rate room of suitable sue One wall of an inside generator loom shall be 
an exterior wall 

4.3.4 Portable acetylene genera' ors should be used, cleaned, and re- 
charged in a well-ventilatcd place and away fiom naked flame, fire or 
combustible material 

4.3.5 When lecharging or cleaning generators of the 'dipping type' 
( carbidc-to-water type ), the basket should always be cleaned and fitted with 
new carbide A partially spent charge should not, in any circumstances, 
be replaced in the geneiator 

4.3.6 When removing pieces of caibide which may have become wedged 
m the feed mechanism of ' < arbide-to- water ' type generator, the creation of 
spark by rough handhng should always be avoided Wooden instrument 
should preferably be used to dislodge the pieces 

4.3.7 Acetylene generators should be periodically checked by competent 
people 

4.3.8 Before any repair work is undertaken, it should be made certain that 
the generator is completely free of gas and the whole generator should be 
filled up with water to drive the gas out 

39 



SP: 12-1975 

4.3.9 Only approved amount of carbide should be used in the hopper/ 
basket ol the generator. Excess charge should be avoided. 

4.3.10 Hydraulic bac k pressure valves or non-i cturn valves of the approv- 
ed types shall be only used in the line between the generator and welding 
points. 

4.3.11 'llic ualei level of the hydraulic back pressure valve should be 
rlicckcd daily and topped up. The valve sliould be overhauled periodically. 

4.4 Storing of Calciam Carbide 

4.4.1 I'he storage of calcuim carbide exceeding 12"7 kg by weight is 
governed by: 

a) The Carbide of Calcium Rules, 1937; and 

b) The Petroleum and Carbide of Calcium Manual, 1950. 

Rcfcicncc should be made to these publications before arranging to 
stoic bulk ciuantitics of calcium carbide. 

4.5 Use of Gas Welding and Cutting Equipment 

4.5.1 Equipment for use with any one type of gas should not be used with 
oilier gases. All eciuipment intended for use on combustible gases arc fitted 
with left-hand screw connections. That, however, does not moan that a 
regulator meant for use on hydrogen may be used on dissolved acetylene 
as hydrogen is stored in cylinder at a much higher pressure than that of 
dissolved acetylene. 

4.5.2 The canvas and rubber hose used with welding and cutting equip- 
ment shall be of the approved standard and colour ( see IS : 41-7-19b8* and 
IS : 3572-1968f ). The practice is to use black colour hose pipe for oxygen 
and compressed air, and red colour hose for fuel combustible gases. 

4.5.3 A blowpipe of the injector type intended for use with low pressure 
shall not be used in connection with high pressure acetylene unless a suitable 
control valve is fitted. A blowpipe of the non-injector type intended for 
use with high pressure shall not be used with low pressure acetylene. 

4.5.4 All blowpipes and other apparatus shall be dismantled and cleaned 
internally at regular intervals, preferably by the makers. The apparatus 
shall be itiaintained in proper working order. 

4.5.5 Accumulation of slag on the blowpipe tip shall be frequently remov- 
ed. No attempt should be made to alter or clean the blowpipe tip by a 
hard metal reamer; only hard wood sticks or soft brass wire shall be used for 
this purpose. 

♦Specification for welding hose of rubber with woven textile reinforcement ( second 
rei islon ) . 

fSpccihcation for welding hose of rubber with braided textile reinforcement (first revision ), 

40 



SP 1 12 -1975 

4.5.6 Gas cylinders should never br used as work support nor should the 
welding blowpipe flame be allowed to rome m contact \vith the cylinders. 
A lighted blowpipe shall not be suspended from the cylinder neck. 

4.5.7 All equipment should be operated with the correct pressures of 
gases and the regulators should be capable of giving the required flow. 

4.5.8 All welding and cutting equipment should be maintained in clean 
and satisfactory operatmg condition and all thicaded connections should 
be kept tight. Leak in any component should be immediately checked and 
remedied. 

4.5.9 Unquahficd and unauthorized persons should not attempt to 
repair any welding and cutting equipment. 

4.5.10 If coal-gas is used, the delivery line should be fitted with a recom- 
mended type of non-return valve. 

4.6 Use of Gas Welding and Cutting Accessories 

4.6.1 'I'he welding hose in use should be ftequenlly chec ked to detect any 
leak, sharp i ut, etc 

4.6.2 Hose pipes should be fumly atiarliod to the equipment with iccom- 
mended type ot hose t lips 

4.6.3 I'o attach the hose pipes on to the equipment, use should be made of 
correct typo of hose fittings. 

4.6.4 The lengths of hose pipes in use for ox>gen and fuel gas should be 
equal and the excess length should not be ( oiled round the gas cylinders 
in use. 

4.6.5 It is dangerous to use high copper ( about 70 percent ) alloy for 
fittings coming in contact with acetylene gas. 

4.6.6 Recommended type of cylinder and spindle key should be used. 
While opening the cylinder spindle, excess leverage should be avoided. 

4.7 Protection of Eyes 

4.7.1 Goggles with lenses of approved tint should be worn to protect the 
eyes from sparks and avoid eye strain 'i'he recommended type of lenses 
are those that conform to IS- 5983-1971*. The goggles should conform 
to IS : 1179-1967t and the frame should be of the closed type. The filter 
lenses should be protected from flying sparks by suitable plain glasses. When 
spoilt, the plain glasses should be replaced. 

♦Specification for protective filters for welding, cutting and similar operations. 
fSpecification for equipment for eye and face protection during welding [first revision ). 

41 



SPtl2-1975 

4.7.2 The goggle frame should be manufactured from a material or 
materials which do not cause irritation to the skin of the operator. 

4.8 Ventilation — Ample means of thorough ventilation should be con- 
stantly maintained in welding and cutting shops. Special care should be 
taken to force ventilate a confined space where gas welding and cutting is 
being done. Further, reference should be made to the Factories Act, 1948 
for detailed information on ventilation. 

4.9 Protection of Clothing 

4.9.1 The clothing worn by a welder should be such that it will give him 
protection from hot metal and flying sparks. The clothing should have as 
few pockets as possibles as sparks, hot metal particles, etc, may get lodged in 
these and cause burns. It is preferable not to roll up sleeves, 

4.9.2 It is preferable to use shoes instead of open type footwear. 

4.9.3 Except for light welding work, all welders should use protective 
leather gloves. For heavy welding and welding inside surface, the welder 
should use flameproof asbestos gloves. 

4.9.4 Where there is danger of falling objects, the operator should use 
protective shockproof helmet. 

4.10 Prevention of Fire 

4.10.1 Sparks from welding and particularly from cutting can travel 
a long distance. It is, therefore, recommended that such work should be 
carried out away from flammable materials. ( Reference may be made to 
IS: 3016-1965*. ) 

4.10.2 Wooden floors are source of danger, and should be avoided. If 
unavoidable, these floors should be covered by sheet metal. 

4.10.3 Fire extinguishers and sand should be kept ready. In case of 
emergency, water may be sprayed to flood the place. 

4.10.4 Should it be necessary to carry out welding or cutting operations 
in the vicinity of existing wooden structures, special precautions should be 
taken to protect such a structure. 

4.10.5 Cutting and welding should not be done in a place which is in 
proximity of a room or store containing flammable vapours, liquid, dust, 
etc. 

4.10.6 Welding should not be carried out in or around a painting 
installation. 

4.10.7 Gas cylinders should not be allowed to come in contact with 
electric cables and electrical conductors. 



*Code of practice for iire precautioni in welding and cutting operatioi^, 

4? 



SP>12 1975 

4.11 Working on Staging, Scaffolding, etc 

4.11.1 If it is necessary to work on stagings, scaffoldings, etc, adequate 
protection should be taken to prevent the operator from falling. 

4.11.2 The operator should be provided with a life line or a safety belt. 

4.11.3 Hand rail or rope line should be provided around the staging. 

4.11.4 The space below the operation limits should be adequately fenced 
off and a note of warning should be displayed. 

4.11.5 Gas cylinders in use or .stored on site should be protected from 
flying sparks and falling hot metal. 

4.12 Welding Tanks or Vessels 

4.12.1 No attempt should be made to preheat or weld jacketed vessels, 
tanks or containcis or cored or hollow parts unless all precautions have 
been taken to remove the confined air or residual gas. 

4.12.2 A hollow vessel should first be drilled ( for ventilation ) before 
attempting to weld, otherwise the vessel may behave like an explosive object. 

4.12.3 Any container used for storing volatile or flammable material 
should be thoroughly degassed before attempting to weld. 

4.12.4 Empty containers of naminabic mateiial should not be used as 
job support. 

4.12.5 A working notic o should be displayed at the spot where this type 
of welding is being cariied out. 

4.13 Welding Inside a Boiler 

4.13.1 In welding inside a boiler where the space is confined, the gas 
cylinders should be kept oiit.side, and the hose pipes in use should be pro- 
perly checked for any cut or leak. Forced ventilation should be maintained 
for the operator by the use of an cxhatist/circulatingfan; under no circum- 
stances oxgyen should be used for this purpose. A bucket of water should 
be kept ready at hand for any emeigencv. In case of fire, the fire extingui- 
sher used should be of the non-corrosive type and it should not give out toxic 
fumes. 

4.13.2 A helper should be in attendance outside the boiler to render all 
assistance to the welder. 

4.14 Working on Painted Surfaces 

4.14.1 When burning of paint, prior to welding or cutting operation on 
painted surfaces, the operator ■■hould use a recommended inhalation mask. 
Similarly precaution shall be taken when working on galvanized parts. 

4.14.2 Should nausea overpower the operator, he can get relief by drink- 
ing milk or light beverage. 

43 



SP: 12 -1975 

SECTION 5 
WELDING METALLURGY 

5.1 General 

Welding, while being the most versatile and adaptable of all joining 
methods, is a highly specialized process, requiring both skill and a thorough 
knowledge of the icchnicalitics involved on the part of the welder. 

CTrncrally in all welding processes, external heat energy in some form 
or other is applied to raise both the joining faces and filler metal to the point 
of fusion or incipient fusion before the welding can take place. Therefore, 
the physical and metallurgical changes which take place in any metal or 
alloy when it is heated to the fusion point and allowed to cool from there, 
assumes great importance in the welding process. 

A wfldcis' ability to produce a good sound weld will depend on his 
basic metallurgical knowledge regarding the behaviour and properties of 
methods and alloys when they arc subjected to any particular thermal 
cycle. 

It is intended in this section to discu.ss briefly the basic metallurgical 
principles involved in welding specially with icgard to gas welding which 
covers a very vast field of metal joining processes involving a great number 
of metals and alloys. 

5.2 Classification of Materials 

As illustrated in Fig. 5.1, engineering materials may be classified into 
two basic groups: 

a) Metallic, and 

b) Non-metallic. 

Metallic materials may again be divided into two groups — ferrous and 
non-ferrous, as shown in Fig. 5.1. 

5.2.1 Ferrous Materials — These have iron as their base. Examples are 
cast iron, wrought iron, mild steel, carbon steel, alloy steel, etc. 

All ferrous materials, with the exception of wrought iron, are derived 
from pig iron which is the raw material obtained by the reduction of iron 
ore in the blast furnace. These are essentially alloys of iron and carbon con- 
taining manganese, silicon, etc, and incidental impurities such as sulphur, 
phosphorus, etc. All these have a direct bearing on the physical properties 
of the metal and also affect their weldability. 

Alloys of iron and carbon containing up to 1 8 percent carbon are gene- 
rally known as steels and those which contain more than 1 "8 percent carbon 
arc generally known as cast iron. There is, however, no clear cut line of 
demarcation between these two. 

44 



SP: 12 -1975 



.2 



.s 

o 

V 

a 

"So 

c 

a 



3 

a, 



-a 



■5i 
c 

o cu 

^ c 
o 

Xi 
u 



o 

3 






V 



3 

O 

_ >" - 

u 

(14 



c« 



u 

r; o " 
I— W)^ "" 

ffi -2 .3 



> O V 
O — O 



-■- O -71 



flj 2 *-* 






c 

Rl 

"J3 






a 
o 

*•* 

bO 

3 
O 



-0 

V 



o 






u 
- u - 

o 



(« 

•a 

1) 
a, 



.J 

M 
H 

■< 

O 

s 

M 
M 

2 

o 
z 

b 

o 

z 

o 

H 
■< 

u 



< 
U 






U3 

-a 



45 



SP J 12 - 1»75 

Steels used in industries may be divided into two groups, namely, 
plain carbon steels and alloys steels The properties of carbon steels depend 
essentially on their carbon content while m the c^isc of alloy steels the pro- 
perties depend both on the carbon percent and aKr> Uii presence and amount 
of one or more alloying elements such as nickel, rhiomium, molybdenum, 
vanadium, tungsten, etc, and the presence of increased percentages of 
manganese or silicon 

In steels, the presence of allowing elements in small quantities improves 
in general their mechanical properties such as strength, toughness, hardness, 
etc Certain special properties such as resistance to heat, corrosion, shock 
or wear may be conferred on steels b> the addition of suitalile alloying ele- 
ments in sufTiciently large quantities The allo^ steels, therefore, are 
further divided into 

a) low alloy steels which contain alloymg elements, m small amounts 
to improve their gcneial mechanical propcitics, and 

b) high alloy steels oi special alloy stc-els which contain suitable 
alloying elements m laige quantities to impart tcitain special 
properties to the steels to foim austcmlic, corrosion and heat- 
resisting steels, high spc-c d cutting steels, aii-haidening steels, etc 

5.2.2 Non-Ferrous Materials ~ These are metals, otlu r than iron based but 
iron may be present as an incidental impui ity oi minor alloving c onstitucnt 

Non-ferrous metals are varied in nature and the behaviour and pro- 
perties of non-ferrous metals are mostly different from one another 
Generally, the non-ferrous metals as well as their alloys are classified 
according to the base metal, such as 

a) Copper and copper-base alloys, for example, brass and bronze, 

b) Aluminium and aluminium-basc alloys, for example, sihcon- 
alumimum, duralumin, etc, 

c) Nickel and nickel base-alloys, for example, monel, 

d) Other non-ferrous metals and alloys, for example, magnesium, 
silver, etc, and their alloys 

5.3 Identification of Metals — It is essential for the welder to be familiar 
with some rough and ready method ol identifying metals in order to dis- 
tinguish one from another There are various methods amongst which the 
spark test is most useful in the workshop The spark test is done by holding 
tightly a sample of metal on a grinding wheel and then obiciving the shape, 
colour and length of the streaks and spai ks produced ( see t ig 5 2) 

5.4 Metallurgy of Steel — In order to understand the metallurgy of weld- 
ing, a welder should have at least the basic knowledge of the following 

a) The changes that occur in the structure of pure iron with rise in 
temperature; 

b) The effect of addition of carbon on the structural changes that 
occur in iron with rise in temperature; 

46 



WROUGHT 
IRON 



SP: 12 -1975 



Long Yellow Streak$ Broadening to a Leaf, Some Distance from 
ttie Grinding Wiieei 




MILD 
STEEL 



MEDIUM 

CARBON 

STEEL 



HIGH 

CARBON 

STEEL 



MANGANESE 
STEEL 



HIGH 
SPEED 
STEEL 



STAINLESS 
STEEL 







The Leaf is Smaller and Gives Rise to a Number of Sparks, Some 
Sparks are Shorter 




Very Small Leaf, Larger Sparks Nearer the Grinding Wheel 




Streaks Lest Bright, Profusion of Sparks Starting ver/ Close to 
the Grinding Wheel, Complete Absence of Leaf 




The Streaks Fork Before Forming Sparks 



Faint Red Streaks Terminating in a Fork 



CAST 
IRON 



MONEL 
METAL 



Bright Yellow Streaks Terminating in Pointed Ends 



Faint Red Streaks Terminating In Complex Bushy Sparks, Yellow 
in Colour 




Faint Red Streaks Quickly Tailing Off 
Fio. 5.2 Spark Test for Identification of Metals 

47 



SP { 12 - 1975 

c) The changes that occur in the structure and constitution of iron- 
carbon alloys: 

1) with rise in temperature, and 

2) with diflferent rates of cooling from temperature as met with 
during welding; 

d) The mechanical properties of steels that have been cooled at 
different rates from temperatures as met with during wclding;/and 

e) The effect of increase in carbon content on the mechanical proper- 

ties of steels that are cooled very rapidly from high temperatures 
as met with during welding. 

The above facts will be dealt with in an elementary way in the 
subsequent paragraphs. 

5.4.1 Iron in its pure form as steel is basically an aggregate of sn\all 
crystals which are oriented in a particular structure according to the tem- 
perature and constituents in the steel. I'he crystallographic structure of 
iron that exists in the room temperature is called a-iron. a-iron is also known 
as ' ferrite '. When the iron is heated from room temperature to higher 
temperature a transformation in the cystallog^aphic structure takes place at 
QIO^C. The iron in new crystallographic form is known asy-iron. a-iron 
contains very little quantity of carbon in solution ( 025 percent, Max ) 
while Y-iron can take up to 1'7 percent carbon in its crystal structure. Any 
carbon in excess of the solubility limit in steel for that particular structure 
and temperature is rejected from solution and forms a compound with 
iron, FcaC, which is known as ' cementite '. 

5.4.2 The effect of addition of carbon in iron up to 0"83 percent is to lower 
its transformation temperature from giCC to 723°C. When the steel con- 
tains more than 0'83 percent carbon the a-iron transforms to y-iron 
on heating above 723°C and y-iron again comes back to a-iron stage when 
(Cooled below 723'C ( see Fig. 5.3 ). 




Fio. 5.3 Pearlite 
48 



SP : 12 - 1975 

5.4.3 If a plain carbon steel of 0'4 percent carbon is seen under a 
microscope after proper preparation, the structure will consist of ferrite 
( a-iron ) and alternate lamelac of ferrite and cementitc known as pearlitc 
( see Fig. 5.4 ) . As the carbon percentage in the steel goes up the total 
amount of pcarlite will increase. A steel containing 0'83 percent carbon 
will give a fully pearlitic structure. In all plain carbon steels when heated 
the a-iron changes to y-form at the transformation temperature. As y-iion 
dissolves carbon up to 1'7 percent, any carbon percent in iron below 
r7 percent will go into solution above transformation temperature. This 
solid solution of carbon in y-iron is called ' austenite'. 

Now during cooling austoniu- transforms back to ferrite and pcarlite 
at transformation icmpcratuic. As already meutioacd ferrite contains 
very little caibon. Mo^l of tlie carbon present in ihe Y-'r''" solution will, 
therefore, form iron cailjidc and in the microstrutlure both fcriitc as well 
as pearlite will be visible depending upon the percentage of carbon present. 




FlO. 5.1- FhRRITE AND PeaRLITL 



5.4.4 When the austenite is cooled at increasing rates, the alternate 
layers of ferrite and cemeutilc constituting the pcarlite become finer aiid 
finer. The eflTect of this is to increase the hardness and strength of the steel so 
treated. When the cooling rate exceeds a particular value, a new stiiiclure 
entirely different from fine pearlitc results. It is called ' martensite ' ( see 
Fig. 5.5 ) and is the hardest constituent of steel and is very brittle. 

5.4.5 As the carbon content in steel increases, a lesser rate of cooling is 
adequate to produce the hard martcnsitic constituent. In other words 
the tendency for the steel to become hard and brittle for a given rate of 

49 



SP: 12- 1975 




Fig. 5.5 Martensite 

cooling increases with the carbon content. Ordinary structural mild steel has 
sufficiently low carbon to prevent hardening under any condition of cooling. 
But, the medium and high carbon steels contain enough carbon to render the 
parent material extremely hard and brittle when cooled from welding tem- 
perature at ordinary rates of cooling as met with in practice. Under tlie 
usual conditions in welding shop, the rate of ctKiling is not only dependent 
on the difTerence in temperature between welding temperature and the room 
temperature, but also on the mass of the parent metal which conducts the 
heat away from the weld metal and the heat affected parent metal. So in 
the thicker sections the rate of cooling is high, that is, the tendency for the 
formation of hard constituent is increased. 

5.5 Weldability — Weldability is a combined property of parent metal 
and filler metal. It may be defined as the capacity to produce a crack-lrce 
and mechanically satisfactory joint. In other words, it is the capacity of 
a metal to be welded under fabrication condition imposed into a specific 
suitably designed structure and to perform satisfactorily the intended service. 
Thus a metal should have good weldability in order to produce a sound and 
satisfactory joint. Weldability of a metal or alloy is determined by its chemi- 
cal composition, mechancial properties and effect of welding on mechanical 
and/or chemical properties. 

5.6 Welding of Steels 

5.6.1 Low Carbon Steels — Steels with low carbon content normally from 
008 to 0'3 percent constitute the major portion of the st(;els that are produced 
in the industry. Most steels that are rolled into plates, bars and sections come 
under this group. Normally preheating of the parent mt;tal is not required 
in the case of steel containing less than 0"15 percent catboti and if the section 
is not very heavy. 

The low carbon steel having carbon percentage near the upper limit 
if cooled rapidly will give hard and less ductile martensite but the slow cooling 

50 



SP 1 12 . 1975 

of the plate or the weld deposit will give reasonably ductile, tough property 
in the welding zone. Oxy-acetylene process, however, for all practical pur- 
poses will be used in thin sections. 

5.6.2 Medium Carbon Steels — Medium carbon steel normally contains 
03 to 06 percent carbon. These are readily hardened when heated to above 
transformation temperature and allowed to cool rapidly. Thus it forms a 
hard and brittle hard /one nc\t to the weld metal when cooled rapidly. The 
heat affected zone may develop crack under restraint. Preheating to about 
180 to 350" C of the pLites or parts to be welded is normally advisable and 
this produces crack free sound joints. The possibility of caibon pick up by 
the weld metal during welding of uK^duun caibon steel is quite consider- 
able as the filler rod noimally contains very little carbon. Tiiorcrorc, there 
is always a tendency of carbon pick particularly when the wcldment is 
cooled rapidly protUu ing a haul and biittle weld deposit. This may also 
lead to a ciack along the liar of iiuixiiiium sticss, that is, centre line of the 
weld. 

In medium-caibon steel it is possible to keep the molten metal more 
fluid at the .same temperature than in low carbon steel tjius rendering the 
opeiator to maintain the weidiiig temperature far above the solidus hue 
to obtain a sullicient fluid puddle for rapid deposition and tree evolution 
of gas. 

Sometimes romplicaled paits, wlicii welded) develop residual stresses 
due to differential contractions. In siirh cases it is desn-able to have a stress- 
relieving f)pcrati()u at about ((00 '(I. 'I'lie duiation of the operation will 
depend on llie thickness of the set lion. 

5.6.3 JJigh Carbon Slid — High carbon steels contain carbon from 06 to 
1'2 pel cent. Welding of high carbon steels by gas welding is a complicated 
process bee ause the cai bon content of the parent metal is very much higher 
than tlic carbon content in filler material. There is alwa>s a differential 
coohng rate in molten parent metal and molten filler material leading to 
crack in the weld junction. Normally a i:)ressure is applied in the weld 
metal pool during welding which gives a kneeding action leading to 
a granular refinement in the welding zone. The parent metal is normally 
preheated to 350 'CI to avoid cracking and final stress-relieving of the wcld- 
ment is done at 600°C. The heat treatment at this temperature helps stress- 
relieving as well as grain refinement. Because of the high temperature of 
welding the welded zone is always liable to be coarse grained. 

5.6.4 Low Alloy Steels — Low alloy steels are very large in number and_ 
vary in their alloy composition depending upon the properties expected 
of them. The pui pose for which one particular low alloy steel used is quite 
different from the purpose of other type. I'he difficulties that are met with 
in welding of low alloy steels are practically similar to those encountered 
while welding medium or high carbon steels. The effect of the addition 

51 



SP : 12 - 1975 

of diffetcnt alloying elements may be considered as equivalent to increasing 
the carbon content in so far as its behaviour while cooling from the welding 
temperature to the room temperature, that is, the susceptibility to cracking 
in the heat afTcclcd zone of the parent metal, under bead ciarkiug and 
hardening of vvcld metal due to alloy pick up fiom the parent metal. One 
or more of the following precautions as may be neressaiy, should be taken 
when welding low alloy .steels: 

a) I'leheatmg of the parts to decrease the cooling rate alter wekhng 
to iTiiniini/e the amount ot marlensite and prevent 1 he ci.uking in 
the heat allt'cled zone; 

b) K('('|)intr llie weld metal pool lo a minimum extent so lliat the .id- 
rmxtuic of parent melal and filler metal is kept at a nnnimum level; 

c) All the precautions for the control of distoition should Ijc taken so 
that weld is sul)jerkd to as few sti esses as possible during ( oo|jn!>, 
and 

d) A prolonged tmie ol cooling between -lOO to 200 C will im identall) 
help in relieving the icsidual stresses" and in inipiovmg the iiic( lia- 
uiial piopeities ol tlu; weld zoik" by teinpeiing the iiiai Iciisite 
foiiiied, il any, during cooling. 

5.6.5 Ihs^h Allnv Steels The high alloy steels aie also known as special 
steels. TIk se ate noinially welded by using the fillei lod of same < heinical 
compo'.ition. '1 hough a satisfactory weld deposit is never obtained by gas 
welding ol high alloy steels all the special steels are not weldable. 'J Jie 
main stech in the weldable group arc auslcnitic manganese steels and stain- 
less steels. Even then gas welding of austenitic manganese steels is not a 
recommended process. In the case of stainless steels a (lux is used to prevent 
the formation of oxides of the alloying element and the weld metal pool 
is disturbed by putting the filler rod on the joint instead of the filler rod end 
in the molten pool. 

5.7 Grey Cast Iron — Cast iron is not usually joined by welding except for 
repair purposes. The earbon content in most cast iron castings ranges from 
2'.'30 to 3'70 percent although a few varieties of high strength, may have hllle 
less than 2"j percent. The silicon percentage varies between OSO to 3 
percent. The filler rod used for cast iron is also cast iron having about 3'0 
percent silicon which on melting in the weld metal pool in the presence of 
ilux give an increased fluidity thus preventing the formation of blow holes. 

All the cast iron parts to be welded are preheated before welding. The 
process of preheating is based on the idea of getting softer weld deposrt as 
well as preventing the weld junction crack. The buttering technique is 
also very much in use in cast iron welding. 

In another process known as braze welding a bond is produced by 
intcr-granular penetration of filler metal in the grain boundaries of cast iron. 
The filler rod used is a copper base alloy. The weld made with braze-welding 

52 



SP: 12 -1975 

IS just as strong as fuiion \N<-ldin^ and the wdd metal is iiioic ductile 
The gicalest advantage of bra/i;i -wcldiiiR is tliat pulKalmE; is not very 
ncccssaiy and the preheating tctnpdaturc dots not uoimtlK ( x( ei d l()0°t\ 

5.8 Malleable Iron —Wilding is used to i(])aii ilicdddtivi malleable 
iron castings I usion welding (like gas ueldrng^i rs nol a siiitaijle j^roeess 
because the molten cast iion on solidification losis the malleable property 
and transforms into white cast iion Iht malleabli non mav, ho\v( ver, be 
bra7c-w elding using similar technique as foi giey non 

5.9 Welding of Non-ferrous Metals and Their Alloys 

5.9.1 Alumimuvi and Aluiriimum Alloys Aluminium and main of its alloys 
may be i eadily wf Ided 1)> gas welding proc( ss Puie aluminium is used where 
coiioMon KSistante is ptirne fattoi Aluminiuni allocs aic used wlierc 
stiength is nectssaiy Pure ahiininium is \\( Ided with puie aluminium lods 
in combination with ihixcs Ahiminium-silicon alloys aie welded witli 
ahimmium silicon rods and aluminium magnesium alloys ai< wi Idcd with 
aluminium alloy lods A llux is alwavs used while welding akiinmiuni and 
Its alloys 

I h< sin l.u (s ol alumiiiiuni to lie \\rld< d should Ik fui lioiu oil, grease 
and (>\id( lilm In oidfi to do this the sui fat e is hi nshed oi cleaiu d t henii- 
tally I h( (lu\ is put on llu Lues to hi wikliil and the ]Oint is wilded 
with the iiquiietl t\ pe ol lod I he molting point o( aluminium being low 
as lompuid to sti els the caie that has to be taken by tht welder to mani- 
ptilali inoili 11 mi lal f)ool is much moie than in tasi of sti i 1 After welding 
the Ihix h IS to bi c li am il off thoioughlv '•o that nocoiiosive aitioii ol the 
flux IS ])!( SI nt 1 h< t II ailing should be doni with hot running watei until 
till \sashwitti IS fill ftoin the I hloi ides fi om the flux 

5.9.2 ( nppc) and ( oppti [llo}\ — Clas welding of coppei is comparatively 
(xpmsiM Howe\et, this mt tal can be advantageously )ointcd by silver 
blazing and soft soldci ing C'oppci silu on filler rods may be used in com- 
bination with fluxes whtie the weld metal and parent metal of same (orn- 
position IS not needed 

5.9.2.1 l^ eldm^ of bronzes — Bion/e welding is done normally with 
silicon bion/c oi phosphoi bionze filler lod A flux to prevent oxidationis 
a!wa\s used in welding of bronzes Modctatc pctning with a light hammer 
will ini lease the mechaniial properties of the wildid )oint 

5.9.2.2 lidding oj brasses — Brass plates are weliled with silicon bronze 
rods with fluxes and the vselding teihniqiie is similar to that required for 
welding of bionze 

5.9.3 Nickel and Nickel Alio} ^, and Ntcklel Bronze — The nickel plates are 
welded with pure nickel rods oi nickel bronze rods The parts need not be 
preheated in the case of nickel and nickel bronze Molten nickel being 
more viscous than steel more manipulation of the weld metal pool is needed 
while welding nickel and its alloys 

53 



SP : 12 - 1975 



SECTION 6 
FILLER RODS AND FLUXES 



6.1 General 

Selection of the correct filler rod for a particular job is one of the 
ess(;ntial prerequisites for successful welding. Cutting out a strip frcim the 
material to bo welded is not always possible and even when it is 
possible, such a strip cannot replace a recommended welding filler material. 
Composition of a filler metal is chosen with special consideration to the 
metallurgical requirement of a weldment. A wrong choice due to either 
ignorance or a false consideration of economy may lead to costly failures. 
IS: 1278-1972* specifies requirements that should be met by filler rods for 
gas welding. There is another specification IS: 2927-19751 which covers 
brazing alloys. It is strongly recommended that filler material conforming 
to these specifications i; used. In certain rar<; c;i,scs, it may bo necessary to 
use filler rods of composition not covered by these specifications; in sucli 
cases filler rods with well established performance should be used. 

Though the inner reducing envelope of an oxy-acetylenc llamc offers 
protection to the weld metal, it is necessary to use a flux in most cases. 
Fluxes used during welding not only protect the weldment from oxidation 
btit also from a slag which floats up and allows clean weld metal, to l)c depo- 
sited. After the completion of welding, flux residues should be cleaned. 

6.2 Filler Rods and Fluxes 

In Table 1 particulars about the common gas welding rods and brazing 
alloys with their application and also where the use of flux is necessary is 
indicated. This table is by no means comprehensive. For more information 
on the various types of filler rods, reference should be made to the related 
specification. Fluxes of well estabhshcd performance should be used. 

6.3 Removal of Flux Residues 

After welding or brazing is over, it is essential to remove the flux resi- 
dues. FliLxes in general are chemically active. Therefore, flux residues, 
if not properly removed, may lead to corrosion of parent metal and weld 
deposit. 

•Specification for filler rods for gas welding ( tccond rtviiion ). 
^Specification for brazing alloys (Jint revision ). 

54 



SP 1 12- 1975 



TABLE 1 rniER METALS AND EUXES FOR CAS WELDING 

[Clmikl] 




1 ILLER MeTAI 1 VPl 


Appucwion 


I LUX 


Mildslerl-lypcSlSI 


'\ general purpose rod for welding mild steel where a minimum bull iield tnisik \lii ngih 
offi Ig/miii' is required ( lulllusion technique wilh neulni (lime ) 


\ t required 


Mild steel -Type SI Si 


Inlendrd fonpplication nmhich n nuiium butt weld tensile stienglh of 440 kg/mm! \ \iit required 
rtquired ( 1 uli fusion trthinoui with neutial liam( ) 


Wear mi5liiig alloy dnl 

3 pcrcfnl niikd slnl I)|)l SIS4 


liiiilding up worn crossing* and oihrr applicilion where llii sleel siirliiu lie subjiiih \ i rumirod 
extreme w( ir by shock md abnM )i (Surhci fusion lechmijui with truss acdykiu 
llirae ) 


rhise rods an intended In be us 1 in lep^ir mil rcrandituining parts wliiih hi\c to Ik 
subsrtiunitly hardined uiditni|ri(d [ lull fusion Idhniquewilb iientnl 11 uii ) 


Villi lli« (ilnicissaryl 


Sliinlf« sleel drcay rfustatil (niobium 

High siliron cast iron- Type S( 11 
Cnpprrlillrrmd-TjprSf 1 


IhfSi lods iri intei tleil li r use m thi welding of roinsion nsistiiig sImK suth is llii i 
ctntimiiig 18 pnrenl chioiiiiuiii ndSpcntiit nickel [lidJ fusion teihuitjui nilh 
neutral llime ) 

laiNided for use in iht ssdding ofeisl iion wbtre in easily maehimble di posit is rKiiiiiul 
( bull fusion leihiiii|iu with inuti d llimi ) 

1 or welding of de oxidised roppi r [ 1 ull liision techni | le with neutr il 11 ime } 


lli\ 1 i|iiiiitl 

llivnmssiry 
llt^ iiiissm 


lirw filltr rod- hpr S (d 


lot use III ihc bia7e wilding of* ippir and mild sleel and lor the fusion ik Iduig of inlniil 
iii iliesmeordoMlysimiln eomposiiiim (OxidningOimt ) 


lli\mc(ssir\ 


Manganese bronze ( high ten ilr bi iss ) 
lypeSU 


foruscmbiizcwildiiigolioppir i isliion and milleable mm and forllitlusion wdding 
of nnierids of the simi oi dosdy sinnlir (onipositioii (Oxidinngllime ) 


lliu nidssiiv 


Medium niikelbnin/e rviieSl'l 


1 ( 1 use in ihe br i/e welding of n il 1 steel cast iron and malli able iii n f Oxidizing il in i ) 


llmn(|uued 


Aluminium (I'tm ) - lype S tIJ 


III use m welding of aliiniiiiiumgridf IB (lull fusion ledinii|ue with mnlral 11 inn ) 


iliix nrussars 
IIk naissirs 

1 1 n necess iry 


Alumiiimm alloy 5 percent siliiun - h])e 
SNGil 


III wd ling ofilnminium casting alloys, ixciptlhosi containing magnesmni, or /ini islhi 
niiin idlition 1 hey may also be usid to wihl wrought alummiuni m ignesium s 1 n n 
alloys (lull fusion technique wilh niutral [lime ) 


Ahiramium all ly 10 U pcruiit silicon 
lypcSNGi 


1 ir wdding high silicon aluminium allois Also recommended fir brazing aluminun 
( Neuiral llame ) 


Aluminium alloy 5 percent topper 


1 or Wilding ilumimimi casting particularly those contaming about 5 percent co|pir 
( 1 ull fusion technique wilh neutral (lame ) 


Uuxnciessirs 



f Cm!\i ntii ) 



SPil2-1975 



TABLE 1 FILLER METALS AND FLUXK FOR CAS WELDING -&«/</ 



FlUU MtTAL TvPli 



Stellitc Grade 1 



Mellitt Grade 
iildlileGradeli 



Copptr phoipliorm hu/mf alloy — 
lyptMCul'^ 

ijJvrr loppcr plioipli irui ,(14 pcrccnl 
iilvcr) -lyptiiAlul"! ^ 



bilvcr coppir phmpliorui ( I \» itcnt Jilwr) 
(ypc (iranrrif jNoyt - / ypt M-{ al'i 



iilvcr-coppfr ;iiic (dl prriuit silver ) 
TypcliAdiAGG 

Sihrr coppir nnc [ii pcrctnl silver) 
lypc BMuAjK) 



SiHer-copper ;mc cadmium (43 percent 
silver)- Type BA-CuAgl6A 



Silver-copper anc cadmium (50 percent 
silverj-TypeBA-CuAjjII 



iilver-copper-jinc cadimijm mckel (50 
percent silver ) -Type BA Cu-Agl2 



APPUCATION 



llardfacing tif (umponniti lubjectcd mainly to ibtasion ( Surface fusion tediniiiue with 
ucfssadljliiirilamr ) 



Hardfidng of loiiiponrnl! subjected to stock and abrasion ( Surface fusion technique 
wilhiwdsjrilyliiir Ihrar ) 



Hirdficini iil i iiinponi ms sulijrcird to abrasion and niiidi rale shock ( Surface fusion 
ttchiiKiue wilh cxKss acetylene dime ) 



Unziiig copper, bnsi and bionze loinpoiii nts ( Brazing «ilb slightly 
coppir iinitnl llanii on copper alliy< ) 



I or iiiakiii^tkiflilejoint in copper without Hiix Also widely used on copper base alloys of 
ihcbrnsiudbronzetypeniconjunclionwiih a suitabli siKer brazing llu« (Flame 
sliglilly Midizing on u pprr neutral on copper alloys ] 



Siniihr to UpeBACul') but wiili a slightly lower tensile strriiglh and elcclncal conduc- 
tmlY i Hm:f slg/idy midimg aii copper, imlnl on copper aSoys | 

Noit — Phosphorus bearing silver bnzing alloys should not be used with ferrous 
metal or alloys of high nickel content 



I his blazing alloy is parlicularly suiiable lor joining electrical components requiring h 
rleclnial conductivity (I lime neutral ) 



This IS a general purpose brazmg alloy and ii particularly suitable for food handling and 
processing equipment where the use of qujlernary alloys conlaining cadmium u objec- 
tionable ( Flame neutral ) 



An ideal composition for economy in brazing operaLon requiring a low temperature, quick 
and complete penetration Suitable on sieel, copper, brass, bron:e, coppcr-nickel alloys 
and nickel silver ( Flame neutral ) 



This alloy is also suitable for steel, copper, brass, bronze, coppcr-iuckel alloys and nickel- 
silvers (Hameneulral) 



Specially suitable for brizin; tungsten carbide bpi to rock drills, millmg cutlen, cutting 
and shaping tools, abo suitable for brazing ilecli which tre difcult to 'wcl' lui^ u 
stainless steels ( Flame neutral ) 



finx 



None u usually lequireil A ciut iron flux 
may be used, if necessary 



•do- 



None for copper tor brass or bronze a 
copper wcldmg Bux niiy be used 



None for copper A flux is necessary I 
brazing copper alloys 



None for copper A flux is necessary for 
trazoig copper a/(r vs 



Flux necessary 



Flux necessary 



Flux necessary 



Flux necessary 



Flux neceiiary 



56 



SP : 12 - 1975 

Some hints for rtMiioval of ilux residues arc given below: 

a) Ahcminium and Aliiniimum Alloys — As soon as possible after wrUliiig, 
wasli the joints in warm water and brush vigorously. When con- 
ditions allow, follow up by a rapid dip in a T) percent solution of 
nitric acid; wash again, using hoi water to assist drying. 

When containers, such as fuel tanks, have been welded and 
parts arc inaccessible for the hot water scrubbing method, use a 
solution of nitric and hydrofluoric acids. To each 5'0 litres of water 
add 400 ml of nitric acid ( specific gravity 1-42 ) followed by 33 ml 
of hythoiluoric acid (40 percent strength ). 'l"he solution used at 
room temperatiue will generally completely remove the Ihix residue 
in 10 minutes, producing a clean uniformly etched surface, free 
from stains, following this treatment the parts should be rinsed 
with cold water ;md finished with a hot water rinse. The time of 
immersion in hot water should not exceed three minutes, otherwise 
staining may result; alter this washing with hot water the parts 
should be dricfl. It is essential when tising this treatment that 
rubber gloves hi' worn by the operator and the acid solution should 
preferably be cimtained in an aluminium vessel. 

b) Magnesium Alloys- -Wash in water followed quickly by standard 
chromating. Acid chromate bath is recommended, 

c) Capper and Bra<^S'- Wash in boiling water followed by brushing. 
Where possible, a 2 percent solution of nitric or sulphuric acid is 
preferred to help in removing the glassy slag, followed by a hot 
water wash. 

d) Stainless Sleel — Treat in boiling 5 percent caustic soda solution, 
followed by washing in hot water. Alternatively, use a de-scaling 
solution of equal volume of hydrochloric acid and water to which 
is added 5 percent of the total volume of nitric acid with 0'2 percent 
of total volume of a snilablc restraincr. 

e) Cast Iron — Residues may he removed easily by a chipping hammer 
or wire brush. 

f) Silver Brazing — The flux residue can be easily removed by soaking 
brazed components in hot water, followed by wire brushing. In 
diflicult cases the work piece should be immersed in 5 to 10 percent 
sulphuric acid solution for a period of 2 to 5 minutes, followed by 
hot water rinsing and wire brushing. 



57 



SP : 12 . 1975 

SECTION 7 
WELDING TECHNIQUE AND PROCEDURE 

7.1 General 

C)\y-ac cty IciK vvckliiig is (und<iiiiciit.ill\ smi[}li' '1 wo pif crs of iiiclal 
arc linnighl togcllicr and the rdgt-s in rontaf t ate mrltrd by the oxy-acelylcne 
llame with or uithout thr addition ol molten metal from a welding rod. 
Welds made m this manner are known as ' fusion welds '. In braze wcldnig 
and Ijra/ing, Ikisc nielal is not fused with weld metal hut a joint is pioduccd 
through tlie foimatioii of a strong bond between the weld metal and the 
base metal Rules for prartieal applications, of course, cannot be stated 
so easily but the art ol ox-^ -acetylene welding nevertheless retains this 
essential simpjic ity. 

7.2 The Oxy- Acetylene Flame 

The oxy-acetylene llame is an ideal souk c of heat for welding. It 
produces a high temperature llame and tlie region ol high temperature is 
Kstrutcd to a small area The mnc i mantle o( the llame readies a tempe- 
rature of about i 2(W C; and is suitoimcled by a Kchuiiig atmosphere com- 
posed mainly of carbon monoxide and hydrog<'ti I his rechicing envelope pro- 
tects the molten metal Irom oxidation during welding tinal combustion of 
carbon numoxide and hydrogen of the inner t nvelope takes place in the 
outer /one ol the (laiiic producing water vapoui and carbon dioxide. I'"or 
(omplete combustion, one volume ol acetylene lerjuircs two and a half 
volumes of oxygen, of which approximate ly one volume is supplied from the 
cylinder and one and a half volume Ircnn the suiiounding atmosphere. 

The technique of ilame adjustment has been explained in Section 3 
Thiee types of flames, namely: (a) the neutral flame, (b) the oxidizing flame, 
and (c ) the carburizing flame, depending on the gas mixture, arc shown in 
Fig 7.1 and 7 2. 

With the complete combustion of acetylene, one gets a neutral flame, 
with a clearly defined white cone. It is, however, not desirable to have a 
sharp line at the tip of the white cone, the correc t adjustment should produce 
a faint ' haze ' oi ' flicker ' around the end. It should be mentioned here 
that the hottest temperature in the flame is obtained at a point just in front 
of the inner white cone. The neutral flame is used to weld steel, stainless 
.steel, cast iron, aluminium, etc 

In an oxidizmg flame there is an excess of oxygen. The white cone 
becomes shorter, pointer and a httlc bluish. For producing an oxidizing 
flame, a neutral flame is produced first and then acetylene flow is slightly 
decreased to give an oxidizing flame. The oxidizing flame is used to weld 
brasses and In bronze welding. 

58 



SPtl2-1975 



HOTTEST ZONE 
IN FLAME 




Fig. 7.1 Section of Oxy-Acetylene Flame 




7.3A Oxidizing Flame 
( Excess of Oxygen ) 
( An oxidizing flime Is 
necessary for welding 
brass ) 



7.2B Neutral Flame 
(Equal Quantities of 
Oxygen and Acetylene) 
( For steel, stalnlets 
steel, cast Iron, copper, 
aluminium, etc) 



7.2C Carburizing Flame 
(Excess of Acetylene) 
( A small excess of acety- 
lene is necessary for 
stelllting, hardfacing, 
etc) 



Fig. 7.2 Oxidizing, Neutral and Carburizing Flame 

Carburizing or reducing flame is the one in which there is ari excess of 
acetylene. Excess acetylene feather is distinctly visible and a reducing 
flame can be easily distinguished from a neutral flame. Here again a neutral 
flame should be produced first and then acetylene flow increased to get the 
required carburizing flame. The carburizing flame is generally used for 
depositing special surfacing metals like stellitc and wear-resisting steels. 

Note — In order to get the required flame it is essential that the welding nozzle should 
be kept clean by probing the orifice with a copper wire. But no sharp instrument, such 
as a drill or reamer should be used for this purpose. 



59 



SP 1 12 . 1975 



7.3 Preparation for Welding 

7.3.1 Type of Joints — Joint edges are generally required to be picpared 
prior to welding It is possible to make a plain butt joint m thin sheet 
rnetdl provided the edges are square ( true ) and clean, but thicker plates have 
to be dressed to a ' Vee ' preparation to allow the flame to penetrate the full 
depth of the plate The shape of the ' Vee ' depends on the weld technique 
adopted and this will be discussed later, figure 7.3 illustrates various butt 
and fillet welds 




SINGLE FILLET 
LAP 



CLOSE SQUARF 
'EE FILLET WELDS 



CORNER 



Fio 7 3 Butt and Fillet We i ds 

The ronect preparation of edges is essential in the pioduction of 
sound welds 

The edge prepaiation, welding technique and speed for various thick- 
nesses of mild steel usmg down-hand position of welding are illustrated m 
Fig 7 4. 

7.3.2 Tacking — The effect of expansion while butt welding two sheets of 
metals without any precautions can be seen in Fig 7 'J 

The edges here were originally in contact along the whole length of 
the joint. When the weld is started, the edges first recede and then close 
up until finally towards the end of the weld they overlap The weld cannot, 
therefoic, be completed To overcome this, the sheets can be tack-weldcd 
at regular intervals along the line of the weld with tacks about 25 mm 

On thicker plate, the method usually adopted is to arrange the two 
plates so that they diverge from the point where welding commenced This 
spacing may be maintained by the use of clamps and is particularly 
apphcable to the longitudinal seams in cylinders ( see Fig. 7.6 ). 

The divergence allowance varies very shghtly with the thickness and 
the speed of welding, but may be assessed as follows: 
Steel 2 to 3 cm/m 

Brass and bronze 1 '5 cm/m 

Monel 3 cm/m 

Aluminium 1*7 cm/m 

Copper 1 '5 cm/m 

60 



SP > 12 - 1975 



z^ 



eZZZZZZ22SSSSS233 



ESZZZ23 r-\vv.w.'4 



Z23 ESS 
--4 U-o-( 




315TO 
I. 00 



All dimensions in millimetres. 

Fio. 7.4 Down-Hand Butt Welds in Sieel-Edof, 
Preparation and Welding Technique 




Fio. 7.5 Distortion due to 

Expansion in Butt Welds 

Produced Without Tack 

Welding 




Fio. 7.6 Divergence Allowance 
to Avoid Distortion 



61 



SP J 12 . 1975 

If this method is not applicable, welding should start at the centre of 
the seam for a shoi t distance, and then a second start should be made at the 
centre, welding m the opposite direction for a shoil distance. Tins method 
should be conlmued until the whole weld is completed. 

7.4 Welding Jigs and Fixtures 

Use of )igs will be found helpful in welding of sheet metal The jig or 
fixluie should be de-signed to clamp the parts firmly to avoid movement dur- 
ing wrldmg and subsequent distortion. 'Ihcy can also be arranged to con- 
duct niu(h of the heat away fiom the weld. 

7.5 Welding Techniques 

7.5.1 Leftward or lunward Welding — Leftward welding technique is used 
on steel lor flanged edge welds, for iinbevelled steel plates up to 3 15 mm and 
(or bevelled plates up to 5 mm. It is also the method used for welding 
of fast lion and non-ferious metals 'Ihe weld is commenced on the 
righthand of tlie joint and welding proceeds towards the left Blowpipe 
is given a foiward motion with a slight side movement just sufficient to 
maintain both edges melting at a desired rale, and the welding lod ts moved 
l)rogussivf'ly along the weld seam ( see Fig 7 7 ) 

7.5.2 Righlwmd and All-Poution Rtghlward Welding - Rightward welding 
is reeominended for steel plates above 5 mm in thickness Plates up to 8 mm 
in thitkness need no edge preparation. Plates above mm in thickness 
should be bevelled to about 30° to give an included angle of 60° for the 
' Vee ' joint 

The weld is commented at tlie lelthand end of the joint and the blow- 
pipe moved towaids the iight The welding rod is given a circular forward 
action and the blowpipe moved steadily along the weld scam. Rightward 
technique is quicker than the leftward method and consumes less gas. 
Because the included angle is smaller, less welding rod is required. Distortion 
is also less. The technique is illustrated in Fig. 7.8. 

The all-position rightwaid technique is a modification of the rightward 
technique whereby the flame precedes the lod. This method is particularly 
suitable for welding of mild steel plate and pipe in the vertical, horizontal- 
vertical and overhead positions The all-position rightward method of 
welding is illustrated in Fig. 7.9. 

It should be stressed that considerable practice is required even by 
operators skilled in normal downward rightward welding to become fami- 
liarized with this technique. 

7.5.3 Vertical Welding — Vertical welding may be used on unbevelled steel 
up to 315 mm in thickness, and up to 16 nun where two operators are 

62 



SP: 12 -1975 




Fig. 7.7 Leftward or Forward Welding TECHNiquE 

employed. The weld is commenced at the bottom and proceeds vertically 
to the end of the seam. The blowpipe and the welding rod are given an 
upward semi-circular motion. For plates 5 to 16 mm in thickness this 
method requires two operators working opposite to eacli other — one on 
each side of the plate {see Fig. 7.10 and 7.11 ). 

7.6 Braze Welding 

7.6.1 In brazing and braze welding, unlike the fusion welding, parts being 
united are not normally brought to a temperature which approaches their 
melting point and in a majority of cases there is no necessary similarity of 
chemical composition between the filler metals and the parent metals. 

63 



SPtl2-1975 




Fio. 7.8 RionrwARD TECHNiquE OF Welding 

7.6.2 Braze welding involves the use of rods which arc composed mainly 
of 60/40 brass with the addition of silicon and tin to act as deoxidizers, and 
other metals to enhance the mechanical properties. Though mctallur- 
gically the rods are brass, by usage these are known as bronze rods such as 
silicon bronze or nickel bronze rods. 

The process takes advantage of the fact that brass filler rods will make 
a sound bond on copper, steel, cast iron, etc, at temperatures from 800 to 
900''G. Very high tensile joints are produced on a very wide variety of 
metals with minimum amount of heat. 

The joint should be clean and free from sharp edges or corners which 
may result in overheating. Full advantage should be taken in braze welding 

64 



SP ! 12 - 1975 



z 
o 

M 

s. 
o 

X 



o 
q: 

Q- 






O 

S 
.-I 

M 



a 
o 

s 



o 

< 

> 

H 
S 
O 

f5 

x 

o 
p 

o 

pL. 
I 

l-l 

< 



















13AV(jl 




TI3M JOl HUM 3Nn 
Nl ONV IVXNOZIUOH 
M0139 ,01 31ZZ0N 



^ino 






12 



y 



1> 



o 

z -" 






65 



SP 1 12 - 1975 



1 6- 



1-6 



X 



-3 -IS 



3-15 

T 



DC 



3 






STEEL 



NON-FERROUS 









♦ §° 






.^\ 


f f^ 


/Z N 






1 A UJ 


Y 


P l.-a 


J 


g sza. 


/i 


e <uj5 


y^/ 


== s So 






/^/ 


= < >0D 


Jy 


s fi^ 


/ y 


:= o 










^^ 


"t^ 




S / 




All dimensions in millimelrci. 

Note — No movement of blowpipe on plate up lo 3 15 mm lluckncss. 
movement of blowpipe as above on plate thicktr than 3"15 mm. 

l"'io. 7.10 Vertical Wei-dino with Single Operator 



Sligla 



of the high shear strength due to bond between the bronze and tlie parent 
metal. Where bevelling is not possible, the width of the bronze deposit 
at the top should be at least twice the thickness of the parent metal. A 
special type of joint preparation called ' shear vee-preparation ' which has 
been devised for high duty work on cast iron is shown in Fig. 7.12. 

7.6.3 In braze welding a slightly oxidizing flame is employed and the use 
of a suitable flux is essential. Heat should be kept as localized as possible 
by the use of a flame of correct size and by working as quickly as possible. 
The operator should watch to see that the bronze is actually flowing over and 
' tinning ' the surface of the metal immediately in front of the flame. 

The process enables a weld to be produced without raising the tempe- 
rature of the parent metal to its fusion point. Dissimilar metals can also 
be joined with the obvious limitation that neither of the parent metals must 



66 



SP: 12- 1975 



UPTO 16 



GAP«f PLATE 

THICKNESS 



UPTO 6 



60" 



OVER 



7^^ 



OVER 8 



NON-FERROUS 




All dimension] in millimetres. 
Fio, 7.11 Vertical Welding with Two Operators 

60-90* 




GAP 1-5 



WOTE-ALL EDGES RADIUSES 

All dimensions in millimetres. 

Fio. 7.12 Shear Vee- Preparation for Braze Welding 
OF Cast Iron 



67 



SPil2-1975 

fuse at a lower temperature than the filler metal and further, they must be 
of such a nature that amalgamation can take place between them and the 
filler metal. 

Braze welding should not be employed: 

a) when the service temperature goes beyond 250°C, 

b) where there is a change of electrolytic action, and 

c) when thctc is an objection to colour dissimilarity. 

7.6.4 In the case of cast iron, bra/.e welding is used chiefly for the repair 
of broken castings, and for the rebuilding of such parts as broken gear teeth. 
( Reference may be made to IS : .'3139-1969* for further details. ) Welding 
proceeds by the leftward or upward vertical method accordmg to the 
position of the joint, the welding blowpipe being given a steady semicircular 
movement. 'I he rod is applied tt) the edges of the metal with a rubbing 
action as soon as bi ou'/e is seen to run forward and ' tin ' the heated surface. 
Braze welding is applicable to malleable iron castings also Figures 7.13 
and 7.14 show the preparation and technique of braze welding of cast iron. 

7.6.5 Braze welding is also applicable to steel and very often used where 
it is necessary to avoid putting moic than the minimum amount of heat into 
the work. Bra/c welding is also used on galvanized iron. Before commenc- 
ing the weld, the upper and lower edges should be smeared with a copper 
welding flux to protctt the zinc coating. 



30 TO 40' 



SLIGHTLY OXIDIZING FLAME 
CONE 3 mm AWAY FROM 
MOLTEN METAL 




60 TO 70 



TINNING AREA OF 
BRONZE WELDING 



30 TO 70 



Fio. 7.13 Angles of Rod and Blowpipe for 
Braze-Weldino of Cast Iron 



•Recommcndfd procedure for repair of grey iron castings by oxy-acetylcne and manual 
metal arc welding. 



68 



SPtl2-1975 



<''y 



CX 



PARENT METAL TO BE 
CLEANED ALONG EDGES 
OF VEE FOR ABOUT 12 mm 

PREPARATION OF PLATE EDGES 



8^* 



DIRECTION 
OF 

welding' 

65 



ANGLE OF BLOWPIPES 



{ 




} 



BLOWPIPE AND ROD MOVEMENT 

Fio. 7.14 Preparation and I'echni^ue for Two-Operator 
Vertical Braze-Welding of Casi' Iron 

7.6.6 By the use of braze welding it is possible to carry out successful 
welds on deoxidized as well as non-deoxidized copper. Figure 7.15 shows 
some of the braze welded copper pipe joints. 

7.7 Brazing 

7.7.1 It will be seen that in braze welding the joint gap is filled by a filler 
metal just as in fusion welding; and Vee preparations arc very often made. 
Brazing is a non-fusion process and is diflctent from braze welding in that 
a joint is made by causing the molten filler metal to be drawn by capillary 
attraction into the space between closely adjacent surfaces of the parts to 
be joined. It is the use of the phenomenon of capillary attraction which 
differentiates the process of brazing from braze welding. To avoid confusion 
with soft soldering which also employs the phenomenon of capillary attraction, 
it is presupposed that for brazing the melting point of the filler metal is 
above 500°C. Given below arc the terms which are commonly used to 
indicate the brazing process: 

a) Brazing — Soldering with brass in strict sense, but commonly applied 
much more generally. 

b) Silver brazing, silver soldering or low temperature brazing — These terms 
are used to define brazing in the temperature range of SOO'C 
to 850° C using filler metals based mostly on the metals silver and 
copper. 

c) Aluminium brazing — Brazing aliuninium and certain aluminium 
alloys using aluminium silicon alloys. 

d) Copper brazing — The term is generally applied to the brazing of 
various metals with copper in reducing atmosphere furnaces. 



69 



SP J 12 -1975 



UJ 




' m>Ayy: 




A Bell type butt joint B Branch tee saddle joint 



E Straight weldable 
copper socket 



I 



C Bell type tee lolnt D Diminishing joint 




F Four-way unequal branch 
weldable copper fitting 



Fio. 7.15 Braze Welded Copper Pipe Joints 



70 



SP : 12 - 1975 



A comparison of joints used in welding and bI•a^ing is shown in 
Fig. 7.16. 



WELDING 



BRAZING 



BUTT LAP 



ai>,,i,,,,,iW,...f .,,,,,„ 2 

TEE 






CORNER < 





CAP TO TUBE 



*iiii) 



I 



TUBULAR 




TUBE THROUGH 
PLATE 

Fig. 7.16 Welded and Brazed Joints 

7.8 Hard Facing 

7.8.1 Hard facing is the technique of depositing by welding a wear- 
resisting alloy on a metal surface subject to wear resulting from impact, 
abrasion, erosion or corrosion or combination of these. 

In general hard facing deposit is applied on a steel base using a reducing 
flame. If the base is clean a flux is seldom necessary. To cite a typical 



7] 



fPil2-1975 

application, a low melting point high carbon alloy such as high chronjium 
iron or a Cr-Co-W alloy is deposited on low or medium carbon steels. The 
blowpipe is adjusted to have an excess of acetylene giving a feather of about 
1^ to 2i times the length of the neutral inner cone. The reducing flame 
carburizes the surface, thus lowering its melting point and finally melts a 
film on the surface. The melting of the surface film gives the appearance of 
' sweating '. The tip of the hard surfacing rod preheated on the fringe of 
flame is now moved into the heat centre of the flame and melted down on the 
' sweated ' metal surface ( see Fig. 7. 1 7 ). On completion of the deposit, the 
work must be allowed to cool down slowly either in a furnace or in lime or 
rnica dust. 




Fio. 7.17 



DEPOSITED 
METAL 



"-metal in sweating condition 
Hard Facing on Steel Surface 



It should be mentioned that not all alloys require a reducing flame. 
Therefore, manufacturer's recommendation should be followed in using any 
hard facing rod. 

7.9 Gas Welding of Various Metals 

7.9.1 Mtld Steel — Little difficulty is experienced in the welding of mild 
steel. Various techniques of welding applicable to mild steel and the pre- 
paration for welding have already been discussed. Mild steel filler rod of 
proper composition ( see Section 6 ) should be used. The blowpipe flame 
should be adjusted to neutral. 

Welding speeds and data for welding of mild steel are given in 
Tables 7.1, 7.2 and 7.3. 

7.9.2 Stainless Steel — An austenitic stainless steel on welding may lose 
its corrosion-resisting properties. This will happen when the stainless 
steel used is not stabilized. Stainless steels depend for their stainless proper- 
ties on the presence of chromium. On welding an unstabilized stainless 
steel, chromium in the heat-affected zone is precipitated along the grain 
boundaries as chromium-carbides and this results in the loss of stainless pro- 
perties in that zone, This phenomenon is known as ' weld decay '. This can 

72 



SP : 12 - 1975 



TABI£ 7.1 WELDING SPEEDS AND DATA FOR LEFTWARD 
WELDING OF STEEL 








[Claust 7.9.1 ) 








Thickness 
Plate 


op Flow Diameter Rate of 
Rate op of Welding 
Each Gas Filler 
( Oxygen Wi re 

AND 

Acetylene ) 


Root- 
Gap 


Welding 

Rod Used 

PER Metre 

OF Weld 


Preparation 

OF 

Edges 


(1) 


(2) 


(3) 


(4) 


(5) 


(6) 


(7) 


mm 


1/h 


mm 


m/h 


mm 


mm 




0-8 
1-6 
2-5 


30- 60 
60- 90 
90-150 


0-8 
1-6 
1-6 


6 -7-5 
7- 5-90 
6-0-7-5 


1-5 


1 0001 

1 750 1 

2 750l 


Square edges 


3'15 


150-210 


or 
2'5 
2-5 


5-5-7-5 


1-5 


1 650 






4-0 
50 


210-300 
300-370, 


3- 15 
3'15 


4-5-5-5 
3-7-l'5 


1-5 

2-5 


2 100 2 
4 800 ■ 


Vee ' weld 
with in- 
cluded 
angle bet- 
ween 80"- 
90"" 


Note- 


- The values giver 


in thi? 


table arc only ir 


dicalive. 






TABLE 7.2 WELDING SPEEDS AND DATA FOR RIGHTWARD 
WELDING OF STEEL 








{Clause 7.9.1 ) 








Thickness 
Plate 


OF Flow- 
Rate OF 
Each Gas 
( Oxygen 

AND 

Acetylene ) 


Diameter Rate of 

OF WtLDlNO 
FiLI CR 

Wire 


Root- 
Gap 


Welding 
Rod Used 
PER Metre 

OF WtLD 


Prepara- 
tion OF 
Edoes 


(1) 


(2) 


(3) 


(4) 


(5) 


(6) 


(7) 


mm 


1/h 


mm 


m/h 


mm 


mm 




50 
6-3 


370- 510 
510- 710 


2-5 
315 


3-7-4-5 
30-3-7 


2-5 
30 


3 400;' 
3 400 ■ 


Square edge 


80 
10-0 
12 
16 
20 
25 


710- 850 

990-1 300 

1 300-1 420 

1 550- J 700 

1 700-2 000 

2 000-2 600 


40 
5-0 
6-3 
(i-3 
6-3 
6-3 


2-2-2-4 
1-8-21 
l-3-r5 
1I-1-3 
0-9- 10 
0-6-0-7 


4 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 


3 400" 

5 250 

4 750 

6 750 ■ 
9 750 

16 500 J 


'Vce' weld 
with in- 
cluded 
angle 60° 


NOTE- 


- The values given 


in this 


tabic are only indicative. 







73 



SPt 12-1975 



TABLE 7.3 WELDING SPEEDS AND DATA FOR VERTICAL WELDING STEEL 

{Claiist 7.9.1 ) 



TillCKNEM 

OP Platl 



(1) 



1- low-Rate Diameter Rate of Root- 
op Each OF Filler Welding Gap 
Ga» per Wire 

Blowpipe 



I/h 



(3) 



m/h 



(5) 



Weldino 

Rod Used 

PER Metre 

OF Weid 

(0) 



No. OP Prf- 

Opera- paration 

TIONS OF EdcFS 



(7) 



(8) 



1 f. 


7')- 90 




1 f) 


4') 




— 


2 500 


r 




2 


'10-105 




l-(. 


3-7 




on 


2 750 


1 




3) 5 


r)0-16'5 




20 


3 




OB 


3 200 


! 




4 


180-210 




2 


2 4 




10 


4 000 


1 




5 


'22'->-2Y) 




2-') 


2 1 




1 ■■) 


3 750 


1 


Square 
edge 


5 


(lO- 90 




1 6 


37 




2 I 


7 500 


2 


(.3 


90-120 




2 '> 


3 




30 


(. 200 


n 




» 


IW 




3-15 


2(. 




4 


->300 


2 




HI 


210 




40 


23 




-JO 


1900 


2 




12 


300 




4-0 


18 




60 


7 250 


— J 




NoTh 


1 —'Ihc 


double operatoi 


tech 


iicjuc IS elTecUvf 


fioni 5 mm 


thick 


ness upwards. 


Note 


2 — The 


\a 


ucs given in 


this 


tabic 


arc only 


nditatnc 







be obviated by suitable heat treatment which involves raising the tempera- 
ture to 1050°C, followed by rapid cooling. As this may not always be a 
practicable proposition, it is desirable to use a stabilized stainless stcrl or extra 
low < arbon stainless steel filler rod. Stainless steel is stabilized with the 
addition of either titanium or columbium. As these elements have more 
affinity for carbon compared to chromium, titanium or columbium carbides 
are foimed in preference to chromium carbides, thus avoiding weld decay. 
In extra low carbon stainless steel, carbon percentage is kept very low, so 
that there is insufficient carbon available for the formation of chromium 
cai bides. 

Stainless bteel filler rods stabilized with columbium are generally used 
for welding. A flux is recommended, and when preparing for the weld, 
it should be mixed to a paste and painted on the underside of the sheet. The 
welding lod should also be fluxed by heating and dipping in the flux. 
Compared with mild steel, the coefl!icient of expansion of stainless steel is 
r>0 percent greater and its licat conductivity is half It is, therefore, 
desirable to use a nozzle one oi two sizes smaller than required for an equi- 
valent thickness of mild steel, and a flame that is neutral but not oxidizing. 
Work once started, should be finished without interruption and the rod 
should always be kept under the protection of the flame envelope. 

7.9.3 Cast Iron — Welding of cast iron needs careful thought and pre- 
paration. Cast iron, like all other cast metals, will tend to develop cracks 
on welding because of its low ductility. It is therefore desirable to preheat 



74 



SP : 12 ■ 1975 

cast iron. Preheating temperature for fusion welding is about yOO'C { dull 
red ). Braze welding of cast iron is done at lower temperature and conse- 
quently the preheating temperature is also less, say, about 400°C ( black 
heat ) . 

The variety of cast iron that a welder normally is required to repair is 
grey cast iron. Cast iron contains about 3 to 4 percent carbon. In grey 
cast iron, most of this carbon is present as free carbon in the form of flakes 
of graphite, which when evenly distributed give the characteristic grey 
colour. This form of cast iron is the most common, and the metal has good 
mechanical properties and is easy to machine. 

In welding, it should be the aim of the welder to deposit grey cast iron. 
In molten condition, most of the carbon is in the form of iron-carbide. Slow 
cooling from the molten condition separates carbon in the form of graphites. 
Silicon in cast iron also helps in this separation and in the random distri- 
bution of graphites. Cast iron welding rods should, therefore, contain 
sufficient quantity of silicon. If the molten cast iron is quickly cooled, the 
separation of iron carbide to iron and carbon cannot take place and the 
deposit becomes white cast iron which is difficult to machine and is extremely 
brittle. It is, therefore, essential that the weld depsoit is slowly cooled. Use 
efflux is essential to prevent oxidation. 

In fusion welding cast iron, the (lame should be neutial, and applied 
at an angle of 60° to 70° to the surface. The weld should consist of a scries 
of overlapping pools, and the rod should be allowed to fall naturally into the 
weld without ' puddling '. Cracks in cast iron should be prepared to 90' 
Vec. Above 1 2 mm thickness, double ' Vec ' preparation is desirable. Pre- 
heating of castings will be discussed in more detail in 7.10.2. 

7.9.4 Malleable Iron — Malleable iron is cast iron with a ductile skin as its 
outer layer. This ductile layer confers malleable property to the malleable 
iron. Welding causes the loss of this malleable property. Malleable iron, 
therefore, should not be repaired by fusion welding. Braze welding is 
recommended. 

7.9.5 Aluminium — The properties of aluminium which have most efTect 
on its welding characteristics are its low melting point ( 659°C ), its high 
thermal conductivity, its affinity for oxygen especially when heated, and its 
being structurally weak when hot. 

Pure aluminium welding rods should be used for welding pure alumi- 
nium plates or sheets but for welding most of the aluminium alloy, a 
5-percent silicon aluminium rod is found useful. A filler rod for an alloy is 
naturally dictated by its composition. 

Because of its affinity for oxygen, an oxidizing flame should never be 
used with aluminium. A neutral flame is used but to be sure that it is not 
oxidizing a slight haze of acetylene should be maintained. 

A highly active flux is necessary to deal with the refractory oxides of 
aluminium. It is essential to remove the flux residues after welding by 
washing in hot water along with wire-brushing. 

75 



8Ptl2-1975 

Joints such as laps .and fillets which have got chances of entrapping the 
flux, shall not be employed in (>xy-4( ctylcne fusion welding of aluininiurn. 
Some joints used in aluminium welding are illustrated in Fig. 7.18. Such 
joints in pure aluminium can however be bra/.cd using 10 to 12 percent 
silicon aluminium rod and a suitai>le(lux. The brazing material flows inside 
due to capillary action and diives out the coirosive flux. 

Leftward or upward vertical methods may be used in aluminium 
welding as shown in Fig. 7.19 and 7.20. 

7.9,6 Case Aluminium — A/umim'um caslings usuaiiy contain proportions of 
other metals and the welding rod should be of suitable composition. A 
5-pcrcent silicon aluminium tod will be found useful in most cases. Use 
of flux is essential. 'Flie flux residues shall be lemoved after welding. 

Details regarding welding of castings arc discussed in 7.10. 



jJSi: 



z«59 



ttliS BZZZZS^ 



.gwwma. 



Fio. 7.18 Typical Joints in Aluminium Welding 




WELDING, 

ROO 



LEFT WARD METHOD 

Fio. 7,19 LEFTWAhD Method of Gas Weldinq Aluminium 



76 



SPtl2-1975 




DIRECTION OF 
WELDING 



Fio. 7.20 Upward Vertical Method of Gas Welding Aluminium 



7.9.7 Duralumin and Alclad — Dmaliimin is an aluminium alloy having 
exceptional metlianiral piopertics When duialunun is coated with pure 
aluminium, the product is known as ' Al< lad ' Gas welding of these two 
materials ib not ic(onimcndcd Whcie sticngth is ol'no impoi lance, welding 
may be carried out using 'j-peiccnt bilicon aluminium rod. 

7.9.8 Copper — For fusion welding, the copper should be of deoxidized ' 
variety. The grades of copper containing oxygen are not huitable for fusion 
welding owing to the formation of cuprous oxide — a copper eutectic — 
which leads to porosity and trac king of the weld metal. Such copper should 
be braze welded 

To produce fusion welding a suitable welding rod containing deoxi- 
dants should be used Use ol a flux should be found beneficial. Because of 
high thermal conductivity, toppei requires a larger no/zle than required 
for steel and it is advisable to empk)y a sec ond blowpipe ahead of the weld 
to preheat the mcfal. Butt v\rlds in plales sliould be set with a gap which 
diverge? by about 1"5 cm per meitc. A backing strip covered with dry 
asbestos will provide a support and concentrate the heat. 

Copper should not be tack-welded and to avoid cracking due to hot- 
shortness long seams can he started 100 to 150 mm from one end, carrying 
the weld to the other end in one operation, and then returning to the starting 
point to complete the weld seam Welds in thin plate should be completed 
in one run, although this will not be pos.siblc for thicker plate. In the latter 
case step welding is possible, provided the bottom run is laid down for lengths 
not exceeding about 100 mm at a time. Where possible the vertical 
upward method is to be prefcired, and plates over 3 mm thick can be welded 

77 



SP 1 12 . 1975 

by this procedure. Light hammering at temperatures above 600°C helpb to 
breakup the eutectic and prevents excessive grain growth, while cold- 
hammering improves the mechanical properties. 

The flame sliould be neutral and to ensure this, it should be adjusted 
to a slight excess of acetylene feather. 

Edge preparations for copper welding arc sfiown in Fig. 7.21. 



I tt l> I I I II > 1 I I 1-tB^i 1 1 I ■ . ■ I h h rrra 

i-12(m«x) 






( VA ///. v/A A \ \ V \\ V vv\^ 




70- 80"tC— J i— y 5 TO e 

All dimensions in millmittrfs. 

I'"io. 7.21 Edgl Preparation for Coppkr Welding 
( DowNiiAND Welding ) 

7.9.9 Bra^s — Alloys of copper and zinc in various proportions, possibly 
with tlie addition of other elements, are known as brasses. Copper melts 
at 1 0S3°C; and yinc melts at 419°C, and brasses melt at intermediate tem- 
peratures. The low melting point of zinc and its tendency to voldtali/-e at 
welding temperatures, have to be considered in selecting the correct flux and 
flame for welding brasses. 

Loss of zinc ran be controlled by using an oxidizing flame, and it is 
better to set the flame first to neutral and then gradually reduce the acety- 
lene flow, testing a peice of scrap brass with the flame until the fuming ceases. 
The metal should be properly fluxed and if a test by welding shows that blow 
holes are being produced, acetylene flow should be decreased still further. In 
order to obtain a soft flame, it is desirable to choose a nozzle one size larger 
than would be used for welding steel. 

A welding rod to suit the composition should be chosen and welding 
carried out with an appropriate flux. Material 3 mm thick and over should 
be bevelled to an included angle of 90'C. The joint should be thoroughly 
cleaned, and fluxed, on both sides prior to welding. 

7.9.10 Bronze — Alloys of copper and tin, in proportions ranging from 80 
to 90 percent of copper, sometimes with the additions oflead and other metals, 



78 



SP 1 12 - 1975 

are known as bronzes. High lead-tin alloys are termed gun metal, and phos- 
phor bronze contain a proportion of phosphorous in addition. When heated, 
the metal appears to boil, and loss of tin and lead can only be prevented by 
an abundant use of flux. A neutral flame is normally required, and the tip 
of the inner cone should be held 40 to 50 mm clear of the weld, to reduce loss 
of tin. The welding procedure generally recommended for brass will give 
sadsfactoiy results. 

Castings benefit from preheating and it is necessary to support the metal 
in the vicinity of the weld. 

7.9.11 Monel Metal and }iickel — Monel contains approximately (37 per- 
cent nickel and 30 percent copper together with iron, manganese, silicon, 
etc, and is used in the dairy and food industries. 

Sheets up to 1 '2 mm thick should be flanged and thicker sheets prepared 
with 90° ' Vcc '. Suitable rod and flux should be used and the flame should 
be slightly reducing. Nozzle one size larger than that used for steel is 
required. 

Pure nickel can be welded in a similar manner using nickel welding rod 
and both the material can be soft and hard soldered. Both leftward and 
rightward technique can be employed but the latter is found to be 
advantageous. 

7.9.12 Inconel - ~ An alloy of nickel, chromium and iron, inconel is used 
where corrosion and heat resistance arc required. It can be welded with a 
slight excess acetylene flame, in conjunction \vith a suitable welding rod and 
flux pasted on the surface to be joined as well as on the welding rod. 

7.9.13 Everdur - An alloy of 96 percent copper with 5 percent silicon and 
1 percent manganese, everdur is used ii\ hot water service, especially in the 
presence of corrosive substances. With a slightly oxidizing flame and wire or 
strip cut from the everdur metal itself, welding can be successfully carried out. 
A copper welding flux should be u.sed. The low thermal conductivity of the 
metal enables a smaller size nozzle to be used than for copper of same 
thickness. 

7.9.14 Magnesium Alloys — Becuase of their being light, magnesium alloys 
arc being used in increasing quantities. A neutral or slightly reducing 
flame should be used in conjunction with a suitable rod and flux. The rods 
should be clean and coated with flux. The flux is corrosive and it should be 
removed and the surface protected with a special chemical treatment like 
chromating. 

Magnesium oxidizes readily when heated, and ignites if overheated. 
The use of proper flame and a suitable flux pasted on rod and on the bottom 
and top surface of the joint will tend to prevent firing. A magnesium fire 
should be extinguished by sand — not by water. 

Note — It is sometimes difficult for the operator to decide whether he hu an 
alumitiium or a magnesium alloy casting for repair. If there is any doubt, mix a small 

79 



SPil2-1975 

amount of ammonium chloride with water and sprinkle on the (cold) catting; if there 
u no reaction, the catting is aluminium, but if the beads of solution begin to ' fizz ' it ii 
a magnesium alloy casting. The solution should be rinsed off with water immediately 
after the test. 

7.10 Repair of Castings 

7.10.0 General — Oac of the iiiijx>rtant applications of gas welding process 
is repair of castings. This is hccau.sc of the control in the heat input that 
could be exercised by the welder while manoeuvring the welding blowpipe. 
Some usefulhints on repair of castings are given in 7.10.1 to 7.10.4. Reference 
may be made to IS : 5139-1969* for hiriher information. 

7.10.1 Inspection nfCaftingi and Prf/wration/or IVeMing — A casting received 
for welding shall be ihorougiily cleaned, degrcased and inspected for cracks. 
Any undetected crack will expand further during welding. It is, therefore, 
essential to examine the casting thoroughly. 

When the casting i hick ness is above r> mm, a 9()' ' Vcc ' preparation 
should be made. A small hole .•■hoiild always he drilled a little beyond the 
visible end of the crack. When ' veeing ' a cratk, the We should also be 
taken beyond the visible end of the crack. On material above 12 mm 
thickness, it is preferable to have double ' Vee ' preparation. 

When iron casting is prepared for braze welding, sharp edges of the 
' Vee ' should be rounded off. (Jround suifa< cs do not ' lin ' properly. Such 
surfaces may be filed with a rough file. Cleaning by sand blasting is an ideal 
preparation for bra/e welding. 

For fusion welding of thin castings, a welder of average skill can scrap 
out a groove on cast iron with the welding lod ( or on aluminium with a steel 
scraper ) as soon as the edges start inelling and befoic adding the filler lod. 

7.10.2 Preheating— C^ast metals (except malleable cast iron) are rela- 
tively non-ductile, that is, they will bieak rather than bend. When only a 
portion of metal structure is heated as in the case of welding — the e.xpansion 
and contraction of the heated portion is resisted bv the cooler portions. 
Wrought metals, being ductile, acLommodate themselves to this by bending 
and buckling. Cast metals, however, cannot do this, thus resulting in 
further fracture. To ovetcoine such a trouble a casting should normally be 
preheated. 

Small castings may be preheated by application of the blowpipe flame 
before commencing the weld, but larger work should be preheated in a fur- 
nace. A simple form of preheating furnace can be built from a number of 
fire bricks as shown in Fig. 7.22A. The stark iron type furnace is illustrated 
in Fig. 7.22B. A blacksmith's forge or use of coke is not recommended for 
preheating due to danger of sulphur from coke entering the weld and heat 
concentration. The furnace should be constructed in a place free from air 
draughts. If necessary, a screen should be used at a distance from the fur- 
nace to prevent disturbance from strong winds. 

•Recommended procedure for repair of grey iron castings by oxy-acetylenc and manual 
metal arc welding. 

80 



ARRANGE SIZE AND SHAPE 
TO SUIT EACH CASTING 



OVERLAP ALLOWS FOR 
VARIATION IN LENGTH 
Of THr. CASTING 





7.22B Sheet Iron Type 



7.22A Brick Type 
Fig. 7.22 Temporary Preheatincj Furnaces 

Place the carting inside the furnace on a few fire bricks to allow heat 
to spread beneath it and providi; adequate support so as to prevent ' sagging ' 
when it is hot. The surface to be welded should be horizontal and there 
should be provision, if necessary, for moving the casting. Fuel used is usually 
charcoal and it is placed in the furnace all around the casting ( but not on 
bottom and top ) in sufficient quantity. After the charcoal has been ignited, 
the top should be covered with asbestos sheet. Vent holes should be arranged 
at regular intervals between the lower courses of bricks, and the fuel should 
be arranged to give more heat to the heaviest parts of casting. 

When coal gas is available, it can be UFcd in the form of bunsen burners 
which can be constructed from lengths of gas barrels ( see Fig. 7.23 ). 

For casting of moderate sizes a preheating table may be used, because 
it enables the welding to be carried out at convenient height. Bright parts 
in castings can be protected with graphite. 

7.10.2.1 Local preheating — It is often pos.«;ible to save time and fuel by 
preheating the points ( see Fig. 7.24 and 7.25 ) which would be stressed by 
expansion and contraction of the weld. The points to be preheated are those 
at which the casting would break if a wedge were driven through the fracture. 
For example the ring shown in Fig. 7.24 would break at C if the wedge B 
is driven in the opening at ^. C is, therefore, the point to be preheated. 

There are a few cases when welding may be carried out without pre- 
heating as in the case of joining two pieces of cast metal bar or tube where 
the joint is not restricted. 

81 



SP 1 12 -1975 



r^O* 



COAL GAS 




I 



•3* HOLE 
A -BOTH ENDS OPEN 



«)♦ 



-60* 



COAL GAS r 
—4 ' 



yo<P 



B-AIR INLET HOLES 



T 

LENGTH DETER- 
MINED BY TRIALS 



r40* 



^^ 



COAL 



GASJ" 



10* 



T 



COMPRESSED t 



C-END BLANKED 



AIR 



10* 



All dimensions in millimetres. 

Fio, 7.23 Burners for Preheatinq 




Fio. 7.24 Local Preheatinq 
82 



SPtl2-l975 




F« FRACTURE 

A -POINTS TO BE 
PREHEATED 



Fig 7.25 Example of Local Preheatino in Order 
TO Separate Welding Edges 

7.10.2.2 Preheating temperatures 

a) Fusion welding cast iron — approximately IWC, that is, dark cherry 
red. By using a tube as telescope ( or by throwing a shadow across 
it ) the colour oi the preheated casting can be seen correctly. Do 
not put the end of the tube right into the furnaces as the heat will 
draw through the tube and may burn the operator's eye. 

b) Bronze welding of cast iron — approximately 400"'G indicated by the 
mcJting of a stick of solder of charring of wood shaving? in. contact 
with the casting preheated. 

c) Aluminium and magnesium alloy casting — 350-400°C indicated by 

charring of saw dust or melting of a soft solder stick by rubbing 
on preheated casting. 

d) For castings in general — for fusion welding — within 400° G to 500°G 
of the melting point. 

7.10.3 Welding — A casting preheated in furnace, should be welded in 
the furnace only exposing the portions of the casting required to be welded. 
Other portions should be kept covered. If necessary, charcoal may be added 
to maintain the heat and necessary arrangement made to protect the 
operator, from the radiated heat. 

7.10.4 Post Cooling — On completion of the weld, the casting should be 
very slowly cooled by keeping it in the furnace, covering the top and all the 
draught holes at the bottom. If necessary, some amount of charcoal may be 
added in the furnace to reduce the rate of cooling. Casting should be taken 
out of the furnace only when it is cooled to ambient temperature. Castings 
locally preheated or heated with coal gas or preheated with a blowpipe can 
be slowly cooled by enclosing them under dry lime. 



83 



SI»:I2-1975 

SECTION 8 
OXYGEN CUTTING 

8.1 General 

Oxygen culling js indispensable in industry today and in this sense 
pciliaps lliL- greatest event in the field was the discovery around the year 1885 
by Mi Thomas Flctchci, of Warrington, England, that steel could be cut by 
rnc.ins of a jet ol oxygen directed on to a portion of it previously heated to 
r( d heat Ah hough the possibility of oxygen tutting was appreciated as early 
A^ 111 tli( \cai Ui85, lis (oninicuial application started 20 ) ears later. Since 
1h«'ii oxygen (utling has produced far reaching changes in the industrial prac- 
1(<(S icj.iling tf) ( lilting and shaping of steel. It is interesting to record that 
baiikds ancl Ic.idinc, sale manufacturcis made a serious protest against the 
itiUodiu iKni ol such apparatus, wluch they considered could only be used 
fill 1( loiuoiis puiposes And ( uriously, they were not wrong; the first 
piac tual use ol oxygen cutting was made in opening a safe in London Post 
Oflue in the year 1901 while at a later date a safe in a German Bank was 
opened in a similar manner. 

8.2 The Process 

Oxygen c uttiiig is primarily a chemical process relying on the marked 
(liciuKal afhnily of oxygen towards ferrous metals, when raised to or above 
the ignilif>n ti mperatui c Advantage is taken of this principle by means of the 
cutting blowpipe, which provides the method of supplying high purity oxygen 
and a suitable fuel gas lo prelieat the metal to the required temperature. 
T he i( ac t ion that takes place is that when a ]et of high purity oxygen strikes 
steel pievioiisly healed to its ignition temperature, combustion takes place 
Willi generation ol considciable heat at the point where oxygen strikes the 
mcial The heat thus genetated, together with that supplied in the preli- 
ininai v heating, is suflic lenl to melt the iion oxide produced by combustion. 
T he slag en oxide, a« pioduccd, is blown out of the zone by the cutting oxygen 
)et As liie slag is blown away the cutting oxygen jet is moved, thus forming 
a nai u)W cut or ' keif '. Since only the metal within the direct path of the 
oxygen jet is acted upon, a remarkable degree of accuracy can be achieved 
in this cutting process. 

The cutting process, therefore, involves three functions: 

a) Raising the steel locally to a temperature at which ignition can 
start. This is called ' pi cheating ' and the steel has to be brought 
to a temperature of about 900°C. 

b) Applying a jet of high purity oxygen of correct volume and velocity 

to cause oxidation of the iron in the path of the jet. 

84 



SP : 12 - 1975 

c) The removal of oxide parlirles from the hnc of cut by means of 
kinetic energy of the oxygen jet and moving ihc jet for progress of 
the cut. 

8.2.1 Although theoretically, once cutting has commenced, heat of 
reaction should keep the process going without external sources of heat, in 
practice preheating cannot be dispensed with. 

The suitabihty of a metal or an alloy for oxygen cutting is governed 
by the following considerations: 

a) The metal should be capable of being oxidized at a temperature 
lower than its melting point, and 

b) The oxides produced should be fusible at a temperature lower than 
that generated by the reaction. 

Theoretically, 300 litres of oxygen are rt^quircd to oxidize completely 
1 kg of iron to I'ejOi- Aculally, in the cutting of ordinary steel, the con- 
sumption varies from 62 to 170 litres of oxygen per kg of iron removed from 
the cut. In addition to the iron oxidiz(;d during cutting, some iron is removed 
by melting and by the erosion or scrubbing elTcct of the- iiilling oxygen stream 
and the iron oxide flowing from the cut. Analysis of the slag has shown in 
some instances over 30 percent to the iron which has not been oxidized. 

8.3 Cutting Blowpipe — Oxygen cutting is accomplished by means of a 
cutting blowpipe with a suitable nozzle that will supply a llamc for heating 
a spot on a piece of iron or steel to the correct preheat tcmpcrattirc and also 
provide a stream of high purity oxygen under pressure so that the oxidation 
of the metal will start in a narrow slot ( kerf) <-xtending entirely through the 
base metal. The cutting blowpipe is provided with valves and regulators to 
control the flow of oxygen and fuel gas. The operating principles of a cut- 
ting blowpipe are given in Fig. 8.1. A typical cutting is shown in Fig. 8.2. 
Acetylene is the most extensively used fuel gas in oxygen cutting although 
hydrogen, propane, LPG, coal gas, coke oven gases are also used. 

8.3.1 Although, in principle, the cutting blowpipe needs only one pre- 
heat flame, this would make it difhcult to change the direction of cutting, 
because preheating must take palcc ah(^ad of the cutting oxygen jet. The 
cutting nozzle is, therefore, provided with an annular ring or a ring of small 
openings ( usually four or more in number ) surrounding the cutting oxygen 
orifice. The preheat flame, therefore, surround? the cutting oxygen jet. The 
nozzle may either be a two-piece nozzle consisting of an inner and an outer 
nozzle or be a single piece nozzle. This arrangement of the preheat flame 
permits the cutting blowpipe to be moved in any direction without losing the 
effect of the preheat flame. The nozzles used for cutting sheet metals, gene- 
rally referred to as ' sheet-metal nozzles ' often have only one preheat flame 
orifice which when the cutting blowpipe is moved precedes the cutting oxygen 
jet. 

85 



SP: 12 -1975 



L 



OXYGEN 
ONLY 



•CUTTING OXYGEN 
CONTROL 



V 



MIX CD GASES 
FOR HEATING 
FLAME 




ACETVLENe 



-HEATING FLAME 
'CUTTING OXYGEN 

Fio. 8.1 Operating Principle of Oxy-Acetylene Cuttino 




mm 




Fig. 8.2 A Cutting Blowpipe 

8.3.2 There are mainly two types of cutting blowpipe, high pressure and 
low pressure, the distinction refers to the fuel gas pressure range required 
for the preheat flame. If the minimum fuel gas pressure required is 
0'15 kgf/cm" or more the blowpipe is known as ' high pressure blowpipe*. 
When the required pressure is lcs3 and the fuel gas has to be drawn to the 
preheat flame with the aid of an injector incorporated in the blowpipe, it is 
designated as ' low pressure ' or ' injector ' type blowpipe. The injector 
type cutting blowpipe can also be used with high pressure fuel gas supply and 
hence these are often referred to as ' universal ' type cutting blowpipes. 

Metal can be cut either by the hand guided cutting blowpipe or by 
means of electrically-driven or hand-operated automatic cutting machines. 
The former is generally known as ' hand ' or ' manual ' cutting and the latter 
as ' machine ' cutting. 

8.3.3 Hand or Manual Cutting Equipment and Methods of Assembly 

8.3.3.1 High pressure {HP) equipment, using dissolved acetylene — High 
pressure oxy-acetylene hand-cutting equipment requires the following; 

a) Supply of acetylene in cylinders or from pipeline, 



86 



SP:l?.l975 

b) Supply of oxygen in cylinders or from pipeline, 

c) Cutting blowpipe with necessary nozzles, 

d) Acetylene pressure regulator, 

e) Oxygen pressure regulator, 

f ) One length each of oxygen and acetylene rubber-canvas hose, 

g) Hose clips, 

h) Spanners and spindle keys, 

j) Welders' goggles and protective gloves, 

k) Spark lighter, and 

m) Trolley for accommodating complete equipment and cylinders, 
if necessary. 

8.3.3.2 Low pressure ( LP ) equipment — Low pressure cutting equip- 
ment is almost identical to HP equipment except that instead of acetylene 
cylinder and regulator, an acetylene generator of suitable capacity and a 
' low pressure ' cutting blowpipe with necessary cutting nozzles are required. 
The acetylene generator being bulky cannot be normally moved about and 
hence a trolley is not generally necessary. 

8.3.3.3 Assembly — Both the HP and LP equipment are assembled 
exactly as HP and LP welding equipment, but the following points should 
be remembered. 

8.3.3.4 Lighting the HP cutting blowpipe — After fitting the correct size 
of cutting nozzle to the blowpipe, open the cylinder valve and set the work- 
ing oxygen pressure on the regulator with the heating and cutting oxygen 
valves of the blowpipe open. Shut the oxygen valves of the blowpipe,- then 
set the acetylene working pressure on the Regulator. The choice of the 
correct size nozzle and settings of the pressures on the regulators should be 
made in accordance with the recommendation of the blowpipe manufacturer. 

Open the acetylene valve slowly and ignite the gas with a spark lighter. 
Open the heating oxygen valve and slowly adjust the flame to neutral. 
Now press the cutting oxygen control lever and again adjust the heating 
control to give a neutral flame. Close the cutting oxygen control valve and 
the blowpipe is now ready for use. 

On completion of the work, close the oxygen cutting valve, then the 
acetylene and heating oxygen valves. Close the cylinder valves and release 
the pressure on the pressure regulator control springs by slackening the 
pressure adjusting screw. 

8.3.3.5 Lighting the LP cutting blowpipe — Before lighting up, check that 
the generator is charged with the correct size and quantity of carbide and 
filled with water in accordance with the manuiacturers' instructions and that 
the hydratilic back pressure valve is filled with water to the correct level. 

87 



8P 1 12 - 1975 

Set the oxygen pressure as for HP equipment. Open the preheat oxygen 
valve on the blowpipe and then acetylene as for HP equipment. For stop- 
ping the work, follow the same procedure as for HP cutting blowpipe. 

8.3.3.6 Pressure regulators for cutting — Select regulators which arc 
capable of supplying oxygen and acetylene at required pressures and in 
sufficient volumes. 

8.4 Procedure for Hand Cutting 

8.4.1 Precautions — Before starting the cut, the operator must ensure that: 

a) there is no inflammable material around the place of work; 

b) if the article to be cut is a drum or a pipe, it does not contain even 
traces of combustible material or any gas or vapour under pressure; 

c) he is protected from lire and sparks; and 

d) he is wearing the right type of goggles. 

8.4.2 Preparation of the Metal Surface — The metal surface where the cut 
is to be made, should be cleaned off paint, tar or heavy scale. Otherwise 
the fumes will cause considerable discomfort to the operator. Burning of 
these substances produce scale which may block the nozzle. It is a good 
practice to pass the preheat flame along the line of cut prior to cutting. This 
followed by wire-brushing will make the line of cut clean of scales. 

8.4.3 Square Edge Cutlinsi — Insert the correct size of nozzle, adjust the 
pressures and light the blowpipe. Hold the blowpipe at one edge of the 
plate and at right angles lo it. The tip of the preheat flame should be about 
1"5 mm aVjove the plate surface. When tlic spot imder the flame is bright 
red, release the cutting oxygen. When the cut is through move the blow- 
pipe along the line of cut at a uniform speed depending on the plate thick- 
ness. The speed of cutting should be just fast enough so that the cut conti- 
nues to penetrate the plate completely without excessive oxidation or melting. 
A suitable gliding device is of great value for efhcient operation, particularly 
to the less experienced operators. 

If the blowpipe is moved too slowly the preheat flame tends to melt 
the edges of the cut producing a ragged appearance. If the speed is too 
fast the cutting oxygen will fail to pierce the plate and cutting will, therefore, 
be incomplete. 

Operating data for cutting mild steel using a typical cutting blowpipe 
is given in Table 8.1. 

The data is intended to serve as a guide only and may vary to suit 
IcKal conditions. 

Acetylene pressure should be not less than 1 50 mm H,0. If dissolved 
acetylene from a cylinder is used, the pressure should be 0'15 kgf/cm*. 

88 



SP: 12- 1975 



TABLE 8.1 OPERATING DATA FOR CUTTING MILD STEEL 

(Claust SA.3} 

Diameter of Cuttino TiiicKNtss Cuitin" Oxygen 

OxYOEN Orifice PsFssuKt 

(1) (2) (3) 

mm mm kgf/i m^ 

0-8 3- G 10-14 

1-2 6- 19 I-1-21 

10 19-100 2-1-1-2 

2-0 100-r)0 '12-4-fa 

2-4 150-200 4'(.-49 

2-8 200-250 4-9-5-5 

3-2 250-300 5 5-5-6 

It may be mentioned here that the volume of s^asoi nru'ssary for the 
cut without interruption should be assessed a( the outset and pio()cr arrange- 
ment be made for regulators capable of supi)K iug gases at the rate required. 
If necessary, a manifold of several c ylinders should be connnissioned. 

While cutting round bais, nick the bai' v\itli a i hisel a( llie point where 
a cut is to be started. Alternatively, pla<e a u'd hot steel \vi\r lou( hing a 
point on the surface of the bar and release the < utling oxygen stream at the 
point of contact to initiate cutting. 

8.4.4 Painted and Galvanized Plates C.'lean the surftice as much as possible 
before the cut and, if possible, use a i espiratoi . '1 he pi ocedure is as outlined 
for square edge cutting. 

8.4.5 Cutting Holes — Hold the blowpipe at right angles to the plate on the 
point where a hole is to be made. When the point is bright red release cut- 
ting oxygen slowly. Raise and tilt the nozzle slowly so that the sparks may 
not foul the nozzle. Thus a hole may be pierced. If a big hole, circular, 
rectangular or of any other shape is to be cut, first of all make an outline 
of the hole. Then pierce a hole at the centre and proceed with cutting along 
the outline. 

8.4.6 Bevelling — Now-a-days bevelling is almost exclusively done by 
machine cutting. But with some practice it should not be difficult for an 
operator to cut bevels on steel plates manually. This is done by holding the 
blowpipe head in such a way that the oxygen streams through the plate at 
the desired angle. It is obvious that the angle between the nozzle and the 
plate must remain constant, and this poses the greatest difficulty for the begin- 
ner. The position of the preheat flame relative to the plate surface is very 
imporUnt. It will be found that if the preheat flamq is either too close ox 

89 



SP: 12 -1975 

too far from the top surface, the cut will not be as good as when it is moved 
along at the proper distance above the plate surface. For a good bevel 
cut a steadier hand and good practice than required for square edge cutting 
is needed. It should be mentioned here that the preheat flame should be 
stronger and cutting oxygen pressure higher for bevelling than required for 
square cutting same thickness of plate. A guiding device may, in this case, 
be very profitably used. 

8.5 Heavy Cntting — Heavy cutting may be arbitrarily defined as cutting 
of steel in the thickness range 300 to 2 000 mm. An important point to be 
understood in connection with heavy cutting is that contrary to what might 
be assumed high pressure is not required. Nor is it necessarily true that the 
cutting oxygen pressure should be increased with the increase in thickness to 
be cut. Cutting oxygen pressures in the range 05-35 kgf/cm' measured at 
the entry of cutting orifice have been found adequate for the purpose. Typical 
data based on flow rate of oxygen for heavy cutting of steel is given in 
Table 8.2. However, the ojxsrators should normally be guided bv the data 
given by the manufacturers. 



TABLE 8.2 


OPERAl'ING DATA FOR HEA^'Y CUTTING OF STF.FI. 


Thickness 


Flow of Oxygen Diameter op 
Cutting Orifice 


Cutting Oxygen 
Pressure at Orifice 


(1) 


(2) (3) 


(4) 


mm 


l/h mm 


kgf/cm« 


400 


42 450- 56 600 4'84- 7-25 


l-75-3'43 


600 


45 280- 84 900 5-33- 830 


1 ■54-3-36 


800 


75 880-118 860 625-1 1'25 


1-12-2-80 


1000 


96 220-141500 8-25-I3-75 


0-7O-2-31 


1 200 


127 350-169 800 10-55-15-00 


0-49- 1-89 



The speed of cutting is between 50 and 150 mm per minute. The 
following points are to be kept in view during heavy cutting: 

a) The equipment must be designed to carry the high volume of 
oxygen required for heavy cutting; and 

b) The preheat orifices should be such that the preheat flame is strong 
and as long as possible. 

8.6 Cutting of Caat Iron — Stricdy speaking cast iron cannot be cut by the 
usual oxygen cutting process in the sense the term is used for cutting mild 
steel. Fortunately in most cases cast iron is cut only for demolidon purposes 
where severing by any means rather than quality-cut is required. This, 
however, can be achieved by suitable modificadon to the flame and technique 
of the cutting process. 

90 



SPt 12.1975 

The content of carbon in cast iron is generally around 3 percent 
and quite a large part of it is present as graphite in the case of grey cast iron. 
In addition cast iron contains a good percentage of silicon. Neither of these 
elements is easily oxidizablc and silicon, when oxidized, forms the refractory 
silicate which prevents the cutting oxygen stream from coming in contact with 
hot iron to keep the cutting operation going. White cast iron, in which most 
of the carbon is in the combined state, is also difficult to cut by the normal 
process. 

It has, however, been found that a carburizing preheat flame together 
with oxygen at a higher pressure and volume than required for cutting same 
thickness of mild steel helps to form the graphite and silicon present in the 
cast iron into a fusible slag which is blown away by the comparatively high 
oxygen pressure. A wider area is required to be preheated to get the neces- 
sary benefit of heat due to oxidation of iron. The cutting oxygen pressure is 
about twice that required for cutting mild steel of same thickness. The cut 
obtained by this process is obviously ragged and the kerf much wider. Due to 
the nature of the flame necessary only dissolved acetylene can be used as 
fuel gas. The heat developed and smoke generated in the process are also 
high. 

8.6.1 Procedure — Select proper nozzle, adjust the correct gas pressures to 
the required values with the valves open and light the preheat flame. The 
acetylene feather should be about 2 to 25 times longer than the central white 
cone with the cutting oxygen valve open. Preheat one end of the job witli 
a swinging movement of the nozzle approximately 6 mm each way of the 
line of cut, with the tip of the nozzle about 8- 1 2 mm above the surface. When 
the area is bright red, release oxygen, the angle of the cutting oxygen stream 
being about 45° with the line of cut. The cut is continued with the swing- 
ing semi-circular movement and the angle is gradually increased to about 75°. 
If the cut is stopped, stop cutting oxygen, go back to the preheating 
zone and heat it with the same swinging movement of the blowpipe. Start 
the cut preferably from one edge of the kerf. Should the cut cease to con- 
tinue, put the red hot end of a mild steel red at a difficult point of the cut 
and release cutting oxygen. This will help restarting of the cut. 

Operating data for cutting cast iron using a typical blowpipe is given in 
Table 8.3. The data is intended to serve as a guide only and may vary to 
suit particular applications. 




PREHEATING 



BLOWPIPE MOVEMENT 
OEVKINO PROOAESS 
OF CUT 



Fio. 8.3 Method of Blowpipe Mamipulation 
91 



8Ptl2.1975 



TABLE 8.3 OPERATING DATA FOR CUTTING CAST IRON 








( Clause 8 ( 


5.1) 






Thickness 


Diameter 
or CtnriNO 

OxYOEN 
O RIFICE 


Operatino Pressure 

, ^ , 

Oxygen Acetylene 


Gas Consumption 




Acetylene 


Heatmg 
Oxygen 


Cutting 
Oxygen 


(1) 


(2) 


(3) 


(4) 


(5) 


(6) 


(7) 


mm 
100-150 


mm 
24 


kgf/cmS 
5 6-6 3 


kgf/cm8 
06 


I/h 
2 800 3 400 


I/h 

2 COO-3 100 


1/h 
19 500-21 800 


200-250 


32 


6 3-7 7 


OG 


4 400 5 100 


4 000-4 500 


28 300-34 000 


300-350 


40 


Over 10 6 


06 


Over 6 800 


Over 6 100 


Over 58 100 



8.7 Oxygen Lancing — For cutting or boring holes m very thick steel or 
cast iron, for breaking up furnace, scidp or spills or clearing fro/en tap holes 
of furnaces, the oidinaiy cutting blowpipe is niadcqujte Toi such work 
oxygen lance is necessaiy The lance consists of a length of 3 15, 6 3 or 
even 10 mm si/c steel gas pipe suitably connecttd to an oxygen regulator 
There is no provision for a heating flame 

To start the tut, hold the end of the lanrc tube a shoit distance away 
from the spot where the cut is to be stai ted, heat the su.riing pomt with a 
separate welding or cuiung blowpipe and, when the stalling pomt is hot 
enough, heat the end of the lance to red Ik at and tuin the oxygen on and 
remove the heating blowpipe Oxidation staits and the burning end of the 
lance furnishes suflicu nt heat to continue cutting opeiation and also to keep 
the oxide fluid so that it will Ilou out of the cut In cutting or boring a hole, 
work the lance up and down oi forwaid and backward — hke a saw — in 
the kerf in order to extend the cut 

During oxygen lancing a shield should be used for protection against 
flying slag, especially when boring holes 

8.8 Flame Gouging — Flame gouging provides a rapid and accurate means 
for removing a narrow strip of surface metal from steel plate, forgings and 
castings It differs from other flame processes in that cutting acUon docs 
not progress right through the thickness of the material but is confined to 
a narrow groove This is achieved by dehvermg a relatively large volume 
of oxygen at low velocity through a specially designed nozzle at a low angle 
so that a smooth, accurately defined groove is cut. The prmciple is the same 
as that of oxygen cutUng, that is, ignition of steel in a stream of oxygen. 
Therefore, all steels which can be flame cut can also be flame gouged. 

A suitable blowpipe with nozzles of difierent sizes is made use of for 
cutdng grooves of different shapes and depths. The nozzles have preheating 
flames so arranged around the central divergent oxygen orifice as to provide 
the required preheat and to maintain the thermal balance in progressive 

92 



SPi 12-1975 

gouging. The flames are initially directed at a steep angle of about 20° to 
the horizontal and when the spot where gouging is to start is red hot the cut- 
ting oxygen stream is released. When the goove starts the angle of the blow- 
pipe is reduced to the normal operating angle of about 5° to the horizontal. 

Gouging is about three times as fast as chipping. Some of the common 
applications of gouging are : (a) removing root side of welds prior to depositing 
a sealing run; (b) removing defective spots in welds for rectification; (c) edge 
preparation for single U and double U groove weld; (d) for maintenance 
operations, such as removing steel tubes seized on mahdriJs; (e) dismantling 
welded structures without damaging the parent plates; and (f) for removing 
surplus metal such as reinforcements on welds and for shaping steel castings. 
Gouging may also be used to remove rivet heads without damaging the 
parent plates. A special rivet washing nozzle should be used for the 
purpose. 

8.9 Under-Water Cutting — With hydrogen as fuel gas, oxygen cutting 
process may also be used for cutting steels under water, up to a depth of 
30 m. Special cutting i;quipment is however required for under-water cutting 
operations. 

8.10 Machine Cutting — Mechanization of blowpipe eliminates the uncer- 
tainties and irregularities inseparable from hand cutting. A very wide range 
of machines is available to suit different purposes. From the simple single 
purpose machines intended for cutting straight lines and circles to the 
sophisticated machines designed for production of irregular shapes in steel 
plates or forgings, a very wide range of different types of cutting machines 
have been developed. Machines falling in the latter category vary in so far 
as methods employed for regulating the movements are concerned, but the 
fundamental principles governing the adjustment of the oxygen supply and 
cutting speed are the same whatever the type. Uniform speed of travel and 
percise control over nozzle size, heating flame and cutting oxygen pressure 
enable a very high degree of accuracy, efficiency and economy to be achieved 
{see Fig 3.9 and 3.10). 

8.11 EflFects of Alloying Elements on Oxygen Cutting of Steels 

8.11.1 It is known that oxygen cutting causes an increase in the surface 
hardness of the cut edge, the degree of hardness increasing with increasing 
percentages of carbon in the steel. For all practical purposes the hardening 
effect is negligible on steels up to 200 mm thick having a maximum carbon per- 
centage of 03 percent. Steel with higher carbon contents should be pre- 
heated. The degree of preheat is higher with higher percentages of carbon. 

The effect of other alloying elements is given below: 
a) Manganese — Steels containing up to 14 percent manganese and 1"5 
percent carbon can be cut without difficulty and the cutting should 
be at the highest possible speed compatible with a good cut and the 
job should be cooled as rapidly as possible. 

93 



SPtl2-1975 

b) Silicon — Silicon, in amounts usually present has no effect. Trans- 
former irons having about 4 percent silicon are readily cut. Silicon 
steels containing considerable amounts of carbon and manganese 
should be preheated and post-annealed. 

c) Chromium — Steeb having up to 5 percent chrpmium can be cut 
without much difficulty. Where higher chromium contents are 
involved powder cutting should be employed. 

d) Nickel — Steeb containing up to 7 percent nickel can be cut readily; 
steels with nickel content 20 to 30 percent, may also be cut if carbon 
content is not too high. 

e) Molybdenum — Molybdenum has the same effect as chromium. Air- 
craft quality chromium-molybdenum steel offers no difficulty. 
High molybdenum-tungsten steels should, however, be cut by the 
powder process. 

f) Tungsten — Usual alloys containing about 12-14 percent tungsten 
can be readily cut; but cutting is difficult with higher percentage of 
tungsten. The limiting percentage is about 20. 

g) Copper — In amounts up to 2 percent copper has no apparant eff«Jct. 

h) Aluminium — ■ Unless present in large amounts (of the order of 10 
percent ) the effect of aluminium is not appreciable. 

j) Phosphorus — This element has no effect in amounts tolerated in steel. 

k) Sulphur — Small amount, as is present in steels, have no effect. Rate 
of cutting is reduced and sulphur dioxide fumes are noticeable when 
the percentage of sulphur is high. 

m) Vanadium — In amounts usually present in steel, this rather improves 
the quality of cut. 

8.11.2 The cutting process also has an influence on the degree of hardness. 
While milling produces least affect, depth of hardness produced by shearing 
is maximum. The depth of hardening produced by various cutting pro- 
cesses is given in Table 8.4 for guidance. 

8.12 Powder Chitting 

8.12«1 Gtneral — As stated earlier the foremost requirement of oxygen cut- 
ting is that the melting point of the oxide should be lower than that of the 
material being cut. While in the case of low carbon steels this requirement 
is fulfilled, the oxides produced during cutting stainless steels and non-ferrous 
materials have a higher melting point than that of the parent metal. The 
alloying element like chromium in the stainless steels and the constituents 
of non-ferrous materials readily combine with oxygen at high temperatiurs. 
The resulting oxides, which are refractory in natuire, form a thin tenacious 

94 



SP: 12 '1975 



TABLE 8.4 DEPTH OF HARDENING PRODUCED BY 
VARIOUS CUTTING PROCESSES 

{Clatue 8.11.2) 

CuTTiNO Process Maximum Depth of Hardenino 



(1) 

Shearing 

Oxy-propane 

Oxy-coal gas 

Oxy-acetylene 

Cold-sawing 

Milling 



Mild Steel 


> 

Low Alloy Steel 


(2) 




(3) 


mm 




mm 


11-25 




6-50 


600 




3-50 


400 




3-75 


4-75 




2 00 


1-75 




100 


1-25 




100 



film on the surface of the metal thus preventing further oxidation of the 
material. It is, therefore, difiicut to cut the high alloy steels and non-ferrous 
material using normal oxy-acetylene cutting process. 

Until the introduction of powder-cutting process mechanical methods 
like shearing and machining were being used to cut and shape high alloy steels 
including heat and corrosion resisting steels. Mechanical methods being 
relatively slow and expensive add considerably to the cost of fabrication of the 
already costly group of materials. Powder cutting process can be used to 
cut, bevel and profile stainless and other high alloy steels at similar speeds 
and with much the same ease as could be obtained by oxygen cutting of low- 
carbon steels. 

8.12.2 Powder Cutting Process — In the powder cutting process oxy-fuel 
torch is supplemented by a stream of powdered material. Finely divided iron- 
rich powder is separately introduced into the reaction zone by compressed air 
or nitrogen. The combustion of iron powder increases the temperature of 
the reaction zone. This will increase the fluidity of the refractory oxides 
which are removed by the combined melting and fluxing action and also to 
a certain extent by the eroding action of the iron particles. A clean surface 
is thus continuously exposed to the stream of oxygen and the cut progresses 
through the thickness of the metal. The quality of cut obtained is only slightly 
inferior to the cut obtained by oxy-acetylene process in low-carbon steal. 

8.12.3 Equipment — The process requires the use of a powder dispensing 
unit to introduce iron powder into the reaction zone. The dispenser should 
be capable of giving a constant rate of flow at any given set of conditions. 
Through suitable controls it should be possible to regulate the rate of flow of 
the powder. 

95 



SPil2-1975 

The powder dispenser ( see Fig. 8.4 ) is essentially a pressure vessel of 
injector type, incorporating a hopper, air filter, air pressure regulator, drier 
and injector unit. The dispenser cover which may be removed to permit 
changing of hopper is fitted with a relief valve set to blow at a predetermined 
pressure. The dispenser is also provided with a screen for removing oversize 
particles from powder and a shallow tray for holding a suitable drying agent. 



^^ 



^POWDER 
MNLET 




CUTTING 
NOZZLE 



^ i r^ \^\ 



POWDER 
.INLET 



CUTTING 

OXYGEN 

STREAM 




CUTTING 
NOZZLE 

POWDER 



PREHEAT 
FLAME 



Fig. 8.4 The Powder Nozzle Showing its Method of Operation 

Compressed air fed throiigh the dispenser picks up the powder as it 
passes through the injector unit. The air-powder mixture is carried to the 
blowpipe by means of rubber hoses. 

8.12.3.1 Hand cutting attachment — The powder is introduced into the 
reaction zone by means of powder cutting attachments fitted to normal oxy- 
gen cutting manual blowpipes. The attachment comprises of powder valve, 
powder nozzle ( see Fig. 8.4 ) and connecting tubing. The powder nozzle 
is fitted over the standard cutting nozzle and powder valve is clamped in a 
suitable position adjacent to the gas valves. Iron powder is injected through 
heating flame into the cutting zone at a point approximately 25 mm below 
the surface of the nozzle. The cutting nozzle ( usually one size larger than 
for equivalent thickness of carbon steels ) is posidoned as for cutting 



96 



SP 1 12 . 1975 

maintaining a clearance of 25 to 35 mm between the nozzle and the work to 
permit the powder to mix and burn with the oxygen in the cutting stress. 

8.12.3.2 Attachments for machine cutting — Powder cutting attachments 
for machine cutting stainless steel up to 300 mm thick have been developed. 
With suitable modifications these may be fitted to various straight line and 
profile cutting machines. 

8.12.3.3 Single tube and multijet attachment — The powder attachments 
are available in two types. In the first type a single tube leads to the cutting 
nozzle and discharges a single stream of powder into the cutting oxygen 
( see Fig. 8.5 ). In many cases particularly for manual cutting or straight 
line machine cutting the powder cutting attachment is eliminated and a single 
tube is substituted. This tube discharges the powder stream at an angle to 
the cutting oxygen jet at a velocity sufficient for it to reach the heating flame. 
The single tube attachment can be used only when cutting is being done in 
one direction, for the powder must in all cases lead the cutting oxygen stream. 




CUTTING 
NOZZLE 



POWDER 
NOZZLE 



POWDER 



PREHEAT 

GAS 

FLAME 

CUTTING 
OXYGEN 



Fio. 8.5 SiNOJLE Tube Powder Feed 

In the multijet type ( see Fig. 8.4 ) the gas-powder mixutre is carried 
from the down stream side of the powder valve to a powder cutting adaptor 
attached to the cutting tip. This adaptor surrounds the periphery of the 
exit end of the tip. General powder jets cause the powder to issue in the form 
of a cone and at sufficient velocity to blow thorugh the preheating flame and 
impinging against the cutting oxygen stream. 



97 



SPtl2-1975 

All powder cutting attachments are designed to be wear resistant, but 
because of the abrasive nature of the iron particles some wear is unavoidable 
in the parts coming in contanct with the powder. 

8.12.4 Compressed Air Requirements — The dispenser should be supplied from 
a source of clean and dry air. Actual dispenser operating prcrsure varies 
from 0070-0-70 kgf/cm* but usually between 021 and 042 kfg/cm*. 
Approximate consumption of air at different operating pressures are given 
below : 

Pressure Consumption 

kgf/cm* 1/h 

0'14 700 

0'35 850 

0-50 1 000 

0-70 1 100 

Oxygen shall not in any circumstances be used in place of air for 
operating the dispenser. 

8.13 Powder Cutting of Different Materials 

8.13.1 Stainless Steel — In general the principles of cutting stainless steel 
arc the same as those used in oxygen cutting of mild steel. It is the general 
practice in powder cutting to use nozzles a size higher than that required to 
cut mild steel of same thickness using oxygen cutting process. A greater 
distance is maintained between the nozzle and the plate surface to permit 
thorough combustion of the powder at the reaction zone. 

The preheating time needed in normal oxygen cutting is eliminated in 
powder cutting. Due to intense heat produced by combustion of iron 
powder, it is possible to make fast cuts when cutting cold material without 
losing time required for preheating. 

8.13.2 Cast Iron and High Alloy Steels — For cutting cast iron operating 
principles are the same as for stainless steel of equal thickness, but speed of 
cut will be less by about 50 percent. Similar reduction in speed would be 
noticed while cutting high alloy steels. 

8.13.3 Copper and Copper Alloys — ^ In the case of copper and copper alloys 
powder cutting process is found to be effective because of the melting action 
coupled with the eroding action of high velocity particles of iron powder 
rather than due to oxidation. An important factor to be considered while 
cutting copper and copper alloys is the high thermal conductivity of the 
material being cut. Due to rapid dissipation of heat large amount of preheat 
is required to maintain the metal at a sufficiently high temperature to enable 
the cut to progress. 

98 



SP : 12 • 1975 

8.13.4 Nickel and Nickel Alloys — Although not having the high thermal 
conductivity of copper, nickel has comparatively high melting point. Consi- 
derably higher preheating temperatures and use of heavy duty blowpipe are, 
therefore, necessary to cut nickel and nickel alloys. However, nickel aUoys 
such as nimonic and inconcl are much more readily cut than certain other 
alloys, preheating being unnecessary. 

8.13.5 Aluminium and Alumtnmm Alloys — In the case of aluminium and 
aluminium alloys the quality of cut obtained by powder cutting can only be 
described as fan . While wiih puie aluminium ragged cut is obtained, in the 
case of certain alloys the cut lace is vei y hard due to formation of oxides 
which extend to a depth up to 6 mm depending on the thickness of the 
malcual. 

8.13.6 Heavy Culling - - For heavy cutting of stainless steels, heavily cnci ust- 
cd opcn-hrarth spills, ladle buttons, etc, blowpipes with appiopriate powder 
( utUni^ atladimcnls ate .wailable Ncvcithcless certain innovations are 
necessary in cutting extra-thick caslmgs. 

8.13.7 I'oitder H'aj/HH^ -- A development of powdci cutting pioccss, pow- 
dei uashiiis; i elates to a theimal method ol letthuu; steel tastmi^s By powdei 
\\asliiiiq, bumt-on and metal-penetrated mouldings can Ijc attended to iiuK h 
mote quickly ilian is possible by conventional tools 

8.13.8 Powder Coii!;itig -'litis process has primauly been developed foi 
use in steel foundi les With tins process stainless steel LAn \n- gougocl at high 
speeds coiiipaiablc to the speeds .i( hieved in gouging mild steel using not iiial 
(>\y-acct\l('ne piocess 

8.13.9 Ponder Lananii — The powder lancing technique piovides a loni- 
paiativcly easy means o( seveiing those materials which aie hirheifo pioved 
impossible Ol iuie( ononiical to t ut by leason ol heavy si/e oi the oxides 
being of rehactory naluie. 

Ihe equipment consists of a special holder incoipotatiiig an iiij('< loi 
and duel valve couph^d to a lugh pressure oxygen supply and standaid 
powder dispenser. 

8.14 Multiple Gutting — Tor regular production of similar jobs an 
operator can simultancoulsy operate a number of cutting blowpipes mounted 
on the same machine. As many as 20 cutting blowpipes have been usetl on 
the .same machine to cut hke number of identical shapes in one opciation 
This increases production and reduces cost of ( utting. 

8.15 Stack Cutting — Stack cutting is the cutting of multiple layeis of 
material clamped together as though they were one thick piece of material. 
The advantages of stack cutting are increased productivity and economy in 
the consumption of gases. The resulting cut edges are sciuarc and more free 
of burrs and drag as compared to sheared edges. Optimum stack thickness 
is 75 to 100 mm. 

99 



SP : 12 . 1975 

It is very important thai the tlamping must In; very cflbctivc so as to 
clir)iiiiat<: ;iil aii' Raps <;'»[)ecially along the hnc of cut. When slicets are involv- 
ed, stack cutting may u-sult in molten edges stuck togetlier. In such cases a 
' waste plate ' which is thrown awu) after the cut canprofitahly he used as tlu; 
top of the sta( k. I'his ])reveiUs fusion of tiic cut edges of the sheets and neat 
cuts art; possi!)le. If the sliects are not cl<;an and if clamping is not effective 
oxygen cutting ijcconies dillicult and recourse has to be taken to powder 
cutting. 

8.16 Accuracy of Oxygen Cutting — The degree of acciirac y ohtained 
depen<ls on the thickness and inlri<acy of the job as well as the (piality of 
equi]jnient used. With elliricnt machines and by following proper proce- 
dures a tolerance of :|;0(J8 nun can b(; obtained ( see IS : 6431-1971* ). 

8.17 Effect of Oxygen Purity — Oxygen of very high ptuity ( 995 percent 
or higher ) should be used for ( ulling. It has been observed that one percent 
decrease; of oxygen piuily will result in increas(;d consumption of cutting 
oxygi'ii by about 2.') p(;r< (nit. Apart Irom this, oxygen of lower purity reduces 
the .speed of culling and render cutting of hightT thicknesses very dillicult. 

8.18 Distortion — Disloition in oxygen cutting can often ]iose serious 
piobjenis. DisloilJon cannrit peiliaps Ik- comph'tely eliiriinated but can be 
reilu( ed by adopting appi opriati; procedures of cutting. Rolling stresses locked 
up into iIk; plate, transverse and longitudinal shrinkage, Iu;at input, plates 
not level or supported at the time of cutting, are some of the factors that give 
rise to distort ion. Some of the n^medial measures used in practice are given 
b<;low. 'I'hese are only sonu; of the basic rules intended to keep distortion to 
a minimum. An appreciation of the cau.ses of distortion and (experience 
add to the elTiciency and accuracy of cutting: 

a) Distorliondue to lo( ked up strcs.ses arc unpredictable; but generally 
these arc not very significant. Transverse and longitudinal shrink- 
age can be estimated roughly and allowed for; a few trials will be 
nece.ssary to ascertain these factors wiiich will vary from work to 
work. Where very higli accuracy is requir(^d and machining of 
the cut edge is called for, the job should be cut a little oversize. 

b) The more the heat input the more will be the distortion. The 
fuel gas has therefore to be .so cho.scn that the cutting speed is highest; 
acetylene would be a good choice. 

c) Accurate levelling of plates is very important. If the plate surface 
is not horizontal and if a bevel is to be rut the angle of bevel will 
be entirely different from what is desired; if a template is used for 
cutting a circle the product will only be oval and the cut edge will 
not be square. 



*Tolerancej on dimension! of plates cut by flame. 

100 



SP: 12 -1975 

d) In order to prevent bowing it is necessary to support and hold the 
work rigidly to Jet the scrap move freely; the scrap should be cut 
off before it can move the work. Small wedges fitted into the kerf 
prevent tlie job or the scrap moving over and (iliing the gap made 
by cutting. Advantages of wedging can be noticed in cutting 
circles, where in the absence of wcdg(;s there will invariably be a 
small step at the start and finish of the cut 

e) While cutting strips or long narrow profilcji two cutters should be 
used; this spreads the input heat to both sides of the strip so that both 
sides react in the same fashion. Distortion is thus minimized due 
to even distribution of heat. 

f ) One of the most important rules is that the work should be left 
attached to the bulk of the material until the last possible moment. 



101 



SPil2-1975 

SECTION 9 
INSPECTION AND TESTING 

9.0 General 

Oxy-acctylenc welding process can be used on the whole range of 
commercial Icrrous and non-ferrous metals and alloys Materials, such as 
high carbon and alloy steels can be v% elded by oxy-acetylenc welding provided 
thejomts, if required, can be properly heat-treated before and after welding 
Cast iron mac hincry frames 30 cm or more thick at fracture point have been 
repaired by ( ithcr fusion oi braze welding ( non-fusion welding ) Sound 
welds aic produced in other materials by appropriate variation in technique, 
lieat-troatment, pre- and post-heating, ttc. Generally spralcing, ox)- 
aci lyicnc ^vddmg is no longer used in striKliiial v\ork m injld steel, ifarc- 
^\eldlng lacilities aic available, except in the tase of relatively thin gauge 
material and pipes 

With the piogicss in the use and acceptance of welding as a fabrication 
medium, inspection and testing of welds has assumed gieat importance To 
obt.uii a deptndable joint it is nec<ssaiy to inspect and exctnsc adequate 
control before, dui ing and after welding It is also iicc essarv to draw samples 
on a scientific basis and list them not only to control the quality of weld, 
but also to assess the skill and ability of the welder 

Inspection and testing jjroccdures for diflcrent welding processes vaiy 
considerably I he various tc-sts to be conducted cjn welded joints are deter- 
mined mainly by the service conditie>ns to which the wekled components 
will be subjee ted Reference may be made to IS J322-1970* ioi details of 
inspection procedure 

9.1 Inspection 

Inspection for welding has to be cariie"d out in three stages 

a) Preliminaiy stage — Before commencing fabucation by welding 

b) In-piocc^ss stage — During fabrication by welding 

c) Final stage — After welding 

9.2 Inspection Before Welding 

Inspection before the commencement of welding should cover all the 
aspects with a view to eliminating all potential sources of defects The 
aspects to be covered are 

a) Drawings and specifications, 
*Codc of procedure for inspection of welds 

102 



SP : 12 - 1975 

b) Selection of welding process, 

c) Material spctifications, 

d) Inspection of materials, 
c) Selection of consumables, 

f ) Inspection of consumables, 

g) Welding procedure, 
h) Welding equipment, 
j) WeJding operators-, 
k) Testing facilities, and 

m) Ancillary equipment and facilities. 

9.3 Inspection During Fabrication 

Inspection during fabii(ation by \velding is perfoiined with the 
following objectives; 

a) To ensure that the procedures, consumables, operators, etc, employ- 
ed have been accoidrd prior approval; 

b) To examine assemblies, vvcid preparations, etc, prior to start 
of welding to eniUic (liat they are in conformity with approved 
procedures and arc designed to give good welding; 

c) 'I'o ensure by visual inspetlion duiing welding that a good finished 
weld results and defects, if any, in the initial stages are removed 
prior to further work; 

d) To test welds which may become diflicult to inspect at a later stage 
due to decreasing acccs'-ibility witli the progress of work; and 

e) To permit modifications, alterations, additions to procedures, consu- 
mables, operators previously accorded approval. 

9.3.1 The inspection during this stage should cover aspects, such as: 

a) inspection of prepared materials, 

b) inspection of assemblies, 

c) inspection of welding con.sumables, 

d) operators, 

c) welding procedures, 

f ) inspection during weldings, and 

g) deviations. 

9.4 Inspection After Welding 

Inspection after welding is performed with a view to assessing: 
a) the quality of weld by mechanical tests either on extension pieces 
or the actual fabricated component; and 

103 



SPil2-I97S 

b) the correctness of the whole weldment by visual and dimensional 
checks, by leak and load tests on the actual component. 

9.4.1 Inspection during this stage should cover: 

a) visual inspection; 

b) inspection for v^reld dimensions; 

c) mechanical tests; 

d) non-destructive tests; 

e) leak tests; and 

f ) load test, proof test and overload test, 

9.4.2 The completed weld and the welded fabrication as a whole should 
be examined visually, preferably with the assistance of a magnifying lens to 
detect: 

a) weld defects occurring at the surface, such as blow-holes, pipes, 
exposed porosity, exposed inclusions, unfilled cracks, unfuscd weld, 
etc; 

b) surface cracks in the weld metal or in the parent metal adjacent 
to weld; 

c) damages to the parent metal, such as undercut, burning, over- 
heating, etc; 

d) profile defects, such as excessive convexity or concavity, overlap, 
unequal leg lengths, excessive reinforcement, incompletely filled 
grooves, excessive penetration bead, roof grooves, shrinkage grooves, 
etc ; and 

e) incorrect finish, for example, ripple, weaving faults, chipping and 
peening marks, spatter, underflushing, overgrinding, uneven welds, 
etc. 

9.4.3 Visual examination can also reveal: 

a) distortion due to welding, that is, local shrinkage, camber, bowing, 
twisting, rotation, buckling waviness, etc; 

b) linear, eccentric, angular and rotational misahgnment of parts; 

c) incorrect positioning of parts; and 

d) visible dimensional errors. 

9.5 Testing of Welds 

In order to ensure the quality of welds, it is necessary to have an effi- 
cient system of testing. In general, mechanical tests are the least expensive 
and most reliable for assessing weld quality, Therefore, mechanical teiti 
are most -widely carrie4 pwt, 

m 



SP: 12 -1975 

Though there is general unammit> of opiaum ,iim>ug vveldmg cjigmocrs 
on the proportics to be detcrmmcd and the piutcduu- of test, thiie is a wide 
divergence in the ihapc and size of test !>pei,imcns and the details of tcsit pro- 
cedures The results obtained on test specimen!, prescribed in diffei ont codes 
and specifications, should not, thciefore, be compared directly 

9.6 Mechanical Tests 

Mechanical tests are generally destructive tcsti except foi tests like 
hardness testing In so lar as the welds arc c oncerned they can be pciiormed 
on: 

a) prototype or sample welds, and 

b) extension pieces or test covipons 

9.6.1 Met hanical tests may ( ompnsc of all oi some of the following 

a) T(sts /or determtn>tii> ^Ireiit^lh and ductilily — I ensile lest, bond tests, 
impact test, load test, etc, 

b) Tests for deterrmmng continuUy, fusion and soundness — Bend test, 

c) Tests for determining penetration and internal u eld configurations — Macro- 
sfction etching; and 

d) Tests for deterimntne, melallurgtcal properties and local structural variations 
in weld and the heal affected zone — Micio-structuial exainmation, 
hardness survey, thcnncal analysis, etc 

9.7 Non-destructive Testing 

Weldments are also siibjicted to non-destructive listing Non- 
destructive testing covers the examination o( welds which does not lender 
the weldment unusable or cause damage to the weld Though visual and 
dimensional inspection are also non-destruf tivc in nature, normally 
non-destructive tcstmg coveis the use oi the following methods 

a) Radiogtaphic examination, 

b) Ultrasonic testing, 

c) Magnetic particle flaw detection, 

d) Liquid penetrant flaw detection, and 

e) Eddy current testing. 



105 



SP : 12 - 1975 



SECTION 10 
ESTIMATING AND COSTING 



10.1 General 



Materials, labour and overheads constitute tiic cost of any fabrication 
work and it is true for oxy-acetylcnc welding also. Estimation of expenses 
for a job to be done by the oxy-acetylcne process presents certain difficulties. 
The process is much more flexible than any of tlie welding processes — it is 
a very impoitant point in its favour for its widc-srale adoption in industry 
and dl the same time it often makes an estimation unrealistic as in practice 
the various fac tors that go into the costing may vary widely. The same work 
can be done at widely different speeds with widely different capacities of the 
welding blowpipe. In Tables 7.1, 7.2 and 7.3 arc given welding speeds and 
data for leftward, rightward and vertical techniques of gas welding. The 
information given is based on good welding practice. 

These tables arc for guidance only and as observed earlier the different 
parameters can vary depending on the skill of the operator. 

10.2 Cost of Fabrication by Gas Welding 

In the following paragraphs the factors afTetling the cost of a fabrica- 
tion by oxy-acctylenc welding have been evaluated: 

a) Base Material — Base material shall be very carefully Selected, keep- 
ing in view the wastage. Utilization of plates should be so planned 
that minimum scrap loss is involved; small components can be 
fabricated by using plates left over. 

b) Preparation for Weldtng — While preparing the plate edges of weld- 
ing judgment must be applied to ensure minimum scrap loss and an 
acceptable preparation ( tee Section 7 ). While for small thick- 
nesses shear cutting is extensively used, oxygen cutting is generally 
recommended for thicknesses 3' 15 mm and higher. 

U.se of wider bevel angles than necessary may lead to increase 
in cost. For example a 40° bevel in place of 30° bevel on a 6-mm 
thick plate will increase the cost of edge preparation by about 
2 percent. The increase in cost of welding will be about 90 per- 
cent due to additional volume of filler metal and gases. 

For each thickness, the specified size of nozzle, gas pressures 
and speed of cutting should be employed to obtain the best results. 
If the equipment is defective or the nozzle is unclean, uneven cuts 
will result. Although generally oxy-cut surfaces do not require 
any further finish prior to welding, extensive grinding will be neces- 
sary to rectify the defects which means extra expenses. Should 

106 



SP : 12 - 1975 

the fit-up be poor due to uneven cutting the weld may be unsatis- 
factory and may even be rejected. 

c) Cost of Actual Welding Operation — I'his includes cost of welding 
rods and fluxc, welding gases and labour charges. 

10.3 Cost of Welding — The entire cost of welding can be broken down 
as follows: 

a) Cost of edge preparation, 

b) Cost of filler metal and liux ( when required ), 

c) Cost of oxygen and acetylene gases, 

d) Cost of post-weld finish or treatment, 

e) Cost of labour, and 

f) Overheads. 

It is obvious that control must be exercised on all these factors for 
achievement of quality in the weldment and economy in fabrication. 

10.3.1 Cost of Edge Preparation — The cost of edge preparation by oxy- 
cutting can be easily calculated by adding together the cost of gases consumed, 
labour charges and overheads. While consumption of oxygen can be easily 
calculated from the pressure-drop in the cylinder by simple multiplication 
and division on the basis of Boyles Law, the volume of dissoved acetylene 
is determined from the diflference of weight of the cylinder before commence- 
ment and after completion of cutting on the basis that 1 m' of acetylene 
approximately weighs 1 ' 1 kg. 

10.3.2 Cost of Filler Metal and Flux — Approximate consumption of the 
selected wire can be estimated by the data given in Tables 7.1, 7.2 
and 7.3. 

Volume for volume the filler metal is generally 5 to 10 times more 
expensive than the base metal. It follows that a weldment to be economical 
must be designed with the least volume of weldment. Furthermore, saving 
in weld metal also means saving in labour, gases and associated overhead 
expenses. If the root gap between plates is increased from 1'5 to 2 5, the 
quantity of weld metal required will be about 60 percent more and the 
expenses for gases will also be approximately 50 percent more. Similarly, 
if the fit-up is not satisfactory the weld quality may deteriorate and the 
expenses may go up. 

Over- welding is sometimes attempted to make the weld ' strongei* '; 
this at once shows a lack of understanding of the principle on which the weld- 
ment is designed. If the design calls for a fillet weld with 6 mm leg length 
then a weld of that size is ample to carry the load safely. Admittedly, in 

107 



SPtl2-19?5 

manual welding, maintenance of an exact 6 mm leg may not be easy 
and in practice a tolerance ± 1 mm is necessary. If the design does not 
permit even this degree of negative tolerance a little over-welding may 
become unavoidable. 

For welding mild steel no flux is required. But flux which is a mixture 
of various chemicals is required for protection of the weld metal and base 
plate at the time of welding, say, aluminium, stainless steel or cast iron. 
On completion of a job, therefore, the cost of the flux used must also be taken 
into consideration. Different types of fluxes arc required for welding 
different metals. 

10.3.3 Cost of Oxygen and Acetylene Gaus — For the put pose of estimation 
reference may be made to Tables 7 1,72 and 7 3. I'hese figures relate to 
welding of steel and hcnre foi welding olliei iiiatciials, such as aluminium, 
stainless steel, etc, these figuies will not apply. For calculation of actual 
quantities of oxygen and acetylene consumed in a particular job the following 
methcxls can be used: 

10.3.3.1 Oxygen — The volume of oxygen consumed ( v ) can be calcu- 
lated from the followmg formula: 

P 
where 

V — volume of oxygen contained in the full cylinder, 

Pi = pressuie of oxygen m the cylinder as indicated by the pres- 
sure regulator at the time of starting the work, 

P, "=■ pressure of oxygen in the cylinder as registered by the pres- 
sure regulator on completion of the job, and 

P == original pressure at which the cylinder was filled by the 
suppliers. 

The following example will further clarify the procedure: 

Suppose that a cylinder has been filled at a pressure of 
125 kgf/cm* and the volume of oxygen in the cylinder at that 
pressure is 6 m'. At the time of starting the work the pressure 
regulator registers a pressure of 100 kgf/cm* and on completion the 
pressure of oxygen in the cylinder is 50 kgf/cm*. The volume of 
oxygen consumed for this work can be calculated as follows: 

F=6m» 

P = 125 kgf/cm» 

m 



SPtl2.1975 

?i == 100 kgf/cm« 

P, = 50 kgf/cm» 

6 ( 100 - 50 ) , 
"= 125 -"^ 

^- 2-4 m' 

Note — The capacity of the cylindtr .ind (he pressure at which it has been filled 
should be ascertained from the suppheis. 

10.3.3.2 Acetylene — Althotigli a lougli estimation Is possible from 
Tables 7.1, 7.2 and 7.3, for exact e.ikiiUtion of acetylene consumed, the 
weight of the acetylene cslinder heloie comnieniiiig the job ( H'l) and 
after its completion ( ir,) will have to be taken: 

iVi - n\ 3 
" = — ri — "^ 

10.3.4 Cost of Posl-WeU Fini'ih or Ircalment - Aft or- weld treatment, such 
as grinding, correction oi distoilion, etc, whenever applicable, have to be 
carried out. Pjoper sequence of welding may keep liic distoilion to a mini- 
mum and should be lollowcd. Weld sliould be done so that inininiuni grind- 
ing, if at all, becomes ncces')4ry. 

10.3.5 Cost oj Labour — From the; point of weld economics as well 
as weld quality it is essential to use the highest speed of welding. With the 
same flow rate of gases if a wcldei welds at a speed ofGui/handif 
another operator welds at a speed of (5 in/h it is obvious that the labour cost is 
increased by 25 percent if the first welder is employed for the job. 

To minimize labour charges, it is also necessary to ensure that most of 
a welder's time is employed in a( tual welding; it may be more economical 
to employ a helper for unimpoitant work, sucli as tacking, positioning, etc, 
which otherwise the welder has to do himself The main object is to increase 
this duty factor. This can be achieved by the following methods: 

a) Use of jigs, fixtures and manipulators — It is well known that a welder 
can work better and faster in the downhand position because in 
this position, fatigue is less. It may de noted that if the cost of 
depositing a 6-mm fillet in the flat position is rated at 100 percent, 
the ratings for similar fillets in horizontal, vertical and overhead 
positions are approximately 150 percent, 300 percent and 400 
percent, respectively. 

b) Incentive schemes on the basis of quality of work and output. 

109 



SPtl2-1975 

10.3.5.1 The influrnrc of the duty factor on labour cost is illustrated in 
the following table. A labour rate of Re 1"(|0 pci hour and welding speed of 
10 m/h at 100 percent duty cylcc have been assumed: 



Duly ['"actor 


Production 


Labour Cost per Metre 


Percent 


m/h 


Paisc 


20 


2 


50 


40 


4 


25 


60 


6 


16 


80 


8 


12 


100 


10 


10 



10.3.6 Overheads 

Overheads vary from factory to factory and also depend upon the 
accounting system Generally for estnnating purposes a factor of 200 
percent of direct labour charge is assumed. 

The total cost of fabrication can now be estimated by adding the costs 
of base material, filler, fluxes, where necessary, edge preparation, oxygen 
acetylene, labour and overheads. 



110 



SP : 12 • 1975 

APPENDIX A 

(Clause 1.1) 
DEFfNITIONS OF COMMON WELDING TERMS 

All-Posidon Rightward Welding — A variation of rightwaid welding in 
which the flame is approximately normal to the molten pool ( see Fig. A- 1 ) . 




Fio. A-1 All- Position Riohtward Welding 

Automatic Welding — Fusion welding in which control of the welding 
operation is predominantly automatic. 

Backfire — The momentary recession ofthe flame into the blowpipe followed 
by immediate re-appearance or complete extinguishment of the flame, 
usually accompanied by an explosive sound. 

Backing Ring — Backing in the form of a ring generally used in the welding 
of piping ( see Fig. A-2 ). 

lACK WELO-^ 
ABC 

continuous type 

flat orooveo riogeo 

sput type 

Fig. A-2 Typical Backing Rings 

Backing Strip — A piece of metal placed at a root and penetrated by weld 
metal. It may remain as part of the joint or may be removed by machin- 
ing or other means ( see Fig. A-3 ). 

Blowhole — A large cavity due to entrapped gas. 

Note — This term is conveniently applied to cavities exceeding I '6 mm in diameter. 

Ill 



SP»12-1975 




r 



-r' 



^^^"^ 



CASE1 



Jf 



-tr -^ 



T. 



CASE 2 

Fio. A-3 Backing Strip 

Branch Tee Saddle Joint A joint brtween a branrh pipe set at 90° to 
a main pipe, the entl ol the bianth pipe being shaped to lit snugly against the 
main pipe ( j« Fig A-4 ) . 



BRANCH 
PIPE 







-MAIN PIPE 
Fio. A-4 Branch Tee Saddle Joint 

Brazing — A process of joining mrtals in which mohen filler metal is drawn 
by capillary Attraction into tlic spd( c between closely adjacent surfaces of 
the parts to be joined. In general, the melting point of the filler metal is 
above SOO'G 

Dip Brazing — A process in which a workpiece is partially or totally 
immersed in a bath of molten filler metal which is covered by a layer of 
molten flux. 

Flame Brazing ( Torch Brazing ) — A process in which heat for brazing 
is obtained from a gas flame fiom a manually operated blowpipe or torch. 

Furnace Brazing — A process m which brazing heat is obtained by putting 
a complete workpiece into a furnace which may contain a protective 
atmosphere. 

112 



SPtl2<1975 

induction Brazing — A process in which brazing heat is obtained by 
inducing high-fiequency electric current witlun tlic material in the 
neighbourhood of tlic joint. A piolcdive atmosphcie may be used. 

Resistance Brazing —A process in which bra/mg heat is obtamcd by: 

a) the passage of an electuc cuncnt between the parts to be joined, 
as in resistance welding; oi 

b) tlie passage of an elccliic cuirent through two carbon electrodes 
and the parts to be joined Tlic greater part of the brazing heat 
IS generated in the electiodes and conducted to the joint. 

Salt Bath Brazing — A process in whit h brazing heat is obtained by immers- 
ing a complete workpiecc in a bath of molten salt of suitable melting point. 
The salt used should art as a flux. 

Bronze Filler Metal - A filler metal used for bionze welding consisting 
basically of coper and zinc . It may also contain nickel, manganese, 
and /or other metals. 

Note — The term ' bronze ' is not used here in the ordinary metallurgical sense. 

Bronze Welding — A method of joining metals by means of the deposition 
of molten copper-ric h filler metal ou the pai ts to be joined, without neces- 
sarily fusing them. Tn general, the melting point of the fillci metal is above 
SSCC. 

Note — The moaning now attached to the term is quite arbitrary, since bronze 
is not used and the process is not necessarily wi-lding Bronze welding, unlike brazing, 
does not depend upon capillary attraction. 

Bell Butt Joint — A joint between two pipes of the same diameter, in which 
one pipe end is swaged out to receive the end of the other pipe ( see Fig. A-5 ). 



Fig. 




ENDS 
CHAMFERED 



Bell Butt Joint 



Butt Weld — A weld in which the weld metal lies substantially within the 
extension of the planes of the surfaces of the parts joined or within the 
extension of the planes of the smaller of the two parts of differing size 
( see Fig. A-6 ). 

113 



SP 1 12 - 1975 




Fio. A-C Examples of Butt Welds 

Capillary Pipe — A fine pipe extending along the junction of weld and 
parent metal. 

Note — The defect is caused by faults in the parent metal ( for example, laminations 
or layers of segregation ) mostly occurring along the whole length of the metal 
concerned. 

Carburizing Flame — A reducing flame in which gas or gases burnt are 
carbonaceous. 

NoTF. - In an oxy-acet>lcne carburizing flame the inner cone is not sharply defined 
and is surrounded by a ((uaiitily of unburncd gas known as a ' fealhci '. 

Chipping Goggles — A protective device enclosing a space in front of the 
eyes to sliicld them from injui y during chipping or grinding. They are fitted 
with two plain glasses. 

Chipping Mark — An indentation resulting from chipping preparation or 
dressing. It gives lise to a dark shadow of corresponding shape in the 
radiograph. 

Convexity — I'he maximum distance from the face of a convex fillet weld 
perpendicular to a line joining the toes. 

Crack — A discontinuity produced either by tearing of the metal while in 
a plastic condition ( hot crack or hot tear ) or by fracture when cold ( cold 
crack or cold tear ). 

Crater — A depression left in weld metal where the arc was broken or the 
(lame was removed. 

End Crater — A crater at the end of a weld or at the end of a joint. 

Deposited Metal (Added Metal): 

a) In Welding — Filler metal after it becomes part of the weld. 

b) In Bronze Welding or in Brazing — Filler metal after it becomes part 
of the joint. 

Diminishing Bell Butt Joint — A joint between two pipes of difTerent 
diameters, in which the end of the smaller pipe is swaged out to fit the bore 
of the larger pipe ( see Fig. A-7 ) . 

114 



SPtI2.1975 



/ 

»->- 



Fig. A- 7 Diminishing Bell Butt Joint 

Face Mask — A protective device worn in front of the face to shield it from 
injury during welding. It is fitted with welding glasb(cs) and plain 
glass (e3). 

Face Shield ( Hand Screen, Hand Shield ) — A protective device held in 
the hand to shield the face and throat from injury during welding. It is 
fitted with a window consisting of welding glass and plain glass. 

Filler Metal — Metal to be added in welding or brazing. 

Flame Snap-Out — Harmless unintentional extinc tion of a gas welding 
flame, sometimes accompanied by a minor explosion. 

Flashback — Dangerous retrogression of a gas welding flame beyond the 
blowpipe body into the hose, with subsequent explosion. 

Note — The violence of the explosion depends upon where it occurs. 

Flash Welding (Flash-Butt Welding)— A lesistancc-weidmg process 
wherein coalescence is produced, simultaneously over the entire area of 
abutting sui faces, by the heat obtained from resistance to the flow of electric 
current between the two surfaces, and by the application of pressure after 
heating is substantially completed. Flashing and upsetting are accompanied 
by expulsion of metal from the joint. 

Flux — Fusible material used in welding or oxygen-cutting to dissolve and 
facilitate removal of oxides and other undesirable substances. Also commonly 
used to designate covering of covered electrodes. 

Full-Fusion Welding — A name given to gas ( fusion ) welding to distin- 
guish it from surface-fusion ( semi-fusion ) welding and non-fusion welding. 

Fusion Face — The portion of a surface, or of an edge, whirh is to be fused 
in malu'ng a fusion weld ( see Fig. A-8 ). 

Fusion Wielding — Any welding process in which the weld is made between 
metab in a state of fusion without hammering or pressure. 

Fusion Zone — The portion of a weld in which parent metal has been fused 
( j«Fig. A-9). 

115 



SP : 12 - 1975 



FUSION 
FACES 




Vu). A-8 I'usiON I'ACE 



i-^\\:ld zone-* 
wclo metal / 

•*" ZOWE "^ 



HTAT AFF^CieO 
ZONE 




'WeiO JUNCTWN 

I'lG. A') Various ZoNr s oi a Typk.al Weld 



Gas Pore — A snwll cavil) due to entrapped gas. 

NoTK — This itiiii 1^ conveni^nllv applipd to caviiies no! cxcrrding 1-6 mm in 
iliamctrr. 

Gas Welding — A group of welding processf s wherein weld is produced by 
heating witli a gas flanu: or tlamcs, with or without the application of pressure 
and with or without the use of filler metal. 

Helmet ( Head Screen ) — A protective device supported on the head and 
arranged to shield the face and throat from injury during welding. It is 
fitted with a window consisting of welding glass and plain glass. 

Heat-AiTected Zone — Parent metal metallurgically affected by the heat 
of welding ( or cutting ), hut neither melted nor made plastic ( see Fig. A-9 ). 

Inclusion — - Slag or other foreign matter entrapped during welding. 

Longitudinal Axis of Weld — A line through the length of a weld, perpendi- 
cular to the cross section at its centre of gravity ( see Fig. A-10 ). 

Non-fusion Welding — A term applied to the deposition, by the oxy- 
acetylcne process, of filler metal on parent metal without fusion of the latter. 

Overlap — An imperfection at a toe or root of a weld caused by metal 
flowing on to the surface of the parent metal without fusing to the latter 
( see Fig. A- 1 1 ) . 



116 



SP: 12 -1975 




-AXIS OF WELO 




FLAT POSITION 



AXIS Of- 
WELO 





-AXIS OF WELD AXIS OF WELO - 

HORIZONTAL-VERTICAL POSITION 

-AXIS OF WELO 



AXIS OF WELO 




VERTICAL POSITION 




AXIS OF WELO- 




-AXIS OF WELO 




OVERHEAD POSITION 
Fio. A- 10 Longitudinal Axis of Welds 
117 



Sf: 12 -1975 




Fig. A- 11 Overlap 

Peening — The mechanical working of metals by means of hammer blows. 

Pick-Up — That property of a flux which causes some of it to adhere to the 
heated end of a filler rod, that is, the properly which gives rise to the ' tuft' 
which is applied to the molten pcjol. 

Plain Glass ( Cover Glass ) — Clear glass or other transparent material 
used to protect the surface of welding glass. 

Porosity — A group of gas pores. 

Note • — Porosity may hr conveniently difTcrcntiated according to size as fine, medium, 
or coarse, and may occur as clusters or chains, or may be scattered. 

Pressure-Welding ( Solid-Phase Welding ) — Any welding process in 
which the weld is made by sustained pressure while the surfaces to be united 
arc plastic. 

Projection Welding ■ Resistance welding in whicli throughout the making 
of a weld the pressure is applied at a small projection or projections on one 
or more of the workpicccs. Tiie projections collapse during welding. 

Resistance-Butt Welding - A resistance-welding process wherein weld is 
produced, simultaneoulsy over the entire area of abutting surfaces or progres- 
sively along a joint, by ilie heat obtained from resistance to the flow of 
electric current througli the area of contact of those surfaces. Pressure is 
applied before iieating is started and is maintained throughout the heating 
period. 

Resistance Welding ( Upset Welding ) — Welding in which pressure is 
applied between abutting siufaces at some stage in the process, and in which 
welding heat is prod\u'ed by the electrical resistance at, and adjacent to, 

these surfaces during the passage of an electric current. 

I 
Roller-Spot Welding — Resistance welding in which pressure is applied 
continuously, and current impulsively, to produce a series of intermittent 
linear welds, the workpieee being between two electrode wheek or between 
an electrode \vheel and an electnxie bar. The electrode wheels apply the 
pressure, and may be rotated continuously or stopped during the passage of 
current. 

118 



SPtl2-1975 

Root Concavity — An. iutcniiittcnt broad groove, or series of cavities, 
occurring in submerged-arc welding in the pcnolraiion bead, or in the root, 
of a weld. 

Note — The inipcrfcction occurs when .\ coiijicr backing-bar is used, and is caused 
by fused flux powder tiickliiig through ilie irngular abuliing laces of the parent metal 
and the copper backing-bar. 

Seam Welding — Resistance welding ia whicli pressure is applied" conti- 
nuously, and current impulsively, to produce a linear weld, tlie workpiece 
being between two electrode wJieeli, or between au clcclrode wheel and an 
electrode bar. The electrode wheels apply the pressure, and may be rotated 
continuously or stopped during the passage of current. 

Semi-automatic Welding — Arc welding with equipment which controls 
only the filler metal feed. The advance of llie welding is usually manually 
controlled. 

Series-Spot Welding - Spot welding in which two or more welds are 
made simultancoulsy in electrical scries ( sec l'"ig. A-12 ). 

; / ri.'Mrod:— ^: 

...,. Ill 'VI "— -]f 

£^^^^..,,-^^' ■ -^^h- 

J;: 



^ work 



-■El.ctrod.5 






Eltfct rods 



Current Flow 

Fig. A-12 Examples of Series-Spot Welding 

Short Bell Branch Joint — A branch joint in which the metal round 
a hole in a main pipe is swaged out to receive the end of a branch pipe 
(see Fig. A-I3). 

Spot Welding — A resistance-welding ]3roccss wherein weld is produced by 
the heat obtained from resistance to the How of electric current through the 
work parts held together under pressure by electrodes. The size and shape 
of the individually formed welds are limited primarily by the size and contour 
of the electrodes. 

Surface-Fusion Welding ( Semi-fusion Welding ) — Gas welding in 
which a carburizing flame is used to melt the surface of the parent metal, 
which then unites with molten metal from a suitable filler rod. 

Note — This application is used for Linde welding, hard-surfacing building-up and 
the like. 

119 



SP J 12 - 1975 



BRANCH PIPE 
CHAMFER CO- 




■TAFTEOUP 
SWAGED OUT 

■ MAIN PIPE 

Fio. A-13 Short Bell Branch Joint 

Surfacing — The deposition of filler metal by welding process on to a 
metal surface to obtain desired properties. 

Sustained Backfire — Possibly harmful retrogression of a gas welding flame 
into the blowpipe neck or body, the flame remaining alight. 

Note — It is usually accompanied by popping or squealing and sometimes there is 
small pointed flame at the nozzle. 

Throat Thickness — The minimum thickness of weld metal in a fusion 
weld measured as under ( see Fig. A-14 ): 

a) For a Fillet Weld or a V-, U-, J- or a Bevel-Butt Weld — Along a 
line passing through the root. 




Fio. A-H 



X = THROAT THICKNESS 

V = EFFECTIVE THROAT THICKNESS 

as usuailv adopted 
Example? of Throat Thickness 



120 



SP : 12 - 1975 

b) For a Close Square-Butt Weld— In the plane of the abutting faces. 

c) For an Open Square-Butl Weld — At the centre of the original gap in 
a plane paraillel to the fusion faces. 

Toe of Weld ( Weld Edge ) — The junction between the face of a weld and 
the parent metal. 

Undercut — A groove cut into the base metal along the toe of a weld and 
left unfilled by the weld metal. 

Underflashing — A reduction in metal thickness due to excessive dicssing. 

Weaving — Transverse oscillation of the arc end of an electrode or of a 
blowpipe nozzle during the deposition of weld metal ( see Fig. A- 15 ). 



start 




Stdrt 




Start 




Start 



Fio. A-15 Weave Motions 

Weld — A union between two pieces of metal at faces rendered plastic or 
liquid by heat or by pressure, or both. Filler metal may be used to eflFect 
the union. 



121 



SP}12-1975 

Weld Cycle — The time required for one complete welding operation. 

Weld Face — A surface of a fusion weld exposed on the side from which the 
weld has been made ( see Fig. A-16 ). 

WELD 
FACE 




-TOE 

Fio. A-16 Examples of Weld Faces, Toes and Legs 

Weld Width — Distance between the toes of tlic weld. 

Weld Zone — The sum of the wcld-mctal s'one and the heat-affected zone 
(jwFig. A-9). 

Weldable Fitting — A specially shaped component of .suitable copper alloy, 
fitted to copper or copper-alloy pipe lo facilitate joining thcin by bronze 
welding. 

Welding Current — The current (lowuig tli'ough the welding circuit 
during the making of a weld. In resisiancc welding, the current used during 
pre-weld or post-weld intcr\'als is excluded. 

Welding Glass ( Filter Glass ) — A light-filter to pi otect the eyes from 
harmful radiations emanating fioin an elottric aic or a gas flame. 

Welding Gloves — Gloves to protect the hands, or gauntlets to protect the 
hands and forearms, from heat and metal splashes due to welding. 

Welding Goggles — Goggles with tinted lenses used during welding or 
oxygen cutting to shield eyes from injuiy duiiiig welding or cutting. 

Welding Procedure — A specified couisc of action to be followed in weld- 
ing, including a list of materials and tools to be used. Three typical examples 
of welding procedure are given bcloAv: 

a) Arc Welding 

1) Classification and size of electrodes; 

2) Current and open-circuit voltage; 

3) Length of run per electrode, or speed of travel; 

4) Number and arrangement of runs in multi-run welds; 
5^ Position of welding; 

6) Preparation and set-up of parts; 

7) Welding sequence; and 

8) Pre- or post-heating. 

122 



SP : 12 • 1975 

b) Gas Welding 

1) Specification and diameter of filler rod and, if required, 
specification of the flux; 

2) Gas pressures and nozzle size; 

3) Manipulation and angles of rod and blowpipe and, if required, 
correct application of flux; 

4) Technique of welding; 

5) Edge preparation and, if required, tacking; 

6) Position of welding and number of runs; 

7) Welding sequence; and 

8) Pre- or post-heating. 

c) Resistance Welding 

1) Electrodes sizes and permissible variations, 
. 2) Particulars of machine settings, 

3) Welding sequence, and 

4) Particulars of tests required. 



123 



8P 1 12.1975 

APPENDIX B 

(See Foreword) 

INDIAN STANDARDS ON WELDING 

SI Number and Title of the Standard 

No. 

1. 18:812-1957 Glossary of terms relating to welding and cutting of 

metals 

2. 18:813-1961 8cheme of symbols for welding {amended) 

3. IS : 814( Part I )-1974 Covered electrodes for metal arc welding of 

structural steels: Part I For welding products other than sheets 
{fourth revision ) 

4. IS : 814{ Part II )-1974 Covered electrodes for metal arc welding of 

structural steels: Part II For welding sheets {fourth revision ) 

5. IS: 815-1974 Classification and coding of covered electrodes for 

metal arc welding of structural steels ( second revision ) 

6. 18:816-1969 Code of practice for use of metal arc welding for 

general construction in mild steel {Jirst revision ) 

7. 18:817-1966 Code of practice for training and testing of metal 

arc welders ( revised ) 

8. IS : 818-1968 Code of practice for safety and health requirements in 

electric and gas welding and cutting operations [first revision ) 

9. IS : 819-1957 Code of practice for resistance spot welding for light 

assemblies in mild steel 

10. 18:822-1970 Code of practice for inspection of welds 

11. IS: 823-1964 Code of procedure for manual metal arc welding of 

mild steel 

12. IS: 1024-1968 Code of practice for welding of structures subject to 

dynamic loading 

13. IS : II 79-1967 Equipment for eye and face protection during welding 

{first revision ) 

14. IS: 1261-1959 Code of practice for seam welding in mild steel 

15. IS: 1278-1972 Filler rods for gas welding {second revision) 

16. IS : 1323-1966 Code of practice for oxy-acetylene welding for struc- 

tural work in mild steel ( revised ) 

124 



SP 1 12 . 1975 



SI Number and Title of iht Standard 

No. 



17. 18:1393-1961 Code of practice for training and testing of oxy- 

acetylene welders 

18. IS: 1395-1971 Molybdenum and chromium-molybdenum low alloy 

electrodes for metal arc welding ( second revision ) 

19. IS: 2751-1966 Code of practice for welding of mild steel bars used 

for reinforced concrete construction 

20. 18:2811-1964 Recommendations for manual tungsten inert-gas arc 

welding of stainless steel 

21. 18:2812-1964 Recommendations for manual tungsten inert-gas 

arc welding of aluminium and aluminium alloys 

22. IS : 2927-1975 Brazing alloys {first revision ) 

23. IS: 3016-1965 Code of practice for fire precautions in welding and 

cutting operations 

24. 15:3023-1965 Recommended practice for building-up by metal 

spraying 

25. IS : 3525-1966 Code of practice for use of metal arc welding for hull 

construction of merchant ships in mild steel 

26. IS: 3600 (Part I )-1973 Code of procedure for testing of fusion 

welded joints and weld metal in steel: Part I General tests {first 
revision ) 

27. 18:3613-1974 Acceptance tests for wire flux combinations for sub- 

merged arc welding of structural steels' ( first revision ) 

28. IS : 4353-1967 Recommendations ior sub-merged arc welding of mild 

steel and low alloy steeb 

29. 18:4943-1968 Assessment of butt and fillet fusion welds in steel sheet 

plate and pipe 

30. IS : 4944-1968 Code of procedure for welding at low ambient tempe- 

ratures 

31. 18:4972-1968 Resistance ^ot welding electrodes 

32. 18:5139-1969 Recommended procedure for repair of grey iron 

castings by oxy^acetylene and manual metal arc welding 

33. ^8:5206-1969 Corrosion-resisting chromium and chromium nickel 

9ted covered dectrodes for manual metal arc welding 

125 



SPtl2-1975 

SI. Numhfr and Title of the Standard 

No. 

34. 18:5462-1969 Colour code for identification of covered electrodes 

for metal arc welding 

35. 18:5511-1969 Covered electrodes for manual metal arc welding of 

cast iron 

36. 18:5530-1969 Code of procedure for repair and rectification of steel 

castings by metal arc welding processes 

37. 18:5687-1970 Glossary of terms relating to welding of plastics 

38. 18:5856-1970 Corrosion and heat resisting chromium nickel steel 

solid welding rods and bare electrodes 

39. 18:5857-1970 Nickel and nickel alloy bare solid welding rods and 

bare electrodes 

40. IS : 5897-1970 Aluminium alloy welding rods and wires and magne- 

sium alloy welding rods 

41. 18 ; 5898-1970 Copper and copper alloy bare solid welding rods and 

electrodes 

42. IS : 5922-1970 Qualifying test for welders engaged in aircraft 

welding 

43. 18:6016-1970 Hose connection for welding and cutting appliances 

44. IS : 6227-1971 Code of practice for use of metal arc welding in tubular 

structures 

45. IS : 6409-1971 Code of practice for oxy-acetylene flame cleaning 

46. 18 : 6419-1971 Welding rods and bare electrodes for gas shielded arc 

welding of structural steel 

47. IS : 6431-1971 Tolerances on dimensions of plates cut by flame 

48. 18:6580-1972 Molybdenum and chromium-molybdenum low alloy 

steel welding rods and bare electrodes for gas shielded arc welding 

49. 18:6901-1973 Pressure regulators for gas, cylinders used in welding, 

cutting and related processes 

50. IS : 6916-1973 Code of practice for fabrication welding of steel 

castings 

51. SP:6(7)-1972 181 Handbook for structural engineers: Simple 

welded girders 

52. 181 Handbook of manual metal arc welding for welders 

126 



SP 1 12 -1975 



SI Number and Title of the Standard 

No. 



53. IS : 7273-1974 Mctliods of testing fusion welded joints in aluminium 

and aluminium alloys 

54. 18:7280-1974 Bare wire electrodes for submerged arc welding of 

structural steels 

55. 18:7303-1974 Covcied clrLltodcs for surfacing of metal by manual 

metal arc welding 

56. 18:7307 ( Part I )-1974 Approval tests for welding procedures: 

Part I Fusion welding of steel 

57. 18 : 7310( Part I )-1974 Approval tests for welders woiking to approved 

welding procedures: Part I Fusion welding of steel 

58. IS:7318(Part I )-1974 Approval tests for welders when welding 

procedure approval is not leqiured: Pait I Fusion welding of steel 

59. IS: 7318 (Part II)-1974 Approval tests for welders when welding 

procedure approval is not requiicd; Part II TIG or MIG welding 
of aluminium and its alloys 

60. 18 : 7653-1975 Manual blowpipes for welding and cutting 



127 



SPiI2-1975 

APPENDIX C 

( See Foreword ) 

TECHNICAL COMNflTTEES 

The ISI Committees responsible for processing this handbook consist 
of the following: 

Welding General Sectional Committee, SMDC 14 

Chairman Representing 

Shri R. Ghosh Indian Oxygen Ltd, Calcutta 

Members 

Shri J. K. Ahluwalia Stewarts & Lloyds of India Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri V. N. Desai ( Alternate ) 

Shri N. C. Baochi National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri B. C. Biswas ( Altermte ) 

Shri S. Balasubrahmanyam Binny Ltd, Madras 

Shri K. Balmanohar Hindustan Shipyard Ltd, Visakhapatnam 

Shri R. N. Chakraborty Braithwaite & Co ( India ) Ltd, Calcutta 

Shbi S. p. Dasoupta Central Mechanical Engineering Research 

Institute ( CSIR ), Durgapur 
Shri B. Sen ( Alternate ) 

Director, Research and Public Works Department, Government 
Design ( B & R Branch ) of Haryana, Chandigarh 

Executive Engineer Central Public Works Department, New 

( Electrical), Electrical Delhi 
Division No. 1, New Delhi 
Executive Engineer 
( Electrical ), Central 
Electrical Division 
No. 1 , Calcutta { Alternate ) 

Shri H. D. Govindaraj Philips India Ltd, Bombay 

Dr J. Vaid ( Alternate ) 

Shri S. K. Hari Malik Electricals Private Ltd, Bombay 

Shri M. K. Sinha ( Alternate ) 

Dr J. Jain Tata Engineering & Locomotive Co Ltd, 

Jamshcdpur 

Prof A. P. Jambulinoam Indian Society for Technical Education, 

New Delhi 

128 



SPtl2-1975 

Members Representing 

Joint Dirxctor (M&C), Ministry of Railways 
RDSO, LucKNOW 

Chemist and Metal- 
lurgist, Integral 
Coach Factory, 
Perambur ( Alternate I ) 
Production Engineer 
( Shell ), Integral 
Coach Factory, 
Perambur ( Alternate II ) 

Shri M. V. D. Kamath Association of Indian Engineering Industries, 

Calcutta 

Shri M. T. Kanse Directorate General of Supplies & Dis- 

posals ( Inspection Wing ) 
Shri S. N. Basu ( Alternate ) 

Shri G. S. Kodikal Bharat Heavy Plate & Vessels Ltd, 

Visakhapatnam 
Shri A. P. Sanyal ( Alternate ) 

Shri A. C. Mukherjee Power Cables Private Ltd, Kalyan 

Shri A. M. Lothe ( Alternate ) 

Shri S. V. Nadkarni Advani Oerlikon Private Ltd, Bombay 

Shri P. S. Visvanath ( Alternate ) 

Lt-Col p. R. Narasimhan Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Head- 
quarters 

Shri K. M. Pole Walchandnagar Industries, Walchandnagar 

Shri G. D. Apte ( Alternate ) 

Shri H. L. Prabhakar Larsen & Toubro Ltd,Bombay; and Chemical 

Plant and Machinery Association of 
India, Bombay 

Shri P. B. Rao Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Shri V. S. G. Rao Department of Atomic Energy, Bombay 

Shri L. M. Tolani ( Alternate ) 

Shri S. C. Roy Central Boilers Board, New Delhi 

Shri V. V. Sathvanarayana Mining & Allied Machinery Corporation, 

Durgapur 
Shri S. K. Banerjia ( Alternate ) 

Shri S. K. Senoupta Hindustan Steel Ltd, Ranchi 

Shri V. V. Kaviswar ( Alternate ) 

Shri N. K. Suthi Bharat Heavy ElcctricaU Ltd, Hard war 

129 



Members Representing 

Shri H. K. Sharma Directorate General of Technical Develop- 

ment, New Delhi 
Shri K. C. Sharma ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. Srinivasulu Bharat Heavy Eiectricals Ltd, Tiruchi- 

rapalli 
Shri B. Pattabhiraman ( Alternate ) 

Shri V. R. Subramanian Indian Oxygen Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri R. Purkayastha ( Alternate ) 

Shri S. Sundaresan Directorate General of Employment & 

Training, New Delhi 

Superintending Engineer, Public Works Department, Government of 
Central Mechanical Tamil Nadu, Madras 

Circle, Madras 

Shri S. G. N. Swamy Mukand Iron & Steel Works Ltd, Bombay 

Shri R. K. Srivastava ( Alternate ) 

Shri G. R. Rama Rao, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director ( Struc & Met) 

Secretary 
Shri M. S. Naoaraj 
Deputy Director ( Struc & Met ), ISI 

Subcommittee for Training Personnel, SMDC 14:4 

Corwener 

Prof P. S. Mani Sundaram Regional Engineering College, Tiruchira- 

palli 

Members 

Shri J. K. Ahluwalia Stewarts & Lloyds of India Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri A. P. Jambulinoam Indian Society for Technical Education, 

New Delhi 

Shri M. T. Kanse Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals 

( Inspection Wing ) 

Shri J. C. Maqoo Bharat Heavy Eiectricals Ltd, Hardwar 

Shri A. C. Mukherjee Power Cables Private Ltd, Kalyan 

Shri N. Mukherjee Indian Oxygen Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri R. C. Karmakar ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. V. Nadkarni Advani Oerlikon Private Ltd, Bombay 

Shri G. P. Kamat ( Alternate ) 
Dr S. Sundsreshan Indian Institute of Technology, Madras 



SP .12-1975 

Ad-hoc Panel for Drafting Handbook for Gas Welders, 

SMDC 14:AP 



Convener 
Shri R. Ghosh 

Members 
Shri J. C. Acharya 
Shri S. S. Mazumdar 
Shri R. Purkayasfiia 
Shri V. R. Sijbramanian 



Representing 
Indian Oxygen Ltd, Calcutta 

Indian Oxygen Ltd, Calcutta 
Indian Oxygen Ltd, Calcutta 
Indian Oxygen Ltd, Calcutta 
Indian Oxygen Ltd, Calcutta 



131 



