атт Ah IS 18224 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


ated fatter Га ht гат sik 
Wau 95 fer атат 
Aah 


General Standard for Qualification 
and Certification of Welding 
Inspection Personnel 


ICS 25.160.10; 19.100 


© BIS 2023 


ade 9198 эч 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR HAF, 9 гета ME SHE AMT, Ag (8 - 110002 
Vee’ МАМАК BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


May 2023 Price Group 9 


Welding General and its Applications Sectional Committee, MTD 11 


FOREWORD 


This Indian standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Welding 
General and its Applications Sectional Committee had been approved by the Metallurgical Engineering Division 
Council. 


The effectiveness of any inspection depends upon the capabilities of the persons who are responsible for, and 
perform the inspection. This specification has been developed to providea means for evaluating and documenting 
the competence of the personnel whose duties require adequate theoretical and practical knowledge of welding, 
applicable codes and standards, the NDT tests they witness, monitor or evaluate. 


Most of the fabrication and inspection codes insist that only qualified and certified personnel are employed to 
carry out mandatory welding inspection jobs at various levels. Therefore, it isthe responsibility of the manufacturer 
and/or the employer to properly train and certify his welding inspection personnel. 


This standard defines the requirements and program for the National Certifying Body to certify welding 
inspectors. The certification of welding inspectors requires documentation of experience, satisfactory completion 
of an examination, and proof of visual acuity. The examination tests the inspector’s knowledge of welding 
processes, welding procedures, non- destructive examinations, destructive tests, terms, definitions, symbols, 
reports, welding metallurgy, related mathematics, safety, quality assurance, and responsibilities. 


In drafting the specification, assistance has been derived from the following: 


IS 13085 : 2004 General standard for Qualification and Certification of Non-Destructive Testing Personnel 
— Specification 


ISO 9712 : 1999 Non-destructive testing — Qualification and certification of NDT personnel 
AWS ОСІ : 2016 Specification for AWS Certification of Welding Inspectors 
AWS B5.1 : 2013 Specification for the Qualification of Welding Inspectors 


The composition of the committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is listed in Annex E. 


In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, is to be rounded off, it shall be 
done in accordance with IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of 
significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this 
standard. 


IS 18224 : 2023 


Indian Standard 


GENERAL STANDARD FOR QUALIFICATION AND 
CERTIFICATION OF WELDING INSPECTION PERSONNEL 


1 SCOPE 


This standard establishes a system for the 
qualification and certification of personnel to 
perform industrial welding inspection. 


2 REFERENCES 

The standards given in Annex D contain provisions 
which, through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the editions indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revision, and parties to 
agreement based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most 
recent editions of the standards indicated in 
Annex D. 


3 TERMINOLOGY AND ABBREVIATION 


3.1 For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definition shall apply: 


3.1.1 Authorization — A permission to work issued 
by the employer or responsible agency based on the 
individual’s suitability for a specific job, in addition 
to the certification, amongstother’s the job specific 
knowledge, skill and physical ability could be 
assessed. 


3.1.2 Authorized Qualifying Body — Competent 
organization, independent of the employer or 
responsible agency, approved by the certification 
body to prepare and administer welding inspection 
training to qualify welding inspection personnel. 


3.1.3 Basic Education — Minimum formal 
academic education required for qualification. It 
may be used to determine duration and level of 
training and experience required to be eligible for 
certification in welding inspection. 


3.1.4 Candidate — The individual seeking 
certification in accordance with this standard. 


3.1 5 Certification — The procedures leading to a 
written testimony of the qualification of an 
individual’s level of competence to perform the 
tasks associated with welding inspection. 


3.1.6 Certificate — Written testimony of 
qualification by authorized qualification body as per 
the provisions of this standard. 


3.1.7 Employer or Responsible Agency — The 
organization for which the candidate works on a 
regular basis. Candidate may be self-employed. 


3.1.8 Examination Center— Center approved by the 
national certifying body, either directly or through 


the authorized qualifying body, where qualification 
examination will be carried out. 


3.1.9 Examiner — А person qualified and 
authorized by the certification body is to conduct 
and grade welding inspection qualification 
examinations. 


NOTE — No person shall be the examiner for any 
candidate he has personally trained for that examination. 


3.1.10 Experience — The period during which the 
candidate performed the welding fabrication/ 
inspection as his main activity under qualified 
supervision including personal application of 
different inspection techniques to materials, parts or 
structures. It does not include practical performed 
during training courses. 


3.1.11 National Certifying Body —The agency that 
administers procedures for certification of welding 
inspection personnel according to the requirements 
of this standard conducts exams апа issues 
certificate to successful inspectors. 


3.1.12 Welding Inspection Training — A process of 
instruction in theory and practice of welding 
inspection commensurate to the level in which the 
certification is being sought. This may take the form 
of training courses to an approved syllabus and 
periods of practical work under qualified 
supervision. 


3.1.13 Operating Authorization — Permission to 
work, issued by the employer or responsible agency 
and based on the individual's suitability for a specific 
job. 

3.1.14 Qualifying Examination — An examination 
administered by the national certifying body to 
assess the knowledge and competence of the 
candidate. Examination includes a written and a 
practical part commensurate to the levels along with 
a viva voce. The candidate should be able to 
demonstrate appropriate level of knowledge and 
skill in welding inspection. Details of the theoretical 
and practical knowledge and competency 
requirements along with examination procedure and 
requirements for each of the three levels are given in 
Annex A. 


3.1.15 Qualification — A set of pre-defined 
academic achievements from а recognized 
institution which is pre-requisite to apply for 
welding inspector certificate and essential to 
perform welding inspection tasks. The scale of 
achievements required varies with the level of 
certification sought. 


IS 18224 : 2023 


3.1.16 Significant Interruption — Absence or a 
change of activity which prevents the certified 
individual from practicing the duties corresponding 
to his level for a continuous periodexceeding one 
year. 


3.1.17 Supervision — Act of directing the welding 
inspection activities performed by other welding 
inspection personnel which include and control all 
operations pertaining to welding inspection. 


3.1.18 Test Specimen — Specimen used in practical 
examinations. 


3.2 Abbreviation 


For the purpose of this standard, the abbreviation 
having the meaning indicated against each isgiven in 
Annex C, other abbreviation used in this standard 
have been fully expressed at its first occurrence. 


4 LEVELS OF COMPETENCE 
4.1 Classification 


An individual certified in accordance with this 
standard shall be classified in one of the three levels 
depending upon his respective level of competence. 
One who has not yet attained certification may be 
registered as a trainee: 


a) Basic level (NWIC — Basic) — Code: 
CWIB; 


b) Standard level (NWIC — Standard) — 
Code: CWIS; and 


c) Advanced level (NWIC — Advanced) — 
Code: CWIA. 
4.2 Required Competence 


The candidate should be able to demonstrate 
appropriate level of knowledge and skill in 
welding inspection covering the following: 

a) Codes and standards; 

b) Raw material, control and traceability; 


с) Knowledge of materials and their 
behaviour during welding; 


а) Conventional welding and cutting 
processes and equipment; 

e) Safety practices during welding and 
cutting; 

f) Conventional DT and NDT methods 
including integrity testing; 


g) Joint types, welding positions and welding 


symbols; 

h) Welding qualification — procedure and 
performance; 

j) Detection and interpretation of 


discontinuities through VT and PT; 


k) Interpretation and evaluation of RT and UT 
reports; 


m) Comment on and review the quality 
control documents namely, QAPs, WPSs, 
PQRs, WPQs, MTCs, DT and NDT reports; 


n) Carry out inspection of welded fabrications 
before, during and after welding including 
dimensional inspection PMI and PWHT as 
per the requirements of relevant standards; 
and 


p) Communicate effectively orally and written 
and prepare reports. 


Details of the theoretical and practical knowledge 
and competency requirements along with 
examination procedure and requirements for each of 
the three levels are given in Annex A and Annex B 
respectively. 


5 FUNCTIONS 
5.1 Basic Level (NWIC — Basic) 


The candidate should be able to independently carry 
out before, during and post-weld visual inspection 
and dimensional checks of weldments against 
specification requirements and drawings. 

The person should also be able to carry out the 
following functions under the supervision of a 
welding inspector — standard level or welding 
inspector — advanced level. 


a) Understand the application of various 
standards, codes, specifications, welding 
symbols, drawings, WPS and 
statutory/regulatory requirements; 


b) Verify the compliance of raw materials 
and consumables, certificates against the 


applicable standards, codes and 
specifications; 
c) Verify that joint dimensions, edge 


preparation, fit up, welding equipment and 
weld preparations are in accordance with the 
drawings, standards and process 
requirements; 

а) Verify the compliance of рге-һеаї 
procedures against the applicable standards; 

e) To carry out in-process surveillance during 
welding to verify compliance with specified 
procedure including pre-heat, welding 
parameters, inter-pass temperature control 
and any post-heat requirements; and 

f) Understand and ensure compliance of 
applicable safety requirements. 


5.2 Standard level (NWICS — Standard) 


The candidate should be able to supervise activities 
of welding inspectors — basic level as given in 5.1. 
Besides, he should be able to independently carry 
out the following functions: 
a) All functions carried out by a welding 
inspector — basic level as given in 5.1; 


b) Develop, comment and review quality 
control plans and inspection and testing 
plans based on product standards, codes, 
specifications, drawings and 
statutory/regulatory requirements; 


c) Review welding procedures (WPS) for 
compliance with code and contract 
requirements and verify welding procedure 
qualification (WPQR) compliance; 

d) Witness procedure qualification test 
including testing of specimen and verify 
compliance with WPQRs, WPSs апа 
welders qualification against applicable 
standards for conventional welding 
processes. (For example, arc welding 
processes, steels, aluminium alloys etc); 


e) Verify the compliance of PWHT 
procedures against the applicable 
standards; 


f) Verify NDT procedure compliance; 


g) Take decisions on acceptance of quality 
documents related to welded fabrication 
(for example, NDT, material testing, 
production testing, etc); 


h) Take decisions based оп quality 
documents (For example, NDT, material 
testing, production testing, etc) according to 
the requirements defined for the 
construction; 

j) Implement’ weld inspection quality 
assurance plans; 

k) Evaluation and acceptance of welded 
fabrication on the basis of DT and NDT 
testreports; 


m) Conduct surveillance and audit of suppliers 
and vendors; 


n) Report on all the above actions; and 


p) Training and evaluation of welding 
inspectors — basic level. 


5.3 Advanced level (NWIC — Advanced) 


Supervise the activities of welding inspectors — 
basic as given in 5.1. Besides, he should be able to 
independently carry out the following functions: 


a) All functions carried out by a welding 
inspector — Basic and standard level as 
given in 5.1 and 5.2 respectively; 


b) Verify base material and filler material 
compatibility; 
c) Witness procedure qualification test 


including testing of specimen and verify 
compliance with WPQRs, WPSs; 


d) Conduct welders’ qualification tests and 
qualify the same against applicable 
standards for conventional welding 
processes. (For example, arc welding 


IS 18224 : 2023 


processes, steels, aluminium alloys, etc); 


e) Write welding procedures specifications 
and welder performance qualification; 


f) Prepare visual inspection, NDT and 
destructive testing requirements; 


g) Identification of weld defects and 
determination of their acceptability 
including radiographic film interpretation 
for carbon, low alloy and stainless steels; 


h) Final acceptance and certification that all 
requirements specified for the weldment 
have been met; 

j) Prepare welding inspection quality 
assurance plans, audit апа surveillance 
plans alongwith documentation and control 
requirements; 


k) Maintenance of comprehensive inspection 
reports; 

m) Training and evaluation of welding 
inspectors — Standard level; and 


n) Provide technical leadership and guidance 
to team of welding inspectors. 


6 REQUIRED CODE OF CONDUCT 


6.1 Considering the importance of quality of welded 
fabrication and also the consequences of its failure 
to individual life and society, the candidate should 
act with complete integrity and in a professional 
manner in welding inspection and acceptance of the 
final product. 


6.2 Undertake and perform welding inspection 
assignments only when qualified/certified to do so. 


6.3 The candidate should behave in a professional 
and disciplined manner which will not affect the 
safety and security of his fellow members associated 
in the manufacturing of the final product. 


6.4 The candidates behaviour towards his/her 
superiors, peers and sub-ordinates should be in line 
with protocol of organization. 


6.5 The candidates shall avoid any conflict of 
interest with the employer or the client and shall not 
disclose any business association or circumstance 
that might be so considered. 


7 GENERAL 
CERTIFICATION 


PRINCIPLES OF 


7.1 Administration 


The certification activity that includes all procedures 
adopted to demonstrate the qualification of an 
individual to carry out tasks in a specific level of 
welding inspection and leads to a written testimony 
of his competence shall be administered by the 
national certifying body with the assistance, where 
necessary, of duly authorized qualifying bodies. 


IS 18224 : 2023 


7.2 National Certifying Body (NCB) 


The national certifying body shall be a professional 
body having suitable competence in the area of 
welding inspection and accredited by national 
accreditation board for certifying bodies of QCI in 
compliance to IS/ISO/IEC 17024 as a certification 
body for personnel. 


7.2.1 Composition 


The national certifying body shall include eminent 
representatives from academic institutes, research 
center, industries, government nodal ministries, 
public sector undertakings, private sector, other 
related societies or institutes, insurance bodies, third 
party inspection agencies including classification 
societies as appropriate. The NCB shall establish in 
writing the number of members in the body and 
their tenure. The body shall submit its report at least 
once in a year to the body forming authority. 


7.2.2 Responsibilities 


The national certifying body shall execute the 
following responsibilities: 


a) Shall initiate, maintain and promote the 
national certification scheme according to 
this standard; 


b) Shall administer the procedures апа 
operation for certification in accordance 
with the documents; 


c) Shall prescribe an obligatory code of 
ethics including options which shall apply 
to committee members and certificate 
holders; 


d) May delegate, under its direct responsibility, 
the detailed administration of the 
certification procedure to other 
organizations which will act as qualifying 
bodies and which could represent industrial 
sectors; 


e) Shall take the ultimate responsibility for the 
certification scheme including technical and 
administrative requirement; 


f) Shall approve properly staffed and equipped 
examination centers, which it shall monitor 
on a periodic basis; 


g) Shall keep all appropriate records and issue 
or delegate the issuing of the written 
testimonies; 


h) Shall identify the examiners to start the 
scheme; 

j) Shall approve training agencies in welding 
inspection techniques; 


k) Shall prepare an updated question bank for 
examinations and also maintain the set of 
practical examination kits; 


m) Shall conduct examination, issue certificate 


to successful candidates and renew/recertify 
candidates as appropriate; and 


n) Shall develop and maintain a quality manual 
which shall outline the quality policy and 
objectives of NCB and also detail/document 
the procedure methodology including 
implementation. 


7.3 Employer or Responsible Agency 


Employer or responsible agency shall introduce the 
candidate to the national certifying body and 
document the validity of the personal information 
provided including the declaration of education, 
training and experience used to establish eligibility 
of the candidate, but shall not be directly involved in 
the certification procedure itself. The employer or 
responsible agency shall be fully responsible for all 
that concerns the authorization to operate and the 
validity of the welding inspection certificate. The 
employer shall also ensure that the annual vision 
acuity requirements of 8.3 are met and verify the 
continuity in welding inspection without significant 
interruption. 

NOTE — If the individual is self-employed, he shall assume 

all responsibilities described for the employer or 

responsible agency, and shall be required to provide 


additional documentation to support claims for experience 
and training. 


7.4 Examination Centers 


7.4.1 Examination centers approved by the national 
certifying body shall have following minimum 
requirements. 


a) Have adequate qualified staff, premises and 
equipment as decided by national certifying 
body to ensure satisfactory qualification 
examinations for the levels; 


b) Use only those documents and examination 
questionnaires established or approved by 
the national certifying body; and 


c) Use only specimens prepared or approved 
by the national certifying body for the 
practical examinations conducted at that 
center. Apply a documented quality 
procedure outlined in quality manual. 


NOTE — When more than one authorized examination 
center exists, each should have specimens containing 
comparable defects, duly approved by NCB. The 
examination specimens shall not be used for training 
purpose under any circumstances. 


7.4.2 An examination center can be situated at 
employer's premises. In this case, examinations shall 
be conducted only in the presence of and under the 
control of an authorized representative of the 
certification body. 


7.5 Authorized Examiner 


The examiner shall be authorized by the national 
certifying body to conduct the qualifying 


examination and grade the examinee. The examiner 
shall be technically qualified and knowledgeable as 
detailed below to carry out the functions. 


7.5.1 Qualifications and Experience 
7.5.1.1 Essential 


a) Degree/Diploma/Licentiate in 
mechanical/electrical/metallurgy/chemical 
/welding technology/AMIIW (Associate 
Member of Indian Institute of Welding); 
and 


b) Minimum 10 years of experience in 
welding inspection field in a fabrication 
industry of inspection agency. 


or 


International welding engineer-qualification with 8 
years’ experience in the field of welding. 


7.5.1.2 Desirable 


a) Іехе]-П qualification in RI, UT, PT, VT, 
MT in accordance with IS 13805/SNT – 
TC-1A and DT; or 

b) Experience in working in а reputed 
laboratory in destructive or non-destructive 
testing and inspection of weld joints. 


7.5.1.3 Professional Experience 


a) Should have wide theoretical and practical 
knowledge of different welding process 
and basic aspects of welding technology as 
inspector; 

b) Should be familiar with practical operation 
of the following welding processes: 

1) Basic gas welding; 
2) Basic arc welding; 
3) Tungsten inert gas (TIG) welding; 
4) Metal active gas (МАС/СО») welding; 
5) Pipe welding (TIG + ARC); and 
6) Gas cutting. 
c) Should be familiar with the different 


welding machines related to above 
processes; 


d) Should have knowledge of drawings and 
various national апай international 
codes/standards and should have 
knowledge of different welding symbols 
being used in fabrication welding; 


e) Should have basic idea of gas cutting and 
brazing process; 


f) Should have basic idea of preheat and post 
weld heat treatment; 


g) Should be familiar with different types of 
weld joints and weld positions; 


h) Should be conversant with the chemistry 


IS 18224 : 2023 


and physical characteristics of different 
base metals used in welding such as steel, 
stainless steel and aluminium; 

j) Should be familiar with: 
1) Weld joint edge geometry checking; 
2) Weld joint fit up checking; and 
3) Weld joint cleanliness checking. 

k) Should be familiar with weld joint 
inspection: 
1) Before start of welding; 
2) During welding; and 
3) After welding; 


m) Should be conversant with dimensional 
accuracy of completed weldment as: 


1) Desirable fillet weld profile; 

2) Unacceptable fillet weld profile; 
3) Desirable groove weld profile; and 
4) Unacceptable groove weld profile. 


n) Should be able to check final weld sizes 
and length; 


p) Should be able to physically check the 
quality of filler wires and electrodes used 
in welding; 

q) Should be conversant with different types 
of weld defects that occur during welding; 


r) Should have knowledge of different 
destructive and non-destructive tests to be 
conducted during welding and defect 
interpretations namely tensile test, bend 
test (weld root, weld face and weld side); 


s) Should be able to interpret radiography 
testing, ultrasonic testing, dye penetrant 
testing, magnetic particle testing reports; 
and 


t) Should have knowledge of WPS and PQR 
and accordingly carry out certification 
tests. 


7.5.2 Physical Attributes 


a) The candidates eyesight corrected with 
glasses should be adequate for meeting the 
requirements for visual testing and 
radiographic testing as рег code 
requirements; and 


b) He should not have any optical disabilities 
like colour blindness or night blindness. 


8 ELIGIBILITY FOR EXAMINATION 
8.1 General 


To be eligible for certification, the candidate shall 
submit a formal application along with documented 
evidence acceptable to the certification body 
regarding the minimum education and welding 
related experience (fabrication or inspection) and 
proof of vision acuity level. 


IS 18224 : 2023 


8.2 Education and Experience 


that educational qualifications in combination with 


PE. ae See experience commensurate to the level of 
To be eligible for examination, the application shall pee : 2.20: ; 
eae уур certification applied for as indicated in Table 1 to 
be accepted by the certifying body after verifying Table 3 


Table 1 Qualification and Experience Requirement for NWIC — Basic Level 


(Clause 8.2) 


SI No. Educational Qualification Experience 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Class УШ 5 years industrial experience out of which 3 years 
in welding area/inspection/NDT of welds 
il) Class X (with science and math)/ITI (mechanical) 3 years industrial experience out of which 2 years 
in welding area/inspection/NDT of welds 
iii) Class XIIVIWS/IWIP(B) diploma ог апу 2 years industrial experience out of which 1 year 
equivalent welding Inspectors course in welding technology/inspection/NDT of welds 
iv) MSc/BE/TWE/BSc/Diploma in 6 months industrial experience in welding 
engineering/IWT/IWIP(S) diploma or technology/inspection/NDT of welds, desirable 
equivalent welding inspectors course but not essential 
Table 2 Qualification and Experience Requirement for NWIC — Standard Level 
(Clause 8.2) 
SI No. Educational Qualification Experience 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Class УШ 8 years industrial experience out of which 5 
years in welding area/inspection/NDT of welds 
ii) Class X (with science and math)/ITI (mechanical) 5 years industrial experience out of which 3 
years in welding area/inspection/NDT of welds 
iii) Class XII/IWS/NWICS — B/TWIP(B) diploma or 3 years industrial experience out of which 2 
equivalent weldingInspectors course years in welding technology/inspection/NDT 
of welds 
iv) BSc/Diploma іп Engineering/IWT, IWIP (S) 2 years industrial experience in welding 
diploma technology/inspection/NDT of welds 
v) MSc/BE/TWE 1 year industrial experience in welding 


technology/inspection/NDT of welds 


IS 18224 : 2023 


Table 3 Qualification and Experience Requirement for NWIC — Advanced Level 
(Clause 8.2) 


SI No. Educational Qualification Experience 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Class X (with science and math)/ITI 10 years industrial experience out of which 5 years 
(mechanical) in welding area/inspection/NDT of welds 
il) IWS/IWIP(S)/Class ХП (with science and 5 years industrial experience out of which 3 years 
mathematics) in welding technology/inspection/NDT of welds 


iii) | BSc/Diploma in engineering/IWT 


iv) MSc/BE/TWE/IWIP (С) 


3 years industrial experience out of which 2 years 
in welding technology/inspection/NDT of welds 


2 years industrial experience out of which 1 year 
in welding technology/inspection/NDT of welds 


NOTE — For applying in NWIC — Advanced level, the candidate must possess NWIC — Standard level or equivalent 


certification. 


8.3 Vision Requirements — The candidate should 
also possess the following minimum standard of 
vision acuity level certified by а registered 
ophthalmologist/ optometrist/ eye specialist: 


a) Near vision — Jaeger J2 or better with 
correction (not more than 12 months old); 


b) Colour vision — As per ISHARAS chart 
(not more than 12 months old); and 


c) Subsequent to certification, the tests of 
visual acuity shall be carried out annually 
and be verified by the employer or the 
responsible agency. 


9 QUALIFICATION EXAMINATIONS — 
CONTENT AND GRADING 


9.1 Qualification Examinations 


Examinations administered under this standard shall 
consist of written part and a practical part followed 
by a viva voice. Details of competence and 
knowledge requirements to appear in qualifying 
examination are given in Annex A. The question 
pattern for both theory and practical is given in 
Annex B. 


9.1.1 Written Examination Content 


The written examination tests the inspector’s 
knowledge of welding processes, welding 
procedures, non-destructive examinations, 
destructive tests, terms, definitions, symbols, 
reports, welding metallurgy, related mathematics, 
safety, quality assurance, and responsibilities. The 
questions are to be selected, commensurate to the 
level, from the national certifying body’s collection 
of basic knowledge questions valid at the date of 
examination. 


9.1.2 Practical Examination Content 


The practical part shall be of sufficient duration, 


complexity and scope to adequately verify the 
candidate’s competence to identify and report 
welding imperfections. 


9.1.3 Viva Voce 


Each candidate has to undergo a viva voce where his 
level of understanding on welding inspection in real 
fabrication situation is adjudged. 


9.2 Conduct of Examination 


9.2.1 Examinations including both written and 
practical tests shall be conducted in examination 
centers approved and monitored by the national 
certifying body directly. 


9.2.2 At the examination, the candidate shall have in 
his possession a valid proof of identification and an 
official notification of the examination, which must 
be shown to the examiner or invigilator on request. 
Any candidate who does not abide by the 
examination rules during the course of the 
examination or who perpetrates or is an accessory to 
fraudulent conduct will be excluded from further 
participation. 


9.2.3 The written and practical tests should be 
conducted and supervised by ап authorized 
examiner designated by the national certifying body. 
The examiner may be assisted by one or more 
invigilators placed under his responsibility. 


9.2.4 The examiner shall mark the written tests 
completed by the candidate. He shall judge and mark 
the results of the practical tests according to a 
procedure which includes at least ten check points. 
This procedure shall be developed by the national 
certifying body. 


9.2.5 A candidate for a practical examination may 
use his own apparatus. The examiner should 
investigate the reliability of the test apparatus made 


IS 18224 : 2023 


available to the candidate, and unreliable apparatus 
should be replaced as well as any apparatus that 
may be rendered unserviceable during the course of 
the examination. Any item of apparatus brought by 
a candidate that is unreliable or rendered 
unserviceable during the examination should be 
replaced by the candidate/course organizer. 


9.3 Grading 


To be certified, the candidate shall score at least 65 
percent each in written, practical and viva voce tests. 
Weightage of written, practical and viva voce tests 
will be 40, 40 and 20 respectively and a candidate 
has to secure minimum 70 percent in weighted 
average to be declared as Pass. 


9.4 Re-examination 
9.4.1 Failed Candidates 


If a candidate fails to secure the qualifying marks as 
indicated above, he will get two more chances to 
reappear and clear it within next 2 years from the 
date of appearing in first exam. Based on the marks 
obtained and self-assessment, he/she is free to 
decide in which part(s) he/she will reappear and 
submit re-examination fees accordingly. At the end 
of each attempt, the candidate will be evaluated, 
taking the best of the available results in each part, 
and result communicated. However, after appearing 
thrice (one regular and two re-exams) if a candidate 
can’t meet the pass criteria, he/she will be declared 
fail. In that case, he has to repeat the full qualifying 
examination. 


9.4.2 Unethical Practices 


A candidate failing for reasons of unethical behavior 
during examination or whose certificate has been 
annulled by the national certifying body for 
unethical practices during welding inspection will 
be debarred for sitting in the examination for 
12 months from the date of commencement of the 
first examination/withdrawal of certificate as the 
case may be. After the lapse of the period, he/she 
may apply as a fresh candidate. 


9.4.2.1 In case a candidate is caught for the second 
time for the unethical practices, he/she will 
permanently debarred from appearing in Ше 
certification exam and viva voce conducted through 
any national certifying body. 


10 CERTIFICATION 
10.1 Administration 


Based on the results of the qualification 
examination, the national certifying body shall 
announce the certification and issue certificates and 
corresponding wallet cards to the successful 
candidates. 


10.2 Certificates and Wallet Cards 


Certificates and wallet cards and corresponding 
wallet cards shall bear: 


a) Full name of the certified individual; 

b) Date of certification; 

c) Date upon which certification expires; 
d) Level of certification; 

e) A unique identification number; 

f) Signature of the certified individual; 

g) А photograph of the certified individual; 


h) Seal of the national certifying body 
cancelling the photograph to avoid 
falsification; and 


j) Signature, on the certificate, of a 
designated representative of the national 
certifying body. 

NOTE — By issuing the certificate and/or the 
corresponding wallet card, the national certifying 
body attests to the qualification of the individual but 
does not give any authority to operate. There may be 
a special space on both the certificate and the wallet 
card for the signature of the employer or responsible 
agency authorizing the holder of the certificate to 
operate and taking responsibility for test results. This 


authorization also serves as testimony of activity of 
the certified individual. 


10.3 Validity 


The period of validity of the certificate shall be five 
years from the date of certification indicated on the 
certificate and/or wallet card. Certification shall be 
invalid if: 


a) The individual becomes physically 
incapable of performing his duties or a 
significant interruption takes place in the 
individual’s work within the scope of the 
certificate; and 


b) The individual fails to meet the vision 
acuity requirements mentioned in 8.3. 


NOTE — A significant interruption means an absence 
or a change of activity which prevents the certified 
individual from practicing the duties corresponding to 
his level for which he is certified, for a continuous 
period exceeding one year. If the criteria for renewal 
are not met, the individual shall apply for 
recertification. 


10.4 Renewal of Certificate 


10.4.1 After the period of validity, certification may 
be renewed by the national certifying body for an 
additional period of five years from the date of 
expiry provided the individual apply for the same in 
prescribed form and meets the following criteria: 


a) Provides evidence of continued 
satisfactory work activity without 
significant interruption; and 


b) Reaffirmation of the ‘Code of Conduct’ as 
prescribed in 6. 


10.4.2 Application for renewal can be made 
6 months before to 6 months after the expiry of 
validity of original certificate. 


10.4.3 Renewal will be made effective from the 
expiry of validity of original certificate. 


10.5 Annulment of Qualification 


Annulment of qualification to the candidates shall 
be considered by the national certifyingbody 
based on the following criteria: 


a) Effective period expired for more than 
6 months with no application made for 
qualification continuation; 


b) Certificate holder is seized with a serious 


disorder either mental or physical; 


we 


С 


wm 


A serious fault has been committed by the 
certificate holder in his/her qualification 
related work at the opinion of the national 
certifying body after reviewing evidence of 
unethical behavior; and 


d 


м7 


Certificate holder has injured the national 
certifying body’s reputation or conducted 
against the purpose of the national certifying 
body. 


10.6 Re-Certification 


10.6.1 Re-certification is required after one renewal 
or 10 years whichever is less. The candidate has to 
apply for the same in prescribed form. This is 
required after one renewal that is 10 years after 
original certification or if the certificate becomes 
invalid due to any reasons like significant 
interruption, loss of vision acuity, suspension of 
certificate due to established unethical practices etc. 
The holder is required to apply to national certifying 
body by using prescribed form. He/she may also 
apply for up-gradation of his/her level also during 
re-certification. 


IS 18224 : 2023 


Re-certification may involve written test, practical 
test and viva voce to be decided by national 
certifying body based on the evidence of continued 
satisfactory work activity without significant 
interruption provided by the candidate in the 
prescribed form; and 


a) Reaffirmation of the ‘Code of Ethics’ as 
prescribed in the NCB quality manual. 


10.6.2 Application for re-certification can be made 
6 months before to 6 months after the expiry of 
validity of renewal certificate. 


10.6.3 Re-certification will be made effective from 
the expiry of validity of renewal certificate. 


11 FILES 


The national certifying body bodies shall maintain 
the followings either in hard copy form or ‘Read 
Only’ digitized (electronic) form: 


a) An updated list of all certified individuals 
classified according to level; and 


b) Files containing following papers for each 
individual who have appeared іп the 
certifying examination. 

1) Application forms; 


2) Examination documents, including 
questionnaires, answers, description of 
specimens, records, results of test and 
grade sheets; 


3) Renewal documents, including 
evidence of physical condition and 
continuous activity; and 


4) Reasons and penalty for апу 
withdrawal of certification. 


NOTE — Files shall be kept under suitable 
conditions of safety and confidentiality for at 
least 2 years after validity of certification has 
lapsed. 


IS 18224 : 2023 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 3.1.14, 4.2 and 9.1) 


WELDING INSPECTOR'S KNOWLEDGE AND COMPETENCY REQUIREMENTS 


SI No. Subjects Basic Level | Std. Level | Adv. Level 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
1) Role and responsibilities of a welding inspector 
a) Preparation and reviewing of controlling documents X 
Example: 
Quality assurance plan (QAP), inspection and test plan(ITP) 
b) Review, comment and witnessing of welding procedureand X X 
performance qualification 
c) [Verification of calibration of equipment and instruments X X X 
d) Witnessing of NDT inspection activities X X X 
e) [Verification of all stage inspection activities duringfabrication X X X 
f) Review of NDT inspection reports and activities X X 
g) Verification of NDE and welder’s qualification andcertification X X 
records 
h) [Interacting with other departments to ensure fabricated components X 
ii) Welding inspectors check list 
Inspection documents and reports to be prepared reviewed and X X 
approved by the welding inspector during various stage of 
fabrication, in line with approved QAP/ ITP such as liquid penetrant 
a) test (LPT) report, raw material inspection report, WPS, РОК, WPQ, 
pneumatic test report etc. 
iii) Quality assurance of welds 
a) [Elements of quality management System (QMS) anddefinition X X X 
b) Quality requirements for fusion welding of metallic materials as X X 
per IS 15326 (all parts) 
c) (Quality assurance plan — Preparation and review X X 
iv) Жау materials control and traceability and welding consumables 
a) (Relevant product forms, for example plate, pipe, forgings апа X X X 
castings and their relevant ASTM standards for carbon steel (CS), 
stainless steel (SS), Al and Ni alloys. 
b) М$ТР (Material sampling and test plan) X X X 
c) Welding consumables selection and Testing X X X 
d) [Material traceability mechanisms X X X 
e) [Material storage — PMI (Portable material identification) X X X 
v) Metallurgy and weldability of steels 


IS 18224 : 2023 


SI No. Subjects Basic Level | Std. Level | Adv. Level 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
a) Phases in steel, iron-carbon (Fe-C) апа continuous cooling X X X 

transformation (CCT) diagrams 
b) — |Hardenability and weldability of steels X X X 
c) (Carbon — Manganese steels and concept of carbonequivalence X X 
(C.E) 
d) [ом alloy steels for low temperature, high temperatureand high X 
tensile service and their weldability 
e) Austenitic, ferritic, martensitic and duplex stainless steels and their X 
weldability 
vi) Metallurgy and weldability of non-ferrous metals andalloys 
a) Aluminium and Al alloys X 
b) М№ске and Ni alloys X 
vii) Welding and cutting processes 
a) Оху-ҒџеІ, plasma and laser cutting processes X X X 
b) Water — jet and abrasive cutting X X 
c) Submerged metal Arc welding (SMAW), gas metal arc welding X X 
(GMAW), flux-cored arc welding (FCAW), gas tungsten arc 
welding (GTAW) and submerged arc welding (SAW) processes 
d) [Resistance welding processes X X X 
e) [Arc welding power sources — Transformer, generator,thyristor and X X X 
invertor 
f) Selection of power sources, AC / DC importance ofpolarity X X X 
g) [Advanced welding and Brazing processes X X 
h) [Introduction to welding automation X X 
viii) Dissimilar welding, repair welding and PWHT 
a) Problems in dissimilar welding X X 
b) Selection of consumables in dissimilar welding X X X 
c) |PWHT — Temperature, soaking time, heating and coolingrate, X X 
uniformity of temperature 
d) (Calibration of furnace, thermo-couples and recorders X X 
e) Stress relieving and solution annealing X X 
f) Surfacing and Repair welding — preparation of work piece for| X X 
repair, WPS for repair. 
ix) Weld defects including distortion in welds 
a) (Classification of weld defects X X X 
b) Process related and metallurgy related defects X X X 
c) (Causes and remedies X X 
d) |Distortion and residual stress control during design and during апа X X 


after fabrication 


IS 18224 : 2023 


SI No. Subjects Basic Level | Std. Level | Adv. Level 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
x) Quality levels for welds and Weld Quality Standards 
a) (Classification and definition of weld defects as per IS 10793 (Part 1) X X X 
b) (Quality levels for Arc welded joints in steel as рег ISO 5817 X X X 

Welding — Fusion-welded joints in steel, nickel, titanium and their 
alloys (beam welding excluded) — Quality levels for imperfections 
c) Relevant API 1104 welding of pipelines and related facilities X X X 
standard for welding of pipe line and related facilities and structural 
steel welding code in compliance with AWS D 1.1 structural steel 
welding code 
xi) Welding joints, symbols and positions 
a) Weld joints and welding symbols IS 813 (all Parts) and AWS D 1.1 X X X 
structural steel welding code 
b) Welding positions as per AWS D 1.1 structural steel Welding code X X X 
and ISO 6947 welding and allied processes — welding positions 
xii) (Codes and standards 
a) Need for codes and standards X X X 
b) Difference between code, standard, specification and procedure X X X 
c) Welding Codes — ASME BPVC section IX welding, brazing and X X 
fusing qualification, ISO 15609 (all parts) Specification and x 
qualification of welding procedures for metallic materials — 
welding procedure specification, ISO 15614 (all parts) Specification 
and qualification of welding procedures for metallic materials — 
welding procedure test, IS 7310 (all parts) and Indian Boiler 
Regulation (IBR) 608 and 609 
xiii) {Welding qualification — procedure and performance 
a) (Consumables qualification X X 
b) Welding procedure specification X X 
c) Essential, non-essential and special essential variables X X 
d) [Formats — WPS, PQR and УРО X X 
e) Qualification ranges X X 
f) Destructive and non-destructive testing of samples. X X 
xiv) Metrology 
a) Nomenclature of butt and fillet welds X X X 
b) Measurement of butt and fillet welds X X X 
c) Weld inspection tools — Weld inspection gauges, fillet gauges X X X 
d) [Techniques for measurement of distortion X X X 
xv) [Introduction to NDT of Welds 
a) What is NDT and need for NDT X X X 
b) (Classification of NDT techniques X X X 
c) Different NDT modalities and applications X X X 


IS 18224 : 2023 


SI No. Subjects Basic Level | Std. Level | Adv. Level 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
xvi) [Visual Inspection (VI) Theory 
a) Basic visual inspection X X X 
b) [Visual inspection aids X X X 
c) VI report format X X X 
d) Codes and standards for Visual inspection X X X 
xvii) [Liquid penetrant test (LPT) and Magnetic particle test (MPT) 
[Theory 
a) Basic and principles of LPT and MPT X X 
b) Equipment and classification X X 
c) Report formats X X 
d) |Limitations and advantages X X 
e) Sensitivity X X 
f) (Codes and standards X X 
хуш) |RT theory 
a) Basics and principles X X 
b) Equipment and sources X X 
c) Film X X 
d) [Radiographic techniques X X 
e) Radiographic quality — Image quality indicator (IQI) and density X X 
f) [Advances in radiography — Digital radiography (DR), computed X X 
radiology (CR) and micro focal 
g) — Codes and standards X X 
h) Advantages and limitations X X 
хіх) КТ film interpretation 
a) Viewing radiographic films with different defects X 
b) identification of different defects X 
c) [Demonstration of density X 
d) Selection of IQI X 
e) [Artefacts X 
xx) (ОТ theory 
a) Basics and principles X X 
b) Equipment, transducers and couplant X X 
c) Normal and angle beam inspection X X 
d) Factors affecting probability of detection (POD) — Beam skewing X X 
e) Sizing of discontinuities X X 
f) [Advantages and limitations X X 
g) Codes and standards X X 


IS 18224 : 2023 


SI No. Subjects Basic Level | Std. Level | Adv. Level 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
h) UT report formats X X 

xxi) [Destructive testing of welds 
a) Tensile testing — Longitudinal and transverse X X 
b) Вепа tests — Root, face and side X X 
c) Impact testing — Room temp and low temp X X 
d) Fillet Test— Macro and Fracture X X 
e) Relevantstandards — Location, orientation and acceptance X X 
criteria 
xxii) [Hazards and safety in welding 
a) Hazards in welding and cutting X X X 
b) Electrical and arc related hazards X X X 
c)  |Gas and gas cylinder and pipeline related hazards X X X 
d) [Personal protective equipment (PPEs) X X X 
e) Shading of viewing glasses including auto-darkening helmets X X X 
f) Ventilation X X X 
g) Safety standards in welding in compliance with ANSI Z49.1 Safety X X X 
in welding, cutting, and allied processes 

xxviii) Recommended training hours (including practical, demo of welding 96 h 8h 48h 

processes, RT and destructive testing and visit to fabrication unit) 


IS 18224 : 2023 


ANNEX B 
(Clause 4.2 and 9.1) 


WELDING INSPECTOR'S EXAMINATION 


SI №. Tests Basic Level | Std. Level | Adv. Level 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
А Theory test X X X 


1) [Theory question papers to be objective type with four (4) 
possible answers 


2) |For basic and standard level 50 questions to have (i) right 
answer. 


3) |For advanced level 40 questions to have one right answer and 
10 questions to have 2 right answers 


4) [Total 50 questions x 2 marks each = 100 marks 100 100 100 


5) |Раѕѕ marks 65 65 65 


B Practical tests 


1) |Plate and Pipe Butt/fillet welds metrology — To size the X 
important weld geometry parameters 


2) Macro examination of — Plate/pipe/fillet and butt welds — To X X 
detect discontinuities and size the same 
3) [РТ and MPT of welds — To detect and size open to surface X 
discontinuities either by carrying out LPT/MPT of weld 
coupons. 
4) WPS апа PQR — To review and correct mistakes X X 
5) Study and interpretation of a weld drawing X 
6) Radiographic interpretation — To interpret the Discontinuities XX 


апа evaluate the same with given acceptance criteria for carboni 
апа stainless steels 


7) (Marks 100 100 100 
8) |Pass marks 65 65 65 
С Viva voce test X X X 


1) [To be conducted during or after practical 


2) |Marks 100 100 100 
3) Раѕѕ marks 65 65 65 
D Overall weightage 
i) [Theory 40 Percent 
11) Practical 40 Percent 
iii) Viva voce 20 Percent 


NOTE — To obtain the certificate, a candidate is to secure minimum 65 percent marks in all the sections individually and 70 percent marks 
in weighted average of all the three sections (A, B and C) mentioned above. 


IS 18224 : 2023 


ANNEX C 
(Clause 3.2) 
ABBREVIATION 

CWIA — Certified welding inspector- n) 
advance level 

р) 
CWIB — Certified welding inspector- ) 
basic level Ч 
CWIS — Certified welding inspector- 
standard level r) 
DT — Destructive testing s) 
ET — Eddy current testing 
ITP — Inspection and test plan t) 
IWE — International welding u) 
engineer w 
TWIP — International welding ) 
inspection personnel У 

7 
IWS — International welding ) 
specialist 

aa) 
IWT — International welding 
technologist 

bb) 

LT — Leak testing 
cc) 


MT — Magnetic particle testing 

NDT — Non-destructive testing 

NWIC — National welding inspectors 
certification scheme 

PMI — Positive material 
identification 

PQR — Procedure qualification 
record 

PT — Liquid penetrant testing 

PWHT — Post weld heat treatment 

QAP — Quality assurance plan 

RT — Radiographic testing 

WPQR = — Welding procedure 
qualification record 

WPS — Welding procedure 
specification 

UT — Ultrasonic testing 

VT — Visual testing 


IS No. 
IS 813 


(Part 1): 
2018/ISO 2553 : 
2013 


(Part 2) : 2018/ISO 
4063 : 2009 


IS 7310 


(Part 1) : 2019/ISO 
9606-1 : 2012 


(Part 2) : 2019/ISO 
9606-2 : 2004 


(Part 3) : 2019/ISO 
9606-3 : 1999 


(Part 4) : 2019/ISO 
9606-4 : 1999 


(Part 5) : 2019/ISO 
9606-5 : 2000 


IS 10793 (Part 1) : 
2018780 6520 : 
2007 


ANNEX D 
(Clause 2) 


Title 
Welding and allied processes: 


Symbolic 
drawings 
(second revision) 


representation 
Welded 


on 
— joints 
Nomenclature of processes and 
reference numbers (second 
revision) 


Qualification testing of welders 
— Fusion welding: 


Steels (first revision) 


Aluminium and aluminium alloys 
(first revision) 


Copper and copper alloys (first 
revision) 


Nickel and nickel alloys (first 
revision) 


Titanium and titanium alloys, 
zirconium and zirconium alloys 
(first revision) 


Welding and allied processes — 
Classification of geometric 
imperfections in metallic 


IS 15326 


(Part 1): 
2018/ISO 3834-1 : 
2005 


(Part 2) : 
2022/ISO 3834-2 : 
2021 


(Part 3) : 
2022/ISO 3834-3 : 
2021 


(Part 4) : 2022/ISO 
3834-4 : 2021 


(Part 5) : 2019150 
3834-4 : 2015 


ІЅЛЅОЛЕС 17024 
: 2012 


IS 18224 : 2023 


materials: Part 1 Fusion welding 
(first revision) 


Quality requirements for fusion 
welding of metallic materials: 


Criteria for the selection of the 
appropriate level of quality 
requirements (first revision) 


Comprehensive quality 
requirements (second revision) 


Standard quality 
(second revision) 


requirements 


Elementary quality requirements 
(second revision) 


Documents with which it is 
necessary to conform to claim 
conformity to the quality 
requirements of ISO 3834-2, ISO 
3834-3 or ISO 3834-4 (first 


revision) 


Conformity assessment 
General requirements for bodies 
operating certification of persons 
(first revision) 


IS 18224 : 2023 


ANNEX E 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Welding General and its Applications Sectional Committee, MTD 11 


Organization 


Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic Research, Kalpakkam 


Ador Welding Limited, Mumbai 


Asian Industries, Mumbai 
BEML Limited, Bengaluru 
Bharat Heavy Electrical Limited, New Delhi 


D & Н Secheron Electrodes Private Limited, New Delhi 


Defence Research and Development Laboratory 


Directorate of Naval Architecture, Naval Headquarters, 
New Delhi 


ESAB India Limited, Chennai 


Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


Godrej & Boyce Manufacturing Company Limited, 
Mumbai 


Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai 


Indian Register of Shipping, Mumbai 


Indian Welding Society, Mumbai 


Indian Institute of Welding, Kolkata 


Jai Gopal Engineering Works 


Ministry of Defence (DGQA) 


Ministry of Railways(RDSO), Lucknow 


National Test House, Ghaziabad 


Nuclear Power Corporation of India Limited, Mumbai 


Representative(s) 


DR SHAJU K. ALBERT (Chairperson) 
SHRI М. KRISNAMOORTHY 


SHRI NINADH THIGALE 
SHRI HARIDAS MONDAL (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJEEV KHANNA 
SHRI PRAVEEN J. 


SHRI LAKAVATH PRAVEEN KUMAR 
SHRI HARI KRISHNA GADILLLI (Alternate) 


SHRI T. J. PRASADA RAO 
SHRI ZAKIR HUSSAIN (Alternate) 


SHRI C. У. S. MURTHY 
SHRI P. MASTANISH (Alternate) 


CAPT SUJIT BAXI 


SHRI P. RAVI KUMAR 


SHRI S. GHOSAL 
SHRI ARJIT ROY (Alternate) 


SHRI S. M. VADIYA 
SHRI ANAND D. BAGDARE (Alternate) 


DR AMITAVA DE 
SHRIN. B. BALLAL (Alternate) 


SHRI S. SHANKAR 
SHRI G. MADHU BABU (Alternate) 


SHRI R. D. PENNATHUR 
SHRI ANAND PURSWANI (Alternate) 


SHRI HARISH KHURANNA 


SHRI JAI GOPAL MEHTA 
SHRI A. K. GUPTA (Alternate) 


SHRI N. K. MURTHY 
SHRI BIKAS MONDAL (Alternate) 


SHRI B. L BAIRWA 
SHRI HARISH CHANDRA (Alternate) 


SHRI SHER SINGH 
SHRI G. N. SUDHAKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI SUNDAR SINGH 
SHRI S. VISWANATH (Alternate) 


IS 18224 : 2023 


Organization Representative(s) 


Office of the Development Commissioner (MSME), SHRI NIRANJAN NAIK 

New Delhi SHRI DINESH KUMAR (Alternate) 
Oil and Natural Gas Corp Limited, Uttarakhand SHRI SAYAD SHAKIR ALI 

SHRI RATENDRA KUMAR (Alternate) 
Ordnance Factory Board, Kolkata SHRIS. K. DOGRA 
SHRI A. B. HANDI (Alternate) 

Tata Motors Limited Engineering Research Centre, SHRI У. HARIHARAN 

Pune SHRIR. R. KULKARNI (Alternate) 
Tata Steel Limited, Scientific Services Development, SHRI MAHADEV SHOME 

Jamshedpur DR GOUTAM MUKHOPADHYAY (Alternate) 
BIS Directorate General SHRI SANJIV MANI, SCIENTIST ‘F’/SENIOR DIRECTOR 


AND HEAD (METALLURGICAL ENGINEERING) 
[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI VISHAL KUMAR RANA 
SCIENTIST ‘B’/ASSISTANT DIRECTOR 
(METALLURGICAL ENGINEERING), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MTD 11 (18754). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8% Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector У, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : СІ.Т. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot Мо. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


