NAT HA IS 16362 : 2020 
Indian Standard 


HT — PEA raten HAAS 
Ratnu A wan maana — fates 


( Teel qha ) 


Geosynthetics — Geotextiles used in 
Subgrade Stabilization in Pavement 
Structures — Specification 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 59.080.70 


© BIS 2020 


anda AM sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Te TH HM, +ç fref — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


February 2020 Price Group 5 


IS 16362 : 2020 


Geosynthetics Sectional Committee, TXD 30 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Geosynthetics Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textile Division Council. 


This standard was first published in the year 2015 and has now been revised to incorporate the following 
major changes: 


a) Requirements for CBR puncture strength have been modified. 


b) Requirements for burst strength, pullout interaction coefficient and coefficient of direct shear have been 
deleted. 


c) References of Indian Standards have been updated. 
d) BIS certification marking clause has been updated. 


A large variety of detrimental factors, such as environmental conditions, subgrade conditions, traffic loading, 
utility cuts, road widening, ageing, etc contribute to distress in pavements which needs to be addressed in the 
maintenance or rehabilitation of the pavements. Pavement maintenance treatments are often ineffective and short 
lived due to their inability to both, treat the cause of the problem and renew the existing pavement condition. 
The main cause of distress in pavements is the inability of pavement materials to drain out precipitated surface 
water infiltrating through the pavement, leading to softening and weakening of pavement subgrade and base 
thus accelerating pavement degradation. Further, existing pavement distress, such as surface cracks, rocking 
joints and subgrade failures cause the rapid reflection of cracking up through the maintenance treatment. 


The preferred strategy for long-term road and pavement performance should, therefore, be to build in safeguards 
during initial construction. These performance safeguards include stabilizing the subgrade against moisture 
intrusion and associated weakening; strengthening road based aggregate with efficient drainage of infiltrated water; 
and, as a last resort, enhancing the stress absorption and moisture proofing capabilities of selected maintenance 
treatments. 


The geogrids and the geotextiles are the most cost effective tools for safeguarding roads and pavements. 
Geosynthetics extend the service life of roads, increase their load-carrying capacity, and reduce rutting. For larger 
rut depths, more strain is induced in the geotextiles where the stiffness properties of geotextiles are essential. 
A considerable reduction in aggregate thickness is possible by the use of geotextiles having a high modulus in 
the direction perpendicular to the road centerline, however, the benefits of the geotextiles are dependent on the 
membrane action achieved with a stiff geotextiles as well as the lateral movement. The most common method 
for quantifying the geosynthetic benefits is the determination of Traffic Benefit Ratio (TBR) which is defined as 
the ratio of reinforced load cycles to failure (excessive rutting) to the number of cycles that cause failure of an 
unreinforced road section. In general, geosynthetics have been found to provide a TBR in the range of 1.5 to 70, 
depending on the type of geosynthetic, its location in the road, and the testing scenario. The researchers have found 
that for weak subgrades (CBR = 2 percent) the geotextile extends the service life of a flexible pavement section by 
a factor of 2.5 to 3.0 compared to a non-stabilized section. Further, a geotextile effectively increased the pavement 
section’s total AASHTO structural number by approximately 19 percent. Similarly, for pavement sections with 
moderate strengths (CBR = 4.2 to 4.5 percent), the geotextile increased the service life of the pavement section 
by a factor of 2.0 to 3.3 and the AASHTO structural number increased by 13 to 22 percent. Also, the benefit of 
inclusion of geosynthetic material is briefed with design methodologies in IRC SP 59 : 2019 ‘Guidelines for use 
of geosynthetics in road pavements and associated works ( first revision )’. Both geotextiles and geogrids thus can 
play an important role in extending the life of a roadway system. 


The four main applications of geosynthetics in roads are, subgrade separation, subgrade stabilization, base/ 
subbase reinforcement and overlay stress absorption and sub-surface drainage. Subgrade stabilization and base 
reinforcement involve improving the road structure as it is constructed by inserting an appropriate geosynthetic 
layer. Base reinforcement is the use of geosynthetics to improve the structure of a paved road. 


Subgrade separation and stabilization applies geosynthetics to both unpaved and paved roads. When serving as a 
separator, the geotextile prevents fines from migrating into the base course and/or prevents base course aggregate 
from penetrating into the subgrade. The soil retaining properties of the geotextile are basically the same as those 


IS 16362 : 2020 


required for drainage and filtration. Therefore, the retention and permeability criteria required for drainage should 
be met. In addition, the geotextile should withstand the stresses resulting from the load applied to the pavement. 
The nature of these stresses depends on the condition of the subgrade, type of construction equipment and the 
cover over the subgrade. Since, the geotextile serves to prevent aggregate from penetrating the subgrade, it shall 
meet puncture, burst, grab and tear strengths required. At small rut depth, the strain in the geosynthetic is also 
small. In this case, the geosynthetic acts primarily as a separator between the soft subgrade and the aggregate. 
Any geosynthetic that survives construction will work as a separator. This application is limited to soils which 
either in initially or seasonably have a CBR >3 but < 8. In this application the geotextile is a substitute for the 
choked subbase stone commonly used over plastic subgrades. It is important to understand that this function may 
be required when geogrids are used to provide base reinforcement or confinement. 


Geotextiles for stabilization provide coincident functions of separation and filtration especially when these are 
used in wet and saturated conditions. In some installations, these can also provide the function of reinforcement. 
For very weak subgrades, it is often beneficial to combine the benefits of both separation and stabilization. The 
following general conclusion can be drawn relating to a typical road base: 


a) A geosynthetic element that functions primarily as a separator (typically when the subgrade CBR > 3) 
will prevent the mixing of poor soils with granular materials of pavement (separation geotextiles). This 
will enhance the long term performance of pavement. 


b 


x 


A geosynthetic element that functions primarily to provide confinement of the aggregate and lateral 
restraint to the subgrade (typically when the subgrade CBR < 3 or between 1 and 3) will both increase 
the allowable bearing capacity of the subgrade and provide an improved load distribution ratio in the 
aggregate. The combined benefits can enhance load carrying capacity of the road by well over 50 percent 
(stabilization geogrids, geocells and geotextiles). 


The general rules for use of geogrids and geotextiles in roadway system are as follows: 


a) Temporary Roads — Used for hauling and access roads that are subject to low volume of traffic including 
working platform for permanent road construction: 


1) Clayey or silty subgrade with California Bearing Ratio (CBR) < 4 — If a clean base aggregate is used, 
then a non-woven separator geotextile shall be used. If a “choked aggregate” like general crusher run 
Is used, then use either a geotextile or a biaxial geogrid that has good aperture stability and appropriate 
size. For a design equivalent single axle loading (ESAL) less than 1 000, a woven geotextile designed for 
both separation and membrane roles may be used; that is, consider the geotextile’s modulus. For larger 
ESAL, use a woven or non woven geotextile designed simply for separation. The reinforcement role of 
the geogrid seems safe for approximately 10 000 ESAL. 


2 


wa 


Sandy subgrade with CBR<3 — Select a biaxial geogrid with good aperture stability and appropriate 
size or, a woven geotextile that has a reasonable interface friction with the sand and the aggregate. If a 
woven geotextile is considered, care should be taken to ensure that it does not actually create a slick slip- 
plane beneath the aggregate, that is, look at the interface friction by using geotextiles with high surface 
roughness which leads to enhanced interface friction. 


b) Permanent Roads (ESAL>200 000): 


1) Clayey or silty subgrade with CBR<3 — Consider building a working platform using the temporary road 
methods upon which conventional road can be constructed. 

2) Clayey or silty subgrade with 3<CBR<8 — If there is any potential for degradation due to water intrusion, 
frost heave, etc. then include a separator geotextile to protect the base aggregate during these periods. 

3) Sandy subgrades with CBR<3 — Use a biaxial geogrid that has good aperture stability and appropriate 
size to reinforce the base aggregate. This is particularly helpful when poor quality stone and small 
aggregate thickness is used, less than 25 cm. 

Geosynthetics can also be used as inter layers by placing them below or within the overlay (asphalt concrete) and 
are thus helpful in rehabilitating distressed road surfaces. These may also provide a moisture barrier. 


Survivability of geotextiles is very important from the viewpoint of their long-term durability and is defined as 
the resistance to mechanical damage during road construction and initial operation. The ability of a geosynthetic 
to survive installation and reasonable service loads shall be assured if it is to perform as designed. Installation 
damage to a geotextile is a function of the following: 


a) Geotextile thickness; 
b) Compactive effort and lift thickness; 
c) Type and weight of construction equipment used for fill spreading; 


IS 16362 : 2020 


d) Grain size distribution of backfill; 

e) Angularity of backfill; 

f) Polymer used in the manufacture of geotextile; and 
g) Geotextile manufacturing process. 


Geotexiles are mainly made from polyester (PET) or polypropylene (PP). PP is lighter than water, strong and 
very durable. PET is heavier than water, has excellent strength and creep properties, and is compatible with most 
common soil environments. Geotextiles are mainly of two types, namely, woven and non-woven geotextiles. 
Knitted and stitch bonded geotextiles are occasionally used in the manufacture of specialty products. Non-woven 
geotextiles are highly desirable for subsurface in planer drainage, and erosion control applications as well as, 
for road stabilization over wet moisture sensitive soils. Out of woven geotextiles, slit film fabrics geotextiles are 
commonly used for sediment control, that is silt fence and road stabilization applications but are poor choices for 
subsurface drainage and erosion control applications. Monofilament woven geotextiles have better permeability 
making them suitable for certain drainage and erosion control applications. High strength multifilament woven 
geotextiles are primarily used in reinforcement applications. 


The committee has reviewed the provisions of the following International Standard referred in this standard and 
has decided that it is acceptable for use in conjunction with this standard: 


International Standard Title 

ISO 10722 : 2019 Geosynthetics — Index test procedure for the evaluation of mechanical damage 
under repeated loading — Damage caused by granular material (Laboratory test 
method) 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex C. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


111 


IS 16362 : 2020 


Indian Standard 


GEOSYNTHETICS — GEOTEXTILES USED IN 
SUBGRADE STABILIZATION IN PAVEMENT 
STRUCTURES — SPECIFICATION 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard covers general and performance 
requirements for geotextiles used in wet and saturated 
soil conditions to provide the subgrade stabilization in 
pavement structures along with coincident functions 
of separation and filtration. In some installations, the 
geotextile can also provide the functions ofreinforcement. 


1.2 The stabilization function of geotextile is 
applicable to pavement structures constructed over 
existing subgrade soils with a California Bearing Ratio 
between | and 3 (1 < CBR < 3), and shear strength 
between approximately 30 to 90 kPa. The stabilization 
application is appropriate for subgrade soils which are 
saturated due to a high ground water table or due to 
prolonged periods of wet weather. 


1.3 This standard is not suitable for embankment 
reinforcement where stress conditions may cause 
global subgrade foundation or stability failure. 


NOTES: 


1 The function of stabilization in this application refers to 
including a tensile member in the form of a geotextile between 
the aggregate cover material and the soft subgrade soil with 
the intent of either increasing the structural support capacity 
of that component of the pavement structure and hence its 
life or reduce the initial cost. The geotextile may also serve 
to stabilize the sub-grade provided the geotextile conforms to 
the requirements for separation and filtration as prescribed in 
relevant specifications.. 


2 The design of geosynthetic-reinforced unpaved roadways 
has been simplified into design charts that relate aggregate 
thickness requirements to a range of subgrade strengths, based 
on standard highway design loading and various allowable rut 
depths. 

3 This is a material purchasing standard and design review 
of its use for intended applications is recommended. This 
is not a construction or design standard. Stabilization of the 
pavement section is a site specific design issue which should 
be addressed by the engineers responsible for the pavement 
and embankment design. This standard is not appropriate for 
embankment reinforcement where stress conditions may cause 
global subgrade foundation or embankment failure. Design 
details for geotextile for stabilization, such as geotextile 
type, cover material thickness, pavement cross-section and 
associated details, shall be as shown on the contract drawings. 


4 This standard is based on the minimum requirements of the 
geotextile to provide tensile reinforcement and survivability 


from installation stress. The physical properties listed in Table 1 
are applicable for a minimum backfill thickness of 150 mm. 
However, in general, the geotextile shall be placed at the proper 
elevation, location and orientation as detailed on the plans 
and specification. Unless otherwise specified in the project 
specification, the contractor shall follow the construction/ 
installation guidelines in the relevant Indian Standard. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A contain provisions 
which through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards indicated in Annex A. 


3 DEFINITIONS 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions as given 
in IS 13321 (Part 1) and the following shall apply. 


3.1 Minimum Average Roll Value (MARV) — The 
average value of roll minus two times the standard 
deviation. Statistically, it yields a 97.7 percent degree 
of confidence that any sample taken during quality 
assurance testing will exceed value reported. 


3.2 Subgrade Improvement — It is defined as the 
improvement of the bearing capacity and mitigation of 
deformation ofthe subgrade soil by placing a geotextile 
immediately over a soft subgrade soil. The goal of this 
application may be to reduce undercut requirements, 
improve construction efficiency, reduce the amount 
of aggregate subbase/base material required, provide 
a stiff working platform for pavement construction, or 
combination of these. 


3.3 Traffic Benefit Ratio (TBR) — It is also known as 
traffic improvement factor or (TIF) and is defined as 
the ratio of reinforced load cycles to failure (excessive 
rutting) to the number of cycles that cause failure 
of an unreinforced road section. Thus it compares 
the performance of a pavement cross-section with a 
geotextile-reinforced base course to a similar cross- 
section without geotextile reinforcement, based on the 
number of cycles to failure. The failure is defined as a 


IS 16362 : 2020 


selected depth of rut through repetitive loading applied 
by a passing wheel load of at least 2041.2 kg per single 
wheel or 4082.4 kg per dual wheel. 


4 REQUIREMENTS 


4.1 Geosynthetic materials shall be inert to commonly 
encountered chemicals, resistant to rot and mildew, and 
shall have no tears or defects which adversely affect 
or alter its physical properties. Materials required 
for complete and proper installation of geosynthetic 
materials that are not specifically described herein, 
(such as pins, nails, washers, etc) shall conform to the 
manufacturer’s recommendations and be as selected 
and supplied by the contractor subject to final approval 
by the engineer. 


4.2 Polymers used in the manufacture of geotextiles, 
and the mechanical fasteners or threads used to join 
adjacent rolls, shall consist of long chain synthetic 
polymers, composed of at least 95 percent by weight 
of polyolefins (polyethylene or polypropylene) or 
polyesters when tested as per dissolution method in 
respective solvents as specified in IS 667. They shall 
be formed into a stable network such that the ribs, 
filaments or yarns retain their dimensional stability 
relative to each other, including selvedges. Polyolefin 
material shall be made resistant to ultraviolet light by 
adding 2 to 3 percent carbon black. Recycled polymers 
shall not be used in the manufacture of geotextiles and 
only virgin polymers shall be used for manufacture. 
In case of polyester geotextiles, the isophthalic acid 
content of the virgin polyester shall be nil when tested 
according to the method prescribed in Annex B. 


4.3 Geotextiles shall be dimensionally stable and able 
to retain their geometry under manufacture, transport, 
and installation. Woven slit film geotextiles (that 
is, geotextiles made from yarns of a flat, tape-like 
character) shall not be allowed. Geotextiles used for 
stabilization of pavement structure shall conform to the 
physical requirements as specified in Table 1. Average 
of test results from any sampled roll in a lot shall meet 
or exceed the minimum values specified in Table 1. 


NOTES: 

1 All numeric values in Table 1 except Apparent Opening Size 
(AOS), represent MARV in the weakest principal direction. 
Values for AOS represent maximum average roll values. 

2 The property values in Table 1 represent default values 
which provide for sufficient geotextile reinforcement and 
survivability under most construction conditions. 


5 SAMPLING AND 
CONFORMITY 


CRITERIA FOR 


5.1 Lot 


The quantity of the same class of geotextile 
manufactured from the same polymer under identical 
conditions and supplied to a buyer against one dispatch 
note shall constitute a lot. 


5.2 Sampling for tests shall be done in accordance with 
IS 14706 from each lot. Acceptance shall be based on 
testing of conformance samples obtained using the 
procedure given in IS 14706. 


5.3 Testing of samples shall be performed in accordance 
with the methods referred to in this standard for 
the indicated requirement(s). The number of test 
specimens shall be as specified in each test method. 
Product acceptance shall be determined by comparing 
the average test results of all the specimens within a 
given sample to the specified MARV. 


5.4 Criteria for Conformity 


The geotextile shall be tested for all the requirements 
as specified in Table 1 and 4.1 to 4.3 of this standard. 
When any individual sample fails to meet any standard 
requirement, thatroll shall be rejected and two additional 
sample rolls shall be selected from the same lot. The 
lot shall be declared conforming to the requirements of 
this standard if neither of these two additional samples 
fails to comply with any part of this standard, otherwise 
the entire quantity of rolls represented by that sample 
shall be rejected. 


6 MARKING AND LABELLING 


6.1 The geotextile material shall be marked with the 
following by attaching the printed labels: 


a) Identification of the geotextile material as per 
manufacturer’s recommendation, for example, 
polyester multifilament woven geotextile for 
stabilization in pavement structures; 


b) Class of geotextile material that is Class 1 or 
Class 2; 


c) Batch number, lot number and roll number; 
d) Date of manufacture of geotextile material; 


e) Any other information/instruction prescribed by 
the manufacturer or by the law in force; 


f) Manufacturer’s name, initials or trade-mark; and 


g) The country of origin. 
6.2 BIS Certification Marking 


The geotextile conforming to the requirements of 
this standard may be certified as per the conformity 
assessment schemes under the provisions of the Bureau 
of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and the Rules and 
Regulations framed thereunder, and the geotextile may 
be marked with the Standard Mark. 


7 PACKING 


The geotextile shall be packed in rolls or as per the 
contract or order. Each roll or package shall be protected 
by wrapping it in a LDPE film of minimum thickness 
of 40 microns to prevent it from the adverse impact of 
heat and moisture, oil, grease, dirt, dust and other stains 
during shipment and storage prior to deployment. 


2020 


IS 16362 


"N OST 29 Ifeys So]13X9]093 Jusure]jJouow USAOM 103 YIFUOHS 189) AYVIA pormbaz əu “Z sse[O 104 p 


“ILOS OY} JO Jey} ULY} 1942913 9q poys S]Hx9093 Jo Ay iqeatuad pue Aramrunod € 


"UON99S 1801 


poy e wo} posou ojdwes 9]1X99093 e jo uonsadsur pensia pue Buysa Aroyeloge] “oouoriodxə Ploy UO pase AjI[IGBATAINS JUDIOYJNS dy} JO MIA UL payloads oq Aew ə|nX91o98 ç SSID JO Z SSe Z 


‘(d49) PPAeı3 pope13 A]ıood se 


p>yısse[9 9uoJs pəusnio pue (MS) pues PopRIS [Jam ‘(JS) pues AaAejo ur ssəns uonejjejsur [eoruguoəui 0} pazos fqns uəuA (A31139)u1 [eingangs 10 Ájroedeo peo] JO ssor) sFeurep uoryejjejsur 0} DOURISISOY Y 


(z ued) TITEL SI 


= OL 


== OL 


"SALON 


uw “yi3uons [RUISIIO jo Jusoıod 
“ySuans pourejor “qoos W Anpgejs pomen (H 


u “(ç 90u 228) ID/MS/IS "WFUONS pourejor 


ZTZLOT OSI <— 06/66/56 —— + — 06/66/56 —— + — 06/66/56 ———> qyuoorod ‘osewep worepejsum o) 2ougsrsəq (I 
sanasdoig Ayyiqeing I 
b6crl SI 320) 320) 320) ev'0 £'0 evo xopy ‘ww ‘(SOY) 921s Surusdo juareddy ` (r 
pec SI S00 s00 s00 s0'0 s0'0 s0'0 ul “008 “KAMA TULIO g (I 
sonssdoig ÁJ113934] [8.139N.DS q 
8L091 SI 000 I 00L I 007 I ooz T 000 7 0087 u ‘N Buns around qgO (THA 
£6crl SI 081 00€ OST 00r OSE 00s um ‘N BUNS sea] [eprzodery, (TA 
09051 SI 0Sp OTL 089 066 018 007 I um ‘N PIUS ureəs UMS (A 
THET SI 00s 008 00L 001 I 006 00r I um ‘N BUNS quo (AT 
FS61 SI <«— PD991980 se JO 0'ç 1007 — <«— Poes JO 0'ç 10 0'Z —— <«— poorse se JO ()'S 1007 —— uy “UL ppm loq (ml 
YS6I SI —— pool8e se 10 0011005 —e +— poise se 10 0011005 — <— pooise se 10 001 1005 —e uw ‘u p3u joy (1 
— —— UDAOM-UQU/UIAOM — <— U9DAOM-U0U/UIAOM — <— U9AOM-UQU/UIAOM — 9]11X9J093 Jo SAAL ( 
s9n.19do.A1d xəpul Y 
(6) (8) (O) (9) (s) (p) (e) (2) 0) 

yuooıod IS = yusamd 0ç > juodiod 0ç = qusoiod 0ç > yuoolod yg = quaoiod 0ç > 

uonesuofg uonesuofg uonesuofg uonesuofg uone3uofg uonesuofg 

ç SSEIO T Sse I sse[O 

% PU > ‘ON 
“ISIL JO PO (Hyuswr.ambayg (SPHSLIEPEAEUZ IS 


suoneoyddy uoneziyiqeis 107 SI[HX9J09 Jo syuawa.aınbay I AQEL 


(ys pun Erp səsnpjO ) 


IS 16362 : 2020 


8 INFORMATION AND SAMPLES TO BE 
SUBMITTED BY THE MANUFACTURER 


The manufacturer shall submit to the purchaser the 
following: 


a) Geotextile product sample approximately one 
square metre or larger; 


b) Geotextile product data sheet and certification 
from himself or by third party certification, such 
as the use of the Standard Mark stating that the 
geotextile product supplied meets the requirements 
of this standard; and 


c) Manufacturer’s installation 
general recommendations. 


instructions and 


9 STORAGE AND PROTECTION 


9.1 During storage, elevate the geotextile rolls off the 
ground and adequately protect them from the following: 


a) Site construction damage; 
b) Excessive precipitation; 


c) Extended exposure to sunlight; 
d) Aggressive chemicals; 
e) Flames or temperatures in excess of 71°C; 


f) Excessive mud, wet concrete, epoxy, or other 
deleterious materials coming in contact with and 
affixing to the geotextile material; and 


g) Any other environmental condition that 
may damage the physical property values of 
reinforcement. 


9.2 Lay the rolled materials flat or vertical on ends. 


9.3 Do not leave the geotextile material directly 
exposed to sunlight for a period longer than the period 
recommended by the manufacturer. 


9.4 Each geotextile roll shall be wrapped with a material 
that will protect it from damage due to shipment, water, 
sunlight and contaminants. 


9.5 Keep geotextile dry until installation, and do not 
store directly on the ground. 


IS 16362 : 2020 


ANNEXA 
( Clause 2 ) 


LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 


IS No. Title IS No. Title 

667 : 1981 Methods for identification of 14294:1995  Geotextiles — Method for 

textile fibres (first revision) determination of apparent opening 
ee . ize by dry sieving techni 

1954 : 1990 Determination of length and width nn 2 SR rer 
of woven fabrics — Methods 14324 : 1995 Geotextiles — Methods of 
(second revision) test for determination of water 

ilit- tivit 
13162 (Part 2): Geotextiles — Methods of test: er wen a 
1991 Part 2 Determination of resistance 14706: 1999 Geotextiles — Sampling and 

to the exposure of ultraviolet preparation of test specimens 
light and water (Xenon-arc type 15060 : 2018 Geotextiles — Tensile test for 
apparatus) joints/seams by _ wide-width 

13321 (Part 1): Glossary ofterms for geosynthetics: method 

1992 Part 1 Terms used in materials and 16078 : 2013 Geosynthetics — Static puncture 

properties test (CBR test) 

14293 : 1995 Geotextiles — Method of test for 16342 : 2015 Geosynthetics — Method of 
trapezoid tearing strength test for grab breaking load and 

elongation of geotextiles 
ANNEXB 


( Clause 4.2 ) 


METHOD OF TEST FOR ISOPHTHALIC ACID CONTENT OF THE 
VIRGIN POLYESTER FIBRE 


B-1 PRINCIPLE 


This method is applicable to measure isophthalic 
acid content in polyethylene terephthalate sample. 
The polymer sample is digested in benzyl alcohol, 
depolymerized then esterified to dibenzyl isophthalate, 
dibenzyl terephthalate and glycol’s. Isopropyl titanate 
is added as a depolymerization catalyst. The sample is 
analyzed by gas chromatography and the peak areas of 
the two esters are used to estimate the weight percentage 
dimethyl isophthalate using an internal standard. 


B-2 POTENTIAL ENVIORMENT ISSUE 


B-2.1 In case of spillage, it can lead to pollution near 
the workplace area and environment hazard. After 
analysis sample is disposed as per laid down procedure. 


B-2.2 Hydrogen, nitrogen and instrument air are used 
during analysis. The hydrogen gas has no adverse 
ecological effects are expected. Hydrogen does 
not contain any Class I or Class II ozone depleting 


chemicals. However, hydrogen is explosive. Gaseous 
nitrogen is an inert non-flammable gas. High 
concentration in air may cause deficiency of oxygen 
with the risk of unconsciousness and death. Chloroform 
in high concentration in air can kill most animals in few 
minutes. 


B-3 POTENTIAL SAFETY, OCCUPATIONAL 
HEALTH ISSUES 


B-3.1 Proper PPE’s like safety goggles, apron, surgical 
hand gloves to be used. 


B-3.2 Glassware is to be handled with care. 


B-3.3 Leak check to be carried out while handling of 
gas cylinder. 


B-3.4 Glassware is to be handled with care. 


B-3.5 Inhalation of chloroform causes dilation pupils 
with reduced reaction to light as well as reduced 


IS 16362 : 2020 


intraocculat pressure, irritation of mucous membrane, 
conjunctiva. If contacted with skin and eyes cause 
irritation. Seek medical advice if inhaled. 


B-3.6 Use leather hand gloves while handling hot 
apparatus and equipments. 


B-4 APPARTUS 


B-4.1 Gas Chromatograph (GC), 
ionization detector. 


with flame 


B-4.2 Capillary Column, 60 m length and 0.53 mm 
ID MXT®- 1 


B-4.3 Dispensette or Pipette, 2 ml, 5 ml and 10 ml. 
B-4.4 Volumetric Flask, 100 ml, 500 ml. 

B-4.5 Beaker 

B-4.6 Funnel 

B-4.7 Flask, 50 ml. 


B-4.8 Heating Mental, to maintain temperature of 
250°C. 


B-4.9 AR Grade Dimethyl Isopthalate (DMI) 
B-4.10 AR Grade Benzyl Alcohol 

B-4.11 AR Grade Chloroform 

B-4.12 AR Grade Isopropyl! Titnate 

B-4.13 AR Grade Dimethyl Suburate 


B-5 PREPARATION 
SOLUTIONS 


OF STANDARD 


B-5.1 Stock Dibenzyl Suburate (Internal Standard) 
Solution 


Take 1.0 + 0.01 g of dimethyl suburate (DMS). Add 
100 ml of benzyl alcohol and 6 to 7 drops of isopropyl 
titnate digest it for 2 h. Allow it to cool up to room 
temperature then make the volume to 500 ml by 
carefully rinsing the flask by isopropyl alcohol. 
Dimethyl suburate will get converted into dibenzyl 
suburate (DBS). Mark the stock solution as DBS per 
2ml = X-XXXX mg 


B-5.2 Stock Dimethyl Isopthalate (DMI) Solution 


Take 0.2 + 0.01 g of dimethyl isopthalate (DMI). Add 
40 ml of benzyl alcohol and 6 to 7 drops of isopropyl 
titnate digest it for 2 h. Allow it to cool up to room 
temperature then make the volume to 100 ml by 
carefully rinsing the flask by isopropyl alcohol. This 
will be converted to dibenzyl isopthalate (DBI). Mark 
the stock solution as DBI per 2 ml = X-XXXX mg. 


B-5.3 Standard Solution for Response Factor 


Take 2 ml of solution prepared in B-5.1 and 2 ml of 
solution prepared in B-5.2. Add 10 ml of chloroform. 


B-5.4 2.0 Percent Standard IPA Stock Solution 


Weigh out accurately 0.200 + 0.005 g of pure DMI 
powder into round bottom flask, add 30 ml of benzyl 
alcohol and 3 drops of isopropyl titante, reflux the 
solution for 5 h reagent and dilute to 100 g by isopropyl] 
alcohol, calculate actual DMI concentration by 
considering its purity and label the flask with actual 
weight taken. Consider this weight during calculation 
of IPA by GC. 


B-5.5 2.0 Percent Standard IPA Solution for GC 
Injection 


Take 2.0 ml IPA stock solution and add 2 ml internal 
standard (see B-5.1) and further add 10 ml of 
chloroform, same bottle to be labelled as 2.0 percent 
IPA inject 1 ul in GC. 


B-6 CALIBRATION FOR PERFORMANCE 
CHECK -—TWICE /MONTH WITH STANDARD 
CHIPS 


B-7 ANALYTICAL PROCEDURE 


Inject 1 ul of standard solution for response factor 
(see B-5.3) and calculate response factor. Inject 1 ul of 
2 percent standard IPA solution. If value of 2.0 percent 
standard IPA solution is varying in the range of 0.01 
percent, then there is no need for change in response 
factor. If there is deviation in value then rerun standard 
solution for response factor (see B-5.3). Weight 0.2 + 
0.02 g of chips into the round bottom flask. Add 2 ml 
of benzyl alcohol. Add 3 drops of isopropyl titanate. 
Digest the solution for 1 h. Allow it to cool up to room 
temperature. Add 10 ml of chloroform. Add 2 ml of 
internal standard solution that is solution prepared 
in B-5.1 and shake vigorously. Inject 1 ul of sample 
solution into gas chromatograph. 


B-8 CHROMATOGRAPH SETTINGS 


Injector temperature : 300°C 
Detector temperature : 320°C 
Oven temperature : 270°C 

Gas flow rates 
Nitrogen : 20 psig 
Hydrogen : 30 + 10 ml/min 
Air : 300 + 20 ml/min 
Attenuation 1-4 
Range ¿1 


B-9 CALCULATION 
A. > W, 
Response factor (RF) = 
4, > W, 


,= Area of dibenzyl suburate (DBS) (Internal 
standard) solution; 


= Weight of DBS in solution, in mg; 


N 
I 


IS 16362 : 2020 


A,= Area of DBI in standard solution; and 
W, = Weight of DBI in standard solution, in mg. 


Percent IPA = 


RF x mg Internal Standard x Area of IPA 
in sample x 100 


Weight of sample, in mg x Area of internal 
standard in sample 


IS 16362 : 2020 


ANNEX C 


( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Geosynthetics Sectional Committee, TXD 30 


Organization 


The South India Textile Research Association Council, 
Coimbatore 


Ahmedabad Textile Industry’s Research Association, 
Ahmedabad 


Best Geotechnique Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 

Central Coir Research Institute, Alappuzha 

Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 

Central Soil and Materials Research Station, New Delhi 


Charankattu Coir Mfg Co (P) Ltd, Kerala 


Central Water Commission, New Delhi 


Department of Jute and Fibre Technology, Kolkata 


DKTE Centre of Excellence in Nonwovens, Ichalkaranji 


Ganga Flood Control Commission, Patna 


Garware Wall Ropes Ltd, Pune 


Geosynthetics Testing Services Pvt Ltd, Ahmedabad 


ICAR- National Institute of Natural Fibre Engineering & 
Technology, Kolkata 


Indian Institute of Technology, Gandhinagar 

Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi 

Indian Jute Industries’ Research Association, Kolkata 
Indian Jute Mills Association, Kolkatta 


Indian Technical Textile Association, Mumbai 


International Geosynthetics Society, India Chapter, 
New Delhi 


Kusumgar Corporates, Mumbai 


Representative(s) 


Dr A. N. Desai (Chairman) 


SHRIMATI DEEPALI PLAWAT 
Suri JIGAR Dave (Alternate) 


SHRI SATISH NAIK 
Dr D. ANITA RAVINDRANATH 
SHRIMATI SUMY SEBASTIAN (Alternate) 


SHRI SUDHIR MATHUR 
Suri Jar BAHAGWAN (Alternate) 


Dr R. CHITRA 
Suri MANISH Gupta (Alternate) 


Suri C. R. DEvRAJ 

Suri C. D. ATHUL RAJ (Alternate) 
REPRESENTATIVE 
DR SWAPAN GHOSH 

Pror (Dr) A. K. SAMANTHA (Alternate) 
SHRI ANIKET Š. BHUTE 
SHRI A. K. SINHA 

SHRI MANOJ KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI TIRUMAL KULKARNI 
SHRI RAJENDRA GHADGE (Alternate) 
DR DEEPAK MANJUNATH 


SHRI MANIK BHOWMICK 
Dr SANJOY DEBNATH (Alternate) 


PROF AMIT PRASHANT 
Pror A. K. GHOSH 


Dr MAHUYA GHOSH 
Suri Kousuik Das (Alternate) 


Suri S. K. CHANDRA 
Suri J. K. BEHERA (Alternate) 


Dr Anup RAKSHIT 
SHRIMATI Rucuita Gupta (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Suri Y. K. KUSUMGAR 
Dr M. K. TALUKDAR (Alternate) 


Organization 


Macaferri Environmental Solutions Pvt Ltd, 
Navi Mumbai 


Megaplast India Pvt Ltd, Daman 


Ministry of Road Transport & Highways, New Delhi 


Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai, Thane 


National Highways Authority of India, Ghaziabad 


National Jute Board, Kolkatta 


Office of the Jute Commissioner, Kolkatta 


Office of the Textile Commissioner, Mumbai 


Premier Polyfilms Ltd, Ghaziabad 


Reliance Industries Ltd, New Delhi 


Strata Geosystems (I) Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


Techfab India, Mumbai 


Texel Industries Limited, Gandhinagar 


The Bombay Textile Research Association, Mumbai 


The Synthetics & Art Silk Mills Research Association, 
Mumbai 


In personal capacity [Bhakta Nivas, 12-1-170/46 P, 
Hanuman Nagar, Jaipuri Colony, Nagole, 
Hyderabad 500 068] 


In personal capacity [104, Kanchanban, A. W. Vartak 
Marg, Vile Parle (East), Mumbai 400 057] 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 16362 : 2020 


Representative(s) 
Dr RATNAKAR MAHAJAN 
Suri C. V. RAJESH 
SHRI HEMENDRA BEHERA (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJIV KUMAR 


Dr VISHAL RAMESH THOMBARE 
SHRI MANDAR BHALCHANDRA PINGLE (Alternate) 


SHRI RAKESH PRAKASH SINGH 
Suri Mupit GARG (Alternate) 


Suri P. K. CHOUDHURY 
Suri M. Dutta (Alternate) 


Suri R. K. Roy 
SHRI SOUMYADIPTA Datta (Alternate) 


SHRI AJAY PANDIT 
SHRI SANJAY CHARAK (Alternate) 


SHRI AMITAABH GOENKA 
SHRI PRAVEEN KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI MAHESH SHARMA 
Suri V. RAVIKANTH (Alternate) 


SHRI NARENDRA DALMIA 
SHRI SHAHROKH BAGLI (Alternate) 


SHRI ANANT KANOI 
SHRI SAURABH Vyas (Alternate) 


SHRI SHAILESH R. MEHTA 
SHRI NARESH R MEHTA (ALTERNATIVE) 


SHRI V. K. PATIL 
DRANJAN K. MUKHOPADHYAY (Alternate) 


DR MANISHA MATHUR 
SHRIMATI ASHWINI SUDAM (Alternate) 


Dr G. V. Rao 


SHRI V. N. GoRE 


Suri A. K. Bera, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (TXD) 


[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio ) ] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI J. K. GUPTA 
Scientist ‘D’ (TXD), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part ofthese publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TXD 30 (14519). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


