Indian Standard

GUIDELINES FOR RECYCLING OF PLASTICS

ICS 13.030.80;83.080

0

BIS 1998

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARC

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

March

1998

Price Group 2

Plastics

Sectional

Committee,

PCD 12

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Plastics Sectional Committee had been approved by the Petroleum, Coal and Related Products Division Council. The Indian processors are already Recycling/Reprocessing of plastics waste/scrap is not new to India. collecting the plastics waste/scrap of all sorts and converting into pellets for re-use. Need for recycling/ reprocessing of plastics became more relevant with increase in the plastics consumption and also with availability of waste/scrap plastics in huge quantities. The methods of recycling and the technology used for the same at present are quite outmoded and are in need of upgradation. It has also been observed that some of the industries even recycle the plastics waste/scrap which is totally unhygienic and as such is a health hazard for persons who use items made from such plastics and even used at times for packaging of foodstuff and medicines. Plastics waste/scrap also occurs in recycled/reprocessed. It is essential of commingled plastics waste/scrap to formulate these guidelines for the commingled form and has, therefore, to be segregated before being to segregate the plastics waste/scrap fully and not to attempt reprocessing without appropriate technologies. These considerations led the committee recycling/reprocessing of plastics.

While preparing this standard, considerable assistance has been derived from ASTM D 5033-90 `Standard guide for the development of standards relating to the proper use of recycled plastics', issued by American Society for Testing and Materials, USA.

IS 14534

: 1998

Indian Standard

GUIDELINES FOR RECYCLING OF PLASTICS
1 SCOPE 1.1 This standard prescribes guidelines for the selection, segregation and processing of plastics waste/ scrap.

segregated, processed and returned for use. 3.4 Plastics
Reprocessing

Reprocessing of plastics scrap as defined in 3.5. 3.5 Plaatiea Scrap Plastics material originating from a variety of inplant/in-house operations that may consist of a single material or a blend of materials. 3.6 Post-Consumer
Plastics Waste

1.2 This standard also prescribes guidelines to the manufacturers of plastic products with regard to the marking to be used on the finished product in order to facilitate identification of the basic raw material. It will also help in identifying whether the material used on the end product is virgin, recyclate or a blend of virgin and recyclate. 2 NORMATIVE REFERENCES

The following Indian Standards contain provisions which, through reference in this text, constitute provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, the editions indicated were valid. All standards are subject to revision and parties to agreements based on this standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent editions of the standard indicated below: IS No. 2828: 1964 7019:1982 Title Glossary of terms used in plastics industry Glossary of terms in plastics and flexible packaging, excluding paper @rst revision) Recycled plastics for the manufacturing of products Designation

Waste originating from the sources, like Municipal Solid Waste (MSW), catering, packaging, household, agricultural, curbside, etc. 3.7 Virgin Plastics Plastics materials which have not been subjected to use earlier and also not blended with scrap or waste. 3.8 Re-Use The use of product form. more than once in its original

4 TYPES OF WASTE/SCRAP To define, maintain and monitor quality of waste/ scrap, the following practice shall be adopted for their segregation: Post consumer waste

145351998

Type 1
Type II

3 TERMINOLOGY For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given in IS 2828, IS 7019 and the following shall apply. 3.1 Commingled Plastics

Post-consumer clean plastics waste of known origin. Post-consumer plastics waste of unknown origin having visible impurities (including recycled plastics waste with visible contamination). In-house plastics scrap of single origin. In-house plastics scrap'-mixed.
OF RECYCLING

In-house scrap Type A Type B

A mixture of plastics waste which has not been segregated. 3.2 End Products Product made out of virgin, recycled/reprocessed plastics. Typical suggested end products along with use of appropriate types of plastics waste/scrap as per 4 are given in Annex A. 3.3 Plastics
Recycling

5 CLASSIFICATLON

5.1 Plastics recycling technologies have been historically divided into four general types - primary, secondary, tertiary and quaternary. 5.1.1 Primary Recycling involves processing of a

A process by which plastics waste is collected, 1

waste/scrap into a product with characteristics similar to those of the original product. The recycling of

IS 14534 : 1998 relatively uncontaminated waste plastics, that has historically taken place in the manufacturing sector, is an example of primary recycling. 61.2 Secondary Recycling inVOlV,es processing of waste/scrap plastics into materials that have characteristics different from those of the original plastics products. Some manufacturing and postconsumer wastes currently enter secondary recycling streams that allow higher contamination levels than primary recycling. 5.1.3 Tertiary Recycling involves the production of basic chemicals and fuels from plastics waste/scrap as part of the municipal waste stream or as a segmgated waste. Pyrolysis and hydrolysis are examples of these processes. 5.1.4 Quaternary Recycling retrieves the energy content of waste/scrap plastics by burning/incineration. 5.2 Only primary recycling of post-consumer materials or purchased industrial plastics scrap, and secondary and tertiary plastics recycling reduce current waste disposal volumes. Quaternary recycling falls within the term `resource recovery'. Primary recycling of scrap from in-plant operations is so Commonly practised that it is excluded from standard recycling definitions. 6 IDENTIFICATION 6.1 The manufacturers of plastics end products from either virgin or recycled plastics shall mark the symbol at the time ,of processing in order to hClp the reprocessors to identify the basic r&v material. The symbols defined by Society of the Plast& Industry (SPI), USA are as follows: Alternatively, the following codification shall be used: RO Rl R2 R3 R4 R5 R6 R7 R8 R9 RlO No recycle/reprocess Less than 10 percent 11 to 20 percent 21 to 30, percent 31 to 40 percent 41 to 50 percent 51 to 60 percent 61 to 70 percent 71 to 80 percent 81 to 90 percent over 90 percent

6.2.1 The following infoimation shall also be printed bilingually, English/Hindi and local language wherever possible on the end-product for the benefit of usersfi-eprocessors: `This product (like carry bags/shopping bags, bottles, blow-moufded containers, ,etc) is made of (indicate materials) and is reusable/ recyclable `. 6.2.1.1 However, carry bkgskontainers made out of recycled plastics shall be labellcd as `Not m&able
for p8ckiq@#to~ 7 STEPS food products'

INVOLVED

IN THE RECYCLING

PROCESS
7.1 Selection

have to .select the waste/scrap which are suitable for recycling/ reprocessing as per the types indicated in 4.

7.1.1 The recycle&reprocessors

PET

HOPE

V

LWE

PP

PS

OTHER

PET - Polyethylene terephthalate. HDPE - High density polyethylene, V - Vinyl (PVC), LDPE - Low density polyethylene. NOTEPP - Polypropylene. PS - P.olystyrene and other meam all Other resins and multi-materials, like ABS (Acrylonitrile butadiene stymoe), PPO (Polyphenylene oxide), PC (Polycllrbonate), PBT (Polybutylene terephthalate). etc.

While marking the symbol 7, the respective basic raw material like ABS, PPO, PC, PBT, etc, and mixed shall be indicated below the symbol. 6.2 In addition to the symbol indicated at 6.1, the end product ma& out of recycled/reprocessed plastics, wherever possible, shall be marked with `Recycled indicating percentage of use of recycled material'. Example : `This product contains 20 to 30 percent post consumer recycled plastics.' 2

7.1.2 All medical plastics wastes and containers, used for packaging of toxic contents, such as pesticides, insecticides, shall be segregated separately and put to appropriate incineration to recover energy.

7.2 Segregation Segregation shall be done in accordance with 4.1.2 of IS 14535 followed by the symbol marked on the product which are taken up for recycling. This

IS 14534 : 1998 marking will not only facilitate segregation but will also guide customer on the buying and correct usage of the end-product. 7.3 Processing 7.3.1 The segregated plastics waste/scrap irrespective of the source of origin and type/form shall be subjected to size reduction, cleaning from dust/dirt and washing (wherever applicable) with water/detergent, etc. To prevent pollution, appropriate measures shall be taken to dispose of the effluent generated as a result of washing of the waste, as per norms under Pollution Control Act, and only thereafter be put to recycling/ reprocessing. 7.3.2 The cleaned and washed material as obtained in 7.3.1, may be blended with additives, processing aids, pigments, etc, as the case may be, and finally granulated by using appropriate screen mesh for filtration of contaminants and impurities. 7.3.3 Efforts shall be made to avoid downgrading the quality and performance of end-products using recycled mhterials. Necessary levels of performance shall be maintained. If feasible, for individual products, a second and lower level of performance may be used, if the level is separated and clearly defined and it maintains adequate performance requirements. 7.3.4 Reprocessing of dirty coloured plastics post consumer (including recycled earlier) waste and the use of recyclate so generated for the manufacture of critical consumer items like carry bags, blow-moulded containers,water bottles, toys, etc, shall be discouraged as this fops environmentally unsound practice. 7.3.5 The recycled materials accordance with IS 14535. 8 INSTRUCTIONS shall be designated in

AND PRECAUTIONS

8.1 A regular check on the working, performance and maintenance particularly on temperature controls, etc, of the processing machinery shall be done. 8.2 Indoor air quality and adequate lighting in the reprocessing unit shall be maintained for healthy working environment with the provisions of suitable exhausts/vents/scrubbers, etc. 8.3 Adequate provided. fire protection measures shall be

8.4 Burning of plastics waste/scrap in garbage dumps or otherwise shall not be permitted. 8.5 The recycled/reprocessed plastics material shall not be used in the manufacture of end-products which come in contact with foodstuffs, pharmaceutical and drinking water.

ANNEX A (Clause 3.2)
TYPICAL SUGGESTED END-PRODUCTS USING TYPES OF RECYCLED/REPROCESSED PLASTICS Product/Material Trash/Garbage bags (PE) h) Municipal supplies burrows, etc (PE, PP) Garbage bins, wheel

APPROPRIATE

WASTE/SCRAP

Carry bags (PE) j) Office supplies - File folders, binder covers, presentation folders, etc (PVC, PE, PP)

Carpets and floor mats, playground equipment's, jacket, T-shirts, sports-wear, geotextiles, tool handles, footwear, luggage, etc (PE, PP, PET, PS) F&reational equipments -Garden PPComparatives (PE, PP) furniture, etc,

d) Non food containers
petroleum packaging e)

for detergents, shampoos, products, pallets, including reusable containers (PE, PP, PS, PET)

k)

Produce containers for agricultural produce, eggs, fiuits and vegetable (PE, PP, PS) supplies Planters, trays, flowerpots, nursery bags. tarpaulins ice (PE, PVC, I'!`. PS) products shingles, - Wood substitute ctc (PS, PVC, PC) such as

m) Twine (Sutli), box strapping PE, Nylon) n)

for packaging

(PP.

1') Horticultural

Pipes and fittings for cable, ducts/conduits drainage, agricultural (PVC, PE, PP) Shoes, Chapples (PVC)

SWR,

P) q)

g)

Building fencing,

Film, sheet for non-food applications PE, PP)

(PET, PVC,

3

Bureae of Indian Standards

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Buwau of Indian Standards Acf, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.
Copyright

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sirs, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publication), BIS.
Review of Indian Standards

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to Ihe latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards Monthly Additions' This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc:.No.
I KID 12 (1170).

Amendments

Issued Since Publication

Amend No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones: 323 0131,323 33 75,323 94 02 Regional Offices: Central Eastern
:
Telegrams:

Manaksanstha (Commsn to all offices) Telephone 323 76 17,323 38 41 337 84 99,337 85 61 { 337 86 26,337 9120

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 l/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054

:

Northern : SC0 335-334, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, C!IENNAI 600113
Western

235 02 16,235 04 42 235 15 19,235 23 15 { 832 92 95,832 78 58 832 78 91,832 78 92

:

Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHGPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATl. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. Printed atSimco Printing Ren,Delhi, Iwlia

