**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 7657-2 (1975) : Starter Ring Gears for Internal 
Combustion Engines, Part II: Gears for Axial and Coaxial 
Starters [TED 2: Automotive Primemovers] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC 62V43-571"7:62V833 



IS: 7657 (Part II) -1975 



Indian Standard 



( Reaffirmed 1999) 




SPECIFICATION FOR STARTER RING 
GEARS FOR INTERNAL COMBUSTION ENGINES 

PART II GEARS FOR AXIAL AND COAXIAL STARTERS 



1. Scope — Specifies gear profile, dimensions, material and other requirements for involute spur 
gears for axial and coaxial starters having aluminium bronze or hardened steel pinions for use on 
heavy duty commercial vehicles, marine engines and heavy duty stationary engines. 

2. Terminology — Definitions given in IS : 7657 ( Part I )-1975 * Specification for starter ring gears 
for internal combustion engines: Part I Gears for inertia and solenoid pre-engaged starters* and the 
following definition shall apply. 

2-1 Axial Pre-engagement — Engageiweni of the pinion effected by axial movement of the motor 
shaft or by the operation of a mechanism coaxial with it which is within the motor. 

3. Dimensions — These gears are generally used with 3 and 4 module involute spur gears. The 
tolerances shall be specified according to any one of the methods given in Table 1. 



O) 

c 

Ui 



TABLE 1 RECOMMENDEO METHODS OF MEASUREMENTS FOR STARTER RING GEARS 

All dimerrsions in millimetres. 







METHOD 1 

Span Over Given 

Number of Teeth* 

Base Tangent Length 


METHOD II 

Dimensions Over 

Roller Using 

^ Roller 


METHOD III 
Chordal Measurement 




Cliordal 
Height 


Chordal 
Thickness 


Before shrinlc fit 


Max 










Min 










After shrini^ fitt 

( For a nominal 
shrinkage of 
0*5 mm )t 


Max 










Min 











*Given number of teeth depends on total number of teeth on ring gear and pressure angle. 
fNot applicable for bolted type of ring gears. 

^Recommended practice is to have 0'028 mm shrinkage allowance per 25 mm of inside diameter ( to maintain a hoop 
stress of not more than 227'5 N/mm* ). 



3.1 FaceWidtii of Teetti — This shall be as follows: 

Axial starters — 22 mm ( Max ) 
Coaxial starters — 16 mm ( /Wax ) 

3.2 Tootti Ctiamfer — Teeth should not be rounded or chamfered, but shall have all sharp edges 
removed. 

3.3 Working Clearance — Shall be 0'6 to 0"8 mm backlash under adverse working conditions. For 
shrunk-on type rin^ gears an additional diametral allowance of 0'5 mm shall be provided. 



Adopted 29 April 1975 



@ August 1975, ISI 




€iri 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110001 



IS: 7657 (Part II) -1975 

4. Material — Steel C40 or C45 according to 18:5517-1969 'Specification for steels for hardening 
and tempering ' for use with hardened steel pinions. 

4.1 For use with aluminium bronze pinions, 31Ni3Cr65Mo55 steel according to IS : 1570-1961 
' Schedules for wrought steels for general engineering purposes ' shall be used. 

4.2 Any other material which would give hardness conditions specified in 6 could be used subject 
to agreement between the purchaser and the manufacturer, 

5. Designation — Shall include: 

a) Name, 

b) Symbol A or CA for axial or coaxial type, 

c) Module, 

d) Whether used with soft or hard pinion —■ Symbol S or H respectively, and 

e) No. of this standard. 

Example: 

A ring gear for axial type starters of module 3 and to be used with hard pinion shall 
be designated as: 

Ring Gear A 3 H IS : 7657 ( Part II ) 

6- Hardness — The hardness of the tooth engaging face on the pitch line shall be as follows: 

Type of Ring Gear Hardness ( HV ) 

Ring gears used with hardened pinions 470 to 550 

Ring gears used with soft pinions 200 to 262 

6.1 The minimum depth of hardness shall be 2"5 mm over the whole profile. 

7. Assembly on Flywheel 

7.1 Manual Gear Box Vehicles ~ The gear ring can be bolted on to the flywheel or can be shrunk-on. 
With shrunk-on gear rings this operation is sometimes combined with tempering. If tempering has 
iDeen done separately, the ring should not be heated to more than 200°C to avoid softening of gear 
teeth. This is of special importance when replacement rings are fitted by service stations. A 
shoulder or step on the flywheel is recommended to ensure that the ring is located equally with the 
correct out of mesh clearance when fitted to the engine. 

7-2 Automatic Gear Box Vehicles — The ring gear can be bolted or shrunk-on, but it is also common 
practice for the ring gear to be welded to a flexible plate. In the latter case, the ring gear is made 
to the finished size since there is ao expansion of the ring during fitting. It should be noted that 
the inherently more flexible location unusually results in a higher noise level, although wear rates 
can be similar to that of the other methods. Particular attention should be paid to accuracy of 
location. 



EXPLANATORY NOTE 

This standard covers ring gears for heavy duty commercial vehicle applications and for marine 
engines and heavy duty stationary engines used with axial and coaxial starters. It does not cover 
ring gears for inertia or pre-engaged starters which are covered in Part I of this standard. 

Requirements of this standard are so chosen that they meet the requirements of starter 
endurance test specified in IS : 3141-1965 * Specification for starters for automobiles '. 



Printed at NeelkamaJ Printers, Delhi, India 



