IS 10386( Part9):
( Reaffirmed 2003 )

1998

Indian Standard

SAFETYCODEFO~ROPERATIONAND MAINTENANCEOFRIVERVALLEY PROJECTS
PART 9 CANALS AND CROSS DRAINAGE WORKS

_ICS 93.160

0 BIS 1998

BUREAU
MANAK

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS
MARG

BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR NEW DELHI 110002

October

1998

Price Group

3

Safety in Construction,

Operation

and Maintenance

of River Valley Projects, RVD 21

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Safety in Construction, Operation and Maintenance of River Valley Projects Sectional Committee had been approved by the River Valley Division Council. Structures for conveyance of water at depths more than 0.6 m and velocity greater than 0.9 mlsec, constitute safety hazards, both to the public and to construction and operating personnel, which require to be considered by the designer. The many variable factors to be considered in determining the requirements for safety make it impossible to establish exact predetermined standards for all features; the best that can be done is to set up general guidelines to serve as technical guides in the final determination of proper safety facilities. Such guidelines are presented in this standard. The importance of adequate and safe equipment as a factor in preventing accidents shall not be overlooked. Only machinery, equipment, tools, and supplies which are standard, so far as safety provisions are concerned shall be considered in design and in purchases made. All specifications for the purchase of power driven machinery and equipment shall include provisions for built-in shields or guards and safety devices. The necessary safety and first-aid equipment and fire extinguishers shall also provided for the safety of employees. The climatic conditions and the weather in an area have a major influence on the satety facilities to be provided at a given structure. These shall be considered in all designs from the safety point of view, whether the structure is large or small.

AMENDMENT NO.1 APRIL 2011 TO IS 10386 (PART 9) : 1998 SAFETY CODE FOR OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF RIVER VALLEY PROJECTS
PART 9 CANALS AND CROSS DRAINAGE WORKS (Page I, clallse 3.1, line 6)- Substitute 'wooden' for 'wood'. (Page 3, clause 4.2, Title) - Substitute 'structure' for 'structures'. (Page 4, clause 4.2.1, line I) - Substitute 'sypbons' for 'siphons'. (Page 5. clause 4.2.1, Guardrails line 3) 'Siphons'.
Substitute 'Syphons' for

(Page 5, clause 4.2.1, Fences, line 7) - Add' , 'after' 1.2 m'. (Page 5, Fig. 7, Cap/ians) -- Substitute 'SYPHON' for 'SIPHON' (Page 6, clause 4.2.2, line 2) - Substitute 'syphons' far 'siphons'. (Page 6, clallse 4.2.3, line 2) - Add',' after the word 'used'.

(WRD 21)
Reprography Unit. 8[S, New Delhi, India

IS 10386 ( Part 9 ) ~:1998

Indian Standard

SAFETYCODEFOROPERATIONAND MAINTENANCEOFRIVERVALLEYPROJECTS
PART 9 CANALS 1 SCOPE This standard (Part 9) lays down guidelines for safety measures to be adopted during operation of a canal/ cross drainage work. 2 CLASSES OF HAZARD ANDCROSS DRAINAGE WORKS Class F-Canals that would be an extreme hazard to big game animals.
NOTE - For the purpose of the above clause the canal is deemed to include all types of canal and their appurtenant structures.

3 TYPES OF SAFETY 3.1 Fences

DEVICES

In evaluating the need for safety facilities at a particular structure, one of the most important things to be-considered is the size of canal and the frequency of visits of the general public to the site, which has a direct bearing upon the likelihood of accidents occurring there. The following classification of accident/hazard may be considered: Class A-Canals adjacent to schools and recreational areas, such as playgrounds, subject to frequent visits by children. Class B-Canals nearby or adjacent to such areas which are subject to frequent visits by the public. Class C-Canals nearby or adjacent to farms or highways which could be subject to visits by children seeking recreation, such as swimming. Class D-Canals far removed from any dwelling and subject to infrequent visits by operating personnel and a occasional sportsman. Class E-Canals animals. that would be a hazard to domestic

Fences are one of the most common protective devices used to keep unauthorized persons and domestic and wild animals from getting into places where they might be hurt or where they might damage installed equipment. Fence designs vary from four strands of barbed wire on wood posts to a high-quality link mesh fence supported by steer posts set m concrete. Special attention shall be given to make it very difficult for a person to squeeze around tht ena of a fence and enter restricted areas. In any event Lne design data transmitted by the field must include information regarding the fencing needed. 3.1.1 a)
Types of Fences School Safety Fence-Fence 2 m high with 1.7 m of woven wire and three strands of barbed wire. Steel posts at 3 m centre to centre with toprail (see Fig. 1).

50X50X6 mm ANGLE IRON POST

WOVEN WlRE

All dimensions in millimetres. FIG. 1 WOVEN WIRE TYPE FENCE 1

IS 10386 ( Part 9 ) : 1998 b) Urban and Rural Safety Fence-Fence 1.5 m high with 1.2 m of woven wire and three strands of barbed wire. Steel posts at 3 m center to center with toprail (see Fig. 1). Woven- Wire Stock Fence-Fence 1.2 m high with 0.9 m of woven wire and three strands of barbed wire. Steel posts may be provided at 3.0 m intervals (see Fig. 1). d) Barbed-Wire Stock Fence-Fence I .2 m high with strands of barbed wire. Posts may be either steel or other suitable materials (see Fig. 2). Deerproof Fence-Fence 2.8 m high with 2.2 m of woven wire and two strands barbed wire above and one strand below the woven wire. Fencing is supported by steel posts (see Fig. 3).

e)

c)

CROSS

BARS

ANGLE IRON WST

TYPICAL

SECTION

All dimensions in millimetres. FIG. 2 BARBED WIRE TYPE FENCE
2 STRAND 4mm GALV. WITH 4 POINT BA BARBED WtRE

3mm WOVEN e3.3 BARS

WIRE AT 150 C/C

2

*J,IBARS

AT 200

c/c c/c c/c

*3,3BARS

AT 150

+3,5BARS

AT 125

35X4 UN0 50X50X6 SURFACE IRON POST

STAPLES

ANGLE

L-SECTION

All dimensions in millimetres. FIG. 3 DEERPROOFFENCING 2

IS 10386 ( Part 9 ) : 1998 3.1.2 Fencing Utilization Requirement Fencing Requirement School Safety Fence Urban and Rural Safety Fence Urban and Rural Safety Fknce None unless required by Right-of-way Agreement Barbed-or Woven-wire Stock Fence Deerproof Fence falling in case of a miss-step. Handrails are sometimes modified to perform the functions of a guardrail as well; for instance, the handrail along the side of a stairway might be covered with wire mesh to prevent children from getting between the rails. Handrails may be made of steel, aluminium, or wood depending upon their location and their function. 3.4 Signs The proper use of signs to point out particular hazards to operating personnel, or to the public, is very important. A well-worded sign advising of the specific danger will warn persons and may prevent danger to life and property. Signs pointing out specific dangers are much to be preferred over signs which merely threaten dire consequences to trespassers, although `No Trespassing' signs do serve a useful purpose. Signs which might serve to call the attention of trapped person to escape devices shall be considered. In case areas are likely to be frequented by persons not familiar with the English language the warning signs shall be worded in Hindi/regional language. Information signs, dedication plaques, etc, shall be located away from roadways so that traffic shall not effect the visibiliy of the sign boards and thus eliminate a traffic hazard. Road signs of the conventional type shall be installed along principal access roads where needed. 4 SAFETY DEVICES REQUIRED FOR CANALS AND THEIR STRUCTURES 4.1 General Sharp turns in canal bank roads shall be~protected with guardrails, and signs shall be posted along the roads warning drivers that the road is private and that they travel at their own risk. Signs shall also be posted to warn `would be' swimmers of deep water or other hazards. Lined canals having a vertical lining height of 0.9 m or more shall be equipped with escape ladders (see Fig. 4) installed opposite each other at intervals of not more than 500 m, on each side of the canal, and immediately upstream of siphons, falls and similar structures. The canals shall be fenced where justified by the degree of hazard. 4.2 Escape Devices at Canal Structure In addition to ladders in canals, other escape devices may be provided to assist persons in extricating themselves from a canal or other canal structures that are particularly hazardous. Among these facilities are suspended cables with drop lines, floats or booms across channels, escape nets, and trashracks. The devices are designed to provide a person trapped in the

Class of Hazard A B C D E F 3.2 Guardrails

Guardrails are classified into two general types, those used to protect vehicles and those used to protect pedestrains. Guaidrails are often used to serve both purposes. Guardrails installed to protect vehicles, such as those at dangerous turns on a canal bank road, usually consist of short heavy posts set in the ground along the smaller of the rod supporting a cable or sheet steel deflector on the traffic side of the rail. The function of the guardrail is two fold. It marks tp safe limit of the roadway and also tends to deflect vehicles which may contact it. Since the guardrail serves as a marker, it is important that guard rails along roadways be made and kept clearly visible. Reflectors may be installed on the posts to make them more visible at nights. Guardrails to protect pedestrains may be made of planks and wood posts or pipe rails and metal posts set in concrete. For the protection of children it is desirable to place wire mesh on the pipe guardrail to prevent passage between the pipes. As in the case of other safety devices, the selection of the type of guardrail to be used will depend upon what is to be accomplished and the class of hazard. Design shall provide for suitable guardrails, fences, walls, and enclosures, where needed, to be constructed as an integral part of the structure. Guardrails are needed on both sides of all bridges, on the open side of all stairways, ramps, walkways and similar places where the vertical height above the surrounding area is 1.O m or more. Guardrails are required around all uncovered hatchways and openings in floors and platforms, and all windows and other wall openings if the bottom of the opening is less than 1.O m above the floor, or if the design of the opening makes such a guard necessary. 3.3 Handrails Handrails may be used along the sides of stairways or ramps to lend a person support and to guard against his

3

IS 10386 ( Part 9 ) : 1998

6 20 mm STEEL

CONCRETE

LINING

CONCRETE A-A

`-r LINING

SHOWINGUDDER
All dimensions in millimetres.

RUNGDETAiL

FIG. 4 SAFETY LADDER FOR CONCRETELINED CANALS deep water a chance to save himself by catching hold of the device and working his way to a ladder on the bank. The device shall be located far enough above the structure that the drawdown into the structure, does not make it impossible for a person to extricate himself. Suspended cables are usually installed so that the drop lines which may be either chains or knotted ropes, reach the minimum operating water surface. Floats or booms across channels, if properly made, offer a trapped person something that he can get an arm or leg over and possibly get upon and work his way to the bank. Escape nets are usually hung from cables stretched across the channel or from a light steel truss structure. The net is installed so that it reaches below the normal minimum operating water surface; carried down the canal is swept a person being against it and if he is conscious he has a good chance to save himself. In designing a boom, the individual floats shall be large enough to support the weight of a person. While trashracks are not necessarily classed as escape devices or safety facilities, they do perform that function at times. With slight modification, a trashrack designed to strain weeds out of the water entering a structure could be adopted to keep humans or animals from being drawn into the structure. The modification required would probably be no more than flattening the slope of the trashrack and providing an escape ladder at one end of the rack. 4.2.1 Syphons All siphons over 0.9 m in diameter shall be protected as specified below : 4
All dimensions in millimetres.

Class of Hazard A,BorC

Safety Device Transition Enclosures * at Inlet t Outlet Inlet Rack Net Cable None Guardrail Fence Fence Guardrail Guardrail Guardrail Guardrail None

\

D

Safety Rack-Safety pipe racks (see Fig. 5) shall have 20 cm clear spacing between pipes and be installed on 3 : 1 or flatter slope. This device shall be used in small

T
i----24HALF PLAN

FIG.5 SAFETYPIPERACKS

IS 10386 ( Part 9 ) : 1998 canals and where maintenance with weeds are not severe. problems associated transition on both sides of the canal. The railing shall be 1 m high and consist of either pipe, cable or chain with metal posts embedded in concrete. Fences-Safety fencing in conjunction with safety nets or cables shall be a chain link fence of minimum height 1.2 m, with three strands of barbed wire vertically above it and shall be provided across the transition headwall, extending to the anchor posts of the safety net or cable; except that where connection is made to an existing fence higher than 1.2 m a fence of equal height shall be provided.

Safety Net-Safety nets (see Fig. 6) shall be used in small canals where safety rack installations are not deemed advisable. Safety Cable-Floated cables (see Fig. 7) shall be used in large canals where excessive spans limit the use of the safety rack or safety net. Guardrails-Guardrails in conjunction with pipe racks, for Class A, B, or C exposure, shall cross the siphon transition headwall and extend the length of the
END POST

IT-lb WIRE ROPE SAFETY CABLE

ATTACH SUSPENDERSTOCASLE WITH REPAIR LINKS ATTACH TIES FIRMLY TO SUSPENDERS

CONCRETE

FOOTING

600 SQUARE

CANAL

SIDE SLOPE BE 5mm COIL

NOTE :ALCTIES

AND SUSPENDERSTO

CHAIN

All dimensions

m mdhnetrex.

FIG. 6 TYPICALSAFETYNETANDCABLEDETAILS

SAFETY

CABLE CORNER POST

A-A

All dimensions

in millimetres.

FIG. 7 SIPHON SAFETYFENCEANDSAFETYCAFJLE 5

IS 10386 ( Part 9 ) : 1998 4.2.2 Tunnels Tunnel reaches shall be protected in the same way as those of siphons since the hazards are similar. 4.2.3 Bridges 4.2.6 Stilling Basins Stilling basins constitute definite safety hazards and, depending upon the class of hazard, shall be guarded by adequate protective devices. Where the top of the walls are flush or nearly f-lush with the ground, guardrailing, possibility of a chain-link type, shall be installed on top of the wall in such a way that there is no room for a person to stand on top of the wall inside of the fence. Where the top of the walls extend as much as 1.2 m above the ground level, so that guardrailing is not necessary, the top of the wall shall be designed so that it is not possible for a person to stand upon it or to walk upon it. Wing walls at the inlets to spillways shall be protected in a similar manner. Guardrailing and fencing are discussed in 3.1 and 3.2. 4.2.7 Inlet and Outlet Works In addition to the protection recommended in 4.2.6 for stilling basins constructed in connection with inlet and outlet works, log booms or safety nets shall be provided near tailraces and inlet and outlet works on bodies of water where boatsmen or swimmers may be endangered. 4.2.8 Stop Logs and Bulkhead Gates For the temporary closing of openings such as penstock inlets or draft-tube outlets, it has been found that bulkheads are to be preferred over stop logs if suitable hoisting equipment is provided. Some projects have found that the use of bulkheads is preferable to the use of stop logs on canal structures. Where the former is used a truck-mounted crane is usually necessary to handle the bulkheads. Stop-log grooves shall be designed with this possibility in mind. In all the above mentioned cases the use of bulkheads is preferable so that the closing operation is simplified and is made safer as well as faster. Further, a tighter seal is usually obtained and better protection is afforded to the men working behind the bulkhead.

Foot and vehicular bridges shall be well guarded with guardrails. The type of railing used shall give the protection needed under the class of hazard existing (see 2 and 3.2). For combination of pedestrian and vehicular bridges located within thickly populated areas, and which have guardrails separating the vehicular and pedestrian traffic lanes, consideration shall be given to making the separating guardrail splashproof to protect pedestrians. Operating bridges shall be provided railing. Public entry shall be banned bridges by a suitable barrier. 4.2.4 Falls and Chutes with suitable on operating

Rectangular section falls and chutes of 1.5 m depth or more and under Class A, B, or C hazard, shall be fenced or have guardrailing constructed along each side of the structure. In those cases where a canal fall or escape carries more than a 1.2 m depth of water into the structure, the need for a safety net or cable and drop-line device across the water prism upstream from the intake of the structure to facilitate escape from the water shall be considered. 4.2.5 Trashracks

Trashrack operating decks are hazardous primarily because the wet trash removed from the racks is often deposited on the deck, making it wet and slippery. It is desirable therefore to have a rough, nonslip surface on the operating deck floor and to have a guardrail, across the front of the deck, against which the operator can brace himself while removing debris from the racks.

6

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards: `Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot : No. RVD 21 ( 177 ).

Amendments Amend No.

Issued Since Publication Text Affected

Date of Issue

BUREAU Headquarters:

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110 002 Telephones : 323 01 31,323 33 75, 323 94 02 Regional Central Offices : Shah Zafar Marg

Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone 323 76 17 323 38 41

: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur NEW DELHI 110 002

1

Eastern

: l/14 C. IT. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700 054 : SC0 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160 022

I

3378499,3378561 337 86 26,337 91 20 60 38 43 60 20 25

Northern

I Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600 113 1 Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, MUMBAI 400 093 Marol, Andheri (East)

235 02 16,235 04 42 235 15 19,235 23 15 832 92 95,832 832 78 91,832 78 58 78 92

Branches

AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNGW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.
Printed at Printogvh, New Delhi, Ph

: 5726547

