( Reaffirmed 2001 )

IS : 8413 (Part

I) - 1977

Indian Standard
REQUIREMENTS FOR BIOLOGICAL TREATMENT EQUIPMENT
PART I TRICKLING Equipment FILTERS Public Health Engineering
Chairman
SHRIT.S.SWAMY

Sectional Committee, BDC 4+0
EngineeWorks &

Represenfing Central Public Health and Environmental ring Organization (Ministry of Housing), New Delhi

Members
SHRI B. B. RAW (Alternote to

Shri T. S. Swamy) DR B. V. BHOOTA SNRI N. BISWAS
SHRI R. C. P. CSIAUDIIARY

All India Manufacturers' Organization, Bombay Directorate General of Technical Development, New Delhi Engineers India Ltc New Delhi

Sri~r K. RUDRAPFA (Allerrcale) Uttar Pradesh Jal Nigam, Lucknow CHIEF ENGINEER SCPERINTENDING ENGINEER (rllfrrtmte) Public Health Engineering Department, GovernCIUEF ENGINEER ment of Jammu & Kashmir, Srinagar SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER (~lller~zafe) hlunicipal Corporation of Delhi CIIILF ENGINEER (WATER) hfunicipal Corporation of &cater Bombay SllKl V. D. DESAI The Hindustan Construction Co Ltd, Bombay SllaI hf. y. MADAN S~IKI C. E. S. RAO (Altrruafe) xational Environmental Engineering Research I'KOY S. RIAJ~~~EK Institute (CSIR), Nagpur SIIKI J. ht. DAVE (Alternate) Paterson Engineering Co (India) Ltd, Calcutta SIIRI S.R. bfAJUMDER SIlRl A. hf. LAIIIRI (.4bertl&) Tamil Nadu Water Supply & Drainage Board, SIlKI K.C;OVINDA hfENON Madras SUPLRISTENDINC ENGINEER (EXECWION) (Alternate) Calcutta hletropolitan Planning Organization, SIlRIR. N. h'b$lIERJEE Calcutta Hydraulic & General Engineers Pvt Ltd, Bombay SIlRl S. S. NAIK SIIRI H. D. PATEL (Alfcrrmfe) Public Health Engineering Dcpartmcnt, GovernSHRI D. APPUKUTTAN NAIR ment of Kerala Institution of Public Health Engineers, India, Smu s. K. NEOGI Calcutta SIIKI D. K. G~rosrr (Allenlate) (Confinued 012 page 2) Q Copyright 1977

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the Indiun Copyright Act (XIV of 1957) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under tho said Act.

IS : 8413 (Part I) - 1977
(Continuedjhn page 1) Members
SHRI COL PROP K. &MANNA RAJ KUMAR SHRI I. S. BEDI (Al!enrote) S. SUBBA

Representing Corporation of Madras Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army All India Institute Calcutta of Hygiene

Headquarters Health,

RAO

& Public

SHRI A. V. RAO (Aitertrale) SHRI D. R. JAGANNATII RAO SIIRI hf. C. VAInYA (,~!itUll&) SHRI B. N. SEN
SHRI T. N. CIIATTERJIX SIiRI J. L. SET111

Public Health Engineering Department, ment of Rladhya Pradesh, Bhopal Department Bengal, of Health, Calcutta Government

Govern-

of

West

/ (:lkwrarc~

Public Hrailh Engineering Department, Governmcnt of Haryana, Chandigarh SHRI L. M. CUAUDUARI (.-ll!ertmfe) Uorr Oliver India Lld, Bomba) SIIRI hl. L. SIIAII Gee-hlillrr & Co, Calcutta SHRI M. J. SIIETTY SIIRI D. K. ~:lIOUDIIURY (:llfer?Iafe) Public Heallh Engineering Drparlment, GovernSHRI 1). R. SINGAL ment of Punjab, Chandigarh `i`hr Instilulion of Engincrrs (India). Calcutta SilKI S. i\. SWAMY Calldy Filtrrs (I~ldin) Lld, Bombay SIIKI P. S. TBNDOI.KAR SIwI C. L. SASTPI (.4/ler~o[er Public Health I:nginrcring Deparlmrnt. GovernSIlKI C. VIS~S\YARIAII mcnl of Kalnnlak;l. Bangalore Director (;cneral, IS1 (KY-@cio .\fcmbrj 1 SIIRI D. /\JITHA SI%lIlA. Director (Civ Enggj SCCirctdOry
SIIRI lkpuly \.IUOD KUMAR Engg), ISI Urrctor (Civ

Cm C!,CI
Lharc1oa Salronal Environmrlltal

Institute r\lcmbrr.r

(CSIK).

Engineering Nagpul

Rcsrarch

Inslilulion 111` Public Calculla
SIIRI SIlKI Ih 0. K. N. s. K. NI~OCI SIsc~rr ~.4kJmIfr) Uttar (.4lfrr?~nlzi I'. BIsllsol CIIAI~RAIM~-~~ B. B. BIIAI.I:W.AO

Health

l~~nginccrs.

India.

Pradrsh India

Jai

Nigam,

Luckno\\

1511HIR. s.
SIIRI SIlRl PROP SIIRI

l~nginrrrs (.,l/lcrwlr) The

l.imiIc*d. New Delhi Conslruclion Technical Co I.ld, Inslilutr.
l(Conlindrd

SIIRI hf. 1'. hl.\nA~
L'. S. \\`AI>l.\ (:!h!ldt~ B. L..

Hindustan .Jubilce

Ilotnb;ry BoIIlbay
on

~~AIIA~.\I.
\`. S. AICRTIIY

Viclori;l
(/~/ltr~tdri

R.

fiafr

I ti)

2

IS : 8413 (Part I) - 1977

Indian Standard
REQUIREMENTS FOR BlOLOGICAL TREATMENT EQUIPMENT
PART I TRICKLING FILTERS

0.
0.1 This Indian

FOREWORD

Standard (Part I) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 31 January 1977, after the draft finalized by the Public Health Engineering Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council.

0.2 A series of Indian Standards are bemg formulated to cover different types of equipment used in waste water treatment. For biological treatment of waste water under aerobic conditions several processes, such as trickling filters, activated sludge oxidation ditches, etc, are used. 0.3 Trickling filters can be classified into two groups. The classification is according to applied hydraulic and organic loadings of settled waste water. Stamdard rate trickling filters have hydraulic loading between 525 to 2 100 ms/h/hectare while high rate trickling filters, including recirculation, have hydraulic loading between 4 200 to 15 000 ms/h/hectare. Organic loading for these two types of filters varies from 80 to 400 g/day/m3 for the former and 400 to 4 800 g/day/m3 for the latter. This standard does not, howcvcr, cover the design aspect of the trickling filters but has been intended to provide guidance regarding the equipment to be .used for these filters. 0.4 In the formulation of this standard due weightage has been given to international co-ordination among the standards and practices prevailing in diffcrcnt countrio in addition to relating it to the practices in the field in this country. 0.5 For the purpose of' deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS: 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value slrould IX the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard trickling filters.
*Kul~.~for rounding (part I) covers requirements for equipment used in

nlT numerical

values (w&d).

3

IS : 8413 (Part I) - 1977 2. TERMINOLOGY
2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall apply. 2.1 Hydraulic Loading -- Total volume of liquid including recirculated flow, if any, per hour per unit surface area of filter 1)cd. This is gcnerall) expressed in ms/h/hectarc. 2.2 Organic Loading-Total wcigllt 01 .?-clay-20'C BOD Tllih is generally expressed day per unit volume of filter media. 2.3 Recirculation Flow - It is that recycled through the filter again. part of the filter applied per as g/day/m3. which is

effluent

2.4 Recirculation Ratio 1 It is the ratio of t11c recirculated flow to the average influent flow. Where two or more recirculation methods are-used in the same design, the recirculation ratio shall be worked out by summing all flows recirculated through the filter IO the average influent flow. 2.5 Trickling Filter -- A filter consisting of an artificial bed of material as specified in Table 1 over which wa\,tc water is distributed and applied in or fLvcd drops, films or spray, from troughs, drippers, moving distributors nozzles and through which it trickles to the undcrclrains, giving oppnrtunit) for the formation of zooglcal film on thr surfaw nicdia. 3. MATERIALS

3.1 The materials
TABLE SI. No. 1

for componen
MATERIALS

1s of trickling

filter arc indicated
COMPONENTS

ini Table
OF

1.

FOR DIFFERENT TKICKLING FILTERS

COslPOSES1S

KI:I:ERESCE 1'0 ISDIA\s

S.L.,WDARDS (2)
Rokq IAstribufor a) Tic rods and turn-buckle h) Turn tablr basr c) Balls d) Krnwvablc insrrts c.) Revolving assctnbly f) Distribution arm hlild Steel High grade L.I.~I iroll Steel (high mrhon~ Strcl. hardc~llrd (:nst ClCd .\lild strcl (pr<bprrly pmtcctedj. cast iron and structural stwl. libw
glass, hard P\`C: Cast iron

(1)
I.

(4) IS : 22b-l!69* IS : 210-I97W IS : 226-1969* IS : 1030-1974: JS : 197%19719 1s : zti-1!wP IS : 1536-196711 1s : noi-19q

-i) Iron ball, dozing siphon h) Legs of dozing siphon *Specification tSpecification ~Spccification ~Spnilication I!Specification (rcr+.r~lf). ~Spccification for for for for for

1

structural steel (standard qualityj (~/uroflr t~~i~imr~. prey iron castings (.wrot~~rcri.krl. carbon steel castings fur gvncr:~J crrgittccrirlg purpows (rrmnd wr i&~tr!. lint pipe ($rirrfrwi.rinn~. crntrifugnlly cast (spmj iron prrswrc pipe for tvatcr. gas .md sewage rnallrablc iron castimngs. (Confinutd`~

for whit&cart

IS : 8413 (Part I) - 1977

TABLE

1

MATERIALS FOR TRICKLING

DIFFERENT FILTERS MATERIAL (3)

COMPONENTS Contd

OF

SL No. (1)

COMPONENTS (2) j) Sniff pipe of dozing siphon k) Spreader, orifice plates

REFERENCE TO INDIAN STANDARDS (4) IS IS IS IS IS

m) Seals

Structural steel Copper Bronze Brass Aluminium Stainless steel Mercury, chrome leather, nitrile rubber gasket

: 226-1969" : 191-19677 : 410-1967: : 736-19655 : 1570 (Part
V)-197211

i.

Filter Filter media

Filter blocks Support piers Drainage channel

Granite, gneiss, basalt and trap, gravel, blast furnace slag, broken bricks of hard variety, ceramic hollow cylinders, plastic material, slate and blocks of inert materials Vitrified clay or cement concrete Cement concrete Vitrified clay Cement concrete Cement concrete

-

._ IS IS IS IS IS IS IS IS

: 456-19648 : 456~1964(1 : ;;;6-19646 : 456~1964q : 3370 (Part I)-1965*+ : 3370 (Part II)-1965** : 3370 (Part III)-1967+* : 3370 (Part IV)-1967+*

3.

Cizd Structure

<

*Specification for structural steel (standard quality) (fourth &&a). tSpecificalion for copper (second rezhion). fSpecification for rolled brass plate, sheet, strip and foil (secondr&ion). $Specification for wrought ahfminium and aluminium alloys, plate (for general engineering purposes). J/Schedules for wrought steels for general engineering purposes: Part V Stainless steel and heat-resisting steels (Jirst reuision): IjCode of practice for plain and reinforced concrete (sec& revision). **Code of practice for concrete structures for the storage of liquids: Part Part Part Part I General requirements II Reinforced concrete structures III Prestressed concrete structures IV Design tables

IS : 8413 (Part I) - 1977 4. CONSTRtJCTION 4.1 Essential Parts essential parts: A rectangular or circular with impervious floor, Underdrainage, Ventilators, Filter media, and shall be impervious. Dry packing not be used for construction of side walls. of Distributors. tank constructed of concrete or masonry

AND MANUFACTURE
Each trickling filter shall consist of the following

a) b) cl 4 5)

4.2 Civil
4.3

Structures-Floors

stones and bricks should

Underdrainage

System
with an underThey a.11 have drains, support-

trickling filter shall be provided drainage system for collection of effluent and ventilation. three essential parts, namely, filter blocks to act as lateral ing piers for filter blocks, and main drainage channel.

4.3.1 General-Every

4.3.2 Filter Blocks -These shall be precast solid or hollow concrete or vitrified clay units of rectangular or any other shape having openings on top face equal to 20 percent of the top surface area. Material specification for concrete should follow IS : 456-1964". Supporting piers a.re necessary for precast solid blocks but hollow blocks may be directly laid on the sloping floor. The height of the piers shall not be If,, than 10 mm. A typical diagram of filter block is given at Fig. 1. 4.3.3 Main Collecting Chat& -The main collecting channel may be diametrically or peripherially located. It should be designed to flow half to three-fourths full at peak flow, with a velocity of 60 to 90 cm/s. The main collecting channel should be constructed with concrete (see IS : 4561964*) or brick or vitrified clay pipe or channels below the floor level and covered with slabs or filter blocks depending on width of the channel. 4.3.4 drains. Filter shall be provided with arra.ngements for cleaning the under-

4.4 Ventilators - The filter bed shall he provided with ventilators along the entire periphery of the filter at 200 cm centre-to-centre. They should be of a diameter greater than 100 mm and should he raised above the media top by 75 mm and covered with cowl. 4.5 ing

Filter Media 4.5.1 The material
conditions. In used for filter shall be durable under actual operatorder to satisfy this quality, they should be hard,

*Code of practice for plain and reinforced concrete (second revtiionl 6

IS : 8413 (Part I) - 1977
sound,' insoluble in waste water and should be resistant to decomposition and disintegration when subject to continuous application of waste water and variation in temperature and other conditions. In cold climatic condition where water is subjected to freezing and thawing, natural stone media should be tested against disintegration by sodium sulphate test as described in Appendix A. Any media of which 10 percent by mass of the number of pieces tested fails or from which total material passing a 12.5 mm sieve (square openings) exceeds 10 percent of the total mass of the material tested, shou!d be regarded as unsuitable. Media with high silica content should be tested to determine its soundness before use.

1 4
MORTAR JOINT

VIlRIFIED

CLAY

FLOOR

BLOCK+

TYPE

1

TYPE 2

FIG. 1 TYPICAL DRAWINGOF FILTER BLOCKS
7

IS : 8413 (Part I) - 1977 4.5,2 An ideal filter medium should also have a high surface area per unit volume and should not clog easily. The most suitable material is generally locally available crushed stone or gravel. Other materials, such as slag, cinders, hard coal have also been used. 4.5.3 Size and Shaje - Media consisting of uniform size should be used in single layer treatment. In multi-layer treatment each layer should contain media of uniform size. The minimum thickness of each layer should be at least 6 times the dimension of the largest stone in the layer. The minimum void in any layer shall be at least 40 percent. Recommended sizes of natural media are within the range of 50 to 75 mm or 75 to 100 mm or 90 to 115 mm or 100 to 125 mm. It is recommended that not more than 5 percent of materials by volume be allowed for both upper and lower size limits. It is also recommended that as far as possible the three dimensions of the media pieces should be equal. 4.5.4 Cleaning of Filter Materials - All media shall be thoroughly cleaned with water before being placed in a filter bed to remove fines, dust, clay and other foreign matter. 4.6 Distributors - Waste water distributors ing three types: a) Rotary distributors, b) Fixed-spray nozzles, and c) Longitudinal travelling distributors. are mainly of the follow-

4.6.1 Tyfies of Rotary. Distributors - There are mainly two types of rotary distributors: a) Hydraulic-reaction-driven rotary - A typical sketch of rotary distributor is given in Fig. 2, and b) Motor-driven rotary. 4.6.1.1 Hydraulic reaction driven rotary distributor - It shall essentially consist of. a central assembly which can revolve about the vertical axis. Two `or more horizontal distribution arms are attached to this central assembly. Waste water is discharged through the orifices on one side of each of these arms. The reaction of the discharge from these orifices causes the arms to revolve about the vertical axis in a direction opposite to the discharge. Details of central assembly and distribution arms are given below: a) Central assembly -The central assembly consists of (1) stationary turntable base erected over a concrete pedestal at the ccntres of the filter, and (2) revolving assembly mounted on the stationary assembly. A typical sketch of central assembly is given in Fig. 3. 1) Stationary turntable base - It shall be made of high grade cast iron (see IS : 210-1962*) with provision for anchoring it to a pedestal with not less than six anchor bolts. This base shall be *Specificationfor Fey iron castings(second revision). 8

IS : 8413 (Part I) - 1977
provided with either one or two large diameter ball races consisting of high grade steel balls which `run in an oil-bath. These balls shall be protected from dust and moisture by felt or other seals of suitable material. Removable inserts shall be used in the base to act as bearing surfaces for the walls. Provisions shall be made for draining and filling the oil-bath. A mercur) seal or any other approved type arrangement to prevent contact of the bearing with waste water and short circuiting of the waste water shall be provided between the fixed base and the revolving assembly. Where a mercury seal is provided, arrangements shall be provided for (i) easy filling in of mercury, (ii) draining with a catch well, and (iii) locking arrangement on the drain line to prevent pilferage of the mercury. All seals shall be able to take care of differences in head and fric`tion losses with a factor of safety of 3. 2) Revolving assembly-It shall consist of an assembly to revolve on the ball race and a hollow central column mounted thereon The with outlet arrangements for fixing the distributor arms. assembly shall be of cast iron as in the stationary base while the central column shall be of mild steel plate of thickness not less than 5 mm. The central column shall be so designed as to overflow before the seal fails. Where distributor arms with double compartments are provided, the central column shall have suitable devices such as overflow rings to regulate the Aow into the upper compartmrnts whenever the how reaches the maximum.

b)

Distributor arm-s-There shall be either two or four arms for c?istributing the waste water. The arms shall be of such size that the velocity of flow in them shall not be less than O-6 m/s and shall not exceed 1.2 m/s. Each arm shall be provided with an end dump gate for quick flushing of the contents. The arms shall be fastened to the central column by means of leakproof flangrd connections with gaskets. The arms shall also be connected to the acljacent arms as well as the central columns with necessary guy rods, turnbuckles and the tie rods for strength and balance. When two di>tributor arms are provided two more dummy stub arms TIIC shall be provided for stability or equilibrium purposes. thickness of the mild steel or fabricated steel used in the arms shall not be less than 5 mm. The distribution arms may be of circuIar or near rectangular cross sections with single or double compartments one above `the other. For small flows, pipe arms may be provided. Where fabricated distributor arms are provided the cross section of the arms shall be progressively smaller from the centre of the filter to the periphery to maintain constant velociry of flow as the flow is progressively decreasing towards the periphery. The arms shall l>e pla.ced 150 to 300 mm above the top of the filter media.

9

IS : 8413 (Part

I) - 1977

The waste water shall be evenly distributed over the eatire tnp surface of the filter bed by means of orifices and nozzles placed suitably along one side of the arm. The flow sprayed by each orifice shall be regulated by a non-ferrous metal deflector plate or spreader of minimum 3 mm thickness, fixed to the distributor arm, under the orifice plates. There shall be two orifice plates overlapping each other for each orifice, made of non-ferrous or simi1p.F material with slot openings to enable accurate adjustment of area of orifice for regulating the flow from each orifice. A rubber gasket shall be provided between the orifice in the arm and the orifice plates. The orifice plates and the spreaders shall be fastened to' the distributor arms by means of non-ferrous bolts and nuts for easy assembly and dismantling for maintenance purposes. The nozzles where provided, shall be of the reaction type designed for The rotarv distributor shall optimum distribution of the spacing. discharge its contents over the filter media in proportion to the anmllar areas covered by each successive distributor length from the centre. The opening of. the orifices or the nozzles shall be so designed as to compensate for the differential head resulting from Ioss due to velocity friction, etc, and gain due to centrifugal force causing rotation of arm and part recovery of velocity head. The minimum size of the orifice shall be 16 mm. 4.6.1.2 Motor driven rotary distributor -They shall be similar to the reaction type distributor in construction except that the arms shall be rotated by means of a motor plus reduction gear. The motor shall have a fixed speed. The motor shall comply with the requirements of IS : 3251970* or IS : 996-1964t whichever is applicable. When the motor-Is located at the centre of the filter next to the turntable, a walkway shall be provided for access in such a manner as to permit access to the centre of the filter bed even with the,distributor arms rotating. 4.6.1.3 Speed of rotary distributors - Generally two and four arms distributors are rotated at 2 and 1.4 rev/min respectively. However, the speed of the rotary distributor shall be within the approved maximum and minimum range as agreed to between the manufacturer and the purchaser and these speeds shall not be exceeded or decreased at maximum and minimum flows. 4.6.2 Fixed Spray Nozzles Distributors-The system consist of a series at the apexes of equilateral traingles covering of spray nozzles located the filter bed (see Fig. 4). A pipe network distributes the waste water uniSpecial nozzles having `a tlat spray pattern are formly to the nozzles. used. Nozzles normally throw a spray so as to cover an annular area. Since the head on the nozzles is decreased in a predetermined manner as the waste water level in the dozing tank is drawn down, the diameter of
*Specification j-Specification for three-phase induction motors (third rezti~n). for single-phase small ac and universal electric motors (revised).

10

IS : 8413 (Part I) - 1977
the spray coirered is reduced at such a rate that the entire maximum diameter is dozed evenly. area within the

to rectangular beds. 4.6.3 Travelling Distributors - This is applicable A common type of travklling distributor consists of a trough supported by truss resting on a truck that runs on a rail on either side of the filter bed. Waste water is fed into the trough through a siphon attached to Lhe moving distributor and from a fured trough parallel to the rail. The waste water is fed from the travelling trough by jets similar to those from the revolving distributor arm. They may be self-propelled or motor driven. 5. DOZING SIPHONS 5.1 Dozing siphons are necessarily provided for the standard rate filter with fixed nozzle distributors to provide intermittent spray of waste water. They are also used at plants where wide variations occur m gravity flow to Such tanks provide the minimum head reaction type rotary distributors. Recirculation during minirequired to keep the distributor in operation. mum flow periods is a better device than dozing siphons for this purpose. When a dozing siphon is provided it shall consist of bell supported on legs anchored to dozing tank floor. Cast iron feed and overflow pipe above the tank Aoor shall be provided. Mild steel control pipe with cast iron fittings shall be used between siphon bell and overflow pipe. The siphon shall be provided with a sniff pipe to permit air entry. The sniff pipe shall be provided with mild steel guard. The size o,f the siphon tank (dozing tank) shall be such that it provides a minimum of 2 minutes or preferably 24 minThe drawdown shall be of the order utes detention at maximum flow rate. of 250 to 300 mm. The tank shall not be less than 150 mm below low water level. The dozing tank with siphon shall be placed at such an elevation so thaq the high water level in the tank shall be not less than 600 to 1 350 mm above the level of orifice in distribution arm and the low water level be high enough to furnish head to propel the distributor, usually at least 300mm above the level of the distribution orifices. The corresponding values may be 3 m and 1.5 m respectively for dozing tanks installed for standard rate A typical diagram of dozing siphon is given filter with fixed nozzle spray. in Fig. 5. 6. PAINTING

6.1 Painting-All

stec.! su~~i~~s to be painted shall be thoroughly dried and freed from rust and grease. A suitable anticorrosive primer shall be used for painting. One coat of primer and at least three coats of bitumastic or other anticorrosive paints shall be used after erection [see IS : 1477(Part I)-1971* and IS: 1477 (Part II)-197171. Alternatively the use of epoxy or similar coating may be considered.

*Code of practice for painting of ferrous metals in buildings: Part I Pretreatment ( jirs t revision). tCode of practice for painting of ferrous metals in buildings: Pair II Painting i_hst revision).

11

IS : 8413 (Part 1) - 1977

UNDERDRAIN

OSOUl10-PROOF

2A Trickling

Filter with

Rotary

Distributor
CHANNEL

RAIL-

FILTER

MEOIAJ

2B Travelling

Distributor

Fro. 2 DISTRIBUTOR GENERAL ARRANGEMENT 12

-

I

I

CENTRE

WELL WE!4

DOUBLE CENTRE

COMPARTMENT WELL7

,-ADJUSTABLE

II

_/-ANNULAR SECCNOAPY (2 ARM

BAFFLE

180' *PART)7

W

r

SEAL rSEAL

PLATE WEIGHT

J
STAINLESS STEEL
ti:

PRIMARY

ARM

(2 - 18O"APART)

TOP -LEVELLING

OF ROCK NUT

ANCHOR

BOLi -

FIG. 3 ROTARY DISTRIBUTOR C:EXTRE ASSEMBLY

iS : 8413 (Part I) - 1977

1s : 8413 (Part
MAXIMUM HIGH IN CHANNEL WATER WATER LEVEL MAXIMUM NET AT HEAD MAXIMUM DISCHARGE LINE

I) - 1977

7

7

7

LEVEL

OF

NOZZLE

\

LOW

WATER

LINE

FIG. 5 TYPICAL

SECTION OF A DOZING TANK

APPENDIX (&use
SODIUM SULPHATE

A 4.5.1)
ON FILTER MEDIA

TEST

IS : 8413 (Part
(Continuedfrom page 2)

I) - 1977

Rc/vesentiflg AJembers Geo IMiller & Co, New Delhi SI~RI U. C. MANKAD SHRI D. K. CIIAUDIIARY (Alter&e) EIMCO-KCP Ltd. hladras SHRI H. N. MISRA Hydraulic & Grncral Engineers Pvt Ltd, Bombay SIIRI S. S. N~iti SHRI H. D. PATEI. (Alterrmlc) Public Health Engineering Department, tiovcrnSI~KID. APPUKUTTAN NAIR mcnt of Kerala, `I'rivandrum SHRI K. RAMACHANDRAN (Ale,nate) Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay SHRI N. L. PATEL SHRI G. F. KHA;MBATTI(Alternate) Central Mechanical Engineering Research Institute DR S. RAMACHANDRA (CSIR), Durgapur SIIKI S. NATARAJAX (Alteninte) Dorr Oliver India`Ltd, Bombay SIIRI M. L. SHAH SHRI V. W. KALE (Alternate) ,411 India Institute of Hygiene 81 Public Health, PROF S. SUBSA RAO Calcutta SHKI 2%. v. RAO (.4/lnnale)

16

