IS 12666 : 1999

Indian Standard

(Reaffirmed 2003)

METHODS FOR PERFORMANCE ASSESSMENT OF ULTRASONIC FLAWDETECTIONEQUIPMENT ma-ts STv6

UT)C

620~179*15~05

@ BIS 1990

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARD.S
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

January

1990

Price

Group .

5

Non-Destructive

Testing

Sectional

Committee,

SMDC

25

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 10 December 1988, after the draft finalized by the Non-Destructive Testing Sectional Committee had been approved by the Structural and Metals Division Council. This standard has been prepared for the guidance of persons involved in testing and will be useful for checking the performance of equipment formance arising from ageing, wear and tear, etc. non-destructive ultrasonic and the variations in per-

To simplify methods of checking and to make them directly informative, calibration blocks includblocks for evaluation of ultrasonic flaw detection ing those as specified in IS 4904 : 1982 `Calibration equipment ( second rcuision )' suitable for use both on site and in laboratory have been recommended in this standard. In certain cases, however, it has been found necessary to recommend blocks which can best be used only in a test room. Some recommendations cover only generic types of choice of test material and surface finish being left to contracting parties who will be guided by dimensions; considerations of practical relevance, such as test ranges and working sensitivity levels.

IS 12666 s 1988

Indian Standard

PBRFORMANCEASSESSMENTOFULTRASONIC FLAW DETECTION EQUIPMENT
1 SCOPE

4.3 Selection

of Probe

1.1 This standard deals with methods for checking the overall performance of ultrasonic flaw detection equipment along with the probe. 1.2 This standard provides practical guidance for evaluation of some of the parameters of ultrasonic flaw detection equipment which strongly influence the integrity of flaw detection and assessment. It may be noted here that while some parameters depend only upon the probes, some others depend only upon flaw detector and the remaining parameters depend both upon the probes and flaw detector.
NOTE - More accurate assessment of the sound field ( or at least a more direct one ) is possible by using laboratory equipment, such as, beam plotters or simple optical ( Schlieren ) visualizer. Such methods are, however, regarded as beyond the scope of this standard.

For checking the linearity of time base up to 100 mm, probe of any diameter and frequency may be used. However, for ranges greater than 100 mm, both the diameter and the frequency should be as large as available. This is necessary in order to have smaller beam spread to avoid effects of mode transformation ( for example, side Lvall echoes ). 4.4 Probe Position

For time base ranges up to 100 mm, the pr'obe shall be placed at position A and for time base ranges above 100 mm to 500 mm at position B on the calibration blocks ( see Fig. 1A and 1B ).

1.3 This standard applies to compressional and shear-wave probes used in contact scanning but not to probes used in immersion testing techniques for which more complex checks are required.

1.4 This standard does not cover general and environmental testing of ultrasonic flaw detection equipment. 2 REFERENCES The Indian Standards listed below adjuncts to this standard: IS 2417 : 1977 IS 4904 : 1982 Glossary ultrasonic are necessary
I __

POSITION

A
I ' I

I ' I

f I

I

11 I'

of terms relating to testing ( jirst revision )

Calibration blocks for evaluation of ultrasonic flaw detection equipment ( second revision )

3 TERMINOLOGY For the purpose of this standard, the given in IS 2417 : 1977 shall apply. 4 LINEARITY DETECTOR 4.1 Linearity flaw detector. 4.2 Ranges The linearity the complete of time base shall range. be checked for OF of time TIME base BASE depends definitions

OF only

FLAW upon
PROBE POSITION FOR CHECKING BASE USING CALIBRATION BLOCK

FIG. 1
LINEARITY

OF TIME

4.5 Setting

of the Time

Base

The time base shall be adjusted that a multiple echo pattern 1

in such a way is displayed. At .

IS 1!2666 : 1966
least two of the bottom echo indications ( generally, the first and the last on the screen ) separattwo other indications, shall ed by at least coincide with the particular scale markings. The intermediate echoes should then line up with appropriate positions on the scale. 4.6 Gain Setting The successive bottom echoes shall be brought to substantially the same amplitude ( that is, greater than half-full scale usable deflection ) when measuring their positions against graticule. 4.7 Assessment
of Linearity

ordinate the positions of the on the screen ( see Fig. 2 ).

echoes

as observed

Deviations from linearity shall be expressed as a percentage of the time base range considered over the full scale reading. Non-linearity of more than f2 percent to fl minor subdivision on the time base scale is not permissible. 5. LINEARITY OF AMPLIFICATION FLAW DETECTOR
5.1 General

OF

To assess the linearity of the time base, the intervals between the leading edges of successive bottom echoes shall be measured and their deviation with respect to the graticule recorded. "The maximum deviation ( a max ) among deviations of the stand-up points for each echo may be recorded and then linearity may be calculated by the following formula: T wheie m
a max

Iinearity of amplification depends upon the frequency of receiving probe used, setting up of pulse power, grain control and time base range of the flaw detector. It is desirable that the deviation from linearity of amplification be checked for all the frequency ranges and at all the settings of pulse power, gain and time base. 5.2 Probe Position For the time base ranges of 250 mm, the probe shall be positioned at ( Fig. IA ) on the calibration block and for a range of 500 mm shall be positioned at B ( see Fig. 1B ). In the first case, ten multiple echoes will be observed and in the second case, five. The multiple echoes are indicated by the indices 1, 2, 3, 4, etc ( seeFig. 3 ).

X 100 percent base",

`6' is the full scale of the time

The results may be presented graphically by plotting as the absciss, the echo position corresponding with a linear scale and as the

5

0 FIG. 2

1

2

3

L

5

LINEAR

SCALE

EXAMPLEOF DIAGRAMSHOWING LINEARITYOF THE TIME BASE

+ Ol=

bl

0
FIG. 3 EXAMPLEOF DIAGRAM FORCHECKINGLINEARITY FORAMPLIFICATION 2

IS 12666 : 1988 5.3 Gain Setting The gain shall first be set ,up to give the n to echo ( where n is any of the echoes indicated, on full usable scale height or the height specified by the manufacturer ( a, ). Any control for a suppression of signals below threshold level shall be set to zero. The height in mm of the following bottom echo shall be recorded as !zl. The gain shall be reset to obtain the echo at 50 percent of the original scale height and the height of the following bottom echo shall be read as h2. 5.4 Assessment The linearity by checking: of Linearity shall be assessed 6.3 Gain Setting The controls shall be set to give maximum gain Any control for and maximum pulse energy. suppression of signals below threshold level shall be set to maximum suppression. 6.4 Assersmeot of Penetrative Power penetrative power, echoes obtained from insert. on the the

To assess maximum number of multiple bottom of the plastic

In the block and the amplitudes shall be determined.
NOTE - .4n alternate method 1.5 mm hole of calibration block

the echoes

of the equipment
lig = x,

50 percent is expressed
-

is through the use of given in Fig. 13. The probe is placed as shown in Fig. 5 and its position is With reject adjusted till the echo height is maximum.
control and attenuation in amplifier set to zero the gain Next, the control is set to get mid-screen echo height. gain control is set at maximum and the attenuation is introduced in the amplifier till thp echo height is again in the middle of the screen.

Percentage &

deviation L:
hl

as

2h2 x 100 hl Generally, deviation of non-linearity than &5 percent is not permissible.

of more

6 PENETRATIVE 6.1 General

POWER

The amount of attenuation so introduced, known as `gain reserve', is a measure of penetrative power or overall system gain. Usually, a gain reserve of 35 db may be accepted. However, this figure depends upon the flaw detector as well as on the probe; with the same probe, some flaw detectors may grve higher gain reserve. Also, for critical flaw detection in highly attenuating materials, this figure may be considered low.

Attention, is drawn to the fact that this evaluation can only be used as an indication of maximum penetrative power by direct comparison of different units, that is, instruments and/or probes. However, acceptance based on the penetrating power is subject to mutual agreement between the manufacturer and the user of the ultrasonic A definite assessment equipment/probe system. cannot be obtained using simple methods due to the differences in the manufacture of the plastic insert, influence of temperature on the results obtained, reflection from sides of calibration block, etc. 6.2 Probe Position The probe shall be placed at position C ( see Fig. 4 ) on the calibration block given in Fig. 13 using a time base range of 500 mm.
7

FIG. 5

TEST BLOCK SZTTINCI FOR CHZCKINCJ OVERALL SYSTGM GAIN

RESOLVING

POWER

7.1 General This depends upon both the probe and the flaw Axial resolving power only is usually detector. of significance. However, when two reflecting targets lying sideways approximately the same distance from probe are to be detected, lateral resolving power is also to be checked. 7.2 Axial Rcrolving 7.2.1 Probe Position The probe shall be placed on the centre line of the calibration block shown in Fig. IA over the change in radius from one step to the next. Its position is adjurted so that the echoes from the two successive steps are of the same height. 7.2.2 Gain Settiy The echoes approximately 3 of two successive steps half screen height. shall . be Power

-@

POSl4ION

c

--!
,.

$

-POSITION

C

I '
FIG. 4 PROBB RLSOLUTION

1:
1

11

I

POSITION FOR CHECKING PENETRATIVE POWER

IS 12666 : 1988 7.2.3 Assessment of Resolving Power The steps are said to be resolved when their echoes are clearly separated at least up to 6 dB below maximum echo height as shown in Fig. 6. 7.3 Lateral Resolving Power This is evaluated from the angle 4 subtended by the region of maximum intensity ( acoustical axis) and the line on which intensity drops down It is then expressed by tan 4. by 6 dB. For normal beam probe, a block as shown in Fig. 13 is used. The probe is first placed to get maximum echo height from the hole and is then shifted sideways till echo height drops by 6 dB. The lateral resolution is then given by tan 4 or by d/R, where d is probe shift and R is the distance of hold from the probe. For angle beam probe, a block as shown in Fig. 14 is used. The target echo is maximized and the probe position is marked preferably on a guide strip. The probe is then shifted successively to the left or to the right until the echo height is dropped by 6 dB. The angular resolution power for the angle beam is then expressed as probe shift D divided by distance R. 8 PROBE INDEX 8.1 General This depends only upon the probe. Probe index of an angle beam probe can be determined with the help of A2 calibration block given in IS 4904 : 1982. Block given in Fig. 14 provides one test range of 100 mm and block given in Fig. 15 provides two test ranges of 75 and 140 mm. Whichever block is used, it is advisable to position a guide strip, preferably magnetic, on one side face to ensure that the probe's movement is always parallel to the side faces. A convenient size of the guide strip will be 150 mm X 25.3 mm. The position ascertainabIe of the probe index to within -Jl mm. should be 8.2 Probe Position The probe is kept on the block such as to get echoes from the curved surfaces of the blocks. The probe is moved till maximum height of echo is achieved. 8.3 Gain Setting It is recommended that rejection at maximum and pulse energy position. 8.4 Assessment control be kept at about middle

of Probe Index

The point of probe exactly above the centre of the curved surface of block ( marked on the block ) is the probe index.
NOTES 1 It is the first indispensable characteristic which should be determined before any comparisons of beam angle or beam profile are attempted. It may be significantly different than marked on the probe. 2 To meet the cases where the specified procedure or the conditions of the test call for continuous checking on site, the miniature block specified in IS 4904 : 1982 is recommended. This block is 12.5 mm thick and is, therefore, prone to side wall echoes if used with too large a probe. 3 In case of squint in the probe guided strip is not recommended. ( see 12 ), the use of

9 BEAM ANGLE 9.1 General The beam angle depends only upon the probe. The calibration block ( SGC Fig. 13 ) can be used for the evaluation of angle at which the beam emerges out from the angle beam probe. Miniature block ( see IS 4904 : 1982 ) may also be used Miniature block is not recomfor this purpose. mended for accurate determination of beam angle. This block is, however, quite suitable for detection of drift in the values of angle previously determined. 9.2 Probe Position When block as given in Fig. 13 is used, the probe is pIaced such that the echoes from either 1'5 mm

6A 3 mm Step Echoes Resolved
FIG. 6

i', L
>6d8 I

i

-_A

6B 3 mm Step Echoes not Resolved

LINEAR DISPLAY FOR PROBE RESOLUTION 4

IS 12666r1988
diameter hole or from 50 mm diameter hole or from 50 mm diameter plastic insert are of maximum height. When block as given in Fig. 14 is used, probe is placed such that the echoes from either 1 2 mm diameter hole or from 75 and 140 mm arcs after reflection are of maximum height. 9.3 Gain Setting It is recommended that rejection at maximum a!ld pulse energy position. 9.4 Assessment
of Beam 10.2.1 Probe Position

control be kept at about middle

Angle

The angle marked on the block and lying just below the probe index is taken as the probe If probe index falls between two marks, angle. the beam angle may be calculated as shown in Fig. 7. The deviations in beam angle as specified by the manufacturer shall be with+ &-2".
NOTE `The probe should be moved from the zero degree angle position to increasing angle side. It may other&e be misleading as a probe of 45' may show maximum height position at about GO" also.

The probe is first marked at four numbered reference point 90" apart. With twin-crystal psobes, it may be necessary to identify the transNext, the position of the acoustical axis mitter. of the beam ( see Fig. 8 ) has to be checked by maximizing the echo from the deepest target for all the four reference points. If the maximum echo position does not coincide with the reference line on the face of block ( centre line of target ) within 2 mm, the axis is probably not centrally aligned and has to be checked at other ( intermediate ) reference points ( There will always be two position 180" apart, at which the acoustical axis anti target will lie in the same plate ). 10.2.1.1 With the axis and the echo maximized position P in Fig. 8A, the edge positions of the probe is marked on the block The probe is then drawn back from the target reference line until the signal has dropped to one tenth of its original height ( position P ) and the edge marked again. 10.2.2
Gain Setting

10 BEAM

PROFILE

10.1 General

This depends only upon the probe. The method described below gives only a qualitative assessment of beam profile. For more accurate of the field evaluation, point measurement intensity would be required and shall not be given here. For most purposes of non-destructive testing, the method pescribed here will suffice. 10.2 Normal
Beam Probe

Any control for suppression of signals threshold level shall be set to zero. 10.2.3 Assessment of Beam Pro@

below

Measurement of the probe shall shift in 10.2.1 gives the half-width of the beam at this level which is plotted as distance Xin Fig. 8B. 10.2.3.1 The probe is intervals of 90" for procedure repeated. four different depths shown in Fig. 8(B). rotated through stlccessive point 2, 3 and 4 and the The completed plot for then gives beam profile as

This block shown in Fig. 14 is to be used. The clock has reference lines marked on its surfaces just above the axis of the hold. The choice of depths of hole depends upon the need of the job. If required,, another block with depth 10, 15, 25 and 40 mm may be used.
REAM ANGLE

ECHO'P' All dimensions in millimetres.

MAXIMIZED

FIG. 7

CALCULATIONOF BEAM ANCLE( ALTERNATIVBTO VISUALESTIMATION )MEASURED

IS 12666 I 1988 ignored and one edge of the probe shoe is used instead as the reference point for the cross-check. A line drawn through the maximum echo positions should intersect the work surface line at a point 1 mm from the reputed index point whilst the angle measured between the new axis and the vertical through the new index should be within f 0.5" of the angle originally determined. If the foregoing conditions are not met, it will be necessary to decide which of the two results is to be considered valid for the job concerned, namely, the one based on as given in Fig. 13 block or the one based on very small targets. 10.3.2 Horizontal Plant The horizontal profile is plotted in the same way as the vertical but using 50 mm face in Fig. 9(B). This procedure involves maximizing the echoes from the tips of target holes and lateral probe traverse to find 10/l signal drop position. 11 OPERATING FREQUENCY

8A u

PROBE

POSITIONS

8B BEAM PROFILES All dimensions in millimctres. FIG. 8
PROBE

11.1 For accurate measurement of frequency, electronic instruments, such as, spectrum analyser, have to be used. However, for practical purposes, following method is recommended. 11.1.1 The maximum echo from 25 mm thickness of the A2 block is obtained. The unrectified display is used for this measurement. If the flaw detector does not provide an unrectified display, it shall be obtained by connecting an oscilloscope to the flaw detector amplifier at the point immediately before the signal is rectified. The display of unrectified pulse shall be such that the zero signal level is at mid-screen and the highest amplitude cycle reaches the top or the bottom of the screen. The time scale shall be calibrated to give 5 ps full screen width. 11.2 The integral number of complete cycles which just lie within the pulse length is counted. The pulse length is measured in time as shown in Fig. 10. The frequency is then obtained by dividing the number of cycles by the time interval of pulse length. . 12 BEAM 12.1 Beam probe. ALIGNMENT alignment ( SQUINT only ) upon the

POWIONS

AND BEAM PROFILES

10.3 Angle

Beam

Probe

10.3.1 Vertical Plane The calibration block shown in Fig. 15 is for plotting beam profile of angle beam probes. 10.3.1.1 The block with target holes at different depths and means of measuring probe shift about a fixed reference point is required which, in this case, is usually the probe index. The 10/l ampliof operations tude drop is. used, the sequence being shown in Fig. 9. 10.3.1.2 For the final plot, the reported beam index is taken as the master reference point whilst the axis is drawn through the points indicated by the maximum echo positions. If these do not lie close to the line, the test should be repeated. 10.3.1.3 A useful cross-check on reproducibility of results can be made by reversing the plotting procedure. To do this, the reputed index is

depends

6

IS i2666 I 1988

/REPUTED (A-?

BEAM BLOCKI

ANGLE

FIG. 9

SBQUISNCE

OF

OPERATIONSFOR CHECKING BEAM PROFILES OF SHEAR WAVE PROBES
12.2 Normal Beam Probe
UPPER ENVELOPE

LOWER

ENVELOPE

PULSE

LENGTH

TIME

FIG. 10

DEFINITIONS OF PULSE LENGTH AND PULSE ENVELOPES

The calibration block shown in Fig. 14 is used and the procedure is essentially the same as for plotting the beam profile ( see 10 1. 12.2.1 If, when maximizing a target echo, the relevant probe reference line does not coincide with the target reference line marked on the surface of the calibration block, the probe axis is out of alignment and the extent of the same It is also called as `shifts' has to be ascertained. of the probes. 12.2.2 In Fig. 1 I(a) and (b), it is assumed that the beam is reflected in 45" direction along the line b--b'. At stage 1 ( Fig. 1 IB ), the maximum signal will be received only when the probe has been drawn back from the target reference line ( engraved on the block ) through the shift distance [ set Fig. 11 (c), (d) and (e) 1, the point at which the beam axis strikes the target lies ahead of the 2-4 line and s in this position on the master plot [ Fig. 1 l(f) and (g) 1.

IS .12666 : 1988

b
REFERENCE LINEOF TARGE

Section plane

through b b' lb1 Stage-l '

MASTER If)

PLOT

FIG. 11 ALIGNMENT OF BEAM COMPRESSIONAL

WAVES

8

fS 12666t 1988

ANNEX

A

CALIBRATION BLOCKS FOR PERFORMANCE TESTING OF ULTRASONIC FLAW DETECTION EQUIPMENT
A-l A-l.1

PHYSICAL
Dimensions

PROPERTIES

A-l.4

Surface

Finish

The con-

surfaces

The dimensions of calibration block shall form to those given in respective figures. A-l.2 Tolerances

R, value not greater
A-2 RESOLUTION This block Fig. 13.

of the block shall than 0'8 pm. BLOCIK

be finished

to

shall have the dimensions

shown

in

Wherever practicable, the limits shall be held to + 0'10 mm. A-I.3 Material

on dimensions

Block shall be manufactured from low carbon alloy ferritic steel, open hearth killed, normalized to produce, a fine-grained structure and homogeneous throughout. The material shall be free from internal flaws.

._g+.--___-_I_---

J
+O~~NER A2,BLOCK OF

I

_--

-___

15 15 ,
15 t

__

__

- ._---

!

--

--

EDGE OF AZ BLOCK\

h

9$-, 3b

SOUND BEAM

PROBE ---___ L %ut% OF
1

All dimensions in millimetres. FIG. 13 CALIBRATION BI.OCK FOR CHECKING RESOLUTION

STRAIGHT

EDGE

A-3 BEAM

PROFILE

BLOCK

C

I

The block shall have dimensions shown in Fig. 14. The width W shall be so chosen that it would be two times greater than the diameter of the probe. A-4 BEAM PROFILE BLOCK S shown in Fig. 15.

PROat ~!a.

15 TURNED

TO GIVE

A MAXIMUM

SIGNAL

The block shall have dimensions A-5 LOW BLOCK

12 MEASURING SQUINT ON THE CALIBRATION BLOCK

This block shall have dimensions

shown in Fig. 16.

PREFERENCE

LINE

'

All dimensions in millimetres. FIG. 14 BPAY PROFILE BLOOK C 9

APPROPRIATE TES.? luucxs

STEEL `2;:;

PLATE E,Ss --Y

All dimensions FIG. 15

in millimetres.

BEAM PROFILE BLOCK S

HESCLIJ HOLES AS INiC BELOW

ADDITIONAL (OPTIONAL

I HOLES

ALL HOLES + 1.5 mm

loo

1

FIG. 16: WELDING INSTITUTE ( IOW ) BLOCK FOR CHECKING BEAM PROFILE AND RESOLUTION

i!!l
L ` 2

19

-

All dimension8

in millimetre:.

10

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence ior the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

I

.

I

Bureau

of Indian

Standards

BIS is a statutory harm-mious goods and attending
Copyright

institution

established matters

under

the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote marking and quality certification 01

development

of the activities

of stan lardization, in the country.

to connected

131s has the copyright

of all its publications. the standard, relating

No part of these publications of BIS. This of necessary details, such

may be reproduced and sizes, type

in or BIS

any form without grade designations.
Revision

the prior permission Enquirie:

in writing to copyright

does not preclude as symbols to the Director

the free use, in

the course of implementing

be addreisef

( Publications),

of Indian

Standards

lndian

Standards

are reviewed

are issued from time to time. possession of the latest amendm-nt$ 10 BIS giving Dot : No. the following

periodically and revised, when Users of Indian Standards or edition : Comments

necessary and amendments, if any, should ascertain that they are in Standard may be sent

on this tnlian

reference

SMDC

25 ( 2859 )

Amendments

Issued

Since Publication

Amend

No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS .i

Marg,

New Delhi

110002 Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices Telephone )

Regional Central

Offices: : Manak Bhavan, NEW DELHI 9 Bahadur 110002 Shah Zat'ar Marg

I 331 01 31 331 13 75 Maniktola 36 24 99 160036 1 2 1843 3 16 41 r41 24 42

Eastern

: l/l4 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Koad, CALCUTTA 700054 : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH

Northern

Southern Western

: C. I. T. Campus, : Manakalaya, BOMBAY

IV Cross Road, Marol,

MADRAS Andheri

600113 1'1% 4 ::

E9 MIDC, 400093

( East ) 632 92 95

Branches

: AHMADABAD. GUWAHATI. TRIVANDRUM.

BANGALORE. HYDERABAD.

WOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. JAlPUR. KANPUR. PATNA. L.

8,
Lklhi, lnuw

l'rlnted at l'rinrograbh,

