Compressors Sectional Committee, EDC 62; Test for Air Compressor Subcommittee, EDC 62 : 2 [ Ref: Doc : EDC 62 (3953) ] 


UDC 621-51 


IS : 6430- 1985 




Indian Standard 
SPECIFICATION FOR 
MOBILE AIR COMPRESSOR FOR 
CONSTRUCTION PURPOSES 
( First Revision ) 


(Reaffirmed 2001) 
(Reaffirmed 2012) 


1. Scope — Covers general requirements and performance of internal combustion-engine or electric- 
motor-driven mobile air compressor plants with positive displacement which include reciprocating, 
rotary and screw type compressors for construction purposes with pressure up to 20 bar. The require¬ 
ments of the standard shall also apply to wheel and skid-mounted plants. 

1.1 This standard does not cover the truck-mounted or self-propelled compressors driven by prime 
mover of the vehicle itself. 

2. Terminology 

2.1 For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given In IS : 5727-1981 ‘Glossary of terms relat¬ 
ing to compressors and exhausters (revised)' shall apply. 

2.2 Mobile Compressor — A compressor mounted on a trailer which can be towed by a vehicle at 
speeds and conditions specified in this standard; or a skid-mounted compressor which can be lifted 
along with the skid and bolted on to a trailer which can be towed bye vehicle at speeds and conditions 
specified in this standard. 

Note —The definition in 2.2 does not include trolley-mounted small Inflating units, which are not covered by this 
Standard. 

3. Material —All materials and components used in the manufacture and construction of the mobile 
air-compressors shall be in accordance with the good engineering practice and as far as possible shall 
conform to the requirements of relevaat Indian Standards. 

4. Designation of Sizes — The size of the compressor shall be specified by its capacity in terms of 
free air delivered at the specified working pressure. 

5. Operating and Storage Conditions — The machine shall be capable of operation and storage in 
the environments as given in 5.1 to 5.3. 

5.1 Temperature —Ihe compressor shall normally be capable of working and being stored without any 
defect at temperature 5 to 45®C when the prime mover is an electric motor or an internal combustion 
engine. 

5.1.1 If so required by the purchaser, the compressor shajlifia^^^lexpf working at temperature 
other than specified above. / ^ \ 

\ V Intranet Print ) * 


\ V "iiranet Prmt ) * 

5.2 Humidity — The compressor shall be suitable forsppfi^ti on at SSj aerce^nt relative humidity at all 

temperatures below 27*C ambient. At and above shall be suitable for 

relative humidity, not in excess of that corresponding to SOTnm-of-nWfcury. 

5.3 Altitude — The machine shall be capable of giving its rated output up to 300 m altitude. If 
the machine is to run at higher altitudes the derating factor shall be given by the supplier. If specially 
required by the purchaser, the engine shall be capable of running at the rated speed and load at higher 
altitudes up to and including 4 200 m. 

6. Performance 


6.1 Output —The compressor shall be capable of delivering specified free air flow at rated discharge 
pressure measured in accordance with IS ; 5456-1969 'Code of practice fortesting of positive displa¬ 
cement type air compressors and exhausters’ 


6.2 Air Temperature —The manufacturer shall indicate the rise in temperature (above the intake 
temperature of the discharged air) measured at outlet of compressed air receiver, when the compressor 
is working at full load under normal working conditions. 


Adopted 30 August 1985 



September 1986, I SI 


INDIAN standards INSTITUTION 

MANAX 3HAVAN. 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARS 
NSW DELHI 110002 







IS:6430. (985 


6.3 Coolant Temperature — In case of engine driven compressor under continuous full load conditions, 
the temperature of the coolant in the radiator header tank shall be lower than the boiling point of the 
coolant by at least 7®C. 

Note — The boiling point of water will be higher when pressurized cap is used, 

6.4 Oil Temperature—‘IhB temperature of the oil in compressor and engine shall not exceed 120*C 
when the plant is running continuously at full load. 

Mobility— The samples of the mobile compressor as defined in 2.2 selected In accordance 
with 6.5.2 shall pass the type test as described in 6.5.1. 

6.5.1 The mobile compressor shall traverse 80 km on a rough cross country road at a speed of not 
less than 15 km/h without damage to its any component and without in any way affecting its 
performance. 

Note — Eighty kilometres run on a rough cross country road need not be a continuous run. 

6.5.2 Unless otherwise agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier, the number of samples for 
the mobility test may be one in twenty with a minimum of one for consignments of less than twenty 
and more than five. For consignments of less than five the manufacturer shall give a certificate that 
the mobile compressor fulfils the requirements of the type test in 6.5.1. 

6.6 Operating Angie — The plant shall be capable of operating satisfactorily even when tilted at an 
angle of one in seven in any direction. 

7. Air Compressor— The air compressors shall meet the requirements as given in 7.1 or 7.2. 

7.1 OH Flooded Rotary Vane and Screw Types — The compressor shall be of one or two stages and 
shall conform to the requirements as given in 7.1.1 to 7.1.4. 

7.1.1 Oil system — The compressor oil system shall be self-priming and shall incorporate an element 
type filler, easily accessible and with a minimum life of 100 hours. The system shall be so arranged 
that oil shall automatically by-pass the filter in the event of a restriction. An oil contents gauge or 
dip-stick shall be supplied and there shall be a means of adequately draining the system. 

7.1.2 Air output control— IWxB ehaW be done by engine speed control and suction unloading; for 
electric motor run compressors, it shall be with suction unloading only. The engine speed shall be 
within the limits recommended by the engine manufacturers. The air output control shall give a maxi¬ 
mum pressure differential of 1 kg/cm^ between full output and no flow, this pressure being measured 
at inlet to the receiver connection. The control shall be adjustable to give the rated capacity at any 
discharge pressure up to 15 kg/cm* below the rated pressure of the compressor. All moisture filters 
in the air system shall be rustproof and easily accessible. 

7.1.3 Discharge pressure control — Tor the proper functioning of the compressor, necessary device 
shall be fitted to maintain an adequate air pressure in any receiver even if air cocks are fully open. 

7.1.4 Automatic shut down devices —^Automatic shut down devices shall be fitted, if required by 
the purchaser. 

7.2 Reciprocating Type — Reciprocating type compressor shall conform to the requirements given 
in 7.2.1 to 7.2.3. 

7.2.1 Lubricating system — The compressor shall have suitable lubrication system to give adequate 
lubrication under all starting and climatic conditions. The lubricating system shall incorporate an oil 
filter easily accessible. If so required by the purchaser, the system shall be so arranged that oil shall 
automatically by-pass the filter and the oil cooler (if fitted), in the event of a restriction in either of 
these components. Means shall be provided for isolating the oil cooler (\i fitted); alternatively auto¬ 
matic shut-down device shall be provided. Easily accessible drain points shall be provided for draining 
all lubricant. An oil contents gauge or dipstick shall be provided for measuring the level of the oil in 
the crankcase. 

7.2.2 The compressor shall be fitted with an automatic device to maintain the pressure in the air 
receiver between the limits of rated pressure. If required by the purchaser, an automatic pressure 
operated control shall be incorporated to reduce the engine speed and unload the compressor. 

7.2.3 Water cooling system^ In the case of water cooled machines the cooling system may be 
combined with that of the engine. If a separate cooling system is used it shall conform to the require¬ 
ments as given in 7.2.3.1 to 7.2,3.4. 

7.2.3.1 The system shall be so arranged that when the plant is shut down, water circulation shall 
be maintained by thermosyphone. 

7.2.3.2 in case of internal combustion engine driven compressors, it is recommended that a ther¬ 
mostat by-pass valve is incorporated in the system. 


2 



IS: 6430- 1985 


7.2.3.3 The radiator may, at the request of user, be fitted with adjustable doors or shutters, 
whereby the operating temperature of the engine may be maintained at a satisfactory figure when the 
plant is running at temperatures down to —13®C. 

7.2.3.4 Easily accessible drain points ( either drain cocks or drain plugs ) shall be provided in order 
to drain the system completely without tilting or dfsmantlmg the plant, brain-cocks shall be closed 
when the handles are in the down position. 

B. Air Receiver — The requirements of air receiver shall be as agreed to between the purchaser and 
the manufacturer. 

9. Prime Mover 

9.1 The prime mover shall be either an electric motor conforming to relevant Indian Standards or an 
internal combustion engine conforming to IS : 10001-1981 'Specification for performance requirements 
for constant speed compression ignition (diesel) engines for general purpose (up to 20 kW)' 
and IS : 10002*1981 'Specification for performance requirements for constant speed compression 
ignition ( diesel ) engines for general purposes ( above 20 kW )'. The prime mover shall meet the power 
demand of the compressor under conditions as specified in 5. Provision shall be made to measure the 
speed by tachometer. 

9.2 The compressor unit shall be provided with the following ; 

a) Running hour recorder, when so required by the purchaser; 

b) Revolution meter, when so required by the user; 

c) Exhaust to be so arranged as to avoid contamination of air inspired by the compressor and 
the engine; 

d) The engine exhaust silencer, so designed and fitted that the noise level should be limited to 
75 dB at 7 m distance; end 

e) A cold starting device shall be supplied with the prime mover when the compressor is to 
operate at temperature below 5®C. 

9.3 Starting System — The internal combustion engine shall be provided with an electric of hydraulic 
or spring starting gear. The electric starter when provided shall be on 12 V/24 V electric system. Hand 
starting arrangement may be provided as an alternative to electric or hydraulic or spring starting gear 
for engines up to 22*5 kW. 

9.4 In the case of an electric motor being the prime mover, the following shall be provided : 

a) Starter with overload relay trip and no volt coil; 

b) Voltmeter ( optional ); 

c) Ammeter; 

d) Running hour recorder, when so required by the purchaser; 

e) Tachometer ( optional ); and 

f) Suppression of radio interference ( optional ). 

10- Mounting 

10.1 The compressor, prime mover and the air receiver shall be mounted either on a trailer of sound 
design or a skid capable of being fitted on a trailer {see 2.2). The compressor and prime-mover shall 
also be mounted on a tabular frame forming an air receiver of sound design and capable of taking the 
entire load. 

10.2 Trailer Mounting — The trailer shall have pneumatic or solid rubber wheels with 1 or 2 axles as 
agreed to between the user and the manufacturer. When the compressor is mounted on a trailer, the 
following shall be ensured. 

10.2.1 Centre of gravity — The fully laden plant shall not overturn on its near or off side when 
mounted on a tilting platform, tilted laterally to an angle of 15“. 

If so agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier, as a special requirement the fully-laden 
plant shall not overturn on to its near or off side when mounted on a Tilting platform, tilted laterally to 
an angle of 30*. 

Note 1 — The requirements in 10,2.1 shall not necessarily mean that the plant shall be capable of operating under 
the conditions mentioned in 10,2.1. The plant shall be capable of operating satisfactorily at an angle as indicated 
in 6.6. 


Note 2 —The requirements in 10.2.1 shall not be considered as 'routine test*. Normally the manufacturer's cer¬ 
tificate guaranteeing the performance In accordance with 10.2.1 shall suffice, but where specifically required by 
the purchaser a type test may be dona In accordance with 6.5.2. 


3 



15:6430-1985 


18. Dismantability 

18.1 During design, consideration may be kept for a pirrchaser'a regurrement who wants the plant to 
be made dismantable into convenient independent small loads, as mutually agreed upon by the purcha¬ 
ser and the manufacturer, for transportation in inaccessible areas. 

18.1.1 The plant shall be capable of being dismantled easily in short time by ordinary hand tools 
and shall not require any special tools or equipment for that purpose. 

19. Test on Compressors — For acceptance, the compressors shall be tested in accordance with 
IS; 5456-1969 'Code of practice for testing of positive displacement type air compressors and 
exhausters' and methods of tests agreed to between the purchaser and the manufacturer, as applicable. 

20. Documents 

20.1 A copy of operating and maintenance manual illustrated parts list shall be provided along with 
each unit. 

20.1.1 If required by the purchaser, the workshop manual shall specify the working limits for the 
dimensions of ail Important moving or wearing parts of the compressor, beyond which the parts shali 
be replaced. 

21. Marking 

21.1 Informstion Plate — An approved information plate or plates, permanently and clearly marked with 
the following Information, shall be fitted to each plant: 

a) Maker's name, type and serial number; 

b) Rated output; and 

c) Rated pressure. 

21.2 Coolant drain-cocks shall be suitably identified in a conspicuous and permanent manner. An 
arrow and the words 'DRAIN-COCK' shall be painted on a prominent part of the plant to indicate the 
position of the drain-cocks. 


EXPLANATORY NOTE 

This standard was first published in 1972 by the Construction Plant and Machinery Sectional 
Committee ( EDC 28 ) of the Civil Engineering Department. The subject was later on transferred to 
Compressors Sectional Committee ( EDC 62 ) of Mechanical Engineering Department. 

Mobile air compressors are extensively used on construction projects for rock drilling, excava¬ 
tion tools, riveting, pile driving hammers, concrete vibrators pumps and a number of portable tools. 
They are also used for work in pneumatic caissons and tunnels and provide the pressure for foundation 
grouting. They may be used In combination with water or sand for cleaning rock, concrete or steel 
surfaces. In view of the increasing use of air compressors on construction sites as a result of greater 
mechanization In construction industry, it has been considered necessary to lay down standards for 
mobile air compressors for construction purpose. 

The first version of the standard was prepared with the following objectives; 

a) To guide the purchaser and the manufacturer by specifying working Limits ior capacity, 
general construction and other features of machine; and 

b) To guide the purchaser in obtaining machines with some guaranteed performance. 

This revision has been taken up to keep the standard abreast ofmodern manufacturing techniques. 
The main changes made in the standard are: 

a) A unified temperature range of 5 to 45'’C has been specified for both electric motor as well 
as IC engine driven compressor In 5.1.1. 

The previous ranges were 0 to 40*C for electric driven compressors and 0 to 45*C for IC 
engine driven compressors. 

b) Reference to IS ; 10000, IS ; 10001 and IS : 10902 has been made in place of IS : 1601 
which has been withdrawn. 

c) The temperature of M2*C' has been modified to in 8.3- 

d) The temperature of —13*C has bean substituted for —S in 7.2.3.3. 



Printed at Delhi Printers; Delhli India 



AMENDMENT NO. 1 JULY 1989 

TO 

IS : 6430 - 1985 SPECIFICATION FOR MOBILE 
AIR COMPRESSOR FOR CONSTRUCTION 
PURPOSES 

( First Revision ) 

[ Page 3, clause 9.2(d) ] — Delete. 

( Page 3, clause 9.2 ) — Insert the following new clauses: 

“9.24 To keep more pollution under control, ii is desirable that the noise 
level of compressor unit may be 75 dB + 3 at 7 m distance. Actual noise 
level shall be .specified by the manufacturer. 

9.2.2 IS 11446 : 1985‘Measurement of airborne noise emitted by com¬ 
pressors units intended for outdoor use’ shall be followed for the measure¬ 
ment of noise level of the compressor unit.” 

( Page 4, clause 12.1, last sentence ) — Substitute the following for the 
existing sentence: 

‘The fuel gauge calibrated in litres, shall be fitted in the tank on the base 
panel as agreed to between the purchaser and the manufacturer.” 

[ Page 5, clause 154(b) ] — Substitute the following for the existing 
item: 

‘Capillary dial type thermometers of dial size not less than 50 mm for 
recording engine cooling water temperature.’ 

( Page 5, clause 15.5) — Substitute the following for the existing 
clause: 

‘All pressure gauges shall be of automotive type.’ 


(EDC 62 ) 


Printed at Printwell Printers, Delhi, India 



AMENDMENT NO. 2 JULY 1992 
TO 

IS 6430:1985 SPECIFICATION FOR MOBILE AIR 
COMPRESSOR FOR CONSTRUCTION PURPOSES 

(First Revision) 

(Page 3, clause 9.1) — Substitute the following for the existing clause: 

“9.1 The prime mover shall be either an electric motor conforming to relevant 
Indian Standards or an internal combustion engine conforming to IS 10001:1981 
'Specification for performance requirements for constant speed compression 
ignition (diesel) engines for general purpose (up to 20 kW)' or IS 10002 : 1981 
'Specification for performance requirements for constant speed compression 
ignition (diesel) engines for general purposes (above 20 kW)" or variable speed 
compression ignition (diesel) engine as agreed to between the manufacturer and 
the purchaser. The prime mover shall meet the power demand of the compressor 
under conditions as specified in 5. Provision shall be made to measure the speed 
by tachometer/" 

[Pages 4, clause 12.1, last sentence (see also Amendment No. 1)] — 
Substitute the following for the existing sentence: 

'A fuel gauge, indicating refill level and maximum level, shall be fitted in the 
tank on the base panel as agreed to between the manufacturer and the purchaser." 


(HMD 22) 


Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 



