**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 10920 (1984): Code of safety for phosphorus trichloride 
[CHD 8: Occupational Safety, Health and Chemical Hazards] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



15:10920-1884 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF SAFETY FOR 
PHOSPHORUS TRICHLORIDE 



IJDC 614 878:061-638 



m 



© Copyright 1984 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Gr 3 August 1984 



AMENDMENT NO. 1 DECEMBER 2006 

TO 

IS 10920 : 1984 CODE OF SAFETY FOR 

PHOSPHORUS TRICHLORTOE 

(pagfi 5, clause 4.1) — Substitute the following for the existing: 
"Diicshoid LimU Value: TLV - TWA : 0.2 ppm, TLV-STEL: 0.5 ppm' 



(CHD8) 



Reprography Unit, BIS, New DeUii, India 



IS 1 10920 • 1984 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF SAFETY FOR 
PHOSPHORUS TRICHLORIDE 

Chemical Hazards Sectional Committee, CDC 18 

Chairman Representing 

Shbi S. C. Kale Directorate General, Factory Advice Services & 

Labour Institutes ( Ministry of Labour ), 
Bombay 

Members 

Db V. P. Gupta ( Alternate to 
Shri S. C. Kale ) 
Shbi K. D. Amre National Organic Chemical Industries Ltd, Bombay 

Shri M. C. Patwabdhan ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. N. Chandbasrkharn Directorate General Ordnance Factories ( Ministry 

of Defence )» Calcutta 
Shri Chabanjit Lal Chief Controller of Explosives, Nagpur 

Shri B. R. Dave ( Alternate ) 
Dr D. Choudhari Indian Chemical Manufacturers* Association, 

Calcutta 
Shri D. K. Sirkab ( Alternate ) 
Shbi A. M. Dakd Indian Petrochemicals Corporation Ltd, Vadodara 

Shri D. L. Vyas ( Alternate ) 
Deputy Directob ( Ghem ), Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) 
Resbabch, Designs and 
Standards Oroanization, 

LUCKKOW 

Db S. S. Gothoskab Directorate General of Health Services, New Delhi 

Shbi R. Balasubramanyan ( Alternate ) 
Shbi K. C. Gupta . National Safety Council, Bombay 

Shbi N. Raohavan ( Alternate ) 
Shbi C. Hjnoabh Century Rayon, Kalyan 

Shki J. J. Adhia ( Alternate ) 
Db V, R. B. Mathur Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 
Shbi P. O. NaNoia Hindustan Organic Chemicals Ltd, Rasayani 

Shri A. G, Sheshan ( Alternate ) 
Db K. Narayanan Rao Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay 

Dr D. J, Parikh National Institute of Occupational Health, 

Ahmadabad 
DrS. B.Ray Ministry of Defence ( DGI ), Pun^ 

Shri T. N. Rewal Ministry of Defence ( DG I ), Kanpur . . 

Shri P. Dutta (Alternate ) 

* ( Continued on page 2 ) 



® C^pyrighi 1984 
INDIAN STANDARDS INS nrUriON 

This publicatibn is protected under the Indiem Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reprioductibtt b 'whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 10920 - 1»84 

( Continued from page I ) 

Members Representing 

Shbi N. K. Samanta Indian Explosivet Ltd, Cakutta 

Srri a. Sinha ( Alternate ) 
Db p. N. Viswanathan Industrial Toxicology Reiearch Centre ( CSIR ), 

Lucknow 

Dr B» N. Gupta ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. K. Mathur, Director General, ISI ( Ex-offidc Member ) ^ 



Director ( Chem ) 



Secretary 

Shri K. K. Tbipathi 
Senior Deputy Director ( Chem ), ISI 



Industrial Chemical Hazards Subcommittee, CDC 18 : 4 

Convener 

Shbi S. C. Kalb Directorate General, Factory Advice Services k 

Labour Institutes ( Ministry of Labour ), 
Bombay 

Members 

Dr V . P. Gupta ( Alternate to 
Shri S. C. Kale ) 
Shri G. R. Balasubram/niax Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay 
Shbi Cbabakjit Lal Chief Controller of Explosives, Nagpur 

Shri B. R. Dave ( Alternate ) 
Db S. R. Chaudhuby All India Institute of Hygiene & Public Health, 

Calcutta 
Db D. Chouohuri Union Carbide of India Ltd, Calcutta 

Deputy Director ( Cheh ), Railway Board { Ministry of Railways ) 
Resbaboh, Drsioks akd 
StaiToards Oboakisation, 
Lucknow 
Shbi V. N. Godbolb Albright Morarji and Pandit Ltd, Ambefnath 

Shbi K. R. Pbabbu ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. C. Gupta National Safety Council, Bombay 

Shri N. Raohavan ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. V. Kanoo Indian Chemical Manufacturers* Association, 

Calcutta 
Db p. V. SubbauaniaH ( Aiterndii ) 
Db C. R. Krishnamurti Industrial Toxicologv Research Centre ( C$IR ), 

Lucknow 
Db p. N, Viswamathan ( Alternate ) 
Db S. L. Mbhta Century Rayon, Kalyan 

Shri R, K. Shuicla ( Alternate ) 
Db O. p. Mittal Ciba-Giegy of India Ltd, Bombay 

Db C. S. Naih The Fertilizer and Qh(»lllka]i Tfavaneore Ltd, 

Udyogmandal 
DbD*J. Paruch National Institute of Occupational Health, 

Ahfitadabad 
Shbi J. D. Pabieh The Atul Products Ltd| Atul 

Shbi M. V. Dmsai ( Alternate ) 

{C0niimi$icHpAg$i2) 
2 



18:10920-1984 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF SAFETY FOR 
PHOSPHORUS TRICHLORIDE 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 30 April 1984, after the draft finalized by the Chemical 
Hazards Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical 
Division Council. 

0.2 Phosphorus trichloride is an industrial chemical used in organic 
syntheses, especially of some organophosphorus insecticides, as a chlorinat- 
ing agent, in the manufacture of other phosphorus chloride compounds 
and in the production of iridescent metallic deposits. 

0.3 Although phosphorus trichloride is itself not combustible, its reaction 
with water produces hydrochloric acid which may constitute a moderate 
fire hazard due to reaction of these acids with most metals to give off 
hydrogen. Phosphorus trichloride vapour is a severe irritant of the eyes, 
mucous membranes and skin. It is corrosive to most common metals. 

0.4 In the preparation of this safety code, considerable assistance has 
been derived from the following publications: 

Chemical safety data sheet SD-27 'Phosphorus trichloride', 1972. 
Manufacturing Chemists Association, Washington, D.C. 

Progtor (NH) and Hughes ( J P ), Chemical Hazards of the 
Workplace. 1978. J.B. Lippincott Company, Philadelphia, 
U.S.A., pp. 420-421. 



t. SCOPE 

1.1 This code describes properties of phosphorus trichloride, nature of 
hazards associated with it, symptoms of poisoning, measures for first-aid 
and medical treatment, safety measures for controlling hazjirds in storage, 
handling and transport, decontamination of containers and spillage, and 
requirements for safety education of employees in industry. 

1.2 This code does not deal with specifications for design of buildings, 
containers, chemical engineering and safety equipments and methods of 
manufacture. 

3 



IS: 10920-1984 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2»1 For the purposes of this code, the definitions given in IS : 4155-1966* 
and IS : 4167-I966t shall apply. 

3. GENERAL INFORMATION, PROPERTIES, ETC 

3.1 General Information 

3.1.1 Common Name -— Phosphorus trichloride, Phosphorus chloride 

3.1.2 Chemical Name — Phosphorus trichloride 

3.1.3 Empirical Formula — CI — P — CI 

I 
C 

3.1.4 Molecular Formula — PCI3 

3.1.5 Molecular Weight ^ 137-35 

3.2 Physical Properties 

3.2.1 Description — Colourless to light yellow clear liquid with pungent 
and irritating odour, resembling hydrochloric acid fumes in air. 

3.2.2 Freezing Point — mmm lU'S^C 

3.2.3 Boiling Point — Te^'C 

3.2.4 Specific Gravity — 1*573 at 20''C 

( water at 4^C = 1 ) 

3*2.5 Vapour Pressure — 13-3 kPa at 2rC 

( volatilizes at ordinary temperature ) 

3.2.6 Solubility — Soluble in benzene, ether, carbon disulphide and 
carbon tetrachloride. 

3.3 Chemical Properties 

3.3.1 Affinity for Other Chemicals — Phosphorus trichloride reacts 
immediately with acetic acid, aluminium, chromyl chloride, fluorine, 
dimethyl sulfoxide, hydroxylamine, iodine, nitric acid, etc. 

3.3.2 Important Common Reactions — It reacts with water, aqueous 
solutions, alcohol and many other organic compounds to liberate heat, 
hydrochloric acid and phosphorus acids. 

3.3.3 Stability at High Temperature — It volatilizes at ordinary temper- 
ature. 



*Glo8sary of terms relating to chemical and radiation hazards and hazardous 
chemicab. 

tGIossary of terms relating to air pollution. 

4 



i.S#4 Wfiether Pllanimable, J^on-Fli'mmable or Supporter of Combustion — 
Although phosphorus trichloride is itself not combustible, its reaction 
with water . produces hydrochjoric acid and acids of phosphorus whjch 
may constitute a moderate fire hazard due to reaction of these acids with 
most metals to give off hydrogen. Reaction with water may generate 
phosphine or phosphorus which are flammable. 

3*4 Corrosion Properties 

3.4.1 Phosphorus trichloride is corrosive to iron if not protected fully 
from moisture. 

3.4.2 Phosphorus trichloride is corrosive to most comrnon metals except 
nickel and lead. 

4. INFORMATION ON HEALTH EFFECTS AND TOXICITY 

4.1 Threshold Limit Value ( ACGIH ) — O'S ppm or 3 itig/m3. 

4.2 Routes of Entry — These range from irritation of eyes, nose, throat 
and mild bronchial spa^m ( mild exposure ) to burns of eyes, skin and 
severe pulmohary edema ( seVere cases ). Expectoration may contain 
blbod. 

4.3 Health Effects — Symptoms may be delayed, that is, in severe cases, 
respiratory Symptoms may occur after two to 6 hours, while in moderate 
exposure the otiset of symptoms may not occur until 12 to 24 hours later. 
By analogy, with effects caused in animals, kidney damage may be 
observed. In riiild isxposure resulting in miicous membrane irritation, 
the symptoms may mimic a viral upper respiratory tract infection. Thfe 
latter may be characterized by fever, myalgias and lymp][iocytosis. As 
the tracheobronchial tree and pulmonary parenchyma become involved, 
the symptoms and signs shall be differentiated from cardiogenic pulmo- 
nary edema, severe viral or bacterial pneumonia, and adult respiratory 
distress syndrome. 

5. STORAGE, HANDLING AND TRANSPORTATIOK 
5.1 Storage 

5.1.1 Always store dry phosphorus trichloride in clearly labelled dry 
steel, glass, earthenware containers lined with lead, nickel or other 
impervious material. 

5.1.2 Good ventilation should be provided to have enough air 
transfer. 

i.1.3 Flooring should be acid proof such that any leaks or spills do 
hot damage flooring. 



IS t 10920 -* 1984 

5*1 A It is dejirable to have fire-proof electric fittings in the storage 
areas. 

5.1 ,5 Fire protection measures should be taken in storage areas. 

5.2 Handling and Transfer 

5.2*1 In industrial use, phosphorus trichloride can be handled without 
hazard provided the following basic measures are effectively imple- 
mented: 

a) Proper safety education and training of all supervisors and 
employees; 

b) Provision and use, when needed, of personal protective clothing 
and equipment, together with essential safety devices and rapid 
communication facilities; and 

c) Strict supervision of all employees assigned to jobs in which 
injury due to phosphorus trichloride is possible. 

Mechanized loading and unloading of containers helps to minimise 
chance exposure of . operators to phosphorus trichloride. While opening 
drums and transferring material by gravity, pump or vacuum methods 
using suitable nickel, glass, stainless steel or lead lines, due care should 
be taken to protect all equipment from moisture and to protect operators 
with suitable personal protective clothing and equipment. Do not heat 
glass flasks containing phosphorus trichloride on water bath. 

5«2.2 Spillage of phosphorus trichloride should be absorbed in Fuller's 
earth or dry sand. 

5.3 Transport 

5.3,1 For inplant transport, mechanized loading and unloading of 
containers helps to minimise chance exposure of operators to phosphorus 
trichloride. 

5.3*2 Due care should be taken during transport to protect containers 
from water, organic chemicals and heat. 

6. FIRE FIGHTING 

6.1 Though phosphorus trichloride is neither flammable nor explosive, 
the reaction with water is very violent. Small amounts leaking into 
drains or ditches carrying water can cause flashes of fire which is 
particularly hazardous if it occurs in operating buildings. These flashes 
of fire may also occur when opening or washing empty drums or other 
containers used for shipment or storage of phosphorus trichloride, and 
from the reaction of phosphorus trichloride with organic matter. Dry 
chemical powder extinguisher can also be used. 

6 



IS 8 10920 - 1984 

If fire occurs which releases large quantities of phosphorus 
trichloride, large quantities of sand should cover the spillage of phosphorus 
trichloride and a carbondioxide based fire extinguisher should be used 
for fighting the fire. 

6.2 Water should not be used for fire fighting. 

7. SPILLAGE, LEAKAGE AND DISPOSAL OF MATERIAL 

7.1 Equipment and container should be frequently inspected to detect 
and prevent leaks. If leaks or spills of phosphorus trichloride occur 
and its vapours become strong enough to be noticed, only properly 
protected personnel should remain in the area. 

7.2 Spilled phosphorus trichloride should never be left unattended to. 
The recommended method for use in cleaning up spillage consists of 
absorbing it in Fuller's earth or dry sand. 

7.3 After absorbing the spilled phosphorus trichloride, the Fuller's earth 
or dry sand can be shovelled into dry metal containers and carried to an 
isolated area where it can be dispersed and flooded with water or 
emptied into a large volume of water. The area treated with Fuller's 
earth or dry sand should then be flooded with large amounts of water. 

7.4 Maximum ventilation should be provided in the case of leaks or 
spillage occuring indoors. If the container shows signs of leakage it 
should be moved outdoor or to an isolated, well- ventilated area where 
Its contents can be transferred safely to suitable containers while protect- 
ing phosphorus trichloride from exposure to water. 

8. WASTE DISPOSAL 

8.1 Generally liquid waste contains phosphorus trichloride only. Gaseous 
waste contains either phosphorus trichloride vapours or hydrogen chloride 
and phosphorus acids resulting from the reaction of phosphorus trichloride 
and water. 

8.2 To dispose off small quantities of waste phosphorus trichloride { up to 
5 kg ) it should be sprinkled or added cautiously onto a thick layer of 
mixed soda ash and slaked lime ( 50-50 ) from behind a body shield. 
Water should be mixed and then sprayed cautiously with an atomizer. 
The residue mixture is then scooped and shifted into a large volume of 
water. Finally it should be neutralized and washed down the drain with 
large excess of water. 

' For the disposal of large quantities, the user should consider the 
possibility of returning the contaminated material to the supplier for 
reprocessing. 



§. tlkE PREVENTtbl* 

9.1 It is desirable to go for flameproof electrical equipment. 

9.2 Though phosphorus trichloride is neither flammable nor explosive, it 
is advisable to control ignition sources like ojieii flames because ori 
contact with water, phosphorus trichloride gives hydrochloric acid which 
after the r^ictibh with rtietsil giv^s biit hydrogen gas which can be ignited 
with explosive force. 

9.3 Earthing of individual equipment is desirable in the plant and 
these earthitigs should be firmly connected with the main earthitig 
station. 

10. HAZARD iNf ORMATIOiN 

10.1 Phosphorus trichloride is classified Jis corrosive liquid. The word 
'CORROSIVE' should be marked on the label. Along with this it is 
d^iirabie to t)ut 'CARGO FIRE — AVOID WAtER' ( or words of 
similar nature ). 

10.2 The following notices shall be displayed in the plant: 

t>0 Nbt MEATHE VAPOUR 

WASH THOROUGHLY AFTER HANDLING 

AVOID CONTACT WITH EYES, OR SKtN, Ok 

CLOTHING. 

10.3 The following information should be given on the label: 

AVOID CONTACT WITH EYES, OR SKIN, OR 

CLOTHING. 

DO NOT BREATHE VAPOUR 

KEEP CONTAINER CLOSED 

USE WITH ADEQUATE VENTILATION 

WASH THOROUGHLY AFTER HANDLING 

DESTROY THE CONTAINER 

11. PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQjUIPMENT 

11.1 I'ltbn-respiratory Protective Devices to be Used 

a) Chemical safety goggles, cup-tyi)e rubber framed or plastic 
goggles with impact resistant glass; 

b) Face shields: Plastic shields full length 200 mm minimum with 
forehead protection; 

c) Safety shoes, hat, gloves made of rubber may be used to guard 
against liquid leaks or splashes; and 

8 



IS : 10920 - 1984 

d) Full body overalls should also be worn and all contaminated 
clothing should be removed promptly and laundered and 
thoroughly dried before use. 

12* TRAINING AND EDUCATION 

12.1 Occupational safety depends to a great extent upon the effectiveness 
of employee or worker education, proper safety measures, intelligent 
supervision and the use of safety equipment, protective clothing and 
maintenance of strict personal hygiene. Preplacement training on safety 
should be given to each employee. 

12.2 Regular training classes should be conducted to maintain a high 
degree of safety in procedures for handling, storage and tank-filling, 
repairs and cleaning. Supervisors and workers must be thoroughly 
informed of the hazards associated with improper handling of phosphorus 
trichloride. Each employee should know what to do in an emergency 
and should be fully aware of first-aid measures. 

12*3 Each employee should be given refresher training after certain 
interval of time. 

13. HEALTH MONITORING 

13.1 Diagnostic studies of persons for pre-employment should include 
electro-cardiogram, sputum— gram stain and culture, differential white 
blood cell count, and arterial blood gas analysis, 

13.2 The medical examination should take place every year. 

13.3 Maintenance of Records 

13.3.1 Proper records should be kept of medical examinations. 

14. FIRST AID 

14.1 Actions in Emergency 

14.1.0 General — In all cases of contact or injury with phosphorus 
trichloride liquid or vapour, remove victim at once from source of 
chemical and decontaminate thoroughly as follows before arrival of 
physician. 

14.1.1 If Skin Affected — Remove contaminated clothing, shoes and 
gloves and deluge skin thoroughly and continuously with water for at 
least ' 5 minutes. If skin is affected washing contamination at ears and 
body with 5 percent copper sulphate solution, then wash with soap and 
water and then treat the skin burns as for normal treatments. 



tS 1 10*^ - 1984 

14*142 If Eyes Affected — Immediately irrigate eyes/conjuctive with 
clean water, that is, from an eyewash fountain, for at least 15 minutes, 
keeping lids open. Following initial fountain washing, the eyes should 
be washed for a second period of 15 minutes at the medical facility. No 
attempt should be made to neutralize the chemical in the eyes. Avoid 
eye ointments. Speedy examination and treatment by a physician, 
preferably an ophthalmologist is essential. 

14.1.3 If Inhaled — Remove victim to open and fresh air. If breathing 
has stopped, give artificial respiration, with oxygen if available. 
Immediate hospitalization and observation for 72 hours for delayed onset 
of severe pulmonary edema are advisable. 

14.1.4 If Ingested or Swallowed — Give large quantities of water if 
victim is conscious and able to swallow. Do not induce vomiting. If 
vomiting does occur, give additional water to replace what is lost. An 
ounce of olive oil may be given if available. Do not give baking soda 
or other alkaline solutions. As ingestion may be followed by shock, keep 
patient warm and quiet, and lying down, if possible. Do not give 
stimulants or morphine, unless ordered by physician. Avoid mouth-to- 
mouth artificial respiration. 

14.2 Suggestion to Physicians Rendering Medical Aid 

14.2.1 If Skin is Affected — Applications of wet dressings for 15 to 20 
minutes 3 or 4 times daily for 2 to 3 days may be used in cases of acute 
dermatitis with vesiculations. Systemic steroids may be used, usually 
for not more than 7 to 10 days. Additional treatment includes oral 
histamines for sedation and relief of itching and complete rest and 
protection of the involved skin. 

Note — Corticosteroids shall not be given to persons having active or questionably 
active tuberculosis, herpes simplex, keratitis or skin infection, or acute psychosis. 

14.2.2 If Inhaled — Obtain chest X-ray and examine for infiltrate 
perform analysis of arterial blood gases. Maintain arterial oxygen 
pressure above 60 mm Hg by instituting in stop-wise fashion by one of the 
following measures, as needed: 

a) Administer 60 to 100 percent oxygen by mask or cannula, 

b) Endotracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation, and 

c) Intermittent use of positive and expiratory pressure ( PEEP ) 
breathing apparatus. 

Fluid balance shall be maintained, use of a diuretic may be required. 
Steroids may be administered on a short-term basis ( two to four days ) 
to decrease the inflammatory response of the lungs. 

10 



tS : 10920 • 1984 

14.2*3 If Ingested — Treatment for shock may be needed. Do not use 
stomach tubes, emetics or sodium bicarbonate. Neutralize with 
aluminium hydroxide, milk of magnesia/ milk, chalk or egg white. 
When indicated, 0'5 g caffeine, sodium benzoate may be injected 
intramuscularly. For severe pain, 8 to 15 mg morphine sulphate may be 
given intravenously. 

14.2*4 Medical Surveillance — Preplacement and regular, for example, 
quarterly physical examination with emphasis on the respiratory tract 
and kidneys is recommended. 



11 



IS 1 10920 . 1984 

( Continuid fiom page 2 ) 

Mitnbers Represmting 

Shbi a. H. Rao Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 
Sbbi V. V. M. Rao Hindustan Petroleum Corporation, Bombay 

Shri D. V. A. Raju ( Alternate ) 
Shbi Deepak R. Shah Excel Industries Ltd, Bombay 

Shbx S. S. Kaimal ( Alternate ) 
Sbri K. K. Subbama^ian National Organic Chemical Industries Ltd, Bombay 

Shbi M. C. Patwardhan ( Alternate ) 
Shbi S, A. Trivedi Navin Fluorine Industries, Bombay 

Shbi J. N. Parbkh ( Alternate ) 
Shri H, K, Vbnkataramiah Hindustan Organic Chemicals Ltd, Rasayani 

Shbi A. G. Shbshan ( Alternate ) 



12 



INTERNATIONAL SYSTEM OF UNITS ( SI UNITS ) 

Baae Units 



QUANTTTY 


Uiriv 


StlSFOL 




Length 


metre 


n 




Mass 


kilogracD 


kg 




Time 


second 


R 




Electric current 


ampere 


A 




7 hermodynaniif 


kelvtn 


K 




temperature 








Luminous intensity 


candfla 


cd 




Amotmt oi suhstunc*' 


mole 


mo) 




Sappletnentary Untie 








Quantity 


UWIT 


Symbol 




Plane angle 


radian 


rad 




Solid angle 


•feradiao 


sr 




Derived Units 








QnAWTlTY 


UlfiT 


SYMBOt 


DBiurinoK 


Force 


newtOB 


N 


I N « 1 kg.m/s' 


Energy 


joule 


J 


I J « 1 N.ID 


Power 


watt 


W 


I W « 1 J/, 


Flux 


weber 


Wb 


I Wb « I V^ 


Flux density 


tetia 


T 


1 T -. 1 Wb/m» 


Frequency 


bert2 


Ha 


1 H« - 1 c/s (s'-') 


Electric conductanc<* 


fiemeni 


S 


I S « I A/V 


Elecuomotive force 


volt 


V 


I V « I W/A 


Pressure, stress 


pascal 


Pa 


1 Pa ^ 1 N/m' 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bah^^ur Shih Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 



Telephones s 26 60 21, 27 01 31 

Regional Offices: 

Western : Novelty Chambers, Grant Ro»d 
Eastern i 5 Gbowringbee Approach 
Southern t C. I. T. Campus, A iyar 
Northern i B69, Phase VH 

BfMfuh Ojgues I 

"Pushpak*, Nurmobamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur 

*F* Block, Unity Bldg, Narasimbaraja Square 



Telegrania i MaaaikeaiaLatKa 

Telephone 

BOMBAY 400007 89 65 28 

CALCUn^A 700072 27 50 90 

MADRAS 600113 4124 42 

8.A.S. NAGAR 8 78 26 
( MOHALI ) 160051 



AHMADABAD 380001 
BANGALORE 560002 



Gangotri Complex, Bhadbhada Road, T.T. Nag*r BHOPAL 462003 

22E Kalpana Area *^"^ '" * >wT,.o«iAf 

5-8-56C, L. N, Gupta Marg 

R 14 Yudbister Marg, C Scheme 

1 17/418 B Sarvodaya Nagar 

Patliputra Industrial Estate 

Hantix Bldg ( 2nd Floor ), Rly Sutio© Road 



2 03 91 
22 48 05 
6 27 16 
BHUBANESHWAR 751014 5 36 27 
HYDERABAD 500001 22 10 83 

JAIPUR 302005 6 98 32 

KANPUR 208005 4 72 92 

PATNA800(il3 6 28 08 

TRIVANDRUM 695001 32 27 

Printed *t Frmtograpb, New Dtlhi, India 



