•••••**••*•**•*• 



i&Sz 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
'The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
r Step Out From the Old to the New' 



IS 4805 (1978) : Guide for construction of brick kiln [CED 
30: Clay and Stabilized Soil Products for Construction] 



* 



• 



j^nifcuac^ vi # mj^wafearoASiiTFS 



ZS&W I • ^SS>^^N&^> 



>^frcivfe£a 




Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge" 



?TR rr^ fnj\ <sMMI | Wf ^ft ^TPTT ^f W ^RTT "f 

Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 





BLANK PAGE 



^ *2*~* 





5> 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



Indian Standard 



IS; 4805- 197ft 

( Reaffirmed 2002 ) 



GUIDE FOR 
CONSTRUCTION OF BRICK KILN 

( First Revision ) 



First Reprint JANUARY 1983 



UDC 6667 1*04 i : 69'05 ( 026 ) 




® Copyright 1978 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Gr 2 August 1978 



IS: 4805 -1978 

Indian Standard 

GUIDE FOR 
CONSTRUCTION OF BRICK KILN 

( First Revision ) 

Clay Products far Building Sectional Committee, BDC 30 

Chairman Representing 

Shri R. G. GokhaI;E Bureau of Public Enterprises, Ministry of Finance 

Members 

Shri P. M. Apte Housing & Urban Development Corporation Ltd, 

New Delhi 
Shri B. K. Chakraborty ( Alternate ) 
Shri C.J. Balchandani Public Works Department, Government of Madhya 

Pradesh, Bhopal 
Shri D. R. Batliwala Department of Atomic Energy, Bombay 

Shri M. G. Wagh ( Alternate ) 
Shri A, K. Bhattacharyya National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri P. R. Das ( Alternate ) 
Director, GERI Public Works Department, Government of Gujarat, 

Vadodara 
Research Officer ( Mate- 
rial Testing Division ) 
( Alternate ) 
Joint Director Research Ministry of Railways 
(B&S),RDSO 

Assistant Director Rese- 
arch (B&S), RDSO 
( Alternate ) 
Shri Kulbir Singh Public Works Department, Chandigarh Administra- 

tion 
Shri N. C. Majtjmdar Central Building Research Institute (GSIR), 

Roorkee 
Dr R. B. Hajela ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. Padmanabhan The Travancore Tile Manufacturers * Association, 

Quilon 
Shri P. K. Pandare Life Insurance Corporation of India, Bombay 

Shri G. R*. Pandit Western India Tile Manufacturers ' Association, 

Mangalore 
Shri S. J. Pattam The Commonwealth Trust Limited, Calicut 



Shri P. B. Nair ( Alternate ) 



( Continued on page 2 ) 



(g) Copyright 1978 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 

reproduction in whole or in pan by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 4805 - 1978 



( Continued from page 1 ) 



Members 
Shri A. R. Rajagopalan 



Representing 

Krishna Tiles & Potteries ( Madras ) Pvt Ltd. 
Madras 
Shri A. R. Krishnamurthy 
( Alternate ) 
Dr A. V. R. Rao National Buildings Organization, New Delhi 

Shri J. Sen Gupta ( Alternate ) 
Senior Architect B ( I ) Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 

Surveyor op Works II 
( Attached to Superin- 
tending Surveyor op 
Works II ) ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. S. Siali Engineer-in-Chief's Branch ( Ministry of Defence ) 

Shri J. Rama Murty ( Alternate ) 
Shri Tara Singh Somal All India Brick and Tile Manufacturers* Federation, 

New Delhi 
Shri Dharam Pal Ghadha ( Alternate ) 



Shri V. N. Sunder 

Superintending En g i n e e r 

( Designs ) 
Superintending Engineer 

( Planning Circle ) 
Superintending Engineer 
(Planning & Designs ) 
Executive Engineer ( Soil 
Mechanics & Research 
Division ) ( Alternate ) 
Surveyor of Works ( II ) 
Shri D. Trivedi 

Maj-Gen B. P. Wadhera 
Shri D. Ajitha Simha, 
Director ( Civ Engg ) 



Standard Brick & Tile Co ( Yelahanka ) Pvt Ltd, 

Yelahanka 
Public Works Department, Government of 

Karnataka, Bangalore 
Public Works Department, Government of West 

Bengal, Calcutta 
Public Works Department, Government of Tamil 

Nadu, Madras 



Delhi Development Authority, New Delhi 

National Buildings Construction Corporation Ltd, 

New Delhi 
The Institution of Engineers ( India ), Calcutta 
Director General, ISI ( Ex-offieio Member ) 



Secretary 

Shri S. Sengupta 
Assistant Director ( Civ Engg ), ISI 



IS: 4805- 1978 



Indian Standard 

GUIDE FOR 
CONSTRUCTION OF BRICK KILN 

(First Revision) 



0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Indian 
Standards Institution on 3 April 1978, after the draft finalized by the 
Clay Products for Building Sectional Committee had been approved by 
the Civil Engineering Division Council. 

0,2 Different types of kilns are being used for burning bricks. These 
kilns vary considerably in design, capacity and output. It is not infre- 
quent to find two kilns of identical design located at the same place and 
yet producing bricks varying widely in quality. It has been found 
desirable that some degree of uniformity should be introduced in the 
design of kilns, so as to ensure the production of good quality bricks with 
the minimum consumption of coal. At present the design of kiln and 
its method of operation are largely governed by the rule of thumb. How- 
ever, surveys carried out by the Central Building Research Institute and 
also information gathered from manufacturers from various parts of the 
country, indicate that a broad outline can be furnished as a general 
guidance for their better performance. 

0.3 This standard was first published in 1968. This revision has been 
prepared based on experience gained in the working of this kiln for the 
past 10 years. Provisions relating to chimney have been modified and 
details of chimney and attachments have been included. 

0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in 
accordance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value 
in this standard. 

•Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). 



IS: 4805 -1978 

1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard gives the broad guidelines required for the construction 
of top fed coal fired continuous brick kilns worked on natural draught. 

2. NECESSARY INFORMATION 

2.1 For efficient design and construction of the brick kilns, detailed 
information with regard to the following may be furnished to those 
responsible for the work: 

a) Level of sub-soil water at the place where the brick kiln is required 
to be constructed; 

b) Slope of the ground and natural drainage; 

c) Type of soil with special reference to black cotton soil; 

d) Climatic conditions; and 

e) Vicinity to inhabited area, communication, etc. 

3. SITE 

3.1 The kiln should preferably be constructed on a high ground, the level 
of which should be such that rain-water naturally drains away from the 
kiln and does not flow towards it. 

3.2 The floor level of the trenches of the brick kiln should be such that 
it is not less than 3 m above the water table of sub-soil water measured 
during rainy season. In any case floor level should not be more than 
1 m below the ground level. 

4. CONSTRUCTION 

4.1 The size of the kiln depends upon capacity. Two limits for the sizes 
are suggested in 4.1.1 and 4.1.2. Depending upon the requirements and 
other local factors, there may be sizes between these two limits also. The 
shape of the kiln is given in Fig. 1. 

4.1*1 Large Capacity Brick Kiln —~ It should consist of 30 chambers, each 
of 50 m in length and width of the trench should be 9*0 m. The capacity 
of chamber may be 28000 standard bricks ( see Fig. 1 ). 

4.1.2 Small Capacity Brick Kiln — It should consist of 30 chambers each of 
50 m in length and width of the trench should be 4*50 m. The capacity 
of the chamber may be 14000 standard bricks. 

4.2 The height of the trenches in both the cases should be 2*25 m. 

4.3 The side walls of the kiln should be provided with flues over which 
chimney would be placed. Each chamber should be provided with two 
flues, one on the inner and the other on the outer wall. For the small 
capacity kiln only one flue on the outer wall need be provided for each 
chamber. 



Oi 




M? — ff - 



a p$ — w — #-3 




/^l iMl =315 



W=3F=gi 

*ff r » l f g ^ ^ 



4000 



— 500 *j- 500 -J 



T~T 






— 60 



900- 



60 



I 



^Tfr 



I 




14^ ' ■ ^a i • : ^•/w i v^ i^i 1 ' J ' W ' " ' ' W 



EARTH 
MBANKMENT 



GL 



30 



ENLARGED SECTION XX 

All dimensions in centimetres. 



90 



I koo*| 



Fig. 1 Shape of Large Capacity Bull's Trench Kiln 



•• 
© 

t 

Ml 

(0 

09 



IS: 4805 -1978 

4.4 Adequate number of wickets should also be provided for easy access 
into different parts of the trenches. 

4.5 The floor of the trenches should be paved with burnt bricks on edge. 

4.6 The thickness of the side walls should be 60 cm and should be 
constructed of ordinary burnt bricks. 

Note — The un-burnt bricks may also be used, but for better efficiency and less 
expenditure on maintenance the use of burnt brick is recommended. 

4.7 The side walls should be plastered with mud-mortar. 

Note — For better insulation the side walls may be constructed with a cavity of 
2 5 cm. The cavity may be loosely filled with fine ash. 

4.8 The construction of the flues should be as shown in Fig. 2. The size 
of the flues should be 1'20 X 090 m. 

4J> The distance between the flues should be 50 m centre-to* centre. 

4.10 The shape of the chimney and its attachments should be as shown 
in Fig. 3. Two chimneys will be required. 



IS : 4805 - 1978 



CHIMNeV-v 




\ ~ 3( 

o 
en 


) —70 ■ 




1 

! 

ir 


' ' ' 





PLATE 
DAMPER 



SECTION XX 




All dimensions in centimetres. 
Fig. 2 Details of Flue 



70 <t> 



oo 




3A CHIMNEY 



105 



c=: 



-£: 



\. 



7 



BASE PIATE OF CHiMNEV 25mm 
THICK OR TWO PLATES 12mm THICK 
WELOEO 



tr 



BRASS BUSH 
TREAD 50mm 



♦ 100mm, 12-5mm 
THICK BRASS WASHER 




FRONT VIEW 




SIDE VIEW 
3B Base Plate with Wheels 
All dimensions arc in centimetres unless otherwise specified. 

Fig. 3 Details of Chimney and Attachments 



93 



U1 



<0 



