IS 12370 : 1993 IS0 6716 : 1991

(Reaffirmed 2001)

Indian Standard
BURSTING DISCS AND BURSTING DISC DEVICES ( First Revision )

UDC

621'646'8

@ BlS 1993

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR NEW DELHI

STANDARDS
SHAH 110002 ZAFAR MARG I
Price Group 11

May

1993

Chemical Engineering' Plants and Related Equipment Sectional Committee,

HMD 17

CONTENTS Section 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 .. . ... . Scope ... Normative reference . .. Definitions . .. Selection . .. Application .. . Installation . .. Discharge capacity ::: Information to be supplied by the purchaser ... . .. Quality assurance 1 General ... . .. . .. . .. .. . .. . 2 Components of bursting 1:: . .. . .. .. . disc devices . .. .. . . .. . .. ... ... . .. . .. . .. ... .. . .. . .. . . .. ... . .. . .. ... ... . .. ... ... . .. . .. ... . .. . .. ... . .. . .. . .. . .. . .. . .. . .. . .. ... .. . . .. . .. .. . . .. . .. ... . .. . .. . .. .. . . .. . .. . .. . .. .. .
..s

. .. . .. . .. ... . .. . .. . .. . .. . .. .. . ... . .. .. . .. . . .. .. . ... . .. . .. .. . .. . . .. .. . . .. . .. .. . . .. . .. . .. ... ...

Page 1 1 : : 5 5 ; 8 8 z! 12 12 12 13 :: 13 13 14 14 14 16 1: 18 18 18

Section 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.5 2.6

Bursting discs Bursting disc holders Back pressure supports Temperature shields Stiffening rings Gaskets 3 Means

of protection .. . 3.1 General .. . 3.2 Coatings . .. 3.3 Plating .. . 3.4 Bursting disc linings Section 4 Inspection 4.1 Inspection 4.2 Testing Section 5 Marking, 5.1 Marking 5.2 Packaging and testing . .. . .. identification . .. . ..

Section

from corrosion ... . .. .. . .. . . .. . .. . ..

.

.

.

.

.

.

and packaging . .. .*. ... ... . .. .. . . .. .. . . .. *..
.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

. .. Section 6 Certification 6.1 Test certificates 6.2 Additional information"'

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

Annexes . .. .. . . .. A Discharge capacity . .. B Derivation of compressibility factor Z C Typical outline ot subjects for inClUSiOn in a quality assurance system . .. ... .. . . .. D Bibliography
. . . . . .

.. . ... . .. .. .

:7" 29 31

NATIONAL

FOREWORD

This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) which is identical with IS0 6718 : 1991 `Bursting discs and bursting disc devices', issued by the International Organization for Standardization ( IS0 ), was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation of the Chemical Engineering Plants and Related Equipment Sectional Committee ( HMD 17) and approval of the Heavy Mechanical Engineering Division Council. This standard was first issued in 1988 as `Bursting discs and bursting disc devices' by adopting IS0 6718 : 1988 in dual number. Consequent upon the revision of IS0 6718 : 1988, this standard has also been revised by adopting IS0 6718 : 1991, to bring it in line with international practices. ( Continued on third cover )

IS 12370 : 1993 IS0 6718 : 1991

.lndian Standard
BURSTING DISCS AND BURSTING DISC DEVICES

( First Revision )

Section
1.1 . Scope
This International Standard specifies requirements for bursting discs and bursting disc devices llsed to protect pressure vessels, piping or other enclosures from excessive .pressure or vacuum. They are designed to burst or vent when the pressure differenbursting disc exceeds a tial across the predetermined value at a predetermined temperature.

1:

General
1.3.3 bursting pressure: Value of the pressure differential across the bursting disc at which a bursting disc device functions. It may value. be specified as a maximlJm or minimum

1.3.4 specified bursting pressure: Pressure, quoted with a cotncident temperature, specified by the purchaser when defining the bursting disc requirement. It may value. be specified as a maximum or minimum

1.2

Normative

reference

The following standard contains provisions which, through reference in this text, constitute provisions of this International Standard. At the time of publication, the edition indicated was valid. All standards are subject to revision, and parties to agreements based on this International Standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent edition of the standard indicated below. Members of IEC and IS0 maintain registers of currently valid International Standards. IS0 9001:1987, Qualify systems assurance in design/development, stallation and servicing. Model for qualily production, in-

1.3.5 average bursting pressure: Arithmetic average value of the bursting pressures, at the coincident temperature of the test bursts carried out, of a batch of bursting discs. 1.3.6 coincident conjunction with temperature: Temperature a bursting pressure. used in

1.3.7 operating temperature: Average of the bursting disc and the surrounding normal operation.

temperature parts during

1.3

Definitions
Standard, the

For the purposes of this International following definitions apply.

1.3.8 bursting tolerance: Maximum variation in test results in equal positive and negative quantities or percentages related to the average bursting pressure. When a zero manufacturing range is stated, the tolerance applies directly to the specified bursting pressure. 1.3.9 manufacturing range: Range of pressure within which the average bursting pressure of a batch of bursting discs shall fall in order to be acceptable for a particular application as agreed between the manufacturer and the purchaser. 1.3.10 performance tolerance: Rangk of pressure, in positive and negative quantities or percentages, which includes both the manufacturing range and

1.3.1

purchaser:

purchases device.

Organization the finished bursting

or individual disc or bursting

who disc

1.3.2 manufacturer: Organization constructs and tests the bursting disc device in accordance with specification.

which designs, disc or bursting the purchaser's

1

IS 12370 IS0 6718

: 1993 : 1991

the bursting tolerance and which is applied ing pressure.

at a coincident temperature, directly to the specified burst-

fluidized bed or other similar of a bursting disc device.

method

to components

1.3.11 foil: Sheet or strip of metallic bursting discs.

used

for the manufacture

1.3.23 lining: Additidnal sheet or sheets forming part of the bursting disc assembly The lining may be metallic or non-metallic. 1.3.24 plating: Metal layer applied to disc or disc-holder by a plating process. 1.3.25 limited closes. excess flow valve: flow. When this flow

of material or holder

1.3.12 batch: Group of bursting discs of the same type, size, average bursting pressure and coincident temperature, manufactured from material of the same identity and properties, and made as a single group. device: Non-reclosing disc 1.3.13 bursting actuatedby differential pressure-relief device pressure and designed to function by the bursting or venting of the bursting disc(s). It is the complete assembly of installed components including, where appropriate, the bursting disc holder. 1.3.14 bursting disc assembly: Complete assembly of components which are installed in the bursting disc holder to perform the desired function. 1.3.15 bursting pressure-sensitive vice. disc: Pressure-containing component of a bursting and de-

a bursting

Device which permits is exceeded the valve

1.3.26 conventional domed bursting disc: Bursting disc which is domed in the direction of the bursting pressure and designed to fail in tension. (See figures 1 and 2.)

1.3.27 conventional slotted lined bursting disc: Conventional domed bursting disc made up of two or more layers, one of which is slit or slotted SO as to reduce its strength and to control the bursting pressure of the bursting disc. (See figure 3.) bursting disc: Bursting disc the direction of the bursting to fail by buckling, bending

disc

1.3.16 bursting disc holder: That part of a bursting disc device which retains the bursting disc assembly

in position.
1.3.17 back pressure: Static pressure existing the outlet of a bursting disc device at the time device is required to operate. It is the result of pressure in the discharge from other sources or a& a result of vacuum ups&earn side. at the

1.3.28 reverse domed which is domed against pressure and designed or shearing. (See figure 4.)

system on the

1.3.29 graphite bursting disc: Bursting disc manufactured in graphite and designed to fail by bending or shearing. 1.3.30 temperature shield: bursting disc from excessive Device which temperature. protects a

1.3.18 back pressure support: That component of a bursting disc assembly which prevents the failure of the bursting disc due to back pressure differential. A back pressure support which is intended to pVevent the failure of the burstirlg disc when the system pressure falls below atmospheric pressure is sometimes referred to as a vacuum support. 1.3.19 baffle plate: Plate attached to the vent of a bursting disc device or system to redirect charge and/or to reduce recoil. 1.3.20 device muffled outlet: Component of a bursting which disperses the discharge. side dis-

1.3.31 bursting ,disc device discharge area: Area which is the minimum cross-sectional flow area of the bursting disc device taking into consideration the possible reduction in the cross-section owing to, for example, back pressure supports, catching devices or parts of the bursting disc which remain after bursting or venting. 1.3.32 bursting disc device discharge capacity: Rate at which a bursting disc device can discharge fluid after bursting or venting of the bursting disc. 1.3.33 independent authority: That authority which, in the country concerned, bears responsibility for all aspects of. surveillance of tests, checking of calculations and certification of bursting disc aevice disI charge capacities. 1.3.34 service life: Time period beginning at the installation of a bursting disc assembly and ending when the bursting disc is replaced or when it bursts.

disc

1.3.21 stiffening ring: bursting disc assembly ening of fragile bursting 1.3.22 material coating: Layer applied by

Integral component of the used primarily for the stiffdiscs. of metallic or non-metallic brush, spraying, dipping,

Is12370:1993 1% 6718:1991

1.3.35 operating
bursting disc

pressure: Pressure is exposed during normal

to which operation.

the

1.3.36 inspection authority: or association which verifies International Standard. 1.337 lot appropriate of material: regulations

independent compliance

authority with this

1.4.5 To function properly, bursting discs, and back pressure supports where required, shall be installed in accordance with the recommendations of the manufacturer.
requested by the purchaser, data regarding the variation in bursting pressure with relation to the temperature for a batch of bursting discs shall be provided by the manufacturer. NOTE 1 The bursting pressure of a bursting disc according to its material and type may vary with temperature. Generally a bursting disc operating at high temperatures has a lower bursting pressure than that at room temperature; a bursting disc operating at below room temperature has a higer bursting pressure than that at room temperature.
When a bursting disc is specified with a bursting pressure at a coincident temperature to protect a system, the bursting disc may not give the necessary protection at a lower temperature. The system has to be considered.with regard to the bursting pressures of the bursting disc over the temperature range of the system.

1.4.6 When

Unless othepise or standards,

stated

in

4

for metal; all material issuing from the same heat number and heat treatment batch and having a specified thickness with tolerances to an appropriate standard; for impregnated graphite; cific grade and impregnant. all material of a spe-

b)

1.3.38 relieving pressure: Maximum pressure under discharge conditions in the pressurized system. It may differ from the bursting pressure of the bursting disc device (see A.1.5). 1.3.39 relieving. temperature: Maximum temperature under discharge conditions in the pressurized system. It may differ from the coincident temperature specified for the bursting disc device.

Bursting temperature shield or perature tablishing disc.

may be protected from excessive by suitable location, a temperature by other means. The influence of the temprotection should be considered when esthe coincident temperature of the bursting

discs

1.4

Selection

1.4.1 Bursting discs are differential pressure devices, and therefore the pressure on each side of the bursting disc shall be taken into account.

1.4.7 The manufacturer's when selecting a bursting `plication

advice shall be sought disc for a particular ap-

1.4.8 When reverse domed bursting discs are required for liquid relief the manufacturer shall be
consulted.

highly stressed components, bursting discs have a limited service life and may require replacement at regular intervals. The frequency of replacement depends on the type and material of the bursting disc, the corrosive nature of the environment, the fluctuations in operating temperature, operating pressure and back pressure, the ratio of differential pressure to minimum bursting pressure, the resistance to creep and fatigue and other operating conditions.

1.4.2 As

1.5

Application

to the requirements of appropriate regulations or standards, bursting discs may be used either as the sole safety device or in conjunction with safety valves.

1.5.1 Subject

1.5.2 The
relieving cases:.

use device

of a bursting disc may be preferred

as a pressurein the following

1.4.3 Bursting disc devices are frequently required to work in corrosive environments where corrosion may cause premature failure of the bursting disc. Materials likely to be affected by corrosion may be protected by coating,. plating, lining or other suitable means which shall be supplied only by the manufacturer (see section 3). 1.4.4 The

a) where
ertia

pressure of a safety

rise may be so rapid that the valve would be a disadvaniage; fluid

in-

b) where

even be tolerated

minute leakage of the under normal conditions;

cannot

choice of the appropriate bursting disc material depends on the chemical and physical conditions that will be met on each side of the bursting disc when it is in service.

where which

service conditions may involve deposition could render a safety valve inoperative; cold valve service conditions from operating. could prevent a

d) where
safety

3

IS12370:1993 ISO6716:lQQl

1.5.3 Where a bursting disc alone is used as the relieving device, its maximum bursting pressure at the coincident temperature shall comply with the appropriate regulations or standards covering the system to be protected. 1.5.4 The selection of bursting discs for use on vessels which may be involved with extremely rapid and uncontrolled changes in pressure requires special consideration not covered by this International Stahdard. 1.5.5 Bursting disc devices may be used in combination with safety valves as permitted by the appropriate regulations or standards, and as specified below. The application of the bursting discs shall not adversely affect the operation of the safety valve nor result in excess pressure to the system. 1.5.5.1 Bursting disc devices in combination with safety valve(s) may be used in the following cases:

3) the flow capacity of the combination shall be assumed to be no greater than 80 % of the rated relieving capacity of the safety valve alone.

d) The space between the bursting

disc and safety valve shall be provided with a means for monitoring any pressure build-up. This cavity may also be vented by means of an excess-flow valve.
pressure difpressure to between the occur should to corrosion

NOTE 2 Bursting discs, since they are ferential devices, require a higher ,system burst if pressure builds up in the space bursting disc and safety valve, which will leakage develop in the bursting disc due or other causes.

e) In situetions

where fragmentation or release of bursting disc material may occur, the installation shall be designed so that parts or particles of the bursting disc cannot render the safety valve inoperative nor reduce the flow area of the safety valve.

a) in series, to protect the safety valve against corrosion, fouling or service conditions affect the safety valve performance; which may 1.5.5.3 A bursting disc device may be installed ter the outlet of a safety valve if the following quirements are met. afre-

W in series, to prevent leakage; d in serie's, to prevent
the pressure bursting disc: total loss of contents from system following venting of the

a) The safety valve is so designed

that its operating characteristics shall not be adversely affected by the bursting disc installed. so that the safety valve opens at its set pressure. The space between the safety valve disc and the bursting disc shall be vented or drained to prevent pressure build-up. bursting pressure of the bursting disc at the coincident temperature plus any pressure in the discharge piping shall not Exceed

d) in parallel,

as an additional

safeguard. bere-

b) The system shall be designed

1.5.5.2 A bursting disc device may be installed fore the inlet of a safety valve if the following quirements are met.

c) The maximum 4
The maximum bursting pressure at the coincident temperature shall comply with the appropriate regulations or standards for the system being protected. discharge capacity and the operating characteristics of the particular combination of safety valve and bursting disc device have been established by test in accordance with appropriate regulations or standards the test results shall be used. not been tested

1) the pressure
manufacturer,

permitted

by the

safety

valve

b) If the

2)

the design pressure of any pipe or fitting between the safety valve and the bursting disc, and by the appropriate

permitted 3) the pressure regulations or standards.

cl Where a combination'has

4 In installations

1; the bursting disc device discharge area shall be such as to satisfy the safety valve inlet piping pressure drop requirements stated in the appropriate regulations or standards, 2) the bursting disc device discharge area shall be not less-than 80 % of the nominal area of the safety valve inlet, and

where fragmentation or release of bursting disc material may occur, the system shall be designed so that the performance of the safety valve is not impaired land adequate venting is provided. the bursting disc device discharge area shall not affect the discharge capacity and the operating characteristics of the safety valve. 2

4 On bursting,

4

IS12370:1993 IS06718:ltil

f)

The contents of the protected system shall be clean fluids, free from gumming or fouling matter, so that accumulation in the space between the safety valve inlet and the bursting disc (or in any other outlet that may be provided) does not obstruct the outlet.
disc assembly on the discharge side of a safety valve should not be replaced while there is any possibility of the safety valve opening.

1.6.3 Adequate precautions shall be taken to prevent deposition on the pressure side of the bursting disc, and in the part leading to it, of sublimates or other solids that could affect the safe operation of the burstlng disc. Casual liquid or foreign matter shall, for similar reasons, be prevented from accumulating on the vent side of the bursting disc and within the discharge pipe. The application of an additional protective film or coating to an installed bursting disc is not allowed, except when approved by the manufacturer, since this may considerably affect the bursting pressure of the bursting disc. 1.6.4 The purchaser shall ensure that provision is made to absorb the effect of reaction forces on the vessel and associated pipework which will arise when the bursting disc bursts or vents.. 1.6.5 If the bursting of a bursting disc can' discharge a flammable fluid, the danger of ignition in the discharge pipe shall be considered and appropriate measures taken to minimize the hazard. 1.6.6 Bursting discs shall be examined for defects immediately before installation and care shall be taken during their assembly, and particularly during that of thin bursting discs. 1.6.7 In situations where fragmentation or release of bursting disc material may occur, any piping beyond the bursting disc shall be so designed that it shall not be obstructed by fragments from the bursting disc device. 1.6.8 The manufacturer's installailon instructions, and in particular the directional arrow, bolti,ng torque instructions and the reference to the use of gaskets, shall be strictly followed.
NOTE 5 If the components are assembled incorrectly or the bursting disc device is installed incorrectly, the bursting disc may burst or vent at a system pressure higher or lower than that expected.

NOTE 3

A bursting

device may be installed both before and afler a safety valve provided that the requirements of 1.5.5.2 and 1.5.5.3 are taken into consideration.
1.554 A bursting disc

1.5.5.5 A bursting disc device fitted in parallel with a safety valve as an additional safeguard, such as to protect the system against the consequence of a rapid rise in pressure, shall be specified to burst at a pressure not exceeding that specified in the appropriate regulations or standards. 1.5.5.6 A bursting disc device may be fitted in series with a second bursting disc device. In such cases the system shall be designed in accordance with the following requirements.

a) The space between

the bursting discs shall be large enough to ensure the correct functioning of the bursting discs. the bursting discs shall be provided with a means of monitoring any pressure build-up. This space may also be vented by
means of an excess-flow valve.

b) The space between

Bursting discs, since they are pressure difNOTE 4 ferential devices, require a higher system pressure to burst if pressure builds up in the space between the bursting discs, which will occur should leakage develop in the bursting disc due to corrosion or other causes.

1.6

Installation

1.6.1 A bursting disc device shall be placed as close as practicable to the space it is intended to protect, taking into account pressure pulses, temperature conditions, etc. The discharge system shall be of ample size and as straight and as short as practicable, terminating in such a way as to avoid dangerous or damaging conditions arising an venting. 1.6.2 Bursting disc devices shall be mounted so that they are accessible for replacement and protected from accidental damage. Consideration shall be given to the effects of weather, including freezing of the discharge pipe and possible corrosion due to the atmosphere.

i .7

`Discharge

capacity

1.7.1 Guidance for determining the mass flow rate, for single-phase flow, through a discharge system containing a bursting disc device is given in annex A. The manufacturer shall, when requested by'the purchaser, provide information relating to the bursting disc device. Such information may include

5

IS 12370 1%) 6718

: 1993 : 1991

a) the

bursting 1.3.31), and pressure

disc

device

discharge

area

(see

e)

b) ;he

loss

(resistance

coefficient)

all conditions of temperature and pressure (including back pressure) to which the bursting disc device may be subjected; rate and frequency of pressure changes, if applicable; expected maximum pressure during relieving conditions. and temperature

Unless specified otherwise in appropriate regulations or standards, the information may be established by a) b) tests using on actual established bursting disc devices, data the purchaser values may be or

f-l

1.8.3
scientific Alternatively, by agreement between and the manufacturer, conservative used.

Bursting
shall

disc

device

operating

details

The following

be specified: bursting pressure and co-

a) maxirnum
incident

specified temperature;

1.7.2 The discharge area of a bursting disc device, used as the primary relief device, shall be sufficient to discharge the maximum quantity of fluid that can be generated or stlppiied to a pressure system whilst preventing the pressure from exceeding the pressures permitted by appropriate regulations or standards covering the system to be protected.

b)

minimum specified incident temperature;

bursting

pressure

and

co-

cl rate of change
bursting

in the pressure with respect press(Jre, where appropriate;

to the

d)

1.8 Information purchaser 1.8.1 General

to be supplied

by the

bursting disc device theoretical discharge capacity, required to prevent accumulated pressure exceeding allowed maximum; minimum required; bursting disc device discharge area

4 r)

Where possible, the minimum information specified in 1.8.2 to 1.8.5 shall be supplied by the purchaser with every enquiry, to assist the manufacturer in specifying a suitable bursting disc device for a particular application. 1.8.2 Application shall details be specified: or system cod6 where

materials which the purchaser, from a knowledge of the process, regards as suitable for consideration in the selection of the bursting disc device material(s); which may not be used or other reasons. for safety. cor-

9) materials
rosion

The following

1.8.4

Installation shall

details be specified. in

a) description

of the vessel, equipment to be protected, and vessel design appropriate;

The following

a) physical

location of the bursting d,isc device the system, preferably in the form of a sketch; method system flange, of fitting the bursting (e.g. between flanges, direct weld to outlet); disc device direct fitting

b)

intended ap@ication of the bursting disc device; state whether the device is required to operate for example as the primary relief device, secondary relief device, for safety valve protection or in some other capacity; specification and relative position ' `v valves or other safety devices fitted of an, _,_. to the equipment or system; may come in contact with any. part of the bursting disc device; physical properti'es of the fluid, e.g. gas, vapour, liquid or solid, wet or dry, at all stages of the process (including venting); chemical properties of the fluid which -may affect bursting disc performance;

b)

in the to one

cl
cl perforrrsnce

diameter of inlet pipe to bursting disc device and diameter of discharge pipe from bursting disc device, including flange size, rating, type and specification or other fixing details (e.g. thread specification and size):

d) the fluid which

d)
4

type
holder

and
(see

preferred
2.2);

material

,of

bursting

disc

form and finish of external mating surfaces ferent than the manufacturer's standard.

if dif-

6

IS12370:1993 Is0 6718:1991

1.8.5

Special details
shall be specified: requirements adin this International

bursting

discs

and

bursting

the specified
The following a) inspection ditional to Standard;

requirements

disc devices conform (see IS0 9001).

to

and certification those defined

The manufacturer shall make available to the inspection authority at the manufacturer's works a current copy of the written description of the quality system. The manufacturer's quality system shall provide for the inspection authority at the manufacturer's works to have reasonable access to all documents necessary for the inspection authority lo perform its duties. Such access to documentation shall be subject to any confidentiality requirements and procedures laid down in the manufacturer's quality system The manufacturer may provide such access either to his own files of such documents or by providing copies to the insbection authority. NOTE 6
for inclusion

b)

special features required device (e.g. excess-flow monitoring device, jacking special where. features

the bursting disc valve, pressurebolts, lifting rings); not slated else-

in

c)

of application

1.9

QuAity

assurance

The manufacturer shall establish, document and maintain an effective and economical quality assurance system to ensure and demonstrate that the

Annex

C provides

a typical

outline

of subjects

in the quality

system

IS 12370 IS0 6718

: 1993 : 1991

Section
2.1 Bursting discs

2:

Components

of bursting

disc devices

2.1.1

Materials

All materials including linings, coatings and platings used for the manufacture of bursting discs shall have uniform properties suitable for the working environment in which the but-Sting discs are to be used. The material in the final form shall be free from defects whi-h may lead to premature failure.

1)

The bursting disc may be multilayered.

-

Figure

2 -

Conventional simple domed disc with flat seat

bursting

2.1.2

Conventional

domed

bursting

discs

Conventional domed bursting discs are domed in the direction of the subsequent applied bursting pressure. These bursting discs shall be domed'by a means capable of producing a permanent set such that no furttier plastic flow will occur initially when the bursting disc is. subjected to its intended operating conditions. Conventional domed bursting discs burst or vent in tension and comprise the following types:

1)
Figure

The bursting disc may be multilayered.

4 b) cl

conventional simple figures 1 and 2); conventional figure 3); other types International slotted

domed

bursting

discs

(see 3 Conventional slotted lined bursting disc

lined

bursting

discs

(see

which meet Standard.

the

requirements

of this 2.1.3 Reverse domed bursting discs

Reverse domed bursting discs are domed against lhe direction of the ,bursting pressure (see figure4) and are designed to fail by buckling under pressure They include the following types:

a)

reverse domed bursting discs with knife which open by being cut during reversal dome;

blades, of the

b)
11 The bursting disc may be multilayered

Figure

1 -

Conventional simple domed disc with angle seat

bursting

reverse domed bursting discs having lines of weakness (without knife blades), which open along these lines when the dome reverses at the bursting pressure;

1

c)

reverse domed bursting discs having a slip or tear-away design (without knife blades), which vent by being expelled downstream from the holder; a catching device yay be provided;

8

IS 12370:
IS0 6716

1993 : 1991

other types which meet the requirements International Standard.

of this

Figure

6 -

Monobloc

bursting disc recessed outlet side

on the

I)

The bursting disc may be multilayered.

Figure

4 -- Reverse domed

bursting

disc

2.1.4

Graphite

bursting

discs

2.1.4.1

General

Figure Graphite bursting discs are designed suit of bending or shearing. to fail as a re-

7 -

Monobloc

bursting disc recessed inlet side

on the

Graphite bursting discs are normally flat and are designed such that upon bursting a full bore opening is obtained. They comprise various types as specified in 2.1.4.2 to 2.1.4.4.

2.1.4.2

Replaceable

element

bursting

disc

Holders arc! required for use with replaceable ement bursfing discs. Figure5 shows a typical placeghle element bursting disc.

elre-

t
Figure 8 Monobloc bursting both sides disc recessed

on

t
Figure 5 Replaceable element bursting disc

Figure6 shows a design in which the bllrsting pressure shall only be applied to the flat face of the monobloc bursting disc. Figure 7 shows a similar bursting disc but the design is such that the bursting pressure shall only be applied into the recess. For this type of bursting disc, the bore of the vent-side mounting local to the bursting disc shall be in accordance with the Irlanufacturer's instructions. Norrnally th'ls bore will be greater than the inside diameter of the recess. Figure 6 is typical of designs where the burstitng disc has a recess on both sides and in which lhe bllrsting

2.1.4.3

Monobloc

bursting

disc

Monobloc bursting discs are installed tween flanges. Thr-ee typical monohloc illustrated in fiqures 6 to 8.

directly designs

beare

IS 1237b: IS0 6718

1993 : f991

pressure shall ameter recess. 2.1.4.4

only

be applied

into the smaller

di-

2.2.2.3 The bursting disc holder as supplied by the manufacturer shall not be modified in any way except with the approval of the manufacturer.

Other types
allowed of this 2.2.2.4 Where reasonably practicable, the ness of that part of the bursting disc holder which the dome of the bursting disc protrudes be greater than the height of the dome of the ing disc so as to prevent damage to it during lation. If this is not reasonably practicable, means may be used to protect the bursting during installation. thickinto shall burstinstalother disc

Other types of graphite bursting discs are provided that they meet the requirements International Standard.

2.1.5

Other

designs

Other designs, including flat bursting discs (see figure9), are allowed provided that they meet the requirements of this International Standard.

2.2.3

Types

Capsule/insert 2.2.3.1 figure 10)

bursting

disc holder

(see

1) The bursting disc may be multilayered.
Figure 9 Flat bursting disc

A capsule/insert bursting disc holder is designed to be installed centrally within the flange bolts. Accurate centralization of the bursting disc device within the supporting flanges is essential for correcl bursting disc functioning and effective flange gasket sealing. Centralization may be achieved by one of the_ following means, as agreed by the manufacturer and purchaser. a) the outside diameter is such that the bursting disc holder or device is accurately located within the bolls of the supporting flanges: by use of locating by manual by other collars; during fitting.

2.2 2.2.1

Bursting Material(s)

disc holders

b) The material(s) 6f the bursting disc holder shall be as agreed betweeb the manufacturer and purchaser. The use of corrjosion-resistant material(s) for the vent side is re because corrosion of this mmended part of the bur ting disc holder may cause damage to the burstin T disc, leading to premature failure when pressure is applied. c) d)

adjustment suitable means

2.2.2

Design

2.2.2.1 The bursting disc, holder has a substantial influence on the bursting pr,essure and the correct operation of the bursting disc; it shall adequately secure and support the bursting disc in operation Each bursting disc shall be used only with its correctly designed and manufactured bursting disc holder. A bursting disc holder when installed shall apply, or transmit, a clamping load sufficient to ensure the correct operation of the bursting disc. 2.2.2.2 The design of a bursting OISC holder shall be such that, for practical purposes, the bursting disc assembly is effectively sealed when correctly instqlled.

Figure

10 -

Capsule/insert

bursting

disc holder

10

IS 12370 IS0 6718

: 1993 : 1991

2.2.3.2 figures

Full diameter 11 and 12)

bursting

disc holder

(see

connection for the inlet may be threaded or welded. The connection for the outlet may be threaded, welded, free-vented or muffled.

A full diameter bursting disc holder comprises a pair of flanges or other type of housing which normally has the same outside diameter as any companion flanges. The connections to the mating pipework may be threaded, welded or flat, depending on the purchaser's requirements.

Figure

13 -

Union bursting

disc holder

2.2.3.4 Plug/screw figure 14) Figure 11 Full diameter bursting line) disc holder (in

bursting

disc holder

(see

A plug/screw bursting disc holdet- consists of two or more parts screwed together and locating a bIJrsting disc. The inlet connection rnay be welded or threaded. The outlet connection may be welded, threaded, free-vented or muffled This type of bursting disc holder is generally StJited to small sizes of bursting discs and a wide range of pressures. If installed in pipework, an addiiionai connection may be required to facili!ate installation and removal of the bursting disc.

Figure

12 -

Full diameter bursting of line)

disc holder

(end

6

2.2.3.3

Union

bursting

disc holder

(see fig\Jre 13)

t
A union bursting disc holder consists of an inlet an outlet member connected by a union nut. and The Figure 14 Plug/screw bursting disc holder

11

IS 12370 : 1993 IS0 6718 : 1991

2.2.3.5

Other types of bursting disc holders
disc the holders are requirements allowed of this

perforated to transmit the bursting disc.

the pressure

in the system

to

Other types of bursting provided that they meet International Standard.

2.3
2.3.1

Back pressure
General

supports

Where a bursting disc may be subjected in service to a back pressure differential, it shall be fitted with a back pressure support unless the bursting disc itself is strong enough to support the pressure differential. The inclusion of a back pressure support may reduce the discharge capacity and shall be taken into account when selecting the bursting disc size. The bursting disc and back pressure support be supplied by the manufacturer, preferably assembly, to ensure that a) shall as an

If there is not adequate discharge capacity through the slits and/or perforations, the back pressure support shall open when subjected to a pressure not exceeding the minimum bursting pt-essure at the coincident temperature of the associated burstincl disc. The supp&t shall open to provide a flow area sufficient to permit the discharge of the contents of the system within the requirements of 1.7.2 when the bursting disc has burst. 2.3.3 Non-opening back

pressure

supports

The non-opening type of back pressure support shall fit closely against the bursting disc to give support to part of its area. The support shall be uerforaled with one or more holes to' provide a flow' area sufficient to permit the discharge of the contents of the system within the requirements of 1.7 2 2.4

there is a correct fit between the back pressure support and bursting disc to prevent damage lo the bursting disc, and the back pressure support is fitted to the correct side of the bursting disc as designed by the manufacturer.

Temperature

shields

b)

A temperature shield shall be used to protect a bursting disc fitted with a back pressure support only when specifically recommended by the bursting disc manufacturer. 2.5

The back pressure support shall be such that the bursting disc assembl$.is not deformed when subjected to the back pressure specified. The edges of the slits and/or perforations shall be free from all burrs or similar imperfections that might cause a premature failure. 2.3.2

Stiffening

rings
discs may handling. be fitted with stiffening

Fragile bursting rings for easier

2.6

Gaskets

Opening

back pressure

supports

The opening type of back pressure support shall fit closely against the bursting disc so as to give support to part of its area. The support shall be slit or

Gaskets used on either side or both sides of a bursting disc shall be compatible with lhe chemical, thermal and mechanical demands of the application. The use, type, material, thickness and diameter of the gasket shall comply with the bursting disc manufacturer's recommendation

12

IS 12370: IS0 6718

1993 : 1991

Section
3.1 General

3:

Means

of protection
3.3

from corrosion
Plating

Bursting disc devices are frequently required to work in corrosive environments. Materials likely to be affected by corrosion may be protected by coating, plating, lining or other suitable means which shall be supplied only by the manufacturer.

Plating shall be applied by a suitable method to give an even and homogeneous plating to the surface to be protected.

3.2

Coatings
method !o to the sur-

3.4

Bursting

disc linings

Coatings shall be applied by a suitable give an even and homogeneous coating faces to be protected.

The linings, where possible, should be attached to the bursting disc so as to preserve them as a set or integral unit.

13

IS 12376: 1993 IS0 6716 : 1991

Section
4.1 Inspection

4:

Inspection

and testing

After manufacture, all components of a bursting disc device shall be inspected visually. Any that exhibit defects which may affect the performance of the bursting disc device shall be discarded or such defects shall be rectified. Bursting discs made from foil less than 0.2 mm thick shall be examined, for example over a suitable light box using an illuminance not less than 5000 Ix, and shall be discarded if they appear porous. The continuity of coatings, plating be checked by suitable means. and linings shall

4.2.1.2.2 For conventional simple domed bursting discs and flat and monobloc graphite bursting discs, pressure/temperature curves may be used for the interpolation of the bursting pressure at coincident temperature. Each pressure/temperature curve is specific to each of those types of bursting discs manufactured from a specific lot of material. These lished pressure/temperature as follows. curves shall be estab-

A sample batch of at least 12 bursting discs shall be tested. The bursting discs shall be tested at each of four different temperatures across the applicable temperature range, with a minimum of three bursting discs at each temperature. The results of these tests shall be used to establish a curve of bursting pressure versus temperature for that particular batch.of material. When this method of testing is used, a quantity'of bursting discs in accordance with table 1, from each lot of bursting discs, shall be tested at room temperature to verify that the bursting pressure falls within the specified performance tolerance or range of minimum and maximum bursting pressure at room temperature.

NOTE 7 For example, for non-conductive suitable method is electro-static testing. Those discs exhibiting defects rity of the bu'rsting disc device that shalt

material

a

affect the integbe discarded or

such defects

shall be rectified.

4.2
4.2.1

Testing
Burst testing of sample
bursting discs

A number of completed bursting discs shall be seJected at random from each batch and shalt be subjected to testing as specified in 4.2.1.1 or 4 2.1.2. 4.2.1.1 Bursting discs for use at room temperature shall be tested at room temperature. The number tested shall be in accordance with table 1. 4.2.1.2 Bursting discs for use at a temperature other than room temperature shall be tesled as agreed between the manufacturer and the purchaser, as specified in the appropriate regulations or standards, or by one of the procedures specified in 4.2.1.2.1 to 4.2.1.2.3. 4.2.1.2.1 At least two sample bursting discs from each batch of bursting discs, manufactured from the same material and of the same size as those to be used, shall be tested at the specified coincident temperature to verify that the bursting pressure falls
within the specified and performance maximum tolerance pressure or range at the of minimum coincident In addition, table bursting

4.2.1.2.3 For types of all bursting discs. pressure/temperature curves may be used for the interpolation of the bursting pr-essure at coincident temperature. Each pressure/temperature curve established by this method is specific to a particular type of bursting disc, a particular size and a particular lot of material. These lished pressure/temperature as follows. curves shalt be estab-

A sample batch of at teast 12 bursting discs of a particular type, manufactured from the same lot of material and of the same size as those for which the pressure/temperature curve is being established, shall be tested. The bursting discs from this batch shall be tested at four different temperatures across the applicable temperature range, with a minimum of three bursting discs at each temperature. The results
a curve

of these

Of bursting disc. the test

that

particular

tests shall be used to establish pressure versus temperature for size, tot- of material and type of

temperature. the numbet the with temperature, a minimum of bursting of shall

bursting

discs

1. minus

number

bursting of one

specified in discs tested
at room disc bursting

Where different

results

obtained type

fbr of

at

least

three disc,

sizes

of a particular

bursting

at coincident
temperature,

be tested

being tested at room

temperature.

in a particular lot of material, establish that the pressure/temperature curve is the same across the tested size range, then one curve may be used for

-

14

IS 12370: 1993 Is0 WI6 : 1991

the interpolation of the bursting pressure at the coincident temperature, within the size range tested. When this method is used, a quantity of bursting discs in accordance with table 1, from each batch of bursting discs manufactured from the same lot of material and of the same size and type for which the pressure/temperature curves have been established, shall be tested at room temperature to verify that the bursting pressure falls within the specified performance ,tolerance or range of minimum and maximum bursting pressure at room temperature. 4.2.2 General requirements

Some applications may require testing procedures which deviate from the above. These shall be as agreed between the purchaser and the manufacturer or as specified in the appropriate regulations or standards.

4.2.2.7 When testing with gas it is particularly portant to ensure that the appropriate safety cautions are observed.

impre-

4.2.2.8 When required by the appropriate regulations or standards or the user, an independent authority shall witness the test

4.2.2.1 The sample bursting discs shall be burst in a holder or test die identical in orifice size and orifice configuration with that in which the bursting disc will be installed. 4.2.2.2 In the case of reverse domed bursting discs, the holder shall be connected to a pressure system suitable to achieve bursting disc reversal. 4.i.2.3 A clamping load shall be applied in accordance with the manufacturer's specification. 4.2.2.4 The testing ure and temperature apparatus shall include measuring equipment. press-

Table
Total

1 -

Number

of bursting

discs to be tested
of bursting to be tested 2 3 4 6 discs

number of bursting discs in batch Less than 10

Number

10 to 15 16 to 30 31 to 100 101 to 250 251 to 1000 NOTES

4 % but not less 3 O/sbut not less

than 6 than 10

4.2.2.5 The pressure sensing device shall be located as near as possible to the bursting disc inlet and connected to it in such a way as to minimize pressure drop. 4.2.2.6 With one of the bursting discs installed, increase the pressure at the inlet to 90 % of the expected minimum bursting pressure in a time not less than 5 s. Thereafter, increase the pressure at the device inlet steadily and continuously until the bursting disc bursts or vents. Record the bursting pressure and any other pertinent characteristics.

1 Discarded and test bursting discs are not sidered as part of the total number of the batch. 2 For batches above 1000 the number

con-

of bursting

discs lo be tested shall be agreed between the manufacturer and purchaser.
3 Any agreement to vary the number discs to be tested shall be based upon regulations or standards of bursting appropriate

15

ts12370:1993 IS0 6718:1991

Section 5.1
5.1.1

5:

Marking,

identification

and packaqing

Marking
Bursting discs

5.1.1.1 Each bursting disc shall be permanently marked (where practicable; see 5.1.1.2 to 5.1.1.4) with the following minimum information:

5.1.1.3 Where the physical'size of the bursting disc is so small that it can only bear the vent side identification mark, a suitable individual package bearing the other markings required by 5.1.1.1 shall be used to contain the bursting disc until it is mounted. A tag bearing thG same markings should be included in the package. 5.1.1.4 Where identification marks cannot be seen when the bursting disc assembly is installed in the system,. the purchaser shall be responsible for attaching to the installation a suitable tag which shall be permanently marked with the same information as placed on the bursting disc or in the package. 5.1.2

4 b) c) d)

manufacturer's nominal size appropriate; material

identity; DN or nominal pipe size NPS, as

identity; bursting stating

the maximum and minimum specified pressures and coincident temperature, units, or the specified bursting ance tolerance and stating units;

Bursting

disc

holder

Each bursting disc holder shall be permanently marked on the outside diameter with the following minimum information a) b) c) manufacturer's bursting disc identity; holder DN or identity: nominal pipe size NPS, as

pressure and a performa coincident temperature,

The range of pressure between the madNOTE 8 mum and minimum specified bursting pressures will be equivalent to the performance tolerance.

nominal size appropriate; material direction

e) 9 9) h) 9

the number vent side;

of this

International

Standard;

d) e)

identity: of flow arrow; International Standard.

for monobloc bursting discs only, flow arrow on the outside diameter; where appropriate, torque loading, size of bolts required to clamp; appropriate bursting disc holder

a direction

of

f)

the number

of this

5.1.3 number and

Ancillary

components

identity.

Ancillary components, such as temperature shields, which may be supplied separately from a bursting disc assembly, when appropriate, shall be marked to indicate the direction of flow.

The method of marking shall not impair performance. Where practicable, the bursting disc shall be marked such that the ,information is visible after installation. A physical coding system such as pins and slots applied to a holder and bursting disc may be used in addition to the marking on the bursting disc. The holder for such a combination shall be permanently marked with all information plus the code reference available. 5.1.1.2 If bursting discs cannot be marked with the information specified in 5.1.1.1, this information shall be permanently marked on a lag or label attached to the bursting disc such that (where practicable) it is visible after installation

5.2

Packaging

Bursting disc devices or their components shall be packed to prevent any damage which may impair performance. Each container shall the following minimum be permanently informationmarked with

a) b)

manufacturer's

identity; nominal *pipe size NPS, as

nominal si7c! DN or appropriate; identity;

cl material

16

ISl2370:1993 ISO6718:1991

d)

the maximum and minimum specified pressures and coincident temperature, units, or

bursting stating

f)

the bursting priate.

disc

holder

identity,

where

appro-

If required by the sembly instructions facturer.

purchaser, installation and asshall be provided by the manu-

the specified bursting pressure and a performance tolerance and a coincident temperature, stating units; e) the number of this international Standard;

Where components of the bursting disc assembly, for example back pressure supports, are to be supplied separately then the containers shall be marked with the appropriate cross-reference.

17

IS12370:1993 Iso6718:1991

Section 6.1 Test certificates

6:

Certification r) the material(s)
ponents supplied; of the bursting disc and com-

If specified by the purchaser, the manufacturer shall provide for each batch, or part of batch, a test certificate stating that the bursting discs have been manufactured and tested in accordance with the requirements of this International Standard, and giving the following minimum information:

9) name of the manufacturer; h) manufacturer's 0 inspection
priate); identification mark; (where appro-

authority

identification

a) nominal

size appropriate;

DN or nominal

pipe size NPS, as

i) batch identification; k) the number of this International 1) endorsement
carried out; that the tests Standat-d; have been

b) the maximum

and minimum specified bursting pressures and coincident temperature as specitied by the purchaser for the application,

reported

OC

the specified bursting pressure ance tolerance and a coincident

and a performtemperature; to the conditions

W where

c) information
of the test;

as in b) correlated

testing is required by an appropriate regulation or standard, or as agreed between the manufacturer and the purchaser, the bursting disc device discharge area established by the test, stating units.

d) any

further information regarding bursting pressure/temperature, if requested by the purchaser; pressures bursting and temperatures discs under test

6.2

Additional information

e) the actual bursting
recorded when were burst: the

If specified by the purchaser, where the bursting disc device discharge area has been determined other than by testing on the batch or part batch (see 1.7.1), the bursting disc device discharge area should be provided to the purchaser, stating the unils and the method by which it was established.

IS 12370 : 1993 IS0 6718 : 1991.

Annex A (informative) Discharge capacity
A.1 General annex gives some guidance on the deof the mass ftow rate of a discharge contains a bursting disc device. It resingle-phase flow. A.2 A.2.1 Method General 1

A.1.1 This termination system that lates only to

This method should be used where it can be safety assumed that there are only negligible pressure drops in the inlet pipe or the discharge pipe. In such cases the following applies:

Rules for sizing where two-phase vapour-liquid NOTE 9 flow occurs, either because it is two phase at the inlet or because some or all of the liquid ftashes to vapour on venting, are being considered for inclusion in a future revision of this International Standard.

4 for compressible

Al.2

fluids the flow rate is controlled by the nozzle entry configuration of the equipment and the bursting disc device; fluids a discharge coefficient

Two methods

are given as follows.

a) The first method

gives a simplified approach, neglecting pressure drops in the inlet pipe and in the discharge pipe. Therefore this method is of limited application. systems needs to be given to the throughout the discharge

b) for incompressible
of 0,62 is used.

b) The second method relates to discharge
where consideration changes in pressure system.

The values of the combined coefficient given in tableA. for the nozzle entry configuration and the bursting disc device to be used for compressible fluids are based on experimental work carried out at the University (RWTH) of Aachen and reported in Ill. The limitations of the applications for compressible luids and incompressible fluids are given in A.2.2 and A.2.3 respectively. A.2.2 Compressible method fluids is limited to those appli-

A.1.3 It is important to ensure that the method selected is appropriate to the particular application and is correctly applied by appropriately qualified and experienced persons. A.1.4 Values of pressure loss (resistance coefficients) and coefficients of discharge of the bursting disc device may be governed by appropriate regulations or standards. A.1.5 This discharge rate of the discharge system should be such as to ensure that under relieving conditions the maximum allowable working p'ressure of the p:-essurized system to be protected is not exceeded by more than 10 % of the maximum allowable working pressure, or as governed by the appropriate regulations or standards.

The use of this cations where

a) the bursting

disc device is installed within eight pipe diameters from the entry to the equipment nozzle, disc device discharge area less than 50 % of the inlet pipe area, configurations are as illustrated is not

b) the bursting
cl the nozzle
ble A.1.

in ta-

d) the flow is single phase, and
e) the

length of the discharge pipe following bursting disc device does not exceed five I diameters.

the pipe

IS 12370 : 1993 IS0 6718 : 1991.

Tnhlr
.I_._

-1..

d 1 -

IMrrhmrmr
~"......`~

maffictmnte
__.M...-._..I

,-w
u

No.

No:zle

Discharge coefficient a type (compressible fluids)

Protruding nozzle

0.68

--

A.2.2.1
The

Critical and subcritical

flow

P
A.2.2.2

is the relieving

pressure,

in bar absolute.

flow rate of a compressible flu% through a bursting disc device increases as the downstream pressure is decreased until critical flow is achieved. A further decrease in the downstream pressure will not result in any further increase in the flow rate.

Discharge capacity at critical flow

The discharge capacity at critical flow can be obtained from one of the following equations: In
q,,, = 0.288 3C',& J " ?r (A.3)

Critical
$<(

flow occurs
-L>"`~K-"

when

. WI)
when

(A.4)

and subcritical A+( $,

flow occurs >`"`-1'

. . (A.5)
. (A.2)
.

(A.6)

where

where is the back pressure immediately downstream of the smallest cross-sectional flow area, in bar') absolute; is the,isentropic exponent of the gas or vapour in the pressure system at the relieving inlet conditions;
A0

A

is the required minimum flow area of a bursting square millimetres;

cross-sectional disc device, in

u

c

is a function of the isentropic exponent (for values, see table A.$), where

K

t)

1 b@r -

105 N/m* -

100 kPa

20

IS 12370 : 1993 IS0 6716: 1991

where . (A.7)

A0

M
P

is the molar mole: is the relieving

mass, in kilograms

per kilo-

is the required minimum flow area of the bursting square millimetres;

cross-sectional disc device, in

pressure,

in bar absolute;

A,

is the cross-sectional area pipe, in square millimetres.

of the

inlet

4,

is the mass flow rate to be discharged or the required capacity of the bursting disc device, in kilograms per hour; is the relieving temperature, in kelvin;

r

I

1

A.2.2.3.2 Where required by appropriate regulations or standards, or where the nozzle -disc configuration is different from those shown in tableA.l, tests may be req'uired. The experimentally established discharge coefficient shall be multiplied by 0,9 before application in formulae (A.3) to (A.6). The given discharge area, however, can be applied without any correction. A.2.2.4 Discharge capacity at subcritical flow

V

is the specific volume at the actual relieving pressure and relieving temperalure, in cubic metres per kilogram; is the compressibility factor (this may be assessed from figure B.l);
TableA. gives values of critical NOTE 10 temperature and pressure for some gases to assist in the determination of Z; however, if insufficient information is available, a value of f-0 may be used. (See also annex Et.)

z

The discharge capacity at subcritical flow can be obtained from one of the following equations: q, = 0,288 3CK,,n4 J-$ . (A.8)

u

is the discharge coefficient of the nozzle type and the bursting disc device combined as per A.2.2.3.

(A%
(A.lO)

Table A.2 K

c
1.65 1,73 I,81 1.89 1,96 2,02 2,08 2,14 2,20 2,22 2,24 2,26 2,28 230 2.32 2,34 2,36 2,38 2,39 2,40

Values of C relative to values of -K --

K

c

Y

c
where
A0

(A.ll)

0,40 0,45 050 0,55 0,60 0,65 0,70 0.75 0,80 0.82 0,84 0.86 0.88 0,90 0,92 0.94 0,96 0,98 0,99 1,001

1,02 1,04 1,06

1,08
1,lO

1,1,2
1,14 1,16 1,18 1,20 1,22 1.24 1,26 1,28 1,30 I,32 1.34 I,36 1,38 1,40

2,41 2,43 2,45 2,46 2,48 250 2,51 2,53 2,55 2,56 2.58 2,59 2,61 2,62 2.63 2,65 2,66 2,68 2,69 2,70

I;42
1,44 1,46 I,48 1,50 I,52 1,54 1,56 1.58

1,60
I,62 1,64 1,66 1 1,68 1,70 I,80 I,90 2,00 2,to 2,20

2.72 2,73 2.74 2,76 2,77 2,78 2,79 2,80 2,82 2,83 2.84 2.85 2.86 2,87 2,89 2,94 2,99 3,04 3,09 3,13

is the required minimum flow area of a bursting square millimetres;

cross-sectional disc device, in

C

is a function of the isentropic K (for values, see tableA.2);

coefficient

Kb

is a factor which corrects for the reduction.in capacity due to the increase in back pressure (see table A.4); where

A.2.2.3

Discharge coefficient at critical flow
NOTE 11 For critical flow, Kb = 1,O. 6

(A.12)

A.2.2.3.1 The discharge coefficients for three specific types of nozzle and bursting disc device combinations are listed in tableA.l. These discharge coefficients are valid where

M

is the molar mole;

mass, in kilograms

per kilo-

21

IS 12370
IS0 6718

: 1993 : 1991

P w

is the

relieving

pressure,

in bar absolute;
down-

z

is the

compressibility from figure

factor

(this

may

be

assessed

B.l);

is the back
stream flow area, of

pressure
the in bar flow

immediately

smallest absolute; rate to

crc:ss-sectional

9,

is the or disc the

mass

be of per

discharged a bursting
n

required

capacity

NOTE 12 TabteA. gives values of critical temperature and pressure for some gases to assist in the determination of Z; however, if insufficient information is available, a value of 1.0 may be used. (See also annex B.) is the discharge type and the bined as per coefficient bursting disc of the device nqzzle com-

device, relieving

in kilograms temperature, volume and metres per at

hour; in kelvin;

T
V

is the is the lieving ture,

sDecific pressure in cubic

the

actual tempera-

re-

A.2.2.3

relieving

kilogram:

Table

A.3 -

Properties

of gases
Critical pressure, p, Critical temperature, 7; bar absolule 62.82 37,69 112.98 48364 43.27 36,48 73,97 35,46 77,ll 49,14 40,08 49,45 51,57 17.97 82.68 90,OA 37,49 46.41 66.67 33,94 72,65 50,36 43-57 45,60 70.73 Critical pressure ratio

Oas

Symbol or formula

Molar mass, M

Ratio of specific heat capacities K _ y = cr/`v
(1,013 bar absolute;

kg/kmol Acetylene 4ir Ammonia Argon Elutadiene n-Butane Carbon dioxide Carbon monoxide Chlorine Chlorodifluo;omethane Dlchloredlflrpromethane Ethene Ethylene Hydrogen Hydrogen chloride Hydrogen sulfide lsobutane Methane Methyl chloride Nltrqen Nitrous oxide Oxygen n-Propane Propylene Sulfur dioxide (R 22) (R 12) Cz"2 _ NH3 Ar or A C,", C,",, co2 co C'2 CHCIF, CCI,F, C2H8 `2"4 "2 "Cl "2s CH(C",), C"4 CH,CI ~~ N2 N2O 02 C,", C,", SO, ,/ 26,04 20,97 17,03 39,95 54.09 58,12 44.01 78.01 70.91 86,47 120,91 30,05 28,05 2.02 36,46 34,00 58,12 16,Od 50.49 28,Ol 44,Ol 32~30 44,lO 42,08 64,06

15 "C) I,26 I,40 1.31 1.66 1,113 1,ll

K 309,15 132,45 40555 151,15 425 426.15 304.25 134,15 417,15 370,15 384,65 305,25 202,85 33,25 324,55 373,55 407.15 190,65 416,25 126,05 309,65 154.35 368.75 365,45 430,35 0,553 0,528 0,544 0,488
0.5ai

0,583 0,546 0,528 0.537 0,568 0,577 0,561 0,555 0,527 0,527 0,542 0,583 0,544 0,549 0,521 0,546 0,528 0,579 0,574 0,548 -.---

1.30
1,40 I,35 ?,I8 1,139 1.22 1,25 I,41 1,41 I,32 1,ll
1,31

1.28 I,40 1,30 1,40 1,13 I,15 1,29

NOTE - The principal sources on which the'se data are based are 121,13)and 141.

22

Isentropic exponent, K

pb

p

0,4

O,5

0,6

O,?

o,0

o,9

1,001

1,l

192

193

Jr4

I,5

1,6

1,7

Iv8

13

2.0

2.1

2,2

Capacity correction factor for back pressure, Kb 0.999 0,989 0,996
0,983 0,961 0,929 0,886 0,832 0,991 0,972 0,944 0,903 0,851 .0,967 0,967 0,936 0,895 0,841

1.000 0,999
0,999 0,989 0,964 0,923 0,997 0,982 0,953 0,SOS 1,OOO 0,9!33 0,974 0,943 0.896 0,999 0,989 0,967 0.932 0,884 0,997 0,983 0,959 0,922 0,872 0.994 0,978 0.951 0,913 0,861

0.45 WJ 03 1,cm 0.999 0,999

1,m 0,994

0,999 0,992

0.60 O,G 0.70 0.75 0,999 0,985 0,953

l@O

0,999 0,995

0,999 0,983

0,993 0,968

1,OOo 0,995 0,975 0,938

0,979 0,955 0.922 0,879 0,824 0,755 0,723 0,688

0,649
0.606 0.558 0,504 0,446 0,367 0,440 0,362 0,262 0,000 0,258 0,000

O,aO 0,82 O& 0.86 0.88 0.90 0392

0,999 0,992 0,979 0,957 0,924 0,880 0,820

0,985 0.970 0,946 0,919 0,881 0,831 0,769

0,965 0,944 0,917 0,884 0,842 0,791 0.727

0,942 0,918 0,888 0,852 0,809 0.757 0,693

0,921 0,894 0,862 0,800 0,780 0,728 0,664

0,sOo 0,872 0,839 0.779 0,755 0,703. 0,640

0,881 0,852 0,818 0.759 0,733 0,681 0,619

,
0,528 0,438 0,314 0,ooa 0,514 0,425 0,305 0,000 0,501 0,414 0,296 0,OOO 0,489 0,404 0,289 0,000 0,479 0,395 0,282 0,000

0,864 0,833 0,799 0,742 0,714 0,662 0,601 0,470 0,387 0.277 0,000

0,847 0,817 0,782 0,727 0,697 0,645 0,585

0,833 0.801 0.766 0,712 0,682 0,631 0,571

0,819 0,787 0752 0,7OO 0,668 0,617 0.559

0,806 0,774 0,739 0,688 0,655 0,605 0.547

0,794 0,753 0,727 0.677 0,644 0,594 0,537

0,783 0,752 0,716 0,667 0,633 0,584 0,527 0,461 0,380 0,271 0,000

0,773 0,741 0,706 0,667 0,624 0.575 0,519 0,453 0,373 0,266 0,OOO

0.764 0,732 0.697 0,658 0,615 0,566 0.511

094 O,S6 0998 1,cxl 0.452 0,325 0,OoO

0,739 0,628 0,426 0,OOO

0,687 0,579 0,422. 0,OOfJ

0.647 0,542 0,393 0,oOO

0,614 0,513 0,371 0,m

0.587 0.489 0,353 0,000

0,565 0,469 0,337 0,000

0,545

0.975 0,950 0,915 0,871 0,875 0,747 0,715 0,680 0,641 0,599 0,551 0,497 0,434 0,357 0,254 0,oOO

0,971 0,945 0,909 0,854 0,808 0.739 0,707 0.672 0,634 0,592 0,544 0,490 0428 0,352 0,251 0,oOo

IS 12370
IS0 6718

: 1993 : 1991

A.2.2.5

Discharge

coefficient

at subcritical

flow

P

is the metre.

density,

in

kilograms

per

cubic

In the case of subcritical flow conditions, the discharge coefficients caused by flow restrictions approximate with increasing pressure ratio n/p to those which have been demonstrated for incomnressible fluids. A.2.3 A.2.3.1 Incompressible Discharge fluids

When sizing for viscous relief, first establish what the size would be for non-viscous service to obtain a preliminary area. Then select the next largest size in calculating Rc. If the sizing formula shows that the area assumed in calulating Re was too small, then repeat the calculation with the next largest size of bursting disc device. A.2.3.2 Discharge coefflcierlt

capacity

For incompressible fluids as single-phase flow at the inlet and which do not flash to vapour (neither partly, nor completely) on venting, the following equation applies:

The discharge coefficient n is equal to 0.62 or as eslablished in the appt-opriate regulations or standards. A.2.4 Selection of the bursting disc device

4" =
which

1,6m3J;,dAPP
be rewritten 1 Q&G qm as

.(A13)

may

&==0,621

(A.14)

The actual cross-sectional flow at-ea ,f, of a bursting disc device shall be not less than the required minimum cross-sectional flow area A, calculated, where A,, which is also the discharge area after bursting or venting, is in square millimelres When the cross-sectional flow area of a bursting disc device being selected exceeds the inlet pipe flow area A,, then A, instead of ,4s is the controlling cross-sectional flow area. A.3 A.3.1 Method General 2

where

4

is the required minimum flow area of a bursting square millimetres;

cross-sectional disc device,

in

P .P

is a correction factor for liquid viscosity. Where the liquid has a viscosity less than or equal to that of water at 20 "C, this factor may be taken as 1.0. For greater viscosities, the discharge through a given bursting disc device will be reduced. The factor f, is related to the Reynolds number and can be obtained from figureA.l. Reynolds number Re may be established from the equation

A.3.1.1 This method takes into consideration the reversible and the irreversible changes in pressure throughout the discharge system (e.g. nozzle entry. inlet pipe, bursting disc device, discharge pipe. exit to a downstream vessel or to the atmosphere) A.3.1.2 For the analysis the following information device is required: of the discharge system relating to the bursting disc

Re = 0,313 4 _---%_
I' ; J&l where p is the liquid in Pascal second21; A/, dynamic viscosity,

a)

the pressure loss bursting or venting; area

(resistance

coefficient)

aflet

is the pressure difference on venting between the pressure system and the pressure at the end of the discharge system/the atmosphere, in bar;
The NOTE 13 be considered. effect of static head should

b) the discharge A.3.2 Establish A.3.2.1

after

bursting

or venting.

Compressible whether Subcritical

fluids is subcritical or critical

the flow flow

`7,
n

is the mass flow rate to be discharged, kilograms per hour; is the discharge coefficient type, as-per A.2.3.2; of the nozzle

in In the case of subcritical flow, assume a flow and calculate the changes in preSsure through discharge system. Use an iterative procedure rate the until

2)

1 Pa-s = 1 kgl(m.s)

24

IS 12370 Iso 6718

: 1993 : 1991

the flow rate, for which the calculated pressure drop is equal to or less than the pressure difference available, is found. A.3.2.2 Critical flow

method relevant to the particular wrong method can lead to serious

application. errors.

The

In the case of critical flow, carry out a detailed analysis for the entire discharge system in order to determine where the flow chokes and what the discharge capacity of the system is. The recommended method analysis is as follows. of carrying out the

The most accurate method of sizing is to use a computer program based on the basic fiuid flow equations and thermodynamic/physical property data. Such basic equations are given in, for example, fsl. A.3.3 Establish Reynolds number. A.3.3.1 Incompressible whether number fluids independent of the on the Reynolds

the flow is or dependent

4 b)

Determine the possible choke locations, at the entry to the equipment nozzle.

starling Flow independent of the Reynolds number

Assume a flow rate and then calculate the changes in pressure throughout the discharge system from the exit towards the entry into the equipment nozzle At each possible choke point the pressure. at which the velocity would be equal ?o the critical velocity can be calculated. In this way it can be established whether choking would actually occur.

In the case where the flow is independent of the Reynolds number (complete turbulence), the flow rate may be determined directly by using basic fluid flow formulae. A.3.3.2 Flow dependent on the Reynolds n6mber

Use an iterative procedure until the flow rate, for which the calculated pressure drop is equal to or less than the pressure.difference available, is found. There ate literature many sizing but care is methods necessary given in published in selecting the

In the case where flow is dependent on the Reynolds number, assume a flow rate and calculate the changes in pressure through the discharge system. Use an iterative procedure until the flow rate, for which the calculated pressure drop is equal to or less than the pressure difference available, is found.

25

IS 12370 : 1993 IS0 6716: 1991

.-

" r _ -. \ _
_
:
\o
0.

8
0

td

Figure A.1 -

Correction factors for liquid dynamic viscosity

26

Is12370:

1993

Is0 6718:1991

Annex B (informative) Derivation of compressibility factor %
critical

The compressibility factor Z at relieving conditions may be obtained from accurate /)-I'`/`data for the gas using the followlng equation: Z = 105pvM/R'I where A4 is the grams molar mass per kilomole; of the gas, in kilo-

the gas ftorn figure B 1. I', and /I~ being the lemperatrlre and pressure of the pure gas. EXAMPLE

The value of % for a gas relieving through a bursting disc device with a pressure of 100 bar gauge and a temperature of 70 "C is determined as follows Relieving pressure (in bar absolute) in bar absolute; gas constant Relieving (in kelvin) Critical Critical temperature I' 7 70 -t- 273 Y= 343 -= 50,5 bar absolute 7 298 K p = loot = 101 1

/' R

is the relieving `. ;`=

pressure.

8 ?A

untversal J/(kmol.K)]; temperature,

,, I
V

is the relieving

in kelvin;

pressure [pc temperature `/;
2

is the specific volume at the actual relieving pressure `and relieving temperature, in cubic metres per kilogram.

101 P Pr = -/`c = 50,5 = 7;_+_+ c From figure

In the absence of accurate data, the compressibility factor may be obtained from the reduced temperature 7; = T/7, and the reduced pressure pr = p/r, of

I,15

6 1. % = 0.5

27

IS12370:1993 ts06718:1991

1,3 1,2 1,l
1

i.

1
-I!

I t L

a-2

CL3 0,4 0,s

1

2

345

10

20

30

Reduced pressure, p, = J)//)~ P PC T r,
Figure

is the relieving pressure, is the critml pressure,

in bar absolute; ii7 bar absoiute; in kelvin; in kelvin.

is the relievmg temperature, is the critical temperature,
B."J --

Cbq.mssibility

f;rhw

I? a~ a function

of reduced pressure

and reducera temperature

28

Is 12370 : 1993 IS0 6718 : 1991

Annex C (informative)
Typical outline of subjects for inclusion in a quality assurance system

This annex gives general guidance for a manufacturer's quality system that covers design, manufacture, inspection, testing, marking and packaging.

priate regulations and national standards and should identify those design characteristics that are crucial to the safe and proper functioning of the bursting disc devices.

C.l

Scope of work C.6 Document control
should provide the latest appliall authorized inspection, test-

The written description of the quaMy system should include the scope and locations of the work to which the system is applicable.

C.2

Authority
and
in

and responsibility
responsibility
charge established. of

The manufacturer's quality system procedures which will ensure that cable documentation, including changes, is used for man(lfacture, ing, rnarking and packaging

The authority representative
should

of the management
the quality system

C.7

Purchase

control

be clearly

C.3

Organization

An organization chart showing the relationship between management and engineering, purchasing, inspection and quality control, manufacturing, should be prepared.
The purpose of this chart is to identify and associate the various organizational groups with the particular ftinctions for which they are responsible. These requirements are not intended to encroach on the manufacturer's right to establish and, from time to time, to alter whatever form of organization the manufacturer considers appropriate for his work.

The manufacturer should ensure that all purchased materials and services conform to specified requirements and that all purchase orders give full details of the material and services ordered.

C.8

Material

control

NOTE 14

Persons performing quality control functions should have well-defined responsibility, and the authority and the organizational freedom to identify quality control problems and to' initiate, recommend and provide solutions.

The manufacturer should include a system of receiving control which ensures that the material received is properly identified and that any required documentation is present, identified to the material, and verifies compliance with the specified requirements. The material control system should ensure that only the intended material is used in manufacture. The manufacturer should maintain control of material during the manufacturing process by a system which identifies inspection status of material throughout all stages of manufacture.

C.9

Manufacturing

control

C.4

Review

of the quality

system

The manufacturer should the continuous effectiveness

ensure and demonstrate of his quality system,

C.5

Design

control

The manufacturer shoilld ensure that manufacturing operations are carried out under controlled conditions utilizing documented work instructions. The manufacturer should provide for inspection, where appropriate, for each operation that affects quality, or shouid arrange an appropriate monitoring operation.

The manufacturer should establish procedures for controlling and verifying the design of the product in order to ensure that the specified requirements are met. The design and design verification should be assigned to qualified personnel having well-defined responsibility. The design should conform to appro-

C.10

Quality

control

plan

I

The manufacturer's quality control plan should describe the manufacturing operations, including inspections as indicated in this International Standard.

29

IS12370:1993 ISO6718:1991

C.ll

Welding

C.16 Calibration equipment

of measurement

and test

The quality control system should include provisions for ensuring that welding conforms to specified requirements. Welders should be qualifir:d to the appropriate standards and their qualification records should be made available to the inspection authority if requested.

The manufacturer should provide, control, calibrate and maintain inspection, measuring and test equipment to be used in verifying conformance to the specified requirements. Such calibration should be traceable to a national standard and calibration records should be maintained.

C.12

Non-destructive

examination C.17 Completed item inspection and test

Provision should be made to utilize non-destructive examination as necessary to ensure that materials and components comply with the specified requireNon-destructive examination operators ments. should be authorized by their employer and/or qualified by a national recognized body, and their zuthorizations/qualification records should be made available to the inspection authority if required.

The manufacturer should perform all inspections and tests on the finished product necessary to complete the evidence of full conformance to the specified requirements. Procedures for final inspection and test should ensure that all relevant inspection and testing, specified for quality control, have been carried out.

C.13

Non-conforming

materials/items C.18 Marking and packaging
establish procedures not in conformance for with

The manufacturer should controlling materials/items the specified requirements.

C.14

Heat treatment

The manufacturer should have a system to control marking and packaging to the extent necessary to ensure conformance with the specified requirements.

The manufacturer should maintain a system to ensure that all required heat treatments have been applied. Means should be provided by which heat treatment requirements can be verified.

C.19

Records

retention

C.15

Inspection

status

The manufacturer should maintain a system for identifying the inspection status of material during all stages of manufacture and should be able to distinguish between inspected and non-inspected material.

The manufacturer maintenance of manufacturer's achievement of operation of the be retained for agreed with the

should have a system for the inspection records, radiographs and data reports that describe the the required quality and the effective quality system. The recot-ds should a minimum period of 5 years or as purchaser

C.20

Sample

forms

The forms used in the quality control system and any detailed procedures for their use should be available for review. The written description should make reference to these forms.

30

IS 12370: IS0 6718:

1993 1991

Annex D (informative) Bibliography
[I] KRAUSE, E.

Ausfluflzahlen
Institut, on

von

Lochblenden,

[4]

BRAKER

and

MOSSMAN

Matheson
Gas

kas

Aerodynamisches [2) IUPAC Isotopic

20 December.1983. Atomic 1983. Oxford, 1984, Weights and

Book
1980.

1980. 6th

ed.

Matheson

Dafa Products,

Commission Abundances. elements. Pergamon

Atomic
Press,

weights

of the

[5]

SHAPIRO The dynamics and thermodynamics ot compressible fluid flow. Roland Press, Volume

1, 1953. [3]

Pure and Applied pp. 653-674.

Chemistry.

31
Printed PI Dee Kay Printers, New Delhi, India

( Continued

from second

cover )

The text of IS0 standard has been approved as suitable for publication without deviations. Certain conventions are, however, not identical to Standards. Attention is particularly drawn to the following: a) Wherever the words `International be read as `Indian Standard'. Standard' appear referring

as Indian Standard those used in Indian they should in

to this standard,

b) Comma ( , ) has been used as a decimal marker in the International Standard while Indian Standards, the current practice is to use point ( . ) as the decimal marker.

In this adopted standard, reference appears to IS0 9001. The Indian Standard IS 14001 : 1988 `Quality systems - Model for quality assurance in design/development, production, installation and servicing', which is identical with IS0 9001 : 1987, is to be substituted in its place. For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard in complied with the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )`. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

Standard Mark

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

fhreau
BIS is

of Indian Standards

a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.
promote Copyright

No part of these publications may be reproduced BIS has the copyright of all its publications. in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director or grade designations. ( Publications ), BIS.
Revision of Indian Standards

Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook and `Standards Monthly Additions'. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following reference:
Dot :

No. HMD 17 ( 0130 )
Amendments Issued Since Publication

.Amend No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN Headquarters:

STANDARDS 110002 Telegrams ( Common
: Manaksanstha

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75

to all

Offices )

Regional

Offices t

Telephone 331 01 31 I 331 13 75 37 84 99, ( 37 86 26, 53 38 43, 1 53 23 84 235 02 16, 1 235 15 19, 37 85 61 37 86 62 53 16 40 235 04 42 235 23 15

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/l4 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. 1. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern Southern Western : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036

: C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113
: Manakalaya,

E9 MiDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) 632 92 95, 632 78 58 BOMBAY 400093 632 78 91, 632 78 92 Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. Printed at
Printwell Printera.

Aligarh

India

