( Reaffirmed 2001 )

fS : 8969 - 1978

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF IMPULSE AND ELECTRONIC MASTER AND SLAVE ELECTRIC CLOCK SYSTEMS
Power Installation
Chairman
SHRI

and Maintenance

Sectional

Committee,

ETDC

20

Representing Central Electricity Authority, New Delhi

K.S.

SUBRAHMANYAM

Mem hers SHRI B. C. ALVA Karnataka Electricity Board, Bangalore SHRI T. N. R. RAO ( Alternate) SHRI V. S. BHA~IA Siemens India Ltd, Bombay SHRI M. A. NOORUDIN ( Alternate ) SHRI M. D. BHALERAO Maharashtra State Electricity Board, Bombay DIRECTOR OF RBSEARCH ( Alternate ) SHRI K. K. BOSE The Calcutta Electric Supply Corporation Ltd, Calcutta SHRI A. CHATTERJEE ( Alternate ) SHRI K. V. CEAUBAL The Federation of Electricity Undertakings of India, Bombay SHRI K. S. JOSHI ( Alternate ) SRRI RANES RAY CHAIJDHURY Engineering Construction Corporation Ltd, Bombay SHRI L. E. D'CRUZ ( Alternate ) CHIEF ELECTRICAL E N G I N E E R, Rail;;lii Board ( Ministry of Railways ), iYew NORTHERN RAILWAY JOINT DIRIXC~O~ STANDARDS ( ELECTRICAL IV RDSO ) ( Alternate ) SHRI B. L. DESHPANDE Electrical Engineer to the Government of Maharashtra, Bombay SHRI DEVENDER NATH Larsen & Toubro Ltd, Bombay SHRI I. C. JOSEPH ( Alternate) SHRI K. K. GUPTA Jyoti Ltd, Vadodara SHRI K. W. DHARMADHIEARI ( Alternate ) ( Continued on page 2.) @ INDIAN Copyright 1979 INSTITUTION

STANDARDS

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 8969 - 1978
( Continuedfiompage 1)
Mem hers SHRI MOHAMMED HAMEED Representing Chief Electrical Inspector Tamil Nadu, Madras to the Government of

INSPECTOR ELECTRICAL TECHNICAL, GOVT OF TAMIL NADU ( Altehate ) Rural Electrification Corporation Ltd, New Delhi SHRI R. D. JAIN Central Public Works Department, New Delhi SHRI V. A. KRISRNAMURTHY SURVEYOR OF WORKS SrrRI S( p;;;;n.;SI ( Alternate ) Tariff Advisory Committee ( Insurance Association . . of India ), Bombay SHRI S. N. BANDYOPADRYAY ( Alternate ) ELECTRIC ) Central Electricity Authority, New Delhi MEMBER ( HYDRO DIRECTOR ( HED-1 ) ( Alternate ) Bharat HeavvI Electricals Ltd. , Bhonal SHRI M. L. MITTAL SHRI R. C. NANDERKAR ( Alternate I ) SHRI V. B. BHATIA ( Alternate II ) Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters SHRI K. N. NADGIR SHRI R. S. KUNWAR ( Alternate ) Kerala State Electricity Board, Trivandrum SHRI K. SUDRAKARAN NAIR SHRI R. ANANTHASUBRAMONIA IYER ( Alternate ) Tamil Nadu Electricity Borad, Madras SARI K. NARAYANASWAMY SHRI S. PADMAW~BHAN I Alternate j Tata Consulting Engineers, Bombay SRRI V. V. PARANJPE SHRI R. C. BAJPAI (Alternate) The Fact Engineering and Design Organization, SHRI K. P. R. PILLAI Udyogamandal ( Kerala ) SHRI C. R. R. MENON ( Alternate *) Delhi Electric Supply Undertaking, New Delhi SHRI I. C. SANGER SHRI P. S. SAWRNEY ( Alternate ) Chief Electrical Inspector to the Government of SHRI SARDUL SINGH Punjab, Patiala SENIOR ASSISTANT TO TEE CHIEF ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR ( Alternate 1 NGEF Ltd, Bangalore SHRI K. G. SHANMUKHAPPA SHRI A. N. SRIVATHSA (Alternate ) Chief Electrical Inspector to the Govt of Kerala, DR T. C. SIDHAN Trivandrum Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi SHRI G. N. THADANI SHRI M. K. DAS ( Alternate) The Bombay Electric Supply and Transport SHRI D. M. VATCHA Undertaking, Bombay _. SRRIB. M. SAMANT (Alternate) SHRI S. P. SACHDEV, Director ( Elec tech ) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-o&a Member)

Secretaries Deputy SHRI R. C. JAIN Director ( Elec tech ), ISI

SHRI K..GANESH Assistant Director ( Elec tech ), IS1

2

IS : 8969 I 1978

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF IMPULSE AND ELECTRONIC MASTER AND SLAVE ELECTRIC CLOCK SYSTEMS 0. FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 17 October 1958, after the draft finalized by the Code of Practice for Power Installation and Maintenance Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council. 0.2 This code is intended to serve as a guide to engineers, contractors and users to ensure personal safety against electric shock, safety against the effects of excessive temperature and fire, and reliable operation in the installation of electric clock systems. 0.3 Apart from the information concerning electric clocks themselves, this code also gives additional information regarding power supply requirements of various clock systems.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard covers installation system of both electronic and impulse
1.2 Time recording equipment from the scope of this code. and and type. maintenance time of electric are clock

audible

system

excluded

NOTE 1 -The expression electric clock system here denotes a system controlled from a central source forming part of the system. NOTE 2 - It does not fall within the scope of this code to make recommendation in details regarding the type or design of the various appliances that form the principal components of impulse/electronic clock systems nor does it fall within the scope of this code to make recommendations regarding the standard of performance of such equipment.

2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose
of this code, the following definitions shall apply.

3

IS : 8969 - 1978 2.1 Impulse Master Clock System driven by impulses derived

2.1.1 Impulse Clock/Slave Clock -A clock from a master clock or impulse generator. 2.1.2 Impulse Generatorllmpulse Repeator nous motor driven mechanism to operate impulses for the control of impulse clocks.

A device which uses a synchrocontacts for the generation of

2.1.3 Master Clock - A clock which by opening and closing of contacts, generates impulses at accurate intervals for the control of' impulse clock. 2.2 Electronic Master Clock System produces them. ac

2.2.1 Master Clock -A solid state electronic unit which supply at constant frequency for slave clocks and also controls 2.2.2 Slave Clock operating on constant A clock which operates frequency supply.

by a synchronous

motor

2.2.3 Rated Vlotage - The voltage limits assigned to the clocks by the master and is marked on them ( for example 240 volt f 10 percent ). 2.2.4 Rated Frequency - The designed and marked on it. frequency of supply for which the clock is

2.3 Functional Insulation - The insulation functioning of the clock and for basic protection

necessary for the proper against electric shock.

Insulation ) - An ( Protective 2.4 Supplementary Insulation independent insulation provided in addition to the functional insulation, in order to ensure protection against electric shock in the event of a failure of the functional insulation. 2.5 Double Insulation - Insulation and supplementary insulation. comprising both functional insulation

2.6 Reinforced Insulation - An improved functional insulation with such mechanical and electrical qualities that it provides the same degree of protection against electric shock as double insulation. 2.7 Double Insulated used throughout. Clocks Clocks in which double insulation is

2.8 All Insulated Clocks - Clocks having a durable and substantially continuous enclosure of insulating material which envelops all metal parts, with the exception of small parts, such as name plates, screws and rivets which are isolated from live parts by insulation at least equivalent to reinforced insulation.

IS : 8969 - 1978 3. BXCHANGE OF' INFORMATION

3.1 Before preparation of plans for the installation of clock system, information should be exchanged between the purchaser, the architect and the engineer responsible for its procurement, installation, operation and maintenance so as to correctly ascertain the location of control equipment, distribution points, conditions under which the clock system will operate On the basis of these and initial and final requirements of the building. informations plans should be prepared showing the following:
a) Details b) The of the installation proposed; for the central equipment; for the wiring; and accommodation required

c) The chases, ducts and conduits, etc, required d) Size of slave clock and its characteristics. 4. GENERAL

REQUIREMENTS

and Appliances - All materials, fittings, appliances, etc, used in the installation shall conform to relevant Indian Standard specifications wherever they exist, and in the case where they do not exist, the items shall be approved by competent authority.
The slave IS : 5160-1969". clock of master electronic clock unit shall conform to

4.1 Material

4.2 Radio Interference - Interference master clock contacts and relay contacts radio interference.

suppressors should be fitted to so that the system may not cause

4.3 Earthing - Earthing should be provided wherever mentioned in this code in accordance with the provisions laid down in IS : 3043-1966t. 5. DESIGN

CONSIDERATION -The
clocks ingress should of dust, be designed to take into account the

5.1 General
following

aspects: To prevent Fitted with easily readable dials. This is achieved when the surface is non-reflective and when the hands and numeral present a marked contrast to their background. In case of centre second clocks the second hand can be made distinct by making it of say red colour and also extending the same up+to the graduations. The size and spacing of the numerals should be such that the dial does not appear over full.
synchronous clocks.

a)

b)

*Specification for mains-operated TCode of practice for earthing.

5

IrS: 8969 - i978
c) The wires which connect the clock to the electric means for fixing the dials are concealed. circuit and the

d) The clock cases accord with the local decoration, but in such a manner that the outline of the case contrasts acceptably with the immediate background. e) Reasonably silent operation, having regard to their example, in location like radio stations the clocks microphone silent type. 5.2 Principle of Operation location, for should be of

5.2.1 Impulse Master Clock System - In this system, the electrical impulses are transmitted by master clock to slave clocks. The advantages of such a system is that correct and uniform time is indicated throughout the installation and apart from that, the delicate mechanism necessary for The slave accurate time keeping are concentrated to the master clock. clocks may be fitted where ordinary clock work would be out of question in positions, because of the temperature variation, moisture and vibration. Fig. 1 shows a typical arrangement for this system.

TRICKLE CHARGE

ac SUPPLY FIG.

1 IMPULSE MASTER CLOCK 6

SYSTEM

IS:8969

-1978

5.2.1.1 Master clock - The function of master clock is to transmit by means of make and break contacts, correct periodic impulses throughout the system which it controls. The interval between the impulses shall be determined by the requirement of the system and in some installation the impulses of different intervals may be transmitted by one master clock.
The duration of each impulse shall be sufficient to actuate satisfactorily the various units comprising the system, the necessary electrical energy is derived from primary and secondary cells. The master clock is provided with a fully compensated seconds beat pendulum capable for being regulated at site to keep time within one second in 24 hours. The retardation or advancement of the clock can be done by simple adjustment on the pendulum. 5.2.1.2 Mains driven impulse generatorAn alternative method of generating periodic electric impulses is by means of ac mains driven synchronous motor. Impulses of the required intervals and of suitable duration are obtained through a train of gears controlling cam-operated contacts. This method of operation is dependent upon the mains for its accuracy and continuity. 5.2.2 Electronic Master Clock System 5.2.2.1 Master clock control unit - This unit comprises of a silicon controlled rectifier operated parallel inverter circuit which converts the dc input to an ac output voltage of up to 240 volts ( maximum ), 50 Hz, the voltage and frequency being controlled very accurately. As shown in Fig. 2, the dc supply for the inverter is obtained from ac mains through a rectifier-cum battery charger unit or from a standby battery in case of mains failure. The ac voltage is stepped down, rectified and filtered to The standby obtain stabilised dc supply and is fed to the inverter circuit. batteries are kept on float charge to ensure that the input to inverter and other control circuits is not interrupted in case of ac main failure.
NOTE-For the master clock control unit the output voltage is permitted up to a maximum of 240 volts. However, to reduce -the risk of electric shocks, shortcircuits due to moisture, and to facilitate easy wiring and maintenance, safe lower voltages are preferred.

II

j

1 SINGLE

PHASE

I

FIG.

2

OF MASTER CLOCK UNIT BLOCK DIAGRAM
7

IS : 8969 - 1978 5.2.2.2 Trolly rack -The trolly rack is used for the distribution of stabilized output from the inverter to various clocks. It also provides automatic changeover to ac mains in case of inverter failure. The changeover is annunciated by an audible alarm and a visual indication. The layout is of the inverter is controlled by shown in Fig. 3. The output frequency quartz crystal oscillator. There is also a provision for changing the frequency of the input signal to the clocks by means of manual switch. This enables the simultaneous adjustment of the clocks, if the need arises.
dc OR FROM BATTERY

RECTIFIER

FIG.3 BLOCKDIAGRAM OF INVERTER
5.3 Insulations of Clocks - The electric clock system may be classified according to the insulation provided as follows: a) Class IClocks having at least functional insulation throughout and provided with an earthing terminal or earthing contact. Class I clocks may have parts with double insulation or reinforced insulation, or parts operating at safety extra-low voltage. b) Class IIClocks with double insulation throughout and without insulation provision and/or reinforced for earthing.

1) Insulation-Encased Class IIClocks having a durable and substantially continuous enclosure of insulating material which envelopes all metal parts, with the exception of small parts, such as name plates, screws and rivets, which are isolated from live parts by insulation at least equivalent to reinforced insulation. 2) Metal-Encased Class IIClocks having a substantially continuous metal enclosure, in which double insulation is used throughout, except for those parts where reinforced insulation is used, because the application of double insulation is manifestly impracticable.

s

l8 t 8969 - 1978
NOTE 1 - Clocks could be a combination and still be called a Class II clock. part of types specified in (1) and (2) above a

NOTE 2 - The enclosure of an insulation-encased or the whole of the supplementary insulationor

Class II clock may form of the reinforced insulation. and/or contact, operating reinforced it is deemed at safety

NOTE 3- If a clock with double msulation throughout has an earthing terminal or earthing Class I. NOTE 4-Class voltage. 5.4 II clocks may have parts

insulation to be of extra-low

Protection Against Electric Shock - The enclosure of the clocks shall have no openings piving access to live parts or functional insulated parts or functional insulation other than the openings necessary fbr the use and working of the clocks. Where such openings are necessary, sufficient protection against accidental contact with live parts shall be provided. 5.5 Power Supply -To system are as follows: essential feature of a power supply to a clock

a) Maintenance at all times of a voltage adequate for the operation of all impulse/electronic clocks and other devices included in the system, and b) Continuity of supply.

5.5.1 To ensure the necessary continuity of supply, the direct connection of the clock system to the supply mains is not recommended. Batteries The capacity of a battery should be at least should always be provided. sufficient to supply the installation for 48 hours and should in no case be It should be installed in a accessible position. less than 10 ampere hours. 5.5.2 Where the supply is ac, the use of a single battery on constant trickle charge is recommended, means being provided for charging at a higher rate when necessary. This method of charging is particularly suitable for impulse clock system. 5.5.3 Where the main supply is dc, two batteries should be provided with suitable changeover switch, arrangement being made for alternate charging and use of batteries. The supply mains should be terminated on a switch and fuse of adequate capacity to meet the estimated load. 5.6 Circuit Arrangements

5.6.1 Series Arrungement - In simple installations impulse clocks designed to operate at the same current may be connected in one series circuit, with a battery having a sutlicient voltage to ensure satisfactory operation. In more complex installation the impulse clock may be arranged in number of series circuits each of which is connected to a pair of contact on a relay

9

IS : 8969 - 1978
which is operated from contacts of master clock, installation more than one relay may be required. and in very large

5.6.2 Parallel Arrangement - Impulse clock may be connected in parallel with each other and with other devices included in the system, provided they are all designed to operate at same voltage. In such a system the number of impulse clocks shall be limited as to avoid overloading the contacts of master clocks or relays. This may necessitate the division of the system into a number of parallel circuits, each connected to a separate pair of relay contacts; when the number of such contacts is considerable, several relays may be required, each connected to a separate contact of a master relay operated in turn from a master clock contacts. In electronic master clock system the groups of clocks connected from each channel are shown in Fig. 4.

q

--_ ---

I
MASTER CLOCK CONTROL UNIT

FIG. 4

LAYOUT DIAGRAM FOR A TVPICAL MASTER CLOCK UNIT

6. INSTALLATION

6.1 General 6.1.1 Placement of Orders for Central Equi'ment - For large installation the equipment may have to be specially manufactured and should be ordered at an early date to ensure its availability.
10

IS : 8969 - 1978
6.1.2 Installation of Central Equipment -Work may commence on the installation of the central equipment at any stage of building work, provided that all buildin<g work in the room concerned, including decoration, is finished and that the room is dry and free from vibration and dust. Electric light and power should be available at the commencement of installation. Works of other contractors likely to give rise to dust, for concrete mixing, should not be carried out in the immediate example, vicinity after installation of the central equipment has begun. 6.1.3 6.2 The wiring shall be done in accordance with IS : 732-1963*.

Location

of Clocks placed in a location and in particular, free interference. Wide requires to be readily be preferably housed

6.2.1 Master Clock - The master clock should be which is reasonably free from dust, damp and fumes from vibration and any other form of mechanical variation of temperature should also be avoided. It accessible for maintenance at all times. It should in a room centrally located in a building.

The main room should not be less than 2.4 x 3-6 m. It may be sufficient for housing two master clocks, changeover switch, battery charging equipment, impulse repeaters ( in case of impulse clock ), etc. Space for one attendant with necessary tools and lo:q. book shall be provided in this room. A section of the room shall be utlhzed for placing batteries. This portion should be suitably glazed with acidproof tiles. Water connection and suitable drain for waste water shall also be provided. Provisions shall also be made to exhaust acid fumes. 6.2.2 Slave Clock be considered:' For slave clock location the following points should

a) The number of dials and their position should be so arranged that readability from all positions, and in all conditions of lighting, is assured. b) The location and size of clocks may frequently depend upon aesthetic requirements, but from the point of view of readability a ratio of 0.30 m diameter of dial to every 2.7 m of height is acceptable. The following height for different clocks are adequate. Diameter of Clock Height from Floor 0.30 m 0.45 m 0.60 m 2.70 m 3.30 m 4.50 m

*Code of practice for electrical wiring installations ( system voltage not exceeding 650 volts ) ( revised ). 11

is : 8969 - is'18
c) The design, colouring and finish of the casing of the clock should be in accordance with the general scheme of decoration, but the dial should be conspicuous.
NOTE the accuracy For dusty environmental conditions care should be taken of the slave clack is not affected by the presence of dust. to ensure that

6.3

Work

at Site -

The works to be done on site consist of the following: accommodation during the central building work, and and other apparatus in cabling and wiring, equipment, clocks

a) Structural b) Internal c) Fitting

and external and connecting

d) Fittings and connecting at individual points. 6.3.1 mind: Structural Accommodation

the impulse -The

following

points should be borne

The general requirements are outlined in 3.1 and 6.1. To minimise the amount of alteration to complete structure, it is important that careful attention should be given during building construction to the provisions of chases, ducts, holes, laying of conduit, cable, etc. 6.3.2 Wiring - It is recommended that circuit wiring shall be connected to terminals fixed immediately adjacent to the impulse/slave clock. In laying out the wiring for large building, it may be desirable to arrange wiring and fit the terminals in suitable position so that the circuit may be divided for localization of faults or the isolation of defective section. All terminals shall be clearly marked for the purpose of identification. The wiring shall be done in accordance with IS : 732-1963". If the wiring is done in ducts or trunkings used for other communication services, the requirements of 4.2 should be complied. The wiring for the clock system shall not be done in ducts used for power circuits. Where metallic ducts or conduits are used it is necessary that permanent electrical conductance and metallic rigidity is obtained. Special conductor should be provided to keep it distinctive from other electric wiring. It is also recommended that conduit may also be colour coded to protect against unauthorised tempering by other services. Ample draw-in boxes should be provided and all tees and bends should be of inspection type, where these are located under floor, access shall be provided by small section of screwed floor boards or other suitable floor traps. To avoid disturbances of floor covering, the conduit or duct should be located at side of corridors.
*Code of practice 650 volts ) (mised). for electrical wiring installations (system Loltage not exceeding

12

IS : 8969 - 1978
When multi-core cables are used, additional cores may be provided as spares depending upon the requirements of the installations. Cables should either be connected direct to the clock terminals or in a conduit box from which adequate flexible connections to the clock shall be required. Socket outlet and plugs should not be provided clocks. The threaded/screwless multi-pin connectors ensure proper connection. for connecting the may be used to

6.3.2.1 Fittings of slave clocks -The body of slave clock is usually provided with an internal bracket so that the clock may be hung upon a screw or stud firmly inserted into the wall. 7. INSPECTION

AND TESTING

may be made, where desired, for general 7.1 General -Arrangement inspection including operational test to be carried out in the presence of purchaser's representative in the factory. The installation after completion should be inspected to ensure that the method, material and components used conforms to the relevant specifications, and that record, plans and operating instructions have been supplied by the manufacturer. 7.2 Insulation tion resistance Test -A test should be made at 500 volts dc and insulaof the complete installation shall be measured as follows: of impulse installation clock system - The insulation should not be less than 1 MQ. resistance of

a) In case complete b)

In case of electronic clock system the following parts:

The tests shall be made between

1) Live parts and accessible metal parts, metal foil on external part of insulating material and shafts of handles, knob, grip, etc, all connected together. As far as possible, disconnec2) Live parts of different polarity. tion should be made without damaging the appliances. 3) Metal enclosure or metal covers, lined with insulating and metal foil on the inner surface. The insulation resistance functional insulation. For resistance protective insulation shall not be less than Requirements should be made generally shall not be less than materials 1 MQ for

and reinforced insulation, 10 MQ insulation.

the insulation

7.3 Performance the installation

and functional test of - An electrical to ensure that it shall give satisfactory

13

IS : 8969 - 1978
service under the extremes of working conditions likely to be experienced. When the work is an extention of an existing installation the latter should be thoroughly tested to ensure that it shall function satisfactorily in conjunction with the new equipment. The time keeping of the clock variations in voltage supply while 5" from the normal position. 8. MAINTENANCE 8.1 Personnel - The efficient maintenance of electric clock installation is generally a matter of specialized knowledge which cannot be reliably imparted in a short period, even to personnel who may be otherwise skilled in electrical installation and maintenance. Either a maintenance contract may be made with the manufacturer or any employee of the user with suitable experience of electrical equipment can probably have special training with the manufacturers, supplier or contractors to deal with the simple day to day maintenance. 8.2 Removing or Adding Slave Clock in a Circuit-In case of impulse clock system to remove a clock from a circuit in operation, the lead should be disconnected frotn the clock terminals immediately after an and connected together before the next impulse is impulse is received, received, otherwise, clock may lose time and be put out of state. An additional clock may be inserted in a circuit in similar fashion. shall be unaffected by f 10 percent the clock is in any position within

8.3 Maintenance Prior to Commissioning - It may sometimes not be possible to commission the installation immediately after completion, arrangement should be made for maintenance of installation prior to commissioning, and precaution should be taken against damage from damp and other causes. 8.4 Log Book-For large installation, a log book should be kept in which details of all faults or routine maintenance of system should be carried out at intervals in accordance with the manufacturers instructions/expert advice. From the log books performance of the system and quality of maintenance may be seen by the manufacturer or the engineer concerned. It should be monitored and corrected periodically. 8.5 Instructions tions including - Clock system shall be provided with necessary precaution to be taken for its proper use. shall furnish a list of spares, instruc-

8.6 The manufacturer/supplier maintenance.

for two years

14

tkbkAN ON
CODES

s+kANr)ARbS

OF PRACTiCE

FOR

POWER

INSTALLATION

AND MAINTENANCE

IS: 732-1963 900-1965 1866-1961 1885 ( Part 1865 (Part 18 16-1967 2032 ( Part 2274-1963 2309-1969 2551-1963 3043- 1966 3072-1975 3106-1966 3914-1967 4648-1968 5124-1969 5216-1969 5578-1970 5613 ( Part Code of practice for electrical exceeding 650 volts ) ( revised ) Code of practice ( revised) Code of practice for installation wiring installations (system voltage not

and maintenance of insulating oil

of induction

motors

for maintenance

XXX )-1971 Electrotechnical vocabulary: sion and distribution of electrical energy XXXVII electricity Code
revision )

Part XXX Part

Overhead XXXVII

transmisTariffs for
(Jirst

)-1974

Electrotechnical for installation

vocabulary:

of practice

and maintenance

of transformers

XI )-1970 installations

Graphical symbols used in electrotechnology: in buildings for electrical wiring installations (system

Part XI Electrical voltage exceedagainst

Code of practice ing 650 volts )

Code of practice for the protection lightning (Jitst revision ) Danger notice plates for earthing for installation Code of practice Code of practice revision )

of buildings

and allied structures

and

maintenances and motor

of switchgear maintenance starters

(jirst

Code of practice for ( voltage not exceeding

selection, installation 650 volts ) of ac induction

of fuses not

Code of practice for selection exceeding 1 000 volts ) Guide for electrical

( voltage

layout in residential

buildings of ac induction work motor

Code of practice for installation and maintenance starters ( voltage not exceeding 1 000 volts ) Guide for safety procedures Guide for marking and practices conductors in electrical of insulated

Code of practice for design, installation and maintenance of I/Set 1 )-1970 overhead power lines: Part I Lines up to and including 11 kV, Section 1 Design Code of practice for design, installation and maintenance I/Set 2 J-1971 of overhead power lines: Part I Lines up to and including 11 kV, Section 2 Installation and maintenance Code of practice for design, installation and maintenance II/Set 1 )-1976 of overhead power lines: Part II Lines above 11 kV and up to and including 220 kV, Section 1 Design Code of practice for design, installation and maintenance II/Set 2 )-I976 of overhead power lines: Part II Lines above 11 kV up to and including 220 kV, Section 2 Installation and maintenance

5613 (Part

5613 ( Part

5613 ( Part

5728-1970 5908-1970 5987-1970 7689-1974 7733-1975 7752 ( Part 7987-1976 8061-1976 8437-1977 8884-1978 8923-1978 8969-1978

Guide for short circuit Method of measurement Code of practice

calculationS of electrical installation ( voltage in buildings not exceeding 1 000 V) of switches

for selection

Guide for the control of undesirable static electricity Code of practice for electrical wiring installation in hospitals Guide for improvement of power factor I )-1975 Part I Low and medium supply voltages Guide for selection Code of practice Code of practice Warning Code of electronic symbol of high voltage circuit-breakers and maintenance of electric of service lines for design installation for the installation for dangerous in consumer installation:

Guide on effects of currents

passing through human body bells and call system of impulse and voltages and maintenance clock systems

practice for installation master and slave electric

