**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 10830 (1984) : Gymnastic equipment-Landing mats and 
surfaces for exercises-Determination of hardness and impact 
damping [PCD 22: Sports Goods] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC 685'643'6 : 620*1 78*1 53*2 : 725'852 



IS : 10830- 1984 
ISO 5903 - 1981 




indlan Standard ( Reaffirmed 2002 ) 

SPECIFICATION FOR GYMNASTIC EQUIPMENT — 

LANDING MATS AND SURFACES FOR FLOOR EXERCISES — 

DETERMINATION OF HARDNESS AND IMPACT DAMPING 

( ISO Title : Gymnastic Equipment — Landing Mats and Surfaces 

for Floor Exercises— Determination of Hardness and Impact Damping ) 



National Foreword 

this Indian Standard, which is identical with ISO 5903 - 1981 'Gymnastic equipment — Landing 
mats and surfaces for floor exercises — Determination of hardness and impact damping* issued by the 
International Organization for StandardizatiogilSO ), was adopted by Indian Standards Institution on 
the recommendation of the Sports Goods Sectional Committee and approved by the Consumer Products 
and Medical Instruments Division Council, 

Comma (,) has been used as a decimal marker while in Indian Standards the current practice is 
to use a point ( . ) as the decimal marker. 

Wherever the words 'International Standard' appear referring to this standard, they should be read 
as 'Indian Standard'. 

In this Indian Standard the following International Standards are referred to whose corresponding 
Indian Standards are also given. Read the corresponding Indian Standard wherever a reference to an 
International Standard appears : 



International Standard 



ISO 5905-1980 
Gymnastic equipment — 
Landing mats ( 2000 mm 
X 1 250 mm x 60 mm ) 



ISO 5906-1980 
Gymnastic equipment — 
Surfaces for floor 
exercises — Mats 



ISO 5907-1980 
Gymnastic equipment 
Surfaces for floor 
exercises — Boards 



Corresponding 
Indian Standard 

IS: 10831-1984 
Specification for 
gymnastic equipment — 
Landing mats ( 2000 mm 
X 1250 mm x 60 mm ) 

IS: 10832-1984 
Specification for 
gymnastic equipment — 
Surfaces for floor 
exercises — mats 

IS: 10833-1984 
Specification for 
gymnastic equipment — 
Surfaces for floor 
exercises — Boards 



Degree of Correspondance 



Identical 



Identical 



Identical 



Adopted 23 January 1984 



O July 1984, fSI 



Qr 2 



INDIAN STAW0ARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN. 9 BAKADUR SKAK ZAFAR MARQ 

NEW DELHI 110002 



IS : 10830 - 1984 
ISO 5903 - 1981 



1 Scope and field of application 

This Internatronal Standard specifies a method 
for the determination of the hardness and impact 
damping of gymnastic landing mats and surfaces 
( mats and boards ) for floor exercises for use in 
competitions and trainirig, in order to 

a) ensure that for competitions and training, 
mats and surfaces for floor exercises are used, 
the hardness and Impact damping of which lie 
in a specified range; 

b) reduce the risk of injury to the gymnasts. 

NOTE — These properties shall be considered as being the 
essential characteristics for the use of these products. 



2 References 

ISO 5905, Gymnastic equipmant — Landing mat, 

ISO 5906, Gymnastic equipmant — Surfaces for 
floor exercises — Mats. 

ISO 5907, Gymnastic equipment — Surfaces for 
floor exercises — Boards, 



3 Principle 

Dropping, from a specified height, a test piece on 
to the horizontally placed landing surface of the 
gyrnnastic landing mat or surface for floor exerci- 
ses. Recording of the position of the test piece 
after sinking in and rebounding. 



4 Apparatus 

4.1 Test device, the design of which is at the 
option of the tester, however, the frame of the 
device shall not influence the test result. 



4.2 A cylindrical test piece made of steel, 
having a mass of 10 kg and a diameter of 100 mm, 
positioned at a height /? = 400 mm above Ihe 
landing surface of the gymnastic landing mat or 
surface for floor exercises. The external edge of 
the rebound surface of the cylindrical test piece 
being tounded with a radius /? = 6 ± 1 mm. 

4.3 Registering device, mechanical or electroni- 
cal, for recording the greatest depth of penetration 
P and the greatest height of rebound /?. 

The field of fluctuation of the six individual values 
at one measuring point shall not exceed 3 mm for 
the depth of penetration P and shall rot exceed 
10 mm for the height of rebound /?. 

4.4 Levelling indicator. 
5 Procedure 



Carry out 
20 ± 3°C. 



the tests at an ambient temperature of 



Place the parts to be tested on a solid, flat and 
horizontal floor, such as a concrete floor at least 
80 mm thick. 

Place the test device (4.1), by means of a levelling 
indicator (4.4), on the parts to be tested in such a 
way that the guide tube for the test piece (4.2) is 
vertical. 

Record, by means of registering device (4.3), P 
and /?. 

Carry out eight measurements for each measuring 
point. The position and number of the measuring 
points are indicated in ISO 5905, ISO 5906 and 
ISO 5907. 

The first two measurements at each measuring 
point shall not be used. 

Take the mean values of the other six measure- 
ments and base the total mean value on them. 

Record P on the measuring diagram to the nearest 
0'5 mm and R to the nearest 1 mm. 



IS : 10830- 1984 
ISO 5903-1981 



6 Expression of results 

The following values shall be recorded and calcu- 
lated respectively : 

P the greatest depth of penetration in milli- 
metres of the test piece into the landing mat 
and on the surface for floor exercises respecti- 
vely, taken as the value for hardness; 

R the greatest height of rebound, in milli- 
metres, of the test piece taken as the value for 
impact damping; 

N the number of rebounds of the test piece 
after first rebound on the mat, also taken as a 
value for impact damping. 

NOTE — In determining the number N of rebounds, only 
those with a height of at least 10 mm should be counted. 

Instead of direct measuring, N may be given by 
the formula 




where 



400 mm; 
is the largest height of rebound, in 



7 Notes on procedure 

7.1 On the basis of extensive practical experiments 
on gymnastic landing mats and surfaces for floor 
exercises (mats and boards) the criteria for the 
characteristics of these products and the appro- 
priate test methods have been drawn up. These 
are described in this International Standard. 

7.2 It was found that, above all, hardness (or 
softness) and impact damping are the decisive 
characteristic qualities for gymnastic landing mats 
and surfaces for floor exercises. The test method 
is based on the analysis of movement during 
landing and ihe evaluation of the energy level. 
The test piece having a mass of 10 kg and falling 
from a height h of 400 mm, causes about the same 
transfer of energy into the landing surface as the 
gymnast. 

7.3 As a function of, for example the thickness of 
the gymnastic landing mat, the greatest depth of 
penetration P is a measure of the time which is at 
the disposal of the gymnast for landing. On the 
other hand, the greatest height of rebound R 
depends on the design of the gymnastic landing 
mat and measures the deformation hollow which 
increases with the decrease in /?. This is important 
for ensuring a safe landing for the gymnast and 
enables him to avoid incorrect landing on the 
surface, directly before the phase of highest con- 
sumption of energy and enables him to avoid 
injury. 



R 

millimetres; 

M is the minimum height of rebound, in 
millimetres. 

NOTE —The square brackets indicate that when the value 
for the expression in brackets lies between two integral 
numbers, the smaller intergral number shall be taken for /V. 
With h =- 400 mm and A7 = 1 mm the result is: 



L5,99-ln R] 



In the case of different results for N between the 
measured and calculated value, the measured value 
shall be taken. 

The coefficient of impact damping,^, as an addi- 
tijonal measure for impact damping, is given by 
the formula 



'-h^'4 



where h = 400 mm. 



8 Test report 

The test report shall include the following 
particulars : 

a) reference to this Internationa! Standard; 

b) description of the object tested; 

c) individual values and mean values of R and 
P for each measuring point; 

d) total mean values of R and P; 

e) fields of fluctuation of the mean values of 
R and P of the individual measuring points; 

f) any deviation from this International Stan- 
dard and reasons for this deviation; 

g) date of test. 

if desired : 

h) number N of rebound of the test piece; 
j) coefficient of impact damping, €. 



Printed at Printrade, New Delhi, India 



