ттт Aah IS 19041 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


ет SAT (Stats) À Фа че ger 
wal aa — ҒТР та utter fear 


Destoner for Millets — Specification 
and Test Code 


ICS 65.060 


© BIS 2023 


т HA э] 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
COP ЧИШ WE чач, 9 Ie эте THK AMT, 95 Reed - 110002 


MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2023 Price Group 10 


Agriculture and Food Processing Equipment Sectional Committee, FAD 20 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Agriculture 
and Food Processing Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Food and Agriculture Division 
Council. 


Millets are exceptionally nutritious and were once a dietary staple. However, changing consumer preferences and 
a lack of millet processing resources led to a decline in their consumption. Millets require processing before 
consumption, and the government initiated efforts to promote millet consumption during the 2023 International 
Year of Millet (IYOM - 2023). Equipment used in millet processing are very crucial for ensuring the quality of 
processed millets. Therefore, it is important to establish equipment standards to maintain the overall quality and 
promote the consumption of this valuable and nutritious grain, benefiting both health and the economy. 


Destoning of seeds/grains is an important post-harvest processing operation which upgrades the quality of 
seeds/grains and thereby its commercial value. Therefore, a need was felt to develop a standard to assure the 
quality and for performance certification purpose, standards for the specifications and the test methods will ensure 
quality of this equipment manufactured and thus the quality of the process and the produces/products. This 
standard will also serve as guidance to the manufacturers of this equipment. 


A series of Indian Standards are being developed on the equipment used in primary processing of millets. Apart 
from this standard, three other standards on millets processing equipment have been published which are as under: 


IS 19039 : 2023 Cleaner cum grader for millets with pre-cleaner — Specification and test code 
IS 19040 : 2023 Millet Dehusker — Centrifugal Type — Specification and test code 
IS 19042 : 2023 Symbols and flow diagram for primary processing of millets 


Another standard covering the specification for pearler-cum-polisher for millets is under preparation IS XXXX : 
20xx. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex L. 
In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or 


calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules 
for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. 


IS 19041: 2023 


Indian Standard 


DESTONER FOR MILLETS — SPECIFICATION AND 
TEST CODE 


1SCOPE 


This standard specifies material, construction, 
performance and other requirements of destoner for 
millet crops. It also prescribes the test methods for 
evaluating the performance of the destoner. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A contain provisions 
which, through reference in this standard, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the editions indicated were valid. AII 
standards are subject to revision, and parties to 
agreement based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most 
recent edition of these standards. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard the following 
definitions shall apply. 


3.1 Adjustments — The destoner has many 
adjustments which allow the operator to control the 
separating action precisely which are given in 3.1.1 
to 3.1.4. 


3.1.1 Feed Regulating Mechanism — The 
mechanism which regulates the feed rate in the 
destoner. 


3.1.2 Air Control Device — A mechanism at the air- 
inlet to the fans which regulates the air velocity or 
air pressure through the deck base and surface 
material at the outlet. 
NOTE — Air is used for stratification of seed/grain material 
vertically on the deck, in which seed of higher specific 


gravity fall through the substrata while seed of lower gravity 
will be buoyed up the strata. 


3.1.3 Deck Slope — Slope of deck from the feed 
hopper to the extreme discharge end, which controls 
the output capacity of the machine. 


3.1.4. Deck Oscillation Speed Control — The 
mechanism which regulates the motion of the deck 
per unit time. 


3.2 Blower — А device to produce air blast by 
taking the atmospheric air through suction. 


3.3 Body — It is the stationary machine base frame 
with fans and air chamber connected with the deck 
with flexible tarpaulin shroud. 


3.4 Deck — The deck is the adjustable frame fitted 
in the body with oscillating mechanism or table on 
which fluidization of material and separation is 
affected. 


3.5 Cleaned Seed/Grain — The seed/grain lot 
which is free from chaff, dust, undersize impurities, 
oversize impurities, stones, metal pieces, 
seeds/grains of other crops, seeds/grains of other 
varieties, damaged seeds, etc are as removed using 
appropriate processing units. 


3.6 Feed Rate — The quantity of the cleaned 
seed/grain fed into the destoner per unit time. It is 
important to maintain steady feed rate after machine 
setting to ensure quality. 


3.7 Foreign Matter — It includes inorganic and 
organic matters. The inorganic matter shall include 
sand, gravel, dirt, pebbles, stones, lumps of earth, 
mud, iron chips, etc. The organic matter shall 
include chaff, straw, weed seeds, dead insects, 
worms, other inedible grains, etc. 


3.8 Rated Input Capacity — The feed rate at which 
the cleaning efficiency is within the specified limit. 


3.9 Routine Tests — Tests carried out on each 
equipment to check the requirements which are 
likely to vary during production. 


3.10 Specific Gravity Separator — A machine 
used for upgrading cleaned seed/grain passed 
through an air-screen-cleaner. It separates from 
uniform sized seeds/grains, lighter immature and 
insect damaged, rain damaged seed and heavy inert 
material based on specific gravity of different 
components in order to get good seed. The 
separation is achieved with the co-ordination of 
number of adjustments among machine parameters. 


3.11 Type Tests — Tests carried out on destoner to 
prove conformity with the requirements of relevant 
standard. These are intended to prove the general 
qualities and design of a particular type of destoner. 


3.12 Unclean Seeds/Grains — The mixture of 
clean seeds/grains and foreign matter. 


IS 19041: 2023 


4 TYPES OF MILLETS AND DESTONER 
4.1 Millet Grains 


Millets are the group of small grains and following 
are the crops classified under millets as given in 
Table 1, which can be processed by this equipment. 
These grains are equally rich in nutrients to rice and 
wheat. Though they look similar in shape and size, 
they differ and cleaning/grading require different 
sieve perforations. 


4.2 Destoner 


Destoner utilizes Ше difference їп mass 
(density/specific gravity) between the stone/mud 
present in the grains and the good grains for 
segregation under continuous vibration and air flow. 
The destoner may be only as a destoner or with an 
aspirator or destoner with grader and aspirator. 
Destoner plays a crucial role during pre and post 
hulling operations and thereby helps in improving 
the quality of the output. Use of destoner for 
removing the stones in the feed material is essential 
to prevent damage to the sensitive/soft natured 
components in the processing units. Also removing 
the stones after the processes ensures removal of 
stones in the final product. By using this machine, 
drudgery to the labourers is reduced and the quantity 


of material processed in unit time is increased many 
fold. 


The destoner consists of a vibrating deck, feed 
hopper with feed regulator, blower, cam mechanism 
for vibration, etc. The destoner will have a capacity 
range of 300 kg to 2 tonnes per hour and operated by 
2 hp to 5 hp electric motor. The vibrating deck made 
of dimple sheet is mounted on suitable bearings and 
connected to the cam through a connecting rod 
(Fig. | and Fig. 2). The main frame houses the 
blower, motor, power transmission system and cam 
mechanism and closed on all sides with opening at 
top. The suction of the blower is placed on one of 
the sides of the frame with a shutter to control the 
flow and the air blast is delivered at the bottom of 
the deck through a flexible duct. The vibrating duct 
is placed with an inclination on the bearings and has 
provision to adjust the inclination in the range of 
15 degree to 20 degree. The deck along the tail end 
is extended outside the frame and is narrowed as an 
outlet, normally for the cleaned seeds/grains. The 
other end in the upward slope is also extended 
outside the frame and narrowed towards an outlet for 
the heavier objects (stones). A stopper is provided at 
the end of the upward slope to prevent flowing of the 
stones to the deck when the deck vibration comes to 
halt. A hopper with feed regulator mechanism is 
placed with suitable supports above the deck. 


Table 1 Common Name and Botanical Name of Millet Crops 


(Clause 4.1 


SI No. Common Name of Millets Botanical Name 
(1) (2) (3) 
1) Sorghum/Jowar/Great millet Sorghum bicolor 
ii) Pearl millet/Bajra Pennisetum glaucum 
iii) Finger millet/Ragi Eleusine coracana 
iv) Kodo millet Paspalum scrobiculatum 
v) Foxtail/Italian millet Setaria italic 
vi) Little millet/Kutki millet Panicum sumatrense 
vii) Proso/Common millet Panicum miliaceum 
viii) Barnyard millet Echinochloa esculenta 
ix) Browntop millet Urochloa ramose 


^m 


enh IES 
sis 


Fic. 1 SCHEMATIC DIAGRAM OF DESTONER SHOWING PRINCIPLES OF OPERATION 


STONE OUTLET 
REGULATOR 


STONE OUTLET 


ADJUSTMENT 
FOR DECK 


IS 19041 : 2023 


FEED HOPPER 


EED REGULATOR 


OSCILLATING DECK 


CLEAN GRAIN 


AIR DUCT 
CONNECTING ROD 
ECCENTRIC / CAM 


BLOWER 


FIG. 2 SCHEMATIC DIAGRAM OF DESTONER SHOWING THE MAJOR COMPONENTS 


When the destoner is operated, the blower delivers 
the blast of air to the vibrating deck from the bottom. 
The bed of seed/grain mass received on the deck 
from the hopper will undergo stratification vertically 
on the deck, in which seed/grain of higher mass 
(density/specific gravity) fall down through the 
substrata while seed/grain of lower mass 
(density/specific gravity) will be buoyed up the 
strata. This separation and the vibration of the deck 
make the stones to move upwards and the good 
seeds/grains downwards towards the appropriate 


outlets/chutes. The parameters like, slope of the 
deck, air flow rate and feed rate will be adjusted 
according to the millet crop to achieve higher 
performance. 


5 MATERIALS 


5.1 The material of construction of various 
components of destoner shall be as given in col (3) 
of Table 2. The material may confirm to the 
relevant Indian Standards given in col (4). 


Table 2 Material of Construction 


(Clause 5.1 
SI No. Component Material Reference to IS 

(1) (2) (3) (4) 
1) Air control shutters Mild steel IS 2062 
Galvanized sheet IS 277 
ii) Bearing housing/Plummer block Cast iron IS 210 
iii) Blower casing Mild steel IS 2062 
Cast iron IS 210 
iv) Blower impeller (blade holder) Cast iron IS 210 
v) Bottom and top drum of elevator Cast iron IS 210 
vi) Bucket/cups Mild steel/plastics IS 2062 
vil) Cam High carbon steel IS 7226 
Vili) Deck Mild steel IS 2062 
Stainless steel (SS 304) IS 6911 
ix) Discharge spout Mild steel IS 2062 
Galvanized sheet IS 277 
Stainless steel (SS 304) IS 6911 
X) Elevator body/frame Mild steel IS 2062 
wood IS 399 
xi) Feed hopper Mild steel IS 2062 
Stainless steel (SS 304) IS 6911 
xil) Frame Mild steel IS 2062 
Galvanized iron IS 277 
xiii) Gears High carbon steel IS 7226 


IS 19041: 2023 


Table 2 (Concluded) 


SI No. Component Material Reference to IS 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 

xiv) Hand wheels/adjustment levers Cast iron IS 210 
Mild steel IS 2062 
xv) Pullies Cast iron IS 210 
Mild steel IS 2062 
xvi) Screens/sieves Mild steel IS 2062 
Stainless steel (SS 304) IS 6911 
xvii) Shafts Mild steel IS 2062 


5.2 The wire cloth sieve and perforated type sieve 
should conform to IS 2405 (Part 1) and 
IS 2405 (Part 2) respectively. 


6 CONSTRUCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS 
6.1 Frame 


The main frame shall be fabricated using suitable 
size of mild steel/galvanized iron with channel/angle 
sections and shall be covered wherever required 
with mild steel sheet/galvanised sheet/stainless steel 
sheet of adequate thickness, not less than 1.0 mm 
thickness, depending on the requirements and 
provided with gasket/packing to prevent leakage of 
air. 


6.2 Hopper 


Hopper shall be made of mild steel/stainless steel 
(SS 304) sheet and provided with a feed regulating 
device. The hopper will be provided with side slope 
for easy flow of the grains/kernels. The feed hopper 
will be located at appropriate height from ground 
level for easy filling manually. Alternatively, the 
unit may be provided with a bucket elevator for 
filling the hopper. 


6.3 Blower 


Blower will be of adequate size and the impeller is 
balanced and mounted on self-aligned bearings to 
run without vibration and the casing will be strong 
enough. The shutter to adjust the air flow rate will 
be provided with a locking arrangement to hold the 
position and ensures noise/vibration free running. 


6.4 Vibrating Deck 


The deck shall be provided with appropriate slope 
range and with provision to adjust the slope to suit 
various millet crops. The screen used in the deck will 
be with suitable perforation permitting the air flow 
and preventing the grains/seeds to pass through. 


6.5 Transmission Drive 


The suitable drive system using V-belt pulley 
system for transmitting the power shall be provided 
in the destoner. 


6.6 Shafts 


The shafts shall be supported with suitable bearings 
and housings on the stable part of machine. 


6.7 Outlet/Chute for the Sound Grains and 
Reject Grains/Stones 


The outlet for the good grains shall be placed at the 
suitable height from ground for easy 
collection/filling in gunny bags. The reject/stones 
outlet will also Бе provided with easy 
collection/filling in gunny bags. 


6.8 Surface Finish 


All the joints and surfaces shall be made smooth and 
protected from weather conditions. 


7 PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS 


7.1 When tested in accordance with the method 
given in 10, the destoner shall confirm to the 
following requirements: 


a) Improvement in quality of seed/grain 
between input to destoner output shall be 
25 percent minimum; 


b) The percentage of heavier impurities/stones 
collected along good grain/seed shall not be 
more than 5 percent; and 


c) The percentage of good  seeds/grains 
collected in stone outlet shall not be more 
than 5 percent. 


7.2 The destoner shall withstand the tests given 
under 10. 


7.3 The destoner shall be operated at no load in 
accordance with the method given in 8 of IS 5718. 
During the no-load run, the visual observation shall 
not show the following abnormalities: 


a) Presence of any marked vibrations 
during operation; 

b) Presence of undue knocking or rattling 
sound; 

c) Frequent slippage of belts/chains; 

d) Non-smooth running of shafts in the 
bearing housings; 

e) Any marked wear or slackness in any 
components; 


f) Any marked rise in temperature of 
operational bearings and its housing; 


g) Vibrations in running of blowers; and 


h) No mechanical damage to any 
components of the destoner. 


7.4 The rated input capacity in quintals per kWh 
energy consumed, with 5 percent and 10 percent 
heavier objects/stones, shall be declared by the 
manufacturer. The various adjustments, namely, 
slope, air flow rate, etc shall also be declared. When 
tested in accordance with the method given in 9.1.9 
of IS 8440, the declared capacity shall not differ by 
+5 percent. 


7.5 During and after the capacity test, the visual 
observation shall not indicate the following: 


a) Observations given under 7.3(a) to 
7.3(h); 
b) Frequent clogging of screen perforations; 


c) Non-smooth flowing of material through 
different components; 


d) Frequent clogging of hopper; 
e) Any marked wear, deformation and 
breakdown; 


f) Frequent loosening of fasteners; and 


g) Leakage of grains from the deck while in 
operation. 


7.6 When tested in accordance with 9.2 of IS 8440, 
no breakdown shall occur in any units of the 
destoner. 


7.7 When tested in accordance with the method 
given in 10, the destoner shall conform to the 
following requirements: 


a) The grader shall meet the requirement 
given in 7.1; and 

b) The input capacity of the millet grains per 
kWh energy used shall be not less than 
500 kg/kWh. The capacity shall be 
declared 


IS 19041 : 2023 


by the manufacturer. 


7.8 The rated input capacity in tonnes/h and rated 
energy consumption in kWh/tonne for raw 
seeds/grains with 10 percent to 20 percent impurities 
like chaff, dust, soil particles, discoloured 
seeds/grains, cut and damage seeds/grains, for 
millets shall be declared when tested in accordance 
with the method given in IS 5718 or IS 8440. The 
declared value shall not differ by 5 percent. The 
effectiveness of stone separation shall not be less 
than 0.90. It means 90 percent of the stones/mud will 
be separated by the destoner from the millet 
kernels/grains. 


8 OTHER REQUIREMENTS 


8.1 The necessary bearings, eccentric/cam, variable 
pulley and proper drive system shall be provided. 


8.2 The necessary provisions for application of 
grease/oil for bearings and other moving parts of the 
destoner shall be provided. Also they shall be dust 
proof. 


8.3 The construction shall be such as to help easy 
and immediate repairs and maintenance. 


8.4 The machine shall be provided with easy 
facilities for adjustments (see 3.1). 


8.5 Provision for tightening belts/chains shall be 
provided. 


8.6 The destoner shall be provided with the 
operator's manual (see 4.2 of IS 8132). 


8.7 Provision for changing/adjusting the following 
shall be made: 


a) Feed rate; 
b) Air displacement; and 
c) Deck slope. 


9 WORKMANSHIP AND FINISH 


9.1 The components of destoner shall be free from 
cracks, pits and other visual defects which may be 
detrimental for their use. 


9.2 The welding and joints, if any, shall not be 
porous and shall be smooth (see IS 816). 


9.3 The rust preventive coating shall be provided to 
the steel components and varnish to the wooden 
components. 


9.4 The controls and adjustments provided shall be 
easy and smooth to operate. 


IS 19041: 2023 


10 METHODS OF TEST FOR DESTONER 


10.1 Selection and Specification of Destoner for 
Type Tests 


10.1.1 Selection 


The destoner shall be taken from the series 
production by the testing authority with the 
agreement of the manufacturer. 


10.1.2 Specification 


The manufacturer shall supply specification sheet 
duly filled in as given in Annex B as well as any 
further information required to carry out the tests. 
The manufacturer shall also supply all literature, 
operational manual and schematic diagram of grain 
flow in the destoner. The manufacturer shall also 
indicate the maximum input capacity and rated input 
capacity with the foreign matter at 5 percent and 
10 percent. 


10.2 Test Material 


10.2.1 Sufficient quantity of the raw material 
(millet grains namely, sorghum, bajra, finger 
millet, banyard millet, proso millet, little millet, fox 
tail millet, kodo millet, brown top millet, etc), 
preferably the same variety shall be taken. The 
proportion of impurities, stones, mud, chaff, plant 
materials, etc shall be analyzed by taking 
5 samples each of 100 g and the average shall be 
reported. The grain/seed lot selected for testing 
destoner shall have purity in the range of 70 percent 
to 80 percent. 


10.2.2 The moisture content of test material shall be 
measured according to IS 4333 (Part 2) and shall be 
not more than 14 percent (wet basis). 


10.3 Running in and Preliminary Adjustments 


10.3.1 The destoner shall be installed on a level and 
preferably on a hard surface with anti-vibration 
mount/concrete foundation. All the adjustments 
shall be made in accordance with the manufacturer's 
recommendation. 


10.3.2 The destoner shall be attached with a suitable 
prime mover, preferably with an electric motor and 
auto-voltage stabilizer. An energy meter or some 
form of transmission dynamometer shall be fitted. 
The power delivered to the destoner may be supplied 
in the following ways: 


a) Direct coupling the prime mover with the 
main shaft of the destoner; and 

b) Connecting the prime mover with the help 
of a flat or V-belt and pullies with the 
destoner's main shaft. 


In the case of (a), the power delivered to the grader 
would be the power output of the prime mover, 
whereas in the case of (b), the allowances for flat 
and V-belt drive losses may be taken at 6 percent 
and 3 percent respectively. 


10.3.3 The destoner shall be run-in without load 
before commencing the tests. The running-in shall 
be carried out in accordance with the manufacturer's 
recommendation. In the absence of any 
recommendation by the manufacturer, the destoner 
shall be run-in for 30 min. During the period of the 
run-in, adjustments for various functional 
components may be done. All the adjustments done 
shall be in accordance with the instructions 
contained in the manual supplied by the 
manufacturer. 


10.4 Tests 


Tests as indicated in 10.4.1 shall becarried out 
on millet destoner. 


10.4.1 Type Tests 


10.4.1.1 General 


a) Checking of specifications (Annex B); 
b) Checking of material (see 5.1 and Annex C); 
and 


c) Visual observations and checking of 
provisions for adjustments (see 7.5 and 
Annex D). 


10.4.1.2 Test at no-load 


a) Power consumption (see Annex E) shall be 
recorded from the start and closing reading 
of energy meter. 


b) After running-in is over, the destoner shall be 
run at no load for 10 min at the specified 
speed. During and after the no load run, the 
visual observation at the destoner shall not 
show the following: 


1) Presence of any marked vibration 
during operation; 

2) Presence of undue knocking or 
rattling sound; 

3) Any marked rise in bearing 
temperature; 


4) Any marked unusual wear or 
slackness in any component; and 


5) Any marked change in oscillation 
or slopes. 


c) Data shall be recorded in accordance with the 
proforma given in Annex D. 


10.4.1.3 Test at load 


a) Operation and collection of data 


The destoner shall be operated at its input 
capacity specified by the manufacturer for the 
particular crop grain/seed and variety, 
incorporating best combination of adjustments 
for a period of 30 min. During the running 
period, speed of shaft, speed of oscillation, deck 
slope, air control lever position, etc shall be 
noted and recorded in Annex Е. 


Three sets of samples, from the feed, at the 
sound grain outlet and reject grain/stone outlet, 
either manually after each 10 min or 
continuously by automatic flow samplers for 
the entire period shall be collected. 


b) Preparation and analysis of samples 


1) The samples drawn from each outlet shall 
be bulked and thoroughly mixed to form 
a composite sample. 


2) Each sample shall be further divided 
using a sample divider to get 100 g of 
representative sample. 

3) Each 100 g sample shall be manually 
analyzed for physical purity to find the 
percentage availability of the stones and 
the good grains/seeds and recorded in 
Annex G. 

(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Fraction 1 Feed To be 
(Е) material analyzed for 
the fraction 
of good 
seeds/grains 
in the feed. 
ii) Fraction 2 Good To be 
(E) grains/se analyzed for 
eds the fraction 
outlet of good 
seeds/grains 
received in 
the good 
grains/seeds 
outlet 
ш) Fraction 3 Stones To be 
(G) outlet analyzed for 
the fraction 
of good 
grains/seeds 


received in 
the stones/ 
reject outlet 


IS 19041 : 2023 


c) Determination of effectiveness of stone 
separation 


The effectiveness of separation shall be 
calculated by the following formula: 
E x(F—G)x(E —F)x(1—G) 
Е x(E -G)x(1 —F) 


where 

D — effectiveness of stone 
separation, decimal; 

E = mean of fraction of good 
seeds/grains ас good 
grain/seed outlet; 

F = fraction of good 
seeds/grains in feed; and 

G = mean of fraction of good 


seeds/grains at rejection/ 
stones outlet. 


Record the data in the data sheet as given in 
Annex G. 


d) Determination of power consumption 


The power requirement during the test run 
shall be calculated/measured in accordance 
with the following methods and record the 
data in accordance with Annex H. 


1) In case of prime mover fitted with an 
energy meter, the readings taken shall 
be the power consumption for 10 min. 
The power consumption per hour 
giving due allowance to the type of 
drive shall be calculated and reported. 


2 


МУ 


In case of prime mover fitted with the 
dynamometer, the reading taken shall 
indicate the torque required. The 
power consumption, giving due 
allowance to the type of drive, shall be 
calculated by the following formula: 


T xS 


= 554930 ^ 09 


where 


P = power, in kW; 
T = torque, in Nm; and 
S = speed, in rpm. 
NOTE — For the purpose of certification, the power 


consumption at the declared feed rate shall only be 
calculated. 


IS 19041: 2023 


3) Determination of the rated input 
capacity — From the quantity of feed 
(kg) taken for the test and the time taken (in 
minutes) to remove Ше stones, 
capacity is calculated and expressed as ton/ 
h. The capacity in terms of the energy 
consumed shall be calculated by dividing 
the capacity by power consumed and shall 
be expressed in kg/kWh. Record the data in 
Annex С. 


NOTE — For the purpose of certification, since the 
separator has been operated only at declared capacity, 
it shall be seen whether the effectiveness of stone 
separation is met at the declared capacity or not. 


10.4.1.4 Routine tests 


a) Visual observations and checking of 
provision for adjustments (see 10.4.1.1); and 


b) Test at no-load (see 10.4.1.2). 
10.4.1.5 Long run test 


The destoner shall be operated for a minimum 
duration of 20 h at no load which could be covered 
by continuous run of at least 5 h. During and after 
the operation no breakdown or defects shall develop 
in the destoner. Record the major breakdowns, 
defects developed, and repairs made into the data 
sheet given in Annex J. 


10.5 Summary Report 


For the guidance of the user, compile a summary 
report on the proforma as given in Annex K. 


11 MARKING AND PACKING 
11.1 Marking 


Each destoner shall be marked with the following 
particulars: 


a) Manufacturers’ name, address апа 
trade-mark; 


b) Type and model number; 

c) Year of manufacture; 

d) Power rating and capacity; 

e) Drive details like direction of rotation, 
number of oscillations of deck/min/speed of 
main shaft (rpm), air velocity of fan 
(m/min), etc; and 

f) Batch or code number, if any. 


11.2 A minimum cautionary notice worded as 
follows shall be written in vernacular language 
legibly and prominently on the main body of the 
destoner: 


a) Do not wear loose dress, bangles, watch, 
etc, while working with the destoner; 


b) Do not work under the influence of 
intoxicants like liquor, opium, etc; 


c) Children and aged persons should be 
discouraged for working on destoner; 


d) Do not make adjustments when destoner 
is working; and 

e) Do not put or take-off belt while pulley 
is running. 


11.3 Packing 


The destoner shall be packed for safety and security 
of human being while in transit and as agreed to 
between the purchaser and supplier for safe handling 
in transit. 


12 BIS Certification Marking 


The product(s) conforming to the requirements of 
this standard may be certified as per the conformity 
assessment schemes under the provisions of the 
Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and the 
Rules and Regulations framed there under, and the 
products may be marked with the Standard Mark. 


15 Мо. 
IS 210 : 2009 


IS 277 : 2018 


IS 399 : 1963 


IS 816 : 1969 


IS 2062 : 2011 


IS 2405 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 2) 
LIST OF REFERRED STANDARDS 


Title 


Grey iron castings — 
Specification (fifth revision) 


Galvanized steel strips and sheets 
(plain and corrugated) — 
Specification (seventh revision) 


Classification of | commercial 
timbers and their zonal distribution 
(revised) 


Code of practice for use of metal 
arc welding for general 
construction in mild steel (first 
revision) 


Hot rolled medium and high tensile 
structural steel — Specification 
(seventh revision) 


Industrial sieves — Specification: 


(Part 1) : 2023 Wire cloth sieves (second revision) 


(Part 2) : 2023 


IS 4333 
(Part 2) : 2017/ 
ISO 712 : 2009 


Wire sieves (second revision) 


Methods of analysis for food 
grains: Part 2 — Determination 
of moisture content (second 
revision) 


IS No. 
IS 5718 : 2000 


IS 6911 : 1017 


IS 7226 : 1974 


IS 8132 : 2023/ 
ISO 3600 : 2022 


IS 8440 : 2023 


IS 19041 : 2023 


Title 


Agricultural produce processing 
equipment — Seed cleaners — 
Test code 


Stainless steel plate, sheet and 
strip — Specification (second 
revision) 

Specification for cold-rolled 
medium, high carbon and low 
alloy steel strip for general 
engineering purposes 

Tractors and machinery for 
agriculture and forestry, powered 
lawn and garden equipment — 
Operator's manuals — Content 
and format (third revision) 

Paddy cleaners — Test code 
(first revision) 


IS 19041: 2023 


ANNEX B 
(Clauses 10.1.2 and 10.4.1.1) 
SPECIFICATION SHEET 
Manufacturer Testing Station 
В-1 GENERAL 

a) Make 
b) Model 
c) Type 


d) Year of manufacture 
e) Recommended grains for stone separation 


B-2 POWER UNIT 


a) Type of prime mover 
b) Recommended power, in kW 
c) Type of drive 


B-3 MAIN DRIVE 


a) Type 

b) Size of belt 

с) Size of pulley, in mm 

d) Diameter of main shaft, in mm 
e) Type and number of bearings 

f) Size of connecting rod, in mm 
g) Size of cam or eccentric, in mm 


B-4 DECK 


a) Size (length and width), in mm 

b) Construction of deck 

с) Type of perforation/dimple/surface nature 

d) Thickness of deck, in mm 

e) Size of perforation, in mm 

f) Number of perforations/100 cm? 

g) Pitch of perforations, in mm 

h) Provision to adjust end slope 

j) Provision to vary the vibration/oscillation speed of deck 


B-5 BLOWER 


a) Number of blowers 

b) Type of blower 

c) Type of drive 

d) Speed of impeller, in m/min (rpm) 

е) Provision to adjust velocity/flow rate 

f) Protection against entry of insects/dust along air 
g) Protection against dress/arm getting in 

h) Provision for easy cleaning 


B-6 FEEDING 


a) Method of feeding 
b) Location of inlet 


IS 19041: 2023 


с) Type of feed regulation mechanism (baffle/shutter, etc) 

d) Height of feeding hopper from ground level in installed condition, in m 
e) Capacity of hopper, in m? or kg 

f) Provision for elevator 


B-7 OUTLETS 


a) Number of outlets 

b) Height of outlets from ground level in installed condition, in mm 
с) Projection of outlets from frame, in mm 

d) Type 

e) Construction details 


B-8 FRAME DETAILS 


a) Construction 
b) Easy of dismantling and assembling 
c) Overall dimension of the unit (L x B x H, in mm) 


B-9 TOOLS, ACCESSORIES AND MANUALS PROVIDED 


NOTES 
1 The items which are not applicable in a particular destoner should be crossed while filling. 
2 If other items are provided, their details should be filled in. 


Test Engineer 


IS 19041: 2023 


ANNEX C 
(Clause 10.4.1.1) 


DATA SHEET FOR MATERIAL OF CONSTRUCTION 


C-1 DATE OF TEST: 


C-2 MATERIAL OF CONSTRUCTION 


SI No. 


(1) 
i) 
ii) 
iii) 
iv) 
v) 
vi) 
vii) 
viii) 
ix) 
x) 
xi) 
xii) 


Component 


(2) 
Frame 
Deck 
Blower impeller 
Good grain outlet 
Reject outlet 
Feed hopper 
Main shaft 
Transmission system 
Pullies, gears, sprockets, etc 
Cam, eccentric, crank, etc 
Spring 
Others 


Material and Size 


(3) 


Test Engineer 


IS 19041: 2023 


ANNEX D 


[Clause 10.4.1.1, and 10.4.1.2 (c)] 
DATA SHEET FOR VISUAL OBSERVATIONS AND PROVISION FOR ADJUSTMENTS 


D-1 OBSERVATIONS 


a) Adequacy of marking inlet and outlets 

b) Adequacy of marking of direction of rotation of drives 

c) Adequacy of protection of bearings against ingress of dust 

d) Adequacy of safety arrangements, specially near moving parts 
е) Provision for lubrication of moving parts 

f) Provision for belt tightening 

g) Provision for transportation 

h) Provision for fixing on level hard surface 

j) Provision for easy changing of components requiring frequent replacement 
k) Provision for anti-corrosive coatings 

m) Tightness of bolts and nuts and other fasteners 

n) Other observations 


D-2 PROVISION FOR ADJUSTMENT OF: 


a) Feed rate 

b) Deck oscillation speed 
c) Blower impeller speed 
d) Deck slopes 

e) Air flow rate 


Test Engineer 


IS 19041: 2023 


ANNEX E 
(Clause 10.4.1.2) 


DATA SHEET FOR TEST AT NO LOAD 
E-1 SOURCE OF POWER 
E-2 TYPE OF DRIVE 
E-3 TOTAL TIME OF RUN, min 
E-4 AVERAGE POWER CONSUMPTION FOR ONE HOUR, W 
E-5 OBSERVATIONS: 


a) Presence of any marked vibration during operation 

b) Presence of undue knocking or rattling sound 

c) Frequent slippage of drive belt 

d) Any marked unusual wear or slackness in any component 

e) Any marked rise in bearing temperature 

f) Any marked scene of failure or breakage or damage to any parts or components of destoner 
g) Any marked change in oscillation or slope 

h) Other observations 


Test Engineer 


АММЕХ Е 


(Clause 10.4.1.3) 


DATA SHEET FOR TEST AT LOAD 


F-1 SOURCE OF POWER 
F-2 POWER RATING, kW 
F-3 MACHINE DETAIL 

a) Stroke length of deck 


b) Oscillation of deck (number of strokes/min) 
c) End slope of deck, degree 


F-4 SEED/GRAIN 


a) Type of seed/grain 

b) Variety of seed/grain 

C) Average size of seed/grain 

d) Moisture content, percent dry basis 

e) Fraction of impurities/stones present before feeding 


F-5 TEST DATA 


IS 19041 : 2023 


SINo. Date Starting Stopping Duration Speed Feed Power Fuel Total Sample Quantity (kg) of 
Time Time of m/min Rate Required Consumption Quantity Collected Samples from 
Operation of Good from Sample No. 
Grain at (0 (ii) (iii) 
Main 
Grain 
Outlet 
(rev/min) (kg/h) (kW) Пл) (kg) 
Feed 
Good 
grain 
outlet 


15 


IS 19041: 2023 


Table (Concluded) 


SINo. Date Starting Stopping Duration Speed Feed Power Fuel Total Sample 
Time Time of m/min Rate Required Consumption Quantity Collected 
Operation of Good from 
Grain at 
Main 
Grain 
Outlet 
(rev/min) (kg/h) (kW) Пл) (kg) 
Stone 
outlet 


The data should be collected for every test conducted on different feed rates if necessary. 


F-6 OBSERVATIONS 


a) Presence of any marked vibration during operation 
b) Presence of undue knocking or rattling sound 

c) Frequent slippage of belts 

d) Smooth running of shafts in their respective bearings 
e) Frequent clogging 

f) Frequent loosening of fasteners 

g) Frequent clogging of grain in elevator unit 

h) Smooth flowing of material through different components 
j) Any marked rise in bearing temperature 

k) Any marked wear, deformation and breakdown 

m) Frequent loosening of fasteners 

n) Other observations, if any 


16 


Quantity (kg) of 


Samples from 


Sample No. 


(i) (ii) 


(iii) 


Test Engineer 


IS 19041: 2023 


ANNEX G 
[Clause 10.4.1.3, SI No.(3)] 
DATA SHEET FOR ANALYSIS OF SAMPLES 


SINo. Feed Sample Sample Mass Mass of (g) E/F/G 
Rate Source M 
(kg/h) (g) Good Seeds/Grain Stones 
Sample No. Sample No. 
m ma 
i 11 iii Mean i ii iii Mean 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (©) (7) (8 © (10) (ID (12 (13) 
Feed 100 Е = (8)(4) 
Good grain 100 Е = (8)/(4) 
outlet 
Stone outlet 100 С = (8)/(4) 


Е = mean of fraction of good seeds/grains at good grain/seed outlet; 
F = fraction of good seeds/grains in feed; and 
С = mean of fraction of good seeds/grains at rejection/stones outlet. 


Test Engineer 


IS 19041 


: 2023 


ANNEX Н 


[Clause 10.4.1.3, S7 No.(d)] 
DATA SHEET FOR EFFICIENCY, POWER REQUIREMENT AND CAPACITIES 


SI No. Item Test No. 
1 2 3 4 5 etc 
(1) (2) GO @ © (6) D @ 
i) Feed rate, in kg/h 
ii) Power required, in kW 
ili) Vibration of deck (m/min) 
iv) Total grain received at clean grain outlet, in kg 
у) Effectiveness of separation of stone, decimal 
vi) Rated input capacity, in kg/h 


Test Engineer 


ANNEX J 
(Clause 10.4.1.5) 
DATA SHEET FOR LONG-RUN TEST 


J-1 TOTAL RUNNING TIME, h 

J-2 CONTINUOUS RUNNING TIME, h 

J-3 BREAKDOWNS IN SEPARATION UNIT (DECK) 

J-4 BREAKDOWNS IN OUTLETS/CHUTES/ELEVATION UNIT 
J-5 BREAKDOWNS IN THE MAIN FRAME 

J-6 ANY MAJOR REPAIRS CONDUCTED 


J-7 ANY OTHER OBSERVATIONS AFFECTING THE PERFORMANCE 


IS 19041 : 2023 


Test Engineer 


IS 19041: 2023 


ANNEX К 


(Clause 10.5) 
SUMMARY REPORT 


K-1 NAME AND ADDRESS OF MANUFACTURER 

K-2 MODEL NUMBER 

K-3 NAME OF TESTING STATION 

K-4 BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF THE MILLET DESTONER 

K-5 TYPE AND VARIETY OF MILLET USED 

K-6 PERCENTAGE OF FOREIGN MATTER PRESENT BEFORE FEEDING 
K-7 MOISTURE CONTENT OF RAW MATERIAL, percent d.b. 


K-8 PROVISIONS FOR ADJUSTMENT: 


a) Speed of vibration/oscillation of deck 
b) Screen slope 

с) Air displacement 

d) Feed rate 


K-9 POWER REQUIREMENT, kW 
a) Observed power at no-load 
b) Observed power at load at rated input capacity 
C) Observed power at maximum input capacity 
d) Recommended power 
K-10 EFFECTIVENESS OF SEPARATION OF STONE 
K-11 RATED INPUT CAPACITY, kg/h 
K-12 ANY MARKED OBSERVATION AFFECTING PERFORMANCE 
K-13 ANY MARKED BREAKDOWNS 


K-14 OTHER OBSERVATIONS 


Test Engineer 


20 


IS 19041: 2023 


ANNEX L 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Agriculture and Food Processing Equipment Sectional Committee, FAD 20 


Organization 
Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi 


Agriculture Machinery Manufacturers Association, 
Pune 


CCS Haryana Agricultural University, Hisar 


CSIR - Central Food Technological Research 
Institute, Mysuru 


Dr Panjabrao Deshmukh Krishi Vidyapeeth, Akola 
ICAR - Central Institute for Women in Agriculture, 
Bhubaneswar 


ICAR - Central Institute of Agricultural Engineering, 
Bhopal 


ICAR - Central Institute of Post-Harvest Engineering 
and Technology, Ludhiana 


ICAR - Indian Institute of Horticultural Research, 
Bengaluru 


Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi 


Indosaw Industrial Products Private Limited, 


Ambala 
Mahatma Phule Krishi Vidyapeeth, Rahuri 


Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agriculture, 
New Delhi 


National Committee on Precision Agriculture and 
Horticulture, New Delhi 


National Institute of Food Technology, 
Entrepreneurship and Management, Thanjavur 


North Eastern Region Farm Machinery Training and 
Testing Institute, Biswanath Chariali 


Northern. Region Farm Machinery Training and 
Testing Institute, Hisar 


Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana 


21 


Representative(s) 
DR SHYAM NARAYAN JHA (Chairperson) 


DR SURENDRA SINGH 
SHRI MITUL PANCHAL (Alternate) 


DR RAVI GUPTA 


DR UMESH HEBBAR 
DR NAVIN KUMAR RASTOGI (Alternate) 


DR SUCHITA V. GUPTA 
DR BHAGYASHREE N. PATIL (Alternate) 


DR SACHIDANANDA SWAIN 
ER CHAITRALI S. MHATRE (Alternate) 


Dr S. К. GIRI 
DR RAVINDRA NAIK (Alternate) 


DR SANDEEP MANN 
DR SANDEEP P. DAWANGE (Alternate) 


DR A. CAROLINA RATHINA KUMARI 
DR S. BHUVANESWARI (Alternate) 


DR K. NARSAIAH 
DR KRISHNA PRATAP SINGH (Alternate) 


DR VINOD Н. KALBANDE 


DR VIKRAM PARASHARAM KAD 


SHRIC. R. LOHI 
SHRI Y. K. RAO (Alternate) 


SHRI ANAND ZAMBRE 
SHRI KRISHNA KUMAR KAUSHAL (Alternate) 


DR S. BHUVANA 
DR P. P. RAO 
SHRIS. С. PAWAR (Alternate) 


DR MUKESH JAIN 
SHRI SANJAY KUMAR (Alternate) 


DR SANDHYA SINGH 
DR MANINDER KAUR (Alternate I) 
DR ROHIT SHARMA (Alternate II) 


IS 19041 : 2023 


Organization 


Tamil Nadu Agricultural University, Coimbatore 


In Personal Capacity (CD 223, Ansal Golf Link 1, 
Greater Noida - 201315) 


In Personal Capacity (MIG - 154, E-7 Sector 
Aerea Colony, Bhopal - 462061) 


In Personal Capacity (12/36 Sowbhagya Nagar, A 


Representative(s) 


DR V. THIRUPATHI 
DR P. RAJKUMAR (Alternate I) 
DR P. SUDHA (Alternate II) 


DR PITAM CHANDRA 


SHRI S. D. DESHPANDE 


DR R. VISVANATHAN 


Block Civil, Aerodrome Post, Coimbatore - 
641014) 
BIS Directorate General SHRIMATI SUNEETI TOTEJA, SCIENTIST ‘E’/DIRECTOR 
AND HEAD (FOOD AND AGRICULTURE) [REPRESENTING 
DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 
Member Secretary 
SHRI PRADEEP SHARMA 


SCIENTIST ‘B’/ASSISTANT DIRECTOR 
(FOOD AND AGRICULTURE), BIS 


Panel to Formulate New Standards on Equipment Used in Primary Processing of Millet, FAD20/P16 


Organization 


ICAR - Central Institute of Agricultural Engineering, 
Bhopal 


ICAR - Central Institute of Post-Harvest Engineering and 
Technology, Ludhiana 


Indian Institute of Millet Research, Hyderabad 
Tamil Nadu Agricultural University, Coimbatore 


National Institute of Food Technology, Enterpreneurship 
and Management, Thanjavur 


University of Agricultural Sciences, Raichur 


In Personal Capacity (12/36 Sowbhagya Nagar, 
Aerodrome Post, Coimbatore - 641014) 


22 


Representative(s) 


DR RAVINDRA NAIK (Convenor) 
DR DEBABANDYA MOHAPATRA 


DR R. K. VISHWAKARMA 


DR B. DAYAKAR RAO 
DR P. SUDHA 


DR V. PALALNIMUTHU 


DR UDAY KUMAR NIDONI 


DR R. VISVANATHAN 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: FAD 20 (22780). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :; 601/А, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8% Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri | 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


