NAT Alaa IS 9317 : 2022 
Indian Standard 


threat — Wearaett 


(gra TA) 


Skis — Vocabulary 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 01.040.97; 97.220.20 


© BIS 2022 


anda AM SAN 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 TEE TH HM, ay freh — 110002 


zf MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


September 2022 Price Group 7 


Mountaineering and Adventure Sports Sectional Committee, PGD 27 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) has been adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft 
finalized by the Mountaineering and Adventure Sports Sectional Committee had been approved by the Production 
and General Engineering Division Council. 


This standard was originally published in 1979 and subsequently revised in 2001. First revision was based 
on ISO 6289 : 1985 ‘Skis — Terms and definitions’ and ISO 7796 : 1985 ‘Skis — Geometry — Measuring 
conditions’. The first revision covered the requirements given in IS 9969 : 1981 ‘Alpine Skis Terminology’ which 
was subsequently withdrawn. The second revision of this standard has been undertaken to align it with the latest 
version of ISO 6289 : 2003 in which some new term have been added. 


During the preparation of this standard, it became obvious that for better communication a common technology 
was needed. Therefore, it was decided to prepare this standard on skis terminology which contains all technical 
terms used in Indian Standards already published on skis, as well as new terms which are of importance for 
product specification. 


In order to improve communication within the skiing community it is highly recommended that all experts 
involved in technical publications are encouraged to use these terms with respect to commonly agreed definitions. 
These definitions are included to encourage uniformity of terminology in product specifications. 


While preparing this standard, considerable assistance has been derived from ISO 6289 : 2003 ‘Skis — Terms and 
definitions’ and ISO 7796 : 1985 ‘Skis — Geometry — Measuring conditions’. 

The composition of the Committee responsible for formulation this standard is given in Annex A. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 9317 : 2022 


Indian Standard 
SKIS — VOCABULARY 


( Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard defines terms for the specification of 
important characteristics of alpine, cross country 
skis (XC-skis) and snowboards. This standard also 
specifies the conditions for measuring the geometrical 
characteristics of skis. 


These definitions are intended to provide better 
uniformity of terminology in product specifications. 


2 GENERAL TERMS 


2.1 Ski — Sliding skid of narrow width in relation to 
its length, with the front end turned up in a radius to 
ride over obstacles, used as a sporting and recreational 
device for sliding on snow, ice and artificial snow, but 
also serving other purposes. 


The term’ ski’ does not include under other conditions, 
for example sliding on plastic mats, unless this is 
clearly stated by the manufacturer. 


It is to be understood that in this standard the term ‘ski’ 
is used to refer to different types of snow skis. The term 
‘snow ski’ is sometimes used as a general term for all 
skis used in Alpine and Nordic skiing. 


2.2 Alpine Ski — A snow ski used for sliding down 
slopes as a result of gravitational force. The control of 
direction and speed is accomplished through combined 
motion in the longitudinal and lateral directions of the 
ski. In order to transmit the steering forces, the edges 
of the running surface are generally equipped with hard 
and wear-resistant materials. 


2.2.1 Mountaineering Ski — Alpine ski designed for 
the ascent and descent of mountains. Usually with 
so-called touring binding which allow heel lift in the 
ascent phase (normally, the ski is light, short and wide). 


2.2.2 Snowfield Slider — Ski used for sliding down 
snowfields. Generally, its length does not exceed twice 
the length of the boot. 


2.2.3 Downhill Ski — Alpine ski intended for downhill 
competitions in which high speeds are attained 
according to the relevant rules. 


2.2.4 Slalom Ski — Alpine ski intended for slalom 
competitions according to the relevant rules. 


2.2.5 6289 : 2003 Giant-Slalom Ski — Alpine ski 
intended for giant slalom competitions according to the 
relevant giant slalom rules. 


2.2.6 Freestyle Ski — Alpine ski intended to be used in 
freestyle competitions according to the regulations of 
freestyle associations. 


2.2.7 Ballet Ski — Freestyle ski intended for ballet and 
acrobatic ballet type manoeuvres. Easy turning and 
skidding capabilities are key characteristics. 


2.2.8 Adults Ski — Ski intended to be used by adult 
persons who weigh more than 45 kg. 


2.2.9 Junior Ski — Ski intended to be used by persons 
who weigh 30 to 45 kg. 


2.2.10 Children's Ski — Ski intended to be used by 
persons who weigh less than 30 kg. 


2.3 Cross-country Ski (XC-ski) — Snow ski designed 
for skiing over flat and hilly terrain. 


2.3.1 Cross-country Racing Ski — Cross-country ski 
designed for use in cross-country competition. 


Design emphasis is placed on light weight in addition 
to gliding ease in well-prepared tracks. 


2.3.2 Light Touring Ski — Cross-country ski designed 
for skiing in tracks and outside tracks under relatively 
good snow conditions. 


2.3.3 Touring Ski — Cross-country ski designed for 
skiing in tracks as well as outside tracks. 


2.3.4 Mountain Ski — Cross-country ski designed for 
skiing in mountainous terrain. 


2.3.5 Wilderness Ski (Bush Walker) — Cross-country 
ski designed for skiing outside tracks under all snow 
conditions. 


A very short (usually about 150 cm) and broad ski. 


2.3.6 Cross-country Adults Ski — Ski intended to be 
used by adult persons who weigh more than 45 kg. 


2.3.7 Cross-country Junior Ski — Ski, usually of the 
same construction as an adult’s ski but shorter, intended 
for juniors and adults with relatively short height and a 
weight of 30 to 45 kg. 


IS 9317 : 2022 


2.3.8 Cross-country Children's Ski — Ski, usually of 
a special construction intended to be used by children 
who walk rather than glide on the snow and who weigh 
less than 30 kg. 


2.4 Snowboard — Single-plane device ridden with a 
sideways stance with the feet angled to the longitudinal 
axis of the device. 


2.4.1 Alpine Snowboard — Snowboard designed 
for practice of the alpine type of riding, especially 
competition oriented. 


2.4.2 Free-ride Snowboard — Snowboard for the 
purpose of riding mountain on natural terrain with 
different snow conditions. 


2.4.3 Free-style Snowboard — Snowboard for the 
purpose of doing tricks and manoeuvres adapted 
directly from skateboarding. 


2.4.4 Goofy — Snowboard riding with the right foot 
forward. 


2.4.5 Regular — Snowboard riding with the left foot 
forward. 


2.5 Monoski — Single plane riding ski ridden with the 
feet parallel to the longitudinal axis of the ski. 


2.6 Telemark Skiing — Type of alpine skiing technique 
where the heel of the boot is not freed during downhill 
skiing. 


alpine ski 


ski alpin 


Key 
1 top surface 2 side surface 


3 bottom surface 4 bottom groove 


3 TERMS RELATING TO DESIGN FEATURES 


3.1 Terms Relating to Functional Ski Elements 


3.1.1 Bottom Surface (Running Surface) — The 
underside of the ski which interfaces the snow when 
skiing (see Fig. 1) 


3.1.2 Top Surface — The side of the ski opposite to the 
bottom surface (see Fig. 1) 


3.1.3 Side Surface — Surface which borders the sides 
of the ski (see Fig. 1). The side surface may have a 
stepped profile. 


3.1.4 Bottom Groove — A concave recess running 
longitudinally along the bottom surface of the ski 
(see Fig. 1) 


3.1.5 Bottom Surface Edge — Intersection of bottom 
surface and side surface. 


3.1.6 Ski Tip — The extreme forward point of the ski. 
3.1.7 Ski Tail — The extreme rear-edge of the ski. 


3.1.8 Ski Shovel — The forward section of the ski, 
which is turned up in order to ride easily over obstacles 
(see Fig. 2). 


3.1.9 Forward Contact Line — The forward most 
contact line between the bottom surface of the ski and 
a flat surface against which the ski body is pressed 
(see Fig. 2). 


| ski de fond 


| lcrase-cou ntry ski 


FıG.1 TERMS RELATED TO FUNCTIONAL SKI ELEMENTS 


Key 


1 tail turn-up 2 ski shovel 
3 afterbody of ski 
5 rear contact line 


7 body of ski 


IS 9317 : 2022 


4 forebody of ski 


6 forward contact line 


FiG.2 TERMS RELATED TO BODY OF SKI 


3.1.10 Rear Contact Line — The rear most contact 
line between the ski bottom surface and a flat surface 
against which the ski body is pressed (see Fig. 2). 


3.1.11 Body of Ski — The part of the ski between the 
forward contact line and the rear contact line (see Fig. 2). 


3.1.12 Tail Turn-up — The turned-up portion of the ski, 
rearward of the rear contact line (see Fig. 2). 


3.1.13 Forebody of Ski — The front half of the ski body 
towards the shovel (see Fig. 2). 


3.1.14 Afterbody of Ski — The rear half of the ski body 
towards the tail turn-up (see Fig. 2). 


3.1.15 Neutral Plane — The plane internal to the ski 
where no bending stresses occur when the ski is bent 
perpendicular to its bottom surface. 


3.2 Terms Relating to Types of Construction 


Modem skis generally consist of composite structures. 
A composite structure in the technical sense is a type of 
construction in which different materials are combined 
in a single structural element such that every material 
performs optimally to an applied stress. Materials with 
high strength and stiffness are incorporated mainly in 
the external zones of the ski cross-section in order to 
sustain the bending and torsional stresses occurring 
in the ski. These structural members are called the 
load-carrying layers, because of their contribution 
to important properties of the ski, such as breaking 
strength and stifíness. A combination of different 
materials in the load-carrying layers is possible. 


A ski maybe classified according to the construction 
employed and the materials used in the load-carrying 
members of the ski. For an exact specification of 
constructional parameters, it is recommended that the 
ski elements and the materials employed be explicit. 


For example: 


Load-carrying Glass fibre reinforced plastic 

layers 

Core Ash wood 

Steel edge Cracked edge, hardness 45 HRC 

Top edge Aluminium 

Side walls Phenolic material 

Running surface | sintered UHMW PE 

material (Ultra-High-Molecular-Weight 
Polyethylene) 

Top surface Phenolic material 

material 


3.2.1 Sandwich Construction — Composite structure in 
which the ski core is reinforced above and below with 
materials of higher strength and stiffness than the core 
itself. 


These reinforcing materials are generally distributed 
over the entire width and length of ski. The ski core 
may be partly hollow and made from a variety of 
materials, such as wood or polyurethane. 


3.2.2 Box Construction — Composite structure in which 
the load-carrying members are built as a combination 
of webs and flanges arranged in box form following the 


IS 9317 : 2022 


external shape of the ski cross-section or partly in the 
interior of the ski. 


The ski core may be partly hollow and made from a 
variety of materials, such as wood or polyurethane. 


3.2.3 Wood Ski — Ski with wood core, not having 
load-carrying layers of higher strength and stiffness 
than wood, except the steel edge. 


3.2.4 Metal Ski — Sandwich or box structure where 
the load-carrying layers are metal, normally aluminium 
alloy. 


The core material may be partly hollow and made from 
a variety of materials, such as wood or polyurethane. 


3.2.5 Fibreglass Ski — Sandwich or box construction 
where the load-carrying facings (except the steel edges 
or metal top edges) are made from glass fibre reinforced 
plastics. 


The core material may be partly hollow and made from 
a variety of materials, such as wood or polyurethane. 


3.2.6 Carbon or Aramid Fibre Ski — Sandwich or box 
construction where the load-carrying facings (except 
the steel edges or metal top edges) are made from 
carbon fibre reinforced plastics, aramid fibre or other 
fibre, usually in combination with glass-fibres. 


The core may be partly hollow and made from a variety 
of materials, such as wood or polyurethane. 


3.2.7 Fibre-metal Ski — Term sometimes used for 
skis with load-carrying layers which consist of a 
combination of fibre reinforced plastics and metals. 


The core may be partly hollow and made from a variety 
of materials, such as wood or polyurethane. 


3.2.8 Asymmetrical — Snowboard which is designed 
asymmetrically along the longitudinal axis. 


3.2.9 Twin-tip Snowboard — Snowboard with identical 
turned-up tips. 


3.2.10 Cap Construction — Form of sandwich 
construction with a continuous peripheral envelope, 
forming the top surface and whole of part of the sides. 


3.2.11 Shell Construction — form of box construction 
with a continuous peripheral envelope, the top surface 
and whole or part of the sides forming the structure of 
the ski. 


3.3 Terms Relating to Ski Elements 


3.3.1 Load-carrying Layers — Facings of materials 
of high strength and stiffness located near the outer 
zones of the top and bottom surfaces of ski, which, 
when the ski is bent, carry in one layer tensile stress 
(tensile facing) and in one layer compressive stress 
(compression facing) only. 


3.3.2 Load-carrying Webs (Ribs) — Layers of materials 
of high strength and stiffness which are usually arranged 
parallel to the side surface of the ski in combination 
with the top and bottom facings, forming a box-like 
structure that carries bending and shear stresses. 


3.3.3 Core — Structural element situated between the 
load-carrying layers and webs respectively. 


3.3.4 Insert — An inner element designed to increase 
the pull-out resistance of the binding screws. 


3.3.5 Bottom Edge — Structural element forming the 
lateral termination of the bottom surface in order to 
provide protection and transmission of steering forces. 
It usually consists a metal strip. 


3.3.6 Bottom Surface Element (Base) — Structural 
element, serving as bottom surface covering layer of 
the ski. Usually made from low friction plastics with 
good wax penetration. 


3.3.7 Top Surface Element — Structural element used 
on the top surface of the ski. It serves to protect the 
underlying structural elements as well as providing a 
base for the top cosmetics. 


3.3.8 Top Edge — Structural element forming the top 
surface edge, serving principally for protection. 


3.3.9 Tip Protector — Structural element for the 
purpose of protecting side surface, top and bottom edge 
in the tip and shovel area. 


3.3.10 Tail Protector — Structural element located near 
the tail of ski with the purpose of protecting the tail 
area. 


3.3.11 Kicking Aid — Special surface configuration 
or preparation at the bottom surface which aids in the 
creation of longitudinal forces needed for forward 
motion. 


3.3.11.1 Step wax application area — A suitable part 
of the bottom surface coated with step waxes properly 
selected in accordance with the slope conditions. 


3.3.11.2 Step pattern — Steps designed in a special 
way in order to allow gliding in the forward direction 
and give resistance to motion in the reverse direction. 


3.3.11.3 Mohair or fur inserts — Inserts of different 
sizes used in such a way that the bristles are pointed 
towards the tail of the ski. 


3.3.11.4 Micro-structure — Roughness of the gliding 
surface obtained by special grinding techniques or by 
the use of composite materials in the ski base. 


These materials are sometimes used in combination. 
As a kicking aid, this type of microstructure is usually 
confined to the central portion of the running surface. 


4 TERMS AND SYMBOLS 
GEOMETRY OF SKI 


RELATING TO 


4.1 Nominal Length, /, — Length used for indication 
of the size of the ski (see Fig. 3). The developed length 
according to 4.2 shall be used to indicate the nominal 
length. 


4.2 Developed Length — Length of the running 
surface measured between the ski tail and the ski tip. 


4.3 Projected Length, /, — Length of the projection 
of the ski, measured between the ski tail and the ski 
tip with the ski body pressed against a planar surface 
(see Fig. 3). 


4.4 Contact Length, Z, — Distance between the two 
contact lines where a 0.5 mm thick (alpine skis) or 
0.1 mm thick (XC-skis) feeler gauge intersects the 
running surface, with the ski body pressed against a 
planar surface (see Fig. 3). 


4.5 Shovel Length, /, — Projected length of the 
forward turn-up, measured from the tip to the contact 
line according to 4.4 (see Fig. 3). 


4.6 Tail Turn-up Length, /, — Projected length, 
measured from the ski tail to the contact line according 
to 4.4 (see Fig. 3). 


4.7 Side Geometry — The form of the curve bordering 
the running surface and defined by the bottom edge. 


IS 9317 : 2022 


4.7.1 Nominal Width — The nominal width of an alpine 
ski is the width of the waist. The nominal width of 
XC-skis is the width measured at the mounting point. 


4.7.2 Side Geometry of Skis with Concave Side Cut 


In some places like Norway, the “telemark cut” is used 
for this concept. 


4.7.2.1 Width of the shoulder of the ski, b, — Maximum 
width of the shovel section of the ski. (see Fig. 4). 


4.7.2.2 Width of the waist of the ski, b,, — Narrowest 
width of the running surface in the central section of the 


ski (see Fig. 4). 


4.7.2.3 Width of the heel of the ski, b,, — Maximum 
width of the running surface in the rear section of the 
ski (see Fig. 4). 


4.7.2.4 Side cut — The line describing the curved 
portion of the side contour between the shoulder, b, 
and the heel, b,,, of the ski and defined by the bottom 
surface edge (see Fig. 4). 


4.7.2.5 Length of the side cut, l, — Distance between 
the lines at the b, and b, dimensions (see Fig. 4). 


4.7.2.6 Side camber, d, — Maximum distance from a 
line drawn between the widest points of the ski and the 
side of the ski (see Fig. 4). 


Fic. 3 SYMBOLS RELATED TO GEOMETRY OF THE SKI 


FIG.4 SYMBOLS RELATED TO SIDE GEOMETRY WITH CONCAVE SIDE CUT 


5 


IS 9317 : 2022 


4.7.2.7 Waist index, R, — Ratio of the side camber, d, 
to the length of the side cut, /,. 
R, = 4 


K A 


4.7.2.8 Taper, d, — Half of the difference between b, 
and b, 


4.7.2.9 Radius of side cut, R — approximation of the 
average radius, R, allowing global specification of the 
lateral outline of the ski specified by: 


_ Ga) 
2 000 (bir F byr ~ 2b,,) 


where 
091 F081. 
with 
La distance between the lines b,, and bẹ in 
millimetres; 


l = distance between b,, and the rear end of the 
ski, in millimetres; 
L= distance between b,, and the front end of the 
ski, in millimetres; 
bg = width of the running surface at 0.91, from bp 
in millimetres; 
b = width of the running surface at 0.81, from bp 
in millimetres; and 
R = radius of side cut, in metres (see Fig. 5). 


4.7.3 Side Geometry of'Skis with Parallel Side Cut 


4.7.3.1 Width at the forward contact line — Width 
of the running surface at the forward contact line 
(see Fig. 6). 


4.7.3.2 Width at the rear contact line — Width of the 
running surface at the rear contact line (see Fig. 6). 


4.7.3.3 Forward deflection point — The forward end of 
the parallel sides portion of ski body (see Fig. 6). 


4.7.3.4 Length of the forward conical shape — Distance 
between the forward contact line and the forward 
deflection point (see Fig. 6). 


Key 


1 rear contact line 2 forward deflection point 


3 rear deflection point 4 forward contact line 


Fic. 6 TERMS RELATED TO SIDE GEOMETRY OF SKI WITH PARALLEL SIDE CUT 


4.8 Thickness of the Ski, s — Thickness measured 
perpendicular to the running surface (see Fig. 7). 


4.9 Distance Between Bottom Surfaces — Maximum 
distance between the bottom surfaces of two skis, 
measured in the vertical position. 


4.10 Tip Height, h, — Height of the underside of the 
tip measured from a planar surface with the ski body 
pressed against the surface (see Fig. 7). 


4.11 Tail Height, h, — Height of the underside of the 
tail from a planar surface measured with the ski body 
pressed against the surface (see Fig. 7). 


4.12 Camber Height, h, — Distance between the 
running surface of the ski and a planar surface, 
measured with the ski resting freely under its own mass 
(see Fig. 7). 


4.13 Bottom Camber, h, — Maximum camber height 
measured at the highest point of the running surface 
(see Fig. 8). 


4.14 Maximum Camber Length, ly „ay — Length of 
the camber of the unloaded ski when the ski is placed 
on a planar surface, measured with the ski resting freely 
under its own mass (see Fig. 8). 


4.15 Residual Camber Height, h,, — Distance 
measured at the load application point P, 8 cm behind 
the binding mounting point between the running surface 
of the XC-ski and a flat horizontal surface when the ski 
is subjected to a load, F (see Fig. 9). 


4.16 Contact Load — Load which reduces the residual 
camber height to 0.3 mm. 


4.17 Residual Camber Length, l,, — Length of 
separation between the running surface of the XC-ski 
and a flat horizontal surface on which the ski is pressed 
against by a load, F (see Fig. 9). 


4.18 Standard Residual Camber Length, |, — The 
residual camber length remaining after a standard load, 
F, has been applied. 


4.19 x Co-ordinate for Ski Measurements — The 
x co-ordinate originates at the ski tail and defines a 
point on the ski where a measurement is to be taken. 
The length of the x co-ordinate shall be written as a 
subscript of the measured value (see Fig. 7). 


For example : s,,, = 1.6 means that the thickness is 
1.6 cm at a distance of 123 cm from the ski tail. 


IS 9317 : 2022 


4.20 Terms, Definitions and Symbols Relating to 
Length and Position of Kicking-Aid Area (see Fig. 10) 


4.20.1 Length of the Kicking Aid, |... 


a) For waxed skis, the area in which the stepping 
wax is applied. This area is variable and can only 
be defined exactly if waxing marks are indicated. 


b) For no-wax skis, the area of the bottom surface in 
which the kicking aids are located. 


4.20.2 Positioning index, da, of the Kicking Aid Area 


Distance between the centre of the kicking aid and the 
binding mounting point MP according to the equation: 


d 


ST = Xur = Kom 
where 

Xyp > the position of the binding mounting point 

MP; and 

Xup the position of the centre of the kicking aid. 
If the centre of the kicking aid is in front of the binding 
mounting point, d,, is a negative number. If the centre 
of the kicking aid is behind the binding mounting point, 
d.,is a positive number. 


5 TERMS AND SYMBOLS FOR PHYSICAL 
PROPERTIES 


5.1 Mass of Ski, m — The mass of a finished 
manufactured ski without any mounted parts. 


5.2 Balance Point (XC-ski) — A line perpendicular 
to the centre-line of the running surface at which the 
XC-ski is in equilibrium (balance) when placed on a 
fulcrum. 


5.3 Polar Moment of Inertia (Alpine Ski), Z — The 
mass moment of inertia of the ski about its centre of 


gravity. 


5.4 Spring Constant (Alpine Ski), c — The ratio of 
the force, Æ applied to the ski, to the corresponding 
deflection, f, under the respective test conditions. 


c== 


f 


The spring constants of certain sections of the ski are 
designated by the following subscripts: 


a) centre : M 

b) shovel: S 

c) rear: R 
1) afterbody : A 
2) forebody : B 


IS 9317 : 2022 


FıG. 7 SYMBOLS RELATED TO SKI HEIGHT AND THICKNESS 


İk max 


FIG. 8 SYMBOLS RELATED TO BOTTOM CAMBER 


8 cm 


Key 
1 Binding-mounting point 
FIG. 9 SYMBOLS RELATED TO SKI RESIDUAL CAMBER 


FIG. 10 SYMBOLS RELATED TO SKI LENGTH AND POSITION OF KICKING AID AREA 


8 


5.5 Spring Constant Balance (Alpine Ski), B — The 
ratio ofthe afterbody spring constant, c, to the forebody 
spring constant, c,,: 


5.6 Torsional Spring Constant (Alpine Ski), c, — 
The ratio of the torque, M,, applied to the ski to the 
corresponding torsion angle, a 

M, 

SE 

a 
The subscript of the forebody torsional spring constant 
is B and the one of the afterbody torsional spring 
constant is A. 


5.7 Deformation Load (Alpine Ski), F, — The load 
which causes a permanent deformation of the ski under 
the respective test conditions. 


5.8 Breaking Load, F, — The maximum load which 
causes failure of the ski (breaking of delamination) 
under the respective test conditions. 


5.9 Bending Vibrational Characteristics (Alpine 
Ski) — Characteristics indicated by natural frequency 
and half-life. 


5.10 Natural Frequency (Alpine Ski), f — The 
number of vibrations per unit time. 


5.11 Half Life (Alpine Ski), £, ,— The time required to 
reduce the initial amplitude of vibration by half. 


5.12 Fatigue Characteristics — The change of 
essential properties due to long-term cyclical loading. 


6 TERMS RELATING TO THE BINDING 
MOUNTING AREA 


6.1 Binding Mounting Area — An area on top of the 
ski within which the binding mounting screws may be 
located. 


6.2 Mounting Point — A location on the ski that will 
properly locate the boot along the length of the ski. 


The mounting point corresponds to the boot sole mark 
for alpine skis, and to the front upper part of the boot 
for XC-skis. For XC-skis, the mounting point indicates 
placement of drilling jig. 


6.2.1 Four-hole “4 x 4” — square pattern of inserts to 
mount the bindings on the snowboard. 


6.3 Ski Binding Screw (SBS) — A fastener which 
after mounting ensures attachment of the binding and 
ski by axial pretension. 


6.4 Penetration Depth, d — The length of that portion 
of the screw shaft which penetrates the ski body, 


IS 9317 : 2022 


measured from the ski top surface to the end of the 
screw. 


6.5 Driving Torque — The maximum value of the 
moment which is required to drive the ski binding 
screw into the drill hole of the ski, in accordance with 
defined conditions, without lubrication and without 


tapping. 


6.6 Tightening Torque — The moment specified in 
the mounting instructions, which is recommended for 
tightening the ski binding screw to ensure sufficient 
fastening. 


6.7 Stripping Torque, T, — Maximum measurable 
moment which causes damage to the internal thread in 
the ski or the thread of the screw if the already tightened 
screw is further loaded by a driving moment. 


6.8 Static Screw Retention Strength — The load, 
applied quasi-statically and in the direction of the 
centre-line of the screw, which is required to pull out 
two test screws, at which the material of the top skin of 
the ski fails or the top skin is delaminated. 


6.9 Leash — Cord-like device wherein one end is 
attached to the top surface of the ski or to the binding 
and the other end provides an attachment to one of the 
skier’s or snowboarder’s legs. 


7TERMS RELATING TO SKI PERFORMANCE 


7.1 Alpine Skis 


7.1.1 Terms Relating to Straight Running Performance 
without Edging 


7.1.1.1 Lateral tracking stability — Ski characteristics 
pertaining to maintaining fall-line direction at a given 
speed when subjected to alternating left and right 
deviations. 


7.1.1.2 Vertical tracking stability — Ski characteristic 
pertaining to terrain conformity at a given speed with 
respect to disturbing vibrations. 


7.1.1.3 Shock absorption — Ski characteristic 
pertaining to bump and dip conformity at a given speed 
with respect to shock transfer to the skier. 


7.1.2 Terms Describing Traversing Performance 


7.1.2.1 Traversing stability — Ski characteristic 
pertaining to maintaining a straight traverse track, 
where the skier is in a normal traversing body position 
and edging is sufficient, without the skis rotating up or 
down the slope, to avoid side-slipping. 


7.1.2.2 Traversing edge response — Ski characteristic 
pertaining to a smooth change from carving to skidding 
and vice versa without the skis rotating up or down the 
slope when the edge setting is decreased or increased. 


IS 9317 : 2022 


7.1.3 Terms Describing Turning Performance 


7.1.3.1 Turn initiation response — Ski characteristic 
pertaining to ski reaction to common turning initiation 
techniques with respect to over-turning or excessive 
turning resistance. 


7.1.3.2 Turn execution response — Ski characteristic 
pertaining to maintaining a stable turn, after initiation, 
without corrective actions by the skier (over-turning, 
railing, chattering, and excessive turning resistance are 
examples of negative response). 


7.1.3.3 Turn completion response — Ski characteristic 
pertaining to ease with which a turn maybe completed. 


7.1.3.4 Turning quickness — Ski characteristic 
pertaining to the reproducibility of ski reaction in a 
sequence of short turns with respect to overturning or 
excessive turning resistance. 


7.1.3.5 Carving response Ski characteristic 
pertaining to the execution of a carved turn of a 
given radius on hard snow with minimal skidding or 
chattering. 


7.1.3.6 Skidding response — Ski characteristic 
pertaining to the smoothness and stability of a skidded 
turn during the execution of a turn, traversing or 


stopping. 
7.1.4 General Performance Terms 


7.1.4.1 Edge grip — Ski characteristic pertaining to the 
prevention of undesired side slipping on hard snow at a 
given slope steepness and a given edging angle. 


7.1.4.2 Steering sensitivity — Ski characteristic 
pertaining to ski reaction to steering actions of the 
skier such as edge setting, weight shifting and dynamic 
weighting/unweighting. 


7.1.4.3 Forgiveness — Ski characteristic pertaining 
to the reduction of the effect of slope disturbances or 
exaggerated control actions of the skier. 


7.1.4.4 Edge-grip balance — Ski characteristic 
pertaining to edge grip distribution front-to-back of the 
ski in order to allow a normal skier body position in a 
given skiing situation. 


7.1.4.5 Chattering — Ski characteristic pertaining to 
intermittent edge grip tendency. 


7.1.4.6 Railing — Ski characteristic pertaining to 
ski tendency to maintain direction in spite of applied 
control actions. 


7.1.4.7 Liveliness — Ski characteristic pertaining to 
quick ski reaction to terrain changes and skier actions. 


10 


7.1.4.8 Quietness — Ski characteristic pertaining to 
the ski’s ability to dampen disturbances like shocks, 
vibration and other instabilities. 


7.2 Cross-country Skis 


7.2.1 Terms Relating to Straight Running Performance 
without Edging 


7.2.1.1 Gliding — Characteristic of the ski which 
relates to the smoothness and the speed of the gliding 
phase. 


7.2.1.2 Retention (properties) — Characteristic of the 
ski not to glide backwards during kicking phase. 


7.2.1.3 Lateral tracking stability — Characteristic of 
the ski to maintain the track line direction. 


7.2.1.4 Springiness — Elastic response of the ski to the 
impulse of the skier. 


7.2.2 Terms Describing Turning Performance 


7.2.2.1 Turn executing response — Ski characteristic 
pertaining to maintaining a stable turn. 


7.2.2.2 Skidding response (see 7.1.3.6). 
7.2.3 General Performance Terms 


7.2.3.1 Edge grip — Ski characteristic relevant to 
skidding, snow plough, and fish bone climbing. 
Generally pertaining to the prevention of side slipping. 


7.2.3.2 Frictional noise — Sound produced by friction 
between snow and ski. 


7.2.3.3 Icing — Phenomenon of ice deposition on 
the running surface of the ski depending on the snow 
conditions and the properties of the gliding surface. 


7.2.3.4 Waxability — Characteristic of the ski to be 
easily waxed and to maintain the waxed condition. 


7.3 Terms Relating to the Performance and the Use 
of Snowboards 


7.3.1 To Ride — To move with a snowboard. 
7.3.2 Carving — Extreme turning along the edge. 
7.3.3 Skidding — Sliding without using the edge. 


7.3.4 Riding Fakie — Snowboard riding in the opposite 
ways, that is, the tail of the board used as the front end. 


7.3.5 Backside — General term for rides and jumps 
during which pressure is put on the heel of the foot/leg. 


7.3.6 Frontside Turn 
on the toe of the foot. 


Turn performed with pressure 


7.3.7 Half Pipe — U-shaped channel built in the snow 
for snowboard freestylers. 


7.3.8 Ollie — Jump initiation, where the board is bent 
by a front-leg traction and back-leg pressure. 


8 MEASURING CONDITIONS 


8.1 Conditioning 


All measurements of geometrical characteristics shall 
be carried out on a finished, manufactured ski without 
any fittings and ancillary parts; it shall have been 
conditioned for atleast 2 h at a temperature of 27 + 2 °C 
and relative humidity of 65 + 2 percent. 


IS 9317 : 2022 


8.2 Tolerances 


8.2.1 Data published by the manufacturer based on this 
standard shall be subject to the tolerance limits given 
in Table 1. 


8.3 Test Report 


The test report apart from the specified values 
and observed values shall also include complete 
identification of the ski (brand or trade-name, model 
designation, size and manufacturer’s name). 


Table 1 Tolerance Limits 
(Clause 8.2.1) 


SI No. Dimension Alpine Ski Cross-country Ski 

(mm) (mm) 

(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Length +10 +30 
20 
ii) Width +0.5 +0.5 
-1.5 -1.5 
iii) Thickness +05 +05 
-1.2 -1.2 
iv) Height 10 10 
v) Bottom camber 5 +10 
vi) Residual — +0.8 
vii) Camber height = —0.5 


IS 9317 : 2022 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Mountaineering and Adventure Sports Sectional Committee, PGD 27 


Organization 


Indian Mountaineering Foundation, New Delhi 


Atal Bihari Vajpayee Institute of Mountaineering and 


Allied Sports, Manali 
Border Security Force, New Delhi 


Defence Materials and Stores Research and 
Development Establishment, Kanpur 


Defence Metallurgical Research Laboratory, 
Ministry of Defence, Hyderabad 


Defence Research and Development Organization, 
Ministry of Defence, New Delhi 


Defense Research and Development Organization, 
Snow and Avalanche Study Establishment, 
Chandigarh 


Directorate General of Quality Assurance, 
Ministry of Defence, New Delhi 


Garware Technical Fibres Limited, Pune 
Gipfel Climbing Private Limited, Meerut 
High Altitude Warfare School, Gulmarg, J & K 


Himalayan Mountaineering Institute, Darjeeling 

Indian Mountaineering Foundation, New Delhi 

Indo Tibetan Border Police, New Delhi 

Jawahar Institute of Mountaineering and Winter 
Sports, Pahalgam 

Karam Industries, Noida 


Kohinoor Ropes Pvt Ltd, Aurangabad 


Master General Ordnance Branch, New Delhi 
Motilal Dulichand Private Limited, Kanpur 


Mountaineering and Skiing Institute (M&SI), Auli 


National Test House, Kolkata 
Nehru Institute of Mountaineering, Uttarkashi 


Northern India Textile Research Association, 
Ghaziabad 


Outdoor School, New Delhi 


Representative(s) 


WG Cpr AMIT CHOWDHURY (Chairman) 
DIRECTOR 


SHRI PREM VISHWAS 
IG TRAINING (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR 


Dr T. RAGHU 
MR VENKATA RAMANA (Alternate) 


SHRI R. SHANKAR 


DIRECTOR 


M SATYANARAYANA 
SHRI M. V. KUMBHALKAR (Alternate) 


SATISH J. CHITNIS 
APAR MAHAJAN 
THE COMMANDANT 


Gp CAPT JAIKISHAN 
CAPT MOHAMED FASITH (Alternate) 


SHRI HARISH JOSHI 
SUDHIR KRISHNANKUTTY (Alternate) 


THE COMMANDANT 


PRINCIPAL 


SHRI MOHAMMAD 
SHRI SANJIV SHARMA (Alternate) 


SUNIL BIHANI 
VINAY CHANDAK (Alternate) 


CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER 


SHRI SHAILENDRA MISRA 
SHRI SUNIL PRAHLADKA (Alternate) 


BRIG YASHPAL SINGH (RETD) 
BALWINDER SINGH (A/ternate) 


AVINASH KUMAR 
PRINCIPAL 


Mrs NEHA KAPIL 
Dr M. S. PARMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI MOHIT OBEROI 


Organization 
RK Enterprises, Faridabad 


Safety Appliances Manufacturer’s Association, 
Mumbai 


Sagar Asia Pvt Ltd, Secunderabad 
Sonam Gyatso Mountaineering Institute, Gangtok 


Swami Vivekanand Institute of Mountaineering, 
Mount Abu 


Thanawala and Company, Mumbai 


The Synthetic and Art Silk Mills Research 
Association, Mumbai 


Trekko Equipment, New Delhi 
In Personal Capacity 
In Personal Capacity 
In Personal Capacity 
BIS Director General 


IS 9317 : 2022 


Representative(s) 


SHRI LALIT NAGPAL 
SHRI RAJA RAM PRASAD (Alternate) 


SHRI NATWAR BAGRI 
AVNEET ANTOORKAR (Alternate) 


Ms T. ANITHA PRASAD 
PRINCIPAL 


PRINCIPAL 


SHRI HEMAL M. THANAWALA 


Dr MANISHA MATHUR 
SHRIMATI A. SUDAM (Alternate) 


SHRI NAGESH SETHI 
CoL H. S. CHAUHAN 
CoL A. B. GOTH 
BRIG K. KUMAR 


SHRI NAVINDRA GAUTAM, SCIENTIST ‘E’ AND HEAD (PGD) 


[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 


SHRI KUNDAN GIRI 
SCIENTIST ‘C’ (PGD), BIS 


13 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part ofthese publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: PGD 27 (17506). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 


Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 


Regional Offices: Telephones 


Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower-1, 6" Floor, DMRC Building, 
Bhavbhuti Marg, New Delhi 110002 


Eastern (o : 8" Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, 2367 0012 


| 2323 7617 
Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 | 2320 9474 


Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg 
Chandigarh 160019 


265 9930 


Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western E Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri (East), | 2821 8093 
Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAL 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


