**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 2597-1 (1964): Code of practice for the use of electron 
tubes^ Part 1: Commercial receiving tubes [LITD 4: Electron 
Tubes and Display Devices] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS:2S97(PartI)-l964 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE USE OF 
ELECTRONIC VALVES 

PART I COMMERCIAL RECEIVING VALVES 

(First Reprint OCTOBER 1981 ) 



ODC 621.385 




©Copyright 1964 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

^^^.y^HhUm .»|<AV4J«, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARC 

'k>."j'r'^, .3j-'i^-- ^ NEW DELHI 110002 ■ 

Ktl9-^ March 1964 



IS:2597(PartI)-1964 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE USE OF 
ELECTRONIC VALVES 

PART I COMMERCIAL RECEIVING VALVES 

Electronic Components Sectional Committee, ETDC 25 

Chairman Representing 

Shex T. V. RkUAMumri National Phsrtical Laboratory ( CSIR )» New 

Delhi 

Members 

Da. S. S. S. AoABWALA Cantral Elactronict Engineering Research Insti- 

tute ( CSIR ), Pilani 
8bri B. L. Aooa&wal Small Scale Manufacturer ( Pioneer Electric Cor* 

poration, Agra ) 
SflEi B. BAUtBAMASWAMT Research and Development OrganLcation ( Minis* 

try of Defence ) 
Shri p. K. Saba ( Alternate ) 
Sbbi p. N. Dbobhakta Department of Technical Development* Govern- 

ment of India, New Delhi 
Shbi a. N. Mukbebjbb ( Alternate ) 
Sbbi N. V. Qadadbab Wireless Advieer ( Department of Posts Jt Tele* 

graphs ) 
Sbbi K. R. K. Iyknoab ( Alternate) 
Wo Cdb O. S. Malbab Directorate of Tethnioal Development and Pro- 

duction ( Air ), Ministry of Defence 
Sbbi H. S. Bhattacbabta ( Alternate ) 
Sbbi S. S. Matbabu All India Radio Merchants* Aasociation, Bombay 

Sbbi H. J. Mibcbakdavz Indian Telephone Industries Ltd.« Bangalore 

Sbbi A. Mitba Directorate General of Supplies h Disposals 

( Ministry of Works, Housing k Rehabilita- 
tion ) 
Cdb B. G. Mcdboucab Directorate of Stores Product ion ( Navy ). Ministry 

<t Defence 
Lt Cdb 0. P. Sbboal ( Alternate ) ' 
Sbbi P. R. Mulobabdaki Mulohandani Electrical and Radio Indusirisi Ltd., 

Bombay 
Sbbi B. N. Pbababb Radio and Eleotrioals Manofaetoring Co. Ltd., 

Bangalore 
Sbbi H« V. Ababtbakaaa* 
TAV A (Alternate) 
Sbbi A. S. Rao Atomic Energy Sstablishmant. Bmnbay 

Sbbi U. V. Wablx; ( Alternate ) 

( Cantlnned on page 2 ) 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
MANAK BHAVAN, f BAHADUt SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 



IS:25970^flreI)-19M 

( ContUutedfrom page 1 ) 

Members ReprennHng 

Db. Saboj Datta Direotorata Qeneral of OkviX Aviation ( Radio 

Conitruciion Wing )» Miniatry of Transport 
8hbx S. R. Nibodt ( AUemate ) 
Shri p. L. Sehgal Development Commiseionar, Small Scale Indoe- 

tries, New Delhi 
SuBi R. SS3HA8AYBB Directorate General of Poeta k Telegraphs, Minis- 

try of Transport & Communications 
Sbbi C. R. Subbamamian Bharat Electronics Ltd., Bangalore 

Sbbi K. R. Thakab ( Alternate ) 
Sbbi S. Komab ( Alternate ) 
Sbbi P. Subyanabataka National £kco Radio & Engineering Co. Ltd., 

Bombay 
Sbbi K. N. Tiwari Chief Inspectorate of Electronica ( Ministry of 

Defence ), Bangalore 
Sbbi R. K. Vaishaupatam Radio Manufacturers* Association of India, 

Calcutta 
Sbbi 8. Vbnbatabaman Philips India Ltd., Calcutta 

Sbbi Y. S. Vbnxatxswabak, J^iteotoT, 1^1 {Ex-offich Member) 
Deputy Director ( Electroteoh- 
nical ) 

Secretary 

Sbbi 8. SBnuvAaAK 
Assistant Director ( Eiectrotechnioal \ ISI 

Electronic Tubes and Valves Subcommittee, ETDG 25 : 6 

Convener 
Sbbi C. R. Subbahabiak Bharat Electronics Ltd., Bangalore 

Members 

Sbbi K. S. Sbbbfbabasr ( Alternate to 
Shri C. R. Subramanian ) 
Dr. S. S. 8. AOABWALA Central Electronics Engineering Research Insti- 

tute ( CSIR ), Pilani 
Sbbi H* V. Badbibath Secretariat of Radio and Cable Board 

Pbof. S. Samfatb Indian Institute of Technology , Madras 

Sbbi K. N. Tiwabi Chief Inspectorate of Electronics ( Ministry of 

Defence ), Bangalore 
Sbbi R. K. Vaubampatav Radio Manufacturers* Association of India* 

Calcutta 



AMENDMENT NO- 1 JULY 1973 
TO 

IS : 2597 ( Part I )-1964 CODE OF PRACTICE 
FOR THE USE OF ELECTRONIC 
VALVES 

PART I COMMERCIAL RECEIVING VALVES 

Alterations 

( First cover page^ pages I and 3, Title ) — Substitute the following for 
the existing title: 

^ Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE 
FOR THE USE OF ELECTRON TUBES 

FART I COMMERCIAL RECEIVINO TUBES' 

Substitute * electron tubes * for * electronic valves * and * electron tubes 
and valves ' wherever it appears in the standard. 

Substitute * tube * for * valves * wherever it appears in the standard, 
{ ETDC 39 ) 

R*pr<Mluc«d by Rtprography Untt, 181. Ntw 0«lhl 



IS:2997(PirtI)-19(4 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE USE OF 
ELECTRONIC VALVES 

PART I COMMERCIAL RECEIVING VALVES 
0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part I ) was adopted by the Indian 
Standards Institution on 3 February 1964, after the draft finalized by 
the Electronic Components Sectional Committee had been approved by 
the Eiectrotechnical Division Council. 

0.2 With the establishment of electronic valve manufacture in 
India, the need has been felt for bringing out the necessary national 
standards on the subject. A start has been made in this direction on 
the subject of receiver valves which are currently under production. It 
is proposed to bring out a series of Indian Standards covering tubes and 
valves and this code is one of that series. The other standards will 
cover methods of measurements of characteristics, standard outlines 
and terminology, etc. 

03 This code is intended to give general guidance to the designers of 
electronic equipment to be supplemented by data sheets from the valve 
manufacturer so that optimum efficiency, performance and life can be 
obtained. This part covers the recommendations applicable to com* 
mercial receiving valves. Further parts covering other types of valves, 
such as transmitting valves, industrial valves and special quality valves, 
will be published shortly. 

0.4 The recommendations made in this code relate to normal commer* 
cial application of valves and incases where a higher degree of reliability 
is called for, for example, in certain professioiial equipment, additional 
precautions will have to be taken and for this, reference should be made 
to manufacturers' catalogues. 

0.5 This code is based, to a large extent, on B.S. GP 1005 : 1962 The 
Use of Electronic Valves, issued by the British Sundards Institution. 
The rating systems (see 33J) have been aligned with lEG Publi- 
cation 134*1961 Rating Systems for Electronic Tubes and Valves and 
Analogous Semiconductor Devices, issued by the International Electro- 
technical Commission ( lEC )• 



IS:2597(PartI)«1964 

0.6 A limited terminology for the immediate purposes of this code has 
been included in this standard. A complete terminology on electronic 
valves is separately under preparation. 

0.7 Explanatory paragraphs in italics have been added under most of 
the recommendations in this code. 

0.8 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of 
this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance 
with IS: 2-1960 Rules for Rounding Off Numerical Values { Revised). 
The number of significant places retained in the rounded ofl* value 
should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 

0.9 This code is intended chiefly to lay down recommendations for the 
use of commercial receiving valves, and it does not include all the 
necessary provisions of a contract. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard ( Part I ) covers recommendations for use of commer* 

cial receiving valves. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall 

apply. 

2.1 Bogey Electronic Derices — An electronic device whose characteristics 
have the published nominal values for the type. A bogey electronic 
device for any particular application can be obtained by considering 
only those characteristics which are directly related to the application. 

2.2 Cathode Interface Impedance — An electrical impedance existing 
between the cathode base metal and the cathode coating. 

2.3 Contact Potential DiiTerence — The difference between the worlc func* 
tions of two materials, divided by the electronic charge. 

2.4 Electrode Current — The net current from an electrode into the 
interelcctrodc space. The terms cathode current, anode current, grid 
current, and so on, are used to designate electrode currents from these 
specific electrodes. 

2.5 Electrode Potential — Refers to the potential (or voltage) with 
reference to the cathode or negative filament connection unless otherwise 
specified. 



IS:2S»7(P«rtI)-]964 

2j6 EfcctrMi Defies -— A device in which conducdon is principmlly by 
electrons moving through a vacuum, gas or semiconductor. 

2«7 Eketrooie Vahra «** Valye» vacuum tube, or photocell in which conduce 
tion takes place by electrons moving through a vacuum or gaseous 
medium within a gas-tight envelope. The term ' valve * is used for 
convenience throughout the code and is to be read as meaning * electro- 
nic valve *• 

2^ Rating — A value which establishes either a limiting' capability 
or a limiting condition for an electronic device. It is determined for 
specified values of environment and operation, and may be stated in any 
suitable terms. 

KoTS — LimitiDg oonditiozui may bo either maximom or minimam. 

2J9 Rating System — The set of principles ui>on which ratings are .estab- 
lished and which determine their interpretation. 

Nora — The rating tyttem indicates the division of responsibility between the 
device manufacturer and the circuit designer, with the object of ensuring that the 
working eonditioos do not eocceed the ratings. 

3. RECOMMENDATIONS 

3*1 PabUthed Data — The published data on specific valve types should 
always be carefully studied before the design of an equipment is under- 
taken. Where exceptional need arises or where a valve is to be used in 
an application which does not appear to be provided for by the publish- 
ed data^ the valve manufacturer should be consulted so that the equip* 
ment designer may have additional information from the linanufacturer 
for the application. New application of a valve may need suitable tests 
to be provided during manufacturing. Hence eouipment designer 
should aeep the valve manufacturer informed with the current trend of 
requirements. 

Published ratings represent the valve manufacturer's opinion of the 
most satisfactory compromise between high efficiency and long life^ and are 
based upon a thorough study of valve performance either to normal practice 
or to the manufacturer's forecast of future practice. This is of particular 
importance when major departures from current practice are contemplated; 
the valve manufacturer should be informed well in advance, so that^ if neces- 
sary ^ new ratings can be established from preliminary trials and confirmed 
by further tests from regular production batches. Unless the valve manu-^ 
factwer is so irtformed, he will be faced with the choice of suggesting either 
a rating which is unnecessarily conservative or one involving unknown risks. 

3.1.1 Sdectltm of Ehttrmic Valves ^1% is generally not desirable for 
valves to be specially selected for individual equipment. As it is diflicult 
to estimate the effect of valves vrith one or more characteristics at the 



IS:2597(P«rCl)*1964 

limiting value, it is very desirable that initial tests be made with the 
largest reasonable number of equipments and valves from regular 
production. 

3*1 .2 Early Samples — When equipment is being designed on the basis 
of new valve types, it should be borne in mind that there may be consi- 
derable variations in characteristics and dimensions between first samples 
and subsequent production. 

Early samples of new fahe types embody a considerable amount of 
handwork and are not necessarily typical of mass-produced article. Hand- 
made samples may be superior in stmte respects, but in general vary from 
valve to valve. Valves manufactured in regular production would in general, 
be more consistent than those made in a laboratory. Circuit design based 
on the mean characteristics of a limited number of early sample valves is 
liable to serious error and should not be adopted for production. 

3.2 Dimensioiis — Particular attention should be paid to the published 
dimensions when using established types in the design of equipment. 
Dimensions should not be taken from individual valves to ensure that 
adequate space is allowed for valve shield, and retaining and mounting 
devices for all valves of the type. 

33 Ratings 

3.3.1 General 

a) Ratings are the set of limiting values defining the operating 
conditions within which the valve can be expected to give 
satisfactory performance. These are so chosen that failure 
rate, life and performance are sufficiently satisfactory. The 
expectation of life generally decreases continuously as the 
ratings are approached. Exceeding the rating accelerates the 
decline. Barring a few exceptions the more conservative the 
use of the valve with respect to ratings the greater is the life 
expectancy and reliability. 

b) The first maximum or minimtum rating reached should be the 
limiting factor. All ratings are not mutually compensating, 
for example, it is not safe to assume that one rating ( say, 
maximum anode voltage ) may be exceeded provided a corres- 
.ponding reduction is made in some other rating (for example, 
anode current ), although this may be permissible in some 
instances. Further, a rating variation authorized for a parti- 
cular valve type is not necessarily applicable to another similar 
type. Use of valves in applications where the absolute maximum 
ratings are exceeded should be done only in consulution with 
the valve manufacturer. 



IS:2S97(PartI)-1964 

3.3.2 Rating Systems 

3.3 JLl General — Rating systems are so chosen by the device 
manufacturer to provide acceptable serviceability of the device^ taking 
responsibility for the effect of changes in operating conditions due to 
variations in the characteristics of electronic device under consideration. 
The designer should design the equipment so that, initially and through*- 
out life, no design maximum value for the intended source is exceeded 
with a bogey device under the worst probable operating conditions with 
respect to supply voltage variation, variation in characteristics of all 
other devices in the equipment, equipment control adjustment, load 
variation, signal variation and environmental conditions. Manufac- 
turers of valves specify three rating systems to assist the designer. 

3J.2.2 Absolute^maxbnum rating j>^9/€m— Absolute-maximum ratings 
are limiting values of operating and environmental conditions appli- 
cable to any electronic device of a specific type as defined by its publi- 
shed data, which should not be exceeded under the worst probable 
conditions. 

These values are chosen by the device manufacturer to provide accept* 
able serviceability of the device^ taking NO responsibility for equipment 
variations, environmental variations and the effect of changes in operating 
conditions due to variations in the characteristics of the device under 
consideration and of all other electronic devices in the equipment. 

The equipment designer should ensure that initially and throughout its 
life no absolute-^naximum value for the intended service is exceeded with any 
device under the worst probable operating conditions with respect to supply 
voltage variation^ equipment component variation, equipment control adjust' 
ment, load variation, signal variation, environmental conditions and varia* 
tions in the characteristics of the device under consideration and of all other 
electronic devices in the equipment. 

3.3.2.3 Design-maximum rating j)^j/«m— Design-maximum ratings are 
limiting values of operating and environmental conditions applicable to 
a bogey electronic device of a specified type as defined by its published 
data, and should not be exceeded under the worst probable conditions. 

These values are chosen by the device manufacturer to provide accept- 
able serviceability of the device, taking responsibility for the effects of 
changes in operating conditions due to variations In the characteristics of the 
electronic device under consideration. 

The equipment designer should ensure that Initially and throughout its 
life, no design-maximum value for the intended service is exceeded with a 
bogey device under the worst probable conditions with respect to supply 
volage variation, equipment component variation, variation in the character* 
Istics of all other devices in the equipment, equipment control adjustment^ 
load variation^ signal variatkm and environmemal conditions. 



IS:2597(PartI).1964 

3.3.2.4 Design-centre rating system — Design-centre ratings are limit- 
ing values of operating and environmental conditions applicable to a 
bogey electronic device of a specified type as defined by its published 
data, and should not be exceeded under normal conditions. 

These values are chosen by the device manufacturer to provide accept* 
able serviceability of the device in average applications taking responsibility 
for normal changes in operating cdnditions due to rated supply voltage 
variation, equipment control adjustment^ load variation, signal variation, 
equipment component variation, environmental conditions and variations in 
the characteristics of all electronic devices in the equipment. 

The equipment designer should ensure that initially no design^entre 
value for the intended service is exceeded with a bogey electronic device in 
equipment operating at the stated normal supply voltage. 

3.3.3 Atmospheric Pressure Limitations — Ratings, in general, apply to 
operation at normal atmospheric pressures at altitudes below 1 000 metres 
and at relative humidity below 80 percent. In the event of valves being 
operated at other pressures the valve manufacturer should be consulted 
unless specific ratings are given for the intended use. 

This provision refers, for example, to the use of valves in aircraft, when 
the reduced atmospheric pressure at high attitudes may greatly increase the 
risk of external voltage flashover, and may also greatly reduce the effect of 
convection cooling. Since many valves and other components are rated under 
free air conditions excessively high temperatures may be developed due to the 
lack of convective cooling. Particular attention should be paid to the hot 
spot bulb temperature of valves since, not only will the life of the valves be 
seriously reduced, but the characteristics may also change appreciably with 
the high temperature. 

3.3.4 Frequency Limitations — When a frequency range is specified, the 
valve ratings apply only within this limitation. In some instances valves 
may be operated at reduced ratings at frequencies outside those speci- 
fied for the maximum ratings. Unless, however, such reduced ratings are 
sp>ecified they should not be. assumed without consultation wiSi the 
valve manufacturer. 

If some types of valves are used appreciably above their maximum 
frequency rating, the power dissipated in the lead-in wires owing to resistance 
losses and in the glass between the leads owing to dielectric losses, may be 
sufficient to overheat the wires or the glass. Further, there is an increased 
danger of damage to the vahe owing to eddy current losses heating the bulb. 
Such effects may release gas into the vahe or cause the glass to soften or 
crack. In the case of high-vacuum rectifiers dedgned fiHr use at mains fre- 
quency, increasing the operating frequency may cause electrolysis of the 
glass, particularly in those types in which the anode is supported by metal 

8 



IS:2S97(PftrtI)-1964 

wings touching the bulb. Early failure may also occur owing to the filament 
resonating at the operating frequency, and either shortcircuiting to the 
anode or breaking ibse to fatigue. It is most important, therefore, that 
rectifiers intended for operation at 50 cfs should not be used appreciably 
above this frequency without the manufacturer's approval. 

33S Pulse Operation Limitations — Where no pulse or peak ratings are 
specified it shall not be assumed that the valves will function satis* 
factorily if the average values under pulse operation conditions are with- 
in the normal values. 

Under pulse conditions, the average values of, for example^ current and 
voltage may be well within the normal ratings but very high values will be 
required for short periods of time and unless the vahe has been manufactured 
to meet these requirements premature failure may occur. 

3.4 Heater or FOancnt Voltage Regolation and Supplies 

3.4.1 General — A valve is designed to have optimum life and per- 
formance at its rated voltage or current and to withstand limited devia- 
tions from these values. The equipment should be so designed and 
adjusted that the average heater or filament voltage has the nominal 
rated value. 

When measuring heater or filament voltages, the voltmeter should be 
connected to the valve pins or terminals. In addition, where the waveform 
of the heater I filament supply is not sinusoidal, care should be taken to use 
suitable measuring instruments. Meters embodying rectifiers are generally 
not suitable for this purpose. 

3.4.2 Regulation of Heater or Filament Supplies — Different conditions 
regaxding permissible values for heater voltage or current specified by 
the manufacturer should be adhered to by the equipment designer* 

3^JL1 Abnormal voltage variattons Should the heater or filament 
voltage be liable for variations larger than those indicated as permis- 
sible, and if this condition cannot be overcome in most cases, it will be 
necessary for reduced ratings to be applied to the valve. Information 
on any necessary rating changes should be obtained from the valve 
manufacturers in such cases. 

Consistent emission from the cathode depends uptm equilibrium between 
the evaporation of active material from the surface and its replacement from 
within. If the cathode temperature is excessively high, evaporation will 
occur at a faster rate than replacement. If the cathode temperature is too 
low, both evtqHfration and replacement will decrease. In either case the 
emission from the cathode will decline at an excessive rate and the life will 
be seriously impedred. The permissible variation qf heater or filament 
voltage {and^ therefore, of cathode temperatwts ) does not depend tq^on one 



IS :2597( Parti) -1964 

valve alone but is governed to same degree by ike nature nfike drcuU and 
of the other associated valves. AcHve material evmorated by excessive 
cathode temperature may be depaeited an ather dectroaes; ifdepaeUedan the 
grid it may cause grid emission thus urtavdy damping the inpm<itcmtt. Far 
example^ a high Afutriode which may seem quite tumnal an statie tests may^ 
owing to grid emission, give a paar performance under operating cond i t ions 
in high impedance circuits. Deposit ef active material on the imface of an 
insulator will reduce inter-electrade insidation and increase tlie risk of vtdve 
noise. 

3.4.2.2 Parallel operation from mains — Valves having nominal 
heater characteristics supplied with heater v<dtage in parallel from a 
transformer will give satisfact<»ry operation if the voltages on the heaters 
and filaments are within ±S percent of the jated yslvic when the mains 
supply voltage is at its declared value. In the case of equipment 
designed for mains supplies between 200 and 2S0 volts this will require 
a minimum of three suitably spaced tappings on the primary of the 
transformer. For purpose of selecting suitable taps reference should be 
made to *IS : 591-1954 Specification for Low-Power, Low-Voltage Mains 
Transformers for Radio Receivers, Amplifiers, Small Transmitters and 
Similar Other Purposes. 

Under these conditions, the ratings tdlow for tim mtdns valine varia- 
tions not exceeding ±10 percent. Mains variations otoside timse Omits are 
likely to result in some impairment of life orperfm 



3.4.23 Series operation from mains ^ Valves designed for consUnt 
current operation shall only be used for series operation. Where valve 
heaters with nominal heater characteristics are connected in scries with 
a controlling resistance, operation will be satisfactory if the heater 
current is within 2\ (percent of the rated value when the declared supply 
voltage is applied and valves having nominal heater voltage drop are 
inserted. For equipment designed for mains supplies b etwe en 200 and 
250 volts this requirement necessitates a mininsum of three suitably 
spaced tappings on the controlling reststanoe. 



Under these conditions^ the ratings altowfor mains wabage variations 
not exceeding ± 10 percent. Mains variatiom omttide tltewe IkmUs are Bkdy 
to result in some impairmera of life or performtsnee. Ike use of cert^dn 
combinations of certain types of valve heaters^ awing to Sffaint iidtiat 
heating characteristics, may result in particular heaters being run at an 
excessive temperature during the initial warming^^ period. Theequ^ 
ment designer should ensure that whUe switddng on^ the heater vtdtege of 
the valve does not exceed beyond the limitii^ veduee p enn bs Me for the 
type. To prevent this occurring^ types wUeh amy be ttable to ifapwugg wOt 

*U]ider revision. 

IQ 



AMENDMENT NO. 2 JANUARY 1^75 

TO 

IS : 2597 ( Part I ).1964 CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 

THE USE OF ELECTRON TUBES 

PART I COMMERCIAL RECEIVING TUBES 

Akeradon 

( Page 10, clause 3.4.2.2, /tnf 9 ) — Substitute * IS : 6297 ( Part 11 )- 
1973 Specification for Transformers and Inductors (Power, Audio, Pulse 
and Switching ) for Electronic Equipment, Part II Power Transformers * for 
' IS : 591-1954 Specification for Low-Power, Low- Voltage Mains Transformers 
for Radio Receivers, Amplifiers, Small Transmitters and Similar Other 
Purposes*. 



(ETDC39) 



f^^produc^ by Rvproortphy Unit. I8I, lUw Dtltil 



IS:2597(PjirtI)-1964 

have a maximum surge^vohage rating and may require a surge-limiting device 
to ensure that this voltage is not exceeded. When valve heaters or filaments 
are connected in series from a substantially constant voltage source^ or 
in parallel from a substantially constant-current source^ or in series^ 
parallel^ the sharing of voltage or current will be determined by their 
resistances^ which are dependent on their temperatures. These methods of 
interconnection cannot safely be used with combinations of directly and 
indirectly heated valves. When valves of different heater or filament con- 
struction are operated in such circuits^ it is not sufficient to ensure that the 
heater or filament voltages or currents are correct in normal equilibrium 
operating conditions. Owing to their different temperature-resistance 
characteristics, it is possible that heaters or filaments may sustain abnormal 
temperatures during the period between switching-on and the establishment 
of equilibrium y and also when changes occur in the supply voltages. 

In AC/DC equipment it is not good practice for the scries resis- 
tance employed in the mains supply to be common to both HT and 
LT supplies for the following reasons: 

a) Automatic gain control ( AGC ) will vary the total value of 
HT current, and this current passing through the common 
resistance will affect »the valve heater voltage, thus causing 
greater variations than would be experienced owing to mains 
variation only. 

b) Variations in HT load current due to tolerances on valves and 
components will cause an additional variation in heater 
current. 

c) The total RMS current taken by the equipment with AG 
operation will be greater than the total DC current with DC 
operation. A set correctly adjusted for the latter would, 
therefore, underrun the heaters on an AC supply. 

3.4 J2 A Parallel operation from lead-acid or nickel^iron cells — Valves 
designed and recommended for use with chargers are intended to 
give satisfactory performance over the range of battery' supply voltage 
expected with and without a charger. 

a) Lead-acid cells — The overall variation is from 1*8 to 2*5 V per 
cell although it is appreciated that infrequent short-term 
fluctuations may raise the voltage to 2*7 V. 

b) Nickel-iron cells — The mean voltage per cell should be taken 
as 1*25 V without charger and 1-4 V per cell with charger. 

3AJ1.S Other sources of supply — Where supplies for valves are deriv- 
ed from sources other than those considered in the above clauses, the 
controls should . ensure that the filament/heater voltages are within 
db7| percent of the rated values. 

3«4J4i Operation of heaier or filament supplies above 50 cjs — It 
should not be assumed that heaters designed for 50 c/s will operate 

11 



IS:2597(PartI)-1964 

satisfactorily at higher frequencies. The valve manufacturer may be 
consulted for operation at higher frequencies^ 

3.5 Mounting 

3.5.1 Valves arc mounted in equipment by a number of methods. In 
many cases they arc inserted into plug-in holders which pro- 
vide mechanical support and electrical connections* Components used 
in making connections to valve terminals should be chosen with care to 
avoid the development of bad contacts. 

This precaution is specially important when spring loaded connections 
are used, for example, in vahe^holders for pushpin mounting^ since the heat 
developed at a poor contact tends to damage the springs and leads toprogreS" 
sive deterioration. Such a defect in the cathode-heater circuits will reduce 
cathode temperature with resultant impaired performance^ and, in many 
cases, in reduced life. In the grid circuit a bad contact could introduce 
noise, or in an extreme case cause rapid failure of the valve by removing or 
reducing the grid bias. 

3.5.2 Vertical Mounting — It is generally desirable that valves should be 
mounted base downwards and in a vertical position. Many modern 
valves are designed for, and may be used in, other positions, but when 
the manufacturer's published literature does not give any guidance, the 
manufacturer should be consulted before any change from the vertical 
method of mounting is adopted. 

Mounting valves with the base upwards will affect the flow of air around 
the bulb and may result in the limiting temperature of the bulb or the holder 
be exceeded. If that part of the bulb on which the getter is deposited 
becomes overheated ^ gas will be released and the valve will become * soft\ 
If the pinch of some valves is overheated the inter-^lectrode capacitance will 
change, and when valves are used as oscillators^ frequency drift will 
result. In other cases overheating of the pinch may give rise to electrolysis of 
the glass, resulting in breakdown. If the base is overheated the cement 
may contract and the base become detached from the bulb. 

3.5.3 Horizontal Mounting — Where it is necessary to mount valves 
horizontally, the plane of the filament of directly heated valves should 
be vertical. Similarly for certain indirectly heated valves having a high 
mutual conductance, the plane of the major axis of the control grid 
should be vertical. 

A particular instance where this precaution is necessary is that of 
battery type valves where manufacturers use the minimum number of hooks 
for supporting filaments to obtain optimum characteristics. They also use 
very small clearances of the order of a few thousands of an inch for valves of 
high mutual conductance. When such valves are motmted otherwise than in 
the upright position, they may be more microphonic or the relative movement 

12 



IS:2597(PartI)-1964 

of the electrodes may change the characteristics of the valve , or even cause 
failure due to contact between electrodes. The adoption of the recommenda* 
tions given above reduces these risks. 

3.5«4 Mounting of Small Glass-Based Valves Including Miniature and Sub' 
miniature Valves — Many of these glass-based valves employ semi-rigid 
pins and unless these arc provided with a pin protector, it is advisable 
that the pins should be straightened in a pin straightening tool before 
insertion into the socket. 

// is recommended that for holders with floating contacts a wiring jig be 
used to ensure that the holder contacts are in correct position to receive a 
valve after the holder has been wired. The connections to those floating 
contacts should be as flexible as possible. The use of too stiff wiring will 
destroy all the advantages provided by the float of the contacts and may 
hold the contacts so far out of position as to result in damage to the valve 
bases. 

It is also recommended that one of the withdrawal tools designed for the 
purpose should be used to remove the valve from the valve-holder to minimize 
damage to the glass base. 

3.5.5 Mounting of Miniature and Sub-miniature Valves Having Flexible 
Leads --^ It is usually necessary to secure the valves of these types in 
position by the envelope. Care should be taken to see that the safe bulb 
temperature as specified by the manufacturer is not exceeded owing to 
the method of mounting used. Excess bulb temperature rise may often 
be avoided by the use of mounting clamps of high thermal capacity and 
conductivity placed in intimate thermal contact with the envelope. In 
addition, all mounting clamps should have a blackened inner surface so 
that heat is not reflected back into the valve. 

Nearly half the cooling of a bulb in free air is due to convection^ but 
in a well-designed metallic mounting clamp more than half the heat can be 
removed by conduction. Metals of high conductivity should be used and 
contact with the envelope should be over as large an area as possible. 
Efficient cooling is obtained only when the mounting clamp makes good 
thermal contact with the bulb and with cooler metal in the equipment. 

3.5.6 Glass-to-Metal Seals — Connections having sufficient flexibility to 
allow for mechanical tolerances and also for thermal expansion and 
other mpvements should be employed where strains might be set up in 
glass-to-metal seals. These connections should be designed to avoid 
losses arisine from poor contact and to facilitate adequate heat conduc- 
tion and radiation. 

3»5.7 Spare Socket^Contacts — It is recommended not to utilize the 
tags of spare valve^holder contacts as anchoring pins for circuit wiring. 

13 



lS:2557(PartI).1964 

Difficulties may arise if a valve is replaced by another having different 
internal connections to the pins. 

This practice may adversely affect the characteristics of valves with 
glass bases by the application of potentials to pins which are not connected 
to any valve element but which project into the envelope. 

3.5.8 Internally Connected { IC ) Contacts — When a pin in the list of 
connections is marked * internally connected ' ( IC ) it is particularly 
important that no connection be made to the corresponding valve-hol- 
der tag because the pin may be supporting or inter-connecting an elec- 
trode inside the valve. Such internal connections may differ for 
valves of a given type made by different manufacturers; over a period 
of time they may differ during the production of a valve by one 
manufacturer. 

3.5.9 Soldering of Rigid or Semi-rigid Pins — It is highly undcsu-able to 
solder connections directly to rigid or semi-rigid pins in glass bases or to 
such leads scaled through the envelope. The application of heat 
introduces strain in the glass, the effect of which may not be imme- 
diately apparent, but it may subsequently impair the vacuum or crack 
the seal. 

3.5.10 Soldering of Flexible Leads — Care shall be taken to avoid 
bending the leads sharply close to the glass, for valves designed for 
soldering the leads into the circuit. Care shall also be taken to avoid 
overheating the glass-to-metal seal by heat conduction along the lead. 
It is recommended to use a thermal shunt of adequate heat capacity 
between the point of soldering and the glass seal. In any case the wire 
should not be soldered closer than 5 mm from the seals of miniature 
and sub-miniature types, or as specified by the manufacturer. A pair 
of pliers or clip with * copper * jaws of a minimum of 3 mm width 
attached, can be conveniently used as a thermal shunt for wiring 
miniature and 8ub-miniatiu*e valves. Besides protecting the seal from 
thermal shock it ensures that the joint cannot be made nearer the seal 
than the specified minimum distance. Where conditions preclude the 
use of a thermal shunt particular care should be taken that the tempe* 
rature of the soldering iron is kept high and its application limited 
to the minimum time. 

3.5.11 Effects of Stray Fields — The operation of valves may be 
seriously affected by magnetic or electro-static fields, hence they should 
be positioned and/or shielded so that the deleterious effects of such 
fields are reduced to a minimum* 

The electron stream can be deflected or modulated by the stray fields 
from transformers, loudspeaker magnets, higlhpotential etmiponents and 
wiring, thus adversely affecting the operation of the controlling electrodes. 
Low voltage battery valves are particularly susceptible to such drfects. 

14 



IS:2S97(PtftI).1964 

3*5«12 InsukaioH Restaance of Valve Motmiing — Where a valve is follow- 
ed by a high gain ain{4ifier, the insulation of the valve socket and leads 
shall be adequate, in relation to the magnitude of currents and voltages, 
to avoid the introduction of harmful effects due to leakage currents* In 
the case of certain valves where the input impedance is high, the 
introduction of minute currents or v<ritages due to inadequate insulation 
will produce serious effecu in normal operating conditions, for example, 
inadequate insulation in the mounting or leads of a photocell will 
produce random fluctuations in output; similarly, low insulation betvreen 
grid and heater in a low*noise valve will cause excessive faum« 



3^1 LajHMofEqtdpmem 

3^1.1 The layout and design of equipment should afford sufficient 
ventilation to ensure a safe bulb temperature under all conditions. As 
a general guide, the nuudmum temperature of the hottest part of the 
bulb under operating conditions in the equipment should not exceed by 
more than 20 cent^[rade degrees that temperature which would be 
obtained if the valves were operated at its maximum rating under con- 
ditions of free air circulaticm in a room temperature of 20^C. 

3^L2 Exceptional increases of temperature may arise where valves 
are used in screening cans and in equipments working at high ambient 
temperature conditions. Screening cans should only be used where 
necessary and they should alMrays have black inner surfaces to prevent 
the reflection of heat back into the valves. Screening cans with bright 
inner surface should never be used. 

3ML3 Small glass based valves, including miniature and sub- 
miniature valves with flexible leads, should be operated in free air 
conditions where good air circulation i% possible and preferably in some 
form of heat-conducting shield. Where air ventilation h likely to be 
inadequate, heat conduction shields should always be used or the 
valves should be derated so that the bulb temperatures are maintained 
at safe leveb. Material reductions in maximum bulb temperature can 
be achieved by the use of ccmductioii cooliiqr by so^ening cans speciaUy 
des^pied to make dose contact over a large area with the bulb« The 
valve manufacturer should be consulted regardii^ each valve type 
coiioemed. 

71ie prtsmi trend in waive dasign Is «9 reAice dbmensims wUk the 
object of savii^ space omi of improving efficiency at iiigit frequencies^ and 
the extent to vddch redaction can be made is nsnatty limited by the amount of 
Iteat wMck can be dbsipatedfrom tim exterior smface of the bMt. As the 
propartkm of beat dissipatad from a valve by radiation is nf the order of 
SO percent^ it is n e c e ssar y to aUam ndrgmtf conditions for free radiation 
fromAemfaeet^Aebalbtai 



15 



IS:2597(PartI)-1964 

The increase in the temperature of air in convectivc cooling is very 
small and it is, therefore^ more important that the flow of air should 
be copious and unimpeded than that it should be partictilarly cold. No 
great risk is incurred if the air is slightly warmed by passing near other 
components if this allows it to flow through a less obstructed path, 
but valves should not be positioned adjacent to componenU running at 
very high temperatures such as mains resistors, where direct radiation 
could seriously affect the bulb temperature. To improve radiation from 
the valve, surrounding surfaces should not be polished and should be 
kept as cool as possible. 

3«6.2 Mounting Position — When valves are mounted in other than 
upright positions, greater care is necessary to ensure adequate ventila- 
tion so that the maximum rated temperatures are not exceeded. 

3*6.3 Free- Air Cooling — Adequate ventilation is of special importance 
for power-amplifier valves and rectifiers. 

3.6.3.1 When valves designed for free-air cooling are used in condi- 
tions where free convection cannot be maintained, steps should be taken 
either by reduction in dissipation or by forced air cooling to ensure 
that limiting bulb temperature is not exceeded. The cooling air stream 
should be directed to flow evenly over the surface of the bulb. 

3.6.4 High Voltages — Particular care should be taken to maintain 
adequate ventilation where high voltages are concerned, to avoid insu- 
lation breakdown due to ionization or tracking. 

3.6.5 Dust Precipitation — The precipitation of dust is considerably 
increased at high voltage and in the vicinity of high voltage connections. 
This may result in insulation breakdown or variable leakage resistance 
and thus may affect operation of the equipment. Inadequate cleaning 
may increase the danger of breakdown by producing high voltage- 
gradients. 

3.7 Healer-Catiiode IiisiilatkMi 

3.7.0 General — It is recommended to keep the potential between 
heater and cathode as small as possible. Under no circumstances the 
maximum value should be exceeded which will result in danger of 
breakdown between heater and cathode. 

3.7.1 AC or DC Voltages — The voltage between cathode and heater 
may be DC or AC or a combination of both voltages. When AC 
voltage is used adequate precaution should be taken to ensure that the 
peak value of the voltage is well within the limiting values. Manu* 
facturer should be consulted for safe values of these voltages. Frequ- 
ently, the ratings for the cathode positive to heater and those for the 
cathode negative to heater are widely different and such ratings should 
be carefully observed. Maximum ratings are normally specified in 

16 



IS:2597(PartI)*1964 

published data, but when not published, details should be obtained from 
the valve manufacturer. When the heater is positive with respect to 
cathode sleeve, there may be a breakdown caused by the electrolysis of 
the insulating coating. 

The materials^ dimensions and method of applying the heater-cathode 
insulation are selected to give the most satisfactory compromise between the 
conflicting requirements of good electrical insulation and high thermal 
conductivity and in order to produce the modern quick-heating valve some 
increase in electrical conductivity has been inevitable. Even with quite low 
heater-cathode voltage some current mayflow^ while with increasing voltage 
the current increases ( not necessarily in proportion to the applied voltage ) 
until the insulation breaks down. When the cathode is positive to the heater 
there may be some current due to emission from the heater in addition to the 
leakage current across the insulation. 

3.7J AF or RF Voltages — The insulation resistance between the 
heater and the cathodes should not be included in RF circuits where 
frequency stability or preservation of wave form is important, or in 
AF circuits followed by high gain. 

The leakage currents make themselves apparent as noise or hum which 
may assume serious proportions if the valve in which they originate is follow- 
ed by a large degree of amplification. Moreover, if the heater-cathode 
insulation is included in a tuned circuity any alteration to the physical or 
electrical properties of the insulation will alter the frequency to which the 
circuit is tuned, and if both RF and AF {for example, mains frequency ) 
voltages exist across the insulation, there is a risk of modulation hum, 
particularly in cathode-coupled oscillators and the like. There is also some 
risk of the introduction of hum and noise due to spurious emission from the 
cathode as a result of the heater-cathode potential difference. 

3.7J Cathode Keying — The practice of * keying* by opening a 
cathode circuit may result in a large potential difference between heater 
and cathode and should be avoided. If cathode ^ keying ' is essential a 
resistance not exceeding 0*25 megohm should be connected between 
heater and cathode. 

Similar precautions should be taken for thbse valves in a radio receiver 
or radiogram, the cathode circuits of which may be opened to mute them 
while gramophone records are being played. The suggested value of 25 
megohm for the resistance is approximate only and the actual value should be 
determiiiedfor each circuit. 

3.7 A Isolated Heater Windings — Vfhen a valve is operated from a 
separate transformer winding, it is essential that a DC connection 
should exist between this winding and the cathode to avoid heater- 
cathode insulation breakdown. Where this connection does not exist a 

17 



IS:2597(PartI)-1964 

resistor of the order of 100000 ohms should be connected between 
heater and cathode. 

The heater will develop a potential relative to the cathode depending on 
the ratio of the heater-cathode insulation resistance to the insulation resist^ 
ance between the heater winding and other windings, and on the voltages 
involved. 

3.8 DC Coimeetioas Between the Cathode and Other Electrodes 

3.8.1 In no circumstances should valves be operated without a DC 
connection between each electrode and the cathode. If the connection 
includes a component such as a rectifier having a resistance dependent 
upon the polarity or magnitude of the voltage applied to it, care should 
be taken to ensure that the electrode can never attain a potential 
uncontrolled with respect to the associated cathode. 

3.8.2 The total effective resistance between any electrode and the 
cathode should be the minimum practicable. It is important to remem- 
ber that any apparent advantage of an ( open-circuited ) electrode or of a 
high-resistance path may be lost because of secondary emission 
characteristics of the valve. 

3.9 Control Characteristics with Dbectly-Heated Cathode — The grid and 
anode potentials on which the published control characteristics are 
based are given with reference to the mid-point of the cathode ( which 
may be simulated by the mid-point of the cathode heater transformer 
winding, or by an artificial mid-point). If circuit connections are 
made to one end of the filamentary cathode, allowance should be made 
for the cathode voltage in interpreting the characteristics. 

3.10 Cootrol-Grid Voltages and Currents 

3.10.1 General — It is recommended that the resistance between the 
control-grid and cathode should be kept as low as possible. Published 
data usually include limiting values, but where these are not given the 
manufacturer should be consulted. 

In most circuits, including all Class A applications, only negligible 
currents flow in the control-grid circuit, therefore^ the impedance of this 
circuit can be made quite high without producing any serious reduction of the 
grid input compared with its value on open circuit. The necessity for setting 
an upper limit for the permissible grid-circuit resistance arises from other 
conditions^ the most important being as follows: 

a) Gas current — This current is due to the collection by the grid of 
positive charged ions produced by collisions between electrons and 
any gas molecules present in the valve. Although normally this 
* gas<unent ' Is of the order ofafraetUm of a microampere only, 

18 



IS:2597(PftrfI)-1964 

it may amount to many times this value, possibly owing to overheat* 
ing, tf the valve contains much gas. 

b) Grid emission — This arises if the grid has collected active 
materials evaporated from the cathode during manufacture or while 
in service, and when the temperature of the grid is raised by operate 
ing conditions. 

c) Leakage current — Due to the high temperature and short paths 
employed on many valves, leakage current across the insulation 
between the grid and other electrodes is liable to result from the 
deposit of volatilized metallic materials. 

3.10.1.1 All these effects are equivalent to a resistive-shunt across 
the input circuit, and result in a reduction of the grid-input voltage; 
they may also reduce the selectivity of the preceding tuned circuit and 
alter the DC value of the grid current potential, the change in the 
effective grid bias generally producing an increase in anode current 
and, if the grid current is due to a cause arising from over-heating, the 
increased anode current will make the valve still hotter and the effect 
will be cumulative until a state of equilibrium is reached. In RF valves 
the state of equilibrium is usually a condition in which the grid is very 
positive, and the gain very low. In output valves equilibrium may not 
be reached until the anode current is so high as to destroy the valve 
or some other component. 

3.10»2 Positive Grid Current — Valves should not be used in applica- 
tions, which may result in appreciable grid current, such as in Class 
AB2, B and C amplifiers, without the approval of the manufacturer, 
unless such use is indicated in the manufacturer's published informa* 
tion. 

3J0.3 Derivation of Grid Bias — It is most undesirable that valve bias 
should be provided solely by grid rectification, except when suitable 
precautions have been taken to prevent damage to the valve from loss 
of drive. 

In many valves the cathode current at zero bias is sufficiently large to 
cause excessive anode dissipation. When operating bias is obtained solely 
by grid rectification or series grid resistance^ this bias will disappear on the 
cessation of grid current because of failure of oscillation or driving voltage. 
Unless precautions are taken to switch off or to reduce electrode voltages in 
the event of such failure, the resulting excessive heating may damage or 
destroy the valve. It is recommended^ in the absence of suitable precautions 
to prevent this^ that a proportion of the required grid bias be derived either 
from a fixed voltage supply or by autchbias. This proportion should be 
sufficient^ in the absence of grid current, to reduce the anode current to a 
vcdue below that correspomBng to the maximum raied anode dissipation. 

19 



IS:2997(PartI)-1964 

3.11 SoMi-Grid Voltifef : Sovtt of Sqiply Vohagt 

341.1 When a voltage divider is used to supply voltages on screen* 
grids of muIti*electrode valves, the resistance employed should be as 
low as practicable. Unaligned tetrodes and aligned grid valves operat- 
ing with a voluge on the screen substantially lower than that on the 
anode should derive their screen voltage from a potentiometer network 
or a voltage source having good regulation. The screen voltage of 
unaligned pentode valves may be derived by means of a series resist- 
ance. In the case of frequency changers, reference should be made to 
the published data or, if necessary, to the manufacturers. If the screen- 
grid voltage is allowed to exceed the anode voltage, care is necessary to 
ensure that the screen-grid dissipation is not exceeded. Particular care 
should be taken to avoid removing the anode voltage whilst the screen- 
grid is energized. 

The screen current of aligned grid valves and unaligned tetrodes 
is subject to wider variation, both in manufacture and under operating 
conditionSy than that of unaligned pentodes. Hence considerable variations 
in screen potential may arise between different equipments or with different 
valves in the same equipments if the control of this potential is solely dim to 
the valve screen current. 

Certain output valves when run near the maximum screen dissipathm 
can generate appreciable screen emission and if operated so that during part 
of the cycle the anode is highly positive with respect to the screen^ a high 
resistance in the screen supply may cause sufficient change in the operating 
conditions to endanger the valve or associated components. 

3.12 Suppressor-Grid Voltages 

3.12.1 Negative Voltages — The suppressor-grid of a multi-electrode 
valve should generally be maintained at the same potential as the 
cathode. In certain applications it is permissible to connect the suppret- 
sor-grid to the negative and of the cathode biasing resistor or to the 
AGO line instead of directly to the cathode. 

3.12.2 Valves should not be operated with a negative potential on 
the suppressor-grid sufficiently great to cause the screen*grid dissipation 
to exceed its safe value. Unless the manufacturer's published data 
include suppressor-grid characteristics, or other indication of the per- 
formance of the suppressor-grid is given, it is unwise to design equip- 
ment in which reliance is placed on uniformity of this parameter. 

3A23 Positive Voltages — VdAvet should not be used in circuiu or 
applications which result in appreciable suppressor-grid current. It is, 
therefore, important that in the case of pentodes Connected as triodes^ 
the suppressor-grid should normally be connectoi to the cathode rather 

20 



IS:2S97(PartI)-1964 

than to the anode. Certain valves have low-current diodes internally 
connected to the suppressor-grids which are intended to act as DC 
restorers and thus prevent the suppressor-grid from being driven 
appreciably positive. Positive voltages may be applied to the 
suppressor-grids of valves designed for transmitting or for suppressor- 
grid modulation only where this type of operation is indicated in the 
published data. 

3.12*4 Limiting Circuit-Resistance — Resistance in series with the 
suppressor-grid should be avoided. Where resistance is essential it is 
recommended that the valve manufacturer should be consulted as to its 
value. Where a valve is specifically intended for suppressor-grid 
modulation such information will normally be published. 

3.13 Micropiiany 

3.13.0 To reduce microphony^ valves should be mounted so that they 
are as free as possible from mechanical or acoustic vibration. 

3.13«1 External factors which determine the extent of microphonic 
effects include: 

a) The amount of amplification following the valve; 

b) The method of mounting the valve; 

c) The position of the valve in relation to an^ source of vibration; 

d) The intensity of the vibration reaching the valve; 

e) The frequency characteristics of the whole system; and 

f) The amplitude of the carrier frequency^ where the microphonic 
valve is in an RP circuit. 

3*13.2 The following recommendations, if carried out, will greatly 
assist in reducing microphony to a minimum: 

a) Wherever practicable, the source of vibration should be resili- 
ently mounted. 

b) The chassis containing the valves should be mounted on resili- 
ent bushes. 

c) Those valves which are followed by the largest degree of 
amplification can, with advantage, be mounted in antimicro- 
phonic valve-holders, or in holders which are secured to the 
chassis through rubber grommets, care being taken that the 
leads to the valve-holders and also the top caps, if any, of the 
valves are as flexible as possible. 

d) Valves, piarticularly those valves which are most susceptible to 
microphony, should not be mounted immediately behind or 
dose to a loudspeaker* It is also an advanuge it the valves 

21 



]S:2S97(FirtI)-lM4 

can be shielded to tome exteni from any direct sound waves by 

the interposition of other components. 

Microphony In a vahe consists ofrlythmic variations in tke ouiput of 
the vahe caused by small variations of electrode spacing { either inter-elec* 
trade or between any electrode and an external object ) due to mechanical 
vibrations transmitted to the valves from some external source. 

Such vibrations, which may or may not originate in the signals passing 
through the valve j. may reach the valve either as direct vibrations of the 
chassis transmitted through the valve^holder ta the valve pins and thus caus^- 
ing the valve to vibrate as a whole^ or as sound waves impinging on the 
envelope and conveyed through the mica supports^ etc, to the electrode 
structure. 

If the valve is being used in an audio-frequency circuit, vibrations of the 
electrode structure may produce interference signals even when the valve is 
handling no ' wanted * signals. If on the other hand, the valve is operating 
in a high-frequency ( RF or IF) circuit, microphony vibrations will create 
interference only if a high-frequency carrier is present. In these circum- 
stances the microphony vibrations will modulate the carrier and will become 
evident after the detector stage. 

3.14 Special Considerations Stand by Operation 

3.14.1 Cathode Current — Certain types of valves should not be *-un 
for long periods with cathodes heatea and without cathode emission 
current flowing. Where such conditions are necessary, the valve 
manuracturer should be consulted. 

Operation of a valve for longer periods with cathodes heated but 
without cathode current being drawn may result in a resistive layer between 
the metallic cathode and its emissive coating. This resistance appears in 
the cathode circuit. This would result in^ negative feed back and degrades 
the performance of the tube due to the apparent reduction of mutual 
conductance. 

In the absence of cathode emission current, the cathode is liable to 
become poisoned and the resulting loss of emission may prevent the valve 
from operating satisfactorily when required, 

3.14.2 Electrode Dissipation — Tht life of a valve is partly dependent 
upon the heat dissipated by its various electrodes and all possible pre- 
cautions should be taken to ensure that this is kept at minimum. 
Excessive dissipation may be caused by incorrect tuning of associated 
circuits, unnecessarily high no-signal current, parasitic oscillations, etc. 

Excessive dissipation may result in the evolutkm of gases andlor 
generation of emission from the electrodes^ with consequent ^wbances of 
the operating conditions. 

22 



IS:2597(P«rtI)-1964 

3.143 CofHaci Potential — Circuits which employ valves under condi* 
tions requiring a close control of contact potential ( voltage correspond- 
ing to a start of positive current to any electrode ) should be avoided 
unless the published valve data indicates that this characteristic has 
been adequately specified. 

Most valves undergo a process of ageing during life which is more 
pronounced during the early stages. The surfaces of the cathode and of 
the control grid undergo certain changes which may result in progressive 
variation in the contact potential. It is usually possible to reduce such 
variations to a minimum by special processing of the valve during manu^ 
facture, but such steps are often costly and are not economically Justified 
except for special valves designed for particular applications. 

3.14.4 Cross-Coupling in Multiple-Unit Kfl/v^5 — Electrons emitted by 
one cathode of a multiple-unit valve may reach the electrode of other 
units within the same envelope and cause undesirable coupling between 
otherwise independent units and their associated circuits. 

Cross-coupling rruty also arise as one of the effects of bulb charge^ 
that iSy when a stream of electrons originating from the cathode of one 
unit strikes the glass envelope which thereby acquires a negative charge 
over the area under bombardment. Such a cltarge, which may be varied by 
the electrode potentials of the originating unit, can also modulate the 
electron stream of other units within the envelope. 

Both of the above effects can give rise to a condition whereby it 
becomes impossible to cut off one or more units completely regardless of 
the magnitude of the applied grid voltage. Equipment designers using 
multiple-unit valves in circuits where the effects of cross-coupling are 
important should ensure that the valve is suitable for such applications. 
Otherwise^ the circuits should be designed to be tolerant of cross-coupling^ 
Multiple*unit valves having internal electrostatic shielding are less susceptible 
to the effects described^ 

3.15 Damgc to Eqvipment — Some valves^ particularly rectiBers, may 
ultimately fail by arcing or short circuiting, with serious consequences 
to other components. Therefore, it is essential for a fuse or other pro- 
tective device of suitable rating to be provided. 

3«1( Storagt mid TrtMit 

3.16.1 Valves not installed in the equipment should be stored in their 
original packing or in suitable racks* 

3.1iw2 Normal good storage conditions should be provided to prevent 
deterioration, such as corrosion of contacu or impairment of electrical 
insulation. 

X163 Valves should always be transported in the original packing 
designed for the putpote. 

23 



INTERHATIONAL SYSTEM OF UNITS (81 UNITS) 



Sm* Units 








Qu9ntHy 


Unit 


SyrnM 




LsfiQth 


metre 


m 




Mass 


Icllooram 


iC0 




Time 


eecond 


s 




Electric current 


ampere 


A 




ThermocfynafDlc 


lielvin 


K 




temperature 








tjjminous intensity 


candela 


cd 




Amount of substance 


mole 


mol 




SMpptemontary Units 








QuMtify 


Unit 


Symbol 




Plane anole 


radian 


red 




Solid angle 


steradian 


sr 




Derived Unite 








QuMiity 


Unit 


Symbol 


Conrert/ofi 


Force 


newton 


H 


1 N - 1 ko-1 tw/s* 


Energy 


loulii 


4 


1 4 «> 1 N.m 


Power 


watt 


W 


1 W - iJ/s 


Flux 


weber 


Wb 


1 Wb-.1V.s 


Flux density 


tesia 


T 


1 T - 1 Wb/m« 


Frequency 


hertz 


Hz 


1 Hz - 1 c/a ( S-* ) 


Electric conductance 


Siemens 


S 


1 S - 1 A/V 


Pressure, stress 


pascal 


Pa 


1 Pa - 1 N/m« 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

Manak Bhsvan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar IMarg, NEW DELHI 110002 



Telephones : 2$ iO 21, 27 01 31 

Regional Offices: 

Western : Novelty Chambers, Grant Road 

Eastern : 5 Chowringhee Approach 

Southern ; C. I. T« Campus, Adyar 

Brunch Offices: 

'PushpaK', Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur 

*F' Block, Unity Btdg, Naraslmharafa Square 

Gangotri Complext Btiadbhada Road, T.T. Nagar 

22E Katpana Area 

Ahimsa Btdg. SCO (^83. Sector 17C 

5-8-^S6C L. H, Gupta Marg 

D-277 Todarmai Marg, Banlpark 

117/418 B Sarvodaya Nagar 

Patllputra Industrial Estate 

Hantex BIdg (2nd Floor), RIy Statton Road 



Teloorams % Manaksaiislha 

Telephone 

BOIMBAY 400007 37 97 20 

CALCUTTA 700072 23-OS 02 

MADRAS 000020 41 24 42 

AHMADABAD 800001 2 08 01 

BANGALORE 500002 2 70 40 

BHOPAL 402003 27 10 
BHUBANESHWAR 701014 80 27 

CHANDIGARH 100017 2 03 20 

HYDERABAD 500001 22 10 83 

JAIPUR 302000 00 82 

KANPUR 208005 8 12 72 

PATNA 800013 20 00 

TRIVANORUM 005001 82 27 

>tproiiii€ed i^ Restrao^aphy iin*t, lOl, New bemF 



