( Reaffirmed 2003 )

16 1 iolts - 1982

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR CONTROL OF AIR POLLUTION IN PETROLEUM REFINERIES
Air Quality
Sectional Committee, CDC 53

Chainnar
DE B. B. SUXD~BEEAN

Repmanting
National Environmental Engineering Institute ( CSIR ), Nagpur Research

Dr B. B. Sundaresan ) SH~I A. L. A~QA~WAL

Sam P. K. YENNAWA~ ( Alternate to
National Institute of Occupational ( ICMR ), Ahmadabad Indian Oil Corporation Ltd, Faridabad National Organic Bombay The Dharamsi Bombay Chemical Industries Co Health

DE J. S. AHLUWALIA S~nr V. S. MOPE ( Alternate) SHBI K. D. AMRE

Ltd, Ltd,

SHBI N. G. ASHAB

SHRI H. M. SHAIKH ( Alternate )

Morarji

Chemical

DE M. S. VAIDYA (Alternate) Calcutta Metropolitan Development Authority SHBI A. K. BASU SHRI RANJIT Knaaan S~NQUPTA ( A&mats ) DR NILAY CHAUDHU~I Central Board for the Prevention and Control of Water Pollution, New Delhi MEMBER SECRETARY ( Altemat~ ) Hindustan Steel Ltd, Ranchi SHBI DALJIT SINQH DR R. K. DUTTA ( Altmutc ) Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi PROP J. M. DAVE DE P. J. DEORAS Society for Clean Environment, Bombay DR S. B. CHAPHEKAR ( Alternate I ) Snn~ T. N. MAHADEVAN ( Alternate II ) Indian Chemical Manufacturers Association, SHEI M. V. DESAI Calcutta SHBI B. SUSAN ( Aknats )

( Continuedon page 2 ) @ CqJyri&
1983

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 10179 - 1992
( Continued from pass 1) Members SHIII B. D. DE~EMUKH Rsprcssnting Maharashtra Prevention Board, Bombay of Water Pollution

Sasr QAISA~ AZXIEZ( Alternate ) Cement Manufacturers' Association, Bombay SH~I N. B. EN~INEEB IndiaDnnInstrtute of Petroleum ( CSIR ), Dehra SEEI A. K. GVPTA SHBI B. P. PVNDIB ( After&ate ) Da V. S. GVPTA SIT M. CEANDBA ( Alternate ) UB H. B. MATEVB DE N. K. MEHXOT~A Fertilizer ( Planning Ltd, Sindri Indian Institute Indus;~;40~logy 8z Development ) India

of Technology, Research

New Delhi Centre ( CSIR

),

DE P. N. VIEIHWANATHAN( Afternate I ) DB J. L. KAW ( Alternate II ) Gujarat Water Pollution Control Board, Sasr R. S. MEHTA Gandhinagar SH~I G. B. SONI ( Alternate) S. F. India Ltd, Calcutta SERI A. MOOKHE~JEA SHRI M. CEATJDHVBY ( dlremb ) Central Fuel Research Institute ( CSIR ), DE P. N. MVKHEBJEE Dhanbad DE R. U. ROY ( Ahnak ) The Fertilizer Association of India, New Delhi DR V. PACHAIYAPAN Meteorologicrl Department, New Delhi Ds B. PADMANABHAYVBTBY Hindustan Insecticides Ltd, New Delhi SHBI A. R. PANXEEB Union Carbide India Ltd, Calcutta SH~I Y. G. PATANXAR SHRI J. D. PATEL ( Aftemats ) Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay SHRI J. R. PATWARDHAN SHRI V. B. SHIBODKAR ( Alternate ) Ministry of Defence, Delhi DE P. K. RAMACHANDRAN Da B. V. RAMANI ( Aftsmate) Alkali Manufacturers' Association of India, SHBI V. RAMADVRAI Bombay SHRI R. V. RAXANI ( Alternate ) Directorate General, Factory Advice Service and DE S. S. RAXASWAXY Labour Institutes, Bombay SEXI S. K. DANQWAL ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Technical Development, SHRI A. N. RAO New Delhi Coal India Ltd, Calcutta SHRI S. B. SARKA~ Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay DR V. V. SHIBVAIKAB DR R. K. KAPOOB ( Alternate ) Central Mining Research Station ( CSIR ), DR J. K. SINHA Dhanbad SHRI A. K. BOSE ( Afternuts ) Central Electricity Authority, New Delhi SHBI S. A. SVBBAXANI~ Director General, IS1 (Ex-ofi& Member ) DE HA~I BHA~WAN, Director ( Chem ) &7etarry SEEI A. K. BAEL Assistant Director ( Chem ), IS1 ( Continued om @age 27 )

IS,lO179-1982

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR CONTROL OF AIR POLLUTION IN PETROLEUM REFINERIES
0. FOREWORD

0.1This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 31 May 1982, after the draft finalized by the Air Quality Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division Council.
0.2 All types of industrial units including petroleum refineries are sources of air pollution in varying degrees depending upon the technology and the operating practices adopted by them. In order to ensure uniform application of technology and operating practices, a code of practice, containing the latest available information on sources of air pollution, determination of emissions, control techniques, and measurement and monitoring of emissions and ambient air quality would provide a useful guide in the design and operation of a refinery, with a view to minimizing its effects on the environment. Codes of practice are standards which should be adopted by the respective industries for abatement of pollution by good house keeping. Although limits at which corrective action is to be taken have not been specified, it is intended to incorporate these when more information is available on the subject.

0.3In the preparation
derived

of this standard considerable from the publications given in Appendix A.

assistance

has been

1.SCOPE 1.1This standard

covers the following: and their sources from refining

a) Major and minor air pollutants operations, b) Emissions from refineries, c) Pollution d) Operating e) Measurement f) Monitoring control techniques practices to minimize and

and options, and control emissions,

of emissions, of emissions.

3

IS s 10179 - 1982 2. AIR POLLUTANTS FROM REFINING OPERATIONS

2.1 Major air pollutants that may be emitted from refining operations are sulphur compounds, hydrocarbons, nitrogen oxides, particulates including smoke, and carbon monoxide. Other emissions are aldehydes, ammonia and odours, 2.2 Major Pollutants 2.2.1 Sulphur Compounds - Sulphur dioxide constitutes the maximum proportion of sulphur compounds emitted from refineries. The main sources of sulphur dioxide emissions are combustion operations, such as process heaters, boilers and catalytic cracking regenerators, and sulphur dioxide extraction plants. Refinery flares, incinerators and decoking operations are other minor sources. The amount of sulphur dioxide emission depends upon the type and amount of fuel burnt and its sulphur content. Other sulphur compounds emitted from refineries include hydrogen from treatment processes. sulphide, sulphur trioxide and mercaptans However, these emissions are in very small quantities since they result mainly from evaporation of leaks and vent losses from storage facilities. 2.2.2 Hydrocarbons - Emission of hydrocarbons results mainly from evaporation of light oils during storage and handling of crude and petroleum products and from leaks. Sources of hydrocarbon emissions include loading facilities, sampling, storage tanks, waste-water separators, blowdown systems, pumps, valves, vacuum jets, barometric condensers, airblowing operations and compressor engines. The extent of these emissions depends upon design, maintenance and operating practices. 2.2.3 Oxides of Nitrogen - Combustion of fuel in process heaters and boilers, and in internal combustion engines used to drive compressors and electric generators, are the main sources of nitrogen oxides emissions in the refining industry. Nitrogen oxides are also released from catalytic cracking regenerators and from carbon monoxide ( CO ) boilers. 2.2.3.1 Combustion of fossil fuels produces nitrogen oxides partly from the combination of atmospheric nitrogen with excess oxygen in the furnace atmosphere, and partly from combination of the nitrogen present in the fuel. Formation of nitrogen oxides is mainly dependent on the flame temperature, the residence time at this temperature, and the excess air present in the flame. 2.2.4 Particulates - The major sources of emission of particulates in petroleum refineries are catalytic cracking unit regenerators. Minor sources include asphalt oxidizers sludge burners, emergency flares, boilers and furnaces during sootblowing and emergency operations, and incomplete combustion. 4

rsI iol'rs- 1981
2.2.5 Carbon Monoxide - The only significant source of carbon monoxide in refineries is the catalytic cracking regenerator. This, however, is eliminated in units having a CO boiler. Minor sources include internal combustion engines used for compressors and electrical generator drives and incinerators where these are employed. Incomplete combustion in furnaces and boilers also generates carbon monoxide emissions. 2.3 Other

Pollutants

2.3.1 Aldehydes and Ammonia - These are released in small amounts from catalytic cracking regenerators and combustion reactions.
2.3.2 Odours - Odours result from emissions of hydrocarbons and other compounds in very minute amounts. Human nose is capable of detecting odour much before its presence is indicated by any instrument. Odours are released during operations like treating, air-blowing, steam-blowing, and from drains, tanks, vents, barometric sumps, and waste-water separators. 3. EMISSIONS FROM REFINERIES type of units used in a given processing scheme, the type of crude or crudes processed, varieties of end products, location, source of power, utilities requirements and operating and house-keeping practices. All these factors have a bearing in varying degrees on the quantities of emissions from each refinery. Consequently, it is desirable to undertake individual refinery measurements or calculations to estimate emissions rather than employ generalized emission factors for this purpose. Actual periodical monitoring of stack gases may be made to check the calculated values. 3.2 Sulphur Oxides - The main source of sulphur oxides is fuel combustion. Any organic sulphur contained in a fuel is oxidized to sulphur dioxide Normally about 98 percent of the or sulphur trioxide during combustion. fuel sulphur is converted to sulphur dioxide and the balance to sulphur Eventually, however, considerably more of trioxide during combustion. the sulphur dioxide is oxidized to sulphur trioxide in the ambient air, At present no known methods ultimately forming sulphate particulates. exist to determine the extent of this conversion, hence emissions are only evaluated to the extent of 98 percent conversion to sulphur dioxide and 2 percent to sulphur trioxide. 3.2.1 Emissions of oxides of sulphur are expressed in terms of sulphur dioxide. Knowing the quantity of fuel used, based either on flow meter readings or actual tank gauges, and the sulphur content of the fuel from actual laboratory analyses, the emissions of sulphur dioxide may be easily calculated. Actual monitoring of stack gases in such cases may not be necessary.

3.1 Petroleum refineries differ in the type of processing schemes employed,

iS

I

iOiT9

-

198i

3.2.2 Where hydrogen sulphide removed during amine extraction is directly burnt at the flare or in process furnaces, the quantity of hydrogen sulphide may be obtained from direct measurement by flow meters and a laboratory analysis of the gas for hydrogen sulphide content. Where this is not possible, the quantity of hydrogen sulphide may be obtained indirectly from analyses of the treating unit feed and product for hydrogen sulphide and RSH. A material balance between the input and output streams will then give the quantity of hydrogen sulphide released. 3.2.3 In refineries employing Edleanu plants or sulphur dioxide extraction units, sulphur dioxide may be released directly into the atmosphere by way of leaks, vents, drains and in drying tower operations. An overall material balance on the unit including sulphur dioxide storage, and sulphur content in feed, extract and raffinate streams, will indicate the net escape of sulphur dioxide to the atmosphere. Daily losses of sulphur dioxide from storage inventory if used will give a higher loss to atmosphere, since this loss also includes the sulphur dioxide loss due to entrainment or chemical combination in the raffinate and extract streams. These losses do not result in emissions. 3.3 Hydrocarbons - These emissions cannot be directly measured except in the case of unburnt hydrocarbons released during combustion operaThe major tions. These may be measured by direct stack monitoring. sources of hydrocarbon emissions, however, are evaporation losses from storage tanks and from oil separators. These losses can only be estimated by empirical formulae based on extensive testing and experience. 3.3.1 Evajoration from Storage occur from storage tanks:
Tanks -

The following five types of losses

a)

Breathing

Losses - Losses resulting from the alternate increase and decrease of temperatures of the tank vapours and liquid surface, due to the absorption of heat through the tank shell and roof from the sun, and from daily variations in atmospheric temperature. During the day the air-vapour mixture is expelled from the tank, while fresh air is drawn into the tank at night. This causes the breathing cycle. These losses occur in cone or fixed roof tanks;

b)

Losses - Losses occurring during filling and emptying of storage tanks. When stock is pumped out air is drawn into the tank and the air is saturated by evaporation from the liquid surface. These vapours are then lost when fresh stock is pumped into the tank. These losses are primarily associated with fixed roof and variable space tanks; Filling

6

Its I 10179- 1982

4

Losses `- Losses mainly associated with floating roof tanks as a result of improper fit of the seal and shoe'to the tank shell. Consequently, this allows fresh air to circulate through the vapour space, thus promoting evaporation. The greater the area of the openings through which air can enter, the greater the windage losses; Windage Wetting Losses - Losses taking place in floating roof tanks when a wetted tank wall is exposed to the atmosphere. The losses, however, are negligible; and Boiling Loss - Losses caused by storage of highly volatile stocks at their bubble point. At this temperature boiling of the liquid starts and losses will be excessive. Refineries rarely allow this to happen.

4
e)

3.3.1.1 Factors affecting the magnitude follows:
Factor

of evaporation
Affect on Loss

losses are as

a) Vapour pressure of the stock b) Temperature stock of the

Loss increases with vapour pressure Increase in temperature increases the vapour pressure and hence losses Proportional to the square of diameter of the tank Volume of vapour expelled during breathing is proportional to the total volume. It is, therefore, a function of tank outage. Breathing loss is greatest when inventory is lowest Losses increase with increased temperature change diurnal

c) Area of liquid surface exposed for evaporation d) Volume space of vapour

e) Diurnal temperature change in tank vapour space f) Mechanical of tank of condition

Windage loss is directly proportional to the area of openings through which air circulates Filling losses are directly proportional to tank throughput Paint colour and condition determines heat absorption and therefore loss. 7

g) Volume pumped

liquid

h) Type of paint applied to outer surface

IS t 10179 - 1992 3.3.2 Calculation - Losses may be calculated as given below. The equations given for breathing and filling losses from fixed roof tanks do not take into account the breather valve relief setting which may be as high as 5 kPa gauge and thus substantially reduce the hydrocarbon loss. 3.3.2.1 B _ Brcaihing losses (fixed roof tanks ) 0;5
0

WK[

pa 4 p ] 04s D1.`3 Hs*sr &s

Fp C

where B PI PI = D 3 H== Breathing loss in kg/day ms capacity, True vapour pressure at bulk liquid temperature in Pa, Atmospheric pressure in Pa, Tank diameter in m, Average vapour space height, including correction for roof volume in m, Average daily ambient temperature change in "C, Paint factor ( see Table 1 ), Adjustment factor for tanks smaller than 9 m in diameter ( see Fig. 1 ), Capacity of tank in ms, Liquid factor ( see Table 2 ), and Density of liquid at storage conditions in kg/ms.
PAINT FACTORS FOR FIXED ROOF TANKS
COLOUB or TANK ,----A-~, Roof (2) White Aluminium ( specular ) White Aluminium ( specular ) White Aluminium ( diffure ) White Light Grey Grey Medium Shell (3) White White Aluminium ( specular ) Aluminium ( specular) Aluminium ( diffuse ) Aluminium ( diffuse ) Grey Light Grey Medium Grey PAINT FACTOR ( Fp ) PAINT CONDITIONS C-_-A--~ Poor Good (4) (5) 1.15 1.66 1 no4 1.16 1.20 1.30 1.39 1.30 I.33 1.46 1.18 1.24 1.29 1.38 1'46 1.38 144 1.58

AT=
Fp = C v, X = W =

TABLE 1

%.

(1) 9
ii) iii) iv) v) iv) vii) viii) ix)

1.00

?

0.80

E u : 0.60 + z
W E 0.10 m 3 7 0 a o.zc

0 * Fro.1

3
DIAMETER, METRES

6

ADJUSTMENT FACTOR FOR SMALL-DIAMETER FIXED ROOF TANKS

TABLE 2

LIQUID FACTOR

R ( FIXED ROOF TANKS BREATHING LOSS )

( Clause 3.3.2.1 )

SLNO.
(1) i) ii) iii) iv) v)

LIQUIDSTORED
(2) Crude oil Gasoline Naphtha jet fuel ( JP Kerosene Distillate oil 4 )

K (3) 0.014 0.024 0.023 0.020 0.019

9

IS:10179 - 1982 3.3.2.2 Filling
losses (fixed roof tanks )

where Fi N= Filling loss ( emptying plus filling per year ) in kg/m3 throughput,

Number of tank turnovers annual throughput tank capacity >' ( Density of liquid factor vapour at storage Liquid ( see Table pressure

W= m P =

conditions

in kg/ms, temperature in Pa.

3 ), and

= True

at bulk liquid

3.3.2.3

Filling losses ( variable space tanks ) F v"`"`V"l" ' ( V, -

0.25 V, A-)

where
Fv = Vt =

Filling Volume Volume

loss in kg/m3 throughput, of liquid throughput in ms/year, of expansion capacity in ms, of turnovers per year,

V"e N = Number
W = Density

of liquid at storage conditions in kg/ma, " m = Liquid factor ( see Table 3 ), and P E True vapour pressure at bulk'liquid temperature
3 LIQUID FACTOR m ( FIXED TANKS - FILLING
STORED

in Pa.

TABLE

ROOF/VARIABLE LOSS )
m

SPACE

SL No. (1)

LIQUID

(3) Gasoline Crude Naphtha Kerosene Distillate oil oil jest fuel (JP 4 )

(3) o*ooo 3 0.000 22.5 0.000 324 o*ooo 295 O*OOO27'6

i) ii) iii) iv) v)

10

18 : lo179 - 1982 3.3.2.4Windage tosses ( joating roof tanks )

where S = W = Ic, = P = PI = Vw= D = ET, = K, = xr = v, = Windage loss in kg/ms capacity, Density of liquid at storage conditions in kg/ms, Tank construction factor ( see Table 4 ), True vapour pressure at bulk liquid temperature in Pa, Atmospheric pressure in Pa, Average wind velocity m/s, Tank Diameter in m ( for D > 45 m use D1/$$ instead of D1.' ), Seal factor ( 1.00 for tight fitting modern seals and l-33 for loose fitting older seals ), Liquid factor ( see Table 5 ), Paint factor ( l-00 for light grey or aluminium and O-90 for white ), and Capacity of tank in ms.
4 TANK CONSTRUCTION FACTOR Kt Kt (3) 0.045 0.11 0.13 0.13 0.14

TABLE SL No. (1) i) ii) iii) iv) v) Welded Rivetted Rivetted Rivetted Rivetted

CONSTRUCTIONOB TANK (2) tank - pan/pontoon roof, single/ double seal tank - pontoon roof, double seal tank - pontoon roof, single seal tank `- pan roof, double seal tank - pan roof. sinele seal

TABLE SL No. (1) i) ii) iii) iv) v)

5

LIQUID FACTOR Kc ( FLOATING TANKS - WINDAGE LOSS ) LIQUID STORED (2)

ROOF Kc (3) 1.00

Gasoline Crude Naphtha jet fuel (JP-4 Kerosene Distillate oil

)

0.75 0.96 0 83 0.79

11

IS t 10179 - 1982
3.3.3 Evaporation from Oil Separators - Oil separators and stim ponds usually contain settled oil floating on the water in the separator bays. This oil is skimmed by floating skimmers into the oil collection pipe. Since this is a slow process a large surface of the oil is exposed to evaporation, unless the separator is covered, For covered separators this loss is negligible. For uncovered separators the evaporation loss may be calculated as follows: EL = where EL = Separator S = Separator LE = Light evaporation loss in mslday, in ms/day, and oil, percent the influent oil and 25 percent distillation l-1967*. Using this the percent distilled. slop oil pickup (LB-225)s 0.159 ( 100 LE)

ends in influent

For determining LE, distillation is required on the collected slop oil. Determine the temperature at on the collected slop oil as per IS : 1448 [ P : 18 temperature on the influent oil distillation curve find Use this percentage as LE.

3.4 Oxides of Nitrogen - Emissions of oxides of nitrogen from refinery furnaces and boilers depend upon the fuel nitrogen content, and firing conditions, which depend upon the design of the furnace, type of firing and excess air. Consequently, emissions differ from furnace to furnace, and hence these emissions should be determined by individual stack However, since refinery furnaces sampling for any degree of accuracy. in general are relatively small, and have low flame temperatures and residence time, nitrogen oxides emissions from refineries are generally low. Consequently individual monitoring does not appreciably enhance the quality of data obtained, as compared to emissions estimated by using generalized emission factors. 3.5 Particulates - The major sources of particulates Emissions from these catalytic cracking unit regenerators. from the daily catalyst loss data based on daily inventory from regenerators depend upon operating conditions and Consequently use of emission recovery equipment used. give a true picture of these losses. in refineries are may be estimated numbers. Losses type of catalyst factors does not

3.5.1 Lesser sources include asphalt air blowing operations, fired heaters and boilers, sludge burners and emergency flare. Asphalt air blowing operations give rise to blowing losses which are dependent upon blowing *Methods of test for petroleum and its products: P : 18 Diatillation (fist reuisian ). 12

IS : 10179 - 1982

temperatures. However, the off-gas is generally water scrubbed to recover the entrained oil droplets. The net loss therefore is of the order of 0.1 to Reliable emission factors for blowing O-2 percent of the blowing charge. operations are not available, and the figures `given above may be used for an approximate determination. 3.5.2 Particulates from combustion operations include smoke, cenospheres and ash. Smoke results from formation of sub-micron particles in local fuel-rich zones in the flame by cracking and polymerization of vapourized fuel. Most of the smoke particles burn out in the flame provided sufficient excess air is available for combustion. Very small amount of smoke in the flue gas is also visible. A dense black cloud of smoke leaving a furnace stack contains as little as 0.1 to 0.2 percent by mass of smoke particles. Atomization, air to fuel ratio and mixing are of primary importance in smoke formation. In refineries, since no solid fuel is used, smoke formation occurs only during start-ups, shutdowns, emergencies or during soot blowing operations. 3.5.3 Cenospheres or chars are unburnt carbonaceous residues formed during combustion, when the volatile portion of a residual fuel vaporizes, leaving a residue of carbon and ash. Emission of cenospheres is related to the asphaltene content of the fuel. These burn slowly and hence longer residence time and high excess air reduce their formation. Larger combustion units, therefore, produce less cenospheres, as also lighter fuels. 3.5.4 Ash is the non-combustible residue remaining after combustion of the carbonaceous matter from cenospheres. Ash consists essentially of metallic constituents like vanadium, with small amounts of sodium, potassium, nickel and other trace metals. Ash concentrates only in heavier residual fuels, and even in these the amount is very low, usually of the order of 0.04 to 0.1 percent by mass. Lighter fuels like distillates, naphtha and gas have practically no ash. 3.5.5 Emissions of ash may be estimated by analysis of the fuel burnt. Cenospheres and smoke on the other hand may be determined by actual stack sampling of furnaces and boilers, except in the case of open sludge burners and flares. However, the total particulate emission from these sources is small when proper combustion control is exercised. Generally use of emission factors should suffice for estimating these emissions. 3.6 Carbon Monoxide - The only significant source is the catalytic cracking unit regenerator when CO'boilers are not employed. No emissions of carbon monoxide are released when CO boilers are used. Where CO boilers do not exist the emissions can be accurately calculated based on stack gas analysis of carbon monoxide content and the quantity of air used for regeneration, which is measured and controlled. Emission factors do 13

IS : 10179- 1982 not give a reliable estimate, since carbon controlled by operating conditions. monoxide formation is largely

3.7 Aldehydes and Ammonia - Small amounts of aldehydes and ammonia are released from combustion in furnaces and boilers and catalytic cracking regenerators. These my be determined by actual stack sampling or by use of emission factors. Since the quantities are small, and not controllable, stack monitoring normally does not serve any purpose. e 4. POLLUTION CONTROL TECHNIQUES AND OPTIONS 4.1 Control of air pollution is an expensive and complex problem because the character and quantity of refinery atmospheric emissions vary greatly from refinery to refinery. Controlling factors include crude oil capacity, type of crude oil, complexity of processing employed, operating practices followed, and the degree of maintenance and good housekeeping procedures in force. However, refinery air pollution control techniques exist which should permit refineries to operate in any community without constituting a serious air pollution problem. 4.1.1 Many techniques have been developed and used over many years and considerable experience has been gained in their application. Many others, on the other hand, are still in the development stage and may not as yet be available for general use. A specific technology selected to control a particular pollutant will often be effective in controlling other pollutants as well. However, this need not necessarily hold true in all cases. Additionally, particular technologies may also be effective or practical only for large installations or for new ones. Retrofitting in existing plants that have not left sufficient space for these processes is another problem that might preclude such installations. A realistic control strategy therefore requires the evaluation of the various factors involved. 4.1.2 These factors include the type and number of pollutants, the technical feasibility, size of the installation, cost benefits, commercial confidence and reliability, space availability and the possibility of creating other disposal problems. 4.1.3 The majority of refinery emissions occur during combustion for These include comproviding power and heat for processing operations. bustion of fuel in boilers for steam generation, combustion of fuel in process heaters, and combustion of carbon during regeneration of cracking catalysts. The combustion processes pose general problems such as the presence in the combustion gases of sulphur oxides and partirulates which relate to the quantity of fuel burnt, and the production of nitrogen oxides and other minor pollutants. The control techniques and options available are discussed below from a general standpoint. 14

IS t` 1e179 6 1981 4.2 Control of Emissions from Refinery Process Gases - Nearly all refinery processes generate gases which generally contain hydrogen sulphide or other low molecular weight sulphur compounds. These gases are normally used as fuel in process heaters and boilers. Sulphur dioxide emissions therefore result if the sulphur compounds are not removed. The most common procedure for removal of hydrogen sulphide and light mercaptans involves scrubbing the gases with an absorption agent such an aqueous amine solution. The amine solution extracts the hydrogen sulphide, and is then regenerated by stripping hydrogen sulphide with heat and/or steam. The regenerated solution is reused for further absorption. The hydrogen sulphide recovered from this process can be converted to either sulphuric acid or elemental sulphur. 4.2.1 The use of this process however depends upon the quantity of gas and the sulphur content of the gas. Conversion of hydrogen aulphide to elemental sulphur also requires a certain minimum availability for the process to be viable, 4.3 Control of Emissions from Fuel Combustion - Combustion fuel and residual fuel oils in particular can be a significant source sulphur dioxide emissions from refineries. The major options available this case are changing of fuel type or improving fuel oil quality. of of in

4.3.1 Changing fuel type usually means switching to a cleaner type of fuel such as from residual oil to distillate, distillate to naphtha, and naphtha to gas. Cleaner fuel can also be obtained by switching from a high sulphur to a natural low sulphur fuel oil or crude. While the investment required for fuel switching may be comparatively lower relevant to other options, this often means competing for scarce supplies of the cleaner fuel with substantial cost debits. However, on a short term basis this may Availability, applicability and cost are be the only viable alternative. critical factors in employing this method. 4.3.2 Fuel quality can be improved by treatment 6f fuel ta mtwx+e potentially polluting substances, prior tq combustion. Hydrogen poctssing is a prime example of such an option. Technology for hydro deMphuriz; ation of both distillate and heavy residual fractions of crudt is available. Hydro-treating reduces both sulphur and nitrogen but ratio of sulpbur removal is higher. These processes, however, are extremely expensive, and are normally justifiable from product quality considerations rather than emission reduction. 4.3.3 Other major emissions from fuel combustion are oxides of nitrogen and particulates or smoke. Improved combustion techniques can substantially reduce both the formation of nitrogen oxides as well as emissions of smoke, carbon monoxide, hydrocarbons and acid smut. Proper burner maintenance, good atomization of liquid fuels, optimum excess air levcls,

15

,I8 L 10179- 1982 and correct stack temperatures are all important factors in reducing emissions. Recently developed techniques include staged combustion, fuel gas recirculation, water and steam injection, and fluidized bed combustion. Considerable work has been done on all these, and it appears that staged combustion may be applicable to refinery furnaces and boilers in the near future. The rest, however, have been investigated mostly for large utility boilers. Hence, further research is needed before these can be commercially adopted. Moreover, the emissions of nitrogen oxides particularly are relatively small, and hence use of these new techniques may not be justifiable at this stdge.. 4.3.4 The possible sources of smoke in refinery operations may be classified into three categories, process furnaces and boilers, vent gas flares, and incinerators. Furnaces and heaters normally do not release any undesirable levels of smoke. Where gas is used as a fuel, no smoke results. Whenever liquid fuels, such as residual fuel oils are burnt,, adequate and relatively inexpensive equipment is available to prevent smoke with good operating practices and maintenance. Proper burner design for the specific fuel type, good atomization and air-fuel mixing are important factors to prevent smoke formation with all fuels. 4.3.5 Vent gas flares, on the other hand, may be a major source of Flares are necessary as a safety measure to handle unexpected smoke. losses of vapour. These are released from process units in emergencies caused by compressor failures, excessive pressure in the units, line breaks or leaks, power failures and fires. Since large surges of gas cannot be vented to furnaces or other enclosed burning equipment, flares are usually designed Smoke from these flares results from an to safely dispose off these gases. inadequate supply of air in the combustion zone. Several techniques have been developed that virtually eliminate smoke. The most widely used is injection of large quantities of steam into the combustion zone with Another method uses a venturi scrubbing uniquely designed flare tips. section at the bottom of the stack followed by reheating of the stack gas. However, occasions when large quantities of gases are released to the flare are very rare, since they result only from.emergencies. Under normal operating conditions, most refinery flares are practically non-existent except for the burning of the pilot, and these do not produce any smoke. 4.3.6 Where fuel desulphurization or change of fuel is not possible, waste gas treatment is another way of emission reduction for both gaseous and particulate emissions. Electrostatic precipitators have been successfully However, for sulphur dioxide and nitrogen oxides used for dust removal. emission control, progress in developing suitable processes for fuel gas treatment has been rather slow because of the magnitude and complexity of the problem. For example, removal of sulphur dioxide from flue gases by scrubbing has been successfully operated, abroad, in large power
K.

16

IS : lo179 - 1982
The flue gases are washed with very large plants for a number of years. volumes of water to which a little lime or chalk is added. However, these processes are not very popular on account of the cold wet fumes of washed gases that descend on the neighbourhood, where they may cause worse pollution than if the fuel gas had not been washed and had dispersed naturally. 4.3.7 The technical and economic feasibility of most processes is closely related to plant size. Consequently their major usage has been in large power plants. Such treatments have not been tried on the smaller refinery The most promising processes under investigation furnaces and boilers. include lime-dolomite injection, catalytic oxidation and alkali-alumina absorption. Potassium sulphite scrubbing system is also receiving some However, problems still exist in estabilishing commercial attention. viability and confidence. Byproduct disposal also creates serious problems Consequently the use of flue gas treatment as an for some locations. option for abatement of refinery emissions has not found much favour and may not be practicable. 4.4 Control of Emissions from Catalyst Regeneration - Catalytic cracking unit regenerators are a major potential source of particulate matter emissions and also small amounts of sulphur oxides, and oxides of nitrogen, as well as some aldehydes and ammonia. Of these, the last three do not lend themselves to any control as of today. Particulate matter, however, has always lent itself to control more from the standpoint of the economic recovery of the catalyst. 4.4.1 Normally two-stage conventional cyclones are located within the regenerator vessel for catalyst recovery. Additionally, a third external cyclone stage or an electrostatic precipitator, may be used before discharge of the flue gas to the atmosphere. As regard hydrocarbon emissions from catalytic cracking regenerators, the amount is generally small. Moreover, these hydrocarbons are completely consumed where cracking units are equipped with CO boilers. 4.5 Control of Carbon Monoxide Emissions - The only significant source of carbon monoxide emissions in petroleum refineries is the catalytic cracking regenerator. Concentration of carbon monoxide in the regenerator flue gases may be in the range of six to ten percent. These flue gases are generally released high in the air and at high temperatures, and result in very low ground level concentrations. 4.5.1 Carbon monoxide emissions from catalytic cracking units may' be eliminated by incinerating the gases in waste heat CO boilers at temperatures from 1 100' K to 1400" K. The heat of combustion of carbon monoxide and other combustibles, and the sensible heat of the regenerator gases, are recovered by generating steam or heating the oil charged to

17

IS : lo179 - 1982
the cracking unit. Carbon monoxide is completely oxidized to carbon dioxide. In addition, traces of aldehydes, hydrocarbons and cyanides are also destroyed, While these can be installed easi!y on new plants, retrofitting in existing units may present problems of location and availability of space. 4.5.2 A more recent developmtnt in this respect is high temperature regeneration using molecular sieve zeolite catalysts. This eliminates carbon monoxide and may be adapted to existing plants. 4.6 Control of Emissions in Storage - Hydrocarbons are the products of a refinery and hence there is an obvious economic incentive to prevent Many air pollution control measures are their loss to the atmosphere. therefore necessarily employed as accepted good practice. Hydrocarbon emissions in quantities normally released in refinery operations are invisible and non-toxic. Hydrocarbon vapour losses are the principal contaminants. In addition, objectionable odours may be caused by emissions of sulphur or nitrogen compounds. All these are associated with the movement and storage of oil and gas. However, the control methods developed, and in general use, are capable of sufficiently reducing or eliminating their emissions into the atmosphere. 4.6.1 Emissions from storage vessels are generally caused by evaporation of liquids or liquefied gases. The control of emissions from oil and gas storage facilities serves three purposes, namely reduction or elimination of air contaminant emissions, reduction or elimination of fire hazards, and the recovery of valuable products. This reduction is normally achieved by the use of floating roof or pressure storage for light hydrocarbons. 4:7 Control of Emissions by Dispersion - Another means of abatement of pollution is by dispersion of excess pollutants by use of taller stacks. This technique is of practical utility and has been successfully used in controlling ground level concentrations. It is the simplest and often the most economic. Tall stacks, however, may be a hazard to aircraft or entirely inadequate for certain local topographical and meteorological conditions. Further, since tall stacks do not eliminate but only disperse the pollutants, if the natural scavenging processes are not completely They may effective, they may contribute to regional pollution problems. also transfer the problem from one locality to another. Standard dispersion models may be used for calculating stack heights required ( see IS : 88291978* ). 4.7.1 Additionally, the major methods used to further reduce emission of vapours and odours are as follows: a) Variable vapour space system - As the storage tanks are filled, or emptied out, or when the temperature changes, vapours from *Guidelines for micrometeorological techniques in air pollution studies. 18

IS ! 10179

l

1982

one or more storage tanks are displaced into or out of a special tank provided to hold these vapours. Excess vapours are piped into the fuel system or to a smokeless flare for incineration. Space availability and location of light hydrocarbon storage facilities are major factors affecting the feasibility of this control system. b) Vapour recovery systems - These systems operate like variable vapour space systems, except that certain substances in the emissions are recovered. The excess vapours are compressed into an absorption unit for recovery of the condensible hydrocarbons. The non-condensibles are either piped into a fuel system or a smokeless flare for incineration. The feasibility of this type of control is dependent on the proximity of a process unit. cl Materials and equipment - Utilization of selective materials and equipment also assists in controlling emissions. For example, plastic balls have been proposed as a means of reducing evaporation losses in fixed roof tanks. These are spread as a layer floating on the top of the liquid surface. Use of proper paint for the tank shell and roof also influences the vapour and liquid temperatures. Breathing emissions may be reduced by as much as 25 percent by the use of aluminium paint rather than black paint and 25 percent by the use of white paint rather than aluminium paint. Emissions may also be reduced by using remote gauges and sampling device so as to eliminate the need to open tank gauge hatches for level reading and sampling. In the case of oil separators, installation of covers is also employed to reduce evaporation losses. 4.8 Sulphur Recovery - In many refineries sulphur removal from some refinery streams is a part of refining, from considerations of product quality rather than pollution abatement. These process units generate a potentially rich source for sulphur recovery units. Two important areas in this respect are hydrofining and amine extraction. Both these yield sour gases rich in hydrogen sulphide. Based on availability of hydrogen sulphide a sulphur plant may be an attractive way to reduce emissions as well as recover a useful product. 4.81 The classical method of sulphur recovery is the Claus process. The process is based on producing elemental sulphur, by first converting one-third of the hydrogen sulphide to sulphur dioxide and then using this to combine with the remaining hydrogen sulphide in the presence of a catalyst to form sulphur. Several types of catalysts have been used, but activated bauxite appears to be the most desirable from low cost, durability and activity considerations. 4.8.2 Plants with a single efficiencies up to 85 percent. catalytic converter stage generally give With two stages, efficiencies as high as 19

IS:10179-1982 95 percent have been reported. A further 2 to 3 percent efficiency increase is possible by the addition of a third stage. Although this stage is not generally economically justifiable on recovery considerations, it would be desirable from its usefulness as a protective stage to maintain overall recovery. 4.8.3 An incinerator is normally provided to burn the residual gases prior to discharge to the atmosphere. Plant size is an important consideration in determining the viability of a sulphur recovery unit. 4.9 Increased Efficiency - By far the most important area of pollution reduction is in increased efficiency of energy utilization. Increased heat recovery and heat integration, particularly in older plants, helps reduce fuel consumption, thereby not only reducing pollution, but also manuIdeas such as addition of convection sections, air-preheafacturing cost. ting, flue gas steam generation, and improved burner designs, have been successfully utilized in process furnaces. Condensate recovery and low pressure flash steam saves both fuel and water in boilers. Conservation, therefore, helps to reduce pollution at source and avoids costly end cleanup This should normally be the first area of attack in any pollution processes. control programme, since it also helps conserve national resources. 5. OPERATING PRACTICES

5.1 Good operating practices and housekeeping are important not only from the standpoint of safe operations, but help improve the control of environmental pollution without any investment. 5.1.1 A regular and efficient preventive maintenance programme On-stream inspection comes high on the list of good operating practices. Similarly, proper sampling and loading prevents emergencies and leaks. procedures also aid in avoiding 10s~. Use of proper pump seals and glands minimize leakage from these sources. 5.1.2 A routine periodic check-up of safety valves prevents gas leakage to flare, as well as liquid blowdown, which ultimately increase flare losses. Similarly floating roof tank seals should be regularly inspected for damage Regular loss surveys can pinpoint sources of loss and leaks. and leaks. 5.1.3 Proper furnace operation, burner cleaning, and adjustment of atomizing steam and excess air, are important in ensuring high efficiency of combustion, which will result in less fuel usage with consequent reduction in emissions. Optimum excess air utilization is important in High excess air levels are quite minimizing nitrogen oxides emissions. common, although this can be easily eontrolled by regular check of flue gas for oxygen content. Simple portable analyzers are easily available Complete combustion and minimization of particulate for this pllrpose. 20

48 : 10179- 1982 matter can be effectively controlled by proper atomization of oil fired. Correct usage of atomizing steam and proper fuel temperature are essential for good atomization. 6. MEASUREMENT OF EMISSIONS

6.1 An accurate knowledge of emissions from various sources is essential to assess the effect of emissions on air quality. This knowledge may be obtained either by calculations or by actual measurement, Of the refinery emissions, sulphur dioxide is perhaps the only one that lends itself to determination by calculation. Since oxides of sulphur are generated primarily from combustion of fuels, and since fuels are accurately measured both for quality and quantity by the refineries, the emissions of sulphur dioxide can therefore be easily calculated. Refinery emissions such as particulates and oxides of nitrogen cannot be calculated since their formation depends upon several parameters. For a correct estimate of these emissions, actual measurement has to be resorted to. In the case of hydrocarbon emissions from evaporation sources, these emissions are not measurable. The emissions of hydrocarbons may be calculated by indirect means from an estimation of losses from storage tanks by empirical formulae discussed earlier. In the case of losses from leaks, loading operations and other similar sources, the emissions can only be estimated by conducting regular loss surveys, and then calculating the evaporation losses from these sources. 6.1.1 Sampling to determine particulate emissions, on the other hand, is considerably more complicated than sampling for gaseous pollutants, particularly if any of the particulates are larger than one micron. In the first place, even if the particulates are evenly distributed in the gas at one point, they may become maldistributed, due to settling or centrifugal force, when the gas goes around a bend. It is, therefore, almost, always necessary to sample at a number of points over the cross-section of the duct to get an accurate sample. Secondly, each sample should also be taken isokinetically to have the proper loading of particulates per unit volume of gas. This means that the gas velocity in the sample probe should be exactly the same as the gas velocity in the duct at the sample point. 6.1.2 The samples may be analysed, to determine the concentration of pollutants, by a variety of methods. To ensure that standardized procedures are followed. relevant Indian Standards Methods of test should be used for analysis. 6.1.3 Properly designed and conditioned sample probes should also be employed to ensure that the correct sample is obtained without condensation of certain pollutants in the sampling line, These probes should also 21

IS : 10179 - 1'982 be standardized, followed. 7. MONITORIN'G and the appropriate Indian Standards should be

OF EMISSIONS

7.1 Monitoring of emissions, as well as ambient air quality, are necessary to ensure that quality criteria and emission limits are met. Monitoring of ambient air quality is necessary in all cases, since this directly affects the health of the people in the vicinity of the plant, as well as in the surrounding neighbourhood. Before deciding on air quality monitoring it is necessary to have an idea of all the parameters that need to be measured, and the frequency of measurement. In terms of effects of pollutant on human beings, the major factor of importance is the concentration of a particular pollutant over a given period of time. Three periods are important in ambient air quality measurement; the 1 to 3 hourly maximum concentration, the 24 hour average concentration, and the annual mean, are necessary to decide upon the dose-response relationships. Where operations fluctuate considerably from time to time, continuous recorders may be required. However, most refinery operations are stable and steady operations, and the variations in emissions are relatively small. Consequently, it is adequate to measure the emissions over two hour periods and obtain the necessary hourly, daily and annual averages. 7.2 Several factors need to be taken into account in deciding upon contiContinuous instruments have to be nuous versus manual monitoring. imported, as against local availability of instruments required for manual purpose. The manual instruments are relatively cheap as compared to the more sophisticated continuous instruments. The accuracy of both, however, is adequate for the type of information required. The maintenance requirements, the type of manpower required, and the availability of such manpower, is much more difficult in the case of continuous instruments. In the case of emissions from various sources of refining operations, individual stack monitoring may be required in certain cases only. Individual stack monitors are not of much use in oil or gas fired boilers and furnaces, since fuel is the main contributor, particuarly towards sulphur dioxide emissions, and no control is possible once fuel sulphur is fixed. The emissions of particulates and oxides of nitrogen from stationary combustion sources are generally relatively very small. Hence, spot sampling for measurement for these pollutants should be adequate, Furthermore, individual stack monitors are of use only where control steps can be taken to reduce emissions. In the case of most refinery operations, the emissions during emergencies would tend to decrease rather than increase. Furthermore, most emergencies in refineries cannot be tolerated except for short periods of time, and ultimately lead to a shutdown of the plant. Individual stack monitors may be necessary for flue gas scrubbers, sulphur plant incinerators, and such.equipment. 22

$3 : iol'is 8. EMISSION FACTORS

- 1982

8.1 The list of emission factors given in Table 6 has been provided to enable estimation of emissions from refinery processes, where more detailed calculation or measurement is not possible. These factors should be used with caution and reference should be made to the text prior to usage. Where possible, actual determination by direct measurement or from fuel analysis should be resorted to.

23

TABLE

6

EMISSION

FACTORS

FOR PETROLEUM

REFINERIES

tf
Y

( Clause 8.1) SL No. PROOESSING UNIT PABTIOULATES (3) SIJLPHUR OXIDES CARBON MONOXIDE (5) HYDROQARBONS NITEOGEN OXIDES (NOX) (7) ALDEHYDES AIUMO~IA

*
5
I
Y

(SO3) (1)
i)

(2)
Small furnaces and boilers ( less than 1 x lOleJ/h) Residual fuel -g/l oil burned Distillate fuel -g/l oil burned Gas fuel - g/m3 gas burned Medium furnaces and boilers ( 1 x 10'0 - 1 x 1011 J/h ) Residual fuel - g/l oil burned Distillate fuel - g/l oil burned Gas fuel - g/ma gas burned Large furnaces and boilers ( more than 1 x 1011 J/h) Residual fuel - g/l oil burned Distillate fuel - g/l oil burned Gas fuel - g/ma gas burned Fluid catalytic cracking units - g/l fresh feed Uncontrolled ESP and CO boiler - g/l fresh feed Moving-bed catalytic g/l fresh feed cracking units

(4)

(6)
0.35 0.35 0.128

(8)

(9)

.fz

5

To'" 0.30

19.98 SD 19.98 SD 1 998 s

N Fi

4.8 4.8 1.9

0.07 1 0.071 0.048

ii
N

ii)

2.4 ;I!9

% iii)

19.98 SD 19 98 SD 1 998 s

N NN

0.35 0.35 0.048

66 6.6 2.8

0071 0.07 1 0.048

N ii

i:f 0.24 0.695 0.128

1998 SD 19.98 SD 1 998 s 1.413 1.413

N N N 39.2 N

0.25 0.25 0.016 0.63 0'63

8.3 8.3 3.7 0.012 0.012

PO71 0.07 1 0.048 0.054 0'054

ii
N
0.155 o-155

iv)

v) vi)

0.049 1'50 PO19 6 enN

0.171 -

IO.8

0*25

0'014 N N

PO4 N N

PO17 N N

Fluid coking units Uncontrolled - g/l fresh feed ESP - g/l fresh feed Compressor internal gines g/ma gas burned combustion

:

vii)

1 998 s

193

14.4

1.61

3.2

IS : lo179

l

1982

APPENDIX ( Clause 0.3 )

A

REFERENCE FOR FURTHER INFORMATION
1. Manual on Urban Air Quality Management, WHO Regional Publications, European Series No. 1 2. Air Quality Criteria and Guides for Urban Air Pollutants, WHO Technical Report Series No. 506. Academic Press. 3. Stern, A. C. ( 1978 ) ( ed ). Air Pollution, 4. Environmental Conservation. The Oil & Gas Industries. National Petroleum Council, U. S. Dept. of the Interior ( 1972 ). 5. Control Techniques for Sulphur Oxide Pollutants, U. S. Dept. of H. E. W., NAPCA Publication No. AP-52. 6. Control Techniques for Nitrogen Oxides Emissions from Stationary Sources, U. S. Dept of H. E. W., NAPCA Publication No. AP-67. 7. Control Techniques for Particulate Air Pollutants, U. S. Dept. of H. E. W., NAPCA Publication No. AP-51. 8. Compilation of Air Pollutant Emission Factors, U. S. Dept. of H. E. W., NAPCA Publication No. AP-42. 9. Manual on Disposal of Refinery Wastes, Vol. II, Waste Gases and Particulate Matter, American Petroleum Institute.

26

,._
( Confinwdfrmn pap 2 )

18 t 10139 - 1982

Code of Practice for Control of Air Pollution Subcommittee,
CoMEIlET

CDC 53 : 4

Representing

SE~I N. G. ASEAR
Mtmbm

The Dharamsi Morarji Chemical Co Ltd, Bombay

SHBI H. B. SINQH ( Alternate to Shri N. G. Ashar ) Indian Petrochemicals Corporation Ltd, Gujarat SHRI P. R. GHA~EKHA~ SHBI M. K. PBABHVDESAI( Alkrnata ) Hindusten Petroleum Corvn Ltd. Bombay SH~I 0. P. GOYAL . SHBI R. SBINIVAEIAN ( Alternate 1 ' The Fertiliier ( Planning & Development ) India DE V. S. GVPTA Ltd, Sindri SHRI S. B. SINEA ( Alternate) Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Hyderabad SH~I K. KANA~AVEL SHBI P. R. KBISHNA MVX-ZTHY ( Alternate I ) Sasr IBBAHIM ( Alterna~ II ) India&lc~~amical Manufacturers Association, SEBI J. P. KAPVB DB N. C. MEHTA ( Alternuts ) DBS.N. ~SATHUB Government of Andhra Pradesh ( Industrial Health Cell for Medical Protection ), Hyderabad

DB B. P~ABEAKARARAO ( Alternate ) Central Board for the Prevention and Control of MEYBEB SECBETABY Water Pollution. New Delhi DB K. R. RAN~ANATEAN ( Alternate ) S. F. India Ltd, Calcutta SHBI A. MOOKHERJEA Saab E. NICOLAYSEN ( Alternate ) Indian Institute of Petroleum ( CSIR ), Dehra SHBI H. K. MVL~HANDANI Dun Saar B. P. PVNDIR ( Altermzte ) The Fertiliier Association of India, New Delhi DB V. PACXAIYAPPAN National Environmental Engineering Research SEBI V. L. PAMPATTIWAB Institute ( CSIR ), Nagpur Da G. H. PANDYA ( Altermate ) Batliboi & Co Ltd, Bombay SH~I R. RAMANAN SHBI J. N. MEE~OTBA ( Alternate ) Directorate General Factory Advice Services; and Da S. S. RAMASWAMY Lahour Institute, Bombay SHBI S. K. DAN~WAL ( Alturnate ) Delhi Administration &RI K. SZN GVPTA Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay SHRI V. B. SEIRODKAX~ SEBI S. G. RETABKAB( Alternate ) Central Mining Research Station, Dhanbad DB B. SIN~H DB J.`K. SINHA ( Alternate ) Central Electricity Authority, New Delhi SHBI S. A. SVB~AXAIAN Voltas Limited, Bombay SH~I R. VI~UPAK~HIAH

27

#~TERWNW~~AL SYSTEM OF UNITS ( SI UNITS)
Base Units
. Quantity

unit
metre kilogram second ampere kelvin candela mole

Symbol

Length Mass Time Electric current Thermodynamic temperature Luminous intensity Amount of substance Supplementary
Quantity

Gl :

K cd mol

Units
Unit Symbol

Plane angle Solid angle Derived Units
Quantity

radian steradlan

rad sr

Unit

Symbol

Definition

.Force Energy Power Flux Flux density Frequency Electric conductance Electromotive force Pressure, stress

newton joule watt weber tesla hertz siemens volt Pascal

N J W Wb T HZ S V Pa

I N I J 1 .w I Wb I T I Hz 1 s V 1 I Pa

= P = = = = = = =

I kg.m/s* I N.m I J/s I V.s I Wb/ms I c/s (s-1) I A/V I W/A I N/m*

