( Reaffirmed 2002 )

IS 14198 (Part 2) : 1994 IEC Pub 953-2 : 1990

Rotating Machinery Sectional Committee, ET 15

CONTENTS
INTRODUC~~N ...........................................................................

1
...4 ...4 . .4 ...4 ...5
.6 .8

Clause 1. SEopeandobject ................................................................... 1.1 Scope ....................................................................... 1.2 Object ......................................................................... ............................................ 1.3 Matterstobeconsideredinthecontract.. Units, symbols, terms and definitions 2.1 General .. ..~................................................................. 2.2 Symbols.units ................................................................ 2.3 Subscripts, superscripts and definitions .............................................. 2.4 Definition of guarantee values and test results .......................................... Guidingprinciples ......................................................... 3.1 Advance planning for test ........................................................ 3.2 Preparatory agreements and arrangements for tests .................................... 3.3 Planningofthetest ............................................................ 3.4 Preparationofthetests ......................................................... 3.5 Comparison measurements ......................................................... 3.6 Settingsfortests .............................................................. . ....................... 3.7 Preliminarytests ....................................... 3.8 Acceptancetests .............................................................. 3.9 Repetition of acceptance tests ..................................................... Measuring techniques and measuring instrument .......................................... 4.1 General ..................................................................... 4.2 Measurement of power ......................................................... 4.3 Flow measurement .............................................................. 4.4 Pressure measurement (excluding condensing turbine exhaust pressure) ................... 4.5 Condensing turbine exhaust pressure measurement .................................... 4.6 Temperature measurement ....................................................... 4.7 Steam quality measurement ...................................................... 4.8 Time measurement .............................................................. 4.9 Speedmeasurement ........................................................... Evaluationoftests....................................................................5 5.1 Preparationofevaluation ....................................................... 5.2 Computation of results .......................................................... Correction of test results and comparison with guarantee .................................... 6.1 6.2 6.3 6.4 6.5 Guarantee Correction Correction Correction Definition values and guarantee conditions .......................................... of initial steam flow capacity ............................................ of maximum output ................................................... of thermal_tnd thermodynamic efficiency .................................. and application of correction values .......................................

2.

3.

..~.......12
.12 .13

..13 ..14
18

..19 ..19 ..2 0
.22

4.

22 ...2 2
.27 .30 .37

,42
,44 .47

55 ..5 5 5 ..5 5
.56 .58 .58 .58 .59 ,59

5.

6.

.60

0)

IS 14198(Part 2) : 1994 IEC Pub 953-2 : 1990 6.6

7.

Correctionmethods.. .. A................................. ......................... .................................. 6.7 Variables to be considered in the correction . , .... 6.8 Guarantee comparison .......................................................... 6.9 Deterioration of turbine perfurmance (ageing) ....................................... Measuringuncertainty ..............................................................
l

.60

.63
.66 .68

..6 8 ..6 8 .69
.71 .72 .73

7.1 General ..................................................................... 7.2 Determination of measuringuncertainty of stream and water properties ................... 7.3 Calculation of measuring uncertainty of output ....................................... 7.4 Determination of measuring uncertainty of mass flow ................................. 7.5 Calculation of measuring uncertainty of results ........................................ Appendix A - Feedwater leakage and condenser leakage tests ................................... AppendixB-Throattapnozzle Appendix C -Evaluation .......................................................... of multiple measurements, compatibility .................................

.76 ..7 7 81 2

Appendix D - Massflowbalances...........................................................8

Appendix E-Typical generalized correction curves for correction of test results according to guarantee ..8 4 conditions ............................................................... Appendix F - Short statistical definition of measuring uncertainty and error propagation in acceptance tests .. .103 Appendix G - Calculation of measuring uncertainty of output -Electrical measurement- . . . . . . . . . . . . .106

(ii)

IS 14198(Part 2) : 1994 IEC Pub 953-2 : 1990

Indian Standard
RULESFORSTEAMTURBINESTHERMAL ACCEPTANCETESTS
NATIONAL FOREWORD This Indian Standard which is identical with IEC Pub 953-2 (1990), issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission, was adopted b;y the Bureau oflndian Standards on the recommendation of the Rotating Machinery Sectional Committee (ET 15) and approval of the Electrotechnical Division Council. The text of IEC standard has been approved as suitable for publication as Indian Standard without deviations.' CROSS REFERENCES In this adopted standard, reference appears to certain International Standards for which Indian Standards also exist. The corresponding Indian Standards which are to be substituted in their place are listed below along with their degree of equivalence for the editions indicated: International Standard IS0 31-3 : 1992 Quantities Units - Part 3: Mechanics and CorrespondingIndian Standard IS 1890 (PaYrt 3) : 1994 Quantities, identical units and symbols: Part 3 Mechanics (firstrevision) IS 14198 (Part 1) : 1994 Rules for steam turbine thermal acceptance tests: Part 1 Method A-High accuracy for large condensing steam turbines Degree of Equivdhce Identical

IEC 953-l (1990) Rules for steam turbine thermal acceptance tests Part 1 : Method A - High accuracy large condensing steam turbines

Identical

The concerned technical committee has reviewed the provisions of IS0 5167-l : 1991 referred to in this adopted standard and~hasdecided that it is acceptable~for use in conjunction with this standard. Only the English language text given in the International Standard has been retained while adopting it as Indian Standard, and as such the page numbers given here are not the same as in IEC publication. For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the results of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)`. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

(iii)

IS 14198 Wart ,2) : 1994 IIW Pub 953-2 : 1990

INTRODUCTION The rapid development of measuring techniques, the increasing capacity of steam turbines and the introductionof nuclear power plants necessitated a revision of IEC Publication 46 (1962) regarding acceptance tests. Since all the needs of the power industry in the different parts of the world could not be satisfied by one single publication, the complete standard is divided into two parts, describing two different approaches for conducting and evaluating thermal acceptance tests of steam turbines gnd which can be used separately: a) Method A, which is Part 1 of the standard (IEC 953-l), deals with thermal acceptance high accuracy for large condensing steam turbines. b) Method B, which is Part 2 of the standard (I E C 953-2), deals with thermal acceptance wide range of accuracy for various types and sizes of steam turbines. tests with

tests with a

1)

Basic philosophy

and figures on uncertainty

Part 1 provides for very accurate testing of steam turbines to obtain the level of performance with minimum measuring uncertainty. The operating conditions during the test are stringent and compulsory. Method A is based on the exclusive use of the most accurate calibrated instrumentation and the best measuring procedures currently available. The uncertainty of the test result is always sufficiently small that it normally need not be taken into account in the comparison between test result and guarantee value. This uncertainty will not be larger than about 0.3% for a fossil fired unit and 0.4% for a nuclear unit. The cost for instrumentation and the efforts for preparing and conduCting the tests will generally be justified economically for large and/or prototype units. Method B provides for acceptance tests of steam turbines of various types and capacities with appropriate measuring uncertainty. Instrumentation and measuring procedures have to be chosen accordingly from a scope specifieb in the standard which is centred mainly on standardized instrumentation and procedures, but may extend eventually up to very high accuracy provisions requiring calibration. The resulting measuring uncertainty of the test result is then determined by calculating methods presented in the standard and normally, if not stated otherwise in the contract, taken into account in the comparison between test result and guarantee value. The total cost of an acceptance test can therefore be maintained in relationship with the economic value of the guarantee values to be ascertained.

1

IS 14198(Part2): 1994 IECPub 953.2:1990 The specifications of the operating conditions during the test are somewhat more flexible in this method; furthermore, procedures are recommended for treating cases where these specifications cannot be met. When good-standardized instrumentation and procedures are applied in a test, the measuring uncertainty of the result will usually amount to 0.9% to 1.2% for a large fossil fuel fired condensing unit, to 1.1% to 1.4% for a nuclear unit and to 1.5% to 2.5% for back pressure, extraction and small condensing-turbines. It is possible to reduce these values by additional improvement in instrumentation, primarily by additional measurements of primary mass flows and/or calibration of measuring devices for primary mass flow. 2)
Main differences between Methods A and B

In Method A, much more detailed information concerning the preparation and conduct of the tests and the measuring techniques are contained for guidance of the parties to the test than in Method B. In Method B, the detailed treatment of the objectives is left somewhat more to the discretion and decisions of :he participants and necessitates sufficient experience and expertise on their part.
3) Guiding principles

The requirements concerning the preparation and conditions of the test and especially such conditions of the test as duration, deviations and constancy of test conditions and acceptable differences between double measurements are more stringent in Method A.

The test should be conducted preferably within eight weeks after the beginning of ;he operation. It is the intent during this period to minimize performance deterioration and risk of damage to the turbine. Preliminary tests including enthalpy drop tests should be made during this period to monitor HP and IP turbine section performance. However, these tests do not provide LP section performance and for this reason it is imperative to conduct the acceptance tests as soon as practicable. Whatever the case, when using Method A, if an enthalpy drop test indicates a possible deterioration of the HP or IP section, or if the plant conditions require that the tests be postponed more than four months after the initial start, then the acceptance tests should be delayed. An adjustment of the heat rate test results to start-up enthalpy drop efficiencies or for the effects of aging is not permitted when using Method A. If the test has to be postponed, Method A proposes that the test be carried out after the first major internal inspection; several methods are proposed for establishing the approximate condition of the turbine prior to the tests. 4) Instruments and methods of measurement
a) Measurement

of electrical power In addition to the conditions required for the measurement of electric power, which are similar in both methods, Method A requires a check of the instruments by a comparison measurement after each test run; the permissible difference between double measurements is limited to 0.15%. For the measurement of main flows the use of calibrated pressure difference devices is required in Method A. The application of a device not covered by international standardization, the throattap nozzle, is recommended therein and details of design and application are given. The calibration of these devices shall be conducted with the upstream and downstream piping and flow-straightener. Methods for the necessary extrapolation of the discharge coefficient from the calibration values are given.

b) Flow measurement

2

IS 14198 apart 2) : 1994

EC Pub 953-2 : 1990 In Method B standardized pressure-difference devices are normally applied for flow measurement. Calibration is recommended where a reduction of overall measuring uncertainty is desirable. Double or multiple measurement of primary flow is recommended for the reduction of measuring uncertainty and~a method for checking the compatibility is described. c) Pressure measurement The requirements and recommendations for pressure measurements are essentially similar. Only the methods for the measurement of exhaust-pressure of condensing turbines differ to some extent. d) Temperature measurement The requirements are essentially similar in both methods. However detail requirements stringent in Method A: calibration before and after the test, double measurement of the main temperature thermocouples with continuous leads, required overall accuracy. with with 0.5 K maximum difference, are more

e) Steam quality measurements Methods A and B are identical.

5)

Evaluation of tests

The preparatory work for the evaluation and calculation of the test results is cove;ed in a very similar manner in Methods A and B. However, quantitative requirements are more stringent in Method A. Method `B contains some proposals for handling cases where some requirements met to avoid rejection of the test. have not been values

In addition, Method B contains detailed methods for calculation of measuring uncertainty of measured variables and tests results.

Method B recommends other methods for conducting and evaluating of the tests after the specified period and without a previous inspection.

6)

Correction of test results and comparison with guarantees The correction of test results to guarantee conditions is covered in both Methods A and B. for the comparison of test results to guarantee without consideration of

Method A provides measuring uncertainty.

Method B gives a broader spectrum of correction procedures. Furthermore, uncertainty of the result is taken into account in the guarantee comparison.

the measuring

7)

Proposals for application

Since the acceptance test method to be applied has to be considered in the details of the plant design, it should be stated as early as possible, preferably in the turbine contract, which method will be used. Method B can be applied to steam turbines of any type and any power. The desired measuring uncertainty should be decided upon sufficiently early, so that the necessary provisions can be included in the plant. If the guarantee includes the complete power plant or large parts thereof, the relevant parts of either method can be applied for an acceptance test in accordance with' the definition of the guarantee value.

3

IS 14198(Part 2) : 1994
IEC Pub 953-2: 1990

1. 1.1

Scope and object Scope The rules given in this standard are applicable to thermal acceptance tests covering a wide range of accuracy on steam turbines of every type, rating and application. Only the relevant portion of these rules will apply to any individual case. The rules provide for the testing of turbines, whether operating with either superheated or saturated steam. They include measurements and procedures required to determine specific enthalpy within the moisture region and describe precautions necessary to permit testing while respecting radiological safety rules in nuclear plants. Uniform rules for the preparation. carrying out, evaluation, comparison with guarantee and calculaticjn of measuring uncertainty of acceptance tests are defined in this standard. Details of the corditions under which the acceptance test shall take place are included. Should any complex or special case arise which is not covered by these rules, appropriate agreement shall be reached by manufacturer and purchaser before the contract is signed.

1.2

Object

The purpose of the thermal acceptance tests of steam turbines and turbine plants described in this standard is to verify guarantees given by the manufacturer of the plant concerning: a) turbine plant thermal efficiency or heat rate; h) turbine thermodynamic conditions; efficiency or steam rate or power output at specified steam flow maximum power output,

c) main steam flow capacity and/or

The guarantees with their,provisions shall be formulated completely and without contradictions (see 2.4). The acceptance tests may also include such measurements as are necessary for corrections according to the conditions of the guarantee and checking of the results. 1.3

Matters to be considered

in the contract

Some matters in these rules have to be considered with in the following sub-clauses: Sub-clnlrse 1.1 1.2 3.1 i.i.3 6:8 6.9
2. 2.1 Units, symbols, terms and definitions
General

at an early stage. Such matters are dealt

(paragraph (paragraph (paragraph (paragraph

4) 2) 3 and 4) I)

(paragraph

1)

The Int&national System of Units (SI) is used in these rules; all conversion therefore be avoided.

factors can

4

'

IS 14198 (Pnrt 2) : 1994 IEC Pub 953-2 : 1990 The coherent units for all relevant quantities are given in the Table in 2.2. Some conversion factors are given as well for specific heat rates based on units other than W/W.

2.2

Symbols, units For the purpose of these rules the following symbols, definitions and units shall be used:

Quantity

Symbol

Unit

Examples of multiples and sub-multiples kW kPa kPa LPa kPa

Other IS0 units

Power Flow rate Pressure. absolute Prcssurc. gauge Ambient pressure (barometric) Pressure diffcrcncc Thermodynamic temperature Celsius tcmpcrature Tcmpcraturc differcncc Vertical distance Specific cnthalpy Specific cnthalpy of saturated water Specific cnthalpy of saturated steam Specific cnthalpy Specific heat drop

P
r;l
Pabs

W kg/s Pa Pa Pa Pa K K

Pe
Pamb

bar `) bar `) bar I), mbar

AP
T,@ t, e At

"C z k::g kJ/kg kJ/kg kJ/kg kJ/kg.K g/g min-'

H h h' h"
Ah c x n
V

JZ,
J/kg J/kg

Jk3
J/kg.K

Quality. i.e.. dryness fraction of saturated steam by weight Rotational Velocity Density speed

k$
Ill/S

e ; g `h %

Specific volume Diameter Aceelcration due to gravity Thermal efficiency Thermodynamic cfficicncy Heat rate Steam rate Heat flow rate Cavitation factor Concentration Correction Correction lsentropic factor according to 6.6~) factor according to 6.66) exponent

kglm3 m"/kg mm z2 WiW W/W WiW kg/W-s or kg/J J/s 1 According 1 1 tb nature of tracer kW/kW kW/kW kW/kW k@kW.s kJ/kw*s. kJ/kW.h kg&W-h

SR
d

k$J
kJ/s

,

K
C

F
F* Ic
cd

Discharge coefficient Flow coefficient General quantity Weight factor for averaging Confidence Relative Tolerance limit of x

(Y
X2'

Y

V
V TX = 25
X

measuring uncertainty of steam table

R

`) Admitted by CJPM and IS0 `) According to adplication.

for temporary

use with fluids only.

IS 14198 (Fart 2) : 1994 IIlZCPub 953-2 : 1990 Relation between Heat Rate and thermal efficiency
Units used for HR w/w, kW/kW, kJ/kW - s Relation HR =

1
17t 3600 77,

k.T/k W . h

HR

=

kJlMW

*s

HR

=

1000

kcal/kW - h

HR

= 85dlk45 rlt
3412.14 rlt

BTUikW - h 2.3
Subscripts, superscripts and definitions
Ouantitv ower ubscript b a 4t generator terminals Position or definition

HR

=

raken by auxiliaries not driven by the turbine (see4.2.3); W Vet power output: Ps = Pb separately (see 4.2.3) P,

(see also 1 EC

g
C

4t turbine coupling, less power required by turbine auxiliaries.

if driven

i mech litial steam flow rate and output team condition and flow rate 1

internal to the turbine Vlechanical losses of pump and pump drive Values for fully opened control valves Directly upstream of high pressure (HP) turbine stop valve(s) and the iteam strainer(s) (if any) that are included in the turbine contract At exhaust of the turbine HP from which steam passes to the reheater Directly upstream of intermediate At exhaust of the turbine(s) At extraction pressure IP turbine stop valves

2 3 4 e Condensate and feed water condiions and flow rates 5

discharging to the condenser tuibine

point of extraction

At condenser discharge At inlet to condensate pump At discharge from condensate pump See Figure la At inlet of boiler feed pump At outlet of boiler feed pump At outlet of final feed heater After passage through the cqndensate pump and any coolers (oil generatqr, gas/air) included in the contract the drain cooler

d a is ir

At outletfrom

At outlet of air ejector condenser. Refkrs to water taken from the feed-water regulation of the initial steam tempeiature system to the reheater fo Refers to water taken frotp the-feed-water control of the reheated steam tem'~ratnte system to the superheater to

6

IS 14198 (part 2) :1994 IEC Pub 953-2 : 1990

Quantity Make-up water conditions and flow rate Gland steam conditions and flow rates

Subscript m g gf

Position or definition Measurements adjacent to the inlet flange of the condensate or of the evaporator Steam supplied to glands from a separate source system

Leak-off steam from glands and valve stems returned to the system and included in the measurement of the initial steam flow Flow of leak-off steam from glands and valve stems at inlet end or before a reheater which is led away for any extraneous purpose and neither it nor its heat is delivered to any part of the turbine cycle Leak,off flows similar to q, but coming from a point or points downstream of a reheater Main steam flow at outlet of reactor Refers to feed-water for reactor

q

9Y Main steam flow rate and concentration Mass flow rate and concentration M F core cond inj E R Condenser cooling water
W

Refers to medium fluid passing through reactor core Refers to condensed steam Refers to injected tracer solution At entry into core of PWR Recirculated water flow from water separator

Efficbncy Enthalpy drop Velocity Static pressure Concentration

wi wo wio t td
S

throat sat wat L B inj 0 g
C

Test results and guaranteed values

Condenser inlet Condenser outlet Average value between condenser inlet and outlet Thermal Thermodynamic Refers to isentropic enthalpy drop At throat of flow-metering nozzle Saturation pressure of water at pertinent temperature In water phase In pump loop of BWR In blow-down water of PWR Of injected tracer At injection point before tracer injection Guaranteed Corrected Measured Product of all individual correction factors Numbering of individual correction factors For correction of efficiency For correction of output Numbering subscripts

Correction Factor For Fc

m tot 1, 2, 3 rl P

General use

i, j

For confidence limit Vand relative measuring uncertainty r, subscripts which are identical to symbols for quantities always indicate the confidence limit applicable to the relative measuring uncertainty of this quantity.

Quantity Efficiency General

Superscript I -

Definition Reference value of computer-calculated Average value Weighted average value efficiency

7

IS 14198(Part 2) : 1994 IEC Pub 953-2: 1990 2.4 Definition of guarantee values and test results

For the quantitative steam turbine plant,' Guarantee values are evaluated in the same .

description of the thermodynamic performance of a steam turbine or several quantities are technically appropriate and generally applied. expressed as such quantities and, consequently, test results are to be manner.

The general definition of these quantities is always quite obvious. The details, however, may be different in each case and shall be fully considered (see also 1.2).

2.4.1

Thermal efficiency

For a power station turbine with regenerative feed heating, the thermal efficiency is the significant criterion. It is defined as the ratio of power output to heat added to the cycle from external sources.

where: 4 Ahj are the mass-flows, to which heat is added are the resulting enthalpy rises

For each specific case a guarantee heat cycle, together with the guarantee terminal parameter, has to be defined as a basis for guarantee definition and test evaluttion. It should be as simple as possible and as near as practicable to the cycle configuration to be realized for the test (see also 3.4.4). 4 practical definition Figure la is then: for a turbine plant with single reheat and feed heating according to
Pb (or Pg or PC)* rlt = riz, (hI 1 hJ +
h3 (h3 -

h2)

(2)

* According to contract specification.

8

IS 14198 (h-t 2) : 1994 IECPub 933-2:1990

I
1 )

"q

.

.
"qy

I
2&

3 1

-

r

-

I . "#

_EC DC

OC

GC

I
I 483/!W

GC OC DC EC

= = = =

generator gas cooler oil cooler drain cook air ejector condenser

The point number remains the same for the same item of any other turbine type: for example, point 9 will be at the inlet of the feed pump, point 8 may be anywhere between downstream of point 6 and point 11. FIG. la. -- Reheating regenerative condensing turbine with feed-water heating.

II, q

484/9 0

FIG. lb. - Straight condensing without feed-heating.

or back-pressure

turbine

FIG. lc. - Extraction without feed-heating.

condensing

or back-pressure

turbine

FIG. 1. - Diagram for interpretation of symbols and subscripts.

9

l!JS 14198(Part 2) : 1994 IEC Pub 953-2: 1990

Any additional heat and/or mass flows added to or subtracted from the cycle e.g. ,.by makeup flow &, spray attemperator flow q, or h, or additional extraction for steam air preheater has to be accounted for in the evaluation by an appropriate correction of the test result (see Clause 6). Losses are not included in this definition, but treated according to 5.2.3.4. To keep the sum of corrections small, it may be reasonable to include in the guarantee definition, by means of additional terms, important heat and mass flows present in the cycle configuration for the test for technical reasons (e.g., spray attemperator, reactor blow down, etc.). This, however, also modifies the thermodynamic character of the definition and the resulting values of the thermal efficiency are not directly comparable with those according to formula (2). Furthermore, the correction procedure will not be avoided altogether in this way, because it is improbable that the values of these additional flows during the test will coincide exactly with those in the amended guarantee definition. It is impracticable to describe in these rules all the possible variations in turbine cycles. In cases of complicated deviations of test cycle configuration from guarantee definition, it is advisable to use the correction procedures according to 6.6.1.

2.4.2

Heat rate The heat rate traditionally has been used (and is still used) for the same objective as thermal efficiency, which is applied in these rules.

In a coherent

unit system (SI):
HR =-

1
(3) Ilt

The unit of the so calculated heat rate is kWtkW = k.I/kW - s. Heat rate values expressed in other units can be converted easily to thermal efficiency values, taking into account the appropriate conversion factors (see 2.2).

2.4.3

Thermodynamic

efficiency

For a turbine receiving all the steam at one initial steam condition and discharging all the steam at a lower pressure (condensing or back-pressure turbine without regenerating feedheating or reheat), the thermodynamic efficiency is the most appropriate measure of performance. It is defined as ratio of power output to isentropic power capacity (product of steam mass flow and isentropic enthalpy drop between initial steam condition and exhaust pressure) :

%d =

P riz Ah

s

(4)

The numerical value of thermodynamic efficiency does not depend on the initial steam and exhaust conditions, but is the indication for the efficiency of the expansion only.

10

IS 14198 (Part 2) : 1994 IEC Pub 953-2 : 1990

The formula defining the thermodynamic efficiency without feed-heating according to Figure lb, is then:

for a straight

condensing

turbine

%d

=

where: Ak1.4 -is the isentropic enthal'py drop between initial steam condition at point 1 and pressure at point 4

2.4.4

Steam rate The steam rate traditionally has been used (and is still used) as a performance criterion for turbines as described in 2.4.3. It is defined as the ratio of initial steam flow rate to power output and is connected with thermodynamic efficiency as follows in coherent units (Sl).

Steam rate values expressed in other units~can be converted to thermodynamic efficiency values after determination of the relevant Ah, value taking into account the appropriate L conversion factors (see 2.2). Since numerical steam rate values depend also on initial steam and exhaust conditions, they are not comparable for turbines with different specified conditions.-Therefore, thermodynamic efficiency is used in these rules.

2.4.5

Main steam flow capacity The maximum flow rate of main steam with all regulating valves wide open under specified steam conditions (usually the steam conditions according to the definition ~of the other guarantee values) is the measure of the maximum flow capacity of the turbine.

2.4.6

Maximum power output The power output of the turbine at the maximum flow rate of main steam can be guaranteed for a specified heat-cycle, which may differ to some extent from the guarantee heat cycle valid for the thermal efficiency. A maximum power output guarantee can be relevant for district heating turbines, etc.

2.4.7

Guarantee

values for extraction and mixed-pressure

turbines**

For mixed-pressure turbines and single or multiple-extraction turbines with or without regulated extraction pressure(s), in all cases without regenerative feed-heating, the guarantee values are `most appropriately defined as thermodynamic efficiency in the following generalized way:

where tij and Ahsj are the steam flow rate and isentropic enthalpy drop respectively for each consecutive section of thk turbine.
* According to contract specification. ** Mixed pressure turbines - several inlets at different pressures during the expansion.

IS 14198 (Tart 2) : 1994

IEC Pub 953-t : 1990 For example, for a single extraction to Figure lc, this results in: turbine (either back-pressure or condensing), according

Pb (or Pg or PC)*
%d = hl * Ah, l,e + @I he) Ah, e,4 03)

In the case of an extraction or mixed-pressure turbine, however, it is necessary to specify in addition to the values of output, initial steam flow rate and thermodynamic efficiency, the pertinent flow rate value(s) of extraction steam flow(s) and secondary steam flow(s). This applies at each load subject to guarantee. Guarantee values for mixed-pressure or extraction turbines with regenerative feed-heating can be defined. if more practicable, as thermal efficiency also. In this case, too, the pertinent flow rate value(s) of secondary steam and extraction steam flow(s) is (are) necessary for a complete guarantee definition.

3.
3.1

Guiding

principles

Advance planning for test

The parties to any test under these rules shall reach agreement, when the plant is being designed. as to the testing procedure. the interpretation of guarantees, the number, location and arrangement of measuring points and measuring devices, valves and piping arrangements. This especially applies to steam turbines in nuclear power stations where subsequent modifications are often impracticable and the measuring points are not always accessible once the plant has started to operate. It is recommended that for the most important measurements special connection facilities such as flanges and thermometer wells be provided for the measuring equipment so that the acceptance tests can be carried out without impairing the instruments for normal operation. The instrumentation has to be selected in such a way that power and heat flows which enter and leave the "system", as defined in the contract, and the conditions at its boundaries, can be determined. The parties interested in the test shall reach agreement at a date as early as practicable on the measuring accuracy desired for the acceptance tests. This accuracy, with due consideration of the cost of the acceptance test, shall be in reasonable relationship with the significance of the plant. The following is a list of typical items upon which agreement plant design: a) Location of, and piping arrangement calculations are to be based. around, should be reached during the devices on which test

flow measuring

b) Number and location of valves required to ensure as far as practicable that no unaccounted for flow enters or leaves the test cycle or bypasses any cycle component. c) Number and location of temperature wells and pressure connections correct measurements at critical points.
d) Number

required

to ensure correct

and location df duplicate measurements at critical points.

instrument

connections

required

to ensure

* According to contract specification.

12

IS 14198 (Part 2) : 1994 IEC Pub 953-2 : 1990

e) Handling of leak-off flows to avoL complications

in testing or the introduction

of errors.

f) Means of measuring pump shaft leakages, if necessary. g) Method of d e t ermining steam quality, including sampling technique recommended ~methods are given in 4.7. 3.2 Preparatory agreements and arrangements for tests

as required.

The

4 Before the test the parties to the tests shall reach an agreement as to the test programme, the
specific objectives of the tests, the measuring methods and the method of operation with due regard to limitation of the necessary corrections, the method for correcting the test results and for guarantee comparison with due regard to the contract conditions.

b) Agreement

shall be-reached as to the variables to be measured, the measuring instruments and who is to supply them, the location of the indicating instruments and the operating and recording personnel required. Agreement shall be reached on the methods of obtaining the comparison measurements (see 3.5). Agreement shall be reached on such matters as the means of securing constancy of steam conditions and output. Instruments liable to failure or breakage in service should be duplicated by reserve instruments, properly calibrated, which can be put into service without delay. A record of such change of instrument during a test shall be clearly made on the observer's record sheet. Instruments shall be located and arranged so that they may be read accurately with comfort by the observer. The calibration environment should be as close as practicable to the environment in which the instrument will operate during the test. This may be accomplished by locating the instruments in a controlled environment.

f) The determination

of the enthalpy of steam superheated less than 15 K, or of the quality of steam containing moisture, may be made only when the parties to the test agree upon the method to be employed for this determination. The agreement, the method for making the determination and the method of applying the enthalpy or quality values to the test results shall be fully described in the test report. The rate of flow of steam `of any quality may be, determined, where practicable, condensing it completely and then measuring the condensate flow rate. by

g) Agreement shall be reached as to the method of calibration of instruments, and by whom and when. h) For any of the measurements necessary for a test under these rules, any methods may be employed other than those prescribed in these ruIes, provided they are mutually agreed upon in writing before the test by the parties to the test. Any such depnture from the prescribed methods shall be clearly described in the test report. In the absence of written agreements, the rules herein shall be mandatory. i) An independent expert may be a party to all agreements.

d
3.3 3.3.1

Agreement shall be reached on the minimum number of operating and recording personnel that is required.

Planning of the test Time for acceptance tests The acceptance tests shall be performed at the operating plant or, by mutual agreement, on the test bed of the manufacturer. Acceptance tests on site shall be carried out , if practicable,

13

1s 14198 (Part 2) : 1994 IEC Pub 953-2 : 1990 within eight weeks* after the first synchronization (see 3.5.). In any event, except with written agreement to the contrary, the acceptance test shall take place within the guarantee period specified in the contract.

3.3.2

Direction of accebtartce tests The responsibility for the direction of the acceptance tests shall be clearly assigned by the parties prior to the test, preferably to one person. This person is responsible for the correct execution and evaluation of the acceptance tests, and serves as arbitrator in the event of disputes as to the accuracy of observations, conditions, or methods of operation. He is entitled and obliged to obtain information on all necessary details. Accredited representatives of the purchaser and the manufacturer may at all times be present to verify that the tests are conducted in accordance with these rules and the agreements made prior to the tests. A party to the contract who is not responsible for the direction of the acceptance tests shall also be given the opportunity of obtaining information a sufficient time before the tests.

3.3.3

Cost of acceptance tests The contract shall stipulate who is to bear the costs of acceptance acceptance tests (see also 3.5, 3.7 and 3.9). tests and any repeated

3.4 3.4.1

Preparation of the tests Condition of the plant Prior to commencement of the acceptance tests, it is essential to be satisfied that the steam turbine and driven machine are in suitable condition, together with the condenser and/or feedheaters if included in the guarantee. It is also essential to verify that leaks in the condensers, feedheaters, pipes and valves have been eliminated. Prior to the acceptance tests, the supplier shall be given the opportunity to check the condition of the plant, if necessary by making his own measurements. Any deficiency determined at this time shall be rectified. Although these rules deal specifically with the performance testing of steam turbine generators, it is required that all other equipment supplied as part of the same turbine generator contract shall be in full and correct working order and in normal commercial disposition during the turbine generator tests. This requirement does not apply if other equipment has been ordered as an extra to the contract after the performance guarantees have been contractually agreed, or if special measures to render the equipment non-operative during the tests have been agreed beforehand between the parties to the test and are described in prominent detail in the test report. An example of equipment in this category would be piping and valves, supplied as part of the same turbine generator contract, designed to permit steam to bypass part or all of the turbine expansion stages for temperature-matching purposes during start-up.

* It is the intent durine. this neriod to minimize oerformance deterioration and risk of damage to the turbine. Enthalpy drop tests o;preliminary tests should be made during this period to monitor HP andIP turbine section performance. However, these tests do not provide LP section performance and for this reason it is imperative to conduct the acceptance tests as soon as practicable.

14

IS 14198 (Part 2) : 1994 II?<: Pub 953.2 : 1990 3.4.2 Condition of the steam turbine The condition of the steam turbine depends on the effects of ageing') (see 6.9), of partial damage*) and of deposits3). The condition of the steam turbine can be determined by an internal inspection of the steam path generally by opening the steam turbine or by comparison measurements according to 3.5. The absence of partial damage and/or deposits shall be confirmed 3.4.1). before the test (see also

Opening the turbine or an individual casing in order to locate a defect may be taken into consideration if large and inexplicable deviations are apparent from the comparison measurements. 3.4.3 Condition of the condenser When the guarantees include the condenser performance and are based upon cooling water flow and temperature, the condenser shall be clean and the system shall be tested for sufficient air tightness. Agreement of the parties regarding these matters shall be reached. The condition of the condenser shall be checked by opening the water boxes or measuring the terminal temperature difference. In the case of deposits", the condenser shall be cleaned by the purchaser prior to the acceptance tests at the request of the supplier or the parties concefned by the test may agree on a suitable correction. 3.4.4 Isolution of the cycle The accuracy of test results depends to a large extent on effective isolation of the system. Extraneous flows should be isolated from the system and internal flows which bypass in an unaccounted-for way either cycle components or mass flow measuring equipment should bc eliminated, if practicable, to obviate the need for measurement. If there is any douht about the ability to isolate these flows during the test, preparations shall be made prior to the test to measure them. All unused connections shall be blanked-off. If this is not practicable, the connections he broken at a suitable point so that the outlets are under constant observation. shall

The equipment and flows to be isolated and the methods to accomplish this should be agreed well ahead of the initial operation date of the turbine. The isolation of the cycle has to be described in the test report. When the system is properly isolated for a performance test, the unaccounted-for leakage expressed in percent of initial steam flow at full load should not exceed the relative measuring uncertainty of the test result (expressed in percent) multiplied by 0.4 (see S-2.3.4). Water storage in the condenser hotwell, deaerating and other extraction feedwater heaters, boiler drum(s), moisture separators, reheaters, and any other storage points within the cycle are to be taken into account (see also 5.2.3.4).

3.4.4.1

Isolation of equipment and flows flows that should bc

The following list includes items of the equipment and extrancqus isolated from the primary turbine feedwatcr cycle, if practicable:

`) Agcing means deterioration during correct trperating and shutdown I:\ nditiuns in a manner such that the performance of the turbine is adversely influenced. " Partial tlamagc: damage and variations in the tlearance of the bladmg, of balance pistons and shaft plands. valve spindle wear: leakages in the valve glands and seat*. ." Deposit\: salts or rnr.tai on the steam side. slime. ashes, bacteria. algae. etc.. on the cooling water sick.

15

IS 14198(Part 2) : 1994 IBC Pub 953-2: 1990

4 Large-capacity storage tanks. b) Evaporators and allied equipment
heaters.

such as evaporator

condenser

and evaporator

prr-

4

Bypass systems and auxiliary steam lines for starting, if compatible devices.

with safe operation.

4 Bypass lines for condensate primary flow-measuring e) Turbine sprays.
f)

Drain lines on stop, intercept Demineralizing equipment.

and control valves.

g) Interconnecting

lines to other units.

h)

Isolation of demineralizing equipment does not necessarily mean removing the equipnient from the cycle. It does, however, mean that all ties with other units shall be isolated a~~cl such equipment as recirculating lines that affect the primary flow measurement shall be isolated or the flows measured.

4

Chemical-feed Boiler vents.

equipment

using condensate.

i)

W Steam-operated soot ~blowers. 0 Condensate and feedwater flow bypassing heaters.
m) Heater drain bypasses. 4 Heater`shell drains.

0) Heater water-box vents.
PI

Hogging jets.

9) Condenser water-box priming jets. r) Steam or water for station heating. S) Blow-down from steam generator.
3.4.4.2 Flows which shall be determined if not isolated

The following extraneous flows which enter or leave the cycle in such a manner as to cause an error in the flows through the turbine shall be measured or estimated, if they arc not isolated from the system.
a) b)

Boiler fire door cooling flow and boiler-slag-tap

cooling coil flow.

Sealing and gland cooling flow on the following (both supply and return): 1) 2) 3) 4) 5) 6) condensate boiler-water pumps; or reactor circulating pump;

boiler feed pumps; heater drain pumps when not self-sealed; turbines for turbine-drive water. lines and balance drum flow. pumps;

control rod seals on nuclear reactors.

c)
d)

Desuperheating

Boiler feed pump minimum-flow Steam for fuel oil atomization

e)

and heating.

16

IS 14198 (Part 2) : 1994 IEC Pub 953-2: 1990 f) g) h) 4 i) k) 1) m) n) 0) P) 4) rJ sl t) u) v)

Boiler blowdowns. Boiler fill Ames. Turbine water-seai Desuperheating Emergency flow. water for turbine cooling steam. overflows.

blowdown valve of turbine gland leakage and sealing system.

Turbine water-seal

Steam and water lines installed for washing the turbine. Steam, other than gland leak-off steam, to the steam-seal regulating valve. Make-up water, if necessary. Pegging steam (such as higher stage extraction deaerator. Heater vents shall be closed if practicable. Deaerator overflow line. flanges, such as water-sealed vacuum breakers. at light loads) for low-pressure operation of

If not, they shall be throttled

to a minimum.

Water leakage into any water-sealed Pump seal leakage leaving the cycle. Automatic extraction

steam for industrial uses. (if isolation is not practicable).

Steam to air preheaters

z

Water and steam sampling equipment. If it is impracticable to isolate water and steam sampling equipment, and if the sampling flow is significant, it shall be measured. Deaerator Reactor-core Sub-cooled vents. spray. water used for moisture separator or reheater coil drain cooling. lines (if not included in

w) x) Y) z)

Continuous drains from wet steam turbine casings and connection the guarantee).

3.4.4.3

Suggested methods andlor

devices for isolating equipment from turbine feedwater

cycle

The following methods are suggested for isolating miwellaneous equipment and extraneous flows from the primary turbine feedwager cycle and for checking such isolation:

4 b) 4 4 e)

Double valves and tell-tales. Blank flanges. Blank between two flanges. Removal of spool piece for visual inspection. Visual inspection for steam blowing to atmosphere - such as safety valves. and not

f) g)

Closed valve which is known to be leak-proof operated prior to or during the test. Temperature necessary). indication (only acceptable

(test witnessed by bot.h parties)

under certain conditions

- mutual agreement

h) Accurate measurements

of levels in any tanks which should be isolated from the system.

17

IS 14198(Part 2):1994 ,IECPub 953-2:1990 i) Very important isolating valves (for example, HP and LP bypass valves) should be inspected and, if necessary, sealed prior to the test.

3.4.5

Checks for leakage of condenser

and feedwater heaters

Condensers and feedwater heaters shall be checked for leakage and steps shall be taken to eliminate any significant leakage (see Appendix A). In case of doubt, the check can be repeated
3.4.6 Cleanliness of the steam strainers

after the test.

If necessary,
3.4.7 Checkin:

the steam strainers shall be cleaned before the acceptance
equipment

tests.

of the test measuring

All measuring equipment shall be examined before the test as to its condition and suitability. It shall be further established whether the measuring instrument, the point~of installation, and the installation are in accordance with relevant requirements. The results of all these checks shall be recorded in the test report. 3.5
Comparison measurements

For comparison measurements, only those variables are taken into &count which are essential to establish the condition of the steam turbine. For the comparison, it is advisable to measure the internal efficiency, the pressure and temperature at the extractions, the gland leakage flows, and the condenser terminal difference as well as the vibration level~of the steam turbine rotor at suitable points. The measuring uncertainty the acceptance tests. of comparison measurements should not be larger than that of

The type and scope of the comparisonmeasurements by the purchaser and the supplier Xsee 3.3.3). The parties interested ments. in the acceptance-test

as well as the costs shall be agreed upon in the comparison measure-

shall participate

The reference measurement shall be made immediately if necessary. Check measurements may be made: a) b) c) before the acceptance after blade washing; before and/or test or during the preliminary

after the first start-up, at partial load test;

a after an inspection. . The measurements taken during the acceptance check measurement.

test can normally be evaluated

as a final

Should the result of a check measurement point towards a deposit which can be removed by blade washing, the supplier may require of the purchaser that the steamturbine be washed. If the check measurement sufficiently agrees with the reference measurement after the washing, the acceptance test may be carried out. Should the check measurement not agree sufficiently with the preference measurement, the.parties to the contract should then decide either to eliminate the defect or to carry out the acceptance test. If the tests proceed, the comparison measurements shall be included in the test report. If the result of the reference-measurement differs consideiably from the expected values according to the guarantee, remedial measures may be agreed upon by the purchaser and the supplier.

IS 14198 (I'art 2) : 1994 IEC Pub 953-2 : 1990 3.6 3.6.1 Settings

for tests

Load settings The acceptance tests for a turbine with partial arc admission shall be conducted at "valve points", which are those positions of the control valves where the total throttle effects are minimized. The output at a "valve point" may only deviate from the specified value within the limits stated in 3.8.2. In addition, the position of the LP control valves of extraction turbines should be brought to a "valve point", if practicable, by adjusting the extraneous steam flow. Similarly, the "valve points" of the secondary initial steam control valves of double pressure turbines can be achieved by adjustment of the secondary steam flow, if practicable. These adjustments may result in deviations of the output from the specified value greater than stated in 3.8. In these cases a re-calculation of the guarantee value according to 6.6.1 may be made by agreement of the parties. If large fluctuations in output or steam flow due to operating conditions are occurring, it is permitted to use a device limiting further opening of valves in order to keep optimum valve positions. The relative positions of the valves shall not differ throughout the test period. In the event of variable pressure operation of a full arc admission turbine, tests shall be conducted with control valves wide open. The same applies to throttle control if the guarantee is based upon wide open control valves.

3.6.2

Special settings No special adjustments shall be made to the turbine for test purposes that are inappropriate for commercial and continuous operation under any and all of the specified outputs and operating conditions. Exceptions are air bleed adjustments to control the vacuum, the use of load-limiting devices or other similar test control means, such as isolation of the cycle to prevent extraneous flows and/or internal by-pass flows of steam or water by closing certain drains or other valves. These shall be consistent with the terms of the guarantee and practicable with regard to operating safety and technique. The turbine shaft seals shall be adjusted to normal operating condition before a test and arrangements made to measure outward or inward flow that will influence test results.

3.7

Preliminary tests Preliminary a)
b)

tests may be run for the purpose of whether the turbine is in a suitable condition for the ccmduct of an acceptance

determining test,

checking all instruments, training personnel in test procedures. test has been made, it may be considered, if mutually agreed, as an

c)

After a preliminary acceptance test.

IS 14198 (Part 2) : 1991 IEC Pub 953-Z : 1990 If the preliminary tests are unsatisfactory,~the causes shall be investigated and, if necessary, the turbine shall be placed at the disposal of the manufacturer so that the latter may examine it and ascertain whether it is in a suitable condition for an acceptance-test. 3.8 3.8.1 Acceptance tests Constancy of test conditions All tests shall be preceded by a period of temperature and flow stabilization, the,duration of which shall be agreed upon by the parties interested in the test, since it will vary with the size of the turbine, the internal conditions and the amount of load change. Any condi+i:m, the variation of which may influence the results of the test, shall be caused to become as nearly constant- as practicable before the test begins, and shall be so maintained throughout the test within the permissible variations according to 3.8.2. In order to maintain constancy of throttling, the travel of the governing valve, in the opening direction only, should be limited at the chosen position and the governor should be sufficiently overwound to ensure that it does not respond to normal changes in system frequency.

3.8.2

Maximum

deviation and fluctuation

in test conditions

Except upon agreement to the contrary by the parties, the maximum permissible deviation of the average test condition for each variable from that specified and the maximum permissible fluctuation of the variable during any one test run shall not exceed the limit prescribed in Table I. Should these requirements not be met, the measurement may serve as information only, unless special agreement relating to the influence of the deviating operating conditions is reached. 3.8.3 Duration of test runs and frequency of reading The requisite test duration is dependent on the steadiness of operating conditions and the speed of acquisition of test data. Accurately measurable changes in level of water stored in the system may be a limiting factor. The recommended minimum test period (see 5.1) of an acceptance test is 1 h. This may be reduced by agreement or technical necessity, but should be nor less than 30 min. The duration of the capacity tests should be agreed between the parties, but should be not less than 15 min. Related test data recorded with inchcating measuring equipment shall, if practicable, be read at the same time. Since the values measured are not constant, random errors cannot be avoided when taking readings at regular time intervals. The intervals shall be sufficiently short to ensure that these errors do not substantially affect the measuring uncertainty of the whole. This is of vital importance for readings of differential pressure for mass flow measurement and electrical output. For tests of one hour's duration readings at &e-minute intervals will satisfactorily fulfil requirements for maximum deviations allowed in Table I. Pressures and temperatures for the determination of thermodynamic properties may be read at longer intervals, that is, from 3 min to 5 min according to amount and type of fluctuations.

If the adoption of longer intervals between readings is necessary a correspondingly duration of the test may be required.

longer

20

IS 14198 (Part 2) : 1994 IFC I. * 1990 1 l'llb 953-7

The time of the reading should be indicated to the observers through signals from a main clock. It may alternatively be taken from the observers' watches, which shall be synchronized with each other prior to each test.
TABLE I

Maximum

deviations and fluctuations')
Maximum

in operating conditions
permissible deviation of average that specified of test from

I
Initial Initial Dryness Extraction steam steam pressure temperature fraction pressure Exhaust pressure: - for feed heating - for back pressure

Variable _. +5%2' +15 K2' ttl.tltX (regulated)

+5%2) _
See

turbines

`) +5% 2, t2S% t 10%
+15 K k7%

- for condensing Extraction
Reheat Isentropic Output Cooling Cooling Speed temperature enthalpy or initial water water

turbines

if condenser

is not included in guarantee

flow rate
drop steam flow

23% ?15% +5&z +iOK

after correction

for specified is included

coriditions in guarantee

flow inlet temperature temperature

if condenser

Final feed water

+20/o 3) -. than half the pcrmissiblc

`) The maximum fluctuation of the variable permitted during each test shall not be greater deviation given in Table I except for the'output which may vary by f3%.

`) All these items may not lead to a deviation of cnthalpy 3, If permitted by the technical guarantee of the turbine.

drop of more than +7%.

4, Reasonably small deviations in the extraction pressures as compared with the design values normal!y have a negligible effect on the overall performance. Should there be disproportionately large deviations in the extraction steam flows suggesting malfunctioning of the heaters. the effect on the overall performance may be serious. and agreement shall then be reached on the course to be followed.

3.8.4

Reading of integrating measuring instruments The mean values of the electrical output and the mass flow can also be determined by integrating measuring instruments by dividing the difference in the readings at the beginning and at the end of a test by the corresponding time interval. All integrating measurement instruments should be read simultaneously. measurement instruments should be read at or nearly at the same time. Related indicating

It is advisable to take simultaneous readings of all integrating instruments at regular intervals during the test. This will enable checks for consistency to be made and permits the period for evaluation to be adjusted, if required, after the conclusion of the test. All observations should begin somewhat before and stop somewhat after the intended test period provided all operating conditions remain constant. 3.8.5 Alternative methods certain details of the test.

Alternative methods are presented in these rules for conducting The test report shall state which alternative has been employed.

21

IS 14198 (Part 2) : 1991 IEC Pub 953-2.. 1990

3.8.6

Recording

of tests

Each observer shall record his actual observations. All records shall be made with carbon copies, at least in duplicate, or by mutual agreement be photo-copied immediately after each test-run. Immediately after the test each interested party shall receive a complete set of records. 3.8.7
Additional measurement

Should a deficiency be found during a test, which is rectified within a relatively short time, the test may be continued. In this event supplementary measurements shall be taken, if necessary, provided always that the correction involved can be calculated sufficiently accurately (e. g., smali variations in the terminal temperature difference of the condenser, a heater cut-out or deficiencies of measuring instruments). Should a control valve which ought to be closed at test load open because of fluctuations in load, or should inadmissibly large fluctuations in test conditions arise during a limited period, this period of the test may subsequently be omitted by mutual agreement of the parties to the test, provided the remaining period fulfils the requirements of 3.8.3. Otherwise the test has to be repeated. It is recommended that one or more stage pressures and temperatures be observed during the tests, since these may serve as a means of disclosing reasons for any inconsistencies. > 3.8.8
Preliminary calculations

Preliminary calculations of corrections and test results shall be conducted the test in order to confirm the validity of the data taken. 3.8.9
Consistency of tests

immediately

after

Should serious inconsistencies arise, either during a test or during the computation of results from a series of tests, the test or tests shall be rejected, in whole or in part, unless otherwise agreed. 3.9
Repetition of acceptance tests

Should the acceptance test result be unsatisfactory, the supplier shall be given an opportunity to make modifications and to repeat the test at his own expense. A repetition may also be requested by one of the parties to the contract if justified by doubts about the results. If the supplier, for reasons which are his responsibility, has made modifications following the acceptance test which make it probable that guarantee values will QO longer be met -within a reasonable margin, the acceptance tests may be-repeated at the request of the purchaser.

4. 4.1
4.1.1

Measuring techniques and measuring instruments
General Measuring instruments

Instruments conforming acceptance tests:
a) b)

to any one or more of the following categories by an official authority.

are permitted

for

Measuring instruments-calibrated

Measuring instruments, which have been calibrated by comparison brated measuring instruments by an official authority.

with officially cali-

22

IS 14198 (Part 2): 1994 IEChbYS3-2:1990

c) Standardized measuring instruments with known accuracy. 4 Other approved measuring instruments with known accuracy, the use of which has been
agreed upon between the parties to the ccntract. Table II indicates the available types of instrumentation Typical arrangements for acceptance tests. accuracy in a plant are illustrated in Figures 2 Bnd 3.

If transducers are used, they shall have a suitable range and a demonstrable equivalent to usual instrumentation. Measuring instruments and transducers record on a data logging system. may be equipped

with devices to enable them to

Data logging systems for automatic correction and recording of measured values may be used. They may also be used for subsequent processing of these values. Their dependability and correctness of operation has to be checked or proven in advance.

4.1.2

Measuring uncertainty The measurement of each quantity entering into the computation of the test result is liable to some degree of error. The test result is subject to a degree of uncertainty depending on the combined effect of all these errors of measurement. The measuring uncertainty of the instruments and procedures has to be clearly berified by sufficient general information or, if necessary, by special determination. This particularly applies to remote measuring systems and automatic data-collecting systems. The uncertainty level for each individual measurement shall be_ chosen relationship with the influence of the reading on the test result. in reasonable for the of the

Data are given in Table II for the measuring uncertainty that can be expected individual measured variables according to general experience. The measuring uncertainty of the test results can be calculated from the uncertainties individual measurements according to Clause 7. 4.1.3 Calibration of instruments

Instruments requiring calibration shall be calibrated before the test. Certificates shall be available to the parties before the test. Any recalibration after the test shall be a matter for agreement between the parties. 4.1.4 Alternative instrumentation By mutual agreement of the parties to the test, advanced instrument systems such as those using electronic devices or mass-flow techniques, may be used as alternatives to the mandatory instrument requirements, provided that the application of such systems has demonstrated accuracy equivalent to that required by these rules. 4.1.5 Mercury in instrumentation Mercury and compounds of mercury react with component materials and cause environmental problems. The very low vapour pressure of mercury presents a serious health hazard if spillage occurs. The greatest care and strict adherence to all applicable regulations concerning mercury is necessary. If mercury is used the following precautions should be taken: a) Keep instrument valves closed except during test runs.

23

IS 1419Y (I'art 1EC Pub !Js2

2) : 1994 : 1990 TABLE II

Acceptable instrumentation for acceptance and resulting average uncertainties
Refcrmce Mcasurcd Variable Deadweight Transducer Bourdon Bourdon Mercury Accuracy Class

tests

Measuring gauge calibrated

Instrument

Range P> Zbar

Average Measuring Uncertainty f0.3% +0.3%-0.5% +0.3%-0.6% Y!z 1% +lmm +Imm fl mm

Remarks

1
2 3 4 5 6 I __ x Differential prcssurc

for test for test 0.3% 0.6%

For all pressures P> Zbar P> 2bar PC Zbar P< 2bar h>lOOmm

-

Pressure

gauge calibrated gauge calibrated manometer

Liquid manometer Liquid manometer Differential test pressure transducer calibrated for

On length of liquid column

For all differential pressures t s 300�C

+0.3%<).5% tlK to.5% + to.2 20.5% fO.l K IS0 S167 _ K

9

Thermocouples

calibrated

t> 300�C O<t~lOO"C calibrated graduated pressure devices

10

Temperature

Resistance

thermometer

tr1OO"C O.lO"C t< 100�C

II 12 13 14 Cooling water flow Primary flow

Mercury-in-glass-thermometer 0.1 "C calibrated Standardized Calibrated differential differential

0.75-1.s*

pressure

devices D> 1000 1EC41

Vane type flow meter

Two-wattmeter 1s ~ 16 Electrical output Instrument Instruments

method calibrated for test 0.2% 0.2% 0.1%-0.2% calibrated for test at test load

transformers

Three-wattmeter Instrument Instruments

method calibrated for test for test 0.2% 0.2% 0.2% 0.2% O.l%-O.Z% -approximately 22% Range of calibration meter meter Range of calibration Range of calibration f IE(`41 IE(`41

transformers calibrated

17 18 19 20 21 22 23

Current Voltage Mechanical output

Ammeter Voltmeter Torsion method Manual dynamometer for pump tachometer revolution revolution barometer or thermodynamic

1.O%

Speed

Manual

*0.50/b ?O.l% +0.2 mbar I___

Electronic Ambient pressure Precision

* Thcaccuracy of the primary flow measurement differential device shall be chosen accordingly.

is decisive for the measuring

uncertainty

of the test result according

to Table 3 and the pressure

24

IS 14198(Part 2) : 1994 IEC Pub 953-2: 1990

b) c) d)

Install quick closing solenoid valves automatically on system upsets. Employ double mercury traps.

in instrument

pressure

sensing

lines to close

Locate the primary flow element in the low temperature pati of the feed water cycle of nuclear plants where it is remote from the steam supply system.

4.2 4.2.1

Measurement

of power of mechanical turbine output

Determination

The mechanical output of the steam turbine can be determined techniques:

by one of the following four

4

By measuring the output at the generator losses. '

terminals (see 4.2.4) and adding the generator

6) By measuring torque and speed.
Absorption or torsion dynamometers are permissible, provided precautions are taken in their construction. and use to ensure accuracy. This includes electric or eddy-current generators, the input of which is measured by the reaction of the stator. If auxiliary power services of the turbine, such as governor and lubricating oil pumps, are driven from an external energy supply, their power requirements shall be deducted from the turbine output at the coupling in order to determine the net output eat the turbine coupling. .

c) By establishing an energy balance of the steam turbine.
The output is derived from the algebraic sum of all energy flows passing through the energy balance envelope established around the steam turbine').

4

By establishing

an energy balance of a driven machine (e.g. compressor,

pump).

The output is derived from the algebraicsum of all energy flows passing through the energy balance envelope around the driven machine'). 4.2.2
Measurement of boiler feed pump power

For a complete evaluation and for correction of the test results according to the guarantee definition, it is normally necessary to measure the power consumed by boiler feed pumps. It

corresponds to the increase in the enthalpy of the water*) , and possibly the power consumed by the hydraulic couplings and speed changers if the pumps-aredriven directly from the mainshaft. or by an auxiliary steam turbine driven by a bleed from the main turbine.

IS 14198 (I'wt 2) : 1994 WC Pub 953-2 : 1990 If the use of a dynamometer (see 4.2.1) is not practicable, the pump power is best determined from the rise in specific enthalpy across the pump multiplied by the mass flow. Since the temperature rise across the pump is small, a high degree of precision is needed in the temperature measurement (e. g. multiple thermocouples connected in series or resistance thermometers in differential connection). In the absence of precise measurements, values of pump efficiency supplied by the manufacturer may be used in conjunction with the measured flow and pressure rise, but unless they are based on tests over the full range of load, they may be open to question. Sealing water flow and/or tion of the mass flow. injection water flow has to be duly considered in the determina-

The power losses in the pump bearings, the hydraulic coupling and the gear drive are equivalent to the heat picked up in the oil cooling water. Radiation losses are generally negligible. If more than one pump is in service, it may not be practicable to measure the water flow or the mechanical losses in the bearings, couplings and gear drives individually. However, the total power consumed by the boiler feed pumps in service is all that is needed for an acceptance test. The power consumed by a pump driven by a rotating electrical machine c'an be determined from the power consumed by the motor, having regard to the efficiency of the latter according to information supplied by the manufacturer, and from the measurement of the power consumed by the bearings, the hydraulic coupling and the gear drive. If the auxiliary turbine driving the pump is outside the responsibility of the supplier of the main turbine, it may be sufficient to measure the flow rate and the condition of the bled steam..

4.23

Determination

of electrical power of a turbine generator

The net power of a turbine generator

is defined by the following formula:
P, = Pb - P,

Where an auxiliary of the turbo-generator is driven by an electric motor, the power P, is the power delivered to the motor. This applies whether the power is derived from the generator terminals downstream of the point where Ph is measured or from a separately generated supply. * Where an auxiliary of the turbo-generator is driven by other means, for example, a pump or exciter driven by a prime mover, the power P, is the power input to the coupling. Where excitation is derived from the generator terminals at a point downstream of the point where the power Pb is measured or from some other source, P, is the power input to the excitation equipment. When the turbine generator, condensing and feed water heating plant are guaranteed as a combined unit, the power requirements of the condenser and feed water cheating auxiliaries shall be treated in accordance with the terms of the contract.

* This does not refer to I EC 34-2.

1s 14198(Part 2) : 1994 IEC Pub 953-2: 1990

4.2.4

Measurement

of electCca1 power

For a three-phase generator with the neutral directly earthed (grounded) or with the fourline system, the unit power shall be measured by the three-wattmeter method. For a three-phase generator with neutral earthed (grounded) through resistance, reactance, or transformer with resistance, the unit~power may be measured by the'two-wattmeter method, but preferably by the three-wattmeter method. In all instances, watthour meters may be used in place of wattmeters. A double measurement of the electrical power, if practicable, including the duplication voltage and current transformers, has advantages for improvement of accuracy. 4.2.5 Electrical instrument connections The instrument transformers shall be connected into the lines from the generator as near to the generator tkrminals as practicable and on the generator side of any external connections by which power can enter or leave the generator circuit. The leads to the meters shall be arranged in such a manner that they will not influence the meter readings by reason of inductance or any other such cause. Inductance may be eliminated by braiding the wires of each pair of conductors for at least 1 m from the position where the instruments are located. It is desirable to check the whole arrangement of meter9 for stray fields, not only from the instrument leads but also from any other source. The calibration of the transformers shall be made wherever instruments and wiring impedance as in the tests. practicable with the same of

The wiring influence of the voltage circuit shall not cause a significant error in measurement of the power output which will be compared with the guarantee. The choice of cross-sectional area of the wiring shall take into account the length of the wire, the influence of the voltage transformers and the resistance of safety fuse's in the circuit. The errors due to wiring resistance (including fuses) shall always be taken into account.

4.2.6

Electrical instrumertts Singlephase or polyphase portable precision wattmeters, or singlephase or polyphase portable precision watthourmeters shall be used with appropriate voltage and current transformers for measuring electrical outpvt. Any error in each wattmeter or watthourmeter shall not exceed 0.2% of the reading. Portable ammeters, voltmeters and wattmeters shall be included in the measuring circuits to establish that the generator load conforms to rated conditions during the tests and to measure the current, voltage and power factor. For the environmental conditions of the instrumentation see 3.2 point e) (second paragraph). The recording time of watthourmeters shall be measured in a manner such that any inaccuracy will not exceed 0.03%. Watthourmeter readings shall be recorded during the test at regular intervals (at least every 5 min).

4.2.7

Instrument

transformers

Instrument current and potential transformers of appropriate rating and accuracy charactetistlcs, specially~intended for test purposes, should be used. Values of ratio and phase-angle corrections for the conditions of loading equivalent to the test instruments and leads used

29

IS 14198 (Part 2) : 1994 EC Pub 953-2 : 1990

during the test shall be obtained by a recognized calibration procedure to cover the range of test values of current and voltage. Instrument transfomiers shall be used. which have no burden other than that of the test instrumentsand leads. Otherwise, it has to be confirmed that the permissible burden is not exceeded.

4.3 4.3.1

Flow measurement Determination of flows to be measured

In an acceptance Primary flows:

test the flows to be measured can be divided into two categories: Flows which are in direct relation to the power output and which must be measured with a corresponding degre6 of precision (see 7.4). To verify the accuracy of measurement of the primary flows, it is recommended that they be measured simultaneously in at least two different locations, and the readings compared.

Secondary

flows:

Flows which are necessary for the operation of the plant and which shall be taken into account in the adjustment of the measuredvalues of the primary flows in orderto determine the turbine initial steam and reheat steam flows. z

4.3.2

Measurement a) b)

of primary water flow

The measurement

of primary flow may be made: or calibrated orifices or nozzles;

by means of standardized

by direct weighing using tanks and suitable scales; by means of calibrated volumetric measuring tanks.

c)

It is seldom practicable or economical to employ weigh tanks or volumetric tanks for the testing of the large units installed in modern power stations. The usual method of determining flows is by means of differential pressure devices.

4.3.2.1

Differential pressure devices for measuring primary water or steam flow

Standardized

or calibrated differential

pressure devices may be used to measure flow.

IS 14198(part 2) : 1994 IEC Pub 953-2: 1990 4.3.2.2 Calibration of differential pressure devices for water flow

If adifferential pressure device has to be calibrated, this should preferably be done with flow conditions corresponding to the same range of Reynolds numbers that will prevail in the turbine tests. However, the laboratory facilities at present available are not capable of achieving values of Reynolds numbers as great as those associated with test flow conditions for modern large steam turbines. The necessary extrapolation of the discharge coefficient and the resulting difference of the measured and extrapolated value shall be considered in the determination of the measuring uncertainty. Calibration is to be conducted with the upstream and downstream piping comprising the flow section to be used in the test, including the flow straightener if used. It should be demonstrated during calibration that a pressure difference repeating selected calibration points with sufficient accuracy. 4.3.2.3
Inspection of differential pressure devices

devtce is capable of

It is recommended that shortly before or after the test all differential pressure devices and their pipe sections used for measurement of primary mass flow be inspected for condition (e.g. roughness), size (e.g. sharpness of edge for orifice plates), and general conformity with the standard required. The outcome of this inspection shall be recorded. If differential pressure devices are not inspected, this shall be duly considered in the evaluation of the test according to L 5.2.3.1. These differential pressure devices shall not be installed prior to the cleaning period before commissioning of the plant. They shall either be fitted after cleaning or they,shall be bypassed. In the case of condensing turbines, it is mandatory that practical arrangements for inspection be provided for at least one differential pressure device for a primary mass flow, preferably the condensate mass flow upstream of the deaerator. At least one differential pressure device has to be inspected after the test if this is required by one party. 4.3.3
Installation and location of differential pressure devices

The minimum requisite lengths of straight piping upstream and downstream of the orifice or nozzle are influenced by the configuration of the piping before and after the straight sections; for particulars see the IS0 standard quoted. In special circumstances where rotational flow can be expected or when the required straight lengths are not available, application of flow straighteners shall be considered. The incorrect use of flow straighteners may lead to errors. If a flow straightener is used and straight pipe length is not sufficient, the measuring ele,ment shall be calibrated with the complete straight piping section upstream and downstream, the flow straightener included. It is advisable that one of the flow-measuring devices be located in the system at a point where the temperature is less than 150�C to minimize temperature effects, that is, thermal expansion correction and any distortion of the primary element. In order to reduce the possibility of thermal distortion of the flow-measuring device, it is desirable that the pipe and the flanges of the flow section be made of corrosion-rcsil tant material having the same coefficient of expansion as tbe primary element. When a flow-measuring device for water flow is installed in a vertical run of pipe, a correction may be necessary to account for differences in altitude between the two pressure-tapping points and differences in density between the water flowing through the flow-measuring device and the water in the pressure-tap lines.

31

IS 14198 (Part 2) : 1994 IEC Pub 953-2 . * 1990 To minimize the difficulty of obtaining steady flow, the flow-measuring device should not be located at a pump discharge. Advantage should be taken of the damping effect of any existing heat exchangers and long lengths of pipe in the cycle. The location of the flow-measuring device should also be such that the effects of recirculating and bypassing flows are eliminated. If this is not practicable, extraneous flows shall be measured with sufficient accuracy.

If the feedwater heating cycle includes a deaerator, it is recommended that the condensate flow entering it be measured. This eliminates any possibility of heater leakage recirculating through the flow-measuring device. If the cycle has no deaerator, it is recommended that the flow be measured after it has passed through the low-pressure heaters and before it enters the boiler feed pump. If the drains from the high-pressure heaters join the main condensate flow upstream of the flow-measuring device, it will benecessary to measure the total drain flow from the high-pressure heaters and calculate the extraction steam by heat balance around the heaters to determine the high-pressure heater leakage. For turbines using wet steam and heaters with pumped-ahead drains, a suitable double flow measurement may be required to determine if any of the heaters leak. The location of the low pressure flow measurement will depend on the cycle arrangement. Heater leakage can also be measured by using the tracer method.

4.3.4

Differential pressure measurements

The measurement of the differential pressure necessitates systems shall be installed with the precautions listed below. Measuring accuracy manometer systems. Connecting piping than 6mm inside inside the piping. device and then connecting piping for primary flows can be increased

particular

care. Manometer

by the use of two independent

used between the pressure taps and the manometers shall be not less diameter tubing of material which will minimize resistance damping This tubing should run horizontally for 1 m from the flow-measuring slope down continuously without loops to the manometers. The shall be shown to be tight by a pressure test. should not

The length of piping between the flow-measuring device and manometers exceed 7.5 m if practicable. It shall also be uninsulated.

Precautions shall be taken ,when running the manometer piping to ensure that any temperature difference between the fluid in the two lines connecting the primary element and each manometer remains negligible. It is recommendedthat thepiping be bundled and run in such a manner as to minimize heat transfer to these pipes from an externd source. The manometer piping shall be well cleaned, preferably by flushing, before the manometer is connected. The manometer connections shall include the~necessary means for shutting off manometer piping or venting at any time during the test. Sufficient time should be allowed for the water legs in the connecting piping to reach temperature equilibrium. Zero-displacement solenoid-operated valves may be installed in each tube close to the primary element to eliminate mercury column movement during reading. These valves are to be closed for reading at prescribed intervals without regard to position of the mercury column. Other means of obtaining instantaneous readings may be employed if they do not

32

IS 14198 (Part 2) : 1994 IEC Pub 953-2 : 1990 introduce errors in the reading. Solenoid valves should not be used with transducers.

f)

The manometers should be located at a lower elevation than the primary-flow element. However, when this is impracticable, special precautions shall be taken to ensure proper venting of the system. Suitable venting pots shall be installed above the manometers with valves for venting. Also, a temperature seal (loop in piping) shall be installed between the primary element and the manometers. and should be read with the aid of antiparallax readers or other suitable means. The mercury shall be instrument-grade having less than one part per million of non-volatile residue. The manometer shall be scrupulously clean before the mercury is introduced.

'

S) The manometers should be precision-type

h) When pressure transducers

are used, they shall be calibrated before the tests. Each calibration shall be done with rising and falling pressure. The long-term stability of the transducers shall be carefully recorded. The tests are to be calculated with the mean calibrated values. For the measurement of steam flow, venting pots should be installed at the same elevation as the primary element pressure taps, and at a suitable distance to ensure proper condensation. The water levels shall be at the same elevation, otherwise differences are to be determined. The connecting piping to the water pots should have a suffiaiently large diameter to avoid the formation of water plugs. The connecting lines to the manometer shall be installed with a continuous downward slope. After venting, time should be allowed for the water legs to form and cool. Special attention has to be paid to the proper formation of water legs at sub-atmospheric pressure.

4

4.3.5

Wuter flow fluctuation

Flow measurements shall not be attempted unless the flow is steady or varies only slightly with time. Variations in the flow shall be suppressed before the beginning of a test by very careful adjustment of flow and level controls or by introducing a combination of capacitance (such as bypassing flow around the pump) and resistance (such as throttling the pump discharge) in the line between the pulsation sources and the flow-measuring device. Damping devices on the manometers do not eliminate errors due to pulsations and, therefore, shall not be used.lf the pulsations remain excessive after every effort has been made to suppress them, mutual agreement is required before the test can be started. Electrical locking of a digital reading is also advisable.

4..3.6

Secondary

pow measurements

In addition to the primary flow measurements (see above), many secondary flow measurements are required. Because of differences in plant layout and the alternative positions of flowmeasuring devices, it is not possible to specify the accuracy required in each separate measurement. The parties to the test should decide what secondary flow measurements shall be made for the type of turbine installation concerned and then arrange for each measuring device to have an accuracy such that the combined effect of all errors in the secondary tlow measurements is in appropriate proportion to the error in the test result. Consequently, if standardized measuring devices'are used, calibration may not be necessary.

33

IS 14198(Fart2):1994 IECPub 953.2:1990 If the secondary flow-measurement is of steam, the steam shall remain superheated in passing through the flow-measuring device. Measurement shall not be attempted if the amount of superheat is less than 15 K at the smallest cross-section of the nozzle or orifice. 4.3.6.1
Extraction steam flows to feed heaters

If the extraction steam is superheated the extraction flow can be determined by heat balance calculation. The accuracy of the result falls off as the temperature rise across the heater diminishes. A direct measurement by suitable pressure differential measuring accuracy can be achieved. devices is possible, if the necessary

Wet steam extraction flows can be determined from heater drain flow measurements. This can be accomplished by using a standardized or, if necessary, a calibrated flow measuring device with suitable installation conditions. The heater drain flows can be measured using differential pressure devices except for the lowest pressure heaters with cascaded drains where very little pressure drop is available. In these cases, Venturi tubes or other low head loss primary elements of the required accuracy should be used. The differential pressure should preferably be measured with a transducer. The connecting piping between the transducer and the differential pressure device should be as short as practicable to minimize damping errors due to unsteady flow and care shall be taken to z eliminate air bubbles in this piping.

If, for these reasons, transducers are mounted in areas not accessible during operation of the plant, suitable means for a remote operated calibration are required. The calibrating reference should be a secondary standard. Heater drain flows are often very unsteady; observed every 20 s. therefore, the transducer output should be

In sizing the primary elements to avoid cavitation, the best compromise~between. Reynolds number, pressure loss, diameter ratio, and deflection should be made without reducing the critical cavitation coefficient "K" below 0.2. where:

K=

P throat e 2

-

psat

(10)

* w2 throat

The cavitation problem may be reduced by providing a loop seal or increasing the length of the loop seal to put more head on the meter so that the critical cavitation coefficient will be greater than 0.2. If the heater drain flow is subcooled the cavitation problem is also reduced. The extraction wet steam flow can be determined by a heat balance calculation. if the enthalpy of the extraction steam has been determined by the tracer method (see 4.7.2).

4.3.6.2

HP heater drains , When the main flow meters are at the deaerator

outlet, the flow from the HP heater drains shall be metered by a device capable of sufficient accuracy, unless the HP heaters have been checked for leakage.

34

IS 14198 (PPart2) : 1994 IEC I'ub 953-2 . * 1990 4.3.6.3
Moisture separator and reheater drains

It may not be possible to install a flow-measuring device because the available head is less than that required to avoid cavitation and also for reasons of plant design or operation. In these circumstances, the tracer technique can be used to measure the flow with a sufficient accuracy. In case of measurement with a pressure difference device the recommendation of 4.3.6.1 shall be followed.

4.3.6.4

Boiler feed pump turbine steam supply

Steam consumption of a boiler feed pump turbine is preferably if a separate condenser is installed.

to be measured as condensate

In a reheat cycle having a boiler feed pump driven by a turbine supplied with steam from the main turbine at a point up-stream of the reheater, the steam supplied shall be measured to enable the flow through the reheater to be determined.

4.3.6.5

Turbine gland leakages

The gland leakage flows of reheating condensing turbines which do not pass through the reheater but are returned to the system beyond the reheater, have to be determingd separately, preferably by measurement, as these flows shall be considered when determining the heat supplied by the reheater. If any glands are provided with leak-offs to atmosphere or to a point that is extraneous turbine system, this flow should be measured unless agreed to be negligible. to the

4.3.6.6

Desuperheating

spray water flow

When spray water from the feed-heating system is used for regulating the reheat steam temperature, the rate of flow of such water shall be measured. Also, if the initial steam temperature is similarly regulated, the rate of flow of spray water to the superheater shall be measured, unless the water is drawn from a position downstream of the final feed heater and the last feed water flow measliring device. 4.3.6.7
Boiler feed pump gland sealing and, balance water flow

The amounts of water supplied to thehfeed pump glan& for sealing and/or cooling purposes and the amounts of leak-off water returning to various parts of the system are liable to be' considerable, which may be direct additions to, or subtractions from, the main flow measurement. The number of boiler feed pump water flows to be measured will depend on the location of the main metering device. Calibrated or standardized measuring devices are required and it should be ascertained at the time of the test that they are in good condition. . 4.3.6.8
Stored water changes

Changes in stored water quantities within the test cycle shall be taken into account in the assessment of the condensate/feedwater flows through the system; Such stored~water quantity changes will include those in condenser hot-wells, boiler drums, deaerator storage tanks, feed heater bodies and any storage or drain tanks that cannot be isolated from the system.

35

IS 14198 (Part 2) : 1994
IEC Pub 953-2 : 1990

Water level changes in all storage vessels should be measured by temporary scales rigidly fixed close to the sight glasses of the permanently installed level gauges, or, alternatively, by transducers used in'conjunction with test data-logging equipment. If the temperature of the water in a vessel is appreciably different from the ambient temperature and an external gauge glass is employed, for example, as in the case of a deaerator storage tank, the density of water in the gauge glass should be used in the conversion of water level change to amass change in the vessel. Gauge glasses which are connected to vessels containing hot water should not be blown down within a period of approximately half an hour before taking a reading in order to avoid a false level indication due to a change of temperature in the water column. Since time is-a critical factor in the measurement of the water level changes, the test readings shall be closely synchronized with the signals for commencement and termination of a test.

4.3.6.9

Leakage determination

It will be necessary to use calculated values for internal pump leakages, shaft packing, valve stem leakages, internal turbine leakages and other leakages when it is not practicable to measure these flows. z 4.3.7
Occasional secondary flows

Further secondary flows, which occur relatively rarely, or need not be measured, following:
4.3.7.1 Ejector steam

include the

Steam-jet air ejector steam flow can be calculated from the measured pressure and temperature of the steam supply and the known cross-sectional area of the jets. When the steam.supply is wet, it may be preferable to use the design flow rates given by the manufacturer. The amount of steam removed from the condenser by the air removal means is generally negligible. Should it be measured, the method of measurement shall be agreed upon by the parties to the test. 4.3.7.2
Make-up flow \

Make-up flow to the system, if it cannot be avoided, shall be determined.

4.3.7.3

Water seals

Sealing water is used in connection with hydraulic glands or atmospheric exhaust valves, condensate pump glands, etc. As the seals have to be maintained, the flow of water used shall be measured or estimated and an appropriate allowance made, if it influences the result of the test. It shall be ensured that there is no variable storage in the sealing system and no possibility of leakage of sealing water other than into the condensate system. If external leakage of condensate water from seals cannot be avoided, its flow shall be determined and added to the condensate flow.

36

IS 14198 (Part 2) : 1994 IEC Pub 953-2 : 1990
4.3.7.4 Auxiliary exhaust steam

Any auxiliary exhaust steam that normally enters the condenser shall either be diverted elsewhere during the period of the test, or measured. In deciding upon the best position to install the measuring device, particular attention should be paid to the net head loss and the possibility of flashing in the throat. 4.3.8
Density of water and steam

The density of water which is required for calculation of mass flow rate is calculated from an accurately measured temperature and reasonably approximate pressure. The temperature shall be measured with a precision-calibrated instrument. If an extra instrument is used, it should be located at least 10 pipe diameters downstream of the primary element. Forprimary water flow, it is also permissible to use the average of the discharge temperature of the upstream heater and the inlet temperature of the downstream heater, providing no extraneous flow enters between them and the temperature is taken at least 10 diameters downstream from the heater outlet to ensure adequate mixing. The density of steam which is required for calculation of mass flow rate is calculated from using a precision measurements of pressures, using a precision gauge, and temperature instrument or resistance thermometer. The reference planes for the density determination are to be taken according to the calibration procedure or the standard of the flow measuring device. L 4.3.9
Determination of cooling waterflow of condenser

This flow is normally only required generator performance guarantee.

if condenser

performance

is included in the turbine

In many cases a direct measurement is not possible or practicable because of technical difficulties. In these instances, the cooling water flow can be determined conveniently by a heat balance calculation. The quantity of the condenser cooling may be calculated. the following methods may be used:
a)

If measurement

is feasible, one of

standardized

nozzles or orifices in the pipe line; in the pipe line; head is sufficient to give the necessary

b) c)
d)

Venturi tubes, or their equivalent current meters;

Pitot tubes, provided it is agreed that the differential accuracy; weir-notch method.

e)

Further measuring methods necessitating used with sufficient knowledge and care:
f)

less installation tracers;

effort are available and may be

dilution methods using chemical or radioactive ultrasonic techniques.
(excluding condensing

g) 4.4 4.4.1

Pressure measurement

turbine exhaust pressure)

Pressures to be measured

The initial pressure of steam supplied shall be measured generator side of, and as close as practicable to, the turbine strainer if this has been furnished by the manufacturer under steam pressure shall be measured in the pipe downstream from nished under the turbine contract, unless the turbine contract

in the steam line on the steamstop valve and upstream of the the turbine contract. The initial the parts which have not been furor specification states otherwise.

37

IS 14198(Part 2):1994 XECPub 953-2:1990 The steam strainer shall be known to be clean. If there is a doubt about its cleanliness on the part of either of the parties to the test, it shall be examined prior to the test and cleaned if necessary. Pressures should also be measured at the inlets to the HP, IP and LP cylinders of the mam turbine, at the inlet and outlet of the boiler feed pump turbine (if integrated with the feedheating system) and at both ends of bled steam lines; also at the suction and discharge of all pumps in the condensate and feed system. Wherever practicable, pressure tappings shall be situated in straight runs of piping, remote from any flow disturbances. The pressures measured during steam turbine tests shall be static pressures.

4.4.2

Instruments

Deadweight gauges, Bourdon tube type test gauges or mercury manometers shall be used. All of these instruments can be replaced by transducers of suitable measuring range and equivalent accuracy (see 4.4.2.5). Pulsations of pressure shown shall not be damped by throttling on the gauge valve or by the use of commercial gauge dampers. A volume chamber may be employed. 4.4.2.1
Measurement of pressure above 250 kPa (2.5 bar) *

Bourdon gauges or preferably deadweight gauges shall be used for measuring the pressures above 250 kPa. These gauges shall be mounted in locations -as free as practicable from vibration, dirt and excessive variations in ambient temperatures. For the measurement calibrated test Bourdon 4.4.2.2
Measurements

of pressures where the highest degree of accuracy is not essential, gauges may be used.
pressure

of pressure below 250 kPu (2.5 bar), but ahove urmospheric

Where the level of pressure permits their use, liquid manometers

are recommended. not less than Ymm to

For single-leg manometers the bore should be uniform and preferably avoid excessive capillary effects.
4.4.2.3 Measurement of pressures below atmospheric pressure

Mercury manometers

(see 4.1.5)shall

be used for measuring pressures below atmosphenc. not less

The tubing for mercury manometers shall be high-grade lead-free~glass, preferably than 10mm bore in the region where readings will be taken.

Where small pressure differences must require to be measured with high accuracy, silicone oil may advantageously be used as the manometer fluid in place of mercury. 4.4.2.4
Liquids for manometers The liquid used shall be suitable for the application Transducers

and of known density.

4.4.2.5

Accurate pressure measurements are possible with transducers, provided that their use and care are well understood and that they are properly maintained and installed. Regardless of the application, each transducer should be calibrated before the tests.

38

IS 14198(Part 2) : 1994
IEC Pub 953-2: 1990

Each transducer should be located in a position which is free from vibration and dirt, and where there are~not likely to be large changes in ambient temperature such as may be caused by an outside door. If a transducer is sensitive to changes in environment, such as temperature, the system should be given sufficient time (e. g. 2 h for a quartz Bourdon type transducer) to stabilize before readings are taken. A zero reading shall be taken before and after each test run.

4.4.3

Pressure` tapping holes and connecting

lines

Tapping holes should be at right angles to the inner surface of the pipe. The inner rim of the hole should be free from burrs, having its edge sharp and square. For a length of at least twice its diameter, the hoie should be straight and of uniform~bore. The bore of the tapping holes should be, from 6 mm for higher pressure to 12 mm for lower pressures.

To prevent errors due to an unknown head of water accumulating in the line connecting the tapping hole to the pressure measuring device, the installation should always be arranged to have the connection lines either completely full of water or completely empty.

4.4.3.1

For pressures

above 250 kPa (2.5 bar)

For higher pressures in the range above that of liquid manometers, it shall be ensured that the connecting lines are full of water. The gauge can be above, or preferably below, the tapping point. The tapping hole should preferably have a 6 mm diameter.

4.4.3.2

For pressures

below 250 kPa (2.5 bar), but above atmospheric pressure

The gauge should be situated below the tapping. Although small bore connecting lines may be considered, they are prone to becoming blocked, so connecting lines not less than 12 mm in diameter are recommended. For pressures above atmospheric but low enough to~be measured with liquid manometers, the connecting lines may be arranged to be either full or empty. The chances of incurring an error due to unknown heads of water in the connecting lines are high in this,pressure range and a condensing vessel between the tapping and the pressure measuring device should be provided.

39

IS 14198(Part 2) : 1994
IEC Pub 953-2: 1990 4.4.4

Shut-off valves A suitable shut-off valve should be installed at each pressure tapping point, and for high pressures there should be a second~valve at the `gauge end of the connecting line.

4.4.5

Calibration of pressure measuring devices The calibration accuracy of test pressure measuring devices should be within *0.2% of the pressure being measured, except that for measurements which are not of primary importance this accuracy should be within &OS%. The parties to the acceptance test should agree, at a pretest meeting, which pressures, if any, may be measured to the lower standard of accuracy. All the test pressure gauges and transducers (but not liquid manometers) should be calibrated against a dead-weight tester or standard manometer before the acceptance tests. Bourdon tube type instruments should also be calibrated immediately after the tests. If there is no reason for preferring one calibration to the other a mean of the two calibrations should be used. When transducers with data loggers are used the calibration should be made by. comparing the true pressure as shown by the dead-weight tester against the typed print-out of the data logger. If the data logger also has a tape output for feeding into a comp@er it should be demonstrated that the typed output and the tape output are identical. If differential pressure Bourdon gauges or transducers are used for measuring reheat pressure drops or bled steam line pressure drops, two dead-weight testers should Abeused to apply the working pressures to the differential pressure gauge for calibration. Liquid manometers need not be calibrated if the parties using them produce evidence to establish the accuracy of the manometer scales and the purity or density of the manometer fluid. In the case of single leg manometers, evidence of the uniformity of the bore of the tube and the cross-sectional areas of the tube and reservoir should also be available. If a test manometer equipped to record on a data logger is capable of being used manually, it should be ascertained that the typed print-out agrees with the manual observations. If a test manometer used in conjunction with a data logger cannot be read manually then it should be treated as a transducer and calibrated against a manometer of proven accuracy. A transmitter may also be calibrated by applying a measured column of low density fluid directly to the low pressure side of the sensitive element and applying simultaneously ~ahigh density fluid to the high pressure side of the sensitive element. These two columns then provide the differential pressure. The required working pressure from a pressure source is now simultaneously applied to both columns taking the precaution of ensuring that the pressure medium used does not mix with either the low density or high density fluid. The lengths of the columns are observed and read off by means of high pressure sight glasses.

4.4.6

.4tmospheric

pressure

The atmospheric pressure to which liquid manometers or columns are referred shall, wherever practicable. be determined by means of a precision barometer. The barometer shall be of the mercury-in-glass type, certified by a recognized national authority, with the bore of the glass tube not less than 6mm. Alternatively, an aneroid or other type of barometer may be used. provided that its accuracy and suitability are certified by a recognizedauthority.

40

IS 14198 (Part 2) : 1994 IEC Pub 953-2 : 1990

The barometer should be located in the same room as that of the manometer practicable at the same height.

and as near as

If a barometer is not available, the atmospheric pressure shall be determined by the reading taken at the time of the test from a local recognized weather bureau corrected for the difference of elevation between the weather bureau and the turbine. 4.4.7
Correction of readings

The readings should be averaged over the test period and then corrected

as follows:

All pressure-measuring devices with a head of water in the connecting line should be corrected by adding the pressure equivalent of the head of water when the gauge is above the tapping and subtracting it when the gauge is below the tapping. A calibration been calibrated. correction shall be applied to those pressure-measuring devices which have

The absolute pressures measured by means of liquid manometers and mercury-in-glass barometers shall be calculated in accordance with IS0 31/ 111 taking into account:
a)

the average of readings; the correction of the length of the scale on account of temperature; for single leg manometers, capillarity corrections 12 mm diameter; local acceleration difference fluid.

z

h)
C) d)

unless they have tubes of not less than

density of the liquid (taking into account the liquid in the opposite legj; due to gravity; only, the ambient pressure duly corrected; and gravity, of tapping point and instrument, with density of the for liquid manometers in elevation

e)
f)

g)

4.4.7.1

Corrections for the water head

To obtain the correct pressure at the tapping point, the 71 assure equivalent of the head of water between the steam pipe tapping and the gauge centre line shall be added (when the gauge is above the tapping) or subtracted (when the gauge is below the tapping) from the gauge reading:
PP = Heg
where:

(11)

H
P s

= vertical distance between the tapping point and the centre of the pressure gauges
= density of water at the ambient temperature = local acceleration due to gravity

4.4.7.2

Barometer

reading corrections

Mercury-in-glass barometers shall first be corrected al 273 K with appropriate allowance for the reference temperature of the scale. The reference temperature for the scale in metric countries is usually 273 K. Barometers shall secondly need to be Lorrected for capillary depression of the mercury. The scale of a mercury-in-glass barometer may have been set to correct for this, in which case no further capillarity correction shall be applied.

41

IS 14198 (Part 2):1994 IEC_l'ub953-2 :1990

Barometers are thirdly to be corrected for difference barometer and any of the mercury pressure reading,devices

in elevation, if any, between that are referred to it.

a

A fourth correction shall be made for gravity at the location of the test. Values of the various correction factors may be found in several recognized tables of standards such 0s those of the World Meteorological Organization, the Tables of the National Weather Bureau, the Smithsonian Tables, etc.

4.5 4.5.1

Condensing General

turbine exhaust pressure measurement

The test instrumentation should give the mean static pressure at the exhaust from each individual LP casing. It should normally consist of separate sets of pressure sensing holes, preferably connected individually or consecutively by use of suitable switching devices.

The following rules are intended to apply' to all condenser arrangements. It is realised, however, that it may be easier to comply with them in respect of underslung condensers than in the case ~of side-mounted condensers, particularly of the integral type. Should it be found virtually impossible to comply with the sub-clauses below, then the parties concerned should mutually agree on some alternative means of making the measurements, being guided as far as possible by the concepts herein.

4.5.2

Plane of measurement

Unless specified otherwise in the contract documents, the condenser inlet shall be taken as the measuring plane for both turbine and condenser purposes. Modern condensers are of four general types: transverse underslung, axial underslung, sepaiate side-mounted, integral sidemounted. For the first type, the condenser inlet generally is identified with the turbitie exhaust flange. For the other three types of condenser it is more difficult to identify the condenser inlet. In such cases the condenser inlet should be placed in one or more planes as closeas practicable to the condenser tube nests.

4.5.3

Pressure taps

Considerable variations in static pressure usually exist across the exhaust so that it is necessary to make provision for measuring the mean at the condenser inlet by providing numerc)us pressure sensing holes, Special locations of demonstrable accuracy may kc used when agreed upon by the parties to the test, but in na case shall there be fewer than 2 per exhaust annulus, When test results are not ~dldale to loe&e sensing Ma one dsvisr should be employed for sack 125m2,

IS 14198 (Part 2) : 1994 IEC Pub 953-2 : 1990

The holes should be normally 10 mm in diameter and never less than 8 mm in diameter. They should be drilled normal to the wall, ahburrs shall be removed and a wide area round the hole should be dressed clean. Gauge connections through the walls of the exhaust conduit or through ribs traversing the steam space shall be normal to and flush with the surface of the wall. The hole at the open end should be 12mm in diameter and uniformly rounded to a radius not exceeding 0.8mm. If the configuration of the exhaust is such that wall measurements are unrepresentative, internal devices, including special pressure taps with guide plates, baskets or equivalent devices, should be used and they may also be used if a wall is inaccessible. Any internal device shall have been shown to be insensitive mutually acceptable to the parties concerned. 4.5.4 Manifolds Pressure averaging manifolds should not be used. to steam incidence, and be

4.5.5

Connecting lines

z

Special precautions shall be taken in making the connections to the exhaust conduit. Each mercury manometer or column shall be mounted as near as practicable to the corresponding pressure connection in the exhaust conduit or casing; but-in a position where it will be free from excessive vibration and where the observer can take readings with convenience and accuracy. The test gauges should be at a higher level than the sensing holes, so that the measuring system can be self-draining back to the condenser. Alternatively, special arrangements for adequate draining may be made. If it should prove difficult to devise a self-draining system, then the parties interested in the tests should mutually agree on a means of adequately draining or purging the system by air or nitrogen flushing. Other requirements for low-pressure connecting lines appear in 4.4.3.

4 5.6

Instruments Any reliable instrument for measuring the exhaust pressure may be used, including openended liquid manometers and a barometer. closed liquid manometers (absolute pressure gauges) or pressure transducers. The reading accuracy should be 35 Pa. An accurate determination of site barometric pressure is required (see 4.4.6).

4.5.7

Tightness of measu-ring system The tightness of the measuring system should be checked. When the valves adjacent to the sensing holes are-closed under specified vacuum, the column reading, if mercury is being used, should not fall at a rate greater than 6mm in 5 min. Rubber diaphragm type valves are more effective than cocks in keeping the system tight.

4.5.8

Calibration In accordance with the requirements of the fifth paragraph of 4.4.5, liquid column vacuum gauges need not be calibrated if the parties using them produce evidence to establish the

A?

IS 14198 (Part 2) : 1994 TEC Pub 953-2 : 1990

accuracy of the manometric scales and can show that the purity or density of the liquid is satisfactory. Corrections for meniscus and capillarity are unnecessary if mercury manometers have 12.0mm bore tubes or larger. If pressure transducers are used they should be calibrated before and after the test against a liquid manometer or vacuum dead weight tester. If a liquid column gauge is equipped to record on a data logger and can also be read manually as a liquid column, then the requirements of the sixth paragraph of 4.4.5 apply. 4.5.9
Correction of readings

The readings should be averaged over the test period and then corrected 4.4.7. Liquid column readings should be corrected 4.6
4.6.1 Temperature measurement

in accordance

with

in accordance

with 4.4.7.

Points of temperature measurement

Temperature measurements shall be made at points as close as practicable to the points at Which the corresponding pressures are measured for cnthalpy determinations. Temperatures, the values of which influence the results of the test, shall be taken at two different points close together and the mean of the two readings shall bc taken as the temperature of the fluid. Should it be suspected that there are distributions of flow having different temperatures within a pipe, and the weighted average temperature influences the results of the test, the pipe is to be explored across its diameter by tcmpcrature measurement means and an average determined by a means to be agreed by the parties to the test.

4.6.2
a) 6)

Instruments

The preferred calibrated voltmeter;

instruments electrical

for measuring relatively high temperatures thermometer with calibrated

are: bridge or digital Continuous

resistance

precision

calibrated high-grade thermocouple and precision bridge or digital voltmeter. leads to the cold junction arc recommended for high measuring accuracy.

The thermocouples and resistance thermometers, and their potentiometers, bridges and galvanometers or digital voltmeters should be calibrated before the test or at regular intervals where sufficient stability has been shown. Otherwise the increased uncertainty of measurement has to be taken into account in accordance with 7.2.2. Recalibration after the tests will generally measurements are sufficiently cross-checked. All this equipment examined periodically. shall be carefully not be necessary if individual temperature shall be

handled

and maintained.

Its condition

Additional mercury-in-glass thermometers are recommended for use when the temperature to be measured is less than 373 K and the locations are such that readings may be taken without difficulty. Mercury-in-glass thermometers used to measure temperatures which influence the results of the test shall be of the solid-stem precision type with etched scale plate graduated with scales suitable for the measurements to be made. Commercial or ,industrial metal-encased thermometers shall not be used.

44

IS 14198 (Part 2) : 1994 IEC Pub 953-2 : 1990 4.6.3

Main temperature

measurements

The main temperatures are those which have a direct influence on the acceptance test result,. such as'initial steam, hot and cold reheat steam, final feed water temperature, and cooling water temperatures. Other temperatures, such as feed water pump inlet temperatures and discharge and deaerator condensate inlet temperatures, may also be main temperatures according to the guarantee formulation, and to the method of determining the primary flow. If the fluid flows associated with the main temperature measurements are conveyed in multiple pipes, each main temperature should be taken as the arithmetic mean of the individual temperatures unless the parties interested in the test agree that some other flow weighting is appropriate. Two thermometer wells should be provided in each pipe to permit the temperature measurement to be independently duplicated. The temperature in each pipe should be taken as the arithmetic average of the two measurements unless the parties to the test agree otherwise. The final feed temperature measurements should be taken after the junctions of any heater by-passes, and sufficiently far downstream to ensure that adequate mixing has occurred.

4.64

Feed train temperature

measurements

(including bled steam)

z

These temperatures are normally only required when the feed water heating plant (if installed) is not provided by the turbine contractor, although it may be of advantage to measure some or all of them. With the exception of main temperature measurements, the feed train temperature measurements need not be duplicated. Sufficient inlet and outlet temperatures on each heater should be measured to enable a heat balance to be calculated. In many instances, the inlet feed temperature of one hea4er would be the same as the'outlet feed temperature of the preceding heater* and, in these instances, one temperature measurement to serve both heaters would be sufficient. If both the feed inlet temperature and the preceding feed outlet temperature are measured, then the mean of the two should be taken to obviate discrepancies in the heat balance. Where a return connection exists between the two points, measurements should be made upstream and downstream of the junction. Steam temperatures should be measured at each end of the bled steam pipes: near the turbine connection upstream of the non-return valve and near the feedwater inlet connection. If mixing occurs in a bled steam pipC, the temperature of the mixture should be taken sufficiently far downstream of the junction to ensure that adequate mixing has occurred. Thermowells should be located possibility of stratification. 4.65
Condenser

in areas which assure good mixin'g and have minimum

cooling water temperature

measurement

These temperatures are normally only required if condenser turbine generator performance guarantee.
a)

performance

is included in the

Inlet temperature Inlet temperature is generally constant across the section of the pipe, and unless there is reason to suspect that stratification is occurring, one temperature measurement in each
is taken at least 10 diameters downstream from the heater outlet to ensure adequate mixing.

* The temperature

45

IS 14198 (Part 2) : 1994 IEC Yub 953-2 : 1990

inlet pipe will suffice. Thermometer pockets may be used or, alternatively, a continuous flow of sample water may be drawn off through a chamber into which is inserted a direct contact thermometer. If either party suspects stratification, the measurement shah be by one or both of the methods used for outlet temperature as described in the following paragraph. b) Outlet temperature Temperature stratification occurs in the cooling water discharge boxes. To permit mixing to occur, the measuring positions should be several diameters downstream. Temperature sampling probes should be used at each condenser outlet, on at least two diameters. The probes may be either perforated sampling tubes through which water can be drawn off to a mixing chamber or they may be thermopiles to obtain a mean temperature in situ. There shall be not less than one sampling hole or thermocouple for each 0.2 m2 of pipe area and they should be situated at centres of equal areas. There should be not less than four sampling holes or thermocouples for each outlet pipe and they should be situated in such a way that they are representative for the cross-section of the pipe. If practicable, the temperature can be measured after mixing in the outlet water channel with due consideration for temperature loss.

4.6~5

Accuracy

of temperature measuring equipment

L

The temperature measuring equipment shall be of such accuracy that the individual maximum errors do not prevent the desired level of test~accuracy from being achieved. 4.67
Thermometer wells

The material of a thermometer well shall be.suitable for the temperature to be measured. Tubes and wells shall be as thin as practicable, consistent with safe stress, the inner diameters being as small as practicable. It is important that the wells be clean and free from corrosion or oxide. Wells for high or main temperature measurements may be provided with external fins for good heat absorption. With high pressures and high temperatures, it is advisable to weld the thermometer wells to the pipe. Thermometer wells shall preferably be dry, especially for the higher temperature measurements but shall be carefully covered and sealed with material to reduce air circulation or loss of heat. If temperature rise across the feed pump has to be measured, the thermometer pockets at inlet and discharge shall be of duplicate type and material. The pocket in the discharge piping shall be located sufficiently downstream of the pump to permit a good mixing of the flow.

4.6.8

Precautions to be observed in the measurement

of temperature

The following precautions

shall be observed in the measurement

of the temperature:

4

Heat that is transmitted by conduction or radiation to or from the temperature measuring means other than from the medium being measured shall be reduced to a minimum.

b) The immediate vicinity of the point of insertion and the projecting parts of the well and its
support shall be thermally insulated. In pipes of less than 75 mm internal diameter, the thermometer shall be arranged axially in the pipe by inserting it in an elbow or tee. At any location where an elbow or tee is not available, the piping shall be modified accordingly.

46

IS 14198(Ru-t2):1994 IECPubY53-2:lYYO In pipes having an internal diameter greater than or equal to 75 mm, the sensitive element shall be located between the centre and a point 25 mm radially beyond, except that in the case of very large pipes and special multi-point measuring devices, no well need exceed a length of 150 mm inside a pipe. d) e) In measuring the temperature in a dead space. of fluids the heat-receiving part of the apparatus shall not be

In taking readings, a mercury-in-glass thermometer shall not be raised in the thermometer well further than is necessary to render visible the top of the mercury thread. Other types of instrument shall not be moved while readings are being taken. Each complete temperature measuring installation shall be set up in place in full working condition at the temperature conditions that will prevail auring the test, for not less than 2 h before a test is commenced.

f)

4.7
4.7.1

Steam quality measurement General

In power stations employing certain types of nuclear reactor, the steam supplied to the turbines is at saturation temperature and may contain a small percentage of moisture. It is therefore necessary to ascertain the moisture content in order to determine the enthalpy of the L initial steam. It may also be required to determine the moisture content of the steam after partial expansion in the turbine, for example, at a point where extracted steam is taken to a feedwater heater or a water-separator or reheater. Where it is practicable to condense the extracted steam and measure the condensate, the enthalpy of the steam can be determined by a heat balance calculation. The usual methods of determining a throttling calorimeter, an electrical heating calorimeter. the moisture content of steam are by means of

The former is only applicable when the quality and the pressure of the~steam are sufficient to produce a measurable degree of superheat in the calorimeter. The latter is not subject to these limitations. Both methods, howeyer, are liable to give misleading results because of the probable lack of homogeneity and the difficulty of obtaining a correct sample of the local steam-water mixture. Consequently, there is uncertainty as to whether the steam passing to the calorimeter is representative of the main steam flow. Recently, more precise methods employing radioactivgor introduced and established. 4.7.2
Tracer technique

non-radioactive

tracers have been

The tracer technique employingthe dilution method is an accurate method for determining either the water phase or the moisture fraction of a two-phase vapour-water flow. The dilution method is based on the measurement of a tracer concentration in a water sample. Dilution can be accomplished in either of two ways, applicable to determining both throttle and extraction enthalpy. Condensing method: It is assumed that the tracer concentration in the moisture carried by the steam is the same as that in the water in the boiler. After condensation of the vapour and measurement of the mass flow and of the tracer concentration in the boiler and in the condensate, a mass balance calculation enables the amount of water transported in the steam from the boiler to be determined.

47

IS 14198(Part 2) : 1994 IEC Pub 953-2: 1990

Constant rate injection method: A solution of tracer of known strength is injected at a known rate into the steam flow. After mixing, a sample of the water is drawn off and the tracer concentration measured. A balance calculation enables the moisture content of the steam upstream of the injection point to be determined. Precautions shall be taken toensure that the mixture is homogeneous and that no steam is withdrawn with the water. Methods other than these may be used upon agreement. 4.7.3 Condensing method An appropriate tracer, dissolved in the water phase of wet steam at a concentration C,,, will be diluted by condensation of vapour. After the steam is totally condensed, the tracer concentrationin the condensate will be Ccond. The concentrations are related by the balance:

cwat *i'l
where: m = mass flow rate of water in wet steam flow m CO"d = mass flow rate of condensate

=

Ccond . hmd

(12)

from wet steam

With the tracer concentrations known from test measurements, before and after condensation, steam wetness fraction (moisture) is represented by the ratio: '

(13) and the steam quality is determined by:
C cond

x'=

1 -

c wat

(14)

Throttle quality can be calculated from the quality and pressure of steam leaving the steam generator, and throttle pressure. The moisture in the steam leavmg the steam generator is the result of water carry-over. a tracer present in the steam generator water will also be found in the steam. Thus,

In non-reheat cycles, the tracer will finally be diluted in the total flow going back to the steam generator. By the application of the condensing_method, steam generator exit moisture can be evaluated using equation (14) above. In the case of reheat cycles, the error in the throttle moisture determination caused by plating out of the tracer in the reheaters is negligible, provided that the external moisture separator effectiveness is approximately 100%. However, there is the possibility of measuring the moisture carry-over of the steam generator during special tests with the reheaters out of service if agreed between the parties concerned. When the tracer concentration is measured at the bottom of the steam generator, the factor R (see Figures 4 and 5) has to be taken into account in the determination of the concentration C,,, which serves for the determination of the steam quality. Consequently, this procedure is less precise than the direct measurement of C,,,.

48

p_

IS 14198(Part 2) : 1994 IEC Pub 953-2: 1990

Determination of the concentration in the total flow, Ccond depends on the arrangement of the feedwater heaters. On cycles with cascading heaters, total flow usually exists at the discharge of the condensate pumps. Qn other cycles, if the demineralizers are bypassed during the test, Ccond will be the tracer concentration in the final feedwater. Another possibility is to calculate C&d from a tracer flow balance. However, this calculation requires several flow and concentration measurements. In all cases, effects such as external tracer sources feeding into the cycle or losses of tracer (demineralizers) shall be taken into account.

The condensation method may also be used to determine wet extraction steam enthalpy. This method is particularly attractive if a suitable tracer is already present in the steam path. However, error analysis shows that accurate results can only be obtained on heaters without cascading drains. With this method, extraction balance around the heaters, entbalpy is evaluated from an energy balance and a tracer

For the tracer balance, the concentration of the tracer in all flows to and from each heater shell side are needed. Sampling the heater drains for concentration measurement of the tracer is fairly easy, as this is only single phase flow. Sampling water out of the extraction line requires the same precautions as in the case of the injection method.

49

IS 14198(Part 2) : 1994 IEC Pub 953-2: 1990

Main steam flow (AM = I$)

t40,. - + ' %.t (concentration
at water steam interface)

Feedwater

o+.c,,

493/90

Ga, (+&ore - d'tF)+ tiF CF = tic,,, c,_
CL - tiF CF

(15)

.

mcore -

mF

(16)

(17)

FIG. 4. - Throttle

steam quality calculations

for boiling water reactor.

50

IS 14198(Part 2) : 1994 IEC Pub 953-2: 1990

cwal-

tracer concentration

at water steam interface

CB - blowdown tracer concentration ,i,E * tiR+ rirM
A

--

h
hE

or tijl~--

kM
R

J

*

Ce (measure)
494&o

?ilRxt?&-Lila=-----_ljr~=(l-R)-

kM

&M
R

R

(18)

CB

=iG
c

(19)

wat - I-R

CB

(20)

FIG. 5. -

Throttle steam quality calculations for pressurized water reactor.

51

IS 14198 (Part 2) : 1994

IEC Pub 953-2 : 1990 4.7.4 Constant rate injection method A water-soluble tracer of concentration Ci"j is injected at a constant rate yiti"j into the vapour-water flow where moisture is to be measured. The concentration C,,, is measured in the water phase downstream of the injection point after adequate mixing has taken place. For this condition the following material balance can be written: Co . ti + or

tiinj * Cinj= (lit + ririnj + Ati)

. &at

(21)

(22)
where: ti = mass flow rate of water in vapour-water mixture at the sampling point CO = initial concentration in the water phase at the sampling point, before injection starts, due to natural amounts of tracer (background concentration) Ati = change in water flow, (condensation of vapour due to injection of the cold tracer solution)

Normally

CwatQ C&j, C, < Cwat and Ati < ti, so that the above equation m = Wli,j . ~
.
Cinj

is reduced to:

Cwat
e

(23)

4.7.5

Extraction enthalpy determined by constant rate injection method If the flow rate of the water phase in the extraction line to a feedwater heater is known, wet steam enthalpy can be calculated by energy balance around the heater. The water flow rate can be measured with the constant rate injection method. Measuring flow rate and concentration of the tracer solution and maintaining a constant injection rate is comparatively simple. However, the tracer concentration in the phase downstream of the point of injection can be accurately determined only if the tracer is well mixed and a sample of the liquid phase can be obtained.

4.7.5.1

Injection points

For the sample to be truly representative, the tracer shall be uniformly distributed in the water phase. The injection point should, therefore, be located immediately downstream of the extraction flange of the turbine, and the sampling point should be close to the heater. A long run of pipe with several elbows will promote mixing. Use of a spray for injecting would be beneficial, but it may not be necessary. 4.7.5.2 Samplingpoints

Since any condensed vapour in the sample will falsify the result, care shall be taken in selecting the location of the sampling tap. At the conditions and velocities normally found in extraction lines, the water is not uniformly distributed over the cross-section, but agglom,erated towards the pipe wall. This is favourable for water sampling, so that a simple wall tap should prove satisfactory. However, advantage should be taken of gravitational or centrifugal forces by locating the tap on the bottom of the pipe or on the outside at the exit of an elbow. Figure 6 shows a typical installation of injection land sampling points. In cases where the extraction line is very short, such as beaters installed in condenser necks, problems may be encountered in obtaining water samples. In such cases, these rules recommend that the water sample be taken from the heater drain.

52

IS 14198(Part 2) : 1994 IEC Pub 953-2: 1990 In cycles with pumped ahead drains, the above method yields accuracy equal to the injection method without any additional instrumentation. In cycles with drains cascading to the condenser, the upstream drains shall be diverted directly to the condenser so as to yield comparable results. Such diversion necessitates designing such drain piping to the condenser to accommodate total cascade flow at full load. The diversion method&should be employed prior to the heat rate test.

Turbine

Injection

-f
Sampling
49.5/90

FIG. 6. -

Typical installation

of injection

and sampling

points.

4.7.5.3

Samplingjlow

rates

The sampling flow rate shall be adjusted so that entrainment and subsequent condensation of vapour is prevented. The maximum allowable sampling rate can be determined, for example, by analyzing the sampling stream for dissolved oxygen. Oxygen (20 to 30ppm) is naturally present in the steam from boiling water reactors as a result of radiolysis. The sampling flow rate shall be determined prior to the heat rate test. The oxygen content shall be measured for various sample flow rates and plotted as shown in Figure 7. The flow rate at which steam starts to entrain in the sampling is evidenced by a sharp rise in oxygen content. The validity of using oxygen or other suitable tracer as a means of tracing the vapour fraction is based on the distribution of oxygen between the liquid and vapour phases. At pressures less than 35 bar, oxygen is almost entirely in the vapour phase. In other types of plants, a suitable tracer, such as xenon-133, could be added.

53

I8 -14198 (Part 2) : 1994 IEC Pub 953-2: 1990

I; %

2000

P

2 .s

E

1500
1000

Sample flow rate (mllmin)
496/90

FIG. 7. -

Oxygen content of sample stream.

*

4.7.6

Tracers and their use

For condensing and constant-rate meet the following criteria:

injection

methods to give accurate results, tracers shall

a) No hazard to operating personnel.

bi No harmful effects on materials employed.
c) Soluble in water, but essentially insoluble in steam (concentration
10V6can be attained with suitable tracer compounds). in the steam phase of

4 Non-volatile.
e) Stable at the conditions existing in the turbine cycle, and not absorbed on internal surfaces
(provided that the water is not evaporated completely).

_tl Mixed completely and uniformly with all the water available at any instant.
Light water reactors of the present generation are designed for pressure and temperature levels which permit a number of tracers to meet these criteria. At higher pressure levels this may be more difficult. Furthermore, the problem of chemical contamination, which is tied together with the sensitivity and, accuracy of the analytical methods available, has to be considered. Methods such as measurement of conductivity or the gravimetric methods may be too insensitive to produce the required accuracy at the concentration levels which can be tolerated in some nuclear system. Care shall be taken to prevent environmental contamination when tracers are used. 4.7.6.1
Radioactive tracers

Radioactive tracers are particularly attractive for application in nuclear power plants, where licensing required for possession and handling of radioactive materials presents no particular problem. Tracer concentrations of less than 1 in 10y can be accurately measured using gamma counting techniques. For steam cycles with very low radioactive background, the tracer activity concentration required for accurate testing is very small; however, the tracer should be a short-lived isotope to eliminate long-term contamination problems. Since it is not practicable to measure the concentration of recovered samples simultaneously it will be necessary to apply a correction to the measured concentration of each sample to account for

IS 14198(Part 2) : 1994
IEC Pub 953-2: 1990

isotope decay. One of the tracers which meets these criteria is 15-h sodium-24. If the tracer technique is used to determine throttle and extraction steam quality and heater leakage, there is some advantage in using three different radioactive tracers.

4.7.6.2

Non-radioactive

tracer

A number of tracers are available. The sodium tracer technique is based on accurate and direct determination of the mass concentration of sodium in water samples. Sodium may be present in PWR cycles due to the use of sodium phosphates for secondary loop water chemistry control. The sodium tracer technique also preserves the non-radioactive status of the secondary loop in PWR cycles.
a) Flame photometry method

Sodium prevent sodium also be

analysis may be performed with a flame spectrophotometer. Care shall be taken to environmental sodium from contaminating a sample. Multiple determinations of concentrations shall be made for each sampling point. Sodium concentration may determined from a continuously flowing sample.

b) Sodium ion electrode method

The sodmm analyzer may be used for continuous as for analyzing separate samples.

monitoring

of a flowing sample, as well

The application of non-radioactive tracer techniques shall be consistent with regulations concerning the metallurgical safety of the reactor system and all other related equipment. Lithium salts may also be used in preference to sodium. 4.0
Time measurement

The time of test periods and observations
a) signals from a master clock or timekeeper; b) observations

may be determined

by:

of watches, which are to be synchronized

before the test, by the individual

observers. A time measurement of high accuracy is necessary for each measurement employing an integrating meter. Individual stop watches or electric time measuring devices shall be employed. Special care shall be given to the accurate synchronization ofthe readings of the integrating meter and the time measuring devices. 4.9
Speed measurement

Speed can be measured by means of a counting mechanism and clock, a stroboscope, a frequency measuring instrument (mechanical or electrical) or a speed measuring instrument. Signal transducers and signal transformers are also accepted. 5. 5.1 Evaluation of tests
Preparation of evaluation

From the instrument calculated.

readings taken during the test, the test results according

to 2.4 are

Prior to evaluating the measurements, a time interval which shall constitute the official test period shall be selected from the overall period during which readings for a test have been taken. This interval shall be equal to at least the period laid down in 3.8.3. During this period the provisions of 3.8.1 and 3.8.2 relating to the deviations of the operating conditions from the guarantee conditions and relating to the fluctuations in the operating conditions shall be satisfied.

IS 14198(Part2):1994 IECPub953-2:1990 Readings of all instruments, including integrating instruments, and corresponding time measurements shall be available for the start and the end of the selected test period (see 5.2.1). In the event of disturbances encountered during a test, all instrument readings made during the disturbed period may by mutual agreement be eliminated according to 4.4.7. Evidence shall be furnished that the same steady-state conditions had existed before and after the disturbance. The total length of the remaining test periods shall comply with 3.8.3. In the event of a temporary failure of a measuring instrument during the test, the missing readings may by agreement and where appropriate be deduced from other suitable instrument reaaings. 5.2
5.2.1 Computation of results

Calculation of average values of instrument readings

For further evaluation, the average value of the readings taken during defined according to 5.1 is calculated for each measuring instrument.

the test period

For variables which influence the evaluation in a linear manner, the average. value is the arithmetic mean value. The theoretically correct procedure for averaging the readings of a pressure difference across a flow-measuring device is to calculate the arithmetic mean value of the square roots of the readings. However, if the amplitude of readings is less than IO%, the maximum possible error introduced by not calculating the square root of the arithmetic mean of the readings is less than 0.1 O/o. If data from integrating instruments are compared with averaged readings of indicating instruments, it is important to ensure that they have been determined ~for the same time period. The first and last readings of the indicating instruments should then carry only half the weight in the averaging procedure. 5.2.2
Correction and conversion of averaged

readings resulting from the

The averaged readings are corrected to take care of all influences instrumentation and converted to the necessary units considering: a) instrument
b) calibration

constants and zero corrections: corrections; readings (e.g., barometric pressure, ambient temperature);

c) reference values of instrument
d) any additional

influences (e.g. water legs).

5.2.3
5.2.3.1

Checking of measured data Compatibility

After computation of the measured data, such as pressures, temperatures, flow rates, etc., a thorough examination shall be made for serious errors, inconsistencies with the laws of physics, and general compatibility. If major discrepancies are detected, the cause and extent of which are unknown, the test run shall be repeated completely or to the necessary extent. Appropriate additional measurements shall be made for clarification. Instrument readings which are obviously incorrect shall be eliminated. Subject to mutual agreement of the parties interested in the test, such readings may be replaced by other instrument readings or by appropriate calculated or estimated values.

56

IS 14198 (Part 2) : 1994 IEC Pub 953-2 : 1990
5.2.3.2 Evaluation of multiple measurements

Where results from several independent instruments are available for the same variable, an average value of these shall be calculated in a suitable manner, which considers the relative reliability of the individual measured values xj by applying weighting factors yj. The most probable value J figure for the average value of several results xj is the weighted mean

Each weighting clause 7)

factor

is calculated

from the confidence

limit

VX,of the result xj (see

1 "=G

(25)

In order to check the mutual compatibility of several measured values for the `same variable with consideration of their calculated or estimated measuring uncertainty and for the justification of the averaging as indicated above, the application of a statistical method can be helpful; this is described in detail in Appendix C. 5.2.3.3
Massflow balances

When several mass flow measurements are made in the main steam-water circuit during a test, several values can be calculated for a certain mass flow in the main circuit (e.g., the initial steam flow) by setting up mass flow balances. For the establishment of these balance equationq'it is further necessary to measure certain secondary mass flows as well as level changes in locations where water storage can occur. The setting up of mass flow balances and the computation in Appendix D. 5.2.3.4
Leakages

of the results is treated in detail

Leakages shall, as far as is practicable, be identified and eliminated before the test. If any identified leakages cannot be eliminated, their flow rctes shall be measured or estimated. These estimates shall be included in the main or secondary flow rate calculations. Unidentified leakages, which result in a loss of working fluid;%hall also have their flow rate(s) and positions(s) estimated and included, if considered necessary, in the main or secondary flow rate calculations. The total unaccounted leakage during the test expressed in percent of full load initial steam shall not exceed 0.4 times the relative measuring uncertainty of the test result expressed as a percentage, otherwise the test can be accepted only by mutual agreement of the parties to the test.
flow

5.2.4

Thermodynamicproperties

of steam and water

The steam and for the calculation shall be stated in national Skeleton

water tables and charts upon which the guarantees are based shall be used of the test results. The name and edition of the tables and charts employed the report of the tests. The tables used shall be consistent with the InterTables established at the Sixth International Conference on the Properties

57

IS 14198(Part2):1994 IECPub953-2:1990

c for Industrial

of Steam (ICPS) in 1963, and preferably be based on the 1967 IFC Formulation Use that was approved at the Seventh ICPS in 1968, or the latest edition. 5.2.5
Calculation of test restilts

The thermal and/or thermodynamic efficiency, the initial steam flow capacity and the output have to be calculated in accordance with the definition of the guarantee values (see 2.4). In accordance with 5.1 and 5.2, a definite value shall be established shall be used exclusively in further evaluation. For the determination
6.

for each variable which

of measuring

uncertainty,

see clause 7.

Correction of test results and comparison with guarantee
Guarantee values and guarantee conditions

6.1

The guarantee values with which the thermal acceptance test results shall be compared indicate the level of the turbine performance. Their definitions are given in 2.4. These values are dependent upon steam cycle terminal conditions, and upon the parameters of the feedwater heating system, so each of these shall be defined completely and clearly in the contract document to constitute the specified guarantee conditions. In many cases it i+srecommended that these data be given in the form of a heat-balance diagram. ,containing all necessary information. The test results are equally dependent on these same conditions and parameters, so any observed departure from the value upon which the guarantee is given becomes subject to a correction after the test (see 6.4). If extraction or addition of steam and/or water is already included in the guarantee is an additional specified guarantee condition. 6.2
Correction of initial steamflow capacity

cycle, it

For correction of the initial steam flow capacity equation is applied:

to guarantee

conditions,

the following

P1.g
IjfI,max,c = kl,max,m * ~

Pl,m ' V1.m
l

Pl,m F--PLg

VI.8

(26)

where: t$ max. ,,, - initial steam flow capacity measured during test with valves wide open

If the ratio of exhaust pressure to inlet pressure of the turbine is not suffkiently'small, use of the complete equation may be necessary:
2

the

?ill,max,c'

h,max,m

l

-

P1.g

P1.m

rJi,i
I_ pz,g

P1.m ' V,m Pl,g * Kg

b&&l
1,

l--

F&m

2

(27)

1.m

The exponents

2 of the pressure ratios are approximations

of the exact value -.

l+k k

IS 14198(Part 2):1994 IECPub 953-2:1990 4.3 Correction of maximum output In the correction of the maximum output Pmax to guarantee condition all the operating conditions influencing the initial steam flow, the enthalpy drop and its distribution in the different parts of the turbine and the efficiency values in the different parts of the turbine should be taken into account. Corrections for all these parameters (particularly live steam condition, reheat temperature and condenser pressure) can be made with appropriate correction curves. A completecorrection An appro.ximate -efficiency is: can be made by appropriate formula assuming recalculation of the thermal cycle. of enthalpy drop and

correction

similar distribution

Pmax,

J
c

pmax,m.

ml,max,c .

%aax,c
qmax, m

hl,

(28)

max, m

For the determination of Ijl~,~~~, c see 6.2. The efficiency to be used shall be according to the formulation of the guarantees, the thermal efficiency 7~or the thermodynamic efficiency ?Itd. 6.4
Correction

ofthermal and thermodynamic

efficiency

If any operating conditions according to 6.1 differ during the test from the guarantee conditions, the thermal or thermodynamic efliciency, or heat rate or steam rate, have to be corrected before they can be compared w~ith the guarantee values. In order to keep the correction small, the operating conditions during the test shall be as close as practicable to the specified guarantee conditions. The maximum permissible deviations for the most important operating parameters are stated in 3.8.2. The correction categories. for deviations fR@ specified guarantee conditions can be divided into three conditions of the

Category 1 comprises corrections for deviations of the terminal operating turbine itself from specified guarantee conditions, such as (see also 6.7):

4 initial steam pressure, b) initial steam temperature,
c) reheat steam temperature,

4 intitial steam quality,
e) reheater pressure drop,

"0

turbine-exhaust

pressure or condenser effectiveness,

cooling water temperature

and flow,

gl moisture-separator h) speed.

if not supplied with the turbine, system. This

Category 2 comprises variables which primarily affect the feed-heating category includes corrections, such as the following (see also 6.7):
a) feed-heater

terminal differences, pressure drops, changes and make-up flow, and feed-pumps, in condenser,

b) extraction-line d) enthalpy

c) system water-storage

rise through condensate undercooling

e) condensate

.fl spray-attemperator

flows for boiler,

59

IS 14198 (Part 2) : 1994 IEC Pub 953-2 : 1990

g) different configuration

of feed-heating

system (for example, heater out of service).

Category 3 corrections concern the generator operating conditions. They are independent of the remainder of the plant and simple to determine. If, however, the heat equivalent of the generator losses is transferred into the feed-water, they are of greater consequence and most conveniently treated in Category 2: a) generat0.r power factor, b) voltage, c) hydrogen pressure. 6.5
Definition and application of correction values

For correction purposes, it is normally assumed that the influences of the various operating ~parameters on the test result are mutually independent of each other. Therefore the correction values are determined individually according to the deviations of the individual operating parameters and are then combined to form a total correction. Correction values are factors defined as follows:

(29)
where: qC = corrected efficiency based on specified guaranteed conditions q,, = measured efficiency

The individual factor fi,,. The corrected

correction

factors Fl, F2, F3.. . are then combined
FtOt = F, . F2 . F3.. .

to give a total correction

efficiency

value is then: nc = qrn ' Ftot
(30)

For all parameters, where the correction determined for each guarantee load point.

is load dependent,

correction

factors have to be

The correction of the test result to specified guarantee conditions can also be effected by a complete recalculation of the turbine and its thermal cycle usually by means of a computer, program with due consideration of'the characteristics of the turbine and plant components and the operating conditions during the test. This method yields a complete correction directly, without the use of individual correction factors and also takes into account to a large extent the interdependence of the different variables. It may also be convenient to make only the corrections of category 2 by recalculation, since correction curves for these variables may not be readily available. The category 1 corrections are then made by means of correction curves. 6.6
Correction methods

The determination of the correction method and of the necessary values and curves depends on the method to be applied for the guarantee comparison (see 6.8).
a) If the guarantee

comparison is made for constant initialsteam flow, for each variable its influence on the thermal or thermodynamic efficiency has to be considered for the correction.

60

IS 14195 (Part 2) : 1994 IEC Pub 953-2 : 1990

b) If the guarantee comparison is made for constant valve position of the turbine, influence on both efficiency and output of each variable has to be determined. The ~correction parties interested preparatory work within an agreed contrary has been

the

and comparison procedure to be applied should be agreed upon by the in the test sufficiently early before the test to allow the necessary to be completed. The manufacturer's correction curves should be supplied period, usually three months before the .test, unless agreement to the made in the contract.

The correction method described in 6.6.1 is recommended, in particular, for turbines with complicated cycles (turbines with steam extraction or bleeding for other purposes, with secondary steam, etc.,~or with complex feed-water heating cycles) and for turbines with many cycle corrections. If suitable means of calculation are applied, this method gives corrections which are more exact, complete and useful than corrections according to the method described in 6,6.2. Other suitable correction methods may also be applied by agreement.

6.6.1

Correction by heat balance calculation The correction may be made by calculating a heat balance to correct the test cycle and the test operating conditions to the guarantee cycle and guarantee operating conditions. That is, the turbine test efficiencies may be corrected according to the specified conditions (for the influence of operating conditions, if necessary). These corrected test efficiencies may be used to calculate a "corrected test" cycle which can be compared with the guarantee cycle. Alternatively, the correction may be made by calculating a heat balance to correct the guarantee cycle and the guarantee operating conditions to the test cycle and test operating conditions. The turbine guarantee efficiency may be corrected according to the test conditions (for the influence of operating conditions, if necessary). This corrected test efficiency may be used to calcu1ate.a "corrected guarantee" cycle which can be compared with the test cycle. For turbines using superheated steam, the first method is usually applied, whereas for turbines using wet steam the second method may be easier to perform correctly. For the correction by recalculation of a complete heat balance under test conditions, a calcuiating method (program) is necessary. This correctly takes into account the influence of the test conditions on the performance of the turbine and the plant components. If the program which had been used for the calculation cannot be used, the following method can be applied: of the contract guarantee cycle

First a thermal efficiency value at guarantee conditions 7's is determined with the available program, which may deviate slightly from the guaranteed efficiency ns because of minor differences between the programs and data used for the determination of the guarantee values m under test conditions is calculated and for the recalculation. Then a thermal efficiency 17' with the same program and the same performance characteristics of turbine and plant components. The measured thermal efficiency corrected for test conditions nC is then:

(31)

61

IS 14198 (Part 2) : 1994
EC Pub 953-2 : 1990

The correction by calculation may be limited to the variables of Category 2. The corrections for variables of Categories 1 and 3 are made by use of correction curves. If the recalculation of the cycle for Category 2 corrections results in changes in the values of any parameters in categories 1 or 3, then these changed values shall be used when applying corrections for them from correction curves. Both principles described in 6.6 may be applied for correction by heat balance calculation. The method of guarantee comparison is to be chosen accordingly (see 6.8). All necessary data and calculation methods shall be made available to the parties to the test sufficiently early before the acceptance test. 6.6.2
Correction by use of correction curvesprepared by the manufacturer

For case 6.6.a) the correction curves give values of the correction factor F,, for the efficiency as a function of the different variables. For case 6.66) curves for the correction factors Fc,, for the efficiency - different from those for case 6.6a) - and for the correction factors FF, for the output as a function of the different variables are necessary. If a correction factor depends also on initial steam flow (case 6.6a)), or output (case 6&b)), several correction curves for different loads, preferably for the guarantee loads, are necessary. z It shall be clearly indkated on the correction curves the method.described they have been prepared and have to be applied. in 6.6 for which

-F*

rl

.

I

498/W

FIG. Sa. -

Correction according to 6.60).

FIG. 8b. -

Correction according to 6.6b).

FIG. 8. -

Typical correction

curves.

IS 14198 (Part 2) : 1994 IEC Pub 953-2 * . 1990 6.6.3 Tests to determine correction values
It is possible that the calculation of the correction factors referred to in 6.6.2 may not achieve a satisfactory standard of accuracy. In this event, and especially in relation to the exhaust pressure, it is recommended that special tests be carried out to determine the correction factors.

All tests of the same series in which one quantity is varied in a controlled way (e.g., the exhaust pressure by admitting air to the condenser) shall be run on the same day, by the same personnel and with the same apparatus. A sufficient interval of time shall be allowed between tests of the same series for stable conditions to be established. 6.6.4 Correction by use of generalized correction curves The typical generalized correction curves in Appendix E may be used by agreement for the correction of thermal efficiency test results of a wide range of condensing turbines for the more important variables with sufficient accuracy, if no other means are available. They can be used for the procedure according to 6.6a) only. 6.7 Variables to be considered in the correction Corrections of the test results may be made only for deviations from the guarantee conditions at the inlets to and/or outlets from the system, used as a basis for the definition of the guarantee, or for deviations inside this system, which are beyond the responsibility of the $ turbine supplier. In an individual case "system" can mean: a) turbine only; b) turbine and feed-water cycle with or without pumps: c) turbine, feed-water d) turbine,~feed-water 6.7. I cycle, condenser; cycle, condenser and/or driven machine.

Turbines with regenerative feed-water heating When applying corrections to the results of thermal efficiency or heat rate tests on turbines w~ith regenerative feed-water heating, deviations of the following from the guarantee conditions have to be considered: Category 1:

4 initial steam pressure,`) b) initial steam temperature,
c,Jreheat steam temperature,

4 pressure drop in the reheater, 4 exhaust pressure or condenser cooling water inlet temperature

and flow rate,

n

final feed-water Additional

temperature,

if required,*)

gl speed.
variables for turbines using wet steam: h) initial steam quality,

I) Deviations of~initial steam pressure from the specified value, resulting from a deviation of the steam flow capacity of variable pressure turbines Erom the specified value within the limits stipulated in the contract, shall be considered in the correction. 2, Deviations of final-feed-water temperature from the specified value, resulting from a deviation of the top heater terminal difference or steam extraction pipe pressure drop from the specitied value within the limits stipulated in the contract, shall be considered in the correction.

63

IS 14198 (Part 2) : 1994 IEC Pub 953-2 : 1990 i) steam quality at the outlet of the moisture separator,`) jj terminal difference 2: of condensate into feed-heating system (undercooling of condensate influence of hydrogen cooler, oil cooler and ejector-steam condenser), in the superheater system, in of reheater,`) k) pressure drop in moisture separator and reheater. l) Category

4 inlet temperature
condenser,

b) water flow for spray attemperation
collected at the outlet of feed-heating

and the reheater unless this water is

4 terminal difference of feed-heaters, condensate coolers and desuperheaters,2) 4 pressure drop in extraction lines,2)
d enthalpy rise of feed-water in the feed-pump,

.il modifications
of heaters),

of the configuration

of the feed-heating

system (e.g. total or partial by-pass

make-up water, level in feed-water reservoirs, steam-ejector steam flow, of boiler feed-pump (see also 6.-4), turbine, * steam supply and steam inlet conditions

W 1) 4 4

any other heat additions or extractions initial steam flow,3)

pressure drop in regulating valve(s) in throttling position*), any further deviations from guarantee conditions. 3: power factor,

Category

a) generator b) voltage,

c) generator cooling gas pressure andpurity. 6.7.2
Turbines which have no provision for the addition or extraction of steam after partial expansion

When applying corrections to the results of thermal efficiency or steam rate tests on turbines which have no provisio'n for the addition or extraction of steam after partial expansion, deviations of the following variables from the guarantee conditions have to be considered: Category 1: a) initial steam pressure, b) initial steam temperature,

I) Only if this equipment does not form part of the scope of the contract. 2, Deviations of final feed-water temperature from the specified value, resulting from a deviation of the top heater terminal difference or steam extraction pipe pressure drop from the specified value within the limits stipulated in the contract, shall be considered in the correction. 3, Deviations of initial steam pressure from the specified value, resulting from a deviation of the steam flow capacity of variable pressure turbines from the specified value within the limits stipulated in the contract, shall be considered in the correction.

64

IS 14198 (Part 2) : 1994 IEC Pub 953-2 : 1990

exhaust pressure or condenser cooling water inlet temperature C/J

and flow rate,

4 speed.
Category 2: a) initial steam flow,`) b) pressure drop in regulating valve(s) in throttling position.*) Category 3: a) generator power factor, b) voltage, c) generator cooling gas pressure and purity. ~6.7.3 Turbines with steam extraction

forpurposes

other than feed-water

heating (extraction turbines)

When applying corrections to the results of thermal efficiency or steam rate tests, deviations of the ~following variables from the guarantee conditions have to be considered in addition to those indicated in 6.7.2. Extraction pressure. regulating valve(s) in throttling position.4)

~Extraction flowe3) Pressure drop in the extraction Any other deviations

from guarantee conditions. to the turbine, relevant corrections in accordance with

If a feed-heating system is connected 6.81 shall also be made. 6.7.4 Other types of turbine

This category includes all types of single or multiple extraction turbines, and turbines with secondary initial steam, etc., not classified in the previous sub-clauses Because of the great number of possible variables for correction, an exhaustive list cannot be given. Many of the important variables, however, are listed in 6.8.1 to 6.83. F'urther relevant variables may have to be determined for each case.

r) A correction for differing initial steam flow is necessary only if correction and guarantee comparison are made to a guarantee point, not to a locus curve (see 6X.1). z, The guarantee values are specified normally for valve points (see 3.6.1) and tests are conducted at valve points also with due consideration for the limits of deviations from guarantee conditions specified in Table 1. A correction is not then necessary. If a throttle point is guaranteed (e.g. full arc admission turbine with throttleqegulation at part load) the test shall be made with the throttling pressure drop specified in the guarantee conditions, or a correction has to be made& 3, Deviations of initial steam pressure from the specified value, resulting from a deviation of the steam flow cat, icity of variable pressure turbines from the specified value within the limits stipulated in the contract, shall be considered in the correction. 4, A correction for differing extraction steam flow is necessary only if correction and guarantee comparison to a guarantee point, not to a locus curve (see 6.8). are made

65

IS 14198(Pat-t2) : 1994
IEC Pub 953-2: 1990 6.8 Guarantee

comparison

The comparison of corrected test results with the guarantee values specified in the contract shall be made in conformity with the correction method chosen (see 6.6). Taking into account the measuring uncertainty fulfilled if: of the test result, the guarantee is considered

unless otherwise stated in the contract When n guarantee

(see also 7.5). is considered fulfilled if:

points are given, the guarantee

~P(77ci+Z~i'T]mi_77gi)>O

(33)

unless otherwise stated in the contract. If the different guarantee points are weighted in the contract, the weighting factors shall be applied correspondingly in the guarantee comparison. 6.8.1
Guarantee comparison with locus curve $

If several guarantee points with identical definition (normally locus curve of the guarantee values can be established.

"valve points") are given, a

If the test results have been corrected according to 6.6a), the locus curve shall be established as a function of initial steam flow til.and the corrected test result qCcompared with the value rig of the guarantee curve at the measured initial steam flow tii,, (see Figure 9a). If the test results have been corrected according to 6.6b), the locus curve shall be established as a function of output P and the corrected test result nC compared with the value 77g of the guarantee curve at the guaranteed output Pg (see Figure 9b).

66

1994

I I I

L

i

I I
L

4

3

Pm P,

2 P-

1

500/90

FIG. 9a. - Locus curve of initial steam flow.

FIG. 9b. - Locus curve as function of output.

A 0 c) 0

Guaranteed points Measured points Corrected points Guaranteed point on locus curve

FIG. 9. - Guarantee

comparison

on locus curve.

6.8.2

Guarantee

comparison

with guarantee

point

For comparison with a single guarantee value, a test result corrected according to 6.6a) has to be corrected further for the influence of the difference between measured initial steam flow and guaranteed steam flow. If the test result has been corrected according to 6.66), only the difference between the corrected output and the guarantee output shall be considered for the further correction. 6.8.3
Guarantee comparison for turbines with throttle governing

If guarantees at partial loads are given for turbines with throttle governing, the amount of throttling in the control valves shall al& be stated. The test result then has to be corrected also for the difference in throttling between guarantee condition and test conditions in a way which is in accordance with the method chosen in 6.6. Then the guarantee comparison can be made according to 6.8.1 or 6.8.2. Alternatively, the corrected test value can be compared with the value of the guarantee locus curve at the same percentage value of initial *team flow capacity or of corrected maximum output with valves wide open. The necessary value of the initial steam flow capacity or maximum output of the tested turbine can most conveniently be determined by a test with valves wide open. 6.8.4
Guarantee comparison for extraction turbines

_'

If an extraction diagram is guaranteed or can be established from the guarantee values for an extraction turbine, the method according to 6.6.a) can be applied. The extraction line for

67

IS 1419x (I'art 2) : 1994 IEc Pub 953-2 : 1990

the measured extraction locus curve. Correction extraction steam flow. 6.9
Deterioration

steam flow is determined by interpolation and used as the guarantee and guarantee comparison are then made with constant initial and

of turbine performance

(ageing)

The test shall be conducted as soon as practicable after initial start up (see 3.3.1) or after an inspection provided any deficiency in the unit affecting performance has been corrected. If these conditions cannot be met and comparison measurements for determination of the condition of the steam turbine according to 3.5 have not been made, the actual overall deterioration cannot be determined. If there is reasonable assurance that the unit is free of partial damage and deposits, an average value of the deterioration by ageing (see 3.4.2) may be agreed by the parties EOthe test and taken into account in the comparison of the test results with guarantee. If no special agreement exists, the following rule, which represents average deterioration for fossil fuel fired units, is given for guidance on the action to be taken: Allowance
I Turbine rating

for average deterioration

by ageing:
I Time between first synchronization 12 to 24 months and test:'

I

P

t
< ISOMW >150MW

2 to 12 months

0.06

"/c per month

% per month

`1 Pin MW. ?J Periods during

which

the turbine

casings are open

will not be considered.

7. 7.1

Measuring uncertainty
General

The measurement of each quantity entering into the computation of the test result is liable to some degree of error which depends on the quality of the measuring instruments and the conditions of the measurement. The test result is subject to a degree of uncertainty depending . on the combined effect of all the'errors of measurement. A short statistical definition of measuring uncertainty and a justification for the application of statistical methods under the special circumstances of thermal acceptance tests are given in Appendix F. According to Appendix F, the measuring uncertainty of a variable is established as a confidence limit of the total measuring error for a statistical probability of P = 95%. These confidence limits for individual measurements cannot be determined from the readings of an acceptance test. Confidence limits can be determined as follows: and standards; manufacturer (e.g.

a) from the measuring recommendations

b) from the accuracy classes (error limit) indicated by the instrument
Bourdon gauges, wattmeters);

68

IS 14198(Part 2) : 1994 1% Pub 953-2: 1990

C) from the calibration
in the calibration

accuracy certificate;

of a measuring

instrument error;

(e.g. signal transducer)

as stated

4 from the influence of an unavoidable
4 from general measuring
manometer). experience

installation

(e.g. differential

pressure

measurement

by U-tube

Measurements with calibrated instruments, where the average of the readings is corrected for instrument deviations as determined by the calibration, may still be influenced by errors due to different conditions during the measurement and calibration. These errors are also related to the accuracy class of each instrument. Allowance - if necessary - should be made for these errors by taking into account a part between 0 and 100% of the accuracy class for the determination of the total uncertainty according to the general error propagation laws. In the case of multiple measurement (see 5.2.3.2), the measuring uncertainty Vf of the weighted'average value 2 of several independent measurements xj of the same variable x will be approximately:

The methods for the determination given in the following sub-clauses. Data on measuring Table II. 7.2
7.2.1 Determination Pressure

of uncertainties according

for individual

variables an+d results are are provided in clause 4,

uncertainties

to general experience

of measuring

uncertainty of steam and water properties

In pressure measurement with deadweight gauges, Bourdon tube type gauges and transducers, the measuring uncertainty is determined by the accuracy class of the instruments and the error limits of the calibration. In pressure measurements with liquid manometers the measuring uncertainty depends, inter alia, on the fluctuations of the column, the shape of the meniscus and the quality of the means for reading the liquid level.

Measuring accuracy is also influenced the ambient temperature and vibrations. 7.2.2
Temperature

by the design and location of the pressure tapping,

In temperature measurements with liquid-in-glass thermometers, the error limit of calibration shall be deemed to be the measuring uncertainty of the sensing element. In temperature measurements with thermocouples or resistance thermometers, the measuring uncertainty is established from the error limit of the emf. curve or the err& limits of the measuring resistance (both of which can be limited by calibration) and from the accuracy classes of the measuring instruments (potentiometer; digital voltmeter, etc.). ~. The measuring uncertainty of temperature measurements is liable to be considerably increased by inappropriate installation of sensing elements, uncertainty of the temperature correction of the column of a liquid-in-glass thermometer, inaccurate cold junction temperature, differing terminal temperature, errors due to non-uniform temperature distribution or to flow disturbances.

69

IS 14198(Part 2) : 1994 IEC Pub 953-2: 1990 7.2.3

Enthalpy and enthalpy difference The enthalpy is usually determined from the instrument readings for pressure and. temperature. The uncertainties of these quantities, are therefore included in the uncertainty of the enthalpy. Further allowance shall be made for the tolerance & of steam table values for the enthalpy. The uncertainty of an enthalpy value is: a) Superheated steam (35) b) Wet steam

v, = k

(l-x)$-+2$ 2.VP,.,+ (h" sat sat 1

h') . vx + R'h, + R* h"

(36)

psat can be replaced by tsat. In establishing the uncertainty of enthalpy differences, the steam table tolerance always be applied in full. Three cases shall be distinguished: enthalpy values hi and hj
VA,, = + y ph, +

cannot

4 Isobaric heat addition with change of phase, for example in a steam generator between the

"h
(35).

(37)

where vh, and vh, are calculated values hi and hj

according

to equation

b) Isobaric heat addition without change of phase (e.g. in reheating) between the enthalpy

(38)

where Rh, and &, represent the steam table tolerance of hi and hj. The uncertainty values vh, and vh, are established tolerance, i.e. using Rh = 0 in equation (35). in this case without the steam table

C) Isentropic expansion in a steam turbine (enthalpy drop)

`Ah= f \r ph,+ Vh,+ (hi

- hj)' A2 (s)

(39)

The uncertainty values vhi and vh, shall be established as in case b) with Rh - 0 from equation (35). To determine l/h, use K, = 0. The factor Ats) is given as a function of the entropy s in Figure 10.

70

IS 14198 (Part 2)_: 1994 IEC-Pub 953-2 : 1990

0

6

6.5

7

7.5

6

Entropy (s) kJ/kgK -

FIG. 10. -

Correction

factor for steam table-tolerance.

7.3 7.3.1

Calculation of measuring Electrical measurement

uncertainty of output

According to the law of error propagation, the uncertainty of the measurement of the electrical power is in -general calculated as the geometric summation. of the individual measurement uncertainties of the transformers, the wattmeters, the series resistors, etc. When curves or tables of the detectable systematic errors are available (frpm calibration of any part of the measuring equipment), these shall be used to correct the electrical power that has been measured (see 4.2.6, 4.2.7). The individual uncertainty limits as indicated in the certificates of the calibrations shall be decisive in establishing the measurement uncertainty of the electrical power (see also 7.1). Where no details of detectable systematic errors are available, the calculation of the uncertainty of the total power shall be based on the accuracies class of the individual items of the measuring equipment. In such cases, it is important to note the dependency formers on the values of current and voltage. The accuracy class of a wattmeter of the accuracy class of the trans-

shall be related to the actbal scale value of the reading.

Practical experience has shown that the transforming ratio errors, as well as the phase-angle errors of equal transformers in parallel phases, are not fully independent. This also applies to the calibration of transformers. Therefore, in polyphase measurements (two-wattmeter or three-wattmeter method) the summation of errors is partially arithmetical. In Appendix G, the separation of geometric and arithmetical errors and their summation is given in detail. It includes a number ?f formulae to calculate the measurement uncertainty of electrical power for two- and three-phase measurements, with wattmeters and watthourmeters, respectively.
7.3.2 Mechanical measurement

According to the law of error propagation, the measuring uncertainty is determined from the nieasuring uncertainties for speed and torque. The measuring uncertainty of the torque shall be established on the basis of the measuring procedure and the error limits of calibration.

71

i

IS 14198 (Part 2) : 1994 IECI'ub 953-2 : 1990

7.3.3

Additional uncertainty allowance because of unsteady load conditions

If, during the test `period, the output fluctuations above and below the mean value exceed +5% (see 3.8), rejection of the test may.be avoided by agreeing on an additional uncertainty allowance to compensate for the additional measurement errors. It depends on the magnitude of the fluctuations and can therefore be determined as follows: the absolute values of the deviations are averaged. of the individual output readings from the mean value

2 (mean absolute deviation)
TAP=

- 1
CO~o)

6

(40)

rL\p is to be added arithmetically to the total uncertainty of the output measurement. allowance rAp is applicable only if the mean absolute deviation is greater than 0.5%. 7.4
7.4.1 Determination Measuring of measuring uncertainty of massflow uncertainty of massflow measurements

The

The measuring uncertainty depends on the fluctuations of the readipg, the shape of the meniscus and the quality of the cursor or other device which assists reading of the mercury level. Non-detectable systematic errors can occur if the column cannot be observed directly (due to dirt in the sealing liquid, clinging of droplets or the influence of extraneous fields on a magnetic instrument). Due to changes in liquid levels in storage volumes during tests, the reading of differential pressure measuring instruments may be subject to slow but considerable fluctuations. Such slow fluctuations shall not be taken into account in establishing the uncertainty of a differential pressure measurement. The uncertainty of mass flow measurement is then determined for sharp-edged orifice plates or wall tap nozzles according to IS0 5 167. If the differential pressure device. has been calibrated, the uncertainty of the expansion coefficient may be estimated from the calibration conditions. 7.4.2
Measuring uncertainty of multiple measurements ofprimaryjlow

If primary flow has been determined by multiple measurements or by application of mass flow balances (see 5.2.3.3), their,mutual compatibility has to be checked (see 5.2.3.1). In the case of incompatibility, all pressure difference devices which can be inspected (see 4.3.2.3) shall be checked for condition and size. A weighted average value is calculated from the measured values of all pressure difference devices which have been found in good order, and the measured values of all pressure difference devices without possibility of inspection are checked for compatibility with this average value (see 5.2.3.~1). An incompatible value should either be eliminated from further evaluation or its uncertainty value increased until compatibility is achieved. The decision has to be made with due consideration to the possibilities of imperfect cycle conditions and/or imperfections of the differential pressure device.
I

The possibility of errors at several uninspected differential pressure devices due to the same basic reason (unsharpness of edges or orifices due to wear, damage due to blowing out of pipeline, or chemical cleaning, etc.) should be duly considered in the evaluation.

72

IS 14198 (Part 2) : 1994 IEC Pub 953-2 : 1990

If measured values of inspected differential pressure devices which have been found in good condition are not compatible and their uncertainty values have been determined correctly, an evaluation as multiple measurement according to 5.2.3.2 is not possible. The reasons for incompatibility are to be investigated further. The value of the primary flow is calculated from the remaining compatible according to 5.2.3.2. Its uncertainty value is determined according to 7.1. 7.4.3
Uncertainty allowance for cycle imperfections

measured values

To allow for imperfect conditions of the water-steam-cycle (unknown secondary flows, imperfect isolation, etc.), an additional uncertainty allowance equal to 50% of the part of the total unaccounted-for leakages, which enters into the further evaluation of the initial steam flow (see 5.2.3.4), is added arithmetically to the measuring uncertainty of the primary flow or the average uncertainty of the average primary flow (see 7.4.2).

7.5 7.5.1

Calculation of measuring General

uncertainty of results

The measuring uncertainty of the results is calculated by application of the law of error propagation from the uncertainties of the measured values according to Appendix F with due consideration of eventual interdependences of the variables and their uncertainties.

7.5.2

Measuring

uncertainty of thermal efficiency

For a non-reheat

condensing

turbine plant, the thermal efficiency is:

nt is defined in 2.4.

Its relative measuring

uncertainty

For a single-reheat

condensing

turbine plant, the thermal efficiency

is defined in 2.4.

Normally, the reheater mass flow riz3is not measured independently, but calculated with the aid of secondary mass flows from the corrected initial steam mass flow. In the present case this relationship shall be introduced in the equation for the thermal efficiency before the ' measuring uncertainty is calculated. In the example equation: given in appendix D, the reheater mass flow is established from the

ti3

=

ii,

-

,i,As
tilj

-

,$,I

-

$9

-

0.5

tiV3

(42)

= & - t

which, inserted in equation

(2), gives the thermal efficiency:
P vt= : ml(Ahl,l +Ahz,;)-Ah2,3~~j

(43)

73

IS 14198 (Part 2) : 1994 IEC Pub 953-2 : 1990

If, according to 5.2.3.3. the remaining dependences are ignored to simplify the evaluation, the relative measuring uncertainty of the thermal efficiency is:

with:

QtOt.being the to_tal heat flow and rizj being the secondary (42). 7.5.3
Measuring uncertainty of thermodynamic efficiency

mass flow according

to equation

The thermodynamic the relative measuring

efficiency ntd of a turbine is defined in 2.4. For the most simple case, * uncertainty is:

7.5.4

Uncertainty of corrections

For the determination of the measuring uncertainty of results which have to be corrected, the correction curves of the manufacturer shall be recognized as correct in the tolerable range of correction. If a correction is necessary beyond the acceptable range specified in 3.8.2 and 6.4, an additional allowance (e.g. one-third of the additional correction value which results from the excess of the variable beyond the acceptable correction range) may be agreed by the parties to avoid rejection of the test, or the correction value may be recalculated for the specific cycle. The uncertainty of the correction variables (pressure, temperature, etc.) causes an uncertainty of the correction which in many cases is small enough to be neglected for the determination of the uncertainty of the result. 7.5.5
Guiding values for the measuring uncertainty of results

Establishing the measuring uncertainty of results for large and complicated installations generally calls for a considerable amount of calculating work which, i.n most cases, can only be carried out on the basis of simplified assumptions. It is permissible to omit detailed calculation of the uncertainty value of the test result, if the parties to the test so agree and if it is clear from the results that the contract requirements have been fulfilled. This latter condition is satisfied if the test result, after allowing for a reliable estimate of the uncertainty value, still meets the guarantee. Guiding values for the uncertainty of test results are given in Table III. of the magnitude with the require-

These guiding values, according to general experience, are an indication of measuring uncertainties for correct acceptance tests made in accordance ments of Table III.

74

TABLE III

Guiding values for the uncertainty of test results
Reference
line A Relative measuring uncertainty for the result* I, 2, 3, 5 15, I6 12, 13 Ah, >400 kJ/kg f 1.5-2.0

Type of turbine

Result

For variables
P, - 11 - P4

Instrumentation

Back pressure turbine

`?td

% fil B Back pressure extraction turbine
`#`cd

As references As references As references

Table 11

As reference A in this table. Howewer, P, as reference 2, 3 in Table II and ti2 as reference 12, in Table II As reference A in this table. However, rir~ from I& tWiand r,,., as references 10 and I1 in Table II As references B and C in this table

Ah, >400 kJ/kg f I .7-2.5 f 1.0-1.7

C

Condensing

turbine

%d

D

Condensing

extraction

turbine

%d

+_1.3-2.0

E

Condensing

turbine with reheating

rlt

9, 5, fi 11, b, 111, t5 r,,, two etc. % ml, h3

As references I, 2, 3 and 5, 6 As references 9, IO and I I in Table II As references 10, I I As references 15, I6 1 Calculated from measurements with checked pressure difference devices (preferably in water part of the circuit) as reference I2 in Table II

f0.9-1.2

F

Condensing turbine with saturated steam as initial steam

%

PI

hi %

As references I, 2, 3 in Table II Enthalpy according to special method As references 15, I6 in Table II All other measuring values as reference E in this table

f 1.1-1.6

* These values can be reduced mainly by increasing

the accuracy of the determination

of the primary

flow.

IS 14198 (I'm-t 2) : 1994
EC Pub 953-2 : 1990

APPENDIX
FEEDWATER HEATER LEAKAGE

A
LEAKAGE TESTS

AND CONDENSER

(see 3.4.5) Al. Feedwater heater leakage tests Heaters or boiler indicated operating realized, measured the heater may be checked for leaks, with the turbine out of service, by using the condensate feed pumps to maintain pressure on the water side of the heaters. Leakage is, by the accumulation of water in the hot well or shell of the heater and, if normal water pressure is maintained, the rate of leakage may be estimated. It should be however, that the rate of leakage may vary with the heater temperature. The rate of leakage should be regarded only as an indication of the relative tightness of and should not be used as the basis for correction of the primary flow measurement.

In some installations, it may be possible to check for heater leakage with the turbine in service if a tight shut-off of bled steam can be obtained and if there is no cascading of heater drains into the heater being checked. If leakage is suspected, a useful method to check for heaterleakage in tctual service, is to inject a small quantity of a water treatment chemical into the condensate line before the feed heater. A check of the ccnductivity of the heater drain condensate from any suspected heater will show, in the case of a leak, a sudden rise in conductivity as the-chemical passes through. A2. Condenser leakage tests Prior to and directly after the turbine tests, a hydraulic test should be made on the condenser by filling the steam space with water up to at least 20cm above the top row of tubes and noting the leakage of water, if any, into the water boxes at inlet and outlet. An alternative method of condenser test before and after the turbine tests is to place the condenser and turbine into full vacuum by closing off all access of air and steam, and delivering normal water supply to the condenser tubes with the cooling water pumps. Weighed leakage into the hot well is a measure of condenser leakage. The tightness of the condenser, immediately before and during turbine tests, should be checked by an electrical conductivity test of a sample of condensate from the condenser's hot well and a sample of the cooling water after it has been diluted by a known amount of distilled water. Alternatively, method. the leakage can be checked by a chemical method
OT

by a fluorescence

76

IS 14198 (Part 2) : 1994 IEC Pub 953-2 . * 1990

APPENDIX

B

THROAT TAP NOZZLE (see 4.3.2.1) El. Design and manufacture Because of regarding the Figure Bl is satisfies these the high degree of accuracy necessary, the following requirements are given design and manufacture of throat-tap nozzles for primaryflow measurement. an example of a long-radius, low-ratio, nozzle shape with throat taps that requirements.

4 The entrance shall be designed to give a favourable pressure gradient so that the boundary
layer will be very thin in the throat section and there will be no flow separation. Also, the entrance shall be designed to give a uniform flow approaching the throat section. The cylindrical section of the nozzle shall have parallel walls and be concentric with the pipe (see B2b)). Any divergence may cause a peculiarly shaped coefficient of discharge versus the Reynolds number curve. However, slight convergence is acceptable, but no more than one thousandth of a mm per mm of throat length. The area in the plane of the throat taps shall be used in the coefficient calculation. Referring to Figure B 1, the throat of the nozzle shall be round within the limits of f 0.0002d as determined by measurements on at least four diameters in the plane of the throat taps. The nozzle shall be made from a corrosionresistant material with known thermal-expansion coefficient and its surface should have a 10m4mm finish or better, and shall be free. from all burrs, scratches, imperfections, or ripples.

b) The

4

pressure taps shall be at least two pressure-tap diameters deep. They shall be machined perpendicular to the bore surface, shall have sharp corners, and be free from burrs. The downstream pressure taps shall be machined in the throat of the nozzle in order to decrease the effect of downstream disturbances onthis pressure measurement. The upstream taps shall be carefully made and shall be located one pipe diameter upstream from the nozzle entrance. The final determination of the compliance with the above requirements is the shape of the coefficient of discharge versus the Reynolds number curve (see Figure B2) which should be determined for each set-of taps to be used. The nozzle shall be used only in the range where, the co-efficient of discharge is nearly constant.

d) In order to obtain maximum reading accuracy, the nozzle-throat diameter shall be selected to give the maximum deflection practicable, considering both the available pumping head and the manometer range. The manometer range should be selected to allow for fluctuations and for maximum flow which may be encountered. The nozzle shall not be used to measure flows which give manometer defl`ections of less than 1000 times the reading error or 15Omm of mercury, whichever is larger. When it is necessary to measure flow over a larger range'than can be obtained by complying with this requirement, it is permissible to use additionalnozzles with different throat diameters. These nozzles shall be sized so that one of the test points canbe measured with either nozzle.

77

IS 14198 (Pat-t 2) : 1994 EC l'\lb 953-t : 1990

Notes: 1. - Pressure tap holes to have square and sharp corners and to be' free of burrs. The pressure tap holes are to be drilled and reamed before the final boring and polishing of the throat. A plug with a press fit is then inserted in the hole. The final boring and polishing operation should be done after the insertion of the plug. The plug should be made with provision for pulling it out of the hole after the polishing and machining is completed. After removal of this plug, any slight burr which might be left on the edge of the hole may be removed by taking a tapered piece of maple and rolling it around the pressure tap.
to size 6.35 mm max., 3.175 True ellipse (tolerance f0.025 mm min. mm) 501/w

2. -

The throat of the nozzle may converge as much as 0.001 mm per mm. No divergence is acceptable. Material to be corrosion resistant.

3. -

6 = pressure tap diameter

FIG. Bl. -

Throat-tap

flow nozzle.

L

Throat Reynolds No. x IO-" 0. I 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.8

c

' fi s 0.43
O.YX34 0.9909 0.9939 0.9Y53 O.Y961 O.YYb6 0.95170 O.Y971 0.9970 O.Y970 0.9Y72 0.9974 0.9978 0.9980 0.9983 O.YY91 0.9994 0.9998

---

I Al
2.0. 3.0 4.0 5.0 6.0 8.0

5

s

I

0.36 T
-to5

2

3

4 56

6 IO=

2

3

456

6107
Throat Reynolds

2

3

-

4

IO.0
20.0 30.0 40.0

number Rd
502/90

FIG. B2. -

Typical nozzle calibration curve for p = 0.43. For other values of p within the range 0.25-0.50: c = C@_ 0.43) + 0.011 339 p - 0.0049.

B2.

Flow section a) The flow nozzle shall be installed in a flow section as shown in Figure B3. This flow section shall contain a flow straightener which divides the pipe cross section int,o at least 50 approximately equal spaces or a perforated multiplate flow straightener having approximately 200 holes per plate and there should be 20 diameters of straight run pipe upstream of the flow nozzle to ensure a sufficiently uniform velocity profile in the approaching stream. The requirement of at least 10 pipe diameters of straight pipe on the discharge side of the flow nozzle, of the same nominal size as the upstream pipe, ensures a reliable throat-pressure measurement.

78

IS 14198(Part 2) : 1994 IEC Pub 953-2: 1990

b) The flow nozzle shall be centred in the pipe,within 0.8mm of the pipe axis. The pipe on
either side of the flow nozzle shall be smooth, free from rust, scale and blisters, and the inside diameter measured at four points at any~crass section shall not differ by more than 1O/O, The upstream pipe section shahbe bored as shown in Figure B4 or for the entire length of the inlet section. c) The pipe joints at the flow nozzle shall have the inner' bores square with the faces of the flanges. The compressed thickness of the gaskets shall not exceed 1.6mm and the gaskets shall not extend within the pipe. 4 In order to reduce the possibility of thermal distortion of the nozzle, it is desirable that the pipe and the flanges of the flow section be made of a corrosion-resistant material having the same coefficient of expansion as the nozzle.
.

.

Compreaad Basked thickness . _ / not to exoow 1.6 mm

FIG. B3. Note. -

Flow section.

No obstruction, such as thermocouple, wells, backing rings. etc.

---Flow----.-

Machine with taper not excegding 3.5O

i,

~_______.

", Machine cylindrical within f0.25 with minimum removal of metal

FIG. B4. -

Boring in flow section upstream of nozzle.

IS 14198 (Part 2) : 1994 IEC Pub 953-2 : 1990 B3. Calibration and, therefore, 4 Experience shows that the flow coefficient cannot be predicted within 0.1 O/o it is necessary to calibrate the flow sections (see Figure B3). This calibration shall be undertaken only by recognized authorities under conditions similar to those in the actual installation. It is desirable that the physical construction of the piping in the calibrating set-up should be similar to that in the test setup from the standpoint of pipe configuration, immediately upstream and downstream of the flow-measuring section. Also, the Reynolds number, water temperature and other flow conditions should be as close to the test conditions as possible. If the calibration of the flow section does not comply with B3b), the nozzle shall be carefully inspected to conform to the requirement of Bla), corrected, if necessary, and the flow section recalibrated. If the recalibration still does not comply with B3b), the flow section should be calibrated using different facilities, if available.

b) Calibration

shall be conducted on at least two sets of pressure taps 180" apart. For each set of taps, the calibration curve (not necessarily each individual point) shall be within 0.25O/o of the reference curve and shall have the same slope (see reference curve Figure B2). When it is not practicable to calibrate at the test Reynolds number, the calibration Reynolds number should be obtained in accordance with B3c). The extrapolation to higher Reynolds numbers will then be parallel to the reference curve. The end point of the extrapolation should not differ by more than 0.25% from the calibration curve coefficient at the highest Reynolds number attained during calibration.

The location of the primary-flow section in the cycle, its configuration, and the technique which is employed to obtain the flow measurements are critical and are discussed in subsequent paragraphs. Below a throat Reynolds number of 2 x 106, there is a transition from laminar to turbulent boundary layer. This transition region should be established during calibration and shall be avoided during the test. It is permissible to extrapolate the calibration curve when the nozzle is used beyond the range of the calibrating facility provided the level of the coefficient is established at Reynolds numbers higher than the transition region. This extrapolation should be parallel to the curve shown in Figure B2 and subject to the restrictions of B3b).

d) It is preferable to install flow sections immediately

before the test. A slight iron-oxide film on the nozzle surface will usually collect during the test. If this film is very-thin (less than 0.025mm) and uniformly deposited, its effect on the accuracy of the flow measurement will be negligible. If the thickness of the deposit exceeds this value, or if the nature of the deposit.is not uniform and the surface appears rough, either of two procedures may be followed: .- the nozzle may be cleaned, reinstalled, and the test repeated; or the flowimeasuring section may be recalibrated.

Care has to'be taken not to disturb the deposit before recalibration. If this calibration is significantly different from the calibration prior to the test, it is necessary that another set of runs be made under deposit-free conditions. The test results cannot be adjusted, since it is usually impossible to determine when the deposit formed on the nozzle.

IS 14198(Part 2) : 1994 IEC Pub 953-2: 1990

APPENDIX
EVALUATION OF MULTIPLE

C
COMPATIBILITY

MEASUREMENTS, (see 5.2.3.2)

If several individual values for the same variable have been measured or determined (see 5.2.3.3) and their uncertainties have been evaluated, there-is a good method for checking whether each of these several values is compatible with the weighted average value (see 5.2.3.2) and its uncertainty (see 7.1). It assumes that the uncertainties of the individual values have been determined correctly and that the individual values differ only randomly from the true value. With
Xi vx, 2 v, = = = =

individual uncertainty uncertainty criterion

value Of Xi values (see 5.2.3.2) of 1 (see 7.1)

weighted average value of all individual

the compatibility

(Xi -

2)'

is calculated If Et<o,

for each individual

value Xi.

the individual value Xi in question differs, possibly because of a systematic error in an unacceptable manner from the true value, This is a warning signal to investigate the value xi and its uncertainty value V,, for undetected systematic errors. The lower the value E,, the higher the probability of such an error.

If in the case of an incompatible value a physical inspection of the measuring installation is not practicable or evidence of a systematic error exists, this value should be eliminated from further computation. If for all individual values &j>o the statistical compatibility of the measured values xi and their uncertainty V,, can be assumed.

IS 14198(Part 2) : 1994 IEC Pub 953-2: 1990

APPENDIX

D

MASS FLOW BALANCES (see 5.2.3.3 j In cases where several primary mass flow measurements are carried out in the main flow of the cycle, a particular primary mass flow of the cycle (e.g. the initial steam Bow) can be determined with the aid of mass flows balances by several largely independent measurements. Mass flow balances are not altogether independent when common mass flows occur in such balances. This can be taken into account for the determination of the average value and its uncertainty. To set up the equations for mass flow balances, it is further necessary to measure certain secondary mass flows as well as the level changes of tanks and other storage vessels in the cycle. The unaccounted-for
-

cycle loss is determined

from: z of the test,

the changes AZ of all storage volumes, divided by the duration the measured losses and the make-up water flow (if any).

*

This loss is distributed to the different parts of the plant according to general convention special observations and is considered accordingly in the mass flow balances. z Level changes which are not attributable mass flow values.

and

to losses shall be added as mass flows to the respective

Figure D 1 illustrates the cycle diagram of a single-reheat steam turbine plant. Four primary mass flow measurements are made while four secondary mass flows-and the changes in the contents of two tanks are measured. The initial steam flow can be calculated
- rilvz a) rizl.1 = ?+I1

from the balances in the following four ways:

~b) NII
c) d) ritl,iII rirl,Iv

= = =

TiQ kl0 till

& ?&IDA + h2 tii, -

+

liZ~5 +

ljl~4

+

Ijt~3

-

tiv2

-

?ilvl

ritVl tilV2 ?ilVl

with distribution on tivi to tiv3 according acceptance test run.

to convention

AZ and 1 tiv, = - a duration
i Z

time z of the

82

IS 14198 (Part 2) : 1994 IEC Pub 953-2 : 1990 0.5 I& 0.5 niti

FIG. D 1. -

Diagram of cycle for plant with steam turbine with single reheating and five stages of regenerative feedwater heating extraction.

The various values tij established from the mass flow balances with their measuring uncertainty V,+,,shall be checked for compatibility (see 5.2.3.2). The weighted values. average value tii according to equation (24) is determined from the compatible

Individual mass flows (e.g. tik or ~3) required for further evaluation shall be calculated with the aid of the measured or calculated secondary flows from the averaged initial steam flow tin. If a mass flow equation which is to be used for that calculation has led to an incompatible initial steam flow value in the mass flow ~balance evaluation, the measured mass flow contained in it should be checked. For each mass flow balance a difference
, llfn = til - til,.

ti, can be calculated: of the mass flow

If the uncertainty of the mass flow balance value rizr,* is V,, and the uncertainty tij is vj a mass flow balance correction tin
fiBj,n = cl Pj

can be calculated. The corrected mass flow is then:

The mass flow balance corrections and can be averaged arithmetically.

tia,j for several balance equations will deviate but very slightly

83

IS 14198 (Part 2) : 1994 IEC Pub 953-2 : 1990

APPENDIX

E
OF

TYPICAL GENERALIZED CORRECTION CURVES FOR CORRECTION TEST RESULTS ACCORDING TO GUARANTEE CONDITIONS (see 6.6.4)
General

The curves El to El7 may be used to correct the measured value of thermal'~efficiency for the influence of deviations of the operating parameters from the specified values during the test. They give correction factors E according to the definition in 6.5 and can be used for the correction procedure according to 6.6a) only. The curves are prepared for single point guarantees and they therefore also include data for computation of deviations of measured main steam flow from guaranteed flow (El to E3). In case of guarantees and parameters given as functions of variable main steam flow (efficiency or heat rate curves), the measured main steam flow will be considered as guaranteed and the correction curves for main steam flow (El to E3) may therefore be ignored. The application of certain curves is in some cases dependent concerned are the subject of guarantee. The curves may be used to correct for deviations of operating defined in 3.8.2 (Table I) and shall not be extrapolated. The data are valid for condensing are commonly used in conventional on whether or not the parameters parameters etc., within the limits which

turbines of ratings higher than 30MW and barameters and nuclear power stations.

The uncertainties of the corrections for the various parameters refer to probability P = 0.95 and are independent of each other and the resulting uncertainty may be calculated accordingly. Mathematical formulations programming purposes. representing the curves in El to El7 are given in Table EI for

84

IS 14198(rat-t 2) : 1994 IEC Pub 953-2: 1990

0.06 0.05 0.04 0.03

0.02

0.01

-0.01

-0.02

-0.06

7h.c =

q.m. F

T,

= absolute temperature

at exhaust pressure (K) pressure (kJ/kg)
!

Ah, = isentropic enthalpy drop, main steam/exhaust 7 main steam flow as measured
= mA

main steam flow as guaranteed

K K

= K' for reheat and/or

external moisture separation or wet main steam with or without reheat,

= 0.83 K' without reheat and without external moisture separation

Valid for: Condensing turbines with regenerative feedwater heating, superheated main steam enthalpy constant, output >O.2 maximum output. Uncertainty of computation: AFf0.15 1 F1 I.

FIG. E 1. -

Correction

curve for main flow influence on bow! pressure.

85

1s 14198 `Part 2) : 1994 IEC IDub!53-2 : 1990

::

T+L@-jg

i-L&,- 1)

t
K
104

x)3

,002

,001

-7

180

/

*A -

m, ti
-7

= =

exhaust flows of main turbine (kg/s)

exhaust flow of BFP- auxiliary turbine (kg/s)
main steam as measured main steam as guaranteed axial outlet velocity as guaranteed (m/s) peripheral speed of last stage wheel (pitch diameter) (m/s] with or without reheat.

m4

wa,g =
l4 -

Valid for: Condensing turbines with regenerative feedwater heating, wet or superheated main steam, exhaust pressure < 0.3 bar, u = 200 to 450 m/s, output ~0.2 maximum outp_ut. Uncertainty of computation: Af = fO.2

1 F- I I. curve for main steam flow influeqce on exhaust losses.

FIG. E2. -

Correction

X6

IS 14198 (rat-t 2) : 1994 IEC Pub 953-2 : 1990

q.m- F F = I - K(&I)
th.c -

f
K 0.05

0.04

0.03

0.02

0.01

0

-0.01

main steam flow as measured main steam flaw as guaranteed generator output as guaranteed max. generator output max. apparent generator output (kVA) Valid for: Two-pole and four-pole generators,

,
cooling systems adequate to S,.,,. S,,,, y30000 - I I.

kVA.

Uncertainty

of computation:

AF-

*( 10.3 K 1 + 0.00.3). 1 &

FOG.E3. - Correction efficiency.

curve for main steam flow influence on mechanical

efficiency

and generator

87

IS 14198 (Part 2) : 1994 IEC Pub 953-2 : 1990
71 .c
= qt. ,,, .

F

F=

1+K

h

COR co?1

tp,,, `p

Q

-0.002

*

-0.001

I

load factor apparent generator output (LVA) max. apparent generator output (kVA)

Valid for: S,,, b30 MVA, cos q = 0.7 to 1.0, active output = constant. Uncertainty of computation: AF= f0.4 1 F1 I.

FIG. E4. - Correction

curve for load factor.

IS 14198 (Part 2):1994

IECPub953-2:1990

0.06

0.06

0.04

0.03

0.02

0.01

absolute saturation exhaust pressure(K)

temperature

at

-0.01

isentropic enthalpy drop main steam/ exhaust pressure (kJ/kg) mainsteam pressure as measured

-0.02

-0.03

main steam pressure as guaranteed main steam flow as measured main steam flow as guaranteed Sliding main steam pressure:
K K = K' reheat and/or = 0.83 K' all others

-0.04

-0.05

external moisture separation -0.06

Constant

main steam pressure: K = 0.11 K' steam/steam K - 0 all others reheat

Throttle control

Nozzle control
v P -

K - 0.11 + 0.89 K(v) steam/steam reheat K - 0.83 K (v) without reheat and without external K = K (v) all others

moisture separation

18 (h,tg - 1925)
=

u2

one-row governing stage

rn.'

wheel chamber pressure (bar)

h - main steam enthalpy (kJ/kg)

vo = c!!
PA 8 8 (h& - 1925) uz
P =

0

two-row governing stage

PA = main steam pressure (bar)
u -

control stage peripherical

speed pitch diameter (m/s)

Valid for: Condensing turbines with regenerative feedwater heating, wet or superheated main steam, with or without reheat, main SteafII enthalpy COtWant, v - %;A / jA < 0.9 1, load >0.2 maximum load.

Uncertainty

of computation:

AF= f

0.15 1 F- 1 1 + 0.002

T

PA -*

mA

1).

FIG. E5. -

Correction

curve for main steam pressure.
89

This correction allows for deviation inflow capaciryat agreed valve position (for deviation inflow, see FI).

IS 14198 (Part 2) : 1994 IIEC Pub 953-2 : 1990

l--

-0.0

2--

-0.0B--

j=

h, - 1925 hs - 1925 -0.0

h = specific enthalpy (kJ/kg) Curve A: Main steam of conventional

turbines without reheat. without reheat.

Curve B: Saturated (or nearly saturated) main steam of turbines with external moisture separation,

Curve C: Main steam and reheat steam of conventional turbines with single reheat. Saturated (or nearly saturated) main steam of turbines with external moisture separator and reheat. Valid for: Condensing Uncertainty turbines with regenerative feedwater heating, output >0.2 maximum output. AFf(O.15 1 F- 1 1 +0.002 1j - 1 1).

of computation:

FIG.

E6. - Correction

curve for steam enthalpies.

7)l.c = 4.m'
Fl+K

F

K - 0.21 (xp - xm) x = quality, i.e., dryness fraction of wet steam by weightbeyond Valid-for: Condensing reheat. Uncertainty moisture separator

turbines with regenerative heating system, wet (or nearly wet) main steam, with or without following AFf0.2 1 F-I I.

of computation:

FIG. E7. -

Correction

for final moisture of external separator.
90

IS 14198 (m-t 2) : lY94
IEC Pub 953-2 : 1990

B

qt.c 0.010 F = K =
K'= 91

ql.m*

F

%s
*a / `0

l+K+K'+K"

f
K, K', K"

\\

0 `8

K"-

f (pz'PA)g f (Waxg) f (3

0.005

PA% *

!hn

&

* PAm

pz- saturation pressure at & (bar)
reheat temperature(T) 4PA- main steam pressure (bar)

P=

generator output as guaranteed max. generator output (m/s) main steam, final reheat by

Ww? = last stage axial outlet velocity as guaranteed

Valid for: Condensing turbines with regenerative feedwater heating, wet or slightly superheated main steam, output >0.2 maximum output. Uncertainty of computation: AF= fO.2 \iti + KS2 + K/(1.

FIG. E8. - Correction

curve for reheater terminal difference.
side are included in this correction,

Mainsteam/steam reheater stage only, pressure losses on the main steam
see definition of j.

91

IS 14198 (Pert 2) : 1994 IEC I'ub 953-z : 1990
If the condenser is included in the guatantee, F will not be computed on the basis of the measured exhaust pressure, but by means of the expected exhaust pressure for measured cooling water flow and cooling water temperatures (se2 E IO).

t
K

mv - exhaust flow of main turbine (kg/s) mS = exhaust flow of BFP-auxiliary turbine (kg/s) u = peripheral speed of last stage wheel (pitch diameter) (m/s) = = last stage bucket throat area last stage bucket annulus area main steam flow as measured main steam flow as guaranteed

sin/j -7 m,.,

I,

=_

exhaust pressure as measured exhaust pressure as guaranteed

_

W,,, = last stage axial outlet velocity output as guaranteed (m/s)

Valid for: <:ondensing turbines with regenerative feedwater heating, with or without reheat, superheated exhaust pressure ,' 0.3 bar, u = 200 m/s to 450 m/s, output jO.2 maximum output. Uncertainty of computation: AF= +(().I5 1 F-l 1 + 0.002 ) F - l 1 ).

or wet main steam.

FIG. E9. -

Correction

c&e 02

for exhaust

pressure.

.c

IS 14198 (Purt 2) : 1994 IEC I'UIJ953-2 : 1990 on the basis of the measured exhaust

If the condenser is included in the guarantee, j (see E9) will not be computed pressure, but by means of the following equation.

l.4-* = 3 o.5 . t.m, 1

s$, + 20
11 81, + 20

- ln[s+

1)

l.4--

9 = expected exhaust temperature (T)
p = expected exhaust pressure (saturation pressure at 3) (bar) 4= cooling water exit temperature ("c) 9i= cooling water inlet temperature(T) e = natural number (- 2.7 t8) In = napierian logarithm ti = cooling water flow (kg/s) Valid for: Surface condenser of conventional Uncertainty of computation: design, cooling water velocity in tubes >0.8 m/s. Ai = fO.l @ - 1).

FIG. EIO. - Correction

for condenser

cooling water flo-w and inlet temperature.

93

IS 14198(Part 2) : 1994 IEC Pub 953-2: 1990

P\

= exhaust pressure (bar) = saturation temperature = condensate temperature at exhaust pressure ("C) before lowest heater ("C)

& su P

= pressure of lowest bleeding (bar) main steam, with or without reheat,

W.l\$ = last stage annulus velocity as guaranteed (m/s) Valid for: Condensing turbines with regenerative heating system, wet or superheated exhaust pressure ~0.3 bar, output bO.2 maximum output. Uncertainty of computation: AF= f 0.00004.

1(8, - A),, - (8, - &)g I.

FIG. El I. - Correction

curve for main condensate

subcooling.

94

IS 14198 (Part 2) : 1991 IEC Pub 953-2 : 1990
7h.c =

q.rn.F
&In-SE*
8'Ag &g

FA3 =

1-KA?J t K

8

= %-3% 8'Ag- 8Wg \ \

\

t-

0.6

0.7

SE

=

final feedwater temperature ("C)

PA = saturation temperature for main steam pressure ("C), for pi .,-22.1 bar use 9, + 374�C

SW= condenser discharge temperature ("C)

z

=

number of feed water heaters (-)

!
also for the highest

Remarks: Deviating terminal difference and extraction line pressure loss are to be corrected in addition heater. Valid-for: Uncertainty Condensing turbines with regenerative feedwater heating (at, i 170�C. Z ,-2), with or without reheat, output PO.2 maximum output, of computation: AFf 0.1 (K + 0.1) A%

wet or superheated main steam,

1As 1 <O.OS.

FIG. E12. -

Correction

curve for final feedwater temperature.

9.5

1s 14198(Part 2) : 1994 IEC Pub 953-2. * 1990

0.30

t
K

0.25

0.20

0.15

0.10

0

10 G -

6 for sliding main steam pressure fi [ 1 - (P - I)* + 0.12 (7 - I)] for constant main steam pressure, nozzle control @97 for constant main steam pressure throttle control main steam pressure HP exhaust pressure generator output as guaranteed max. generator output AK = 0 for water extraction at feedpump AK %I = 0.02 for water extraction behind highest pester desuperheating water flow main steam flow

w.xp = last stage axial outlet velocity as guaranteed (m/s) Valid for: Condensing turbines with regenerative feedwater heating and single reheat, main steam and reheat temperatures >47OT, output >0.2 maximum output reheat pressure sliding or constant. Uncertainty of computation: A F = f 0. I5 1 F - I

1

FIG. E13. - Correction

curve for reheater desuperheating

water.

IS

14198 (Part 2) : 1994 IEC Pub 953-2 : 1990

0.C F-

= m.,,,.

F

TV = absolute saturation temperature

of exhaust steam/

pressure (K) Ah, = isentropic enthalpy drop exhaust pressure (kJ/kg) j
PI !a= Yi =

main

= Pie * Ph
I% ' Plm = pressure, high pressure side (bar)

pressure, low pressure side (bar) steam flow concerned main steam flow

-6.06 -

Valid for: Condensing turbines with regenerative feedwater heating, wet or superheated output > 0.2 maximum output, Uncertainty of computation: AF= f 0.15 1 F1 1.

mainsteam,

with or without reheat

FIG. E14. -

Correction

curve for pressure losses.
reheaters, bleedings, etc. For main steam side of main steam / steam

Steam in piping, moisture separators, reheaters, see E8.

IS 14198(Part 2) : 1994 IEC Pub 953-2: 1990
th.c -

qt.m* F

0.06 K

t

0.04

0.03

I

a

absolute saturation haust pressure (K)

temperature

of ex-0.04

isentropic enthalpy drop main steam/exhaust pressure (kJ/kg)
PIE * Ph P2e * Plm

-0.05

heating steam pressure (bar) saturation pressure at 4 (bar) heated flow, outlet temperature heating steam flow main steam flow Valid for: Condensing turbines with regenerative feedwater heating, wet or superheated output >0.2 maximum output. Uncertainty of computation: AFf 0.2 1F- I 1 . main steam, with or without reheat, ("c) -0.06

FIG. E 15. - Correction

curve for terminal differences.

Heaters and bled steam 1 steam reheater stages.

98

IS 14198 (Part 2) : 1994 IEC Pub 953-2 : 1990

QA?ilr, -

&A

- k

(kw)

main steam flow excluding main steam flow to steam/steam reheaters if necessary (kg/s) main steam enthalpy (W/kg) generator output (LW)

k P
A; 1 h

-

-

(?-J-(3,

- steam subflow (kg/s) - f @, s& locus of subtlow/main flow linkage, expressed as main flow isentropic enthalpy (W/kg) - local pressure (bar) main steam entropy (W/kg K) -

P
SA

K

f

- 5; h
Ib K

= = f
=

@v, SA) @J/kg)

= exhaust pressure (bar)

1.15 K' for reheat turbines in the expansion region behind reheat only K' all others last stage axial outlet velocity as guaranteed (m/s)

K Waxg

=
=

-

0. c 1 `.O

0.5

0

E----e
Definition: Subflows are mass flows, which are passing the shaded control area (see figure), but are not directly supplied to or from a primary energy source (boiler, reactor). Therefore a,& ma, ?i& tie, tia are not subflows. These subfiows are particularly leakage flows, extraction flows for non-cycle supply or pump drive, as long as its output is not included in R

Mass flows are inserted in equation (>0) when entering the shaded control area and <0 when leaving it. In case of reheat by main steam, the heat flow to the hp turbine is QA, the main steam heat flow to the reheater is (Qs + Qc,. Valid for: Condensing turbines with regenerative feedwater heating system, main steam wet or superheated, with or without reheat, output >0.2 maximum output, tis + r+r~ + h - 0. Uncertainty of computation: AF - f 0.2 1F - I 1 .

Remarks:

FIG.

E16. - Correction curve for steam subflows. 99

-

IS 14198 (Part 2) : 1994 IEC Pub 953-2 : 1990

&

= rirr,hs(kW)

ms = feedwater flow (<0) (kg/s) hr
P

= final feedwater enthalpy (kJ/kg)
= generator output (kW)

i

= water subflow (kg/s)

ritA = main steam flow, excluding main steam flow to steam/steam reheaters if necessary (kg/s) 8 = locus of subflow/main flow linkage, expressed as main flow temperature ("c)

-

9* = locus of subflow origin, expressed as local main flow temperature ("c)

t
K

SW- condensate
denser ("C)

temperature

after con-

3~ = final feedwater temperature ("C)

Definition: Remarks:

Subflows are defined in figure E16. These subflows are particularly leakage flows, flows for non-cycle supply, make-up water and changes in water level. Mass flows are inserted in equations >0 when entering the shaded control area and <O when leaving it. Complete or partial bypassing of heaters will be simulated by two equal subflows of same subflow temperature, but different direction and different mainflow temperature. Correction for enthalpy rise in feedpump will be simulated by feedflow as subflows leaving the system and entering again with different 3 but same 3. Condensing turbines with regenerative reheat, output >0.2 maximum output. of computation: AFf 0.2 1F1 1. feedwater heating, wet or superheated main steam, with or without

Valid for: Uncertainty

FIG. E17. - Correction curve for water subflows and enthalpy rise in feedpump.
100

IS 14198 (part 2) : 1994 IEC Pub 953-2 : 1990
TABLE EI

Mathematical
El: K'- 0.455 In Ji*

formulations

representing

curves El to El 7

E2:

K -

0.0235

[(h (%A!$))'

- (In 271

E4:

K -

0.0186.

filn=

co9 (pm
I 426~444%
PA

ES:

K

1 - 426 - 444 v

K'-

0455.& . jjlA

E6:

A: K = - 0.348 lnj B: K = - 0.178 lnj C: K= -0.1441nj

E7:

See Figure E7

E8:

K -

0.016 E @( PA1B [VI]*-

1);

K'=O.O035Inp*

In%; 150

K"-

0.006ln$jlnP

E9:

K =

b]*-0.03Inp

EIO: See

figureEl0

E12: K = 0.30

0.03)

1

101

IS 14198 (rart 2) : 1994 IEC Pub 953-2: 1990

W E13: K = 0.02 + 0.1 In I-+ 0.067 In ._-%!
150

E14: K = - 0.455 lnp EI5: K = - 0.455lnp

E_l6: K'= - 0.16+ 1.16x + 0.32 (7; - l)* - (O.O58ln~)(lS
El 7:

-OS@

K = (1 - (1 - jF)".95) (1 - 0.38 (1 - $)*.*) + (1 - $)o.95 [(1 - $)".7s - 0.5 (1 - 8)`.`]

102

IS 14198

(Part 2) : 1994 IEC Pub 953-2 : 1990

APPENDIX
SHORT-STATISTICAL AND ERROR

F

DEFINITION OF MEASURING UNCERTAINTY PROPAGATION Ir;r ACCEPTANCE TESTS (see 7.1 and 7.5.1)

The measurement of a physical quantity can be carried out with limited accuracy only, because of the inevitable measuring error error = measured value - true value In practice, the relative error is used very often, where

relative error =

error true value

%

error measured value

If the errors are randomly distributed, the accuracy of the determination of a constant quantity (length, weight) can be increased by repeating the measurement and calculating the arithmetic mean value. The deviations of the individual measured values from the mean will follow the Gaussian Law (no systematic error present). From the standard deviation of the resulting Gauss curve, the confidence limits V,, of the error of an individual measurement xi can be calculated. The statement V,, = & 26 for P - 95% means that the measured yalue xi is situated with a statistical probability of 95% in the range

where x is the true value.
Vx, are the confidence limits offhe error for the value Xi.

The error of the measured value Xi with respect to the unknown f V,, with a probability of 95%.

true value x is not greater than

The confidence limits V, for a statistical probability of 95 O/o are called measuring uncertainty in the following. The relative measuring uncertainty is defined by

TX

vx vx =--.X
Xi /

For a direct application of the statistical theory of uncertainty of measurements, a great number of measurements of a constant physical quantity with randomly distributed statistically independent errors is necessary, as indicated above. This condition is not fulfilled for a thermal acceptance test. In order to allow statements of the probable uncertainty of values measured during thermal acceptance tests and to permit the application of the laws of error propagation for the determination of the uncertainty of the results calculated from these values, the following generalizations of the definitions are introduced. In thermal acceptance tests the @antities to be measured are not constant in time. A series of readings is taken at regular intervals during the test period and the arithmetic mean value is formed. This mean value contains three different types of independent errors:

103

IS 14198 (Pal-t 2) : l!y4 IEC Pub 953-2 : 1990

a) Random reading error with confidence b) Integration error with confidence c) Non-detectable systematic accuracy class G3). The confidence

limit VAI). equipment with confidence limit Vs or

limit VI.

error 2) of the measuring uncertainty)

limit (measuring

of the averaged reading value X is:

In normal acceptance test practice, the number of readings is sufficiently VI negligible, so that Vs or G is significant for the measuring uncertainty.

large to render

VAand

The average value X with its confidence limits of the error V, can be interpreted measurement according to statistical theory.

as an individual

The confidence limits L's cannot be established from a series of measurements of a timefluctuating variable with one and the same instrumentation by statistical methods and have to be determined by different means for the different kinds of measured values. They shall always be referred to a statistical probability P = 95 O/o. The results (e.g. mass flow, thermal efficiency, etc.) are calculated from measured variables as well as from physical properties and coefficients. Generally the result y is derived from: n, measured variables `xj and from nb physical properties bl and n, coefficients c,: Y = F(xj, bl, Cm)
&, and V, are the confidence limits of the errors of the physical properties non-detectable systematic errors for P M 95 O/o.

and coefficients

due to

If all measured values, physical property values and coefficients and their confidence limits of the error (measuring uncertainty) are independent of each other and determined for the same probability P (e.g., 95 O/o), they can be added according to the law of error propagation (square root rule) and the measuring uncertainty V, of the result determined in this manner will have the same probability. It is:

where Vx, is the measuring

uncertainty

of an individual

variable xi.

The calculation methods applied in this appendix, derived from the probability theory, are based on the assumption that all the values used in the calculation are statistically absolutely independent of each other.

I) A systematic reading error is equivalent to a non-detectable and is to be treated accordingly under3).

or non-detected

systematic error of the measuring equipment

?) The non-detectable systematic error is largely constant in one and the same acceptance test measurement, but are assumed to be randomly distributed in several tests using the same measuring equipment. As a result, the equations of probability theory may be used. 3, For several types of instruments, the manufacturer indicates the accuracy class G, which is a confidence limit of the error with a probability P = 100%. For application, the reference value of G, mostly the scale end value, and limitations of operating conditions hake to be closely observed. 4, Confidence limits (measuring uncertainty) which are independent pf each other and are defined for the same probability P can be added according to the law of error propagation (square root rule).

104

IS 14198(Pnrt2):1994 IECl'ub 953.2:1990 In most cases, however, physical properties and coefficients depend on the measured variables. In such cases the natural relationship between measured variables and physical properties and coefficients: h =
Gn = Fb (xj) Fc (xj)

shall be introduced

into the equation

for y prior to application

of the error propagation

law.

In many cases, the measuring uncertainties of measured values are not independent of these values themselves, or the uncertainties of values measured in parallel or with the same instrumentation are mutually interdependent. The error propagation law as shown above is then not applicable or has to be applied differently. Indications following. for the treatment of the more common cases of interdependence are given in the

In view of the many influencing factors involved, the measuring undertainty of all pressure difference devices for mass flows, as well as all thermometers or thermocouples, shall be considered to be independent. Measurements with instruments which have been calibrated on the same test bed (e.g., orifices and nozzles calibrated together with the test section as well as thermometers and thermocouples) shall be considered to be dependent on each other in view of the calibration error.

Pressure difference devices of the same dimensions working under practically the same conditions (e.g. measurement of initial steam flow in several parallel flows) shall all be considered to be entirely dependent on each other. For the dependence of the measuring uncertainty of instrument transformers, see 7.3.1. For the evaluation of the test, it is recommended that deviations from the assumption of independence of the variables should not be considered if a considerable simplification of the evaluation can be achieved without any appreciable effect on the results, particularly on the measuring uncertainty. The interdependence due to instruments being calibrated on common test beds is generally negligible if the error limits of calibration are small compared with the other measuring uncertainty of the measurement. This also applies to the use of one precision potentiometer for all temperature measurements. To allow correctly for all the interdependences in calculating the measuring uncertainty of the results generally involves a highly sophisticated calculation process and is impracticable in most cases. It is recommended to accept deviations from the principle of independence of measured values and their uncertainties, if a considerable simplification of the computation can thus be achieved without appreciable modification of the results and their uncertainties.

IS 14198 (h-t2):1994

IECPub 95%2:1990

APPENDIX

G
-

CALCULATION OF MEASURING UNCERTAINTY OF OUTPUT ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENT (see 7.3.1)
G 1. Introduction

In general the law of error propagation with geometrical summation of the individual measurement uncertainties is also applied for polyphase measurements (two-wattmeter or three-wattmeter method). Practical experiments have shown that the transforming ratio errors, as well as the phase-angle errors of the transformers in the various phases, ate not fully independent. This also applies to the calibration of transformers. Therefore, the summation arithmetical part. of errors has to be separated into a geometrical part and an

In the calculation of the measurement uncertainty of the total power as the sum of the power in the individual phases, the following measurement uncertainties have to be taken into account.
Wattmeter and watthour meter

The summation of the measurement in the various phases is geometrical.

uncertainty

due to the wattmeters

or watthour meters

Tranzforming error,y of voltage tran:formers

The summation of the measurement uncertainties due to the transforming transformers between the various phases is arithmetical.
Phase-angle errors qf voltage transformers

errors of voltage

The summation of the measurement transformers is arithmetical.

uncertainties

due to the phase-angle

errors of voltage

Tran.sforming errors of current transformers

The summation of the measurement uncertainty due to the transforming transformers in the various phases is arithmetical.
Phase-angle errors of current transformers

errors of current

Tht summation of the measurement transformers is arithmetical.
Total error

uncertainty

due to the phase-angle

errors of current

The uncertainty in total power is calculated by geometrical mentioned under al, b), c), d) and c).

summation

of the uncertainties

Notes I. - The summation mentioned under c) or e) is sometimes made geometrically. This is not correct in the philosophy of this appendix, as the statement in the first paragraph applies to the phase angle errors as well. 2. - In the formulae an uncertainty for the temperature influence on wattmeters or watthour meters is introduced. The temperature factor should be indicated by the manufacturer of the wattmeterslwatthour meters. If the influence of the temperature on the wattmeter reading is exactly known as a function of the temperature and this has been applied as a correction in the evaluation of the measured power, this influence on the measurement uncertainty can be eliminated in the formula for measurement uncertainty.

G2.

Formulae

Formulae are presented for the application of wattmeters, single-phase watthour meters and three-phase watthour meters for the following cases, both for three-phase four wire circuits (three-wattmeter method) and for three-phase three-wire circuits (two-wattmeter method or Aron arrangement):

IS 14198 (Part 2) : 1994 IEC Pub 953-2 . * 1990

4 calibrated transformers

and wattmeters/watthour and non-calibrated with specified and

meters; meter(s) with specified wattmeters/

b) calibrated transformers
accuracy class;

wattmeter/watthour accuracy

c) non-calibrated

transformers watthour meter(s); transformers accuracy class.

class and calibrated meter(s) each

4 non-calibrated

wattmeters/watthour

with specified

In the formulae below the terms with r, and rwhcan be ignored, and the following symbols are used:
Gl G = =

calibration inaccuracy in the ratio error of the voltage transformers calibration inaccuracy in the ratio error of the current transformers inaccuracy in the phase angle of the current transformers

(%) (%) in mrad in mrad

6

6;: - calibration
cw
Cwh

= calibration inaccuracy in the phase angle of the voltage transformers

- calibration inaccuracy of the wattmeters in scale divisions - calibration inaccuracy of the watthour meters (%) - reading inaccuracy of the wattmeters in scale divisions
-

rw
rwh

reading inaccuracy of the watthour meters (%) accuracy class of the voltage transformers (%) (%)

Gu G Gw Gwh D D;;

= accuracy class of the curreirt transformers = accuracy class of the watthour meters (%)

accuracy class of the wattmeters in % of full scale class accuracy for phase angle of the voltage transformers class accuracy for phase angle of the current transformers in mrad in mrad method)

aE = full scale of the wattmeters al,&2 = actual wattmeter/watthour

meter reading (two-wattmeter/watthourmeter (three-wattmeter method) in % accuracy/K

a f
A

= mean value of the wattmeter readings = temperature in degrees Celsius
= temperature

coefficient of wattmeter/watthourmeter

"P
K--

a
a2

confidence limit of the measuring uncertainty

al +

a2

I

-

Three-phase four-wire circuit Case a: a.1 Single-phase wattmeters

r/z ( ) +( P=

c,* c,*

)

~(~~100~+k~100r+l,3 .
(n(t_2;))2 3
+ (+A2

+ {(L&i)*+ (&)*}~* 1O-*tan* cp a.2 Single-phase watthour meters
v'p p (42 + @)2 + (Ml)* +

3 a.3 Three-phase watthourmeters VP * (c# + (c")~ +
(Cwh)* + (hh)*

l/3 A*(t - 23)* + ((&i)* + (S,+J*} - 10S2tan* (P

+ A2 (I -

23)* +`((&i)* + (6&*} - lo-* tan* cp

107

IS 14198(Pa-t 2) : 1994 IEC Pub 953-2: 1990
Case 0.

6.1

Single-phase

wattmeters

G',. I$ = (c;)2+ (C")2 +
+ {(t&i)* + ( t&J2} 6.2 Single-phuse

Z2+(l(t-23))`+ i;. loo2 1 ( 1
3

* 10e2 tan2Cp

watthour meters ( GWtJ2+ A2 (t - 23)2 + ( rWh)2 3

v; = (c$
6.3

+ (L-,)2 +

+ (( &pi)2+ ( &J2)

- 1OS2 tan2 Cp

Three-phase watthour meters VP = (c$' +
( c")~ + ( Gwh)2 + A2 (t -

23)2 + (rd2

+ ((6qi)2 -I (&&2}

l

!Oe2 tatI2 Cp

In general, the calibration uncertainty figures,< and 6* of the transformers and the uncertainties in reading r, and rWhof the' wattmeters/watthour meters can be ignored as compared with the accuracy class of the wattmeters/watthour meters. The formulae may then be simplified to:

-

for single-phase wattmeters:

-

for single-phase watthour meters:

Case c:

for three-phase watthour meters:

VP = G2,,, + A2jt - 23)2

c.1

Single-phase

wattmeters

(Z.
v', = (Gd2+ (GuJ2 +

100)2+(;. 100)
3

+ l/3 A2(t - 23) + {(D,+,i)2 + (D,,J2} . 1O-2 tan2 cp
c.2 Single-phase watthour metres

v2,=(G)2+(G)2+

(cWh)2 +
3

(rwh)2

+ 1/3A2(t-23)2+((D,i)2+(D~U)2}~ c.3
Three-phase watthour metres
v', = ( G)2 + ( GJ2 + ( Cwh)2 + ( r,,+)2 + A2 (t -

10-`tan2cp

23)2 + (( Dqi)2 + ( &)2)

- 10e2tan2 q

* For usual power factors.

108

1s 14198 (Part 2) : 1994 l,EC Pub 953-2 : 1990

The use of the value of the class accuracy of the transformers per phase in the accuracy formulas for total power is in fact based upon the arithmetical addition of absolute uncertainties. (G * Gil =
Gi2 -

G,3; the same applies to G,, 0, and 0") leads to the

Ignoring the calibration and reading inaccuracies c and r of the wattmeter simplified formulae valid for cases c. I, c.2 and c.3, respectively: for single-phase wattmeters: c"p= 4 + q + {( Dqi)' + (&)*)
l

10m2 tan2 cp+ f . A2 (t - 23)2

-

for single-phase watthour wattmeters:
qRp- @+

~+{(Dcpi)2+(Dqu)2)*

10-2tan2p+fA2(t - 23)2
l

-

for three-phase wattnour wattmeters: c = @ + Cz, + (( Dq+)2+ ( DqU)2) low2tan2 up+ A2( t - 23)2

Case d: d.1 Single-phase wattmeters * + izz(t - 23)2 f v'p = (Gi)2 + (G,)* + + {( Di)2 + ( DU)2) lob2 tan2 Cp
l

3

d.2

Single-phase watthour meters (one phase)

v' - (Gij2+ (Cd2+
d.3

( G,,,I,)~ + A2(t - 23)2 + ( r,,d2 3 phase)

+ (( Dqi)2 -t (D,")* * 10e2tan' rp>

Three-phase watthour meters(three

v'p = (G# + ( GU)2+ ( G,I,)~ + A2(t - 23)* + (bh)' + {( Dcpi)' + (D&2 In the formulae, the reading uncertainties the class accuracies.

l

1O-' tan2 cp>

r, and r,h may be ignored as com;>ared with

II -

Three-phase three-wire circuit It is assumed that the voltage transformers are connected in open-V.

The formulae valid for the cases d. 1, d.2 and d.3, respectively, are also available in the case of a Y connection, a DZo connection or a Dyll connection of the voltage transformers ifthey have the same accuracy class, when they are not calibrated or when the voltage transformers are calibrated by means of the same standard voltage transformer and calibration bridge; in the opposite case the errors to be applied in the formulae for a three-phase three-wire circuit should be calculated by means of the following formulae in the case of a Y connection.

109

IS 14198(I%n-t2):1994 IECPub953-2:1990

1) In the case of calibrated voltage transformers
(cu)&{(cu)~ + (cu)s) + 2.9
* 1@*{(&)R -(h&>

('%dRs

+&)R

+ (&@)S)

- 2%(c")R

- (ds>

and (c& w ; {( c,)T +
(cu)S} 2.9 * lo-* {(&&(&&)

(&hS

-+$,,.)T

+ (Ijcpu)S}

+

2.9((Cu)T - (c~)s>

2)

In the caseof non-calibrated
(G)Rs m i (( Gu)R +

voltage transformers
- (&pu)s)

( G,)s} + 2.9 - lo-* ((D&R
- 2.9 {(G)R

(44~~

=i{(

D&R + (D&)

- (GM-

and
+ ( G,)s}

(G)Ts

=i{(C,)T

- 2.9 - lo-*{( D&T

- (QpJs>

(&JTS

= i {(D&T

+ (D,,,)s> + 2.9 ((

G)T

-

(GM

Attention has to be paid to the symmetry qf`the voltages over the transformers
Case a :

a.1

Single-phase wattmeters

v;=(sY+(c")*+{( ;. 100)?+(;. ,,,13(1 -lq*
P+l?(t-23)*{(1+I(:. looi'+(~.,,,,:}

K)*+ K')

.

+ 3 * 1Om2 ( 1 - 2 K)* {( 6qi)2 + ( $U)2) with K = ~ CYI + cyz a.2 Single-phase watthour meters v', = (cJ* + (c$ + {(c&* + (r,,,h)*+ A2 (t - 23)`)
X((l - K)* + ZP} +

3 * lo-*(l-2

K)*{(&pi)*

+

(Sp)*>

a.3

Three-phase watthour meters VP = (s)* + (c,)* + (c,h)* + ( r,h)* + A2 ( t - 23)* + 3 * I O-*( 1 - 2 K)* {(&pi)' `+ (&puJ2)

110

IS 14198 (Part 2) : 1994 IEC Pub 953-2 : 1990 Case b: b.1 Single-phase wattmeters v2,=(q)2+(cu)2+(l - K)2 G$ z
10 + fP{(G,)`+(~)2+Wt -23,2}+(~.1oop~ 2+R(t-23))2 1 -KY

+ E * 100 ti + 3 * lo-*(1 - 2 K)2{($i)2 + (&p~)~> ( 1 b.2 Single-phase watthour meters r/",= (q)' + ( cJ2 + {( G,,,)2 + A2 (t - 23)2} . {( 1 - K)2 + A?} + (r~h)~ {( 1 - K)' + ZQ} + 3 ' 10e2 ( 1 - 2 Q2 {( &qpi)2 + ( 6cpu)2} b.3 Three-phase watthour meters VP = ( s)~ + ( cJ2 + ( G,tJ2 + A2 ( t - 23)* +
+ (bh)*

3 * lo-`( 1 - 2K)2 {(Scpi)2+ (S,pu)2)

In general, the calibration uncertainty figures c and S* of the transformers and the uncertainties in reading r, and rWh of the wattmeters/watthour meters can be ignored as compared with the accuracy class of the wattmeters/watthour meters. The formulae valid for cases b. 1, b.2 and b.3, respectively, may then be simplified to:

-

forsingle-phase v'p" G+

wattmeters: +J}+((l - Icy+ Kz)A'(t-23)2

-K)+z)2+

-

for single-phase watthour meters: v"p' (G,h)`+A'(t-23)' *{(I -K)`+ ti}

-

for three-phase watthour meters: v2p- ( Gwh)2+ A2 (t - 23)2 Case c:

c. 1

Single-phase wattmeters

+{(z.

KMq}+(;.

100)21C-+y(r-23)`.((1-K)`+IO)

.+ 3 * lo-*(1 -2 K)2((Dqi)2 +(&u)`)
* For usual power factors.

111

IS 14198 (Part 2) : 1994 IEC Pub 953-t : 1990

c.2

Single-phase watthour meters v'p - 4 + G', + (c,# + 3 * lob2 (p+ ( r,&2 + A2(t -23)2 . (( 1 - K)* + I?) 2K)2 ((Dqi)* + (D&`)
- 10S2tan2 q

c.3

Three-phase watthour meters v'p = ( G)2 + ( GU)2+ ( cWtJ2 + ( r,,+J2+ A2(t - 23)* + 3 ' 10m2(1 - 2 K)2((Dqi)2 + (Dqju)`)

Ignoring the calibration and reading inaccuracies of the wattmeters/watthour the apropriate formulae for cases c. 1, c.2 and c.3 can simplified to: for wattmeters: v', = q + e + A*(t - 23)* - (( 1 - K)* + I@ + 3 * 1O-*( I - 2K)* (( D(pi)2+ ( D~u)~) for single-phase watthour meters: v'p- q+ q+{aqt-23))2{(1 - Ky+ + (Qpu)`} K2)

meters,

+ 3 * 10v2(1 -2ZQ2((Dqi)* for three-phase watthour meters: VP= Gf'+ G+A2(t-23)2+3* Cased: d.1 Single-phase wattmeters 1/2=q+q+(l

10-2(1-2K)2{(D~i)2+(D~u)2)

- K)2{(GJ2(z)2

+ A2(t - 23J*} + P{tGw)*(z)

+A'(t-23)`}+j;.

loop

- a*+(;.

loo)%

+ 3 . 1O-*( 1 - 2 K)* {( Dvi)2 + ( Dqu)2} d.2 Single-phase watthour meters v',@+
+

cZ,+((GW~)2+A2(t-23)2)~((l

-K)*+

p}+(rwh)*((l

-

K)*+

p)

3 * lo-*(1 - 2 K)2((Dcpi)2 + (DqJ'}

d.3

Three-phase watthour meters v',C;2+ C;2, + (Gwh)2 + d2(t-23)2 + (r,.,t,)2+ 3
l

lo-*(1'-

2K)`((Dqi)`+

(DqU)2}

In these formulae the terms with r, and rWh can be ignored.

112

