( Reaffirmed 2002 )

IS:1885

(PartXLIX)1978

Indian Standard
ELECTROTECHNICAL VOCABULARY
PART XLIX INDUSTRIAL PROCESS MEASUREMENT AND CONTROL Standards Sectional Committee, ETDC 1
Refiesenting
Bharat Bijlee Ltd, Bombay; ond Rotating Machinery Sectional Committee, ETDC 15, IS1 Wireless Planning & Coordination Wing, Ministry of Communications, New Delhi National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi Power Cables Sectional Committee, ETDC 59, IS1 Low Voltage Switchgear and Controlgear Sectional Committee, ETDC 57, IS1 Larsen & Toubro Ltd, Bombay

Electrotechnical
Chairman SHXI J. S.
ZAVERI

Members
SHR~H. V. BADRINATH SHR~M . R . BHAT SHRI V. S. BWATIA
SWRI V. K. BATRA

SHRIJ. M. CHAKRABORTBY SHRI S. D. MEDHEKAR ( Altemafe ) Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) BRIO N. DAYAL DR R. R. DATTA~UPTA ( Alternate ) Central Electricity Authority ( Department of DIRECTOR( TED ) Power), Ministry of Energy DEPUTY DIRECTOR( TED ) ( Alteraafc ) Directorate General of Posts & Telegraphs ( Ministry GENERALMANAGER of Communications ), New Delhi DIRECTOR( TRANSMISSION ) ( Alternate ) Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Bhopal SHRI K. C. KAUL SHRI S. K. BHATIA ( A&ma& ) SHRI P. SIN~H (. Alternate) COL C. D. MALANEY Electronics & Radar Development Establishment ( Ministry of Defence ), Bangalore SHRI V. L. SASTRY ( Alternate ) National Test House, Calcutta SHRI S. K. MUKI~ERJEE PROPR. Cl. NARAYANAN General Nomenclature & Symbols Subcommittee, ETDC 1 : 3, BIS SHRI D. V. NARKE Transformers Sectional Committee, ETDC 18, IS1 High Voltage Switchgear andt.Controlgear Sectional Snru H. M. PAI Committee, ETDC 58, BIS Central Electrochemical Research Institute, SHRI R. RA~HAKRISHNAN Karaikudi SHRI H. N. VENKOBARAO( Alternate )

( Continuedon fiuge 2) @ Copyright 1979
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS This publication is protected uodor the Zndiun Copy& Act (XIV of 1957) and mproductioo in whole or in part by an means except with written permission of the . P* publisher shall be deemed to be ao ID rmgemeot of copyright under the raid Act,

IS : 1885( Part XLIX ) - 1978
( Continuedfrom pup Members
SIIRI

1) Representing Electrical Wiring Accessories Sectional Committee, ETDC 44, IS1 Relays Sectional Committee, ETDC 35, IS1 Institution of Engineers ( India ), Calcutta Secondary Cells & Batteries Sectional Committee, ETDC 11, IS1 Director General, IS1 ( Ex-o#cio Member )

K. N. RAMASWAMY

DRT.S.M.RAO DR S. M. SEN DR H. V. K. UDUPA
SIXRI

S. P. SACHDEV, Director ( Elec tech ) (Secrcfary )

Electrical Instrument for Industrial Sectional Committee, ETDC
Chairman

Processes 53

PROF ( DR) J. K. CHOUDHURY

Jadavpur
Members SHR~ J. S. AHLUWALIA DRY.L. ARORA SHRXC. B. PAND~T( Alternate ) SIIRI K. R. BANERJEE SHRI C. S. DANC ( Allernatc) SHRI J. S. PASS1

University,

Calcutta

Fertilizer Corporation of India Ltd, New Delhi Century Rayon, Bombay Instrumentation Ltd, Kota

General of Supplies & DisposalC Directorate ( Inspection Wing ), New Delhi Electronics Corporation of India Ltd, Hyderabad SHRI J. S. BHATIA DR N. SATYANARAY.ANA ( Alternate) Institute of Paper Technology, Saharanpnr DR H. BAAUMIK SHRI V. K. BUKSHI( Aflernate ) Indian Oil Corporation Ltd, New Delhi SHRI P. K. CHAKRAVORTY Mahindra & Mahindra Ltd, Calcutta SARr H. P. DEY SHRI S. BISWAS( Alternate Hindustan Steel Limited, Ranchi SIIRI A. K. GHOSH National Test House, Calcutta SHRI B. P. GHOSR SHRI D. N. UPADHYA ( Alierna. lgineers India Ltd, New Delhi SHRI R. GOPALAKRISHNAN SHRI A. K. VERMA ( Alferna`e ) Institute for the Design of Electrical Measuring SHRI K. V. GOPALRATNAM Instruments, Bombay DR N. VANVARI ( Altcrnotc ) Central Scientific Instruments Organization ( CSIR), SHRI B. P. MITAL Chandigarh Millowners' Asso;t;ion, Boplbay SARI J. M. NAIL Metallurgical Engmeering SHRI B. C. NAIR Consultants ( MECON ), Ranchi SHRI G. BALASUBRAMANIAN ( Alternate ) Department of Atomic Energy, Bombay SHRI B. S. PRABHAKAR P SHRI S. RAMAKRISHNAN ( Alfernate ) Elico Pvt Ltd, Hyderabad SHRI D. V. S. RAJU SHRI S. A. H. KHAN ( Alternate ) %? ( Continued on page 2 I

)

2

18:1885(PartXLIX)-1978

Indian Standard
ELECTROTECHNICAL VOCABULARY
PART XLIX INDUSTRIAL PROCESS MEASUREMENT AND CONTROL

0.

FOREWORD

8.1 This Indian Standard ( Part XLIX ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 17 July 1978, after the draft finalized by the Electrotechnical Standards Sectional Committee in consultation with the Electrical Instruments for Industrial Processes Sectional Committee has been approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council. 0.2 The definitions contained in this standard have been drawn up with the view of striking a balance between absolute precision and simplicity in terminology. The object of this standard is only to provide definitions which are sufficiently clear 90 that each term is understood with the same meaning by all concerned, and it does not, hence to be treated as a treatise on the subject. It may sometimes be felt that the definitions given here are not adequate, do not take account of certain exceptions, or are not identical to those which may be found in other publications designed Sufficient care has been taken for other readers and with other objectives. to define all terms that are commonly employed in thefield, while realising that omissions and differences are inevitable. Any such imperfections, which will be removed in the subsequent revisions, therefore, should be accepted in the interests of uniformity and clarity. 0.3 In the preparation of this standard, considerable assistance has been derived from IEC Pub 50 (351 )-I975 International Electrotechnical Vocabulary. Chapter 351 : Automatic control, issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission.

1. SCOPE
1.1 This standard ( Part XLIX ) covers automatic industrial process measurement 1.1.1 For the purposes of this standard, under the following heads: Section Section I II General Variables terms and signals 3 definitions of terms employed in and control. the terms are broadly classified

X8 %1995 ( Part XLIX ) - 1978 Section III Section IV Section V Section VI Section VII Block diagram nomenclature Performance Functioning System elements Final controlling elements SECTION 2. GENERAL TERMS to achieve a I characteristics

2.1 System-Set of interdependent elements constituted given objective by performing a specified function.

Nom -The system is considered to be separated from the environment and other external systems by an imaginary surface which cuts the links between them and the considered system. Through these links, the system is affected by the environment, is acted upon by the external systems, or acts itself on the environment or the external systems. * 2.2 Linear System -System equations.
NOTE-In invarient. this vocabulary,

which can be described by a set of linear
the linear systems are considered to be also time-

of operations which perform a physical or chemical 2.3 Process -Set transformation or a series of such transformations.
NoTE - Transportation considered as processes. of matter or energy, transmission of information can be

2.4 Control -Purposeful objectives.
NOTE-Control action itself.

action

on or in a system, to meet specified
and safeguarding besides the control

may include monitoring

2.3 Monitoring - Observation of the operation of a system or part of a system to verify correct functioning by detecting incorrect functioning; this being done by measuring one or more variables of the system and comparing the measured values with the specified values. 2.6 Conduit-The control and monitoring operations of a system including where appropriate those operations which ensure reliability and safeguarding. 2.7 Manual Control -Type of control in which man operates directly or indirectly on the final controlling element.
NOTE-

either

In the process industry, this ir generally done via a standardized signal.

4

IS : 1885 ( Part XLIX )

l

1978

2.8 Automatic Control -Type of control in which a direct or indirect action of man on the final controlling element is not needed. 2.9 Open-Loop ControlControl which does not utilize the measurement of the controlled variable. 2.10 Feedback Control, Closed Loop Control - Control in which the control action is made to depend on the measurement of the controlled variable. 2.11 Control with Fixed Set-Point - Feedback control by which the control&d variable is made to remain substantially constant.
NOTE -The

controlled variable may then be called a regulated variable.

2.12 Follow-Up ControlFeedback control by which the controlled variable is made to vary according to the variations of a reference variable. 2.13 Time Programme - A plan which prescribes system as a function of time only. the actions on a

2.14 Sequential Programme - A plan which prescribes the actions on a system in a predetermined order and in which some actions depend on the execution of preceding ones or on the fulfilment of certain conditions. 2.15 Programmed ' executed. 2.16 Sequential executed. 2.17 Controlled Control Control System -Control in which a programme is is

Control in which a sequential programme System on which control is exerted.

2.18 Controlling System, Controlling Equipment ing all the elements which control the controlled system.
NOTEIn feedback control,

System compris-

this also includes any elements in the feedback.

2.19 Control System - System constituted by a controlled system and its controlling system ( equipment ). , 2.20 Controller - In the controlling equipment of a feedback control system, an element that combines two or more functions of the controlling system; one of these shall be comparison between a feedback signal and reference signal; the other functions may be amplification, equalization, etc. 2.21 Automatic well-defined task. Self-acting ( not needing human operator ) within a

2.22 Automate - To modify an installation to reduce human intervention by using automatic equipment. 5

IS : 1885 ( Part XLIX

) - 1978 SECTION II

3. VARIABLES

AND

SIGNALS

3.1 ( Variable ) Quantity - A quantity or condition whose value may be subject to change and which may usually be measured.
NOTE -The term `variable' alone is frequently used to circumvent correct denomination `variable quantity'. the lengthy but

3.2 Input Variable -Variable applied to a independent of the other variables of the system. 3.3 Output Variable Variable delivered variable

system,

and

which

is

by a system. of the controlled system. system,

3.4 Controlled

Variable

Output

3.5 Manipulated Variable which is also an input variable

Output variable of the controlled

of the controlling system.

input variable OI 3.6 Reference Variable - Constant or.time-dependent a control system, which variable the controlled one should desirably reproduce. 3.7 Disturbance - Undesired and most frequently unprcdictablc in any input variable, other than the reference variable. change

3.8 Signal - Measurable variable, one or more parameters of which carry information about one or more variables which the signal represents.
NOTE These parameters are called `information parameters

' of the signal.

Examples:

sinusoidal carrier, the For an amplitude-modulated instantaneous amplitude is the information parameter of the signal; for a duration- or position-modulated pulse signal, the duration ( or width ) or the position of each pulse respectively is the information parameter of the signal. A signal representing the reference variable. variable and

3.9 Set-Point -

3.10 Feedback Signal - Signal depending returned to a comparing element. 3.11 Error Signal control syjteln. Output

on the controlled element

signal of a comparing

of a feedback

3.12 Quantization - Process by which the range of a variable is divided into a finite number of distinct subranges not neccssnrily equal, each of which is represented by an assigned value named quantized value. 3.13 Quantized parameter. Signal Signal having a quantized information

6

IS : 1885 ( Part XLIX ) - 1978 3.14 Digital
which represents

Signal -

Quantized numbers. Quantized

signal signal

the

information

parameter conventionally

of

3.15 Binary Signal denoted 0 and 1.

with two values parameter a variable

3.16 Analogue Signal - Signal the information assume all values of a given range. 3.17 Sampled intermittently Signal - Signal representing observed and represented.

of which may which is only

SECTION
4. BLOCK DIAGRAM NOMENCLATURE

Ill

4.1 Functional Block - Representation of an assembly of functionally interrelated elements by means of a graphical envelope symbol associated with the functioral relationships which exist between the input and output signals. 4.2 Block Diagram -.Relatively simple diagram to facilitate the underIt is a diagram in standing of the principle of operation of a system. together with its functional which a system or part of a system, relationships, are represented by symbols, block symbols or pictures, here called functional blocks, without necessarily showing all the connections (see Fig. 1 ).
NOTE 1 - In this standard, the functional which represent the signal flow. NOTE 2 A'block diagram for a feedback blocks control are linked by oriented system contains connections

at least:

a) an input, b) an output, c) a comparing d) a forward e) a feedback clement, path, path. and

4.3 Functional Chain - Sub-assembly of functional a block diagram by cutting only two connections.

blocks extracted

from

4.4 Comparing Element - Functional block with two inputs and one output, the output signal being the difference between the two input signals. 4.5 Forward Path - Functional chain linking element to the output of the controlled system. the output of a comparing

4.6 Feedback Path - Functional chain linking an output of the controlled system to one input of the relevant comparing element.

7

IS t 1885 ( Part XLlX 4.7 Main

) - 1978

Feedback Path-Feedback path linking the output of the controlled system to one input of the comparing element nearz!:st the input of the controlling system. 4.8 Control LoopAssembly of elements compfising a comparing clement, the co:responding forward path and the corresponding feedback path.
NOTE - Sometimes a control loop may enclose others, in which case it is called the main loop; the enclosed ones are called minor, subsidiary, secondary, auxiliary or local loops.

SECTION 5. PERFORMANCE

IV

CHARACTERISTICS

5.1 Characteristic Curve - Graph ( curve ) which shows the values, in steady state, of an output variable of a system as a function of an input variable, the other input variables being maintained at specified constant values.

NOTE - When the other input variables teristic curves is obtained.

are treated as parameters,

a set of charac-

5.2 Saturation - Phenomenon represented by the part of a characteristic curve for which the ordindes (which represent the output variable ) show a negligible additional change for any further increase of the abscissae ( which represent the input variable ). 5.3 Dead Band, Dead Zone - Finite range of values within which a variation of the illput variable does not produce any significant change in the output variable. NOTE- When neutral zone.
5.4 this type of characteristics is intentional, it is sometimes called a

Hysteresis - Phenomenon represented by a characteristic curve which has a branch, called ascending branch, for increasing values of the input variable, and a different branch, called descending branch, for decreasing values of the input variable.
NCJTE- Sometimes menon. 5.5 a dead band cfTect can be superposed on a hysteresis pheno-

Inherent Characteristic of a System - Data ( formula or graph ) showing the relationship in steady state between an output variable ( practically variable to be controlled) and one of the input variables of the system, with any controlling equipment disconnected and for fixed values of the other input variables.

9

IS : 1885( Part XLIX

) - 1978

5.6 Control Characteristic of a Controlled System - For an automatic control system with fixed set-point, the data ( formula or graph) showing the relationship in steady state between the controlled variable and an input variable. 5.7 Transient -. The behaviour two steady states. of a variable during transition between

5.8 Time Response -The variation in time of an output variable of a system, produced by a specified variation of one of the input variables. 5.9 Step Response -The time response of a system stepwise variation of one of the input variables.
NOTE: -When the variation of the input variable response is called the unil step response.

produced

by a

is equal to one unit, the step Response - The time of a delta function ( unit-

Unit Impulse 5.10 Weighting Function, response of a system produced by the application impulse function ) on one of t!le inputs.
NOTE

-The

weighting

function is, for a linear system, the time derivative of the

unit step response.

5.11 Transfer FunctionIn a linear system, ratict of the Laplace transform of an output signal to the Laplace transform ofthe corresponding input signal, with all initial conditions zero. 5.12 Frequency Response -For a linear system, the ratio of thp Fourier transform of the output signal to the Fourier transform of the corresponding input signal.
NOTE - The frequent);' response coincides with the transfer function imaginary axis of the complex plane.

taken on the frequency

5.13 Open-Loop Frequency Response - Product responses of the forward path and of the feedback path.

of

the

open-loop gain and the open-loop phase angle are respectively the NOTE -The absolute value and the argument of the open-loop frequency response.

5.14 Gain 7 the amplitude input signai.
NOTE -The

For a linear system in sinusoidal steady state, the ratio of the output signal to the amplitude of the correspsnding
gain is the absolute value of the frequency response.

of

5.15 Logarithmic Gain-If G is the gain of the logarithmic gain, expressed in decibels is, 20 log G.

linear

system,

its

5.16 Phase Angle - For a linear system in sinusoidal steady state, phase difference between the output signal and the corresponding input signal.
NOTE -

The phase angle is the argument of the frequency response.

10

18 : 1885 ( Part XLlX

) - 1978

5.17 Frequency Response Characteristic, Bode Diagram - Graphical representation of logarithmic gain and phase angle as functions of the frequency, which is usually represented on a logarithmic scale. 5.18 Describing Function - For a non-linear element in steady state, with a sinusoidal input signal, the frequency response obtained by taking only the fundmental component of the output signal.
NOTE-The describing function may depend on the frequency and on the amplitude of the input signal, or only on the amplitude of the input signal.

5.19 Settling Time - Time interval between the step change of an input signal and the instant when the resulting variation of the output signal does not deviate more than a specified tolerance, for instance 5 percent, from its final steady-state value. a step response, the time interval between the 5.20 Rise Time -For instant when the output signal, starting from zero, reaches a small specified percentage ( for instance 10 percent) of the final steady-state value, and the instant when it reaches for the first time a large specified percentage ( for instance 90 percent ) of the same steady-state value. 5.21 Dead Time, Delay - Time interval between the instant when a variation of an input variable is produced and the instant when the consequent variation of the output variable starts. 5.22 Time Constant function _' -For x a linear system of first order, described by T. of

the transfer

the time constant

is the value of the factor

to the transport 5.23 Distance-Velocity Lag - A delay attributable material or to the finite rate of propagation of a signal.

5.24 Overshoot - For a step response, the maximum transient deviation from the final steady-state value of the output variable, expressed in perccntagc of the difference between the`final and the original steadystate values. 5.25 Actual Value The value of a variable at a given instant. wanted at a given instant, and the actual

5.26 Desired Value - The value of a variable under specified conditions.

5.27 Deviation - Difference between the desired value of an output variable at a given instant.
SOTE-

value

time.

This definition applies whether the desired value is constant

or varies in

5.28 System Deviation - For a control system, the difference between the rcfercnce variable and the controlled variable at a given instant. 5.29 Steady State Deviation - Steady-state value of the system deviation when all input variables are maintained constant.

IS t 1885 ( Part XLIX

) - 1978

5.30Steady-State
the system maintained

Deviation of the nth Order - Steady-state value of deviation when the nth derivative of one input variable is constant, and the other input variables are constant. to a

5.31 Offset Coefficient - Absolute value of the slope of the tangent control characteristic at a given point.

NOTE - The offset coefficient and the steady-state deviation are rxpressed by the same number when the same units are used for the input variable and the controlled variable in both cases.

5.32 Absence of Offset, Zero Offset - Property of a control system the characteristic of which is horizontal, that is, whose steady-state deviation is zero. 5.33 Stability of a Linear System - For a linear system, the property such that, after having been displaced from its steady-state condition by an external disturbance, it comes back to that condition when the disturbance has ceased. 5.34 Absolute Stability of a Linear System - For a linear single-loop control system, the property such that there exists a limiting value of the static open-loop gain such that the system is stable for all lower values of that gain and unstable for all higher values. 5.35 Conditional Stability of a Linear System-For a linear singleloop control system, the property of being stable for a certain interval of values of the static open-loop gain and unstable for certain lower and higher values of that gain. 5.36 Gain MarginFor an absolutely stable feedback system, the reciprocal of the open-loop gain at the frequency at which the phase angle reaches x rad. 5.37 Phase MarginFor an absolutely stable feedback system, the difference bctwcet x rad and the absolute value of the open-loop phase angle at the frequency at which the open-loop gain is unity. 5.38 Hunting a control system. Usually undesirable )self-sustained Progressive periodic reduction oscillations in

5.39 Damping ( of an Oscillation the amplitude of an oscillation.

wirh time of

5.40 Damping Ratio .- For a linear system of the second order described by the diffcrcntial equation :

The damping
NOTE a0 is

ratio is the value of the factor

D.

called the angular resonance frequency of the system.

12

IS : 1885 ( Part XLIX ) - 1978 5.41 Performance Index - Mathematical expression which characterizes the quality of control under specified conditions. 5.42 Optimal Control - Control for which the performance reaches a maximum or a minimum under specified limitations. SECTION 6. FUNCTIONING 6.1 Type of Action of an Element - For an element, the way in which the input variable affects the output variable, NOTE - Distinctionis made between intermittent and persistent action. 6.2 Modulating Action-Type of action in which the output variable results from modulation of a carrier by the input variable. 6.3 Sampling Action - Type of intermittent action in which the output variable represents samples of the input variable. NOTE - Amplitude or duration modulation of a pulse signal are types of sampling
actions.

index

V

6.4 Holding ActionType of sampling action in which the output variable is held constant during the time intervals between samples ( zeroorder hold) or varied by a definite law in accordance with preceding samples of the input variable ( higher-order hold ). 6.5 Continuous ActionType of action in which a continuous variation between two limits can be imposed on the output variable. -Sometimes this type of action is improperly called `modulating action' NOTE especially when one wants to stress the faet that the action is not a step action. 6.6 Step Action - Type of action in which only a finite number of values, called steps, can be imposed on the output variable. 6.7 Switching Value - For an element with step action, any value of the input variable at which the value of the output variable changes.
NOTE- The value of the output variable may change between two steps for two different switching values ( upper and lower value) according to the sign of the variation of the input variable. A nominal switching value is then often usec ( see Fig. 2 ).

6.8 Differential Gap, Overlap - Difference between the upper and the lower switching values ( in the sense of the `Note' under 6.7 ) ( see Fig. 2 ). NOTE- This should not be confused with `neutral zone'. 6.9 Two-Step Action -Type of action which imposes on the output varizrble either one of two steps. 13

IS : 1885( Part XLIX ) a 1978
Y

d = lower switching b = upper switching a6 = differential Fro.

value value )

gap ( overlap

2

SWITCHING VALUE, DIPWRENTIALGAP ( OVERLAP ) action in which one of the steps is action in which both steps have the Two-step action irx which the steps

6.10 On-Off Action-Two-step assigned the value zero. 6.11 High-Low Action same sign. 6.12 Positive-Negative have opposite signs. 6.13 Multi-Step Two-step Action -

Action -

Step action with more than two steps.

6.14 Positive-Negative Three-Step Action - Multi-step aition with three steps of which one is assigned the value zero and the other two have opposite signs ( see Fig. 3 ). 6.15 Neutral Zone - In a positive-negative three-step action, difference between the two switching values ( see Fig. 3 ). 6.16 Proportional Action, P-Action -Type of continuous action in which the variations of the output variable are proportional to the concomitant variations of the input variable. 6.17 Proportional-Action Coefficient - For an element with proportional action the ratio of the variation of the output variable to the corresponding variation of the input variable. 6.18 Floating Action - Type of continuous action in which the rate of change of the output variable is a predetermined function of the input variable ( that is, in the case of a controller, of the system deviation).
14

Is t 1885( Part XLIX

) - 1978

ab = neutral

zone

FIG. 3

POSITIVE-NEGATIVE THREE-STEP

ACTION, NEUTRAL ZONE

6.19 Single Speed Floating Action - Floating action in which the rate of change of the output variable has only one absolute value. 6.20 Multiple-Speed Floating Action - Floating action in which rate of change of the output variable may have several absolute values. the

action in which the rate 6.21 Continuous Floating Action -Floating of change of the output variable may have any value Bctwcen twogiven limits. 6.22 Integral Action, I-Action - Type of continuous (floating ) action in which the rate of change ( time derivative) of the output variable is proportional to the concomitant value of the input variable ( that is, in the case of a controller, of the system deviation ). 6.23 Integral-Action Coefficient - For an element with integral action, the ratio of the rate cf change ( time derivative ) `of the output variable to the concomitant value of the input variable. 6.24 Integral-Action Time Constant -l?or an clement with integral action, the reciproca! of the integral action coefficient, if the input and output variables have the same dimensions. and integral action 6.25 Reset Time - For an element with proportional ( PI-action), the input variable of which is given a step-wise variation, the reset time is the time required for the output variable to reach twice the value of the variation that occurred immediately after the step was applied. 15

IS t 1885 ( Part XLIX ) - 1978 6.26 Derivative Action, D-Action - Type of `continuous action in which the value of the output variable is proportional to the rate of change ( first time derivative) of the input variable ( that is, in the case of a controller, of the system deviation ). an element 6.27 Derivative-Action Coefficient -For derivative action, the ratio of the value of the output variable of change ( time derivative ) of the input variable. with pure to the rate

6.28 Derivative-Action Time Constant-For an element with pure derivative action, the derivative action time constant is equal to the derivative action coefficient if the input and output variables have the same dimensions. 6.29 Rate Time -For an element with proportional and derivative action ( PD-action ), the input variable of which is given a ramp-wise variation, the rate time is the time required for the output variable variation to reach twice the value of the variation that occurred immediately after the ramp was applied. 6.30 Second Derivative Action, D$-Action- Type of continuous action in which the value of the output vanable is at all times proportional to the second time derivative of the input variable ( that is, in the case of a controller, of the system deviation). 6.31 Composite Action - Additive combination of two or more types of continuous actions ( PI, PD, PID, PIDD,, etc ). 6.32 Type of Control -Type of action of the controlling ( for instance : continuous control, step control, etc ). 6.33 Astatic Control -Type of control every point.of the control characteristic. with zero-offset equipment coefficient in

6.34 Cascade Control - Type of control in which the reference variable of a controller is provided by another control system. 6.35 Neutral Zone Control-Type of control where a change of the controlled variable over a well-defined and adjustable portion of the control range does not cause any change in the manipulated variable. 6.36 Feedforward Control -Type of control in which the manipulated variable, while still depending on the controller output, is also made to depend on the measured value of one or more input variables. 6.37 Measuring Range - Interval defined by two values of the measured variable and within which measurements are made within the specified accuracy. 6.38 Upper ( Lower ) Range ValueHighest ( lowest ) value of the variable that a measuring device is adjusted to measure within the specified 16

IS : 1885 ( Part XLIX

) - 1978

accuracy; for muki-range devices, the upper range value and the lower range value refer to the particular range that the measuring device is set to measure. 6.39 Measuring range values. Span Difference between the upper and the lower

6.40 Upper (Lower ) Range Limit-Highest ( lowest ) value of the variable that a measuring device can be adjusted to measure within a specified accuracy.
NOTE -For a multi-range device, the upper ( lower) ( lowest ) of the different upper ( lower ) range values.
range

limit is the highest

defined by the two extreme values that 6.41 Control Range - Interval the controlled variable can assume under specified operating conditions. 6.42 Correcting Range, Manipulated Range - The interval defined by the two extreme values that the manipulated variable can assunlc. 6.43 Proportional Band of a Controllerportional action, the reciprocal of the controller of the measuring span. SECTION 7. SYSTEM ELEMENTS VI In a controller wit11 proexpressed as a percentage

in 7.1 ( Measuring ) Transducer - Device which accepts informaticn the form of a physical quantity ( its input variable ) and converts it to information in the form of the same or another physical quantity, according to a definite law.
NOTE-There are many different type: of measuring transducers, with different names, according to the nature of the physical phenomenon on which they are based, for example, a) Displacement, c) Measuring angle, velocity, acceleration measuring transducers; b) Flow measuring transducers or flowmeters; transducers for electrical quantities; measuring transducers; d) Temperature

e) Force and torque measuring transducers;

f ) Pressure measuring transducers;
g) Deformation measuring transducers; h) Level measuring transducers; and j) Analytical elements for chemical and physical measurement.

7.2 ( Measuring is a standardized

) Transmitter signal.

-

Measuring

transducer

whose

output

17

IS : 1885 ( Part XLIX 7.3 Sensor, Detecting

?- 1978

converts

the input

transducer Device - Part of a measuring signal into a form suitable for measurement.

which
k

NOTE- The relationship between the input and the output variables fundamental and cannot be altered by external means other than functionally modifying the device.

of a sensor

physically or

7.4 Signal Converter - Device which changes a standardized signal into a different standardized signal, the physical nature of the output being the same as that of the input.

7.5 Process Computer - Digital, part of the process control system.
NOTE 1 Such a computer ( logging and taking set-points, can carry logical a) Acquisition b) Monitoring c) Specifying ) and reduction and

analoguc

or hybrid

computer

which is

out one or more of the following of data,

functions:

decisions, type of operation is

d) LVorking as a substitute for one or more controllers (that called direct digital control when the computer is digital ).

NOTE 2 -The human operator communicates with the computer through a console, an input keyboard, display units, a printing unit, card and tape readers, etc.
NOTE 3 - The exchange of information between the other parts of the system and the computer is achieved by input and output units which may include a multiplexer, an analogue-to-digital converter, a digital-to-analoguc converter, erc.

7.6 Binary-Logic System - System transmitted, processed or stored.

in

which

binary

signals

are

7.7 Binary-Logic Element, Binary Logic Gate - Two-state element which perforins a combinatorial logic operation, for instance: a) tile complcmentation ( it is then called a ITOT-gate ), b) the logical product ( it is then called an AND-gate ), c) the complemetcd logica! product (it is then called a NAND-gate ), d) the logical sum (it is then called an OR-gate ), and e) ttlc complexncntcd logical sum ( it is then called a NOR-gate ). 7.8 Register - Logic system composed of II identical cells having each a logic output and a set of ci)mmon control inputs ( inhibition input, clear input, etc ) and which is intended to store a n-digit binary number. 7.9 Amplifier - Device used to increase the level the necess.rry energy from 3n auxiliary source.
NOTE One may distinguish voltage, power, torque,

of a signal

by taking

etc, amplifiers.

7.10 Operational

Amplifier-Amplifier

with

high

gain,

high

input

impedCrnce and low output

impedance.
amplifier, any linear one can realize transfer function

NOTE- By adding external elements to an operational summing circuits, integrating circuits and more generally or any non-linear transformation law.

A8

IS 8 1885 ( Part 7.11 Sampler, Sampling Element - Signal continuous signal into a sampled signal. converter

XLIX ) - 1978
changes a

which

7.12 Equalizer, Compensating Element - Element connected forivard path or in an auxiliary feedback path of a feedback control at~d whose transfer function is such that the overall performances feed1~nc.k control system arc improved.
NOTE -

in the system of the

Equalizers can be a lead network, a lag network, a lead-lag network, etc.

SECTION
8. FINAL CONTROLLING ELEMENTS

VII

8.0 The terms defined in 8 are examples list is not exhaustive.

offinal

controlling of the forward

elements; path

t!le wljich

8.1 Final Controlling Element - Element directly changes the manipulated variable. 8.2 Actuator Final controlling element

of mechanical

type.

NOTE-The final controlling elements are generally of mechanical type (valves, dampers, vices, etc ) but they may also be of anothrr nature ( exciter of a generator for instance).

8.3 Control of a fluid.

Valve -

Mechanical

device

which

modifies the rate of flow

NOTE -The control of the moving part of the valve can be manual or carried out by an electric, hydraulic or pneumatic motor, either in a continuous or in a step-wise manfier.

8.4 Valve Positioner - An auxiliary control system designed to increase the accuracy and speed of the positioning of the moving part of the valve. 8.5 Torque Variator, Speed Variator - A coupling device which may be acted on in order to vary the ratio of the angular velocities of a driving shaft and of a driven shaft ( or the ratio of the available torques on these shafts ). of the 8.6 Solenoid Actuator - Actuator in which the displacement controlled part is obtained by the attraction of the armature of a solenoid. 8.7 Control-Motor Actuator, Servomotor Actnato, - Actuator in whic!l the displacement of the controlled part is obtained by the movement of a part of a motor. 8.8 Electronic Controlling Elements for Current -Active electronic components with at least three electrodes ( for example for a tube, an 19

IS : 1885 ( Part XLIX ) - 1978 anode, a cathode and a control grid) acting as a current path between anode and cathode when an appropriate signal is applied to the control electrode.
ofsuch controlling elements are: the thyratron (gas-filled tube with NOTE -Examples controlgrid ), the thyristor or semi-conductor controlled rectifier ( four-layers semiconducting device with one control electrode, called gate ), the silicon controlled switch ( four-layers semiconducting device with two control electrodes called cathode gate and anode gate), the triac (which in principle, is a special connection of two silicon controlled rectifiers).

8.9 Magnetic Amplifier - Amplifier in saturation properties of a magnetic core.
NOTE -

which

use is made

of the

The magnetic amplifier may be used as a current controlling device.

20

IS : 1885( Part XLIX ) - 1978
( Continued,from &ge 2 ) Members SHRI K. N. RAMASWAMY Representing Directorate General of Technical Development, New Delhi SHRIR. S~IJNDHIRARAJAN (Alternate) M. N. Dastur & Co ( Pvt) Ltd, Calcutta SHRI N. N. SARKAR SHRI N. G. CHATTOPADIIYAY( Alfrrnatc ) National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), Next Drlh SHRI S. P. SURI DR T.K. SAXENA ( Alternate) Toshniwal Industries Pvt Ltd, Ajmrr DR G. R. TOSWNIWAL SHRI S. C. MAHE~HWARI( Alternote ) ( I:lrctronics ) Controllcratr of Inspection COL VENKATESWARAN ( Ministry of Dcfcncc ), Bangnlorc LT-COL G. R. MAHADBI'AN ( Alfernnlc ) Director Crncral, IS1 ( I%-oJicio Mmhrr ) SHRI S. P. SACHDEV, Director ( Elec tech)
Secrcla~Y

SECRX K. GANESH Assistant Director ( Elec tech), IS1

21

INDIAN ON

STANDARDS

ELECTROTECHNICAL IS

VOCABULARY

:
Electrotechnical vocabulary

1885

:

( Part I )-1961
( Part VIII ( Part IX )-1966 ( Part X )-1968 ( Part XI )-I966 ( Part XIV

Fundamental Secondary Electrical Electrical Electrical

definitions cells and batteries relays

)-I965

power system protection measurements

)-I967

Nuclear power plants Primary cells and batteries Lighting, Section I General aspects 2 General illumination, lighting fittings

( Part XV )-lQ67* ( Part XVI/Set

1 )-I968

( Part XVI/Set 2 )-I968 Lighting, Section and lighting for traffic and signalling ( Part XVI/Set ( Part XVII ( Part XXVII ( Part XXVIII ( Part XXIX ( Part XXX ( Part XXX11 ( Part XXXIV ( Part XXXV ( Part XXXVII ( Part XXXVIII (Part 3 )-1967 j-1969 )-I972 j-1971 )-1971 )-1971 )-I972 )-I973 )-1974 )-197,3 Lighting, )-1969 Switchgear

Section 3 Lamps and auxiliary

apparatus

and controlgear transformers of electrical energy

Static power convertors Instrument Mining Overhead, terms transmission and distribution and accessories for electricity supply

Cables, conductors Cinematography Rotating machinery

Tariffs for electricity Transformers equipment used medical practice and control

( Part XL11 )-1977 XL111 )-1977 )-1978 ( Part XLIX

Power capacitors Electrical Industrial process measurement

