**************** 



-k t^^ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 12864-2 (1989) : Packaging of Thermosf lasks for Export - 
Code of Practice, Part 2: Glass Refills [TED 24: Transport 
Packages] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 12864 (Part2):1989 

Indian Standard ^ "^^"'™^' '°°' ^ 

PACKAGING OF THERMOSFLASKS FOR 
EXPORT — CODE OF PRACTICE 

PART 2 GLASS REFILLS 



UDC 621-798 : 64r546-26004'69 : 006-76 



© BIS 1990 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

June 1990 Price Group 1 



Packaging Codes Sectional Committee, LMD 26 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard ( Part 2 ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 6 December 
1989, after the draft finalized by the Packaging Codes Sectional Committee had been approved by 
the Light Mechanical Engineering Division Council. 

This code lays down guidelines for packaging of glass refills for thermosflasks for export. The 
requirements for packaging of thermosflask ( complete ) are covered in Part 1 of this code. 

Number of refills packed in one bulk CFB box would vary depending upon the importers* 
requirements. The requirements covered in this code are based on a maximum 17 kg net mass 
of refills. 

In laying down this code only the basic material requirements have been identified. Performance 
criteria for bulk packaging have not been stipulated considering the fully containerised handling and 
transportation. It is hoped that the adoption of recommended practice would result in attaining 
uniformity, simplicity and economy in shipment of these products. 



IS 12864 ( Part 2 ) : 1989 



Indian Standard 



PACKAGING OF THERMOSFLASKS FOR 
EXPORT — CODE OF PRACTICE 



PART 2 GLASS REFILLS 



1 SCOPE 

1.1 This standard ( Part 2 ) covers the require- 
ment of packaging of glass refills for thermos- 
flasks for containerised shipment by sea when 
the loading is done in intermodal containers at 
the manufacturer's end under personal super- 
vision and destuffed at the importer's warehouse. 

2 REFERENCES 

2*1 The following Indian Standard is a necessary 
adjunct to this standard: 



IS No. 



Title 



IS 1260 Pictorial markings for han- 

( Part 2 ) : 1979 dling and labelling of goods: 
Part 2 General goods 
( second revision ) 

3 MATERIALS AND CONSTRUCTION 

3.1 Bulk Pack 

The bulk pack for thermosflask refills shall be a 
corrugated fibreboard ( CFB ) box of appropri- 
ate dimensions to contain suitable number of 
thermosflasks refills packed in one or two layers. 
Rectangular slotted CFB partitions shall be used 
in each layer to prevent product to product 
contact. The outer dimensions of the bulk box 
shall be preferably modular to the internal 
dimensions of the intermodal containers in order 
to achieve maximum capacity utilization. When- 
ever the product is placed in two layers, 3-ply 
corrugated fibreboard separator plate shall be 
used inbctween the two layers. 3-ply CFB top 
and bottom plates shall be used if the inner 
flaps of the corrugated fibreboard box do not 
meet. 

34.1 Material and constructional requirements 
for the bulk packaging system shall be as given 
in Annex A. 



4 PACKAGING SEQUENCE 

4.1 The packaging sequence shall be as follows: 

a) A CFB bulk box of appropriate dimen- 
sions is erected by closing the bottom flaps 
either with the help of gummed paper 
tape applied in 'C manner or by gluing 
the flaps together; 

b) If the inner flaps of the CFB box are not 
meeting at the centre, a 3-ply CFB plates 
is placed at the bottom of the box so as 
to make the base uniform; 

c) Rectangular CFB slotted partitions are 
erected and placed inside the box; 

d) Thermosflasks refills are then put indivi- 
dually in the partition cells ( one in each 
cell ). If the refills are to be packed in 
two layers, the refills in the bottom layer 
are so placed that the neck of the refill 
rests on the base of the CFB box; 

e) A CFB separator plate is placed over the 
first layer and second layer of refills is 
packed in the slotted partition cells, erect- 
ed and placed over the first layer so that 
the necks of the refills face the top; 

f ) If the inner flaps of the CFB box are not 
meeting at the centre, a CFB separator 
plate should be placed at the top; 

g) The bulk box is then closed gluing the 
flaps with adhesive or by gummed paper 
tape or pressure sensitive plastic or paper 
tape applied in 'C manner; 

h) The CFB box is then reinforced with two 
non-metallic straps of 12 mm width along 
the girth direction. The straps are clipped 
or heat sealed under tension; and 

j) The bulk box shall be legibly marked^ 
The pictorial marking shall conform to 
IS 1260 (Part 2) : 1979. 



IS 12864 ( Part 2 } : 1989 



ANNEX A 
{ Clause 3A.1 ) 

REQUIREMENTS FOR BULK PACKAGING SYSTEM 



A-l BULK PACK 



Material of construction 
Number of plies 
Type of flute 
Type of paper 
Direction of flute 
Style of box 

Bursting strength ( Min ) 
Manufacturers' joint 
Adhesive used 
Number of pieces/box 
Dimensions 



Corrugated fibre board 

Three 

B ( Narrow ) 

Kraft 

Vertical 

Regular slotted container 

600 kPa 

By staple pins 

Preferably starch based or any other suitable neutral adhesive 

Maximum two 

Modular to internal dimensions of container 



A-2 SEPARATOR PLATES/RECTANGULAR SLOTTED PARTITION 

Material of construction : Corrugated fibre board 
Number of plies : Three 

Type of flute : B ( Narrow ) 

Bursting strength ( Min ) : 500 kPa 

A.3 GUMMED PAPER TAPE 



Grammage of base paper : 
Adhesive coating : 
Burst factor ( Min ) : 


80 g/m2 
30 g/m« 
20 


A.4 NON-METALLIC STRAP 




Material of construction : 


HDPE or PP 


Width : 
Breaking load ( Min ) : 
Elongation at break ( Max ) : 


12 mm 
900 N 
15 percent 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of the Indian 
Standards, Act^ 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on 
products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced 
to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection^ 
testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the pro- 
ducer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to 
that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use 
of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from 
the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



Borean of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institutioti established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act^ 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of 
goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright __ 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in 
any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in 
the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or 
grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. 

Revision of Indian Standards 

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, 
are issued from time lo time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession 
of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS 
giving the following reference : 

Doc: No. LMD26(856) 

Amendments Issued Since Pablication 

Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters : 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Telegrams rJManaksanstha 

( Common to all Offices ) 

?Legional Offices : Telephone 

Central ; Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 331 01 31 

NEW DELHI 110002 1 331 13 75 



Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola 

CALCUTTA 700054 37 86 62 

Northern : SCO 445-446. Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 2 18 43 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 41 29 16 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) 

BOMBAY 400093 6 32 92 95 

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. 
COIMBATORE, FARIDABAD, GHAZIABAD, GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. PATNA. TRIVANDRUM. 



Printed at Swataotra Bharat Press. Delhi, India 



