**************** 



*■ fe^K 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



^^Eti^^tt^n i im^VN^ ^^Ts^^ii ra^gg > ^uiKS*g&^^ 



IS 4654 (1993) : Paraffin wax 
and their Related Products] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



[PCD 3: Petroleum, Lubricants 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



?TR TJ^ ^TT teMHI | ^t ^Tift ^FTT ^f ^TT ^T^?TT \' 

Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 4664 : 1993 

q"TTf^r *ft*r — feftrfe 

( jwg i^ftero ) 

Indian Standard 
PARAFFIN WAX — SPECIFICATION 

( Second Revision J 



First Reprint NOVEMBER 1994 



UDC 665-772 



© BIS 1993 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARO 

NEW DELHI 110002 



Price Group 8 



Petroleum Products Sectional Committee, PCD 3 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard ( Second Revision ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the 
draft finalized by the Petroleum Products Sectional Committee had been approved by Petroleum, Coal 
and Related Products Division Council. 

Paraffin wax is an important petroleum product manufactured in the country and marketed both at home 
and abroad. It is produced in several melting point grades and to different quality standards for a 
variety of applications. This standard is intended to assist in selecting and manufacturing suitable 
quality of the material for the right purpose. 

This standard was first published in 1968. Since then the consumption of paraffin waxes in the country 
has significantly increased for various end uses apart from traditional use in candle and match manufac- 
turing. The first revision of this standard had been brought out in 1974 to modify requirements such as 
melting point, oil content and colour for various end-use trends in the country and relevant changes in 
the present and foreseeable future in manufacturing and trade practices. In addition ultraviolet absorp- 
tion test was also been specified for Type 1 material in addition to acid discolouration test. 

The second revision was taken up as a result of review of this standard by the committee in the light of 
the present day requirements and availability of the paraffin waxes for various end-uses; an additional 
type of paraffin wax Type 2 A having oil content 1-5 percent by mass, and widely prevalent in the 
country has been included. All the existing grades of paraffin wax given in the first revision have been 
retained. However, the references given in 3.1 with respect to their end-uses have been deleted. It was 
felt that these references were caysing a bit confusion rather than providing any guidance to the 
consumers. It is now left to the individual user to select any suitable grade/type for his specific purpose 
among the various grades specified in the standard. 

In formulating this revised standard assistance has been derived form the following standards: 
IND/SL/2906 Paraffin wax, No. 3 Ministry of Defence, Government of India; 
1ND/SL/2907 Paraffin wax, No. 4 Ministry of Defence, Government of India; 
J1SK 2235- 1961 Paraffin waxes, Japanese Industrial Standards Committee; 
GOST 16960-1971 Specification for petroleum paraffins, USSR; and 
GOST 13577-1971 Specification for petroleum paraffin for food industry, USSR. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the 
final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in 
accordance with IS 2 : 1960 'Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )\ The number of 
significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value 
in this standard. 



18 4654:1993 



Indian Standard 
PARAFFIN WAX — SPECIFICATION 



( Second Revision ) 



1 SCOPS 



1*1 This standard prescribes the requirements 
and method of sampling and tests for paraffin 
wax used for waxing paper, making candles* 
impregnating match sticks and for otner general 
uses. 

1.2 This standard does not cover the require- 
ments of paraffin wax used for explosive and 
pyrotechnic industry which is covered by a 
separate standard. 

2 NORMATIVE REFERENCES 

The following standards contain provisions 
which, through reference in this text, constitute 
provision of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the editions indicated were valid. 
AH standards are subject to revision, and 
parties to agreements based on this standard are 
encouraged to investigate the possibility of 
applying the most recent editions of the 
standards indicated below: 



IS No. 
266 :1977 

1070 : 1992 

1447 
( Part 3 ) : 



Title 



Sulphuric 
revision ) 



acid ( second 



1992 



1448: 

2480 
( PSrt 1 ) 



Water for general labora- 
tory use ( third revision ) 

Methods of sampling of 
petroleum and its products: 
Part 3 Methods of sampling 
of semi-solid and solid petro- 
leum products (first revision ) 

Methods of test for petro- 
leum and its products 

General purpose glass 
1983 thermometer: Part 1 Solid 
stem thermometers ( second 
revision ) 



Type! 

Type 2A 

Type 3 . 
3.2 Grades 



Refined, general purpose paraffin 
wax; 

Refined general purpose paraffin 
wax; and 

Semi-refined. 



Subject to agreement between the purchaser 
and the supplier, each of the above three types 
excluding Type 2A will be graded by its melting 
point of 2*5 degree spread in the range of 45 to 
75°C. 

4 REQUIREMENTS 

4.1 Description 

The material shall essentially be solid saturated 
hydrocarbons from petroleum, homogeneous in 
appearance and free from any foreign matter, 
objectionable odour and taste. It may contain 
only minimum specified liquid hydrocarbon and 
shall give on melting, a clear liquid free from 
water, dirt and other visible impurities. 

4.2 The material shall also comply with the 
requirements given in Table 1 when tested 
according to the appropriate method prescribed 
under annexes to this standard and 'P* series of 
IS 1448 reference to which is given in col 7 
and 8 of Table 1. 

4.3 It is recognized that there are some applica- 
tions where, for technical or other reasons, 
limits different from those in this standard or 
additional requirements may be necessary. The 
standard does not cater for such special cases, 
whi<Jh are for arrangement between the puchaser 
and the supplier. 

5 PACKING AND MARKING 



3 TYPES AND GRADES 

3.1 lifts 

The material shall be of the following four 
types: 

Type I — Extra refined, food grade; 



5.1 



The paraffin wax of Type 1 shall be packed in 
polyethylene lined new gunny bags. For paraffin 
waxes Type 2, 2A and 3, new gunny bags/HDPE 
woven sacks or barrels as agreed to between the 
purchaser and the supplier shall be used. 



1 



IS 4654 : 1993 



5.2 Martin 

Each container shall be marked with the 
following information: 

a) Name, type, grade and mass of the 
material; 

b) Indication of the source of manufacture, 
recognized trade mark, if any; 

c) Batch or code number or otherwise to 
enable the lot of consignment/or manu- 
facture to be traced back for records; 



d) Containers ft* Type 2, 2A and 3 paraffin 
wax shall be labelled conspicuously with 
the words: 

•NOT TO BE USED FOR FOOD PACK- 
AGINO, COSMETICS PREPARATION 
OR MEDICINAL USE* 

5 J.1 The material shall also be marked with its 
melting point. 

5.2.2 Each container may also be marked with 
the Standard Mark. 



Table 1 Requirements for Paraffin Wax 

( Clause 4.2 ) 



m Characteristic 


Typel 


Reqatrei 


■eat for 




Method of Teat, 
Reft. 


i^*. 


Type 2 


Type 2 A 


Type 3 




Annex ( P : of 
IS 1448) 


(1) (2) 


(3) 


(4) 


(5) 


(6) 


(7) (8) 


i) Melting point ( cooling 
curve) 


* 45to75*C + 


58°C Mtn 


45 to 75'C 


A — 


ii) Ash, percent by mass, Max 


003 


003 


003 


003 


— P:4 


iii) Acidity: 












a) Organic ( rag of KOH 
perg ),Max 


010 


010 


010 


001 


- P:2 


b) Inorganic ( mg of KOH 
per g ), Max 


002 


002 


0.02 


002 


— .— 


iv) Saponification value, Max 


10 


10 


10 


10 


— P : 55 


v) Oil content, percent by mass. 
Max 


0*50 


05 


1-5 


35 


B — 


vi) Colour: 












a) Lovibond in 18-in cell. 
Max 


10Y 


20Y 


20Y 


— 


- P:13 
Method A 


b) ASTM, Max 


— 


— 


— 


20 


— P;12 


vii) Acid discolouration test 


To pass the test 


— 


— 


— 


C - 



vi!!) Ultra violet (UY) absorbs- 280-289 milli- 
noe per centimetre path microns 
length 015. Max 

290-299 milli- 
microns 

012, Max 

300-359 milli- 
microns 

008, Max 

360-400 milli- 
microns 

002, Max 

ix) Odour, Max 1 



NOTE — When ASTM colorimeter is not available, the colour may be determined by Lovibond Tintometer in 
accordance with Method A in P : 13 of IS 1448, using 1/4 inch cell. The corresonding colour requirements ate 
-4-3Y + 04RJ«#«x. 



AMENDMENT NO. 1 MAY 1994 

TO 

IS 4654: 1993 PARAFFIN WAX —SPECIFICATION 

( Steond Revision) 

| Page 2, Table 1, SI No. (iii) (a), col 6 ] — Read as follows in place of the 
existing: 

'0.10' 



(PCD3) 



fUptognphy Uait, BIS, tUm Delhi. India 



IS 4654 : 1993 



* SAMPLING 

6 A Representative samples of the material shall 
be drawn as prescribed in IS 1447 ( Part 3 ) : 1992. 



6.2 Tests on melting poii|t (cooling curve) 
shall be conducted on individual samples and 
the rest of the tests shall be conducted on 
composite samples. 



ANNEX A 
[Tablel,SlM>.(i)] 

DETERMINATION OF MELTING POINT ( COOLING CURVE ) 



A-l GENERAL 

A-l.l Melting point ( cooling curve ) it a test, 
that is, widely used by wax suppliers and con- 
sumers. It is particularly applied to petroleum 
waxes that are rather highly parafflnic or 
crystalline in nature. A plateau occurs with 
specimens containing appreciable amounts of 
hydrocarbons that crystallize at the sano(e 
tejaperature, giving up heat of fusion, thi)s 
temporarily retarding the cooling rate. In 
general, petroleum waxes with large amounts of 
non-normal hydrocarbons or with amorphous 
solid forms do not show the plateau. 

A-1.2 This method describes a procedure of 
determination of the melting point ( cooling 
curve ) of petroleum wax. It is unsuitable for 
waxes of the petrolatum group, the petroleum 
ceresin group, or to blend of such waxes with 
paraffin wax or scale. i 

A-2 TERMINOLOGY 

A-2.0 For the purpose of this test, the following 
definition shall apply. 

A-2.1 Melting Pofnt ( Cooling Curve ) of Petro- 
leum Wax 

The temperature at which petroleum wax first 
shows a minimum rate of temperature change 
when allowed to cool under prescribed 
conditions. 

A J5 OUTLINE OF THE METHOD 

A specimen of molten wax in a test-tube fitted 
with a thermometer is placed in an air-bath, 
which in turn is surrounded by a water-bath held 
at 16 to 28°C As the molten wax cools, periodic 
headings of its temperature are taken. When 
solidification of the wax occurs and a minimum 
rate of temperature change ( cooling cigye ) is 
observed, the temperature at that point is 
recorded as the melting point ( cooling curve ) 
of the sample. 

A-4 APPARATUS 

A-4.1 Teat-Tube 

25 mm in outside diameter and 100 mm in 
length. It may be marked with a filling line 
50 mm above the bottom. 



A-4.2 Air-Bath 

50 mm in inside diameter and 115 mm in depth 
having, a cork with a hole for holding the test- 
tube firmly in a vertical position in its centre. 

A-4.3 Water-Bath 

A suitable cylindrical vessel 130 mm in inside 
diameter and 150 mm in depth. A fitted cover 
to support the air-bath vertically shall be 
provided so that the sides and bottom of the 
air-bath are surrounded by a layer of water 
38 mm thick. The cover shall have an opening 
at a distance of 20 mm from the outer wall of 
the water-bath for suspending the bath thermo- 
meter. The air-bath, water-bath and water-bath 
cover may be made in one assembly as shown 
in Fig. 1. 

A-4.4 Thermometers 

Water-bath thermometer shall be of any suitable 
type [ see IS 2480 ( Part 1 ) : 1983], accurate to 
1°C throughout the required range. For noting 
the melting point of wax, another thermometer 
complying with the following requirements* 
shall be used: 



Range 
Graduation 
Immersion 
Overall length 
Stem diamgter 
Bulb shape 
Bulb length 
Bulb diameter 
Length of graduated 
portion 

Distance between bottom 
of bulb to minimum 
graduation 

Longer lines at each 
Figured at each 
Expansion chamber 

Top finish 

Scale error not to exceed 



38 to 82°C 
0-l°C 
79 mm 

365 ± 10 mm 
5-5 to 8-0 mm 
Cylindrical 
18 to 20 mm 
5 to 8*0 mm 
215 to 240 mm 

105 to 115 mm 

0-5°C 

1°C 

To allow heating 

tol00°C 
Plain 

± 0-1 deg 



•Thermometer! with the Institute of Petroleum 
Designation IP 17C conform to these requirements. 



184*34:19*3 



r—FILLING LEVEL 




All dimensions in millimetres. 
FlO. 1 ASSBMBLY OP APPARATUS POR DETERMINING MeLTINO POINT ( COOLING CURVB ) OP 

Petroleum Wax 



A-5 PROCEDURE 

A-5.1 Assemble the apparatus as shown in 
Fig. 1. Fill the water-bath to within 13 mm of 
the top with water at a temperature of IS to 
30°C. The bath temperature shall be maintained 
within these limits throughout the test. 

A-S.2 Heat the wax sample to at least 10 deg 
above its melting point by taking it in a test- 
tube, kept in a water-bath, maintained at a 
temperature of not more than 20 deg above the 
expected melting point of the wax. 

A-53 Fill the test-tube to a height of SO mm 
with the molten sample. Insert the melting point 
thermometer through the centre of a cork in 
such a manner that the distance between the 
bulb of the thermometer and the bottom of 
test-tube is 10 mm; Keep the test-tube assembly 
in the air-bath while the temperature of molten 
wax in the test-tube is still at least 10 deg above 
its melting point. 

A-5.4 Read the melting thermometer reading 
after every IS seconds. Discontinue the test when 



five consecutive readings which agree within 
0-l*C, hate been obtained or at least 3 minutes 
after the temperature begins to fail following a 
series of readings agreeing with 0*1°C. 

A.6 CALCULATION AND REPORTING 

A-6.1 Average the five consecutive thermometer 
readings which include the least temperature 
change. Correct this average for error in 
thermometer scale if necessary. 

A*#.2 Report the result to the nearest 0*1°C as 
the petroleum wax melting point (cooling 
curve). 

A-7 PRECISION 

Results of duplicate tests shall not differ by 
more than the following amounts: 



RepMtability 
0-2^C 



Rtproducibillty 



IS 4654:1993 



ANNEX B 
[ Table I, SI No. (v) ] 

DETERMINATION OF OIL CONTENT 



B4 GENERAL 

This method describes a test procedure for the 
determination of oil in petroleum waxes having 
a congealing point of 30°C or higher and 
containing not more than 15 percent of oil. 

B-2 OUTLINE OF THE METHOD 

The sample is dissolved in methyl ethyl ketone, 
the solution cooled to — 32°C to precipitate 
the wax, and filtered. The oil content of the 
filtrate is determined by evaporating the methyl 
ketone and weighing the residue. 

B-3 APPARATUS 

R-3.1 Filter Sticks and Assembly 

Consisting of a 10 mm diameter sintered glass 
filter stick* of 10 to 15/* maximum pore dia- 
meter as determined by the method given in 
Annex F provided with an air pressure inlet 
tube and delivery nozzle. It is provided with a 
ground-glass joint to fit a 25 x 170 mm test- 
tube. The dimensions for a suitable filtration 
assembly are shown in Fig. 2. 

NOTE — A metallic filter stick may be employed if 
desired. A fijter stick made of stainless steel and 
having a 12*5 mm disc of 10 to 15t* maxium pore dia- 
meter has been found to be satisfactory. The metallic 
apparatus is inserted into a 25 X 150 mm test-tube 
and held in place by means of a cork. 

B-3.2 Cooling Bath 

Consisting of an insulated box with 25 mm holes 
in the centre t<* accommodate any desired 
number of test-tubes. The bath may be filled 
with a suitable medium, such as kerosene, and 
may be cooled by circulating a refrigerant 
through coils, or by using solid carbon dioxide. 
A suitable cooling bath to accommodate three 
test-tubes is shown in Fig, 3, 

B-3.3 Dropper Pipette 

Provided with a rubber bulb and calibrated to 
deliver 1 ± 0*05 g/>f molten wax. 

B-3.4 Transfer Pipette 

Calibrated to deliver 15 ± 0*06 ml. 



•Suitable metal filter stick of desired porosity may 
be obtained from the Micro, Metallic Corporation, 
30 Sea Cliff Avenue, Glen Cove, N. Y. A list of U. K- 
suppliers may be, obtained from the Institute of 
Petroleum, 61 New Cavendish Street, London, 
England. 



B-3,5 Air Pressure Regulator 

Designed to supply air to the filtration assembly 
( see B-6.5 ) at the volume and pressure required 
to give an even flow of filtrate. Either the 
conventional pressure-reducing valve or a 
mercury-bubbler-type regulator has been found 
satisfactory, The latter type, illustrated in 
Fig. 4, consists of a 250-ml glass cylinder and a 
T-tube held in the cylinder by means of a rubber 
stopper grooved at the sides to permit the 
escape of excess air. The volume and pressure 
of the air supplied to the filtration assembly is 
regulated to a depth to which the T-tube is 
immersed in mercury at the bottom of the 
cylinder. Absorbent cotton placed in the space 
above the mercury prevents the loss of mercury 
by spattering. The air pressure regulator is 
connected to the filter stick and assembly by 
means of rubber tubing. 

B-3.6 Thermometer 

Conforming to Schedule Mark 3 of IS 2480 
( Part 1 ) : 1983. 

B-3.7 Weighing Bottles 

Conical in shape and glass-stoppered, having a 
capacity of 15 ml. 

B»3*8 Evaporation Assembly 

Consisting of an evaporating cabinet and con- 
nections, essentially as illustrated in Fig. 5, and 
capable of maintaining a temperature of 
35 ± 1 P C around the evaporation flasks. 
Construct the jets with an inside diameter of 
4 ± 0-2 mm Sot delivering a stream of clean, 
dry air vertically downward into the weighing 
bottle. Support each jet so that the tip is 
15 ± 5 mm above the surface of the liquid at 
the start of th* evaporation. Supply air at the 
rate of 2 to 3 litres per minute per jet, purified 
by passage through a tube of 1 cm bore packed 
loosely to a height of 20 cm with absorbent 
cotton* Periodically check the cleanliness of the 
air by evaporating 4 ml of methyl ethyl ketone 
by the procedure specfied in B-6.6. When the 
residue does not exceed 0*1 mg, the evaporation 
equipment is operating satisfactorily. 

BJ.9 Analytical Balance 

Capable of reproducing weights to 0*1 mg. The 
sensitivity should be adjusted so that 0*1 mg 
will deflect the pointer one half division on the 
pointer scale. 



184*54:1993 



GLASS HOOKS 




-H H— 19 TO 21 10 




PART VIEW 
IN DIRECTION OF ARROW % X 



25 00 COOLING TUBE 



SINTERED GLASS DISC 



9 TO 11 00 
All dimensions in millimetres. 

Fio. 2 Filter Stick 



B-3.10 Wire Stirrer 

A piece of stiff iron or nichrome wire of about 
1 mm diameter, 250 mm long. A 10-mm dia- 
meter loop is formed at each end, and the loop 
at the bottom end is bent so that the plane of 
the loop is perpendicular to the wire. 

B-4 SOLVENT 

B-4.1 Methyl Ethyl Ketone 

Distilling between 78 to 81°C and conforming to 
following requirements. The material shall be 
stored over anhydrous calcium sulphate 

5 percent by mass of the solvent ) and shall be 

ltered before use. 



Characteristic 



Requirement 



i 



Characteristic 

Colour 

Relative density, 20/20°C 

Acidity, as acetic acid f 
percent by mass, Max 



Requirement 
Water white 
0-805-0*807 
0-003 



Water content, percent by 0*3 
mas8,Afojc 

Refractive index at 20°C 1*378 ± 0*002 

Residue on evaporation of 0-1 ( see Note ) 
4 ml of sample, mg, Max 

NOTE — Residue on evaporation may be found out 
by the procedure described in B-6.6. 

B-5 SAMPLE 

If the sample of wax is 1 kg or less, obtain a 
representative portion by melting the entire 
sample and stirring thoroughly. For samples over 
1 kg, exercise special care to insure obtaining a 
truly representative portion, bearing in mind 
that the oil may not be distributed uniformly 
throughout the sample, and that mechanical 
operations may express some of the oil. 



18 4654:1993 




THERMOMETER 



AIR PRESSURE 
REGULATOR 




FILTER STICK 
COOLING TU8E 

PHENOLIC PLASTIC 
PANEL 



§|x- GLASS WOOL 
sESl INSULATION 



OUTER CASE 

METAL CONTAINER 
OF ABOUT 1*4 LITRE 
CAPACITY FILLEO 
WITH COOLING 

Medium 



All dimensions in millimetres. 
Fio. 3 Cooling Bath 

PROCEDURE 

B-6.1 Melt a representative portion of the 
sample in a beaker, using a water-bath or even 
maintajped at 70 to 100°C. As soon as the wax 
is completely melted, thoroughly mix by stirring. 
Preheat the dropper pipette in order to prevent 
the solidification of wax in the tip, and with- 
draw a 1 a portion of the sample as soon as 
possible after the wax has melted* Hold the 
pipette in a vertical position, and carefully trans- 
fer its contents into a clean, dry test-tube, 
previously weithed to the nearest 1 mg 
(S04 Not* ). Swirl the test-tube so as to coat the 
bottom evenly with wax. This permits more 
rapid solution latter. Allow the test-tube to cool, 
and weigh to the nearest 1 mg. 



KOTB — The msss of a test-tube which is cleaned by 
means of solvents does not vary to a significant 
extent. Therefore* a tare mass may be obtained and 
used repeatedly. 

B-6.2 Pipette 15 ml of methyl ethyl ketone into 
the test-tube and place the latter just up to the 
level of its contents in a hot water or steam- 
bath. Heat the solvent-wax mixture, stirring up 
and down with the wire stirrer, until a homo- 
geneous solution is obtained. Exercise care to 
avoid loss of solvent by prolonged boiling. 

NOTE — Very high-melting wax samples may not 
form clear solution. Stir until the undissolved 
material is well dispersed as a fine cloud. 

B-6.3 Plunge the test-tube into a 800-ml bea- 
ker of ice water and continue to stir until the 
contents are cold. Remove the stirrer. Remove 
the test tube from the ice bath, wipe dry on the 
outside with a cloth and weigh to the nearest 
0*1 g. During this operation, solvent shall not be 
allowed to vaporize by more than 1 percent. 
The mass of solvent is, therefore, kept practi- 
cally a constant and after a few samples are 
weighed, this mass, approximately 11-9 g, may 
be used as a constant factor. 



AIR PRESSURE 

r 




TO FILTER ASSEMBLY 

1 » 



RUBBER STOPPER 
WITH AIR VENT 



ABSORBENT COTTON 



GLASS CYLINDER 



r 



•GLASS TUBING 
6 TO 8 mm 00 

MERCURY 




Fio. 4 Air Punuu Rmuiatok. 



184654:1993 



JER CONIROl 




FILTERED AIR 
PROMFLOWMETER 



THERMOMETER 
POCKET 



-PERFORATED METAL 
PLATFORM 6-5* HOl ES 



T 

A 



IS- ml WEIGHING 
BOITCE 1 

B 




MANlFOiD 

RACK ANO PINION 
TO AOJUSI HEIGH1 
OF JETS 



AUt JET JS TO *2 10 
6 00 APPRO* 



THERMOSTAT 

HtNOEO 000* WITH 
OlASS WINOOW 



-POSITION OF JETS AT START 
OF EVAPORATION 

HALF SECTION AA 
All dimensions in millimetres. 
Fig. 5 Evaporation Assembly 



B-6.4 place the test-tube containing the wax- 
solvent slurry in the cooling bath, which is 
maintained at - 34-5 ± 1 C C. During this 
chilling operation, it is important that stirring 
by means of the thermometer be almost 
continuous, in order to maintain a slurry of 
uniform consistency as the wax precipitates. Do 
not allow the wax to set up on the walls of the 
cooling vessel nor permit any lumps of wax 
crystals to form. Continue stirring until the 
temperature reaches — 31-5 ± 0-5°C. 

B-6.5 Immerse in the mixture the clean, dry 
filter [stick, which has previously been cooled 
by placing it in a test-tube and holding at 
— 34-5 ± 1°C in the cooling bath for a minimum 
of 10 minutes. Seal the ground-glass joint of the 
filter so as to make an 'air-tight seal. Place an 



unstoppered weighing bottle, previously weighed 
together with glass stopper to the nearest 
0*1 mg, under the delivery nozzle of the 
filtration assembly. 

NOTE — Take every precaution to insure the accu- 
racy of the mass of the stoppered weighing bottfe. 
Prior to determining this mass, rinfcc the clean, dry, 
weighing bottle and stopper with methyl ethyl ketone, 
wipe dry on the outside with a cloth, and place in the 
evaporation assembly to dry for about 5 minutes. 
Then remove the 'weighing bottle and stopper, place 
near the balance, and allow to stand for 10 minutes 
prior to weighing. Stopper the bottle during this cool- 
ing period. Once the weighing bottle and stopper have 
been dried in the evaporation assembly, lift only 
with forceps. Take care to remove and replace the 
glass stopper with a fight touch. 

B-6.6 Apply air pressure to the filtration 
assembly, and immediately collect about 4 ml 
of filtrate in the weighing bottle. Release the 



8 



IS 4654: 19*3 



air pressure to permit the liquid to drain back 
slowly from the delivery nozzle. Remove the 
weighing bottle immediately and stopper and 
weigh to the nearest 10 mg without waiting for 
it to room temperature. Unstopper the weighing 
bottle and place it under one of the jets in the 
evaporation assembly maintained at 35 ± VC 9 
with the air jet centered inside the neck, and 
the tip 15 ± 5 mm above the surface of the 
liquid. After the solvent has evaporated, which 
usually takes less than 30 minutes, remove the 
bottle, stopper, and place near the balance. 
Allow to stand for 10 minutes and weigh to the 
nearest 0*1 mg. 

B-6.6.1 Repeat the evaporation procedure using 
a 5 minute evaporation period instead of 
30 minutes until the loss between successive 
weighings is not over 0*2 mg. 

B-7 CALCULATION 

Calculate the amount of oil in the wax as 
follows: 



Oil content, 
percent by mass 



100 AC 
BD 



— 0*15 



where 



C « mass, in g, of solvent, obtained by 
subtracting mass of test-tube plus wax 
sample ( B-6 .1 ) from mass of test-tube 
and contents ( B-6.2 ); 

B — mass, in g, wax sample; 

D = mass, in g, of solvent evaporated, obtai- 
ned by subtracting mass of weighing 
bottle plus oil residue from mass, of 
weighing bottle plus filtrate ( B-C5 ), 
and 

0*15 « the average correction factor for the 
solubility of wax in the solvent at 
- 31-7 °C. 

B-8 REPORTING 

Report the result as oil content, percent by 
mass, if the result is negative, report as zero. 

B-9 PRECISION 

Results of duplicate tests shall not differ by 
more than the following amounts: 



A — mass, in g, of oil residue; 



Repeatability 

Q-06 + 8 percent of 
mean 



Reproducibility 
0*2+ il percent of 



mean 



ANNEX C 
[Table I, SI No. (vii)] 

ACID DISCOLOURATION TEST 



C-l SCOPE 

This method is indicative of the degree of 
refining of paraffin wart and enables the quality 
of food packaging quality wax to be ensured. 

C-2 APPARATUS 

C-2.1 In addition to the apparatus prescribed in 
[ P : 13 ] : 1960 of IS 144&, the apparatus 
prescribed in 02.2 and C-2.3 is required. In the 
tintometer, J-in cell shall be used lor the deter- 
mination of acid colour after acid discolouration 
test. 

C-l2 Test-Tube 

Made of heat-resistant glass, 200 mm in length 
and 30 mm in diameter. 

C-2.3 Stirrer 

Made of glass, with a 7 mm diameter glass ^rod, 
200 mm in length fitted with a 7 x 20 mm 
straight paddle »t the end. It shall be driven by 
an electric motor at a speed of about 1 500 
rev/rain. 



C-3 REAGENT 
C-3.1 Sulphuric Acid 

90 percent ( see IS 266 : 1977 ). 

C-4 PROCEDURE 

G44 Place 10 g of the sample in a clean and 
dry test-tube. Place the tube in a water-bath 
maintained at 90°C, about half the test-tube 
beii|g immersed. After 10 minutes, add 10 ml 
of sulphuric acid from a measuring cylinder to 
the test-tube. Stir the mixture with the glass 
stirrer at about 1 500 rev/min. After S minutes, 
remove the stirrer and allow the contents of 
the tube, still in the water-bath, to settle for 
another 5 minutes. Remove the tube 'from bath 
and cool to allow the wax to congeal. Pierce a 
hole through the wax by a $lass rod and pour 
the acid into the J-tn tintometer cell and 
measure the tint. 

C4£ The materials shall be regarded to have 
passed the test if Lovibond colour in i~in cell 
of acid after acid discolouration test does not 
exceed 2*0 (yellow series 510), 10 (Red 
series 200 ). 



184*54:1993 



ANNEX D 
[ TabU I, SI Jfo. (vui) ] 

ULTRAVIOLET ABSORBANCE TBST 



1M GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS 

Bectuie of the sensitivity of the test, the posai* 
bility of errors arising from contamination is 
great. It is of the greatest importance that all 
glassware be scrupulously cleaned to remove all 
organic matter, such as oil* grease, detergent 
residues, etc. Examine all glassware, including 
stoppers and stopcocks, under ultraviolet light 
to detct any residual fluorescent contamination* 
As a precautionary measure it is recommended 
practice to rinse all glassware with purified iso- 
octane immediately before use. No grease is to 
be used on stopcocks or joints. Great care to 
avoid contamination of wax samples in handling 
and to assure absence of any extraneous material 
arising from inadequate packaging is essential. 
Because some pf the polynuclear hydrocarbons 
sought in this test are very susceptible to photo- 
oxidation, the entire procedure is to be carried 
out under subdued light. 

D-2 APPARATUS 

D-2.1 Separatory Funnels 

250-ml, 500-ml, 1 000-ml and preferably 
2 000-ml capacity, equipped with tetrafluoro- 
ethlyene polymer stopcocks. 

D-2.2 Reservoir 

500-ml capacity, equipped with a 24/40 standard 
taper male fitting at the bottom and a suitable 
ball-joint at the top for connecting to the' 
nitrogen supply. The male fitting should be 
equipped with glass hooks. 

D-2.3 Chromatographic Tube 

180 mm in length, 13*7 ± 0*1 mm inside dia- 
meter, equipped with a coarse, flritted-glass disc, 
a tetrafluoroethylene polymer stopcock, and a 
female 24/40 standard tapered fitting at the 
opposite end. ( Overall length of the oolumn 
with the female joint is 23S mm ). The female 
fitting should be equipped with glass hooks. 

D-2.4Diac 

Tetrafluoroethylene polymer 30*8 mm diameter 
disc approximately 4*76 mm thick with a hole 
bored in the centre to closely fit the stem of the 
chromatographic tube. 

D-2 3 Heating Jacket 

Conical, for 500-ml separatory ftinneL ( Used 
with variable transformer heat control ). 

D-2.« Suction Flask 

250-ml or 500-ml filter flask. 



D-2,7 

24/40 joints, fitted with a drying tube, length 
optional. 

D-2.8 Evaporation Flask ( Optional ) 

250-ml or 500-ml capacity all glass flask equip- 
ped with standard taper stopper having inlet 
and outlet tubes to permit passage of nitrogen 
across the surface of contained liquid to be 
evaporated. 

D-2.9 Vacuum Distillation Assembly 

All glass ( for purification of dimethyl sulph- 
oxide) 2»litre distillation flask with heating 
mantle; Vigreaux vacuum-jacketed condenser 

ior equivalent ) about 45 cm in length and 
istillifig head with separable cold finger 
condenser. Use of tetrafluoroethylene polymer 
sleeves on the glass joints will prevent freezing. 
Do not use grease on stopcocks or joints. 

D-2.10 Spectrophotometry Oils 

Fused quartz cells, optical path length in the 
range of 3000 ± 005 cm; also for checking 
spectrophotometer performance only, optical 
path length in the range 1*000 ± 0*003 cm. 
With distilled water in the cells, determine any 
absorbance differences. 

D-2.11 Spectrophotometer 

Spectral range 250 to 400 millimicrons with 
spectral slit width of 2 millimicrons or less; 
under instrument operating conditions for these 
absorbance measurements, the spectrophoto- 
meter shall also meet the following performance 
requirements: 

Absorbance repeatability, ± 0*01 at 0*4 
absorbance. 

Absorbance accuracy*, ± 0*05 at 0*4 absor- 
bance. 

Wavelength repeatability, ± 0*2 millimicron. 

Wavelength accuracy, ± 1.0 millimicron. 

D-2.12 Nitrogen Cylinder 

Water-pumped or equivalent purity nitrogen in 
cylinder equipped with regulator and valve to 
control flow at 0*351 3 kg/cm*. 



•As determined by procedure using potassium chro- 
ma* for reference standard. The accuracy is to be 
determined by comparison with standard values at 
290» 345 and 400 millimicrons. 



10 



IS 4654 : 1993 



1V3 REAGENTS AND MATERIALS 

JW»1 Unless specified otherwise, pure chemicals 
and distilled water ( see IS 1070 : 1992 ) shall be 
used. 

NOTE — 'Pure chemicals* shall mean chemicals that 
do sot contain impurities which affect the results of 
analysis. 

D-&2 Organic Sotrents 

All solvents used throughout the procedure 
shall meet the specifications and tests described 
in this specification. The iso-octane, benzene, 
acetone, and methyl alcohol designated in the 
list following this paragraph shall pass the 
following test: 

To the specified quantity of solvent in a 
250-ml Erlenmeyer flask, add 1 ml of purified 
n-hexadecane and evaporate on the steam- 
bath under a stream of nitrogen (a loose 
aluminium foil jacket around the flask will 
speed evaporation). Discontinue evapora- 
tion when not over 1 ml of residue remains. 
( To the residue from benzene add a 
10 ml portion of purified iso-octane, re- 
evaporate and repeat once to insure com- 
plete removal of benzene ). 

Alternatively, the evaporation time can be 
reduced by using the optional evaporation 
flask. In this case the solvent and n-hexade- 
cane are placed in the flask on the steam- 
bath, the tube assembly is inserted, and a 
stream of .nitrogen is fed through the inlet 
tube white the outlet tube is connected to a 
solvent trap and vacuum line in such a way 
as to prevent any flow-back of condensate 
into the flask. 

Dissolve the 1 ml of hexadecane residue in 
iso-octane and make up to 25 ml in volume. 
Determine the absorbance in the 5-cm path 
length cell compared to iso-octane as 
reference. The absorbance of the solution of 
the solvent residue (except for methyl 
alcohol ) shall not exceed 0*01 per cm path 
length between 280 and 400 m/*. For methyl 
alcohol this absorbance value shall be 0*00. 

D-3.2.1 Iso-octane ( 2, 2, 4-Trimethylpentane ) 

Use H 80 ml for the test described in the 
preceding paragraph. Purify, if necessary, by 
passage through a column of activated silica 
gel* aboveJK) cm in length and 5 to 8 cm in 
diameter, 

0^3.2.2 Benzene 

Use 150 ml for the test. Purify, if necessary, by 
distillation or otherwise. 



♦Grade 12, Davison Chemical Company, Baltimore, 
Maryland, USA or equivalent. 



1X3.2 J Acetone 

Use 200 ml for the test. Purify, if necessary, by 
distillation. 

D-3.2.4 Ehiiing Mixtures 

a)* 10 percent benzene in iso-octane — Pipet 
50 ml of benzene into a 500-ml glass- 
stoppered volumetric flask and adjust to 
volume with iso-octane, with mixing. 

b) 20 percent benzene in iso-octane — Pipet 
50 ml of benzene into a 250-ml glass- 
stoppered volumetric flask, and adjust to 
volume with iso-octane, with mixing. 

c) Acetone-benzene-water — Add 20 ml of 
water to 380 ml of acetone and 200 ml of 
benzene, and mix. 

D-3.2.5 n-Hexadecane, 99 Percent, Olefin-Free 

Dilute 0*1 ml of n-hexadecane to 25 ml with iso- 
octane and determine the absorbance in a 5-cm 
cell compared to iso-octane as reference point 
between 280-400 mp. The absorbance per 
centimetre path length shall not exceed 000 in 
this range. Purify, if necessary, by percolation 
through activated silica gel or by distillation. 

D-3.2.6 Methyl Alcohol 

Use 10*0 ml of methyl alcohol. Purify, if 
necessary, by distillation. 

D-3.3 Dimethyl Sulpboxide 

Pure grade, clear, water-white ( m. p. 18°C, Min ). 
Dilute 120 ml of dimethyl sulphoxide with 
240 ml of distilled water in a 500-ml separatory 
funnel, mix and allow to cool for 5 to 
lOmintues. Add 40 ml of iso-octane to the 
solution and extract by shaking the funnel 
vigorously for 2 minutes. Draw off the lower 
aqueous layer into a second 500-ml separatory 
funnel and repeat the exraction with 40 ml of 
iso-octane. Draw off and discard the aqueous 
layer. '= Wash each of the 40-ml extractives three 
times with 50-ml portions of distilled water. 
Shaking time for each wash is 1 minute. Discard 
the aiueous layers. Filter the first extractive 
through anhydrous sodium sulphate prewashed 
with Iso-octane ( see Dr3.2 for preparation of 
filter^, into a 250 ml Erlenmeyer flask, or 
optionally into the evaporating flask. Wash the 
first separatory funnel with the second 40-ml 
iso-octane extractive, and pass through the 
sodium sulphate into the flask. Then wash the 
second and first separatory funnels successively 
with a 10»ml portion of iso-octane, and pass the 
solvent through the sodium sulphate into the 
flask. Add 1 ml of n-hexadecane and evaporate 
the iso-octane on the steam bath under nitrogen. 
Discontinue evaporation when not over 1 ml of 
residue remains. To the residue, add a 10-ml 
portion of iso-octane and re-evaporate to 1 ml 



11 



18 4654 :1993 



of hexadecane. Again, add 10 ml of iso-octane 
to the residue and evaporate to 1 ml of hexa- 
decane to ensure complete removal of all 
volatile materials. Dissolve the 1 ml of hex* 
adecane in iso-octane and make up to 25 ml in 
volume. Determine the absorbance in 5-cm path 
length cells compared to iso-octane as reference. 
The absorbance of the solution should not 
exceed 0*02 per centimetre path length in the 
280-400 m/i range ( see Note ). 

Purify, if necessary, by the following procedure: 

To 1 500 ml of dimethyl sulphoxide in a 
2-litre glass stoppered flask, add 6*0 ml of 
phosphoric acid and 50 g of Norit A ( deco- 
lorizing carbon, alkaline or equivalent). 
Stopper the flask, and with the use of a 
magnetic stirrer ( tetrafluoroethylene poly- 
mer coated bar ) stir the solvent for 
15 minutes. Filter the dimethyl sulphoxide 
through four thickness of fluted paper*. If 
the initial filtrate contains carbon fines, 
refilter through the same filter until a clear 
filtrate is obtained. Protect the sulphoxide 
from air and moisture during this operation 
by covering the solvent in the funnel and 
collection flask with a layer to iso-octane. 
Transfer the filtrate to a 2-litre separatory 
funnel and draw off the dimethylsulphoxide 
into the 2-litre distillation flask of the 
vacuum distillation assembly and distill at 
approximately 3-mm Hg pressure or less. 
Discard the first 200 ml fraction of the 
distillate and replace the distillate collection 
flask with a clean one. Continue the distilla- 
tion until approximately 1 litre of the 
sulphoxide has been collected. 

At completion of the distillation, the reagent 
should be stored in glass stoppered bottles since 
it is very hygroscopic and will react with some 
metal containers in the presence of air. 

NOTE — Difficulty in meeting this absorbance speci- 
fication may be due to organic impurities in the 
distilled water. Repetition of the test omitting the 
dimethyl sulphoxide will disclose their presence. If 
necessary to meet the specification, purify the water 
by redistillation, passage through an ion-exchange 
resin, or otherwise. 

D-3.4 Phosphoric Acid 

85 percent. 

D-3.5 Sodium Borohydride 

98 percent. 

D-3.6 Magnesium Oxidef 

Place lOOg of the magnesium oxide in a large 
beaker, add 700 ml of distilled water to make a 



♦13*5 cm Schleicher and Schuell ( USA ) No. 597 or 
equivalent may be used. 

t Available from Sea Sorb 43, Food Machinery Com- 
p*ny, Westvaco Division, USA, or equivalent. 



thin slurry, and heat on a steam bath for 
30 minutes with intermittent stirring. Stir well 
initially to insure that all the adsorbent is com- 
pletely wetted. Using a buchner ftmnei and a 
filter paper* of suitable diameter, filter with 
suction. Continue suction until water no longer 
drips from the funnel. Transfer the adsorbent to 
a glass trough lined with aluminium foil ( free 
from rolling oil ). Break up the magnesia with a 
clean spatula and spread out the adsorbent on 
the aluminium foil in a layer of about 1 to 
2 cm thick. Dry for 24 h at 160 ± l°C Pulverize 
the magnesia with mortar and pestle. Sieve the 
pulverized adsorbent between 60 to 180 mesh. 
Use the magnesia retained on the 180 mesh 
sieve. 

D-3.7 Celite 545f 

D-3.8 Magnesium Oxide-Celite 545 Mixture 
( 2 + 1 ) by Mass 

Place the magnesium oxide ( 60 to 180 mesh ) 
and the Celite 545 in 2 to 1 proportions, 
respectively, by mass in a glass stoppered flask 
large enough for adequate mixing. Shake 
vigorously for 10 minutes. Transfer mixture to a 
glass trough lined with aluminium foil ( free 
from rolling oil ) and spread it out on a layer 
about 1 to 2 cm thick. Reheat the mixture at 
160 ± 1°C for 2h, and store in a tightly closed 
flask. 

D-3.9 Sodium Sulphate, Anhydrous, Preferably in 
Granular Form 

For each bottle of sodium sulphate reagent 
used, establish as follows the necessary sodium 
sulphate: 

Prewash to provide such filters required in 
the method. Place approximately 35 g of 
anhydrous sodium sulphate in a 30 ml 
coarse, fritted glass funnel or in a 65 mm 
filter funnel with glass wool plug; wash with 
successive 15-ml portions of the indicated 
solvent until a 15-ml portion of the wash 
shows 000 absorbance per cm path length 
between 280 and 400 mpi when tested as 
prescribed under D-3,2. Usually three por- 
tions of wash solvent are sufficient. 

D*3.94 Before proceeding with analysis of a 
sample, determine the absorbance in a 5-cm 
path cell between 250 and 400 m? for the 
reagent blank by carrying out the procedure, 
without a wax sample, at room temperature, 
recording the spectra after the extraction stage 
and after the complete procedure as prescribed. 
The absorbance per cm path length following 
the extraction stage should not exceed 0*040 in 

•Schleicher and Schull ( USA ) No. 5*7 or equivalent 
may be used. 

tJohns Manville Company ( USA ), diatomaceous 
earth, or equivalent may be used. 



12 



IS4*54il9t3 



the wavelength range from 280 to 400 m/ijthe 
absorbance per cm path length following the 
complete procedure should not exceed 0*070 in 
the wavelength range 280 to 299 mp inclusive, 
nor 0*045 in the wavelength range from 300 to 
400 m>*. If in either spectrum the characteristic 
benzene peaks in the 250 to 260 mp region are 
preset, remove the benzene by the procedure 
described under D-3.2 and record ahsorbance 
again. 

D-3.9.2 Place 300 ml of dimethyl sulphoxide in 
a Mitre separatory funnel and add 75 ml of 
phosphoric acid. Mix the contents of the funnel 
and allow to stand for 10 minutes. (The reaction 
between the sulphoxide and the acid is exo- 
thermic. Release pressure after mixing, then 
keep funnel stoppered. ) Add 150 ml of iso- 
octane and shake to pre-equilibrate the solvents. 
Draw off the individual layers and store in glass 
stoppered flasks. 

D4 PROCEDURE 

D-4,1 Place a representative 1 kg sample of 
-wax, or if this amount is not available, the 
entire sample, in a beaker of a capacity about 
three times the volumes of the sample and heat 
with occasional stirring on a steam-bath until 
the wax is completely melted and homogeneous. 
~Wcigh four 25 dt 0*2 g portions of the melted 
wax in separate 100-mT beakers. Reserve three 
of the portions for later replicate analysis as 
necessary. Pour one weighed portipn immedia- 
tely after remelting ( on the steam bath ) into a 
500-ml separatory funnel containing 100 ml of 
the pre-equilibrated sulphoxide-phosphoric acid 
mixture that has been heated in the heating 
jacket at a temperature just high enough to 
Keep the wax melted ( see Note ). 

NOTE — It) preheating the sulphoxide-acid mixture, 
remove the stopper of the* separatory funnel at inter- 
vals to release the pressure. 

D-4.2 Promptly complete the transfer of the 
sample to the fknael in the jacket with portions 
of the prc-equilibfated iso-octane, wanning the 
beaker, if necessary, and ufing a total volume 
of just 50 ml of th£ solvent. If the wax comes 
out of solution during these operations, let the 
stoppered funnel remain in the jacket until the 
wax rcdissolves. (Remove stopper from the 
funnel at intervals to release pressure ). When 
the wax is in solution, remove the ftmnel from 
the jacket and shake it vigorously for 2 minutes. 
Set up three 250*ml separatory funnels with 
each containing 30 ml of pre-equilibrated iso- 
octane. After separation of the liquid phases, 
allow to cool until the main portion begins to 
show a precipitate. Gently swirl the funnel when 
precipitation first occurs on the inside surface 
of the funnel to accelerate th * s profcess. Care- 
filly draw off the lower layer, filter it slowly 
through a thin layer of glass wool fitted loosely 



in a filter ftinnel into the first 250 ml separatory 
ftinnel, and wash in tandem with the 30-ml 
portions of iso-octane contained inthe250-ml 
separatory ftmnels. Shaking time for eich wash 
is 1 minute. Repeat the extraction operation with 
two additional portions of the sulphoxide-acid 
mixture, replacing the funnel in the jacket after 
each extortion to keep the wax in solution and 
washing each extractive in tandem through the 
same three portions of iso-octane. 

D-4.3 Collect the successive extractives ( 300 ml 
total ) in a separatory funnel ( preferably 2 litre ), 
containing 480 ml of distilled water, mix and 
allow to cool for a few minutes after the last ex- 
tractive has been added. Add 80 ml of iso-octane 
to the solution and extract by shaking the funnel 
vigorously for 2 minutes. Draw off the lower 
aqueous layer into a second separatory funnel 
( preferably 2 litre ) and repeat the extraction 
With 80 ml of iso-octane. Draw off and discard 
the aqueous layer* Wash each of the 80*ml 
extractives three times with 100-ml portions of 
distilled water. Shaking time for each wash is 
1 minute. Discard the aqueous layers. Filter the 
first extractive through anhydrous sodium 
sulphate prewashed with iso-octane ( see D-3.2 
for preparation of filter ) into a 250 ml Erlen- 
meyer flask ( or optionally into the evaporation 
flask )• Wash the first separatory ftmnel with 
the second 80-ml iso-octane extractive and pass 
through the sodium sulphate. Then wash the 
second and first, separatory funnels successively 
with a 20-ml portion of iso-octane and pass the 
solvent through the sodium sulphate into the 
flask. Add 1 ml of n-hexadecane and evaporate 
the iso-octane on the steam bath under nitrogfen. 
Discontinue evaporation when not over 1 ml of 
residue remains. To the residue, add a 10-ml 
portion of iso-octane, re-evaporate to 1 ml of 
hexadecane, and repeat this operation once. 

D-4.4 Quantitatively transfer the residue with 
iso-octane to a 25-ml volumetric flask, make up 
to the volume, and mix. Determine the ahsor- 
bance of the solution in the S-cm path length 
cells aompared to iso-octane as reference 
between 280 to 400 mp ( take care to lose none 
of the solution in, filling the sample cell). 
Correct the ahsorbance values for any 
absorbance of the solution in the S-cm path 
length cell* compared to iso-octane as reference 
between 280 to 400 mj» ( take care to.lose none 
of the solution in filling the sample cell). 
Correct the absorbance values for any absor- 
bance derived from reagents as determined by 
carrying out the procedure without a wax 
sample. If the corrected absorbance does not 
exceed the limits prescribed in Table 1, the wax 
meets the ultraviolet absorbance specifications. 
If the corrected absorbance per cm path length 
exceeds the limits prescribed in Table 1, proceed 
in accordance with D-4.5 and D-4.6. 



13 



IS 4654 : 1993 



D-4.S Quantitatively transfer the iso-octane 
solution to a 125- ml flask equipped with 24/40 
joint and evaporate the iso-octane on the 
steam-bath under a stream of nitrogen to a 
volume of 1 ml of hexadecane. Add 10 ml 
of methyl alcohol and approximately 0*3 g 
of sodium borohydride. ( Minimize expo- 
sure of the borohydride to the atmosphere. 
A measuring dipper may be used. ) Immediately 
fit a water-cooled condenser equipped with a 
24/40 joint and with a drying tube into the flask, 
mix until the borohydride is dissolved, and 
allow to stand for 30 minutes at room tempera- 
ture, with intermitted swirling. At the end of 
this period, disconnect the flask and evaporate 
the .methyl alcohol on the steam-bath under 
,. nitrogen until the sodium borohydride begins to 
come out of the solution. Then add 10 ml of 
iso-octane and evaporate to a volume of about 

2 to 3 ml. Again, add 10 ml of iso-octane and 
concentrate to a volume of approximately S ml. 
Swirl the flask repeatedly to assure adequate 
washing of the sodium borohydride residues. 

Q-4.6 Fit the letrafluoroethylene polymer disc 
on the upper part of the stem of the chromato- 
graphic tube, then place the tube with the disc 
on the suction flask and applv the vacuum 
( approximately 13S mm Hg pressure ). Weigh 
out 14 g of the 2 : 1 magnesium oxide-Celite 
545 mixture and pour the adsorbent mixture 
into the chromatographic tube in approximately 

3 cm layers. After the addition of each 
layer, level off the top of the adsorbent 
with a flat glass rod or metal plunger by 
pressing down firmly until the adsorbent is 
well packed. Loosen the top most few mm 
of each adsorbent layer with the end of 
a metal rod before the addition of the next 
layer. Continue packing in this manner until all' 
the 14 g of the adsorbent is added to the tube. 
Level off the top of the adsorbent by pressing 
down firmly with a flat glass rod or metal plun- 
ger to make the depth of the adsorbent bed 
approximately 12*5 cm in depth. Turn off the 
vacuum and remove the suction flask. Fit the 
5Q0 ml reservoir onto the top of the chromato- 
graphic column and prewet the column by 
passing 100 ml of iso-octane through the 
column. Adjust the nitrogen pressure so that the 
rate of descent of the iso-octane coming off of 
the column is between 2 to 3 ml per minute. 
Discontinue pressure iust before the last of the 
iso-octane reaches the level of the adsorbent. 

( CAUTION \ Do not allow the liquid level to 
recede below the adsorbent level at any time. ) 
Remove the reservoir and decant the 5-ml iso- 
octane concentrate solution into the column 
and with slight pressure again allow the liquid 



level to recede to barely above the adsorbent 
level. Rapidly complete the transfer similarly 
with two 5-ml portions of iso-octane, swirling 
the flask repeatedly each time to assure ade- 
quate washing of the residue. Just before the 
final 5-ml wash reaches the top of the adsorbent, 
add 100 ml of iso-octane to the reservoir and 
continue the percolation at the 2 to 3 ml per 
minute rate. Just before the last of the iso- 
octane reaches the adsorbent level, add 100 ml 
of 10 percent benzene in iso-octane to the 
reservoir and continue the percolation at the 
above mentioned rate. Jibt before the solvent 
mixture reaches adsorbent level, add 25 ml of 
20 percent benzene in iso-octane to the reser- 
voir and continue the percolation at 2 to 3 ml 
per minute until all this solvent mixture has 
been removed from the column. Discard all the 
elution solvents collected up to this point. Add 
300 ml of the acetone-benzene water mixture to 
the reservoir and percolate through the column 
to elute the polynuclear compounds. Collect the 
elute in a clean 1 -litre separatory funnel. Allow 
the column to drain until most of the solvent 
mixture is removed. Wash the elute three times 
with 300-ml portions of distilled water, shaking 
well for each wash. (The addition of small 
amounts of sodium chloride facilitates separa- 
tion ). Discard the aqueous layer after each 
wash. After the final separation filter the 
residual benzene through anhydrous sodium 
sulphate prewashed with benzene ( see D-3.9 for 
preparation of filter ) into a 250-ml Erlenmeyer 
flask ( or optionally into the evaporation flask ). 
Wash the separatory funnel with two additional 
20 ml portions of benzene which are also 
filtered through the sodium sulphate. Add 1 ml 
of n-hexadecane and completely remove the 
benzene by evaporation undet nitrogen, using 
the special procedure to eliminate benzene as 
previously described under D-3.2. Quantitatively 
transfer the residue with iso-octane to a 25 ml 
volumetric flask and adjust to volume. Deter- 
mine the absorbance of the solution in the 5 -cm 
path length cells compared to iso-octane as 
reference between 2S0 to 400 m^. Correct for 
any absorbance derived from the reagents as 
determined by carrying out the procedure 
without a wax sample. If either spectrum shows 
the characteristic benzene peaks in the 250 to 
260 mp region, evaporate the solution to 
remove benzene by the procedure under D-3.3. 
Dissolve the residue, transfer quantitatively, 
and adjust to volume in iso-octane in a 25 ml 
volumetric flask. Record the absorbance again. 
If the corrected absorbance does not exceed the 
limits prescribed in Table 1, the wax meets the 
ultraviolet absorbance specfications. 



14 



IS 4654:1993 



ANNEX E 
[ Table 1, SI No. (ix) ] 

DETERMINATION OF ODOUR 



E.1 GENERAL 

E*l.l In some uses of petroleum wax, such as 
food packaging, odour intensity of the wax is an 
important property. For example, some descrip- 
tion of limits on wax odour often appears in 
specifications for petroleum wax. The method 
given here provides a basis for agreement be- 
tween laboratories on .the odour intensity of 
wax using a numerical scale rather than 
descriptive terms. While the method is primarily 
intended for rating odour intensity, results may 
be influenced by odour type. 

E-1.2 This method describes a procedure for 
rating the odour intensity of paraffin wax. 

E-2 TERMINOLOGY 

E-2.1 For the purpose of this test, the following 
definition shall apply. 

E-2.2 Odour of a Paraffin Wax 

Numerical rating corresponding to the odour 
*cale description that best fits the sample being 
tested. 

E-4 OUTLINE OF THE METHOD 

Odour test specimens are prepared from paraffin 
^wax by placing approximately 10 g of thin 
shavings on odour-free paper or glassine. In- 
dividual test specimens are then evaluated for 
odour by each panel member and assigned the 
number corresponding to the odour scale 
description best fitting the intensity of the 
odour. As an alternative procedure, the wax 
shavings are placed in bottles, with each panel 
member making {he odour evaluating between 
15 and 60 minutes after the specimens are 
prepared. The average of the panel rating is 
reported as the odour rating of the sample. 

E-4 APPARATUS 

E-4.UScraper 

A knife, vegetable scraper or other sharp instru- 
ment to produce thin shavings from wax and 
Which may easily be cleaned. 

*4Jt Paper 

Odour-free, or glassine for receiving wax 
shavings. 

E-43 Bottles 

IWde mouth, with caps. 



E-5 TEST PANEL 

Test panel shall consist of at least five persons 
as agreed to between the purchaser and the 
supplier. Individual panel members shall not 
evalute a series of more than three specimens at 
a time. Intervals of at least IS minutes between 
each series shall be mandatory. 

E-6 SAMPLE AND TEST SPECIMEN 

E-6.1 The sample shall consist of a block of wax 
at room temperature, from which at least 100 g 
of shavings may be obtained. 

£-6.2 The test specimen for evaluation by each 
panel member shall consist of approximately 
10 g wax in thin shavings obtained from the 
sample. 

D-7 PROCEDURE 

D-7.1 The test shall be conducted in a room, 
free from odour and having normal relative 
humidity. Any of the two methods described 
in E-7.2 and E-.7.3 shall be followed to observe 
the odour of the wax. Panel members shall not 
discuss the results until all tests have befen 
completed on a sample. 

E-7.2 Method A 

E-7.2.1 Scrape the surface of the sample to 
remove any foreign material and discard those 
scrapings. Using a clean scraper, prepare test 
specimens of approximately 10 g each of wax in 
thin shavings, Placing them on odour-free paper 
or glassine. Obtain shavings which represent a 
cross section of the sample being tested. 
Prepare one test specimen for each panel 
member. 

E-7.2.2 Each panel member shall make the 
odour evaluation immediately after the shavings 
are prepared by placing the nostril* in contact 
with tfe shavings and sniffing lightly ( see Note 
under E-7.3.1 ). 

E-7.3 Method B 

E-7.3.1 Immediately after preparing the shav- 
ings, transfer them to clean, odour-free bottles 
which are then capped. Prepare one bottle for 
each panel member* Each panel member shall 
then evaluate the test specimen between 15 and 
60 minutes after preparation, by removing the 
bottle cap, placing the nostrils at the bottle 
mouth and snuffing lightly ( see Note )• 

NOTE — If the specimen is smeiled repeatedly, the 
odour usually seems to decrease due to the olfactotj 
fatigue or less of volatile components in the sped- 
men or both. 



IS 



I & 4654 : 1993 



E-7.3.2 Record the odour of specimen in terms 
of numerical rating shown below, which corres- 
ponds to the odour intensity that best charac- 
terizes each specimen: 



Numerical Rating 

1 
2 
3 
4 



Odour Description 
None 
Slight 
Moderate 
Strong 
Very Strong 



E-8 CALCULATION AND REPORTING 

E-S.1 Calculate to the nearest unit the average 
of numerical ratings given to sample by the 
panel members. If any of the individual ratings 
differ from the average by more than t unit, 
repeat the test for the sample by all panel 
members till the individual ratings agree with 
the average rating within ± 1 unit. 

E-8.2 Report the average odour rating calcula- 
ted to the nearest unit as the odour rating of the- 
sample* 



ANNEX F 
( Clause B-3.1 ) 

METHOD OF TEST FOR MEASUREMENT OF MAXIMUM PORE DIAMETER OF 

RIGID POROUS FILTERS 



F-l GENERAL 

This method describes a test procedure for the 
determination of the acceptability of porous 
filter sticks. This method establishes the 
maximum pore diameter and also provides a 
means of detecting and measuring changes 
which occur from continued use. 

f-2 DEFINITION 

F-2.1 Maximum Pore Diameter 

It is the diameter in microns of the largest 
opening in filter. 

NOTE — It is recognized that the maximum pore 
diameter as defined herein does not necessarily indi- 
cate the physical dimensions of the largest pore in 
the filter. It is further recognized that the pores are 
highly irregular in shape. Because of the irregularity 
in shape and other phenomena characteristic of filtra- 
tion, a filter may be expected to retain all particles 
larger than the maximum pore diameter as defined 
and determined herein, and will generally retain 
particles which are much smaller than the determined 
diameter. 

P*3 OUTLINE OF METHOD 

The filter is cleaned and wetted with water. It 
is then immersed in water and air pressure is 
applied against its upper surface until the first 
bubble of air passes through the filter. The 
maximum pore diameter is calculated from the 
surface tension of water and the applied 
pressure. 

F-4 APPARATUS 

FU.I Manometer 

Mercury filled and readable to 0*5 mm* 
F-4.2 Air Supply 
Clean and filtered. 



F-4.3 P r e s e t Regulator 
Needle-valve type. 
F-4.4 Drying Oven 

F-5 PROCEDURE 

F-5.1 Clean the filter sticks by soaking in con* 
centrated hydrochloric acid, and then wash 
them with distilled water. Rinse with acetone, 
air dry, and place in drying oven at 105°C for 
30min. 

F-5.2 Thoroughly wet the clean filter to be 
tested by soaking it in distilled water. 

F-5*3 Assemble the apparatus as shown in 
Fig. 6. Apply pressure slowly from a source of 
clean air. 

F-5.4 Immerse the filter just below the surface 
of the water. 

NOTE — If a head of liquid exists above the surface 
of the filter, back pressure produced shall be deduc- 
ted from the observed pressure. 

F-5.5 Increase the air pressure to 10* mm below 
the acceptable pressure limit and then at a slow 
uniform rate of about 3 mm of mercury j*er 
minute until the first bubble passes through the: 
filter. This can be conveniently observed by 

6 lacing the beaker or teit tube Over a mirror. 
Lead the manometer when the first bubble- 
passes off the underside of the filter. 

F4 CALCULATION 

The pore diameter is calculated as follows; 

2 180 



16 



where 

D «« pore diameter, in microns; and 

p ■= manometer reading, in millimeters of 



SOURCE 
OF AIR 



1 





18 4*54:1993 

mercury. 

NOTE — From this equation, pressure corresponding 
to the upper and lower limits of the specified pore 
diameters can be calculated. These pressures may be 
used for acceptance testing. 



AIR FILTER 



AIR PRESSURE 
REGULATOR 



DRYING BULB 



FILTER STICK 



BEAKER OF 
WATER 



MANOMETER- 



W 



Fig. 6 Assbmbly of Apparatus for Checking Porb Diameter of Filter Stick 



17 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to 
promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality 
certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has a copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in 
any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in 
the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or 
grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are 
also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such a review 
indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken 
up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the 
latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 'BIS Handbook 9 and 'Standards 
Monthly Addition*. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. PCD 3 ( 1065 ) 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 

Regional Offices: 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheie VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola 
CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) 
BOMBAY 430093 



Telegrams : Manaksanstha 
( Common to all Offices ) 

Telephones 



{ 



331 01 31 
331 13 75 



84 99, 37 85 61 
86 26, 37 86 62 



f 37 
I 37 

f 53 38 43, 53 16 40 
I 53 23 84 

235 02 16, 235 04 42 
235 15 19, 235 23 15 

f 632 92 95, 632 78 58 
I 632 78 91, 632 78 92 

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. 
LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



{ 



Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 



