( Reaffirmed 2006 )

IS : 4400 ( Part VII) -1971

Indian Standard
METHODS OF MEASUREMENTS ON SEMICONDUCTOR DEVICES
PART VII REVERSE BLOCKING TRIODE THYRISTORS

Semiconductor

Devices and Integrated Circuits Sectional Committee, ETDC 40
&$resenting Behram Wadia & Associates, Poona

Chairman DB B. H. WADIA Members DR K. S. BALAIN

Central Electronics Engineering ( CSIR ) , Pilani

Research

Institute

DB B. R. MARATHE ( Altemute ) Directorate General of Inspection (Ministry of DR R. R. DUTTA GUPTA Defence ) LT-CDB M.K. SANKARAN( Alternate) Directorate General of Civil Aviation SERI S. K. GANQULY National Test House, Calcutta SHRI B. P. G~osa The Radio, Electronics & Television Manufacturers' SHRI R. K. JAIN Association ( RETMA 1, Bombay SERI S. Y. PHATAE ( Alternate) Continental Device India Ltd, Faridabad SHRI S. S. MADAN SHRI A. A. PATAXKAR ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Posts & Telegraphs ( DepartSERI G. B. MEEMAMSI ment of Communications ), New Delhi Directorate General of Defence Research & DevelopSHRI B. S. MURTHY ment ( Ministry of Defence ) Electronic Corporation of India Ltd ( Department of SHBI P. S. RAJU Atomic Energy ) , Hyderabad National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi DR RAM PARSHAD SERI S. P. ScRI ( &ts7a& ) Indian Telephone Industries Ltd, Bangalore SHRI D. K. SACEDEV SHRJ K. M. VISWANATHAN ( Alternate) Bharat Electronics Ltd Bangalore SHRI K. R. SAVOOR Director General, IS1 i Ex-ojicti Mmber ) SHRI Y. S. VENIKATESWABAN, Director ( Elec tech )

Secretary SHRI N. SRINIVASAN Deputy Director ( Elec tech ), ZSI

INDIAN
MANAK

STANDARDS
BHAVAN 9, BAHADUR NEW DELHI

INSTITUTION
SHAH 1 ZAFAR MARG

IS:4400(Part VII)-1971

Indian Standard
METHODS OF MEASUREMENTS ON SEMICONDUCTOR DEVICES
PART VII REVERSE BLOCKING TRIOOE THYRISTORS

0.

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part VII ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 15 November 1971, after the draft finalized by the Semiconductor Devices and Integrated Circuits Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council.
6.2 This standard (Part VII) lays down methods of measurements on reverse blocking triode thyristors (abbreviated as thyristors) for characteristics covered in IS : 3700 (Part VII )-1970*. 0.3 Certain ratings are related to the extended performance of a given device under certain operating conditions and generally declared or assigned by the manufacturer based on his experience. Individual measurements for such ratings are often not feasible and hence methods of measurements for such ratings are not covered in this standard. It is usual for the supplier or user to evaluate these requirements in relation to the reliability and life requirements. 0.3.1 Such ratings as applicable to reverse blocking triode thyristors for which methods of measurements are not described, are: a) b) c) d) e) voltage ratings [see 6.3 of IS:3700 (Part VII)-1970*] current ratings [see 6.4 and 6.5 of IS : 3700 ( Part VII )-1970* ] frequency ratings [see 6.7 of IS : 3700 (Part VII )-1970* ] power dissipation ratings [see 6.8 of 3700 (Part VII)-1970*] temperature ratings [see 6.9 of IS : 3700 ( Part VII )-1970*]

0.4 The polarities of the sources shown in the circuits in this standard are applicable to P-gate thyristors. However, the circuits can be adapted for N-gate thyristors by changing the polarities of the metres and the sources, and also of the anode and cathode terminals. ~+Essential ratings and characteristics of semiconductordevices: blocking triodetbyristors. 2
Part VII

Reverse

..

IS : 4400 ( Part VII ) - 1971 0.5 While preparing this standard, assistance has been derived Pub 147-2C (1970) Third supplement to Pub 147-2 ( 1963) ratings and characteristics of semiconductor devices and general of measuring methods: Part 2 General principles of measuring issued by International Electrotechnical Commission. from IEC `Essential principles methods '

0.6 This standard is one of a series of Indian Standards on semiconductor devices. A list of standards so far prepared in this series is given on page 26. 0.7 In reporting the results of measurements made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960*.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard (Part VII) covers the methods of measurements on reverse blocking triode thyristors (abbreviated as ` thyristor ' ) for characteristics covered in IS : 3700 (Part VII )-1970f. 2. FY;yzL:LOGY, GRAPHICAL SYMBOLS AND LETTER and

2.1 Terminology-For the purpose of this standard the terms definitions given in IS : 1885 ( Part VII/Set 4 )- 1969: shall apply.

the purpose of this standard, the graphical 2.2 Graphical Symbols -For symbols given in IS : 2032 ( Part VIII)-19650 shall apply. 2.3 Letter Symbols -For the purpose of this standard, the letter symbols givenin IS:3715 (Part I)-197111 and IS: 3715 (Part IV)-19717 shall apply. 3. THERMAL CONDITIONS

3.1 The measurements shall be made at the required thermal conditions specified in the relevant clauses of IS : 3700 (Part VII )-1970t. Measurements shall be carried out only after thermal equilibrium is reached. 4. GENERAL 4.1 The relevant conditions specified in IS : 4400 ( Part apply in addition to those specfied in 4.1.1 and 4.1.2. I )-1967** shall

*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( rmised ) . $Essential ratings and characteristics of semiconductor devices: Part VII Reverse blocking triode thyristors. $Electrotechnical vocabulary: Part VII Semiconductor devices, Section 4 Thyrirtors. �Graphical symbols used in electrotechnology: Part VIII Semiconductor devices. ILetter symbols for semiconductor devices: Part I General aspects. TLetter symbols for semiconductor devicea: Part IV Thyristors. **Methoda of measurements on semiconductor devices: Part I General.

3

IS:4ooo

(Part

VII)-1971

4.1.1 Precautions for dc Measurements 4.1.1.1 For the measurements of the forward characteristics of thyristors, the quality of the source of direct current is not considered to be important, provided that the peak-to-peak ripple is less than 10 percent.

4J.1.2 For the measurements of reverse characteristics, the peak-topeak ripple of the voltage source should not exceed 1.0 percent and particular care should be taken to ensure that the voltage ratings of the thyristors are not exceeded due to any voltage transients.
4.1.2

Precautions for ac Measurements

4.1.2.1 Diodes may be included in source circuits in order to protect the amplifiers in the oscilloscope from unwanted half-cycle pulses. 4.1.2.2 Where low reverse and off-state currents are being measured it may be necessary to take suitable precautions, such as the use of a screened transformer and suitable earthing to avoid pick-up. Care should also be taken to avoid stray capacitances, 4.1.2.3 In addition, particular care should be taken to keep residual inductance as low as possible, especially for high current devices. 4.1.3 Temeerature Conditions described, the thermal

4.1.3.1 For all measurements of electrical characteristics conditions of temperature should be specified. 4.1.3.2 equilibrium 4.2 Ratings The measurements is reached. should be performed

only after

4.2.1 Attention is called to the desirability of keeping the test conditions such as applied voltages and currents within the maximum ratings. If the ratings are exceeded, the characteristics of the thyristor may be permanently altered and subsequent tests vitiated. 4.2.2 Care shall be exercised to guard against the presence of transients which might be of sufficient magnitude to cause the deleterious effects specified in 4.2.1. 5. ELECTRICAL
CHARACTERISTICS

5.1 Forward Characteristics - Figure 1 gives a circuit for the measurement of instantaneous on-state-voltage for specified conditions of bias and impedance of the gate circuit, using a half-sine wave voltage supply. The current is applied through the thyristor in the forward direction while the thyristor is in the on-state and the voltage-current curve is displayed on an oscilloscope (see Fig. 2).

4

IS:4400

(Part VIE)-1971

The resistor Rs included in the circuit, (see Fig. 1 ) is introduced to limit the forward current of the diode D and hence should be low compared to forward resistance of the later.

T = Thyristor under test R, = Protective resistor 5 = Gate biasing source

FIG. 1

CIRCUIT FOR THE MEASUREMENT OF FORWARD CHARACTERISTICS

I

ON-STATE

C"W?ENTT;J)

FIO. 2
5.2 On-State

GRAPHICAL REPRESENTATION OF ON-STATE VOLTAGE VERSUS ON-STATE CURRENT CHARACTERISTICS

Voltage-On-state voltage shall be measured in the circuit given in Fig. 3. The specified on-state current is set after the thyristor switches to the on-state and the voltage between the anode and cathode terminals is measured under specified conditions of bias and impedance of the gate circuit. 5

ES:4490 (Part

VU)-1971

I /

7

1 - Thyristor FIG. 3

under test S = Gate biasing source

CIRCUIT FOR THE MEASUREMENT OF ON-STATE VOLTAGE

5.3 Latching Current-The latching current shall be measured in the circuit given in Fig. 4. The anode and gate supplies are connected and the gate triggering conditions shall be set as specified. The resistance RIshall be set initially at its maximum resistance value so that the thyristor does not conduct continuously when switch P is closed and shall then gradually be reduced while the switch P is periodically depressed and released. Each time the switch is depressed, the ammeter reading will rise and then drop back to zero when the switch is released as long as anode current flowing through the thyristor is less than its latching current. When latching finally occurs, the ammeter will deflect and remain deflected as the switch is released. The value of the current as indicated at this transition point is the latching current. 5.4 Holding Current-The holding current shall be measured using the same set-up as for latching current given in Fig. 4. The anode and gate The anode supply voltage supplies are connected as shown in the figure. is fixed and the resistor (RI )in the anode circuit is adjusted so that the onstate current which will flow when the thyristor is turned-on is high enough to ensure complete switching of the thyristor. The push-button switch is then closed and the gate current increased until the thyristor switches on and then the push-button is released. The resistor (RI)in the anode circuit is then increased gradually, thus decreasing the on-state current until the thyristor turns off. The value of the on-state current immediately prior to the thyristor turning off is the holding current. NOTE- Accidental open circuiting of resistance R, during measurement should not be miataken for tunning-off of the thyristor and for determining the value of holding current. 6

1s : 4400 ( Part VII ) - 1971

T = Thyristor under test P = Switch ( push button type ) R, and R, = Protective resistors

$1 = Gate biasing source s* - Gate trigger source

FIG. 4
5.5 Off-State

CIRCUITFOR THE &hmxntEMEhT OF LATCHINGCURRENT
AND HOLDING CURRENT
Current

-The off-state current shall be measured in the circuit given in Fig. 5. The specified peak off-state voltage is applied through the protective resistor and the off-state current is measured under specified conditions of gate bias and impedance .of the gate circuit. The protective resistor shall be sufficiently large to protect the ammeter and the device being measured, should the latter switch to the conducting state. It is also to be noted that considerable care shall be taken in shielding the equipment.

S = Gate biasing source T = fhyristor under test FIG. 5 CIRCUIT FOR THE MEASUREMBNT OF OFF-STATECURRENT

7

IS:4400 (Part

VII)-1971

Off-State Current - Figure 6 gives a circuit for the measurement of instantaneous values of off-state current as a function of offstate voltage for specified conditions of bias and impedance of gate circuit. The curve of voltage-current is displayed on the oscillascope. It is to be noted that considerable care shall be taken in shielding the equipment. 5.6 Instantaneous

T = Thyristor R, = Protective

under test resistor source

G = Gate biasing NOTE 1 -

The use of the diodes Dz and D, in this circuit is optional. of the

NOTB 2 - The peak reverse voltage the thyrirtor rating.

diode D, should be commensurate

with

FIG. 6

CIRCUIT FOR THE MEASUREMENT OFF-STATE CURRENT

OF INSTANTANEOUS

5.7 Reverse Current -Figure 7 gives a circuit for the measurement of reverse current. The specified value of reverse voltage is applied through the protective resistor R and the reverse current is measured under specified conditions of gate bias and impedance of the gate circuit. Considerable care should be taken in shielding the equipment. 5.8 Instantaneous Reverse Current-Figure 8 gives a circuit for the measurement of instantaneous values of reverse current as a function of reverse voltage. The curve of voltage-current is displayed on the oscilloscope. Considerable care shall be taken in shielding the equipment.

a

IS : 4409 ( Part VII ) - 1971

T = Thyristor under test 5 - Gate biasing source

FIG. 7

CIRCUIT FOR THE

MEASUREMENT OF REVERSE CURRENT

T = Thyristor under test Rs = Protective resistor S = Gate biasing source NOTE 1 -The use of diodes D, and D, in this drcuit voltage of the
diode

is optional. 08 should be commensurate

NOTE 2 - The peak reverse with the thyristor rating.

FIG. 8

CIRCUIT FOR THE MEASUREIIBENT OF INSTANTANEOUS REVERSE CURRENT
9

15:4400 (PartVII)-1971 5.9 Gate Trigger Current and Gate Trigger Voltage - Gate trigger voltage and current can be measured in the circuit given in Fig. 9. The specified continuous voltage V [see Note under 7.8 of IS : 3700 (Part VII )Then the voltage between gate 1970* ] is applied in the forward direction. and cathode terminals is increased gradually from zero until the thyristor is switched to the on-state and the voltage between anode and cathode terminals decreases suddenly. The voltage between gate and cathode terminals and the gate current required to trigger the thyristor are the gate trigger voltage and current respectively.
NOTE - Care should be taken to avoid error introduced by the connection of voltmeter and ammeter in the gate circuit. The voltmeter V, should be removed when measuring gate trigger current.

The gate signal should be applied at a sufficiently slow rate to avoid errors due to damping in the meter movements and to permit accurate observation of the meter readings as the thyristor switching point is approached.

-a-V

r

1

L
T = Thyristor under test S = Gate biasing source R = Current limiting resistor

FIG. 9

CIRCUITFOR THE MEASUREMEXW OF GATE TRIGGERCURI+ENT AND GATE TRIGGERVOLTAGE

5.9.1 When the circuit is used to determine the values of gate trigger current and gate trigger voltage that will trigger every thyristor, the anode supply voltage should be low, preferably 12 V or less.
*Essential ratings and characteristics blocking triode thyriators. of semiconductor devices: Part VII Reverse

10

is:4499

(Fart Vrx)-1971

5.19 `Gate Non-trigger Current and Gate Non-trigger Voltage -The gate non-trigger current and the gate non-trigger voltage shall be measured in the circuit given in Fig. 10. The anode supply shall be intermittent and synchronized with the gate voltage and shall be adjusted to the value of the A synchronized half-sine-wave voltage, specified peak off-state voltage. sufficiently large to make the thyristor switch, is applied to the gate circuit. The point of discontinuity on the trace in the gate current voltage

z
NOTE 2 voltage.

Nom 1 -The

two supply sources G, and Gs should be at mains frequency of 50 Ha. The battery B and the clamping diode Ds provide the intermittent on-state

FIG. 10 CIRCUIT FOR THE MEASUREMENTOF GATE NON-TRIGGER CURRENT ' AND GATE NON-TRIGGER VOLTAGE

/a~ = Gate Trigger Current VQT = Gate Trigger Voltage

FIG. 11

GATE CURRENT VERSUS GATE VOLTAGE CHARACTERBTIC 11

IS:4409(PartVll)-1971
characteristic as a result of thyristor switching, displayed on the oscilloscope is observed. This is shown in Fig. 11. The current and voltage, immediately prior to that point, are the gate non-trigger current and voltage respectively. 5.10.1 When the circuit is used to determine the values of gate trigger current and gate trigger voltage that will trigger every thyristor, the anode supply voltage should be low, preferably 12 V or less. 5.11 Gate Gontr6lled Turn-On Time The capacitor C 5.11.1 The measurement circuit is shown in Fig. 12. is charged to the specified voltage Va through diode D during the positive half cycles of 50 Hz supply voltage. DUIing the negative half cycles! the thyristor to be measured is turned-on by means of a synchronized trigger signal, and capacitor C is discharged ( see Fig. 13 ). The waveforms of gate voltage Vg and anode voltage V, of the thyristor are displayed on a dualtrace oscilloscope ( see Fig. 14). TO CR0
VERTICAL PLATE

3

I

v,

`1

_I '
"C I

HORIZONTAL

PLATE

"3

I T = Thyrirtor
under test CIRCUIT FOR THE MEASUREMENT OF GATE' CONTROLLED TURN-ON TIME

FIG. 12

5.11.2 Resistor RI is used to limit the charging current and protect the Resistor Re is used to limit the peak current of the thyristor to diode D. The time constant of Rs C should be not less than ten its specified value. times the specified rise time, but shall be small enough to allow complete discharge of capacitor C prior to the next charging cycle. The inductor L is used for protection of the thyristor and includes any stray inductance due The gate circuit The ratio L/RI should be specified. to circuit wiring. The network connected to conditions and gate bias should be specified. the gate circuit is an example for illustration.
12

I

ISt44ofJ (PartVII)-1971

FIG. 13 INPUT WAVEFORMS b
1
-GATE PULSE WIOTH-

FIG. 14 GATE CONTROLLER TURN-ON TIME 13

IS:4499

(Pm-t VII)-1971

5.11.3 The rise time of the trigger signal should not exceed 10 percent of the specified delay time. The duration of the trigger signal should be sufficiently long relative to the specified turn-on time that the result is not affected within the desired accuracy of measurement. 5.11.4 The gate controlled turn-on time is the sum of the delay time td and the rise time tr of the thyristor anode current. The delay time is measured as the time interval between the 10 percent point on the leading edge of the gate trigger pulse and the time when the thy&or voltage has The rise decreased to 90 percent of its initial value ( before triggering ). time is measured as the time interval during which the thyristor anode voltage has fallen from 90 percent to 10 percent of its initial value (before triggering). When the off-state voltage of the thyristor is not high compared with its on-state voltage, the measurement of rise time should be measured as the time interval between 90 percent and 10 percent of the difference between the off-state and on-state voltages. 5.12 Circuit Commutated Turn-Off Time sum of the reverse (see Fig. 15 ). It is has fallen to zero and the off-state voltage 5.12.1 Circuit commutated turn-off time is the recovery time trr and the gate recovery time tsr measured from the instant when the principal current the time when the thyristor is capable of blocking without switching to the on-state.

5.12.2 The circuit commutated turn-off time is dependent upon: 4 the magnitude of the on-state current;

b)

the rate of fall of on-state current

-

di

dt

;

operating temperature; magnitude of the reverse voltage applied during the turn-off interval; 4 The magnitude and rate of rise of the off-state voltage applied at the end of the turn-off interval; and f 1 The `gate bias conditions during the turn-off interval and the re-application of the off-state voltage. 5.12.3 The basic circuit diagram in Fig. 16 indicates the operating principles of a circuit used to generate the waveforms shown in Fig. 15. For convenience, the circuit uses current generators and ideal switches. 5.12.4 The operation of the circuit is as follows: a) Switches Ss and Sd are closed simultaneously causing the thyristor to switch to the on-state and conduct the specified current I,. Switch Sa is then opened and the trigger circuit disconnected from the thyristor, the on-state current being unaffected. 14

4 The d) The

IS:4409 (Part VII)-1971 b) After the specified conduction time, switch Ss is closed and a reverse voltage of specified amplitude and rate of change is applied across the thyristor to cause current reversal through the thyristor. Switch Sr is closed so that forward off-state voltage of specified amplitude and rate of change is applied across the thyristor to determine when the thyristor is capable of blocking the off-state voltage without switching to the on-state. The switching sequence (Ss to S,) is repeated using successively shorter time intervals until the time interval is just long enough to allow the off-state voltage to be applied without breakover. 5.12.5 In the circuit, diode D, shall have a reverse recovery time longer than the reverse recovery time of the thyristor, so that the full reverse Diode Da is used to prevent a voltage cycle appears across the thyristor. commutation voltage transient when the thyristor begins to recover its reverse blocking capability. Diode Da is used in conjunction with the Inductor L1 and resistor voltage Vi to limit the forward off-state voltage. R, are used to determine the rate of current change during switching from The current Z1 completes the reverse recovery of diode the on-state. D1 and then charges capacitor Ci linearly with time at a rate equal to Z&r producing the required rate of rise of forward off-state voltage at the end of the switching cycle. 5.12.6 The measurement is usually made in a circuit operating on a repetitive basis at supply frequency so that a continuous oscilloscope display is possible. Figure 17 shows an example of such a circuit. The gate trigger generator is synchronized with the supply frequency and provides trigger pulses on the half cycles following the charging of capacitors Cc and Cr. Trigger pulses are applied to the thyristor under test T& and to thyristors 2-b and Tc,, in that order, to perform .the switching functions of switches &, Sr and SI of Fig. 16. 5.12.7 The on-state current IT is obtained from the charge in capacitor 6 which is charged by means of an adjustable halfwave rectified supply. The time constant of C'S and RI shall be sufficiently large so that the specified on-state current is essentially constant over the specified conduction period. The conduction period is ended by the gate pulse which triggers thyristor lb allowing the reverse voltage of capacitor Cp to be applied through the resistor RI, inductor Ll and diode D1 across the thyristor under test, the functions and requirements of Rz, LI and D1 being as described for the basic circuit. 5.12.8 The turn-off time interval is ended by the gate pulse which triggers thyristor Tc. The circuit used in Fig. 17 to generate the forward off-state voltage differs from that shown in the basic circuit in Fig. 16. When thyristor Tc is triggered, diode Ds is reverse biased (because of the voltage on capacitor Cd), causing the current through inductor Lz to 17

IS : 4409 ( Part VII ) - 1971 be diverted through 7-c to charge capacitor Cr at a linear rate. The inductance of La shall be large enough to maintain constant current until capacitor CI charges to a voltage equal to the sum of voltages k's and VO. At this point, diode Da starts to conduct and -clamps the off-state voltage applied to the thyristor under test. Resistor R4 is used to discharge capacitor Ct during the conduction period before the next switching cycle. Resistor Rs serves to control the value of the constant current through L2 and D3. 5.12.9 In addition, the following considerations are applicable:

4

The time constant R,Cs shall be large enough to maintain essentially constant current during the conduction period. For test currents above 100 amperes, a properly designed lumped constant transmission line and a reduced repetition rate may result in a more practical source of conduction current. Thyristor Tb does not turn-off until the charges on Cs and Cs reach equilibrium. This results in considerable power loss in RI loss can be considerably reduced by adding and Rz. This additional circuitry for turning off thyristor 7-b following the triggering of thyristor Tc or by reducing the pulse repetition rate. Resistor current thyristor & provides a discharge path for capacitor Cr. The drawn by R4 shall be less than the holding current of T, so that it may turn-off after Cl becomes charged.

b)

4 4

Effects of distributed capacitance in L2 reverse recovery of diodes D1 and Da and wiring inductance may cause undesirable oscillations in the re-applied forward voltage waveform. These effects can be minimized by good design practices including the use of suitable damping resistances (not included) in Fig. 17. be used to avoid exceeding ratings of of

Good design practice should e> the components selected. 5.13 Total Power Loss -The the following losses:

total power loss is composed

,

primarily

a) Forward conduction losses (see 5.1)) b) Forward blocking losses (see 5.5 ), c) Reverse blocking losses (see 5.7), and d) Gate power losses (see 5.10). 5.13.1 These losses are of current voltage curves indicated against each. individually computed by the obtained from the measurements integration made as against

5.13.2 The total loss is averaged over a whole cycle and plotted average forward current for various conduction angles.

NOTE - Switching losses also are to be taken into account for high frequency application above 400 Hz. ( These depend on individual applications and switching conditions and hence no general method is prescribed. )

19

IS: 4400 ( Part VII) - 1971 5.14 Critical Rate of Rise of Off-State Voltage-The measurement is made at a specified applied anode or principal voltage and the rate of rise is increased until the thyristor switches from the off-state to the on-state. The waveform of the applied voltage is exponential. 5.14.1 Exjonential Rise Method - Figure 18 shows an example of a typical circuit and Fig. 19 shows a graphical representation of exponential waveform. This measurement is performed with an exponential waveform of specified amplitude with the device initially unenergized. The time constant 7 is determined at the point of breakover.

TO

CR0

5 = Gate biasing source T I= Thyristor under test SW si Switch Fm. 18
CIRCUIT FOR MEASUREMENT CRITICAL RATE OF RISE OF OFF-STATE VOLTAGE BY EXPONENTIAL RISE METHOD
`NUMERICAL VALUE OF $$

FIG. 19

EXPONENTIAL RISE WAVEFORM 20

IS:4490 (Part VII)-1971 5.14.2 The rate of rise is calculated as follows: Critical rate of rise = Peak test voltage x O-632 7

5.14.3 The critical rate of rise of off-state voltage is influenced by the value of off-state voltage. Therefore, the measurement should be done with a constant source voltage and variable time constant. 5.14.4 The measurement is performed by decreasing either the resistance RI or the capacitor Cl until the device under test switches to the on-state, or the specified dvldt limit value is reached without switching. The source voltage V shall be maintained at the specified value. 5.14.5 Circuit Requirements Resistor Rs is a current limiting resistor. The values of Ra and CI shall be selected to minimize waveform distortion due to thyristor and circuit wiring impedances. Resistor RI and capacitor Cr form a network to give the required exponential rate of rise of voltage.

4 b) cl

Resistor Ra is used to discharge the capacitor Cl, while switch SW is open, so that the test may be performed on a repetitive basis. 4 Switch SW is used to energize the circuit and should have a closure time including bounce of not more than 10 percent of the practical time constant. The switch should be closed for a minimum period of 10 times the time constant. e) The repetition rate should be low enough so that doubling its value does not change the result within the designed accuracy of measurement . 6. THERMAL CHARACTERISTICS

6.1 Reference Point Temperature 6.1.1 For devices where a hole has been drilled by the manufacturer for this purpose, the temperature of the case is measured by means of a thermocouple inserted into this hole. The thermocouple should be not larger than 0.25 mm. The thermocouple lead should be formed by welding rather than by soldering or twisting. The lead is inserted into the hole which is then closed over the thermocouple lead by tapping the metal at the edges of the hole. 6.1.2 For other devices, the temperature at the reference point is measured by means of a temperature-sensitive element having negligible thermal capacity which is cemented, soldered, clamped or held rigidly against the case of the device so as to ensure a negligible thermal resistance. 21

IS:4400 (Part VII)-1971 6.2 Thermal Resistance and Transient Thermal Impedance 6.2.1 General- The measurement of thermal resistance and transient thermal impedance is based on the use of a temperature-sensitive parameter as an indicator of virtual junction temperature. The on-state voltage of the thyristor at a small percentage of the rated on-state current is normally used as the temperature-sensitive parameter. 6.2.2 Thermal Resistance - Thermal resistance is calculated by measuring two powers PI and P 1, the reference point temperature being TI and la respectively for the same indication of the chosen temperature sensitive parameter like on-state voltage at a small percentage of the rated on-state current (see 6.2.1). Power PI is applied to the thyristor while maintaining a temperature TX at the reference point by suitable means (an oven The flow of power PI is interrupted to for ambient, bath for case, etc ). permit measurement of the selected temperature-sensitive parameter immediately upon interruption of the power. 6.2.2.1 Power Pz is then applied to the device and adjusted while simultaneously maintaining another temperature 2-2 at the reference point so that the temperature-sensitive parameter measures the same value as in 6.2.2. 6.2.2.2 The thermal resistance Rth is calculated from the formula:
Rth = PI 6.2.3 Transient Thermal Impedance
T2TI
PL

6.2.3.1 A calibration curve is prepared for the device by measuring the on-state voltage at a selected value of measuring current, as a function ,of virtual junction temperature, by varying the device temperature externally, Discontinuities as shown in for example, by means of an oil bath. curve B of Fig. 20 indicate partial switching which should be corrected by selecting a higher value of measuring current.

1

c

VIRTUAL

JUNCTION

TEMPERATURE

Fm. 20

CALIBRATION

CURVE

22

16 I4496 ( Part VII ) - 1971 6.2.3.2 A measuring circuit as shown in Fig. 21 may be used to obtain the data required for calculating the transient thermal impedance After applying the heating current and waiting characteristic curve. until thermaI equilibrium is established, the power dissipated in the device The heating current supply is then interrupted, is measured and recorded. and the on-state voltage corresponding to the measuring current supply IS This may be accomrecorded as a function of time as shown in Fig. 22. The measurement may plished by photographing the oscilloscope trace. be repeated at different oscilloscope sweep rates in order to measure adequately the on-state voltage over the entire time range. The reference point temperature shall be monitored as a function of time. Since this change is relatively small and slow, a thermistor or thermocouple measuring system should be adequate.

G = Gate biasingsource : = T$ytor under test = . FIG. 21 CIRWIT FOR MEASURINGTRANSIENTTHERMAL IMPEDANCE

Time in log scale.

FIO. 22

ON-STATE VOLTAGE CURVE 23

IS:4400

(Part VII)-1971

6.2.3.3 The curve of on-state voltage as a function of time can be converted to virtual junction temperature versus time by means `of the calibration curve. 6.2.3.4 Transient thermal impedance is calculated &&)_JA-W-(A'--`) P where &, ( t ) = transient thermal impedance at time ` t `, = virtual junction temperature at the time of A current interruption, Z-Zreference point temperature at the time of B current interruption, A' = virtual junction temperature at time ` t ' after heating current interruption, = reference point temperature at time ` t ' B' after heating current interruption, and P = power dissipated in the device. heating heating seconds seconds as follows:

6.2.3.5 Figure 23 illustrates the shape of a typical transient thermal impedance curve. 6.2.4 Precautions 6.2.4.1 The heating power applied should be either dc or of a sufficiently high frequency that the fluctuation of the virtual junction temperature is negligible. The measurement of on-state voltage should be

A
Rth

t = Time after heating current interruption

( in log Scale)

Fro. 23

TRANSIENT THERMAL IMPEDANCE CURVE 24

IS : 4406 ( Fart VII ) - I971 made at a time following the power interruption(s) such that the nonthermal transients have decayed, but before the change of virtual junction temperature is significant. It is for this reason that the electronic switch circuit and time delay of measurement should also be specified. switching is used; the after power interruption

6.2.4.2 Difficulties with this measurement method are due to ambiguity in determining the value of virtual junction temperature at the time of current interruption. Non-thermal voltage transients occur due to the excess charge carriers present after the heating current is interrupted. This difficulty can be avoided by extrapolating the on-state voltage versus time curve back to zero time from a time at the end of which the device is shown to be in charge equilibrium. This time can be estimated from life time observations or by performing the measurements at different power levels and noting the shortest time for which the virtual The dotted junction temperature is a linear function of power dissipation. portion of the on-state voltage curve in Fig. 22 illustrates the extrapolation of the point shown as VO. Another source of non-thermal transients in the on-state voltage characteristics is due to the collapse of the magnetic field around the device when the heating current is interrupted. 7. MEASUREMENT OF CHARACTERISTIC CURVES 7.1 Mean On-State Current Versus Mean Power Dissipation for Various Conduction Angles - This curve shall be obtained as a computed curve directly from the power loss measurements (see 5.13 j for different conduction angles. 7.2 Mean On-State Current Versus Maximum Permissible Reference Point Temperature for Various Conduction Angles 2 This curve is a computed curve obtained from rhe power loss measurements
(see 5.13) for different conduction measurements (see 6.2.2 ). angles and from the thermal resistancy

7.3 Gate Triggering Characteristics-This curve shall be obtained from the gate trigger current and gate trigger voltage measurements ( set 5.9) and gate non-trigger current and gate non-trigger voltage measurements ( see 5.10 ) .

7.4 On-state Voltage Versus On-State Current on Various Temperatures - This curve shall be obtained from the forward characteristic measurements made as specified in 5.1 at different temperatures. 7.5 Transient Thermal Impedance as a Function Time See6.2.3. 7.6 Hording Current Versus Reference Point Temperature - This curve shall be obtained from the holding current measurements made in accordance with 5.4.
25

INDIAN ON

STANDARDS

SEMICONDUCTOR

DEVICES

Is: 1885 ( Part VII/Set l )-1970 Electrotechnical vocabulary: Part VII Semiconductor devices, Section I General 1885 ( Part VII/Set 2 )-1970 Electrotechnical vocabulary: Part VII Semiconductor devices, Section 2 Diodes 1885 ( vocabularv: Part VII Semiconductor \ Part VIIlSec 3 )-I970 Electrotechnical devices, Section 3 Transistors 1885 ( Part VII/&c 4 )-1970 Electrotechnical vocabulary: Part VII Semiconductor devices, Section 4 Thvristors 1885 ( Part VII/Set 5 )-I971 Electrotechnical vocabulary: Part VII Semiconductor devices, Section 5 Integrated circuits and microelectronics 2032 ( Part VIII )-1965 Graphical symbols used in electrotechnology: Part VIII Semiconductor devices of semiconductor devices: 3700 ( Part I )-1966 Essential ratings and characteristics 3700 (Part 3700 ( Part 3700 ( Part 3700 ( Part 3700 ( Part 3700 (Part 3700 (Part 3715 3715 3715 3715 4400 4400 (Part ( Part ( Part ( Part ( Part ( Part II )-I967 Essential ratings and characteristics of semiconductor devices: Part II Low power signal diodes III)-1967 Essential ratings and characteristics of semiconductor devices: Part III Rectifier diodes IV )-I968 Essential ratings and characteristics of semiconductor devices: Part IV Low power small signal transistors V )-1968 Essential ratings and characteristics of semiconductor devices: Part V Power transistors VI )-1968 Essential ratings and characteristics of semiconductor devices: Part VI Switching transistors VII )-I970 Essential ratings and characteristics of semiconductor devices: Part VII Reverse blocking triode thyristors VIII )-1970 Essential ratings and characteristics of remiconductor devices: Part VIII Voltage regulator and voltage reference diodes I )-1971 Letter symbols for semiconductor devices: Part I General aspects II )-1971 Letter symbols for semiconductor devices: Part II Diodes III )-1971 Letter symbols for semiconductor devices: Part III Transistors Letter symbols for semiconductor devices: Part IV Thyristors IV )-I971 I )-I967 Methods of measurements on semiconductor devices: Part I General II )-1967 Methods of measurements on semiconductor devices: Part II Low power signal diodes III )-1968 Methods of measurements on semiconductor devices: Part III Rectifier diodes VII l-1971 Methods of measurements on semiconductor devices: Part VII Reverse blocking diode thyristors VIII )-1970 Methods of measurements on semiconductor devices: Part VIII Voltage regulator and voltage reference diodes Code of designation of semiconductor devices Dimensions of semiconductor devices NOTE - Standards on dimensions of semiconductor devices are published in loose leaf form ( individually priced at Rs 3.00 per standard ) and are supplied in an attractive binder (priced at Rs SO0 ). So far 26 standards have been published. 5001-1969 5469-1969 Guide for preparation of drawings of semiconductor devices Code of practice for the use of semiconductor junction devices
Part T C,P"Pral _ -- - - ____--

44.60 (Part 4400 f Part 4400 ( Part 441 I-1967 5000

