**************** 



-k t^^ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 11240 (1985) : Method for falling weight test on metallic 
materials [MTD 3: Mechanical Testing of Metals] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



15:11240-1985 

( Reaffirmed 2006 ) 



Indian Standard 



METHOD FOR FALLING 
WEIGHT TEST ON METALLIC MATERJALS 



U DC ft6 9D ] : 620- 1 1^1 ^- A 




© Copy right 1^85 
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK SHAVAN. * BAHAlJlJR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NLW DEUU 110002 

G, 2 Octffber 1985 



18:11240-1985 

Indian Standard 

METHOD FOR FALLING 
WEIGHT TEST ON METALLIC MATERIALS 

Methods of Physical Tests Sectional Committee, SMDC 3 

Chairman Rep resenting 

Shri p. K. Chakravarty The Tata Iron & Steel Co Ltd, Jamshedpur 

Members 

Shri R. K. Abrol Bharat Steel Tubes Ltd, Ganaur 

Shri S. Bonde ( Alternate ) 
Shri Sujit Kumar Basu M. N. Dastur & Co (P) Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri S. Sen Gupta ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. K. Bhatia Quality Marking Centre, Amritsar 

Shri R. N. Biswas Steel Authority of India Ltd ( Durgapur Steel 

Plant ), Durgapur 

Shri T. S. Tewari ( Alternate ) 
Dr a. Chakraborty Usha Martin Industries Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri H, Maheswary ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. K. Cherian Indian Aluminium Co Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri Pankaj De ( Alternate ) 
Dr R. p. Dambal Indian Telephone Industries Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri V. V. Prabhu ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. K. Das Gupta National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi 

Shri K. G. Garg Directorate General of Technical Development & 

Production ( Air }, New Delhi 

Shri P. Raghothama Rao ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. G. Gehani Blue Star Limited, Bombay 

Shri G. S. Sobti ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. Ghosh National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri D. S. Majumdar ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. A. Haque The Tata Iron & Steel Co Ltd, Jamshedpur 

Shri A. S. Walia ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. C. Hore Ministry of Railways 

Shri S. R. De ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. V. Kulkarni Fuel Instruments & Engineers Pvt Ltd, Ichalkaranji 

Shri J. V. Kulkarni ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. Kumar Mining & Allied Machinery Corporation Ltd, 

Durgapur 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1985 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of 
the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



18:11240-1985 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri K. S. Lakshminarayan Avery India Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri R. D. Sharma ( Alternate ) 
Shri C. B, Lunawat The Indian Tube Co Ltd, Jamshedpur 

Shri R. Rama Rao ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. R. Mazumdar Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Shri A. K. Chakroborty ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. N. Nanda Associated Instrument Manufacturers' ( India ) Pvt 

Ltd, New Delhi 
Shri S. C. Jain ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. A. Padmanabhan Central Mechanical Engineering Research Institute 

( CSIR ), Durgapur 
Shri M. Prasad Steel Authority of India Ltd ( Rourkela Steel 

Plant ), Rourkela 
Shri N. Gopalakrishna ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. Radhakrishnan National Aeronautical Laboratory ( CSIR ), 

Bangalore 
Dr V. Srinivasan ( Alternate ) 
Dr V. Rao National Metallurgical Laboratory ( CSIR ), 

Jamshedpur 
Dr D. J. Chakravarti ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. N. Saha Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals, 

New Delhi 
Shri S. IC. Pandey ( Alternate ) 
Shri D, N. Sarkar Ministry of Defence, Ordnance Factories Board, 

Calcutta 
Shri A. R. Basu ( Alternate ) 
Shri F. C. Sharma Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi 

Shri K. Swamiappan Ministry of Defence (R&D) 

Shri H. K. Taneja Indian Register of Shipping, Bombay 

Shri S. Kumar ( Alternate ) 
Shri Yadhvir Singh Steel Authority of India Ltd ( Bokaro Steel Plant ), 

Bokaro 
Shri P. N. Tripathy ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. Raghavendran, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director ( Struc & Met ) 

Secretary 

Shri Jagmohan Singh 
Deputy Director ( Metals ), ISI 



18:11240-1985 

Indian Standard 

METHOD FOR FALLING 
WEIGHT TEST ON METALLIC MATERIALS 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 28 February 1985, after the draft finalized by the Methods of physical 
Tests Sectional Committee had been approved by the Structural and 
Metals Division Council. 

0.2 Falling weight test on metallic materials is generally used to evaluate 
the ductility of the material when subjected to shock loading. This test is 
also referred to as drop test or tup test. This test is most commonly used 
as one of the acceptance tests for railway rolling stock components like 
rails, axels, solid wheels and tyres. This standard has been prepared with 
the object of rationalising the test procedure for general guidance. The 
requirements to be specified in a material standard for conducting the test 
for any material are given in Appendix A. Appropriate reference to this 
standard should be made in the material standard wherever the falling 
weight test is specified. 

0,3 In reporting the result of a test made in accordance with this standard 
if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be 
done in accordance with IS: 2-1960*. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard prescribes the method for conducting the falling weight 
test on metallic materials. The test shall be carried out on the finished 
product in the condition to be delivered to the purchaser unless otherwise 
agreed between the manufacturer and the purchaser. 

2. PRINCIPAL OF TEST 

2.1 The test consists in subjecting the test piece to a known impact force 
to evaluate the ductility and internal soundness of the material when 
subjected to shock loading. 



♦Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). 

3 



18:11240-1985 

3. TEST PIECE 

3.1 The material tested shall be finished product of proper identity. 

3.2 A representative sample shall be selected for the lot offered for testing. 

4. TESTING MACHINE 

4.1 The anvil block shall be strong and rigid enough not to cause any 
vibration or deflection during testing. 

4.2 Support for Test piece — The test piece shall be suitably supported. 
The supports shall be rigid and heavy and shall not deflect or vibrate under 
the impact of the falling weight. 

4.3 Concrete Foundation — The metal anvil shall be supported directly on 
concrete block of sufficient strength. 

4.4 Guide for Falling Weight — Vertical guides with proper clearance shall 
be provided for free fall of the weight. 

4.5 Falling Weight — The falling weight shall be of appropriate mass and 
shape consistant with the component to be tested. 

4.6 Height Gauge — The height of drop shall be clearly marked on the 
vertical guide and be readable from the floor level. 

4,6.1 The zero reference point shall nominally be 100 mm above the 
support. 

5. TEST PROCEDURE 

5.1 The test piece shall be kept in vertical, horizontal or any other position 
in accordance with the requirement of material specification. 

5.2 In case of circular test piece like railway wheel in horizontal position, 
the same shall be supported at least at three equi-distant places unless 
otherwise stated. 

5.3 In case of straight test piece the distance of support shall be as 
specified in the material specification. 

5.4 The test piece shall be supported in such manner that the weight shall 
strike the centre of test piece. 

5.5 The falling weight shall be raised to a height as indicated in the 
material specification and shall be allowed to fall freely to strike the test 
piece. The number of drops and the position of the test component 
between the successive drops shall be as specified in the material specifica- 
tion. 



18:11240-1985 

5.6 If required, the deflection or depression of the test piece at the centre 
from its original position shall be measured after each blow, 

5.7 The test shall be continued till the required deflection or the number of 
blows as specified in the material specification is reached. 

6. TEST REQUIREMENTS 

6.1 The interpretation of deflection and or the fracture shall be made in 
accordance with the material specification as given in Appendix A. 



APPENDIX A 

( Clauses 0,2 and 6.1 ) 

REQUIREMENTS TO BE SPECIFIED IN MATERIAL 
SPECIFICATION 

A-1. The material specification shall specify the following for carrying out 
the falling weight test in accordance with the requirements of this specifica- 
tion: 

a) The position of test piece during test, that is, vertical, horizontal or 
upside down; 

b) Length of test piece or any other description; 

c) Height of fall of the weight and number of blows; 

d) Distance between supports; 

e) Shape and mass of the falling weight; 

f) Deflection of test piece; 

g) In case of repeatative drop test, successive height of fall and the 
minimum height of fall without fracture; and 

h) Interpretation of fractured test piece for significance. 



INTERNATIONAL SYSTEM OF UNITS ( SI UNITS ) 

Base Units 

Symbol 
m 
kg 
s 

A 
K 

cd 
mol 

Symbol 
rad 

sr 

Symbol 

N 1 

J 1 

W 1 

Wb 1 

T 1 

Hz 1 

S 1 

V 1 

Pa 1 



Quantity 


Unit 


Length 


metre 


Mass 


kilogram 


Time 


second 


Electric current 


ampere 


Thermodynamic 


kelvin 


temperature 




Luminous intensity 


candela 


Amount of substance 


mole 


Supplementary Units 




Quantity 


Unit 


Plane angle 


radian 


Solid angle 


steradian 


Derived Units 




Quantity 


Unit 


Force 


newton 


Energy 


joule 


Power 


watt 


Flux 


weber 


Flux density 


tesla 


Frequency 


hertz 


Electric conductance 


Siemens 


Electromotive force 


volt 


Pressure, stress 


pascal 



Definition 

N = 1 kg. m/s^ 

J =1 N,m 
W = 1 J/s 
Wb=l V.s 

T-1 Wb/m« 
Hz=- 1 c/s(s-i) 

S = 1 A/V 

V«l W/A 
Pa-=1 N/m'' 



