**************** 



-k t^^ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 11931 (1987): sewer cleaning metal rods [CED 24: Public 
Health Engineering.] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS: 11931 -19S7 

Indian Standard < ''''"'™'' '°°' ^ 

SPECrFICATION FOR 
SEWER CLEANING M£TAL RODS 



UDC fi2S 2S7 : «69-432 



% 



I- 



BUIEAU OF [NDIAI4 STANDARDS 

UAtiAX. SHAVAN, » BAKADL'R 9MAH ZAPAK 1I4RO 

N£WDtLUI||OQai 



CjtI 



/etflf IS«7 



18:11931-1987 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
SEWER CLEANING METAL RODS 

Public Health Engineering Equipment Sectional Committee, BDC 40 

Chairman Representing 

Dr B. B. Sundaresan University of Madras, Madras 

Members 

Adviser ( PHE ) Ministry of Urban Development, New Delhi 

Assistant Adviser ( PHE ) ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. C. p. Chaudhary Engineers Tndia Limited, New Delhi 

Shri D, K. Choudhary Geo-MilJer and Company, Calcutta 

Shri N Manivannan ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. Daivamani Madras Metropolitan Water Supply and 

Sewerage Board, Madras 
Chief Ekgineer ( Operation 
AND Maintenance ) ( Alternate ) 
Dr Aloke De Jadavpur University, Calcutta 

Deputy Municipal Commissioner Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay, 
C Special Engineering ) Bombay 

Chief Engineer ( Sewerage ) ( Alternate I ) 
Hydraulic Engineer ( Alternate II) 
Engineer-in -Chief Municipal Corporation of Delhi, Delhi 

Shri R. S. Gaitonde Hydraulic and General Engineering Pvt Ltd, 

Bombay 
Shri M Ravi Shankar ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. K. Gandhi Public Health Engineering Department, 

Government of Haryana, Chandigarh 
Shri M. N. Sharma ( Alternate ) 
Shri 1\ K. George College of Engineering, Trivandrum 

Shri S. S. Kalsi Public Health Engineering Department, 

Government of Punjab, Patiala 
Shri R. A. Khanna Public Health Engineering Department, 

Government of Madhya Pradesh, Bhopal 
Shri G. S. Raghvendra ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. R. Mir Public Health Engineering Department, 

Government of Jammu and Kashmir, 
Srinagar 
Shri G. M. Kanth ( Alternate ) 
ShriU. N. Mondal Calcutta Metropolitan Development Authority, 

Calcutta 
Shri S. R. Mukherjee ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1987 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 11931 . 1987 

< Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri Y. N. Nanjudiah Health and Family Weifare Department, 

Government of Gujarat, Gandhinagar 
Shri R. Natarajan Hindustan Dorr-Oliver Limited, Bombay 

Shri Subhash Verma ( Alternate ) 
ProfK. J. Nath All India Institute of Hygiene and Public 

Health, Calcutta 
Shri D. Guin ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. N. Rao Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 
Shri K. P. Dohare ( Alternate ) 
Dr B. Subba Rao Walchand College of Engineering, Sangli 

Shri K. Prabhakar Rao Ministry of Defence ( Engineer-in-Chief*s 

Branch ), Army Headquarters, New Delhi 
Lt-Col-M. p. Thomas ( Alternate ) 
Representative Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur 

Dr A. V. S. Prabhakara Rao ( Alternate ) 
Represent«ative U. P. Jal Nigam, Lucknow 

Representative Tamil Nadu Water Supply and Drainage Board. 

Madras 
Shri S. A. Jagdesan ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. Selvaraj Public Health Engineering Department, 

Government of Karnataka, Bangalore 
Shri Kishore K, Sanghani Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation, Ahmadabad 

Shri A. K. Seth National Environmental Engineering Research 

Institute, Nagpur 
Shri R. Paramasivam ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. A. Swamy The Institution of Engineers ( India ), Calcutta 

Shri P. S. Tendolkar Candy Filters ( India ) Limited, Bombay 

Shri C. L. Sastri ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. S. Wadia The Hindustan Construction Co Ltd, Bombay 

Shri C. E. S. Rao ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. Raman, Director General, BIS ( Ex-ojficio Member ) 

Director ( Civ Engg ) 

Secretary 

Shri A. K. Avasthi 
Deputy Director ( Civ Engg ), BIS 



Sewer Cleaning Equipment Subcommittee, BDC 40 : 3 

Convener 

Shri V. Vardarajan In personal capacity (9AI58,Ist Floor, WEA 

Karol Bagh, New Delhi ) 

Members 

Shri A. C. Bhalla Mechanical Movements Private Limited, Delhi 

Shri N, C. Bhalla ( Alternate ) 
Chief Engineer ( Sewerage Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay, 
Operation ) Bombay 

Deputy Chief Engineer 
( Sewerage Operation ) ( Alt£rnate ) 

( Continued on page 6 ) 
2 



IS : 11931 - 1987 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
SEWER CLEANING METAL RODS 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 20 March 1987, after the draft finalized by the Public Health 
Engineering Equij^ment Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Civil Engineering Division Council. 

0.2 Sewer cleaning metal rods are extensively used for removing block- 
ages in the sewers. The users do not have at present, any standards on 
which they can base their requirements. The standard, which is intended 
to fulfil the need, gives the dimensions, materials and constructional 
requirements of sewer cleaning metal rods. 

0.3 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard, is complied wrth, the final value, observed or calculated 
expressing the result of a te&t or analysis, shall be rounded off in 
accordance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value 
in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard lays down the requirements for material, dimensions, 
construction and testing of metal rods for sewer cleaning. 

2. DIMENSION 

2.1 The cleaning metal rods shall have a length of TO m and 8 mm 
diameter, their ends bent to a length of 12 mm at an angle of 108'' to 
prevent the rods from rotating inside the coupling. 

2*2 Tolerances — Tolerances of metal rods shall be as follows: 

a) Length = ± 10 mm 

b) Dia -= + 0*5 mm 



*Ruies for rounding oflf numerical values ( revised). 

3 



IS : 11931 - 1987 

3, MATERIAL 

3.1 The cleaning rods shall be made out of steel conforming to IS: 8051- 
l976*andIS:8052-1976t. 

4. CONSTRUCTION 

4.1 The cleaning metal rods and coupling shall be of steel and free from *' 
cracks, spots, etc, and the surface shall be clean and smooth. Appropriate 
heat treatment should be given to make the rods flexible. 

4.2 Each rod shall be provided with a steel coupling arrangement and 
nuts to enable the rods to connect each other in quick succession. 
Tapping is done on both sides ofthe couplmg to a distance of 16 mm 
with one with right hand threads and the other with left hand threads. 
The threads shall conform to IS: 4218 (Parts 1 to 6)1:. The coupling 
shall be provided with a hole on each side at a distance of 20 mm from 
the ends to engage the cleaning rods end (s^ee Fig. 1 ). 

4.2.1 Each cleaning rods shall be provided with two nuts, one with 
right hand threading and the other with left hand threading. Threading 
shall conform to IS : 4218 ( Parts 1 to 6 )t 

5. TESTING 

5.1 Bend Test — The metal cleaning rods shall be bent at an angle of 
90° at radius 625 mm and a torque of 26 kg.m is applied for 5 hours. 
The rods should retain elasticity and should not show any sign of crack 
after the test. 

6. MARKING 

6.1 Each rod and coupling shall be marked with the manufacturer's 
name and its trade-mark. 



♦Specification for steel ingots and billets for the production of volute, helical and 
laminated springs for automotive suspension. 

fSpecification for steel ingots and billets for the production of volute, and helical 
springs ( for railway rolling stock ), 
tISO metric screw threads: 
Part 1 Basic and design profiles ( >?r^/ revision ). 
Part 2 Diameter pitch combinations (first revision ). 
Part 3 Basic dimensions for design profiles (first revision ). 
Part 4 Tolerancirg system (first revision ). 
Part 5 Tolerances (^r^/ revision ). 

Part 6 Limits of sizes for commercial bolts and nuts ( diameter range 1 to 52 
mm ) ( first revision ). 



IS : 11931 - 1987 

6.1.1 The rods and the coupling may also be marked with Standard 
Mark. 

Note — The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the 
Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made there- 
under. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys 
the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of 
that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality 
control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. 
Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity 
to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a 
licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or 
producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards. 




Fig. 1 Metal Cleaning Metal Rod 
5 



IS : 11931 - 1987 

( Continued from page 2 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri S. Daivamani Madras Metropolitan Water Supply and 

Sewerage Board, Madras 
Director ( Conservancy ) Corporation of Calcutta, Calcutta 

Shri R. S. Gaitonde Hydraulic and General Engineers Ltd, Bombay 

Shri V. M. Shirodkar ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. K. Gandhi Public Health Engineering Department, 

Government of Haryana, Chandigarh 
Maj Y. p. Maini ( Retd ) Usha Telehoist Limited. New Delhi 

Shri U. N. Mondal Calcutta Metropolitan Development Authority, 

Calcutta 
Shri Raj Kumar U. P. Jal Nigam, Lucknow 

Shri N. S. Mathur ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. S. Ramrakhyani Municipal Corporation of Delhi, Delhi 

Representative Tamil Nadu Water Supply and Drainage Board, 

Madras 
Shri S. A. Jagdesan ( Alternate ) 
SiHii KisHORE, K. Sanghani Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation, Ahmadabad 

Shri B. N. Thayagaraja Bangalore Water Supply and Sewerage Board, 

Bangalore 
Shri H. S. Puttakempanna ( Alternate ) 



