**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 9001-11 (1973) : GUIDANCE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL TESTING, Part 
11: solar radiation test [LITD 1: Environmental Testing 
Procedure] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 9001 ( Part 11 ) : 1973 

Indian Standard 

GUIDANCE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL TESTING 

PART 11 SOLAR RADIATION TEST 



Second Reprint JUNE 1993 
( Incorporating Amendments No. 1 & 2 ) 



UDC 62I-31 + 621-38-038 : 620193-6 



© Copyright 1993 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK. BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARO 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Gr 5 January 1974 



IS 9001 ( Part 11 ) : 1973 

Indian Standard 

GUIDANCE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL TESTING 

PART 11 SOLAR RADIATION TEST 

Rnvironmental Testing Procedures Sectional Committee, ETDC 26 

Chairman Representing 

Bi<Kr D. Swaroop Ministry of Defence, New Delhi 

Members 

Additional Djkkcior Research, Designs & Standards Organization, 

Standards ( S & T ) Ministry of Railways, Lucknow 

Joint Director Standards 
( S & T ) ( A I tenia te ) 
Siiri II. K. L. Arora All India Radio & Electronics Association, 

Bombay 

ShrI R. <». Klswani ( Alternate ) 

Siiri Akiip Ciiaijdhhki ( Alternate ) 
Siiri II. R. Bapu Stmharam Bharal Hlcclronics Ltd, Bangaloje 

Shri P S. K. Prasad ( Alternate ) 
Dr A. S. Khaddri National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri B. P. Cmiosii ( Alternate ) 
Shri Ci. A. Claydon Lucas TVS Ltd. Madias 

Shri B. K. Banirii i ( Alternate ) 
1_)r B. N. Ddtia Directorate General of Obsei vatories ( Ministry 

of Touiism & Civil Aviation ), New Delhi 
I)r P. K Duma Philips India Limited. Bombay 

Shri I). B. N. Miikiuy ( Alternate ) 
C ii-Ni rat Sk -ri i ary Society of Lnviromncnial Engineers, Bangalore 

Shri C. G. SuitKAMANYAN ( Alternate ) 
Sjirj Ghasiia Shnui Central Flcctronics Fnginccring Research Institute 

(CS1R ), Pilani 
Siiri G. R. Ghosh Ministiy of Defence ( DGI ) 

Siiri Sakdui Sink.ii ( Alternate ) 
Shri John Francis Posts and Telegraphs Board, New Delhi 

Siiri R. N. Pa inly Radio Fleetrouic & Television Manufacturers* 

Association, Calcutta 

Shri K. S. Sodhi ( Alternate ) 
Shki D. V. Pi.ikar Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay 

Shri R. Ramachandran National Radio & Fleelro:iie> Co Ltd, Bombay 

Shri P. Sandli.i. All India Instrument Manufacturers* & Dealers' 

Association. Bombay 

Siiri V. K. Vasudi.van ( Alternate ) 
Shri N S. Saihyanarayanan Indian Telephone Industries Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri K. VaidyanatHan ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on pa&e 2 ) 



© Copyright 1993 

BURLAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

This publication is protected under the Imliun C >p\>ri->lu A:t { XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any m:ans e\ejpt xvith writier permission of 
the publisher shall be deemed t :> be an infnig;m; it of c vyright uiJ.-r the said 
Act. 



IS 9001 (Part 11): 1973 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri D. Sen Gupia Directorate of Inspection (Vehicles), Ministry of 

Defence ( DGl ) 

Shri S. R. Murthy ( Alternate ) 
Siiri R. SoMasundaraM Directorate of Technical Development & Pro- 

duction (Air), Ministry of Defence, New Delhi 

Shri A. V. Raju ( Alternate ) 
Dr Y. SoMayajulu National Physical Laboratory (CSIR), New Delhi 

Shri P. Suryanarayana ( Alternate ) 
Lt-Col T. R. K. SundaraM Ministry of Defence (R&D) 

Shri T. G. Srinivasan ( Alternate ) 
CrniC K. Viswanatii Naval Headquarters 

Lt-Cdr J. J. Baxi ( Alternate ) 
Shr* U. V. Warlu Electronics Corporation of India Ltd, Hyderabad 

Shri N. Srinivasan, Director General, BIS ( Lx-of/icio Member ) 

Deputy Director ( Elec tee!: ) 
( Secretary ) 

Panel for Solar Radiation, ETDC 26 : P2 
Convener 
Shri P. S. K. Prasad Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore 

Members 
Shri G. A. Clayoon Lucas-TVS Ltd, Madias 

Shri B. K. Banirjei- ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. R. Ghosh Ministry of Defence ( DCJI ) 

Shri Sardul Singh ( Alternate ) 
Dr J. N. Nanda Defence Research Laboratory (Material), Ministry 

of Defence (R&D ), Kanpur 
Shri B. R. Yadav Directorate General of Observatories ( Ministry of 

Tourism & Civil Aviation ), New Delhi 



IS 9001 ( Part 11 ) : 1973 

Indian Standard 

GUIDANCE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL TESTING 

PART 11 SOLAR RADIATION TEST 

0. FOREWORD 

0*1 This Indian Standard ( Part 11 ) was adopted by the Indian 
Standards Institution on 6 July 1973, after the draft finalized by the 
Environmental Testing Procedures Sectional Committee had been 
approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council. 

0.2 This standard has been largely based on IEC Document 50 ( Central 
Office ) 171 'Draft guidance on solar radiation testing', issued by the 
International Electrotechnical Commission. 

0.3 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of 
this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded 
off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this 
standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard ( Part 11 ) gives guidance regarding test for effects 
of solar radiation on electronic and electrical equipment and compo- 
nents at the surface of the earth. 

2. OBJECT 

2.1 This standard describes methods of simulation designed to examine 
the effect of solar radiation on equipment and components at the 
surface of the earth. The main quantities to be simulated are the 
spectral energy distribution of the sun as observed at the earth's surface 
and the intensity of received energy, in combination with controlled 
temperature conditions. However, it may be necessary to consider 
combination of solar radiation, including sky radiation, with other 
environments, for example, temperature, humidity ami air velocity. 



♦Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). 



IS 9001 (Part 11): 1973 

3. IRRADIANCE AND SPECTRAL DISTRIBUTION OF TEST 
SOURCE 

3.0 The effect of radiation on the specimens will depend on the level 
of irradiance and its spectral distribution. 

3.1 Irradiance -■- The irradiance by the sun on a plane perpendicular to 
the incident radiation outside the earth's atmosphere at the mean 
earthsun distance is known as the solar constant Io. 

The irradiance at the surface of the earth is influenced by the solar 
constant and the attenuation and scattering of radiation in the 
atmosphere. For test purposes, a value of 1-120 kW/rn 2 for the global 
( total ) radiation at the surface of the earth from sun and sky, with 
the sun at zenith, based on a solar constant Io ~ 1*35 kW/m 2 has been 
recommended ( see Note ). 

NOTE — This valin* has been recommended by the international Commission 
on Illumination ( CIE ). 

3.2 Spectral Distribution —The standard spectral distribution of the 
global radiation specified for this test is given in Table 1 of IS : 2106 
( Part XVII )-1973*. Where only the thermal effects of solar radiation 
are of interest, the use of tungsten filament lamps may be permitted. 
However, it shall be clearly understood that the spectral distribution 
of tungsten filament lamps differs markedly from that of natural solar 
radiation ( see Fig. 1 ) and the irradiance shall be adjusted in 
accordance with 3.3. 

3.3 Irradiance to be Used with Other Spectral Distribution — If the source 
of radiation used for the test does not meet the spectral distribution 
given in Table 1 of IS : 2106 ( Part XVII )-l973*, for example, where 
tungsten filament lamps are used ( permissible if the test is solely to 
assess thermal effects ), the irradiance shall be adjusted so that the 
heating effect is the same as if the test specimen(s) were irradiated by 
the global radiation of sun and sky. Therefore, the absorbed radiation 
from the test source shall be the same as for the global radiation of 
sun and sky ( see also Appendix ); 

that is 

E tx = 1-120 ^kW/m 2 
aex 
where 

E bx =s irradiance from the test source, 

a e8 = absorptance of the specimen for the global radiation of 

sun and sky, and 
a« = absorptance of the specimen for the radiation from the 
test source. 



♦Environmental tests for electronic and electrical equipment : Part XVM 
Simulated solar radiation at ground level. 



IS 9001 ( Part 11 ) : 1973 



2-2 
20 
18 
1.6 

1.4 



•^1-2 
5 1-0 



Q 0-8 
5 

< 0.6 
en 

2 0.4 



Si 



0-2 





« 

A 


1 
















i y 




















| % 




















4 * 


i/" 1 


1=1 








-r ■■■■- 






, .......... 




\ 




















\ \ 
V 








,- TUNGSTEN 
LAMP 2600 K 




/ 






















> 















ill 'mslR 


\\ " 

iry\ 














/ 




i ■>■ 














j y 


r * 






I] > 


, 




> 








/ 










T 


ft 


^> 


JL 


/ 








j?*\ 



0-2 0* 0-6 0-8 1-0 1-2 1-4 1-6 

WAVELENGTH — — - 



1-8 



2-0 



^4fM 



*/n Air mass. 
Fig. 1 Radiation from Tungsten Lamp Compared with 
Solar Radiation 



duration of exposure and 
ntcrmittent. Three alternative 



4. TEST PROCEDURE AND DURATION 

4.1 Consideration shall be given to the 
whether it should be continuous or 
procedures are specified: 

a) Procedure 4 /f — A 24-hour cycle, with 8 hours irradiation and 
16 hours darkness, repeated as required. This gives a total 
irradiation of 8-96 kWh/m 2 per diurnal cycle, which approximates 
to the most severe natural conditions. Procedure 'A' should be 
specified where the principal interest is in thermal effects. 



IS 9001 (Part 11): 1973 

b) Procedure 4 /T -- A 24-hour cycle, with 20 hours radiation and 
4 hours darkness, repeated as required. This gives a total 
irradiation of 22-4 kWh/m 2 per diurnal cycle and is applicable 
where the principal interest is in degradation effects. 

c) Procedure 'C ----- Continuous irradiation, as required. A simplified 
test, applicable where cyclic thermal stressing is unimportant 
and photochemical effects only arc to be assessed; also for the 
assessment of heating effects on specimens with low thermal 
capacity. 

4.2 The level of irradiancc, as prescribed in IS: 2106 (Part XVII )-1973*, 
is 1-120 kW/nV J -t- 10 percent. Acceleration of the test by increasing 
the irradiation above this level is not recommended. As stated above, 
the total daily irradiation approximating the most severe natural 
conditions is simulated by Procedure 'A' with a duration of exposure to 
the standard irradiation conditions of 8 hours per day. Thus, exposure 
for periods in excess of 8 hours will effect acceleration over natural 
conditions. However, continuous exposure of 24 hours per day 
( Procedure 'C ) might mask any degradation effects of cyclic thermal 
stressing, and this procedure is not therefore generally recommended 
in this instance. 

4.3 The duration called for will depend on the object of the test. Where 
the interest is id heating effects only, then 3 cycles should be adequate 
( except for large equipments which may require longer to attain 
maximum internal temperatures ). A much longer test duration is 
necessary if degradation effects are to be assessed. 

5. OTHER ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS TO BE CONSIDERED 

5.1 Temperature Within the Enclosure — The temperature within the 
enclosure during irradiation and darkness periods shall be controlled in 
accordance with the Procedure ( ' A\ 4T or <C ) specified. The relevant 
specification should state whether-|-40 C or-|-55'C is to be attained 
during irradiation, depending on the proposed usage of the equipment 
or component. 

5.2 Humidity - Different humidity conditions may markedly affect 
photochemical degradation of materials, piints, plastics, etc, but 
requirements arc so varied that no attempt has been made here to give 
guidance on this matter. Individual requirements should be clearly 
stated in the relevant specification, for example, a 4-hour period of 
damp heat ( 40 ± 2°C :md 93 ± 3 percent RH ) could be specified at 
the commencement of test procedure *B\ 

♦Environmental tests for electronic and electrical equipment : Part XVII 
Simulated solar radiation at ground level. 



IS 9001 ( Part 11 ) : 1973 

5.3 Surface Contamination — Dust and other surface contamination 
may significantly change the absorption characteristics of irradiated 
surfaces. Unless othciwise required, specimens should be tested in a 
clean condition. However, if effects cf surface contamination arc to be 
assessed, the relevant specification should include the necessary 
information on preparation of surfaces, etc. 

5.4 Ozone and Other Contaminating Gases — Ozone, generated by short 
wavelength ultra-violet radiation of test sources, will normally be 
excluded from the test enclosure by the radiation filter( s ) used to 
correct the spectral energy distribution. As ozone and other conta- 
minating gases may significantly a fleet the degradation processes of 
certain materials, it is important to exclude these gases from the test 
enclosures, unless otherwise required by the relevant specification 
( see also 10.3 ). 

5.5 Air Velocity — Attention is drawn to the possible cooling effects of 
air flow over the specimens This may also result in misleading errors 
in open-type thermopiles used to monitor radiation intensity. An air 
flow of as little as one metre per second may effect a reduction in 
temperature rise of over 20 percent. It is, therefore, essential to control 
and measure the rate of air flow, which should be as low as possible 
consistent with achieving satisfactory control of temperature ( and 
humidity, where applicable ). Adjustment of the temperature within 
the enclosure by suitable heating and cooling o^ the walls of the 
enclosure eliminates the need for high air velocities. 

However, in practice, high solar radiation conditions are rarely 
accompanied by complete absence of wind. It m-.iy be necessary, 
therefore, to access the effect of different air velocities over an equip- 
ment or component under test. The relevant specification should state 
any special requirements in this respect. 

5.6 Substrate, Mounting Attitude, etc As the thermal properties of 
the substrate and method of mounting may significantly affect the 
temperature rise of the test specimen( s ), these factors shall be carefully 
considered, so that the heat transfer is representative of typical use. 
The specimen( s ) will probably be required to be mounted either on 
raised supports or on a substrate of specified properties, for example, 
a layer of concrete of specified thickness or a sand bed of certain 
conductivity, etc. Full details of the substrate, method of mounting 
and attitude of the specimenf s ) should be given in the relevant 
specification ( see also Appendix B ). 

6. RADIATION SOURCES 

6.1 General — The radiation source may comprise one or more lamps 
and their associated optical components, for example, reflectors, filters, 
etc, to provide the required spectral distribution and irradiance. 



IS 9001 ( Part 11 ) : 1973 

6.1.1 The high pressure xenon arc lamp with filters may provide the 
best match. Mercury vapour and xenon-mercury lamps have considerable 
deficiencies in matching which may lead to errors. The carbon arc, 
with specially doped electrodes, has been widely used but presents 
difficulties as regards stability and maintenance and is, therefore, not 
generally favoured. Tungsten filament lamps may be used if only thermal 
effects are of interest, but arc almost completely deficient in ultra-violet 
radiations and therefore cannot be used where photochemical effects 
are to be assessed. 

6.1.2 Characteristics of these lamps, features of filters, optical arrange- 
ments, etc, arc covered in 6.2 to 6.7. 

6.2 Xenon Lamps — The configuration and si?e of the h»mp( s ) used will 
depend on the test required. A typical spectial distribution from a 
xenon arc is given in Fig. 2. However, the radiation diiect firm the hot 
electrodes should also be considered. This effect is proportionally much 
greater with short arcs than with long arcs and may considerably 
influence the spectial match, since radiation firm the clcctrcdes has a 
higher proportion of infia-red radiations than that from the arc. The 
relative spectral distribution of the xenon arc radiation has been found 
to be substantially independent of lamp power. However, variation of 
lamp power will change the temperature of the electrodes and hence 
the spectral distribution of their radiation. With long arc lamps, it is 
relatively simple to mask off the electrode radiation. The form of 
construction of the short arc lamp leads to considerably wider manu- 
facturing tolerances than those of the long arc, a point of particular 
importance when replacement beet mes ncccssaiy. 

Routine replacement of either type of lamp will be needed, since the 
emission will change continuously with life and there may be quite wide 
variations of the life characteristic fum lamp to lamp. Despite these 
variations in intensity, the relative spectral distribution of the arc 
radiation should remain practically uncharged, because xenon is a pure 
elemental gas. 

6.3 Tungsten Filament Lamps Because of their deficiency of ultra- 
violet radiation, tungsten lamps arc unsuitable for tests for degradation 
purposes. Serious discrepancies may also occur in results obtained in 
tests for thermal effects, unless the considerable difference in spectral 
energy distribution compared with natural solar radiation arc taken 
into account ( see also 3.3). The spectral distribution curve for a 
typical tungsten lamp at a filament temperature of 2 600°K, is shown in 
Fig 1, compared with natural solar radiation The major part of the 
radiant energy from the tungsten lamp is in the infia-rcd region with 
maximum intensity at about 1-0 /*m. whereas approximately 50 percent 
of solar energy is in the visible and ultra-violet bands, that is, at wave- 
lengths less than 0-7 ^m. The quartz halogen type of tungsten lamp has 
an improved consistency of performance during its life. 

8 



IS 9001 ( Part 11 ) : 1973 




■8 1.0 1-2 1-4 1-6 18 2 ^ m 
WAVELENGTH - 



*/w Air mass. 

Fig. 2 Radiation from Typical High Pressurb Xbnon Arc 
Lamp Compared with Solar Radiation 

6.4 Carbon Arc — Under certain conditions, the carbon arc may be 
made to provide radiation of a spectral distribution somewhat similar 
to that of the sun, as observed at ground level but correcting filters are 
needed, especially in the ultra-violet region. The combustible nature of 
the source has the disadvantages of lack of precise location and the 
impermanence. Perhaps the greatest disadvantage of the carbon arc is 
its burning away. Even with a carefully arranged feed mechanism, the 
continuous burning time is unlikely to exceed 5 hours. 



IS 9001 ( Part 11 ) : 1973 

(.5 Mercury Vapour Lamps — Mercury vapour lamp radiation is 
deficient in the red and infra-red portions of the spectrum and the 
spectrum has some very high energy lines. They have been used in 
conjunction with tungsten filament lamps in solaria, and a combined 
mercury-xenon arc source has been used for environmental testing 
purposes. However, the strong spectral lines make the mercury arc 
generally unacceptable as a simulated solar source. 

6.6 Filters 

6.6.1 Liquid filters have certain disadvantages, such as the possibility of 
boiling, ihe temperature coefficient of spectral transmission, and long 
term drift in spectral character. The present preference is therefore for 
glass filters to be used, although fundamentally a glass is not so accura- 
tely reproducible as a chemical solution. Some trial and error may be 
necessary to compensate for different optical densities by using 
diffierent plate thicknesses. Glass filters are proprietary articles and 
manufacturers should be consulted concerning the choice of filters 
suitable for particular purposes. The choice will depend on the source 
and its method of use. For example, a xenon source may be best 
compensated by a combination of infra-red and ultra-violet absorbing 
filters. 

6.6.2 Some glass infra-red filters may be prone to rapid changes in 
spectral characteristics when exposed to excessive ultra-violet radiation. 
This deterioration may be largely prevented by interposing the ultra- 
violet filter between the source and the infra-red filter. Interference 
type filters, which function by reflecting instead of absorbing the 
unwanted radiation, thus resulting in reduced heating of the glass, are 
generally more stable than absorption filters. 

6.7 Uniformity of Irradiance — Owing to the distance of the sun from 
the earth, solar radiation appears at the earth's surface as an essentially 
parallel beam. Artificial sources are relatively close to the working 
surface and means of directing and focussing the beam shall be provided 
with the aim of providing a uniform irradiance at the measurement 
plane within specification limits ( that is, 1-120 kW/m 2 ± 10 percent ). 
This is difficult to achieve with a short-arc xenon lamp with a parabolic 
reflector, on account of shadows from the lamp electrodes and supports. 
Also, the incandescence of the anode may produce considerable 
radiation at a much lower colour temperature, slightly displaced from 
the main beam, if only the arc itself is at the focus of the reflector. 
Uniform irradiation is more readily achieved with a long-arc lamp 
mounted in a parabolic trough type reflector. However by employing 
very elaborate mounting techniques it is possible to irradiate, with some 
degree of uniformity, a large surface by a number of short-arc xenon 
lamps. 

10 



IS 9001 ( Part 11 ) : 1973 

6.7.1 It is gencarlly advisable to locate radiation sourcc( s ) outside 
the test enclosure or chamber. This avoids possible degradation of the 
optical components, for example by high humidity conditions, and 
contamination of test specimens by ozone generated by xenon and 
other types of arc lamps. In this case, the spectral transmittance of the 
window material shall be taken into account. 

6.7.2 Precise collimation of the radiation beam is not normally 
necessary except for testing special equipment, such as solar cells, 
solar tracking devices, etc. However, some of the simulation techniques 
developed for space research purposes could be adapted for earth- 
surface solar radiation studies. 

7. INSTRUMENTATION 

7.1 Measurement of Irradiancc — The type of instrument considered 
most suitable for monitoring the irradiancc is a pyranometer as used 
for measuring combined solar and sky radiation on a horizontal plane. 

7.1.1 Two types arc suitable for measuring radiation from a simulated 
solar source. Each depends for its operation on thermojunctions. 

7.1.1.1 Moll-Gorezinski pyranometer — The Moll-Gorczinski pyrano- 
meter consists of 14 constantan-manganin strips ( 10 x 1 x 0-005 
mm ) arranged so that their 'hot" junctions lie on a plane and are 
formed into a horizontal surface by means of a black varnish of low 
thermal conductivity. 

The 'cold' junction ends are bent down to make good thermal 
connections with a copper plate of large thermal capacity. The sensitive 
area is surmounted by two concentric glass hemispheres. 

7.1.1.2 Eppley pyranometer — The Fpplcy pyranometer consists of 
two concentric rings of 0*25 mm silver foil. The inner ring is painted 
black ( to absorb "nearly all the radiation) and the outer ring is 
whitened ( to reflect the visible and near infra-red ladiation ). The hot 
and cold junctions are thermally attached to the rings which arc 
enclosed in a 76-mm diameter glass bulb tilled with dry air. 

Neither of these instruments are significantly alfectcd by long-wave 
infra-red radiation emitted by the specimen or the test enclosure. 

7.1.2 A modification of the Moll-Gorczinski pyranometer, commonly 
known as the Kipp solarimeter, is the instrument used by meteorological 
services in many countries. The Eppley pyranometer is the one most 
widely used in the United States. The glass covers used in both these 
instruments will cut off radiation at wavelengths greater than about 
3 jzm; this is only significant when unfiltered tungsten lamps are used 
and a correction factor would then be necessary. 

11 



IS 9001 ( Part 11 ) : 1973 

7.2 Measurement of Spectral Distribution — Total intensity checks are 
readily made, but detailed checks on spectral characteristics are more 
difficult. Major spectral changes may be checked by inexpensive routine 
measurements using a pyranometer in conjunction with selective filters. 
For checking the detail spectral distribution characteristics of the 
facility it would be necessary to employ sophisticated spectroradio- 
mctric instrumentation. However, there seems to be no practical 
obstacle to prevent this calibration being done either as a service by 
the facility manufacturer or by visit from a national calibration centre. 
Correlation would be achieved between the filter/pyranometer and 
spectroradiometric methods at regular intervals. 

7.2.1 Changes in the spectral characteristics of lamps, reflectors and 
filters may occur over a period of time which could result in the spectral 
distribution being seriously outside the permitted tolerances. Manu- 
facturing tolerances may mean that lamp replacement could result in 
unacceptable changes in both the level of irradiation and spectral 
distribution compared with that initially set up. Regular monitoring is 
therfore essential, but monitoring of the detail spectral distribution 
within the test facility may not be possible while a specimen is 
undergoing test. 

7.3 Measurement of Temperature Because of the high level of 
radiation it is essential that temperature sensors are adequately shielded 
from radiant heating effects. This applies both to measuring air 
temperatures within the test enclosure and also to monitoring specimen/ 
equipment temperatures. 

7.3.1 For air temperature measurements, it is obviously impracticable 
to use the standard 'Stevenson' screen used for meteorological measure- 
ments of 'shade temperature' as this is too cumbersome. A suitable 
alternative is a thermocouple freely mounted in a radiation shield 
comprising a vertical cupro-nickcl tube ( approx 1-5 cm dia x 7 cm ) 
surmounted by a spaced metal hood, polished on the inside surface and 
painted white on the outside. 

7.3.2 When monitoring equipment temperatures, sensors, such as 
thermocouples, should be located on the inside surfaces of the external 
case and not be attached to the outside surfaces. Temperature indicating 
paints and waxes are unsuitable for monitoring the temperature of 
irradiated surfaces of specimens, as their absorption characteristic will 
not be the same as that of the specimens. 

8. PREPARATION OF TEST FACILITY AND SPECIMENS 

8.1 Test Facility — It should be ensured that the optical parts of the 
facility, lamps, reflectors and filters, etc, are clean. 

12 



IS 9001 ( Part 11 ) : 1973 

The level of irradiation over the specified measurement plane shall 
be measured immediately prior to each test. 

Any ancillary environmental conditions, for example, ambient tempera- 
ture, humidity, air velocity and other parameters, if specified, should 
be monitored continuously throughout the test. 

8.2 Specimens - r I he method of mounting and the aspect of the 
specimen relative to the direction of radiation v ill have marked 
influences on the heating effects. The specimens will probably be 
required to be mounted cither on raised supports or on a substrate of 
specified properties, for example, a layer of concrete of specified thick- 
ness or a sand-bed of certain conductivity. All this and the attitude of 
the specimens should be specified in the relevant specification. 

8.2.1 Special attention shall be paid to the surface conditions of the 
specimens to see that their finish is clean or in accordance with the 
relevant specification requirements. The heating effect on the specimens 
under test will be largely affected by the condition of the surfaces of 
the specimens. Care should therfore be exercised in handling the 
specimens, especially in avoiding oil-films and in ensuring that the 
sin face finish and its underlay aic fully representative of production 
standaids. Temperature sensors should be attached to specimens as 
required ( see also 7.3 ). 

9. INTERPRETATION OF RESIETS 

9.1 Compliance with Specification The relevant specification should 
indicate the permitted changes in the external condition and/or 
performance of the specimen( s ) under test after exposure to the 
required level of irradiation for specified duiations. In addition to such 
mandatory requirements, the following aspects of interpretation may 
be considered. 

9.2 Comparison with Field Experience — The deterioration effects of expo- 
sure of materials and equipment to sunlight arc well documented ( see also 
9.5 and 9.6 ). Any marked difference between these effects and the 
behaviour under simulated conditions should be investigated and the 
basic cause established, namely, whether caused by the test equipment 
or procedure, or by some peculiarity in the specimens. 

9.3 Short Term Effects — Primarily, heating effects are concerned. 
Short term effects to be looked for will mainly be in the nature of 
local overheating. 

9.4 Long Term Effects — The purpose of carrying out long term tests 
is to determine the pattern of deterioration with the two objectives of 
seeing whether there is an initial rapid change and of assessing the 
useful life of the item under test. 



13 



IS 9001 ( Part 11 ) : 1973 

9.5 Thermal Effects — The maximum surface and internal temperatures 
attained by a specimen or equipment will depend on: 

a) temperature of ambient air; 

b) intensity of radiation; 

c) air velocity; 

d) duration of exposure; and 

e) the thermal properties of the object itself, for example, surface 
reflectance, size and shape, thermal conductance and specific 
heat. 

Equipment may attain temperatures in excess of 60°C, if fully exposed 
to solar radiation in an ambient temperature as low as 35 to 40-C The 
surface reflectance of an object alTects its temperature rise from solar 
heating to a major extent; changing the finish from say a dark colour 
to a gloss white will effect a considerable reduction in temperature. 
Conversely, a pristine finish designed to reduce temperature may be 
expected to deteriorate in time resulting in an increase in temperature. 

Most materials arc selective reflectors, that is, their spectral reflectance 
changes with wavelength. For instance, paints, in general, are poor 
infra-red reflectors although they may be very efficient in the visible 
region. Furthermore, the spectral reflectance of many materials change 
sharply in the visible ( producing a colour sensation to the human eye ) 
and in the naxv infra-red regions. It is important, therefore, that the 
spectral energy distribution of the radiation source( s ) used in any 
simulated test should closely duplicate that of natural solar radiation, 
or that appropriate adjustment of the irradiance is made so that the 
same heating t fleet is obtained ( sec 3.3 and Appendix A ). 

9.6 Degradation of Materials — The combined effects of solar radiation, 
atmospheric gases, temperature and humidity changes, etc, are often 
collectively termed 'weathering' and result in the 'ageing' and ultimate 
destruction of most organic materials ( for example, plastics, rubbers, 
paints, timber, etc ). 

9.6.1 Many materials, which give satisfactory service in temperate 
regions, have been found to be completely unsuitable for use under the 
more adverse conditions of the tropics. Typical defects arc the rapid 
deterioration and breakdown of paints, the cracking and disintegration 
of cable sheathing and the fading of pigments. 

9.6.2 The breakdown of a material under weathering usually results not 
from a single reaction, bat from several individual reactions of different 
types occurring simultaneously, often with interacting effects. Although 
solar radiation, principally the ultra-violet, resulting in photo-degra- 
dation is often the major factor, its eifcets may seldom be separated in 
practice from those of other weathering factors. An example is the 

14 



IS 9001 ( Part 11 ) : 1973 

effects of ultra-violet radiation on polyvinyl chloride, where the 
apparent effect of ultra-violet radiation alone is small, but its 
susceptibility to thermal breakdown, in which oxygen probably plays a 
major role, is markedly increased. 

9.6.3 Unfortunately, artificial tests occasionally produce abnormal 
defects, which do not occur under natural weathering. This may often 
be attributed to one or more of the following causes: 

a) Many laboratory sources of ultra-violet radiation differ 
considerably from natural solar radiation in spectral energy 
distribution. 

b) When the intensity of ultra-violet radiation, temperature, 
humidity, etc, arc increased to obtain an accelerated effect, the 
rate of the individual reactions, which occur under normal 
exposure conditions, are not necessarily increased to the same 
extent. 

c) The artificial tests, in general, do not simulate all the natural 
weathering factors. 

10. HAZARDS AND PERSONNEL SAFETY 

10.1 General — The complex equipment employed for solar radiation 
testing purposes will necessarily call for operation and maintenance by a 
skilled test staff, not only to ensure the correct prescribed performance 
of the test but also by reason of the various health and safety hazards 
that have to be taken into account. 

10.2 Ultra-Violet Radiation -■- The most obvious dangers that have to 
be guarded against are those associated with the harmful effects of high 
intensity radiation in the near ultra-violet region. 

10.2.1 In natural sunlight, the eyes are protected in two ways; the 
brightness of the sun makes it almost impossible to look directly at it, 
and the ultra-violet radiation is considerably attenuated by the 
atmosphere. These protections may not apply to artificial sources. The 
eyes shall be protected by filtered goggles or viewing apertures, 
particularly when setting up the equipment. All testing personnel should 
be warned that severe eye damage may result from only short exposure 
to unfiltcred radiation from arc type lamps. Serious erythema 
( sunburn ) or exposed skin will also occur. Kollcr states that ultra- 
violet radiation of sunlight is a major en sua I factor in cancer of the 
skin in the white population of the USA. The use of suitable protective 
clothing including protection of the head and hands is therefore 
recommended, even when working in test enclosures irradiated by 
filtered sources. 



15 



IS 9001 ( Part 11 ) : 1973 

10.3 Ozone and Harmful Fumes — Another serious health hazard 
arising from the use of xenon and other arc lamps is the possible 
build-up of local toxic concentrations of ozone during the testing 
period. However, the maximum production of ozone occurs at the 
initial switching on of the lamps, and thereafter the hot envelope of 
the lamp tends to degrade the ozone back to oxygen. Where forced air 
cooling is employed, this cooling air should be sucked out and removed 
from the building and not blown into the lamp housing. In this way, 
the ozone hazard will be largely eliminated. Concentrations of 1-0-10-0 
parts per million by volume are known to cause headaches, irritation 
of the nose and throat and watering of the eyes. However, it shall be 
realised that the toxic concentration of ozone is less than 0-1 parts per 
million, which is below the level that is readily detectable by odour 
which is 0-5-1-0 parts per million. Suitable detecting and measuring 
equipment is commercially available. 

10.3.1 The combined effects of heat and ultra-violet radiation on 
certain plastics ( for example mclamine laminates ) may also produce 
toxic fumes. Particular care should therefore be taken in the choice of 
materials used in the construction of a test facility. 

10.4 Risk of Lamp Explosions — The use of high pressure xenon 
discharge lamps as the primary radiation source may also result in 
serious accidents unless a well planned code of practice for the hand- 
ling of these arc discharge tubes has been laid down and is adhered to. 
All such lamps ( whether hot or cold, used or new ) have a liability to 
explode violently by reason of the considerable internal pressure ( two 
to three atmospheres when cold, but up to 20 atmospheres when hot ). 
There should be no visible dirt or oil on the surface, so regular clean 
ing with the detergent and alcohol is necessary using cotton gloves and 
face protection during such cleaning. When cold lamps are to be stored, 
the effects of explosion may be limited by two layers of 0-25 mm 
thick plastic sheet. Particular care shall be taken to limit the spread of 
chain reaction breakdowns in multi-lamp equipments. It is possible to 
use armour plate glass for the dual purpose of protection against lamp 
explosions and as a corrective filter. 

Individual lamp records should be kept as a matter of routine so as to 
be able to detect abnormal voltage/current behaviour. 

10.5 Electric Shock — Normal electric shock preventive measures shall 
of course be adopted, particularly in the case of the high voltage 
ignilor systems used with arc lamps. In some xenon lamps, the arc 
ignition pulse exceeds 60 kV, and an interlock system is therefore 
essential. 

16 



IS 9001 ( Part 11 ) : 1973 

APPENDIX A 

( Clauses 3.3 and 9.5 ) 

CALCULATION OF ADJUSTMENT TO IRRADIANCE 

A-0. This is applicable for radiation sources having a spectral distribu- 
tion not in accordance with Table 1 of IS : 2106 ( Part XVJ1 )-1973* 
( permissible only when the test is made solely to assess thermal 
effects. ) 

A-l. In order to obtain an equivalent heating effect, the irradiance 
from the test source, E e x> shall be adjusted, so that : 

£ex = M20 -" ei -kW/m* 

aex 

where 

oce* = absorptancc of the specimen for the global radiation of sun 
and sky, and 

a ex = absorptance of the specimen for the radiation from the test 
source. 

A-2. The absorptance factors a cx and oc e , may be calculated from the 
formula: 



Soo 
SAx' a( 



A ) d,\ 



MJX ■ 


foo 
\SAx 

o * 


dX 


a c s 


Too 

~~~ [oo 
ISA*' 

o * 


«( 
dA 



( A ) -dA 



where 

SA X = spectral distribution of the test source, 
tt ( a ) = spectral absorptance of the specimen, and 

SA 8 = spectral distribution ( see Note ) of global radiation of sun 
and sky. 

NOTE — For calculation purposes use the more detailed information given in 
Table 1. 



♦Environmental tests for electronic and electrical equipment : Part XVII Simu- 
lated solar radiation at ground level. 

17 



IS 9001 ( Part 11 ) : 1973 

Tabic 1 Detailed Spectral Distribution of Global Radiation for 
Calculation Purposes 

( Clause A-2 ) 



Spectral Region 

(1) 
Ultra-violet 

B* 
Ultra violet 

A 



Visible 



Bandwidth 

(2) 
28-0-32 



0-32 
0-36 



0-36 
40 



0-40 044 
0-44 - 0-48 
0-48 - 0*52 
0\52 - 0-56 
56-0-64 
64 - 68 
0-68 0-72 
72-0-78 

0-78- 10 



Infra red 



10 
12 
1-4 
1-6 
1-8 
20 
2 5 



1-2 
-1-4 
1-6 
1-8 
20 
2-5 
30 



Irradiance 


IkRADIANCK 


W/m» 


Percentage 


(3) 


(4) 


5 


0-4 


27 


2-4 


36 


3-2 


56 


50 


73 


65 


71 


6-4 


65 


5-8 


121 


10-8 


55 


4-9 


52 


46 


67 


60 


J76 


15-7 


108 


9.7 


65 


5-8 


44 


3.9 


29 


2-6 


20 


18 


35 


3 1 


15 


1-4 


1 120 


ioo-cjT" 



"Radiation shoiUr than 0-30 jj.ni reaching the earth's surface is insignificant. 

A-3. For non-radiation transmitting specimens: 

a(A) - l-p(A) 
where 

P ( A ) =• spectral reflectance factor of the specimen. 

NOTE — The spectral absorptance of a surface shall normally hi determined 
from spectral reflectance data. S;veral omnKrcial instruments are available 
for spectral reflectance measurements, using the monochrom itor/intcgrating 
( Ulbricht ) sphere method. 

APPENDIX B 

( Clause 56 ) 

HEAT TRANSFER THROUGH SUBSTRATE 

B-l. In order to specify an appropriate substrate material it may be 
necessary to estimate the probable heat transfer through th; substrate. 



18 



IS 9001 (Part 11): 1973 

B-2. If its thermal conductivity k is known, the heat flow rate q through 
a substrate of thickness Land surface area A, having a temperature 
difference of A T*C between faces, may be calculated from the formula: 

q --- ! watts 

This formula ignores convention and radiation effects which will usually 
( but not necessarily ) be of secondary importance. 

B-3. The thermal conductivities of some common materials are given 
in Table 2. 

Table 2 Thermal Conductivities of Common Materials 

Material 

Silver 

Copper — very pure 

Cupper — commercial 

Gold — pure 

Aluminium 

Duralumin 

Magnesium — pure 

Elektron 

Brass 

Zinc 

Tin 

Iron — wrought, puie 

Iron 

Iron — cast 3 percent carbon 

Iron — chrome steel 

Iron — nickel chrome steel 

Nickel 

Nickel — silver ( Ni-Cu-Zn ) 

Lead — pure 

Graphite — compact 

Fireclay 

Boiler scale 

Concrete 

Brick — dry 

Plate glass 

Marble 

Bakelite 

Rubber 

Plexiglass 

Celluloid 

Beechwood ( along grain ) 

Oak ( cross grain ) 

Oak ( along grain ) — 37 

Pine ( cross grain ) 20 0*14 

Pine ( along grain ) — 26 

NOTE — This is the temperature at which the th.-rmil cm (activity of tho 
material was measured. For practical purposes tlurj will b: littl j dilTerenc - >ver 
the substrate temperature range likely to b: obuiimd i i IS : 210 j ( Part XV II ) - 
1973 'Environmetal tests for cljctro.iie auJ electrical equip tint: Part XVI I 
Simulated solar radiation at ground level*. 



TlMPlRATURF. Q C 


TnruMAi. 


Conductivity 


( SW Note ) 


W.m.-'/V" 


1 Tfmpkrature 




Dll'FHRF.NCE 


(2) 




(3) 


20 




411 


20 




395 


20 




372 


20 




311 


20 




229 


20 




165 


20 




143 


20 




116 


20 




81 116 


20 




113 


20 




66 







S9 


200 




52 


20 




>8 


20 




40 


20 




14-5 


18 




.^•5 







29 3 







351 


20 




12 174 


100 




0-5 12 


100 




0-082-3 


20 




0-8- 1-4 


20 




0-38-0-52 


20 




0-76 


20 




2-8 


20 




0-233 


20 




01 3-0-23 


20 




0184 


20 




0-215 


20 




0-35 


20 




0-17-021 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 10002 
Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 

( Common to all Offices ) 



Regional Offices : Telephone 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg i 331 01 31 

NEW DELHI 1 10002 \331 13 75 

Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, f37 84 99, 37 85 61 
Maniktola, CALCUTTA 700054 \ 37 86 26, 37 86 62 



Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C f 53 38 43, 53 16 40 
CHANDIGARH 160036 

Souther i : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road f 235 02 16, 235 04 42 

MADRAS 1600113 L235 15 19, 235 23 15 



1, f37 
\37 

f 53 38 43, 
\53 23 84 

T6329295, 632 78 
\632 78 91,632 78 



Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, T632 92 95, 632 78 58 

Andheri ( East ), BOMBAY 400093 \632 78 9 1 , 632 78 92 

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANE- 
SHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. 
GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR, KANPUR. 
LUCKNOW. PATNA. TH1RUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at Printwell Pnntcis, Aiigarh, India 



