IS:6609 (Part III)-1973

Indian Standard
METHODS OF TEST FOR COMMERCiAL BLASTING EXPLOSIVES AND ACCESSORiES
PART III DETONATORS, GENERAL AND PERMITTED CDC 51 Explosives and Pyrotechnics
C/.airman DR W. D. PATWAR~HAN Members DR A. K. CHATTERJEE SHHI V. Y. TAMBE (Alternate) SERI L. S. CHEEMA Indian Detonators Ltd, Hyderabad The Fertilizer Naya Nangal Corporation Development of India Ltd, Ltd,

Sectional Committee,
Representing

Ministry of Defence ( R & D )

.%iRI

SRRI CHINMOY SEN ( Alternate ) D. P. Grioun~a~r Nati;atchkal

Corporation

SHRI R. G. DEOLALIKER Directorate General, Ordnance Factories, Calcutta SHRI K. P. 11. PILL~I ( Akrnate ) SHRI C. M. DEOSTHALE Directorate General of Mines Safety, Dhanbad SHInI P. c. GEPTA National Mineral Development Corporation Lta, New Delhi Directorate General of Factory Advice Services & SHRI c. R. HARIHAR IYIR Labour Institutes, New Delhi SHRI R. D. JINDAL Indian Mining Federation, Calcutta SWRI JOOINDBR SINGE Directorate General of Technical Development, New Delhi SHRI JASTINDER SINGH (Alternate) SHIlI B. M. KHANNA Directorate General, Border Roads, New Delhi SHRI R. R. KHANNA Indian Mining Association, Calcutta Central Mining Research Station ( CSIR ), Dhanbad SHRI V. KRISHNA~~UKTHY SHRI S. G. KULKARNI ( Afternate ) SHRI R~VNAQ RAM Ministry of Defence (DGI ) SHRI S. MITRA (Alternate) Chief Inspectorate of Explosives, Nagpur SERI S. C. ROY SHRI M. P. MUKHERJI (Alternate) DR J. N. SEN Indian Explosives Ltd, Calcutta Da S. K. BISWAS ( Alternate ) ( Continued on page 2 ) @ Copyright 1974 STANDARDS INSTITUTION

INDIAN

This publication is protected under the Indian Coplright Act (XIV of 1957) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS:6609 (Fart ill)-1973
( Cantinwd from page 1 ) Members Representing Sn~x K. R. SBaratwra The Associated Cement Companies Ltd, Bombay SIRI M. M. PRABHU ( ARrrnalc ) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-oficio Memmber ) SHRI D. DAS GUPTA, Director ( Chem )

SHRI S. K. MATZWB Deputy Director (Chem ), I.SI

Methods
Conamcr Da A. K. CBATTERJEE Members

of Test

Subcommittee,

CIX

51 : 2

Indian Detonators

Ltd, Hyderabad

DR C. P. Rauaswa~~ (Alternate to Dr A. K. Chatterjee ) Indian Explosives Ltd, Gomia SHRI G. RI. CBOPBA SHRI S. SEWAN (Ahnate) Directorate General of Mines Safety, Dhanbad Sam C. M. DEOSTHALE Central Mining Research Station (CSIR), Dhanhad SHRI V. KRISI~NA~I~YRTHY SHRI S. G. KUIXARNI ( Altnnafe) Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) SRRI RAUNAQ RAN SHRI V. SUBRAYANIAN ( Alternate ) Chief Inspectorate of Explosives, Kagpur `SBRI S. C. ROY SBRI M. P. MUKHERJI ( Alternate)

2

IS : 6609 ( Part III ) - 1973 CONTENTS
PAGE

0. I:oREwIRD
1. SCOPE

. .. ...

.. . ..

... ... ... ...

. . ... .,.

4 5 5 5 7 7 8 9 II 16 16 17 17 18 18 20

2. I'EST METHODS FOR DETONATORS, GENERAL 2.1 Water 2.2 2.3 Resistance ... ... Test ...

. . . . . .. ...
... ... . . ... ... ... .,. ... ...

Drop Test Snatch Test

. ..
... . ..

. ..
...

2.4 Vibration 2.5 Strength 2.6 Strength

Test Test Test (by Sand (by Lead

. .
Method) Method) ... ... ... ... Test . .. ...

Bomb Plate ... ... Current ...

2.7 Electrical

Resistance Test

Test

2.3 No Fire Current. 2.9 Minimum Series ...

Firing

2. IO Applications

3. TEST METHODS FOR`DETONATORS,PERMITTED . . . 3.1 Inccndivity Test for Instantaneous Test for Delay Electric Electric Detonators

3.2 Incendivity

Detonators

ISt6699 (Part III)-1973

Indian

Standard

METHODS OF TEST FOR COMMERCIAL BLASTING EXPLOSIVES AND ACCESSORIES
PART III DETONATORS, GENERAL AND PERMITTED

0. FOREWORD
0.l This Indian Standard ( Part III ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 30 April 1973, after the draft finalized by the Explosives and Pyrotechnics Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division Council. OS The explosives industry in India was for a considerable time confined only to the ordnance factories. However, during the last decade other manufacturing units have come into existence. It was, therefore, considered necessary to formulate specifications for various explosives and explosive accessories produced by the industry. Before laying down specifications, it was felt necessary to prepare standard methods of test. 0.3 Testing of commercial explosives is of utmost importance for ensuring their safety during transport and handling, stability in storage and adequate life and performance under all conditions of use. Test methods included in this standard cover these aspects for all the groups of explosives under consideration. 0.4 Depending upon the origin and type of the explosives, a large number of test methods are in vogue, which though similar in nature, differ in minor details of experimental procedure and expression/ interpretation of results. 0.5 It is a difficult task to select a particular method as Therefore, choice has been effected in favour of those methods, sufficient experience and experimental data is available and mutually acceptable to all concerned, namely, the producers, the authorities and the consumers in the field. the best for which which art inspectin!

0.6 The test methods prescribed in this standard cover both the genera and the permitted explosives and accessories like detonators, detonatin; fuses and safety fuses. They do not cover all items but include thos The method which are currently used and manufactured in the country. 4

IS : 6609 ( Part

III) - 1973

of tests for various explosives and explosive accessories are covered under different parts of this standard: Parl I Part II/Set Part III Part IV Part V Part II/Set 2 Gun powder 1 Explosives, Explosives, Detonators, Detonating Safety fuses general permitted general and permitted fuses

0.7 In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960".

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard (Part III) prescribes the methods of test for detonators, general and permitted including (a) ordinary (plain) detonators, (b) instantaneous electric detonators, and (c) delay electric detonators. 2. TEST 2.1 Water METHODS Resistance FOR DETQNATORS, Test GENERAL

2.1.0 General-The object of the water resistance test is to ensure Unlike plain satisfactory water-tight crimping on the' detonator. detonators, electric. detonators are very frequently used for blasting For this reason, the sealing made by explosive charges in wet boreholes. the crimping should be perfectly water-tight under field conditions use.

of

2.1.1

Apparatus

2.1.1.1 Water pressure test vessel-As shown in Fig. 1. It is provided with a lid which can be tightened with nuts and with pressure gauge to check pressure. There is an inner container to keep the detonators.

2.1.2

Procedure

2.1.2.1 Storage of detonator samples under water pressure -Take the samples under test and tie them in a bunch. Open the lid of watrr pressure test vessel, place the bunch of detonators in the inner container Close the water and fill it with' water so as to cover the detonators. pressure test vessel lid and tighten the nuts. ____ _~_ _... __...-_..
*Rules for rounding
off numerical

values

( rceissd ).

5

IS : 6669 ( Part

III) - 1973
17.5 Q MS HANOI F

rMl6

SWING

HINGES COVER

WE~bcu IV AF!D VESSEL

6mm VESSEL

THICK

MS

All dimensions FJG. 1
WATER

in millimetres.

PRESSURE T~mna 6

V~WL

IS : 6609 ( Part 111 }- 1973 Apply pressure of 21 N/cm8 either by operating foot pump or compressed air line connected to the water pressure test vessel. In case the water main pressure is sufficiently high, it can be used for raising the pressure to .21 N/cma. Check the pressure-gauge every half an hour to Keep the samples under ensure that the pressure is properly maintained. this pressure for 2 hours. 2.L2.2 Firing of the samples - After 2 hours of storage, release the pressure, open and take out the detonators. Determine the strength of the detonators by the method prescribed in 2.6. 2.1.2.3 Record the results giving the type of the detonator, and markings on the lead plates on the basis of comparison with standard markings as in 2.6.2.1. 2.1.3
Prerautions -

The following precautions shall be observed:

a) Do not open the test vessel unless the pressure is released. b) In case of misfire, do not approach the detonator within 5 minutes of firing and after this, follow the recommended procedure for handling misfires. cl In case of partial detonation, scan the area where the detonators were being tested and carefully pick up all partly detonated explosive charges of the detonators and keep these shells for disposal or destruction by detonation. 2.2 Drop Test 2.2.0 General - The object of the test is to determine the insensitivity of detonators to shock. 2.2.1 Procedure - Cut the leading wires of the electric detonators so that 20 cm lengths are left. Drop the detonators through a pipe of not more than 40 mm diameter behind a protective wall from a height of 2 m upon a concrete slab or an iron plate so that they fall vertically with the bottoms downwards. Note down the number of detonators that have fired. Plain detonators are dropped as such. 2.2.2 Precautions -After dropping 5 minutes and then collect the shells. 2.3 Snatch Test the detonators, wait at least for

2.3.0 General-The test is applicatle only to electric detonators. It is performed to judge the safety in handling the detonators to ensure that the detonators are not unduly sensitive and do not go off when subjected to severe jerk on the leading wires. 2.3.1 Apparatus - It consists of a steel box open at one end with a hole in the centre over which a collet to hold the detonator is suspended. 7

IS:6609

(Part

III)-1973

.2.3.2 Procedure - Cut the leading wire; of the electric detonator to be tested to a length of one metre and suspend freely while the ends of the leading wire are passed through and tied to a5-kg weight which is kept on a platform. Keep the arrangement behind a protected shield so that the weight can fall from a height of half a metre and in case of an explosion nobody is endangered. The dropping of the weight shall not cause the detonator to go off. 2.3.3 Precautions -Five minutes after the test, collect the unexploded detonators and destroy them as usual in a safe place. 3.4 Vibration
Test

2.4.0 General -The test is applicable to both ordinary and electric The object of the test is to see that the detonators are not detonators. unduly sensitive to the jolts received during transport and the characteristics of the detonators are not altered. 2.4.1 Procedure -For ordinary detonators, take 20 pieces to be tested and pack them in a suitable carton in two rows of IO each, so that 10 of them face up and the other 10 face down. Give a suitable packing on the sides so that the detonators stand erect without getting disturbed during shaking. In case of electric detonators, take 40 pieces in a bundle and wrap them in paper. Place the detonators horizontally in the wooden box of a shaking machine so that they are not disturbed from their position (by suitable packing on the sides) and drop the box from a height of 15 cm 30 times in one minute for 5 minutes.

3.4.1.1 Ordinary detonators shall be visually examined'for any loose powder, i,f the detonators show no loose powder; they shall be assembled with safety fuse as usual and fired on lead plates. In case of electric detonators, they shall be fired electrically over lead plates. 2.4.2 Precautions The following precautions shall be observed:

a) The arrangement by which the detonators are shaken should be properly protected. In case any of the detonators go off, all the detonators will automatically go off. b) During the conduct of the trials no person should be present in the room where the machine is situated. After the shaking, 5 minutes interval should be given before the machine is approached and the detonator is taken out. 4 If loose powder is found in the ordinary detonators the indication is that the consolidation of the explosive has not been carried out properly. The loose powder should be collected carefully on a piece of glazed paper and then destroyed either chemically or by burning.

c>

n

IS : 6609 ( Part III ) - 1973 2.5 Strength Test (by Sand Bomb Method ) 2.5.0 General - The efficiency of a detonator in initiating an explosive is related to its brisance, in other words, to its crushing or shattering effect. The shattering effect is most easily produced on brittle bodies. Quartz sand possesses the desired qualities; it is cheap, abundant and ciuite uniform in character.
2.5.1 Principle - A stout iron bomb is used to hold the sand in which the detonator is imbedded and fired. The effect of the detonation is ascertained by sifting the sand after the explosion and by calculating from the mass of fine sand recovered, the percentage of sand that had been crushed. The procedure is same for electric as well as ordinary detonators. 2.5.2 Apparatus - As shown in Fig. 2. It consists of a steel cylinder 210 mm long and 90 mm in diameter on t.he exterior, with- a cylindrical chamber 165 mm deep and 50 mm in diameter. The bomb has a steel cover 90 mm in diameter, 22.mm thick above the edges and 24 mm thick in the central position. The central position has a diameter such that its projection section fits neatly into the mouth of the bomb. The cover has two small holes bored parallel through its vertical centre each of such diameter that a leg of the electric detonator will just pass through one of the holes. The other top steel cover, as shown in Fig. 2 has a hole bored through the vertical centre of such a `diameter that the piece of burning fuse used in firing a detonator will pass through the hole with a neat fit. A suitable clamping device, as shown in the figure, keeps the cover in the position and prevents loss of sand when the detonator is fired. 2.5.3 Material

2.5.3.1 Silica sand - The sand shall have a minimum of 99.90 percent silica (sand available at Ennore Madras, Tarnil Nadu State is found suitable ). It shall be washed thoroughly to free it from chlorides and sulphates. It shall be dried and sieved. The sand passing completely through 700-micron IS Sieve (see IS : 460-1962* ) and retained completely on 500-micron IS Sieve shall be used. 2.5.4 Procedure

2.5.4.1 Weigh 80 g of the sand and pour into the cavity of the bomb. Strike the bomb sharply few times with a light wooden hammer or jarred so that the sand gets uniformly packed. Insert the capped end of the fuse or the electric detonator carefully so that it rests on top of the sand vertically and as nearly as possible to the centre of the cavity. Pour another 120 g of the same type of sand around the detonator in the bomb, *Specification for test sieves
(rem&d).

9

FOR
OETONAfORS

t: ..

f G ! * a
V

.rOP COVER BOMB
-90

s
COVER
rPLTOP COVER -BOMB COVER

I

2:

1 50* I-

i

I
I

BASE

PLATE

1
STEEL CYLINDER
All dimensions in millimetrcs.

2io

-STEEL CYLINDER

BASE
PLATE

IS:6609

(Part III)-1973

tap the bomb mildly a few times to get the sand packed uniformly as Pass the end of the fuse or the detonator leading wires through before. the hole in the cover without disturbing the position of the detonator inside the bomb. Place the bomb within the clamping device, fix the cover tightly in position by screwing the two hexagonal nuts on the upright iron rods. Light the end of the fuse in case of plain detonator or fire the electric detonator using an exploder or a suitable firing circuit (A mild clicking noise is produced by firing of the from a safe distance. detonator inside the bomb. ) 2.5.4.2 Empty out the sand carefully upon a large sheet of glazed paper, such sand as may adhere to the inside of the cavity being removed Reject the leading wire of electric by a suitable scrapper and brush. detonator or the charred fuse, also all possible fragments of the copper or aluminium shell after any adhering sand has been removed from them. Sift the entire charge of sand carefully through a nest of sieves of The sand shall not be rubbed with the hand 500 micron, and 125 micron. against the sieve. -Any hard lumps shall be crushed between the fingers. Such lumps are usually found adhering tightly to the fragments of the shell of the detonator. After the screening is complete, empty out the separate fractions of the sand remaining in each sieve and in the bottom tray, on to small sheets of glazed paper and weigh. 2.5.5
Precautions -

The following precautions shall be observed:

4 b)

In case of testing plain detonator, about 4 to 5 cm of the fuse coil ends should be nipped off before use. To prevent escape of sand through the holes on the cover plates while firing, the annular space between fuse or the detonator leading wires should be packed suitably, for example, using a short length of soft rubber tubing. case of misfires, wait at least for 10 minutes. Keep the misfired detonators segregated for disposal/destruction by another detonator.

c>In

2.\ Strength Test (by Lead Plate Method) _ 15.0 General -Tee strength_ of a detonator is its power of initiating dettiation in explosives. Various tests are in use. Although the lead plat test does not furnish a quantitative estimation of initiating power, this : widely accepted. as a routine test in view of its simplicity. The test consts of firing a detonator supported vertically on a lead plate of prescbed dimensions and comparing the markings/perforations produced on thlead plate with a series of standard markings/perforations. `SPtfication for test sieves ( rccised). 11

Ls : 6649 ( Part III ) - 1973 2.6.1 Aptaratus 2.6.1.1 Lead plates - The lead plates used in the test shall be 4-cm square and shall be cut from lead sheet of 5.0 mm thickness (mass 56.7 kq!m*) conforming to lead sheet for use in chemical industry prescribed in IS : 405-1961*.
2.6.1.2 Firing frame-The firing frame consists of horizontal parallel iron plates, the lowest one perforated with circular holes of 3-cm diameter over which the lead plate lies with arrangement for the detonators to be centred vertically on the lead plate and for a series of such detonators to bc fired in one round. 2.6.2 Procedure - Place the lead plates on top of. the holes on the lower most plate. Place the detonators one on top of each plate vertically with the base of the detonator tube in good contact lvith the lead plate. Pass the false or the leading wires of the detonator through the two upper holes and fire the detonators following the recommended shot firing procedure. 2.6.2.1 After firing, wait at least for 5 minutes and then examine the markings produced on the lead plates and compare these with the standard markings/perforations as shown in Fig 3. Report the results giving the type of detonator, the marking/perforation as classified in 2.6.2.2 according to the standard marking/perforation as shown in Fig. 3. 2.6.2.2 Class$cation of results according to Fig; 3: The results shall be classified as follows

A Punched-The
punched circular at the middle and generally piled in the underside the

plate is completely perforated by a cleanly The diameter of the hole is ustially least hole. The metal ij increases towards both the faces. a raised rim on both sides of the plate and ~1 metal may be curled over.

B Perforated - The plate is deeply indented in a crater on its upper side and is perforated by a hole torn at the bottom o@his Viewed from the underside, there is a large circulararea crater. from which lead has been torn away, the perforation occwying the centre. A subclassification is made with reference to tie size The following Wres of perforation at the bottom of the crater. refer to the average diameter exclusive of irregularities:

B.l B.2 B.3 *Specification

Perforation Perforation Perforation

above 6 mm diameter. between 3 and 6 mm diameter. below 3 mm diameter.

for lead sheet ( reuised).

12

IS : 6609 ( Part III ) - 1973

81

Ll

Dl

c2

83 FRONT BACK _" FRONT BACK FRONT E BACK

El
(FRONT ONLY )

E2

Fro. 2. CLASSWICAWJN OF RESULTS OF LEAD PLATE TEST OF DETONATORS I3

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

IS:6699 (Part III)-1973 c) C Broken -The apfiearance is similar to Class B plate except that .It has a pit on the upper side, and the plate is not perforated. the underside is broken by the pressure wave giving the'appearance A of a shallow eruptive crater of which the rim is curled back. subclassification is made depending on the size of the crater. c.1 - Crater of more than 10 mm diameter. C.2 C.3 Crater between 5 and .I0 mm diameter. Crater of less than 5 mm diameter.

d) D Domed- The underside of the plate is not brokep but deformed by a swelling or dome corresponding in position to an indent on the upper side. A subclassification is made depending on the size of the dome. D.1 - Domes of about 10 mm diameter and relatively of greater height; in extreme cases the metal may be so thinned at the top as to give perforation, but these are to be diStinguished from Class B plates by the absence of a curled back rim formation on the uqderside of the plate. 0.2 0.3 Domes of large area but low height. Small domes of less than 7 mm diameter,

The sizes of the indents on the top of the plate roughly correspond to the same three subclasses. E Underjiwmed - There is no mark on the underside of the plate. On the upper side there may be a small indent sometimes containing the torn base of the detonator tube. There are usually no radiating striations on the lead, but there may be some embedded fragments of tube. The indent is shallow, or in extreme cases is absent. The class is subdivided into:. E.1 E.2 Indent on upper side. Little or no indent on the upper side.

2.6.3 Precautions- The following precautions shall be observed: a) While carrying out the test, ensure that the detonator is exactly vertical and placed centrally on the lead plate and making good contact with it. b) In case of firing the detonator with safety fuse, nip off about 5c m of the coil ends prior to inserting one end of the fuse into the detonator. Also take at least 50 cm of fuse for each test. In case of misfires, wait at least for 10 minutes before approaching the misfired detonator. After the tiine interval specified in (c) above, dislodge the misfired d) detonator and destroy it by firing with another good detonator kept in contact. 4 15

s

: 6609 ( Part 111) - 1973
2.7 Electrical Resistance Test

2.7.1 Procr&re-Take Keeping the bare ends detonator into a 3 to diameter, ccnnect an measure the resistance. detonator, length of the

a detonator and stretch its leading wires. of the leading wires short-circuited, insert the 4 mm thick mild steel pipe of about 25 mm ohmmeter across the bare leading wires and Record the results giving the particulars of the leading wires and the resistance in ohms.

2.7.1.1 The ohmmeter shall be of such construction and design that it is not capable of firing an electric fusehead when connected across the ohmmeter terminal and current is allowed to flow through the fusehead. Ah the short-circuit current of the ohmmeter shall not exceed 50 mA. It shall be calibrated to measure circuit resistance with an accuracy of 0'1 ohm. 2.7.2 Precautions detonators always keep the

a) While carrying or handling electric bare leading wires short-circuited.

b) Prior to connecting the bare leading wires with the ohmmeter ensure that the detonator is not in line with the ohmmeter and sufficiently inside the pipe. 2.8 No Fire Current Test

2.8.0 GeneralFor safety in handling, detonators are designed to withstand passage of certain amount of current without exploding. Manufacturers, therefore, specify passage of certain maximum current for a specified duration without detonation. The object of this test is to find out whether passage of the specified current for the specified duration through the detonator is safe or not. 2.8.1 A@aratrts

2.8.1.1 Constant dc current generator-The testing apparatus shall consist of a constant dc current generator, a device to allow the current ,from the generator to flow for a specified time, and a circuit resistance measuring . unit. The set-up shall have a selector s.witch to check the circuit resistance and also to allow the current pulse to flow through the detonator. The current generator shall be capable of giving a current of 10 mA to about 2 500 mA in steps of 50 mA. The instrument shall read the application time from 100 ps to 100 ms in steps of 100 ps. 2.8.1.2 An accurate time measuring device of appropriate range.

2.8.2 Procedure-Take a sample of detonator of a particular make and place it inside the steel tiring chamber with the leading wires connected to two terminals on the chamber. Close the chamber. Connect the firing chamber terminals with the apparatus as given in 2.8.1 using a suitable 16

IS : 6609 ( Part III ) - 1973 Check the detonator firing circuit resistance, by length of cable. switching the circuit resistance measuring unit. Note the resistance, switch on the current generator and timer unit. Set the current to the specified level taking into consideration of the detonator circuit resistance and the time of application of the current to the appropriate level and allow the current to flow through the detonator for the duration by Note whether the detonator operating the firing switch of the apparatus. detonates or not. Record the results, giving the type of detonator, the magnitude of current and application time as specified by the manufacturer, whether the detonator exploded or did not fire. 2.8.3 PrecautionsWait for 10 minutes, remove the detonator under test and repeat the test using a fresh detonator. 2.9 Minimum Series Firing Current Test current 2.9.0 General-The test is intended to determine the minimum at which a series of 20 detonators will fire completely. 2.9.1 &$arutus-same as in 2.8.1.1 and 2.8.1.2.

2.9.2 Procedure-Take the number of detonators as recommended by the manufacturer for series firing, and connect them in series. Measure the circuit resistance. Compensate for the resistance of the circuit. Allow a dc current of appropriate strength and duration, as specified by the manufacturer of the particular type of detonators under test, to flow through the detonators. w ,Note in the series whether fire is there or not, In case of no detonation of some of and record the results accordingly. the detonators, increase the current strength in steps of 50 mA and determine the minimum series firing current at which all the detonators tire. shall be ensured that the detonators are placed at 2.9.3 Precaution -It such a distance from the instrument and the firer that no effects of the exploding detonator are caused either to the person or to the instrument. 2.10 Applications 2.10.1 FOY Ordinary or 2.6 Phall apply. 2.10.2
(Plain) Detonators Detot2ators-

Test methods 2.2, 2.4 and 2.5 All methods shall apply.

For Instantaneous

Elecfric

2.19.3 For Delay Electric Detonators - All methods shall apply and in addition, a time metering test as mentioned in 2.10.3.1 shall also apply. 2.10.3.1 Timing of any scrics of delay detonators shall be measured on a suitable &ctronic timer capable of measuring to au accuracy of f 1 ms in case of millisecond delay detonators and f 0.05 s in case of half-second delay detonators. 17

IS : 6669 fPart III ) - 1973 3. TEST METHODS FOR DETONATORS, PERMITTED

the coal mines regulations, only detonators which 3.0 General -Under have been approved by the Director General of Mines Safety ( DGMS) are used in any coal mine in which approved safety lamps are required to be used. Such detonators are termed as ` permitted ' detonators and these include electric detonators for simultaneous firing, and also delay detonators. 3.1 Incendivity Test for Instantaneous Electric Detbnators 3.1.0 General-The test consists of firing detonators singly in a 28Witre steel chamber containing 9.0 f 0.29 percent methane-air mixture or 8'0 f 0.25 percent natural gas-air mixture as the case may be. 3.1.1
Apparatus -

as shown in Fig. 4.

3.1.1.1 Steel chamber-The internal dimension of the chamber shall be 30 x 30 x 30 cm and the wall thickness of the vessel shall be 12'5 mm. The vessel has a cover, on the upper side of which there is ti pressure indicator mounted for indicating ignition of gas mixture. The cover is held securely in position using nuts and bolts. The vessel has provision for introducing and mixing gas to achieve the specified gas mixture, for inserting detonator and electric fuse wire into the vessel. 3.1.2 Procedure 3.1.2.1 Take two threaded plugs and take a detonator with. 15 cm leading wire, connect the bare leading wires to the two insulated terminals of one of the threaded plugs and insert the detonator i&o the vessel. Connect a 5-cm length of electric fuse wire across the two insulated. terminals of the other threaded plug and introduce the fuse wire inside the vessel. 3.1.2.2 IntrOduce appropriate quantity of methane or, natural into the vessel and start mixing to achieve the specified gas. mixture. gas

3.1.2.3 Draw a sample of the gas mixture from the vessel and check the percentage of methane in the gas mixture using suitable methanometer. If the.gas mixture is within. the specified limit+, lay the cables for firing the detonator and for rupturing the electric fuse wire and connect these cables to the detonator and the electric fuse wire terminals in the threaded plugs. 3.1.2.4 Check the circuit. continuity using an intrinsically safe ohmmeter. Fire the detonator using an approved intrinsically safe single shot exploaer. 3.1.2.~ Rapture the el;ectric fuse wire. Ignition of..the #aS tiixtureS is indicated. by the rise of the pressure indicator and the hissing noise from it. 18

IS:6663 (Part III)-1373

/BLOWER

GAS

CYLINOER

3Ox30x30cm

STEEL

FUSE WIRES

FxO. 4

APPARA~ FOR INCENDIWTY T~sr FOR PERMITTED INSTANTANEOUS ~JETONAT~R

3.1.2.6Note down the pressure developed by the detonator and rupturing of fuse wire. (If the gas mixture is ignited by the detonator or the fuse wire, a pressure of 56 N/cm* is developed. )
3.1.2.7 Record the results giving the type of de&ator, percentage sf' inethane in the gas mixture, relative humidity of thshatmosphere and number of ignitions obtained. NOTE- While carrying out the test, ensure that the vessel ia maintained at room tcolperature. 19

IS : 6699 ( Part III) - 1973 3.2 Incendivity Test for Delay Electric Detonators 3.2.0 General - The test is also applicable to instantaneous copper electric detonators, if required. It consists of firing delay detonators singly in a steel'lined chamber of approximate dimension 71 x 27 x 5 cm containing 9 f 0'25 percent or 8 f 0'25 percent of methane or natural gas-air mixture as the case may be. 3.2.1 &paratus 3.2.1.1 Multi-compartment chamber-as shown in Fig. 5. The chamber consists of a number of compartmems connected in series by means of pipe connections. The chambers have provision for inserting detonators at the middle through threaded plugs and for introducing and circulating gas mixture. The top side of the multi-compartments is closed by polyethylene film. The chamber is placed in a room which can be made dark. A typical figure showing one compartment is also given in Fig. 5. 3.2.2
Procedure 3.2.2.1 Take appropriate number of delay detonators and insert one detonator in each compartment through the threaded plug.

3.2.2.2 Stretch a polyethylene film on the top side of the multicompartment chamber and clamp it on to the chamber to provide gas-tight seal. 3.2.2.3 Introduce adequate quantity of methane or natural gas into the chamber and circulate to obtain a 9 f 0'25 percent or 8 i 0'25 percent methane or natural gas-air mixture as the case may be. 3.2.2.4 Draw a sample of the gas mixture from the chamber check. the percentage of methane using a suitable methanometer. and

3.2.2.5 If the gas mixture is within the specified limits, connect the detonator in parallel with the firing cables through a sequence switch. 3.2.2.6 Close all plug-cocks in the gas ci?+ulating system and fire the shots using the sequence switch and intrinsrcally safe firing circuit or exploder. 3.2.2.7 Observe the number of gzs ignitions, Record the results giving the type of detonator, percentage of methane.in the gas mixture, relative humidity of the atmosphere, number of samples tested and the number of ignitions obtained. 3.2.3 Precautions approaching
3.2.3.1

In case of misfire, wait the misfired detonator.

at least for

10 minutes

before

3.2.3;2 After the time interval specified in 3.2.3.1, dislodge the misfired detonator and destroy it by firing it with another good detonator kept in contact. 20

LGt PIPE

&XlE

WALL OF COMPARTMENT. u LINER

v

NUTS AND BOLTS

N

x

TO METHANE CYLINDER

LINER

Typical Figure of Multi-compartment Chamber Showing One Compartment

FIG. 5

MULTI-COMPARTMENT CHAMBER

FOR TESTING PERMITTED DELAY DETONATORS

