NAT HIAF IS 17531 : 2021 
Indian Standard 


niiae zeifegen SER U 
iu — faterts 


Portable Electric Indoor Air 
Purifier — Specification 


ICS 13.040.20 


© BIS 2021 


anda AM SAN 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR HIA, 9 TEGE TH AMT, ay Redi 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


March 2021 Price Group 7 


Air Quality Sectional Committee, CHD 35 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Air Quality 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division Council. 


Emissions from industrial sources and from community waste dumping grounds alter the composition and 
constituents of air. In addition to this there are several sources of pollution inside households, such as smoke 
released during cooking, burning of incense sticks or mosquito coils and smoking. All these directly impact the 
health as well as the day to day performance of people. 


Portable electric indoor air purifiers refer to purifiers used in residences and office spaces for cleaning air. These 
purifiers have become a common household appliance with growing air pollution levels in urban areas. Indoor air 
purifiers use a variety of mechanisms for reduction of pollutants present in indoor air so that people can breathe 
clean air and the environment is healthier. 

The performance of air purifiers vary depending upon their size, technology, and power input. This standard 
prescribes some essential performance requirements for indoor air purifiers and describes the associated test 
methods. Hence, this standard is important to assess the quality of indoor air purifier. 


In the preparation of this standard, considerable assistance has been derived from the following standards and 
documents: 
[1] ANSI/AHAM AC-1 : 2015 Method for measuring performance of portable household electric room 
air cleaners. 
[2] NF B44-200 : 2016 Independent air purification devices for tertiary sector and residential 
applications — Test methods — Intrinsic performances. 
[3] IEC/FDIS 63086-1 Household and similar electrical air cleaning appliances — Measurement of 
performance — Part 1: General requirements. 
[4] Draft IEC 63086-2-1 Household and similar electrical air cleaning appliances — Methods for 
measuring the performance. 
[5] GB/T 18801 : 2015 Air Cleaner. 
Bibliography is given in Annex E and the list of committee members and experts who have actively contributed 
and participated in the development of this standard is given in Annex F. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 17531 : 2021 


Indian Standard 


PORTABLE ELECTRIC INDOOR AIR 
PURIFIER — SPECIFICATION 


1SCOPE 


This standard prescribes the performance requirements, 
and methods of test for portable electric indoor 
air purifiers and for the air purification function of 
combination devices. 

NOTES 

1 This standard is not applicable to: 

a 


b 


— 


appliances intended exclusively for industrial purposes; 


— 


appliances intended for use in medical treatment locations, 
such as surgical suites, laboratories, medical treatments 
rooms, etc.’ and 


c 


— 


appliances intended for use inside vehicles. 


2 The test method prescribed in this standard has defined 
limits of measurability based on the statistical accuracy of the 
method. Limits of measurability is explained in Annex A. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions which 
through reference in this text constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreement based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
listed below: 


IS No./IEC No./ Title 
ISO No. 
IS 302 (Part 1) : Safety of household and 
2008 similar electrical appliances: 


Part 1 General requirements 
(sixth revision) 


ISO 3743-2:2018 Acoustics — Determination 
of sound power levels of 
noise sources using sound 
pressure — Engineering 
methods for small, movable 
sources in reverberant fields 
— Part 2: Methods for special 


reverberation test rooms 


ISO 21501-1 : 
2009 


Determination of particle size 
distribution — Single particle 
light interaction methods — 
Part 1: Light scattering aerosol 
spectrometer 


IS No./IEC No./ Title 
ISO No. 

IEC 60335-2-65: | Household and similar 
2002 + AMDI : electrical appliances — 
2008 + AMD2 : Safety — Part 2—65 : Particular 
2015 requirements for air-cleaning 

appliances 

IEC 60704-1 : 2010 Household and similar 

electrical appliances — Test 


code for the determination of 
airborne acoustical noise — 
Part 1: General requirements 


IEC 62301 : 2011 Household electrical 
appliances — Measurement of 
standby power 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply: 


3.1 Portable Electric Indoor Air Purifier — 
Electrically powered device that is basically built of 
a set of components possessing the ability to capture 
and/or partially or totally destroy air pollutants for 
cleaning air in a room. Such purifiers can be moved 
from room to room. 


3.1.1 Air Purifier — Floor Type — Floor type air purifiers 
are designed to stand on the floor of a room. 


3.1.2 Air Purifier — Table Type — Table type air purifiers 
are designed to set on a table or counter. 


3.1.3 Air Purifier — Wall Type — Wall type air purifiers 
are designed such that they can be mounted on a wall. 
NOTE — A wall type air purifier must include proper wall 


mounting brackets and instructions to mount the air purifier 
integrally to the wall. 


3.1.4 Air Purifier — Multi-placement Type — 
Multi-placement type air purifiers are designed 
to operate in one or more orientations/positions 
(floor, table, wall). 


3.2 Combination Products — Air purifier that includes 
a secondary function besides air cleaning within the 
same machine, such as humidifying, dehumidifying, 
heating, or air conditioning. 


3.3 Gas Concentration — Parts per billion volume, 
in ppbV. 
NOTE — Formula to convert ng/m” to ppbV: 


IS 17531 : 2021 


Mg 1 


L.kPa 


by = 
ze m? * Molecular Weight 


3.3.1 Initial Concentration — The gas concentration in 
the test chamber at the start of test time (t — 0). 


3.3.2 Background Concentration — The gas 
concentration in the test chamber prior to introduction 
of known concentration of gas in the chamber. 


3.4 Particle Concentration — Number of particles per 
cubic cm (cc) of room air. 


3.4.1 Initial Concentration — The particulate number 
concentration at the start of test time (t = 0). 


3.4.2 Background Concentration — The particulate 
number concentration in the test chamber prior to 
introduction of known concentration of particulate in 
the chamber. 


3.5 Aerosol — Suspension of fine solid particles or 
liquid droplets in air or another gas. 


3.5.1 Smoke Aerosol — Aerosol produced by burning 
cigarette tobacco with air forced through the cigarette’s 
filter. 


3.5.2 Salt Aerosol — Aerosol produced by atomization 
of an aqueous potassium chloride (KCl) or sodium 
chloride (NaCl) solution with subsequent drying. 


3.5.3 Dust Aerosol — Aerosol produced by dispersion 
of commercially available test dust. 


3.5.4 Pollen Aerosol — Aerosol produced by dispersion 
of particulate matter naturally occurring from plants, 
for example, commercially available paper mulberry 
pollen (non-defatted) including fragments. 


3.6 Standby Condition — The state in which the air 
purifier is connected to the power supply, connected 
with a network (if applicable) and its display function 
is on (if applicable) but its other functions are off. 


3.7 Standby Power — Input power of air purifier in 
the standby condition. 


3.8 Natural Decay — Reduction in pollutant 
concentration due to natural phenomena, such 
as agglomeration, surface deposition (including 
sedimentation), chemical reaction, and air exchange. 


3.9 Total Decay — Reduction in pollutant 
concentration due to natural decay combined with the 
action of air purifier. 


3.10 Clean Air Delivery Rate (CADR) — Clean Air 
Delivery Rate (CADR), expressed in m*h~', is defined 
as the measure of the delivery rate of purified air by 


contaminant £ 
mol 


x ssia ZE 
mo 


daa 


an air purifier. CADR is calculated by subtracting the 
natural decay rate constant from the total decay rate 
constant and multiplying the difference by the volume 
of test chamber, as measured in m?. CADR calculation 
is independent of technology used in air purifier for 
contaminant removal. See Annex B for calculation of 
CADR. 


3.11 Air Exchange Rate — The number of times the 
total volume of air in a room changes in an hour due to 
natural ventilation. 


NOTE — Natural ventilation means cross air ventilation in a 
room without the aid of any electrical/mechanical equipment. 


3.12 Room Size — Maximum recommended room 
size for effective air purification by an air purifier. 
See Annex C for calculation of room size. 


3.13 Maximum Performance Operation Mode — 
Manual operation mode where the purifier is set to 
the highest flow rate with all air cleaning functions 
switched on and set to maximum, where applicable. 


NOTE — If the purifier has zero flow rate, the CADR is 
measured with all air cleaning functions switched on. 


3.14 Energy Efficiency in Maximum Performance 
Operation Mode (n) — Volume of clean air delivered 
by consuming a certain amount of energy; calculated 
by dividing CADR by electrical power input and 
expressed in m*W-'!h-!. 


4 PRINCIPLE OF PURIFICATION 


A normal household/office room has a variety of 
pollutants in the air. Some of these pollutants include 
VOCs, dust, particulate matter, pollens, pet hair, odour, 
and microorganisms. Indoor air purifiers apply different 
methodologies for the removal of these pollutants. 


4.1 Passive Purification System 

Uses a train of media/filters to trap pollutants from the 
air which is drawn into the unit. 

4.1.1 High Efficiency Particulate Air (HEPA) Filter 


It is made out of technical textile which is randomly 
arranged, folded and boxed. They come in different 
classes and types [see IS 16753 (Part 1)]. 


NOTE — The highest class is H14, which offers efficiency of 
99.97 percent for 0.3 micron particle. 
4.1.2 Adsorption 


The phenomenon in which molecules of pollutant 
(the adsorbate) are taken up and held on the surface of 
another material (the adsorbent). 


4.1.3 Ultra Low Particulate Air (ULPA) Filter 


This filter media can arrest at least 99.99 percent of 
dust, pollen, mould, bacteria and any airborne particles 
with a size of 100 nanometres (0.1 um) or larger from 
the air. 


4.2 Active Purification System 


Uses technology to emit ions into the room space. 
When particulate matters come in contact with these 
ions, they react and the particles are charged. The 
charged particles coalesce to form large particles, 
which fall down due to increase in weight. When virus 
or pathogen come in contact with these ions, they might 
become inactive. 


5 PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS 


5.1 Clean Air Delivery Rate (CADR) 


The CADR values shall be measured for each test 
pollutant given in 5, at the maximum performance 
operation mode of the purifier as per the method given 
in Annex B, and shall be declared. 


5.2 Capacity of Air Purifier and Room Size 


The capacity of the air purifier in terms of room 
size shall be calculated using CADR for cigarette 
smoke/salt aerosol as per the method given in Annex C, 
and shall be declared. 


5.3 Noise Level (Sound Power Level) 


The sound power level of the purifier at the maximum 
performance operation mode, with cigarette 
smoke/salt aerosol as test pollutant, can be tested as per 
IEC 60704-1 or ISO 3743-2, and shall conform to the 
following table: 


CADR (mh-!) Sound Power Level [dB(A)] 
< 150 <55 
150 < CADR < 300 <61 
300 < CADR < 450 < 66 
450 < < 70 
NOTE — IEC 60704-2-XX is being developed for 


determination of airborne acoustical noise for air purifiers. 


5.4 Power Consumption 


The power consumed by the air purifier at the 
maximum performance operation mode shall be 
measured as per procedure given below, and shall be 
declared as the power input. Tolerance as per Table 1 of 
IS 302 (Part 1) allowed. 


IS 17531 : 2021 


5.4.1 Condition of Measurement 


The measurement of power consumption can be 
conducted simultaneously with the CADR test for 
cigarette smoke/salt aerosol. 


5.4.2 Conditioning of Air Cleaner 


Before carrying out the test, the air purifier motor shall 
be properly conditioned by running the air purifier 
continuously for 48 h with/without filters. If the air 
purifier is conditioned with filters, the filter needs to be 
replaced before starting the test. 


5.4.3 Procedure 


After conditioning of the motor, fully assemble the 
air cleaner with all filters and connect the power 
measuring instrument between the power supply and 
the air purifier. Switch on the air purifier, run it at the 
maximum performance operation mode and reset the 
power measuring instrument. Wait for 2 min and then 
start taking power readings every 1 min for 15 min. 


5.4.4 Calculation 


Take an average of the 15 power readings to obtain 
the power consumption of the air purifier at maximum 
performance operation mode. Upto 3 of the 15 readings 
may be discarded as anomalous if caused by potential 
line surges or other variables. 


5.5 Standby Power 


The standby power of the air purifier shall be less than 
or equal to 2.0 W when measured in accordance with 
IEC 62301. 


5.6 Safety 


The air purifier shall conform to safety requirements 
prescribed in IEC 60335-2-65. 


6 TEST POLLUTANTS 


6.1 Formaldehyde 


Formaldehyde gas standards certified from any National 
Metrological Institute (NMI) or laboratory traceable to 
NMI. 


6.2 Toluene 


Toluene gas standards certified from any National 
Metrological Institute (NMI) or laboratory traceable to 
NMI. 


6.3 Cigarette Smoke/Salt Aerosol 


Polydisperse smoke particles in the size range of 
0.3 to 1.0 um can be generated by lighting a cigarette in 
a chamber and forcing air through the cigarette's filter. 
An example of a generation device is shown in Fig. 1, 
other equivalent generation modes may be used. 


IS 17531 : 2021 


cigarette lighter 
oil-water separator 
particulate filter 
reducing valve 
test cigarette 
cigarette holder 
air import tube 


smoke export tube 


O 00-10 tA i WN — 


air flowmeter 


FiG. | EXAMPLE OF CIGARETTE SMOKE GENERATOR" 


Polydisperse salt aerosol in the size range of 0.3 to 
1.0 um can be generated by atomizing NaCl or KCI 
solution. See Annex D for example of atomization 
procedure. 


6.4 Dust 


Certified Reference Materials (CRMs) from any NMI 
or commercially available test dust certified from NMI 
or lab traceable to NMI, in the size range of 1.0-5.0 um. 


6.5 Pollen 


CRMs from any NMI or commercially available 
non-defatted paper mulberry pollen certified from NMI 
or lab traceable to NMI, in the size range of 5 to 11 um. 


7 APPARATUS 


7.1 Temperature Sensors — With an accuracy of 
+0.5°C, calibrated from NMI or any laboratory 
traceable to NMI. 


7.2 RH Sensors — With an accuracy of +2 percent 
RH, calibrated from NMI or any laboratory traceable 
to NMI. 


7.3 Stopwatch — With an accuracy of 1 s in 24h. 


7.4 Aerosol Generator — Required to disseminate 
the cigarette smoke particles/salt/dust/pollen in the air 
inside the test chamber. 


7.5 Atomizer — Instrument capable of generating 
particle sizes in the range of 0.3 um to 1.0 um. 


7.6 Ceiling Fan — At the centre of the test chamber. 


7.7 Laser Source Optical Particle Counter — To 
determine particle count of individual aerosol particles 
in the range of 0.3 um to 11 um with lower detection 
limit of 0.1 um. The counting efficiency of the particle 
counter shall be > 50 percent for 0.3 um particles. 


7.7.1 The sizing resolution of the particle counter shall 
be < 8 percent (standard deviation/mean) and shall 
be measured in accordance with ISO 21501-1. The 
resolution shall be measured at a particle size in the 
0.5 um — 0.7 um size range. 


7.7.2 The optical particle counter shall have a minimum 
of 12 logarithmically spaced particle size channels. 
There shall be a minimum of three particle size channels 
in each of the following size ranges: 0.3 um to 1.0 um, 
1.0 um to 5.0 um, and 5.0 um to 11.0 um. Particle size 
channel boundaries shall be located at 0.3 um, 1.0 um, 
5.0 um, and 11.0 um. 


7.7.3 The optical particle counter shall be calibrated 
in accordance with ISO 21501-1 from NMI or any 
standard lab traceable to NMI. The calibration shall 
be performed with monodisperse NMI-traceable 
polystyrene latex (PSL) spheres and the calibration 
shall include at least one particle diameter in each of 
the ranges of 0.3 um — 0.4 um, the upper most size 
channel, and at least four other sizes in between. The 
particle size calibration of the optical particle counter 
shall be performed at least annually. 


7.8 VOC Analyzer — Spectrometry-based instrument 
to determine the concentration of formaldehyde and 
toluene, with lower detection limit of 1 ppbV. It shall 
be calibrated from NMI or any standard lab traceable 
to NMI. 


7.9 CO, Detector — With accuracy of + 3 percent 
of reading or + 50 ppm, whichever is higher. The 
resolution shall be 1 ppm. 


7.10 Power Measuring Instrument — Capable 
of measuring true RMS watts, with accuracy of 
+1 percent at rated voltage and frequency, and 
resolution of minimum 0.01 watts. 


NOTE — Aerosol generators and analyzers should be 
calibrated from standard laboratory traceable to NMI. 


8 GRADING 


The air purifiers are classified into the following 
grades based on their energy efficiency when tested at 
maximum performance operation mode using cigarette 
smoke or salt aerosol as test pollutant. 


8.1 Grade I 

n=10m Wh! 
8.2 Grade II 

6 mw Wh! <y < 10 m Wh! 

8.3 Grade III 

n<6mwW lhi! 
9 PACKING 
The air purifiers shall be packed in good quality boxes 


IS 17531 : 2021 


with appropriate cushioning so that the purifier doesn’t 
get damaged during transportation. 


10 MARKING 


10.1 The air purifier shall have the following 
information marked in a permanent and legible manner 
in a location where it is accessible and visible: 


a) Name or trademark of the manufacturing/ 
assembling unit; 


b) Type or model number and serial number of the 
unit; 


c) Rated voltage and rated frequency; 
d) Power input in W at rated conditions; 


e) CADR for cigarette smoke or salt aerosol at 
maximum performance operation mode; 
NOTE — CADR for all test pollutants (see 5) to be declared in 
the product manual. 

f) Sound power level in dB(A) at maximum 
performance operation mode; and 


g) Grade of the air purifier (Grade I, Grade II, and 
Grade III). 


10.2 The information specified at 10.1 (a) to (g) shall 
also be marked on the packaging box. However, the 
serial number of the unit need not be marked on the 
packaging box. 


10.3 BIS Certification Marking 


The product(s) conforming to the requirements of 
this standard may be certified as per the conformity 
assessment schemes under the provisions of the 
Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and the Rules 
and Regulations framed thereunder, and the products 
may be marked with the Standard Mark. 


11 MANUFACTURER’S GUARANTEE 


11.1 The manufacturer shall give a guarantee for the 
soundness of construction and performance of the air 
purifier, and shall be responsible for putting right any 
manufacturing defects free of charge for a period of at 
least twelve months right from the date of sale to the 
original purchaser or date of inspection of approval 
in the case of Government and Semi Government 
institutions. Such repairs or replacements of defective 
parts shall be carried out at manufacturer’s works or by 
its authorized agent at site or at a service shop. 


11.2 The manufacturer shall provide instructions with 
details of maintenance requirements and frequency of 
changing replaceable components. Preferably, visual 
indications may be provided to signal replacement of 
filters. 


11.3 Precautionary instructions for installing, using, 
and maintaining the air purifier shall be provided to the 
consumer. 


IS 17531 : 2021 


ANNEKA 
( Clause 1) 
LIMITS OF MEASURABILITY 


This standard method has defined limits of measurability 
based on the statistical accuracy of the methods. 


The maximum CADR values are determined based on 
theoretical maximum limits. The theoretical maximum 
limits are determined by the maximum number of initial 
available particles, the acceptable minimum number 
of available particles, an average background natural 
decay rate (from statistical study), the size of the test 
chamber, and the available minimum experiment time. 
CADR values for dust, cigarette smoke/salt and pollen 
greater than those listed will not have the necessary 
statistical data required by this method. CADR 
values for pollen approaching that listed are normally 
determined by pooling of the test value data determined 


under this method. Therefore, the standard only applies 
to air purifiers with maximum CADR ratings of: 


Dust CADR = 690 mèh“! 
Cigarette smoke/salt aerosol CADR = 768 mh! 


Pollen CADR = 


768 nih! 


The precision of the standard as based on a 0 CADR 
air purifier expressed as 2 standard deviation limits 
(95 percent) are: 


Dust CADR = 4 


-I8mh'! 


Cigarette smoke/salt aerosol CADR = + 18 mh^! 
Pollen CADR = € 26 n?h'! 


ANNEX B 
( Clause 5.1) 
DETERMINATION OF CLEAN AIR DELIVERY RATE (CADR) 


B-1 STRUCTURE OF TEST CHAMBER 


The CADR ofan air purifier device is evaluated in a test 
chamber. The test chamber is divided into two sections: 


a) Observation section; and 
b) Test section. 


In the observation section, all particles/gas analysers, 
particle generators (cigarette smoke/salt, dust and 
pollen particle generator) and gas cylinders are placed. 
In the test section, CADR testing is carried out. The 
schematic of the test chamber is given in Fig. B-1. 
The dimensions and details of test section are given in 
Table B-1. 


Table B-1 Specifications of Test Section 


Items Parameters 


Interior volume | (30 + 1.5) n? 


Interior 
dimensions 


Height = (2.5 + 0.1) m 


The width shall be within 85 — 100 percent of 
the length. 


Test shall be carried out without the influence of 
outside air, sunlight and other radiation effects. 
Temperature shall be maintained at (25 + 2) °C 


Temperature and 
humidity 


and relative humidity at (50 +10) percent RH. 


Items 


Parameters 


Surfaces 


All surfaces shall be low-adsorptive, chemically 
inert, non-corrosive, easy to clean, and with 
sufficient structural integrity. Recommended 
material for the walls, ceiling, and floor: 
stainless steel AISI grades 304, 310, or 316, 
glass or equivalent. All conducting surfaces 
shall be grounded. 


Sealing material 


Welding, silicon rubber strip material, and low 
emission glass sealant may be used, where 
necessary 


Ceiling fan 


The ceiling fan shall have a diameter between 
1.0 and 1.4 m with three blades and a minimal 
airspeed of 1 m/s. The air speed shall be 
measured 0.5 m below the fan blade's surface 
and laterally half way between the central axis 
and the blade's tip. 


Installation location: on the ceiling, in the 
centre of the test chamber, with the distance of 
the highest point on the blades to the ceiling's 
surface between 0.25 m and 0.5 m. 


Test section air 
treatment unit 


The test section air treatment unit shall be used 
for conditioning of the air (that is, temperature, 
humidity), and filtration of the target pollutant. 
It may be operated in recirculation mode or 
supply fresh air from the external environment. 


Leakage rate 


The air leakage rate shall be not greater 
than 0.05 h^! according to the measurement 
procedure described in B-4. 


ee 
N 


Key: 

(A, B, C) — Particle Generators 

(D) Inlet line for test pollutant 

(E) Optical particle counter 

(F) CO, detector 

(G) VOC analyser 

(H) Analyser inlet/Sampling line with two way valve 


IS 17531 : 2021 


(1) Ceiling fan 

(J) Test air purifier 

(K) Blower section (with pre/HEPA filter) 
(L) Chamber return air unit 

(M) Return air dampner 


Fic. B-1 SCHEMATIC OF TEST CHAMBER FOR CADR MEASUREMENT 


B-1.1 The VOCs, cigarette smoke/salt particles, dust, 
and pollen are dispersed above the ceiling fan through 
a delivery line and injection port. 


B-1.2 The air purifier under test is placed in the middle 
of the test chamber. The air purifier may be placed 
either on the floor or on the table (0.7 m in height), as 
per its design (see 3.1.1 to 3.1.4). If it is a wall type air 
purifier, provision shall be made to keep it in a stable 
position at the centre of the room, on a table or stand at 
a height of 0.7 m. 


B-1.3 For the measurement of particles and gases, 
samples are taken from 2 sampling ports, which are 
placed at a height of 0.6 m and 1.5 m above the floor. 
The samples collected through these ports are analysed 
by the respective particle counters and gas analysers. 


For air purifiers which discharge air in a specific 
direction, the air discharge shall not be pointed toward 
the sampling ports. 


B-1.4 Temperature and humidity inside the test 
section is constantly monitored using 4 temperature 
and 4 RH sensors placed at 4 corners of the chamber. 
Temperature and humidity values outside the prescribe 
range invalidate the tests. 


B-2 TEST PROCEDURE 


B-2.1 Test Voltage and Frequency 


The test shall be carried out at the rated voltage and 
frequency of the air purifier+ 1 percent throughout the 
duration of the test. 


IS 17531 : 2021 


B-2.2 Initial Concentration 


The initial concentration of the test pollutants shall be 
as per limit prescribed below: 


a) Formaldehyde: 100 ppbV 
b) Toluene: 100 ppbV 


c) Cigarette Smoke/salt aerosol: 24 000 to 35 000 
particles/cc (diluter may be required) 


d) Dust: 200 to 400 particles/cc 
e) Pollen: 4 to 9 particles/cc 


B-2.3 Background Concentration 


This is the allowable level of pollutant concentration 
in the test section prior to the introduction of the test 
pollutant. Using the test section air treatment unit, 
allow the test section air to clean until the background 
concentration reaches a level below the values 
indicated: 


a) Formaldehyde: 10 ppbV 

b) Toluene: 10 ppbV 

c) Cigarette Smoke/salt aerosol: 20 particles/cc 
d) Dust: 0.03 particles/cc 

e) Pollen: 0.03 particles/cc 


B-2.4 Test Procedure for Calculating Natural Decay 


B-2.4.1 Keep the air purifier switched off and switch 
on the ceiling fan. The chamber air is circulated out 
by air dampner (M) through air filtration system or air 
treatment unit (K). The filtration system consists of 
prefilter (to remove coarser particles) and HEPA filter 
(to remove fine and ultrafine particles). Recirculation 
of chamber air should be continued from dampner (M) 
to filtration system (K) for sufficient period of time 
with constant monitoring of particle count and gas 
concentration till nominal background concentration 
(see B-2.3) is achieved. Record the background 
concentration. 


B-2.4.2 Turn off the filtration system (dampner, blower 
and HEPA filter), whereas the ceiling fan shall be kept 
operative. The test pollutant is now introduced in the 
test section. The ceiling fan circulates the pollutant 
uniformly throughout the room. Once the initial 
concentration of pollutant reaches the range prescribed 
in B-2.2, the inlet is closed. The ceiling fan is operated 
for one more minute and then switched off. 


After switching off the ceiling fan, begin to acquire the 
concentration after waiting time indicated in Table B-2. 
This value is the initial concentration and regarded as 
t = 0 in the calculations. If the initial concentration is 
not within the limits given in B-2.2, terminate the run. 


Acquire concentration data at 1 min intervals for the 
time indicated in Table B-2. Minimum number of data 
points listed in Table B-2 having concentrations greater 
than the lower limit of instrument measurability are 
required. 


Table B-2 Waiting Time, Test Duration and 
Minimum Number of Data Points 


Aerosol VOC Cigarette Dust Pollen 
Smoke/Salt 
Aerosol 
Waiting time“ (min) 1 3 1 1 
Test duration (min) 20 20 20 10 
Minimum number 9 9 9 5 


of data points 


“The waiting time before starting data acquisition starts to count as soon 
as the ceiling fan is switched off. 


B-2.4.3 Calculate the natural decay constant as per 
B-3.2. 


B-2.4.4 Calculate the standard deviation of the natural 
decay in accordance with B-3.3. A standard deviation 
of less than the 95 percent confidence limit of the 
values indicated in Table B-3 or 10 percent, whichever 
is greater, determines the acceptability of the run. 


Table B-3 Limit for the Standard Deviation to 
Determine the Acceptability of the Natural Decay 


Measurement 
Aerosol VOC Cigarette Dust Pollen 
Smoke/Salt 
Aerosol 
Limit for standard 0.001 0.002 0.001 0.009 


deviation (min!) 


B-2.5 Test Procedure for Calculating Total Decay 
(with Air Purifier) 


B-2.5.1 Repeat procedure given in B-2.4.1. 


B-2.5.2 Turn off the filtration system (dampner, blower 
and HEPA filter), whereas the ceiling fan shall be kept 
operative. The test pollutant is now introduced in the 
test section. The ceiling fan circulates the pollutant 
uniformly throughout the room. Once the initial 
concentration of pollutant reaches the range prescribed 
in B-2.2, the inlet is closed. The ceiling fan is operated 
for one more minute and then switched off. 


Wait for the waiting time indicated in Table B-2 and 
record the initial concentration (t = 0). Switch on the 
air purifier immediately after recording the initial 
concentration. Thereafter acquire concentration data 
at 1 min intervals for the time indicated in Table B-2. 
Minimum number of data points listed in Table B-2 
having concentrations greater than the lower limit 
of instrument measurability are required. Also, if the 
initial concentration is not within the limits given in 
B-2.2, terminate the run. 


B-2.5.3 Calculate the total decay constant as per B-3.2. 


B-2.5.4 Calculate the standard deviation of the total 
decay in accordance with B-3.3. A standard deviation 
of less than the 95 percent confidence limit of the 


values indicated in Table B-4 or 10 percent, whichever 
is greater, determines the acceptability of the run. 


Table B-4 Limit for the Standard Deviation to 
Determine the Acceptability of the Total Decay 


Measurement 
Aerosol VOC Cigarette Dust Pollen 
Smoke/Salt 
Limit for standard 0.003 0.008 0.003 0.0022 


deviation (min!) 


B-2.5.5 Determine CADR of the air purifier as per 
B-3.4. Convert the CADR to m*h"' units as per B-3.6. 


B-2.5.6 Calculate the standard deviation of the CADR 
in accordance with B-3.5. A standard deviation of 
less than the 95 percent confidence limit of the values 
indicated in Table B-5 or 10 percent, whichever is 
greater, determines the acceptability of the run. 


Table B-5 Limit for the Standard Deviation 
to Determine the Acceptability of the CADR 


Measurement 
Aerosol VOC Cigarette Dust Pollen 
Smoke/Salt 
Limit for standard 17 15 17 39 


deviation (min!) 
B-3 CALCULATION 


B-3.1 Criteria for Elimination of Data Points 


The data points recorded shall be eliminated if any of 
the following errors occur while recording data: 


a) Operator error, 
b) Equipment error, 


c) Data point outside 95 percent prediction limit of 
regression line calculated in B-3.3, and 


d) Data point lower than the LDL of measuring 
instrument. 
B-3.2 Calculating Natural and Total Decay Constant 
of Pollutant 


The decay constant, k, for the pollutant is based on the 
formula: 


Cece" (1) 
where 
C, = concentration at time t,; 
C,= initial concentration; 
k= decay constant (min !); and 
t = time (min). 
The decay constant is obtained by the linear regression 
of In C, and f, using the formula: 


kat eiii) 


IS 17531 : 2021 


where 


Sw =>," tne, (2e) NE) 
Sy =>." (4) ay NO) 


where 
n= no. of pairs of data points. 


If the above calculations are used for natural decay 
measurements, the results represent the natural decay 
rate. If the above calculations are used for the total 
decay measurements, the results represent the total 
decay rate. 


B-3.3 Calculation of Standard Deviation 


B-3.3.1 Standard Deviation of Regression Line 


Standard deviation about the regression line is 
calculated as follows: 


VN eee bm) …(5) 


where 
Ss — estimated value of overall standard deviation; 
n= number of pairs of data points used in the 
regression; 
b — intercept of the regression line; 
m= slope of regression line, min |; 
t = time, in minutes; and 
In C, — natural logarithm of concentration at time t.. 


B-3.3.2 Standard Deviation of Regression Line Slope 


The standard deviation of regression line slope is 
calculated as follows: 


PLNS ...(6) 
B-3.4 Calculation of CADR 
The equation for calculating CADR is given below: 
CADR = Wk - k) (7) 
where 
V= volume of test chamber (m°); 
ic 
k- 


n 


B-3.5 Calculation of Standard Deviation of CADR 


Scapr = 30\|(S yea y F (S ope zn y …(8) 


total decay constant (min !); and 


natural decay constant (min !). 


IS 17531 : 2021 


where 
Scape = Standard deviation of CADR, m?/min; 
NE standard deviation of total decay constant, 
min '; 
"T standard deviation of natural decay 
constant, min 1; and 
30 volume of test section, m°. 


B-3.6 Conversion to m?/h 


CADR (m?/h) = CADR (m?/min) x 60 ...(9) 
B-4 DETERMINATION OF THE LEAKAGE 
RATE OF THE TEST CHAMBER 


B-4.1 Tracer Gas 


Carbon dioxide (CO,) is regarded as the tracer gas. The 
decay constant of the tracer gas in the test section is 
measured, which yields the leakage rate. 


B-4.2 Sampling Point 


The sampling ports (H) indicated in Fig. B-1 and 
clause B-1.3 can be used. The sampling port shall be 
connected to a CO, measurement device outside of 
the test section. A continuous-reading measurement 
instrument shall be used. 


B-4.3 Test Section Conditioning 


Turn on the test section air treatment unit to reduce 
the background concentration of particulate matter 
(larger than 0.3 um in diameter) to a level below 
10° m^. Record the background concentration of CO, 
and start the temperature and humidity control device 
to set the temperature and relative humidity to the test 
section conditions specified in Table B-1. 


B-4.4 Tracer Gas Introduction 


Turn off the air treatment unit and turn on the ceiling 


fan. Turn on the tracer gas supply and introduce the 
gas into the test section. As soon as the concentration 
reaches a value greater than 4 000 ppm (parts per 
million), turn off the tracer gas supply and keep the 
ceiling fan on for another 10 min. After the tracer gas is 
completely mixed, turn off the ceiling fan. 

B-4.5 Initial Concentration 


Measure the initial concentration of the tracer gas CO,, 
taking the time ¢ = 0 in the later calculation. 
B-4.6 Data Sampling 


Record the concentration for at least 240 min. 


B-4.7 Decay of Tracer Gas 
Oee 


where 
C,= the concentration of CO, at the time 4 in ppm; 
C, = the initial concentration of CO, at the time 
t= 0 in ppm; 
k= the decay constant, inh !; and 
t= the time, in h. 


B-4.8 Decay Constant 


By linear regression of In C, as a function of f, the decay 
constant kis obtained by: 


i (£ nc, )- HE 


n 


t 


a4). 


izl! 


where 
i= the index of the individual sample; 
t,— the time of the i-th sample; and 
n= the total number of samples. 


ANNEX C 
(Clause 5.2 ) 
DETERMINATION OF ROOM SIZE 


C-1 The room size suitable for an air purifier is 
calculated considering steady state conditions in which 
theair purifier has the ability to reduce the concentration 
of cigarette smoke/salt aerosol in the size range of 
0.3 — 1.0 um to 80 perent of the original value. 


C-2 STEADY 
INDOOR 


STATE CONDITIONS IN 


Sources of contaminant: Indoor sources + outdoor 
sources. 


10 


Removal of contaminant: Ventilation + deposition + air 
purifier 


When no air purifier is working and the particle 
concentration is at steady state: 


Sources = Ventilation + deposition 
Sources = C (k, + k ) ...(10) 


where, k is decay constant due to ventilation and k, is 
decay constant due to deposition. 


C-3 Assuming that after the air purifier is turned ona 
new steady state is achieved where the concentration of 
particles reduced by 80 percent: 


Sources = 0.2C (k, +k, + kio) (11) 
C-4 Equating equations (10) and (11): 
C(k, +k) =0.2C (k + kit kio a (12) 
Rearranging: 
ke =4(k, +k) ...(13) 


Now, k, (total decay constant) and k, (natural decay 
constant) can be written as: 


k, =(k,+k) ...(14) 
k=(k +k, EO ...(15) 

Since, CADR = V (k, — k,), thus, 
CADR = Vk e =4V (k t k) ...(16) 


Assuming an average ceiling height of 2.5 m in Indian 
households and offices: 


IS 17531 : 2021 


CADR 


- 10(K, +k) 


If the user is using air purifier for protection from 
pollutants in outdoor air, the user will close doors and 
windows. In such conditions, the ventilation rate may 
range from 0.05 — 0.57 h`!. This situation also applies 
for winter season when doors and windows are kept 
closed to keep away wind and cold. 


4D 


However, when the source of pollution is indoors, 
for example, cooking fumes, incense stick, dust etc., 
and the windows are open, the ventilation rate may be 
1 h'! or higher. Hence, assuming an average air 
exchange rate for houses in India as k, = 0.6 h`! and 
the average deposition rate for cigarette smoke/salt is 
k, = 0.2 hr, the area of the room can be calculated as 
follows: 


A (m2) = 0.125 CADR (18) 


C-5 The above eguation can also be used to determine 
the required CADR value if the room size is known. 


ANNEX D 
( Clause 6.3 ) 
AEROSOL GENERATION 


D-1 SALT AEROSOL 


The salt aerosol shall consist of polydisperse 
solid-phase (dry) KCl particles generated from an 
aqueous KCl solution using a mass concentration of 
5 percent. Figure D-1 gives an example of a system for 
generating the aerosol. It consists of a small container 
with the aqueous KCI solution and a Laskin nozzle. 
The salt aerosol is generated by feeding compressed 
particle-free air through the Laskin nozzle. The 
aerosol leaving the atomizer shall be dried below the 
efflorescence humidity of KCI to ensure a solid-phase 
aerosol. The dried salt aerosol is introduced into the 
test chamber. Varying the operating air pressure of the 
generator allows control of the time to reach the initial 
concentration. 


NOTES 

1 An aqueous KCI solution with a mass concentration of 
5 percent corresponds to 52.6 g KCl per 1 | de-ionized water. 
2 A silica gel diffusion dryer is recommended for drying the 
salt aerosol. 

3 Short and electrically conductive tubes or hoses shall be used 
to minimize particle losses. 


11 


4 Any other generator capable of producing a salt aerosol in 
sufficient concentrations can be used, such as for example, 
collision nebulizers. 

L 


D-2 SMOKE AEROSOL 


Take one test cigarette from the humidity chamber 
maintaining a temperature of (25 + 2) °C and a relative 
humidity of (50 + 10) percent for the long-term storage. 
Light the cigarette and place it in the cigarette smoke 
generator. Seal the smoke generator and turn on 
(2.4 + 0.5) l/min air supply. 


D-3 POLLEN AEROSOL 


For generation ofpollen aerosol, a 60 ml screw-top glass 
laboratory sample jar is sealed air tight with nominal 
1/4 inch brass fittings for air entry and pollen discharge. 
Attach one of the pre-weighed paper mulberry pollen 
sample bottles to the pollen generator. To generate 
the aerosol, turn on the pollen generator air supply at 
137 kPa for 10 s. 


IS 17531 : 2021 


NN 


E 
ai 
d 


| 
| 
| 
|| 
| 
| 
zi 


Key 
1 Particle-free air inlet (pressure about 17 kPa) 
2 Aerosol outlet to test chamber 
3 Laskin nozzle 
4 Liquid test aerosol 
5 Four Ø 1.0 mm holes 90° apart top edge of holes and just touching the bottom of the collar 
6 Four Ø 2.0 mm holes next to tube in line with the Ø 1.0 mm holes 


Fic. D-1 SALT AEROSOL GENERATOR 


ANNEX E 
( Foreword ) 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
[1] IS 16753 (Part 1) High-Efficiency Filters and [4] IEC/PAS 62587 : 2008 Method for measuring 


Filter Media for Removing Particles in Air 
Part 1 Classification, Performance Testing and 
Marking. 


performance of portable household electric 
room air cleaners. 


[5] IEC/FDIS 63086-1 Household and similar 


[2] ANSUAHAM AC-1 2015 Method for electrical air cleaning appliances — 
measuring performance of portable household Measurement of performance — Part 1: 
electric room air cleaners. General requirements. 

[3] NF B44-200 2016 Independent air [6] Draft IEC 63086-2-1 Household and similar 


purification devices for tertiary sector and 
residential applications — Test methods — 
Intrinsic performances. 


12 


electrical air cleaning appliances — Methods 
for measuring the performance. 


[7] GB/T 18801 : 2015 Air Cleaner. 


IS 17531 : 2021 


ANNEX F 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE MEMBERS AND EXPERTS RESPONSIBLE FOR 
DEVELOPMENT OF STANDARD 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Air Quality Sectional Committee, CHD 35 


Organization 


In personal capacity 


Avantha Centre for Industrial Research and 
Development, Yamuna Nagar 


Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 


Central Institute of Mining and Fuel Research, 
Dhanbad 


Central Pollution Control Board, New Delhi 
Confederation of Indian Industry, New Delhi 


Delhi Technological University, New Delhi 


Director General, Factory Advice Service & Labour 
Institute, Mumbai 


Ecotech Instruments, Greater Noida 


Envirotech Instruments Pvt Ltd 


Gujarat Pollution Control Board, Gandhinagar 
Green Economy Initiatives Pvt Ltd, Mohali 

In personal capacity 

In personal capacity 


Indian Chemical Council, Mumbai 


Indian Institute of Toxicology Research, Lucknow 
Maharashtra State Pollution Control Board 


National Environmental Engineering Research 
Institute, Delhi Centre 


National Council for Cement and Building Materials, 
Ballabhgarh 


National Physical Laboratory, New Delhi 


NTPC Ltd, New Delhi 


Sriram Institute for Industrial Research, New Delhi 


Representative(s) 


Dr (Mrs) Gauri G. PANDIT (Chairman) 


Dr Nisui KANT BHARDWAJ 
Dr Suni Kumar (Alternate) 


Dr A. VINOD KUMAR 
Dn S. K. Sanu (Alternate) 


Dr R. C. TRIPATHI 
Dn N. K. Srivastava (Alternate) 


Suri V. K. SHUKLA 
Dn R. C. Srivastava (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI SEEMA ARORA 
Dr NANDINI Kumar (Alternate) 


Dr ANUBHA MANDAL 


Dr Brij MOHAN 
Ms DHANASHREE ACHREKAR (Alternate) 


Dr RAJENDRA PRASAD 


Dr BALBIR SINGH 
SHRI ASHISH Gupta (Alternate) 
Dr D. N. VANSADIA 
Dn R. S. SAINI 
SHRI SANJIB KU GOSWAMI 
Dn S. K. TYAGI 
Dn RAKESH KUMAR 
Dn Pranav K. Tripatut (Alternate I) 
SHRI J. I. Sevak (Alternate IT) 
Dr S. C. BARMAN 
Dn A. R. SUPATE 
Dn V. R. THAKUR (Alternate) 


Dn S. K. GOYAL 
Dn P. K. LABHASETWAR (Alternate I) 
Dr Smita AGGARWAL (Alternate II) 


Suri M. SELVARAJAN 
SHRI ANAND Borna (Alternate) 


DR SHANKAR AGARWAL 
Dr CHHEMENDRA SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI V. Ravi BABU 
SHRI SUDHIR Daurva (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJNEESH KU SHARMA 
SHRI AMIT BHADOURIA (Alternate) 


IS 17531 : 2021 


Organization 


The Fertilizer Association of India, New Delhi 


UNIPHOS Envirotronics Pvt Ltd 
Blueair 


Sharp 


Godrej & Boyce Manufacturing Co Ltd 
Dyson 


Hitachi 
Panasonic 


Daikin 
Air OK 


Samsung India Electronic Pvt, Ltd 
Anchor Heating and Air Co 
Amway 

Bluestar Ltd 

Environment Management Centre 
JNU, Delhi 

BIS Director General 


Representative(s) 


SHRI MANISH GOSWAMI 


SHRI VIJAY PANDEY 
Dn R. C. Naik (Alternate) 


SHRI SURAJIT GOGOI 
SHRI ALAGIRI SAMY (Alternate) 


SHRI KIsHALAY RAY 
MR CHIYODA Yuk! (Alternate I) 
SHRI SHUVENDU MAZUMDAR (Alternate II) 


SHRI SUHAS KULKARNI 


SHRI ANIRUDH PAWA 
SHRI SHEIKH FARIDI (Alternate) 


MR Icuro [war 
SHRI RAJESH TIWARI (Alternate) 


SHRI ANIL MEHTA 
SHRI SACHIN ASWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI Ravi TANEJA 


SHRI PAVAN REDDY 
SHRI DIKIT VARAPRASAD (Alternate) 


SHRI SAURABH NAG 

SHRI RAJASHEKHAR REDDY 
SHRI ABHINAV SRIVASTAVA 
SHRI JIGAR PATEL 

Dr PRASAD MODAK 


DR ARUN SRIVASTAVA 


SHRI U. K. Das, SCIENTIST ---- AND HEAD (CHD) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


Ms KREETI Das 
Scientist ‘B’ (CHD), BIS 


14 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CHD 35 (13817). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 CIT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


