**************** 



-k t^^ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 6124 (1971) : Method for Determination of Crimp in Wool 
[TXD 1: Physical Methods of Tests] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS: 6124. 1971 

(Reaffirmed 2000) 

Indian Standard 

METHOD FOR 
DETERMINATION OF C^IMP IN WOOL 

UDG 677-31 r 677-014-886 




® Copyright 1971 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI I 

^ce Rs 2-00 October 1971 



Gt a 



18:6124-1971 

Indian Standard 

METHOD FOR 
DETERMINATION OF CRIMP IN WOOL 

Physical Methods of Test Sectional Gommittee, TDC 1 

Chairman Representing 

Dr T. Radhakrishnan Indian Jute Industries' Research Association, 

Calcutta 

Vice-Chairman 
Dr V. SuNDARAM Cotton Technological Research Laboratory ( IGAR ), 

Bombay 

Members 

Dr B. L. Banerjee ( Alternate to 

Dr T. Radhakrishnan ) 
Dr V. G. MuNSHi ( Alternate to 
Dr V. Sundaram ) 
Shri T. V. Ananthan The Bombay Textile Research Association, Bombay 

Shri G. D. Bhogale Department of Agriculture ( Ministry of Food, 

Agriculture, Community Development & 
Co-operation ) 
Shri T. S. Chandrasekhariah Government of Mysore 

Shri K. K. Chatterjee Office of the Jute Commissioner, Calcutta 

Dr D. B. Das Indian Jute Mills Association, Calcutta 

Shri I. B. Dutt Office of the Textile Commissioner, Bombay 

Shri P. N. Maitra ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. R. S. GopalchaR Central Silk Board, Bombay 

Dr B. V. Iyer Ahmedabad Textile Industries' Research Association, 

Ahmedabad 
Shri B. R. Shelat ( Alternate) 
Shri N. C. Jain Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Shri P. B. Mehta ( Alternate ) 
Dr Jai Prakash Textiles Committee, Bombay 

Smt a. Kaplash The Silk and Art Silk Mills' Research Association, 

Bombay 
Shri S. P. Mullick National Test House, Calcutta 

Dr G. N. K. Murthy Ministry of Defence (R&D) 

Lt-Col O. p. Bakshi ( Alternate) 
Shri I. L. Patel Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals 

( Inspection Wing ) 
Shri A. K. Pramanick ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. P. Ramakrishna Pillay The South India Textile Research Association, 

Coimbatore 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARC 
NEW DELHI 1 



IS: 6124 -1971 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri H, Sahasranaman The Millowners* Association, Bombay 

Shri a. D. Sule Wool Research Association, Bombay 

Shri G. R. Kulkarni ( Alternate) 
Dr S. I. Taraporewala The National Rayon Corporation Ltd, Bombay 

Shri D. S. Nadkarni ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. G. Thanawala M. Best Cotton Rope Mfg Go, Bombay 

Shri S, M. Chakraborty, Director General, ISI ( Ex^officio Member ) 

Director (Tex) 

Secretary 

Shri D. R. Kohli 

Assistant Director ( Tex ), ISI 

Subcommittee for Physical Methods of Test for Wool, TDC 1 ; 2 

Members 

Shri G. D. Bhogale Department of Agriculture ( Ministry of Food, 

Agriculture, Gonununity Development & 
Co-operation ) 
Shri A. N. Mukerjee Ministry of Defence (R&D) 

Shri P. K. Minocha ( Alternate ) 
Shri I, L. Patel Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals 

( Inspection Wing ) 
Shri B. P. Sengupta ( Alternate ) 
Shri J. M. Patel Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Shri S. P. Kapoor ( Alternate ) 
Shri Parmanand Issardas Phatnani The All India Wool Trade Federation, Bombay 
Shri A, D. Sule Indian Woollen Mills Federation, Bombay; and 

Wool Research Association, Bombay 
Shri G. R» Kulkarni ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. R. Yeri Government of Maharashtra 



IS: 6124 -1971 

Indian Standard 

METHOD FOR 
DETERMINATION OF CRIMP IN WOOL 

0. FOREWORD 

0#1 This standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 
17 May 1971, after the draft finahzed by the Physical Methods of Test 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textile Division Council, 

0.2 The ' waves ' or ^ curls ' present in wool fibre are called ' crimp '. 
Uniformity and abundance of crimp are the indices of good quality wool. 
Usually the crimp is assessed either by counting the number of * waves ' or 
' curls ^ present in the fibre and expressing it as the number of waves ' or 
'curls' per unit length or by measuring the difference in length of fibre 
between its unstretched and stretched condition and expressing it as a 
percentage of the fibre length in the unstretched condition. Because the 
Indian wools do not possess well defined ' waves ' or ' curls ', this method 
adopted in this standard is based on the later principle. The assessment 
of crimp, in wool fibre, is generally helpful to the sheep-breeder to judge 
the eflfects of pasture and cross-breeding on the quality of wool. Also, the 
evaluation of crimp in wool fibre is essential for the purpose of grading 
wool on a rational and scientific basis. 

0.3 In reporting the result of a test, in accordance with this standard, if 
the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be 
done in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard prescribes a method for determination of crimp in wool 
fibres obtained from the bales, bags, heaps or fleece. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.0 For the purpose of this standard the following definitions shall apply 
and for other terms reference to IS : 232-1 967t be made. 



♦Rules for roiuiding off numerical values ( revised). 
■[■Glossary of textile terms — natural fibres {first revision). 



IS: 6124* 1971 

2.1 Grixnii^ The natural waviness of wool fibre; it is expressed numeri- 
cally by the difference, in length of the fibre between its unstretched and 
stretched condition expressed as a percentage of the lengtii of fibre in 
unstretched condition. 

2.2 Tuft — A bunch of wool fibre sheared from the fleece or drawn from 
the sample, 

3. SAMPLING 

3.1 Test sample to determine the crimp in wool fibre in a lot shall be 
selected so as to be representative of the lot. 

3.2 Test sample drawn in compliance with an agreement between the 
buyer and the seller or as stipulated in the material specification shall be 
held to be representative of the lot» 

4. PREPARATION OF TEST SAMPLES 

4.1 The gross sample drawn shall be thoroughly mixed. It shall then be 
spread out on a table in the form of an uniformly thick layer and divided 
in 16 zones. A tuft of about 100 to 200 g (depending on the quality of 
wool ) shall be taken from each zone without disturbing the lock formation 
as far as possible, 

4.2 Each tuft shall be divided into 2 approximately equal parts, taking 
care to avoid breaking of the fibres and one of the parts shall be discarded 
in each case. The other portion shall be again divided into 2 parts and 
one part of it again rejected. This process shall be repeated till about 
50 fibres remain in each retained part. All the retained parts of fibre taken 
together shall constitute the test sample. The other parts which are to 
be discarded shall be collected together to constitute a duplicate test 
sample. 

5. ATMOSPHERIC CONDITIONS FOR CONDITIONING AND 
TESTING 

5.1 Prior to test, the test sample shall be conditioned to moisture 
equilibrium from dry side in the standard atmosphere of 65 ±2 percent 
relative humidity and 27±2°G temperature ( see also IS : 196-1966*). 

Note — When the test samples have been exposed to standard atmosphere for at 
least 24 hours, in such a way as to expose as far as possible all portions of the samples 
to the atmosphere they shall be deemed to have reached mobture equilibrium. 

5.2 The test shall be carried out in a standard atmosphere ( see 5.1 ). 



•Atmospheric conditions for testing ( revised), 

4 



IS: 6124. 1971 

6. APPARATUS 

6.1 For the purpose of this test, the following apparatus will be used: 

a) Velvet Board — of black or any other contrasting colour; 

b) Flat Transparent Scale — graduated in centimetres and millimetres, 
and 

c) Two Pairs of Forceps. 

7. PROCEDURE 

7.1 From the conditioned sample draw at random at least 300 fibres. 
From these fibres take one fibre and lay it straight without stretching, 
on a velvet board. Place the scale over the fibre without disturbing it. 
Measure the unstretched length L correct to nearest millimetre, from end 
to end of the fibre. Take the same fibre and straighten it out by means of 
the pairs of forceps, taking care not to stretch it but merely to remove its 
crimp. Place it on the velvet board and measure straightened length L^^ 
to nearest millimetre from end to end of the fibre as above. 

7.2 Similarly determine the unstretched and stretched lengths of the 
remaining fibres, making a total of 300 observations. 

8. CALCULATIONS 

8tl Calculate the crimp of each fibre by the following formula: 

Crimp, percent = — ~ — X 100 

where 

£j^= stretched length of fibre, and 

L — unstretched length of the same fibre. 

8.2 Calculate the mean crimp percentage, the standard deviation, the 
co-efficient of variation and the standard error of the mean of all the 
observed values. 

8.3 If the standard error of the mean so calculated is less than 5 percent 
the mean crimp obtained as in 8.2 shall be reported and if the standard 
error of the mean so calculated is equal to or more than 5 percent, 
determine the number of fibres required to make test at 5 percent level of 
significance, and test them following the procedure given in 7.1. 

8.3.1 Calculate again, the mean crimp percentage and report. 

5 



IS: 6124- 1971 

9. REPORT 

9»1 The report shall include the following information: 

a) Type of material, 

b) Crimp, 

c) Standard deviation, 

d) Co-efficient of variation, 

e) Standard error of mean, and 

f) Number of observations. 



