(Reaffirmed 2003)

18 : 1999 - 1987

Indian Standard
METHODS (
Methods
Chairman Di: K. G. RAMAMURTHY Members SHRI R. J. PANDEY ( Alternate to Dr K. G. Ramamurthy ) Bharat Steel Tubes Ltd, Ganaur SHRI R. K. ABROL SHW K. J. SIN~H ARORA ( Alternate ) Steel Authority of India Ltd ( Durgapur Steel SRRI J. BANERJEE Plant ), Durgapur SHRI S. S. BISWAS ( Alternate ) Tata Iron and Steel Co Ltd, Jamshedpur SHRI M. G. BHADE SHRI S. NOOR ( Alternate ) Steekci;;prity of India Ltd ( Bhilai Steel Plant ), SIIRI M. B. BRADURI SHRI M. L. GUPTA ( Alternate ) Indian Iron & Steel Co Ltd, Burnpur DR M. M. CHAERABORTY SHRI PIZABHAT DEAR ( Alternate ) Ministry of Railways, Lucknow CHEMIST & M~TALLURCIST Indian Bureau of Mines, Nagpur CONTROLLER GENERAL I SHRI M. L. SINGHAL ( Alternate ) Chowgule and Co Pvt Ltd, Goa SI~RI N. B. GUDE Ferro Alloys Corporation,Ltd, Shreeramnagar SHRI C. N. H~I~MAN SHRT G. RA JA RAO ( Alternate ) Italab Private Ltd, Bombay SIIKI S. S. HONAVA~ SARI AI. V. DABHOLKAR ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals, SIIRI V. B. KHANHA New Delhi Bharat Aluminium Co Ltd, New Delhi SHRI C. N. KOYAL SHRI C. S. SASTRI ( Alternate ) Steel Authority of India Ltd ( Rourkela Steel SHRI S. G. MANDAL Plant ), Rourkela Mitra S. K. Private Ltd, Calcutta SHRI hf. N. M~TRA SHRI R. N. BANERJEE ( Alternate ) Therapeutics Chemical Research Corporation, SHRI B. R. P-&TEL Bombay SRRI A. Y. PITRE ( Alternate ) ( Continued on page 2 )

OF SAMPLING

BAUXITE

First Revision)
Sectional Committee,
Representing Indian Statistical Institute, Calcutta

of Sampling

SMDC

4

BUREAU

OF INDIAN

@

Copyright 1987 STANDARDS

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part bv any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 1999 - 1987
( Continued from page 1 ) Members DR PREM NARAIN Representing Indian Agricultural New Delhi Statistics Research Imtitute,

DR K. G. ANEJA ( Alternate ) National Test House, Calcutta SHRI M. RAI Essen & Co, Bangalore DR J. RAJARAM SHRI K. N. GURURAJACHAR ( Alternate ) Central Statistical Organization, New Delhi SHRI T. R. RAMAKRISHNA SHRI K. SUNDAR~JAN ( Alternate ) Steel Authority of India Ltd ( R&D Centre ), Ranchi DR M. RANQARAO Hindustan Zinc Ltd, Udaipur DR B. R. L. ROW SHRI A. K. BAJ.~J ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Inspection ( Ministry of SHRI P. M. SENWJPTA Defence ), New Delhi SHRI T. K. BHATTACHARJEE ( Alternate ) Government of India Mint ( Ministry of Finance ) SHRI J. R. SIL Steel Authority of India Ltd ( Bokaro Steel Plant ), SHRI B. D. SINQH Bokaro SHRI R. P. SINQH ( Afternate ) Director General, BIS ( Ex-o#cio Member ) SHRI G. w. DATEY, Director ( Stat )

Secretary SRRI N. SANKAR Joint Director ( Stat ), BIS

Subcommittee
Members

on Sampling of Ores, SMDC

4 : 3

Indian Aluminium Co Ltd, Calcutta SHRI P. K. BASU SARI M. M. DEB SHARMA ( Alternate ) Bhilai Isoat Ltd. Bhilai SRRI M. B. BHADURI SHRIM. L. GUPTA ( Alternate ) A R. V. Briggs & Co Pvt Ltd, Calcutta SHRI A. BISWAS SHRI K. P. DE (Alternate ) Indian Iron & Steel Co Ltd, Burnpur DR M. M. CHAI~RARORTY SRRI PRABHAT DHAR ( Alternate )
SHRI N. CHA~RABARTY National Metallurgical

Indian Bureau of Mines, Nagpur CONTROLLER GENERAL SHRI M. L. SINGHAL ( Alternate ) Chowgule & Co Pvt Ltd, Goa SHR~ N. B. GUDE Perro Alloys Corporation Ltd, Shreeramnagar SHRI C. N. HARMAN SHRI G. RAJA RAO ( Alternate ) Italab Pvt Ltd, Bombay SRRI S. S. HONAVAR SHRI M. V. DARBOLRAR ( Alternate I ) SHRI J. C. DEY ( Alternate II )

Jamshedpur SHRI D. M. CBAKRABARTI ( Alternate ) Export Inspection Council of India, Calcutta SHRI S. S. CROPRA SHHI KARAM CHAND ( Alternate )

Laboratory

(CSIR

),

( Continued on page 15 )

2

IS : 1999 - 1987

Indian Standard
METHODS OF SAMPLING BAUXITE (

First Revision)
FOREWORD

0.

0.1 This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 10 March 1987, after the draft finalized by the Methods of Sampling Sectional Committee had been approved by the Structural and Metals Division Council. 0.2 This standard was originally issued in 1962 based on the sampling methods prevailing at that time in the country. Since then, a lot of developments have taken place in the industry and at present, bauxite is considered to be one of the leading metallic ores available in the country. Subsequent to increased availability of this ore, a number of aluminium based industries have been established in different parts of the country. Consequently, the accuracy of sampling and estimation of physical and chemical properties of aluminium ores has acquired a lot of significance. The tonnage handled at a time has gone up, thanks to the fast mode of transport and handled of bauxite. Further, handling operations have been mechanized in a number of plants and hence, the sampling methods have also to be tuned to this change. 0.3 In the present revision, lot sizes beyond one lakh tonnes have also been covered and correspondingly the number of sub-lots. for a lot have been increased. Since currently, only lumps ( up to 150 mm ) is widely used in the industry, the two categories `run-of-mine' as well as `srnal1 Point sampling has been excluded in the size' have been deleted. current revision since it may lead to large amount of bias. the latest developments in bauxite 0.4 Taking into consideration industry at national and international level.,c a number of clauses have been modified. 0.5 The present revision does not deal with mechanical sampling methods. However, it deals with situations when the ores are handled mechanically. Sampling for exploratory purpose has also not been covered in this standard. 3

IS:1999-1987 0.6 In reporting
the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960".

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard prescribes the methods for sampling of bauxite from conveyors, wagons, stockpiles and also from ship consignments. Methods for sample preparation for determining chemica1 characteristics and moisture content, as well as estimation of size distribution have been given in detail. 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose of this standard,
2.1 the following definitions shall apply.

Lump -

Ores consisting

of all sizes up to 150 mm. to be of the same A lot may consist of which the

quantity of bauxite indicated 2.2 Lot - The category and offered for inspection at one time. the whole or a part of the quantity transacted for. - The quantity 2.3 Sub-lot lot is divided for the purpose of ore in each of sampling.

of the parts into

2.4 Increment - The quantity of ore obtained at one time from a lot or a sub-lot. 2.5 Unit Sample sectional sampling

by a sampling at one

device point in

- The quantity of ore collected or at one time from conveyors.

2.6 Gross Sample - Sample as collected quantity of ore consisting of one or several from a sub-lot.

from' a sub-lot, that is, the increments/unit samples taken

2.7 Laboratory Sample ( Sub-lot ) - The quantity of ore obtained by reducing a gross sample following a specified procedure and intended for laboratory testing to estimate the quality of the sub-lot. 2.8 Composite Sample ( for the lot ) - The quantity of ore obtained by mixing together equal quantities of ores from each of the sub-lot laboratory samples. When sub-lots vary considerably in mass, the quantities of laboratory samples proportionate to the weight of' the sublot may be takefi and mixed.
NOTE -Whenever preparation of sub-lot laboratory composite sample for the lot can be prepared by --IO mm stage in proportion to the sub-lot tonnages. *Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). sample mixing is not required, the the gross samples at

4

IS : 1999 - 1987
2.9 Moisture Sample - A sample to be used exclusively purpose of determining moisture content of the sub-lot. 2.10 Size Sample - A sample taken distribution of the lot or sub-lot. 3. GENERAL PROCEDURE FOR for the determination for the size

of the

SAMPLING

3.0 Even though the sampling procedures may differ from situation to situation, there are certain basic principles underlying the sampling procedures given in this standard. 3.1 Sub-lots - Whenever a consignment is offered for sampling, it has to be ensured that it satisfies the requirements for homogeneous lot. For instance, if a consignment is to consist of ores from different sources or from different shipments, it is only proper to divide the consignment Once a lot is into corresponding lots and then sample them separately. decided for the purpose of sampling, it shall be divided into a number The minimum number of of sub-lots of approximately equal masses. sub-lots for each range of lot tonnages is given in Table 1. Many times, practical situations may demand sub-lots of unequal tonnages or in formation of more sub-lots than prescribed in Table 1. For instance, case of sampling cf bauxite from unorganized mines, with considerable heterogeneity of ore, more number of sub-lots may have to be formed of than given in Table 1. It has to be borne in mind that a division sub-lots is mainly to facilitate drawing representative samples and also to take care of time factor in sampling.

TABLE MASS OF THE LOT TONNES

1 NUMBER
IN

OF SUB-LOTS MIIWWJM NUMBER OF SUB-LOTS 2 3 4 5 6 8 10 12 14 16

up to
5 001 to 10 001 to 15 001 to 25 001 to 35 001 to 45 001 to 60 001 to

5 000 10 000 15 000 25 000 35 000 45 000 60 000 75 000

75 001 to 100 000 100 001 and above

5

IS : 1999- 1987 3.2 The number of increments/unit samples to be drawn from each subThese lot depends on the mass of sub-lot and shall be as in Table 2. increments/unit samples shall be evenly distributed over the sub-lot. The increments shall be drawn with the help of sampling SCOOP as in These grabs or Fig. 1 or sampling baskets or grabs handled manually. baskets shall be constructed in such a way as to withstand the impact of ores.
TABLE 2 NUMBER OF INCREMENTS INCREMENTS 8 kg (3) 100 150 200 (4) 16 24 32 AND UNIT SAMPLES

MASSOF THESUB-LOT ( IN TONNES) (1) up to 2 500 2 501 to 5 000 5 001 and above

NUMBEROP c_---.A--_-~ 25 kg (2) 32 48 64

NUMBER 09 UNIT SAMPLES ( MINIMUX MASS 50 kg )

.Normal

Capacity

of scoop 8 kg ,
25 kg

A 200 350

B
200 350

c
100 150

D 175 300

E
I---

F
-h_--

G

I15 200

optional
optional

FIG. 1

SAMPLING SCOOP

3.3 Gross sample relating to respective sub-lots shall be processed separately for the purpose of preparation of moisture/laboratory samples. Normally gross samples shall not be mixed prior to the stage of -10 mm.

6

IS : 1999 - 1987 4. SAMPLING 4.1 Sampling METHODS from the Conveyors

4.1.1 Stopped Belt Method - When bauxite is moved on conveyors, one of the most reliable method of manual sampling is stopped belt method. Whenever it is practicable to stop the conveyor belt periodically, a large quantity of bauxite known as unit sample may be drawn by stopping The mass of different unit samples shall not be less than the belt. 50 kg and shall be collected from the full width and thickness of the If the mass of unit ores stream over a suitable length of the conveyor. sample is substantially higher! the number of unit samples to be drawn from a sub-lot shall be adjusted to satisfy the gross samples mass as in Table 2; but in any case the number of unit samples shall not be less than 10. the bauxite constituting a 4.1.2 Sample from Conveyor Stream - While the number of unit samples as in sub-lot is moving on the conveyor, Table 2 shall be collected at regular mass intervals during the whole period required to discharge the ore in the sub-lot. These unit samples shall be collected at the discharge end of the belt or at a transfer point by a suitable mechanical device such as trolley or cutter type arrangement or by sampling scoop. The mass of each unit sample shall be not less than 50 kg and for this purpose the speed as well as the aperture of The coefficient of variation of the cutter shall be suitably adjusted. Collection of increments increment mass shall not exceed 20 percent. or unit samples directly from the moving belt shall be avoided even when the speed of the conveyor belt is low. 4.2 Sampling During Loading or Unloading Wagons 4.2.1 Sub-lots - For the purpose of sampling, the ore in a lot shall be divided into a suitable number of sub-lots of approximately equal mass in in accordance with the requirements of Table 1. I'f a lot is received terms of a number of rakes of wagons, each rake may be treated as a sub-lot for the purpose of sampling even though this may mean unequal mass of sub-lot. 4.2.2 A representative gross sample shall be drawn from each of the sub-lots and these gross samples shall be kept separately. Thus there will be as many samples as the number of sub-lots into which a lot has been divided. 4.2.3 In order to get a representative gross sample, the bauxite shalI be sampled as far as possible in a steady motion during loading or unloading of the wagons. 4.2.4 A minimum of 25 percent of the wagons shall be selected at random from the sub-lot. The selection of wagons shall be done by random sampling ( see IS : .4905-1969* ). The number of increments to be taken from the selected wagons in the sub-lot and the mass of
*Methods of random sampling.

7

IS : 1999 - 1987
increment shall be in accordance with Table 2. The increments shall be evenly distributed over the selected wagons. These shall be drawn with the help of grabs, baskets or sampling scoop operated either manually or with mechanical assistance. 4.3 Sampling from Stockpiles

of bauxite 4.3.1 Sub-lots - For the purpose of sampling the quantity on a stockpile shall be divided into a number of sub-lots of approxigross sample shall mately equal mass as in Table 1. The representative drawn from,each of the sub-lots and shall be kept separately. 4.3.2 Sampling of ore from stockpiles shall be carried out as far as possible when the ore is in motion, that is, during the making or dismantling of the stockpiles. 4.3.3 The number of increments to be taken from different sub-lots shall be governed by the mass of the sub-lot as specified in Table 2. This number shall be equally distributed over the sub-Iot. The increments shall be drawn with the help of a suitable sampling scoop. 4.3.4 When it becomes necessary to sample a stationary stockpile sectional sampling method or trench sampling method may be used for a stockpile up to a maximum height of 1.5 metre only. of unit samples Sectional Sampling - By this method, a number 2 shail be collected from each sub-lot. For this purpose, the requisite number of points shall be chosen at random on the entire surface of the stockpiles. At each of the selected points, a circle of suitable diameter ( minimum three times the largest particle size ) shall be marked. The material over the area of this circle and along entire height of the stockpile from top to bottom shall be collected in stages. This can be done by taking initially ores up to a depth of 50 cm and covering the hole so formed by a plate for removing the ores lying on the sides of the hole, Then after removing the plate further depth can be reached in the same manner and the ores can be collected from the freshly formed hole.

as in Table

4.3.5

4.3.6 Trench S&mpling - The gross sample number of increments as specified in Table be collected as indicated below:

shall be made up of the 2. These increments shall

Along a randomly chosen line on the ore surface of the sub-lot a trench shall be dug, right down to the ground level leaving about 0.5 to 1 .O m walking space at the ground level. From the trenches so dug, the required number of increment shall be collected with the help of suitable sampling scoop at various points randomly In case of large spread over the two exposed sides of the renches. stockpiles, in addition to the trench, the sides of the piles may also be opened to expose the ore down to the bottom, at the places where the trench does not expose the ore inside.

8

IS:1999 - 1987 4.4 Sampling From Ship's Holds During Unloading

4.4.1 The quantity of bauxite in the ship's hold constituting a lot shall be ascertained and then this lot rhall be divided into a number of sublots of approximately equal mass as in Table 1. As the unloading operation of a ship m&y be spread over a number of days, the sub-lots will have to be necessarily based on mass interval.
4.4.2 The method of drawing samples of bauxite from the ship's hold will depend qn the method of unloading, namely, by conveyor belt, by The appropriate sampling procedures, loading wagons or stock piling. as given in 4.1 to 4.3 shall be adopted for collection of increments/unit satiples. 4.4.3 All the increments/unit samples collected from the same sub-lots shall be mixed together to constitute a gross sample for the sub-lot. Thus, there will be as many gross samples as the number of sub-lots into which the consignment of bauxite in the ship hold has been divided. 5. SIZE DETERMINATION

OF BAUXITE
of bauxite

5.1 In the absence
shall normally a) Over c) Over d) Below

of any agreement, the size determination be estimated for the following size ranges: 150 mm; 50 mm; and

150 mm; 10 mm, 10 mm. IS Sieves of suitable aperture size as 1 )-1985* and IS : 460 ( Part 2 )-19857 shall up to and including

b) Over 50 mm, up to and including

5.2 For size determination, specified in IS : 460 ( Part be used.

5.3 Each gross sample shall be screened through selected IS Sieves and the ore retained on each of the sieves and that passing through the smallest sieve shall be weighed separately. If, for a particular size are the mass of size fractions corresponding to the range, A, al, a2,. . . . ..a size range A and ml,m2, mk are the corresponding mass of the ore in the k gross samples, then the percentage mass for the size range A is estimated. al + a2 ml $- ??Zg Similarly, other size fr&tions + ak f
mk

x

100

for the lot shall be estimated. correct to one decimal place.

The size fractions

shall be estimated

*Wire cloth test sieves ( third revision ). tperforated plate test sieves ( third revision ). 9

IS : 1999 - 1987
6. REDUCTION OF A GROSS SAMPLE

6.1 Each gross sample shall be reduced separately. For this purpose, all those portions of ore above 10 mm in a gross sample shall be crushed separately to below 10 mm with a jaw crusher or a roll crusher. This crushed ore shall be thoroughly mixed and proportionate quantities from size groups above 10 mm and below 10 mm shall be taken to obtain 50 kg of the gross sample. For obtaining this quantity, mechanical devices may be used for reducing the gross samples to the required masses. Once the 50 kg divided sample of size -10 mm is obtained, it shall be further processed to obtain moisture sample and laboratory sample as given in Fig. 1. For dividing ores > 10 mm size, riffle division shall preferably be adopted. 6.2 Reduction by Coning and Quartering Method

6.2.1 The crushed ore shall be well mixed and then scooped into a cone-shaped pile. Care shall be taken to drop each scoopful exactly over the same spot as otherwise the central axis of the cone will be slackened and an uneven distribution of lumps and fines will result. After the cone is formed, it shall be tiattened by pressing the top of the cone with the smooth surface of the scoop. Then it is cut into quarters by two lines which intersect at right angles at the centre of the cone. The bulk of the sample is reduced by rejecting any two diagonally opposite quarters. 6.3 Increment Reduction Method

6.3.1 The crushed ore shall be spread on a smooth non-moisture absorbing plate into a uniform flat rectangle with the thickness specified in Table 3. The rectangle so formed shall be divided into 5 equal parts lengthwise and 4 equal parts breadthwise. From each of the 20 parts so obtained, equal quantities of ore shall be collected by the use of suitable scoop once or more number of times depending on the quantity of divided sample. 6.4 Moisture Samples - Each gross sample, after size determination, shall be reduced separately. Ores of sizes greater than 10 mm for the gross sample shall be first crushed in jaw crusher, roll crusher or by manual labour using hammer, pounder and a manganese steel plate till the entire quantity of the ore is reduced to -10 mm size. This shall be mixed well and reduced to two parts of 25 kg each as shown in Fig. 1. One part of the divided sample of 25 kg shall be processed for the preparation of laboratory samples and from the other part, duplicate moisture samples of 1 kg each shall be drawn by the method of increment reduction. If necessary, provisions may also be made to have one more set of duplicate moisture samples, in case the first set does not provide precise result. 10

IS :1999

-1987

TABLE

3

THICKNESS OF THE LAYERS AND QUANTITIES COLLECTED FROM EACH PART ( Clause 6.3.1 )

TO BE

MAXIMUMSIZE OFORE (1) mm 10 475 1'70 0.85 0.15

THICKNESS LAYER (2) mm 30 to 40 25 to 35 15 to 25 lOto 5to 10

OF

APPROXIMATE QUANTITY FROMEACHPART (3) g 250 160 40 25 5

6.5 Laboratory Samples - The laboratory samples shall be obtained after the sample is pulverized to pass through 125 micron IS Sieve. The material so obtained shall be divided into three or more parts as requested by the purchaser, the supplier, the referee and also to provide material for a composite sample for the lot. All the laboratory samples shall be preserved in dry, clean and well stoppered containers and labelled with full identifications, like source and category of the ores, supplier's name, date of sampling, the lot and sub-lot numbers and any other relevant detail.

11

IS : 1999 - 1987 Gross Sample

4 Size Determination 4 to -10 mm 4 Mixing and Reduction to 50 kg 4 ~_____~~~~~~~~~~~-~~~~ Crushed 4 25 kg reduced sample 25 kg reduced 4 sample

Crushed to pass through 4.75 mm IS Sieve

Mixing 6.2 kg

and reduction

I + I

Duplicate moisture samples of 1 kg each by increment reduction to

&

Crushed tzpass through 1.70 mm IS Sieve Mixing 3.1 kg and reduction

4

to

4 Crushed to pass through 850 micron IS Sieve Mixing 1.6 kgan: reduction to

& Pulverized to pass through 125 micron IS Sieve ( Laboratory sample for chemical analysis ) FIG. 2 7. NUMBER STAGESIN REDUCING A GROSS SAMPLE

OF TESTS

representing a sub7.1 Moisture Sample - For each gross sample If duplicate lot, a set of duplicate moisture samples shall be tested. samples do not meet the permissible tolerance limits as in 8.1, another set of duplicate determination shall be carried out. 12

IS : 1999 - 1987
shall 7.2 Chemical Composition - AlzOs, SiOz and loss on ignition be tested on individual laboratory samples representing different subOther chemical characteristics shall be tested on a composite lots. sample prepared from the individual laboratory samples. If agreed, Af203, SiOe and loss on ignition also may be tested on the composite sample in, addition to the individual test samples. 8. REPORTING OF TEST RESULTS

8.1 Moisture Content - The number of tests for moisture determination for each sub-lot shall be as given in 7.1. Thus, initially a pair of two moisture samples shall be tested and if their difference does not exceed 0.30 their average shall be reported as the moisture content of the If the difference exceeds 0.30, one more set of duplicate moissub-lot. ture samples shall be tested and their average reported as the moisture content of the sub-lot provided the difference does not exceed 0.30. If in the second set also the difference exceeds the limit, then the test results shall be arranged in ascending or descending order and the average of the two middle values shall be reported ignoring the two extreme values. This value shall be taken as the moisture content of the sub-lot. The moisture content of the lot shall be taken as the weighted average of the sub-lot moisture values. If, however, the mass of the the simple average of the sub-lot sub-lots does not vary very much, moisture values shall be reported as the moisture content of the lot. 8.2 Reporting of Chemical Composition

8.2.1 For those characteristics, where a composite sample has been tested, only one test result will be available and this shall be reported as the value of the characteristic for the lot. 8.2.2 When only two laboratory samples have been analyzed individually from a lot ( when there are on!y two sub-lots ), the average of the two available test results shall be reported as the value of the characteristic for the lot. If the sub-lots are of varying mass, the weighted average of the results shall be taken and be reported as the value for the chemical characteristic for the lot. 8.2.3 When three or more laboratory samples have been analyzed individually from a lot, the following procedure shall be followed to assess the average quality and its limit of variation: Let x1, xg, x3, . . . samples for a particular Calculate: Average (x) = xl +`*.". -!- xn if sub-lots are of approximateiy equal weight
, xn be the results characteristic.

of

analyzing

n laboratory

n

13

IS:1999

- 1987
or weighted average (2) Range =
"1
Xl + ... ...

w1 +

...

+ wn

+ Wn xn where wt, wz, . . . . . . wn are mass of the sub-lots between the maximum and of the values ( when n is less

( R ) = the difference the minimum than 10 )

or(R)

= the

average value of ranges. When the number of sub-lots n is equal to 10 or more, the corresponding results on laboratory samples ( 10 or more ) should be constituted into two equal groups in the order of their occurence. For each group, range ( R) should be calculated and the average value ( I? ) of the R's should be used in the subsequent clause. in the lot shall be reported

The average as equal to ( 5 ).

level

of the characteristic

The limits of variation in the average level of the lot shall be reported as ( 2 & hR ) or ( 2 f h> ), where h is a factor, the value of which depends on the number of samples analyzed. The appropriate value of the factor h shall be taken from the following: No. of Laboratory Samples Analyzed 3 4 5 6 8 10 12 14 16 Valzle of the Factor h 1.30 0.72 o-51 0'40 0.29 0.31 0,25 o-21 0.19

14

IS:1999
( Continued from page 2 Members DR SURESH M. JAMKHIN~IKAR DR NARESH BEDI ( Alternate ) SHRI C. N. KOYAL SHRI C.S. SASTRI( Alternate) SHRI D. LAHIRI SHRI P. C. CHATURVEDI DR R. C. MEHRA
SHRI M. N. MITRA

- 1987

)
Representing SGS India Pvt Ltd, Bombay Bharat Aluminium Co Ltd, New Delhi Ltd,

Geological Survey of India, Calcutta Minerals & Metals Trading Corporation New Delhi

Mitra S. K. Pvt Ltd, Calcutta SHRI R. N. BANERJEE ( Alternate ) Therapeutics Chemical Research Corporation, SHRI B. R. PATEL New Delhi SHRT A. Y. PITRE ( Altermte ) Essen & Co, Bangalore DR J. RAJARAM SRRI K. N. GURURAJACHAR ( Alternate ) Inspection & Testing Co ( India ) Pvt Ltd, Calcutta SHRI M. R. ROY National Mineral Development Corporation Ltd, SHRI G. V. SUBRAMANYA Hvderabad SHRI A. B. BHATNAQAR ( Alternate ) V. M. Salgaocar & Bros Pvt Ltd, Vasco-de-Gama SHRI G. R. TALAULII~AR

( Alternate)

15

INTERNATIONAL Bsmc Units
QUANTITY

SYSTEM

OF UNITS

( SI UNITS)

UNIT

SYMBOL m k S

Length Mass Time Electric current Thermodynamic temperature Luminous intensity Amount of substance Supplementary QUANTITY Plane angle Solid angle Derived Units QUANTITY Force Energy Power Flux Flux density Frequency Electric conductance Electromotive Pressure, stress force Udta

metre kilogram second ampere kelvin candela mole

A K cd mol

UNIT radian steradian

SYMROL rad
SI

UNIT

SYMBOL

DEFINITION 1 1 N = W=lJ/s T = 1 Wb/ms s = 1 A/V 1 kg.m/s' J = 1 N.m

newton joule watt weber tesla hertz siemens volt Pascal

N

J w
Wb T Hz S V Pa

I
1 1

1 Wb = 1 V.s 1 Hz = 1 c/s (s-1)

1 V = 1 W/A
1 Pa = 1 N/m'

