(Reaffirmed 2002)

IS :10471- 1983

Indian Standard
RECOMMENDED PRACTICE FOR CORROSION PREVENTION IN ELECTRONIC COMPONENT AND ASSEMBLIES

Corrosion
-Chairman SHRI C. P. DE Members

Protection

Sectional

Committee,

SMDC

29

Representing Ministry of Defence (R & D )

DR A. G. KULKARNI (Alternate to Shri C. P. De ) DR M. BALAERISHNAN Pvrene-Rai Metal Treatments Ltd. Bombav SHRI M. S. PENDRUKAR (Alternate`) SHRI D. D. BHUPYCANI Indian Tube Co Ltd, Jamshedpur SRRI S. P. CBAKRABORTI Ministry of Shipping & Transport ( Road Wing ) SHRI V. K. JAIN Oil & Natural Gas Commission, Dehra Dun SHRI K. S. BHATIA (Alternate) JOINT DIREOT~R S T A N D A R D s Ministry of Railways I CARRIAGE-I 1. RDSO ' Dxspup~ D&CTOR (MET) 4, RDSO ( Alternate ) The Alkali & Chemical Coruoration of India Ltd. SHRI V. R. KRISHXAN Calcutta DR SANDIP KUMAR Roy ( Alternate ) DR A. K. LAEIRI Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi SHRI D. K. SINGIX Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd SRRI R. M. SINQHAL ( Ahnate I ) SHRI R. M. I&wRA ( d&raUte II ) SHRI K. P. MUKHERJEE National Metallurgical Laboratory ( CSIR ), Tamshedour 1 -~ u -~ ~DR INTER SINOH ( Alternate ) SHRI R. N. MU~HERJEE Steel Authorityof India Ltd ( Bokaro Steel Ltd ), Bokaro SRRI K. ANNAIAH C Alternate `, SHRIR.P.tiAQAR ' ' Tata Consulting Engineers, Bombay SHRI D. P. MEHTA ( Alternate ) Llyods Tar Products Ltd, New Delhi SHRI M. M. NAT= SHRI N. SRINIVAS ( Alternate ) ( Continued on page 2 ) 0 INDIAN Copyright 1983 INSTITUTION

STANDARDS

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

ES :10471-1983
( Continued from page 1 ) Members
SHRI L. PUGAZHEXTAY

Representing Indian Lead Zinc Information Centre, New Delhi Electra-Chemical Research Central Institute ( CSIR) f Karaikudi

DR K. S. RAJAGOPALAN DR K. BALAKRISHAN ( Alternate )

SHRIS.RAMAJ.\YAM

Indian Telephone Industries Ltd, Bangalore SHRI M. S. NANJUNDA RAO ( Alternate \ Tata ' Engineering & Locomotive Co Ltd, SnarG. RAXAMURTHY Jamshedpur SHRI S. K. JAIN ( Alternate ) Ministry of Defence (R & D) DR N. P. RBO SERI J. BANERJEE ( Alternate ) Fibreglass PilkingtonLtd, Bombay SHRI G. H. RODRICRS SHRI S. S. PITRE ( .4lternate ) National Test House, Calcutta DR A. K. SAHIJ SHRI D. K. ROY (Alternate ) Ministry of Defence ( DGOF ) SHRI D. SIN Oil India Ltd., Calcutta SHRI D. S&N GUPTA Steel Authortty of India Ltd (Rourkela Steel SH~I H. R. SREENATH Plant ), Rourkela SHRI B.G. S. GOEL (Ahmzte) National Buildings Organization, New Delhi SHRI K.S.SRINIVASAN SHRISHASHI KANT ( Alternate ) The Fertilizer Corporation of India Ltd, Sindri DR K. M. VERMA SHRI R. K. SINHA ( Alternate ) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-o@cio Member ) SHRI C. R. RAMA RAO, Director ( Srtuc & Met ) Secretary S~LI B. MTJEHERJI Deputy Director ( Metals ), IS1

IS:10471-1983

Indian Standard
RECOMMENDED PRACTICE FOR CORROSION PREVENTION IN ELECTRONIC COMPONENT AND ASSEMBLIES
0.
0.1 This

FOREWORD

Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 29 January 1983, after the draft finalized by the Corrosion Protection Sectional Committee -had been approved by the Structural and Metals Division Council.

.

0.2 Electronic components and assemblies are used in a variety of environments possessing varying magnitude of corrosivity. The high degree of performance and precision achieved in the field of electronics is quite often nullified by failures caused by corrosion of electronic components. Therefore, a standard which establishes the minimum requirement for corrosion control in electronic components is a prerequisite to maintain a factor of higher reliability. Such a standard can also be used as a comprehensive guide for selection of materials and protection measures. 0.3 The purpose of this standard is to establish the requirements for the corrosion control of electronic components and to serve as an aid in selection of materials as well as corrosion control procedures. Compliance with this standard will minimise the corrosion failures in electronic components and assemblies. 0.4 This standard does not attempt to explain the corrosion and does not cover all the eventualities leading to failures arise in a practical situation. 0.5 While preparing this standard, the following overseas publications: assistance has been mechanism which may

derived

from

a) MIL STANDARD 1250 ( MI ) of 1967, U.S.A. b) `Proceedings of the Triservice Published by Matals and Ceramics 1972, U.S.A. Conference Information on Corrosion' Centre, Battele,

IS : 10471- 1983 c) `Marine Willey, Corrosion, 1975. Causes and Prevention, by R.M. by F.L. Burnes Laque, and John W. W.

d) `Protective Coatings for Metals' Bradley, Reinhold, 1967.

1. SCOPE
covers recommendations for prevention of corrosion of metallic materials in electronic components and .assemblies. It does not deal with the electronic uses of non-metallic materials, such as plastics, composites, elastomers and other polymeric materials. 1.2 The scope of this standard is limited to ~the anticorrosive perfor-mance of metallic materials used in electronic components and related corrosion control measures. 1.2.1 This standard does not cover electrical or mechanical except those aspects which affect susceptibility-towards corrosion. 1.2.2 This standard however commercial material or process agency or authority. 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following to those given in IS : 3531-1966" shall apply. definitions, in addition design

1.1 This standard

does not debar the use of other proven selected and concurred by the procuring

2.1 Case Corrosion -- A type of corrosion over the surface of component case ( for example, the case of a capacitor ) which obliterates identification of markings making it difficult for replacement or repair of circuit. 2.2 Element Corrosion - Corrosion under a coating which progresses wicking action along metal lead ( foi by entry of moisture through example --corrosion of wire wound fixed resistors ). 2.3 Bimetallic Corrosion -Corrosion galvanic action through the electrolyte. of metallic couples due to

2.4 Contact Corrosion - Corrosion at contact of electro-mechanical devices such as relays and switches caused by build up of contaminants or by corrosion product across an insulation barrier. *Glossary of terms relating to corrosion of metals. 4

IS : 10471 - 1983 2.5 Lead Wire Corrosion -A lead wires which corrode near necking or growing. form of corrosion failure in respect proximity to the part body resulting of in

2.6 Hermetic Seal - An impervious seal or ceramic materials by brazing, soldering, prevents the passage of gas or moisture. , 2.7 Purple Plague - A brittle the presence of silicones. 2.8 Red Plagueplate over copper

made by fusion of metals welding or fusion which compound product found formed in

gold-aluminium

A copper oxide corrosion at pinholes or breaks.

on -silver

2.9 Silver Migration - The migration of silver from one conductor in a circuit to another which is at different electrical potential across ceramic or plastic insulation under humid conditions. 3. CORROSIVE ATMOSPHERE

3.1 General - It is of prime interest to user or manufacturer to identify the atmosphere in which the equipment will be put to use. Synergistic effects of particulate matter, corrosive gases, humidity and temperature should be taken into account. 3.1.1 Atmospheres vary with respect to moisture, temperature and contaminants. In the proximity of seacoast the atmosphere is laden with increasing amount of sea salts, which promote and accelerate corrosion. In the industrial areas, gases containing oxide of sulphur, nitrogen and suspended particulate matter are encountered. 3.1.2 Metals in the atmosphere tend to form oxide scale which posses higher electrical resistivity compared to base metals. Rate of oxide formation is influenced by temperature. Metal surface at high humidity retain moisture. Particulate matter and tend to become wet or atmospheric gases catalyse formation of electrolytic corrosion products. Protective qualities of the metal/metal oxide surface are liable to degrade under high humidity condition and high degree of suspended matter. 3.2 Moisture - Moisture in the electronic assemblies adversely affects the corrosion resistance of metals. It encourages growth of microorganisms Presence of fungi and bacteria accelerate such as fungi and bacteria. the localised corrosion process. 3.2.1 Adequate housings, seals, gaskets and closures shall be used to exclude moisture from the equipment. Electronic components shall be preserved at temperature above dew point.

IS : 10471- 1983

3.2.2 Pockets, traps and sump areas where moisture may be trapped or collected shall be avoided. 3.2.3 Hygroscopic equipment. materials shall not be used in the electronic

3.2.4 Dessicants shall not be used unless necessary for moisture level Dessicants, if used, shall not be in contact with the unprotected control. part of the equipment. 3.3 Atmosphere in the Equipment -The design and construction of the equipment shall incorporate techniques such as protective coating, encapsulation, evacuation, hermetic sealing, filtering of air, removal of moisture and air borne corrodents to ensure lowest possible corrosivity. 3.3.1 Where forced cooling is necessary to maintain equipment at mosture and airborne contaminants permissible operating temperature, shall be removed externally before cooling air passes over electronic components. 4. SELECTION OF METALS

for the purpose and inherent corrosion 4.1 General - Suitability resistance shall be of prime consideration while selection is done. Unless otherwise specified, the surface of the metals shall be smooth, bearing no Metals shall be compatible with each other and crevices and scratches. shall not produce outgas or. fumes on welding and brazing. Compatibility of metals may be ascertained by referring to Table 1. Corrosion resistance may be determined using neutral salt spray test. 4.1.1 All metals shall be throughly cleaned before joining, rolling, impregnating or encaspulating. Cleaning of surface done after welding, brazing ar soldering. 4.1.2 Steels shall not be cathodically except anodic cleaning. cleaned either in acid casting, shall be or alkali

4.1.3 Organic solvents shall be used with care to avoid contact with plastic or polymeric materials. 4.1.4 Vapour degreasing shall be done in accordance laid down in IS : 3194-1980*.
4.1.5 All cleaning materials shall be components of the assembly ( see Table 1 ).

with procedures with parts or

compatible

*Recommended practice for cleaning of metals prior to electroplating 6

( first revision).

IS i 10471 P 1983
TABLE 1 COMPATIBILITY ( Clauses 4.1,4.1.5,7.2.2 MATERIALS OF MATERIALS and 9.4) INCOMPATIBLE ENVIRONTVIIENT] MATERIAL

Copper, iron, manganese Cadmium Silver Copper, brass, tin, lead, tin-lead, `aluminium, zinc, magnesium, gold coating over copper alloys Copper, brass, siIver Copper,
dicators containing cobalt salts

Rubber, acid Organic vapours Sulphide bearing atmosphere and polymeric materials Polyvinylchloride

Paper, cardboard humidity
inAmmonia Acids

brass,

cadmium,

alkyd, cellulosic, Acrylic, polyethylene polyester, polymeric materials Arcyline,

polyamide, polyurethane

alkyd, cellulosic, polyesters polycarbonates, poly-

Alkali Hydrocarbon solvents

Acrylic, cellulosic, rtyrene Vinyl, neoprene All organic assemblies coating

Diester oils, ketonic solvents used in electronic Silicon oils and greases

4.1.6 Dust, dirt and finger prints shall be removed storage. 4.1.7 Contact leads end sea1 migration. should be of corrosion resistant

prior

to assembly to avoid

metal

4.1.8 Metals which are inherently resitant to tarnish and oxidation shall be selected. Metals, prone to tarnishing, shall be protected from oxidation by plating with noble metals listed in Table 2 or by suitable non-insulating coating given in Table 3.
4.2 Conjoint Action of Stress and Corrosion - Metals and alloys which are resistant to stress corrosion and intergranular corrosion shall be involed. selected where residual and induced stresses are After mechanical working, such as bending, shaping and forming, annealing shall be carried out to remove residual stresses.

IS :10471-1983
TABLE 2 SELECTION OF CORROSION RESISTANT METALLIC COATINGS

( Claitse_r4.1.8, 5.2 and 8.1`)
PURPOSE RECOMMENDEDCOATINO

COATIxQ NOT RECOMMENDED Chromium, c o p p e r,' silver, gold Chromium, c o p p CT, nickle, gold, silver

Contact with aluminium and magnesium Prior to painting Tarnish prevention

Cadmium, Cadmium,

tin tin

Nickel between copper and silver, gold over copper and silver, rhodium over nickel, silver Passivatcd coatings Tin, goldor c a d m i u m tin lead tin, nickle, tin Nickel, chromium, rhodium Cadmium Cadmium, silver, tin copper

Marine

expsoure

Solderability Storage Wear Easy etching for printed circuit board manufacture

heavy Reflowed gold or rhodium Hard chromium rhodium Cadmium, nickel,

Tin-lead, r h o d i u m, silver, gold

TABLE

3

COMPATIBLE

SURFACE

FINISHES

FOR

ELECTRICAL

BONDING

( Clnuscs 4.1.8 and 7.2.4 METAL Aluminium and clad alloys aluminium

)
SURFACE FINISH

Bare or low electrical resistance chromaie type film treatment, tin plating, cadmium plating or nickel cadmium plating . Bare or tin plate, cadmium Bare or chromate treated lead plating, cadmium because Tin coating, tin coating preferred plating preferred

Copper and copper alloys Cadmium Iron and steel Nickel and corrosion steel5 Silver Tin resistant

Bare, difficult to bonding adherent oxide film Bare Bare

I

of :

",

/ `.'

IS :10471- 1983 4.3 Hydrogen Embrittlement - Metals and alloys which are not susceptible to delayed fracture due to hydrogen pickup shall be given preference. Metals and alloys subceptible to such delayed fracture are to be coated by organic coating or vacuum deposition of resistant metals.
4.3.1 Where tmbrittlement hours. electroplating is a necessity, the components relieved at 1909 f 14% for a minimum period parts shall be mechanically with IS : 7001-1973*. stress shall be of there by

4.3.2 Where practicable shot peening in accordance

relieved

4.4 Whisker GrowthTin, cadmium and iron are susceptible to Whisker growth shall be miniwhisker growth in humid atmosphere. mized by use of heavier metal coating within permissible limits. Hot dip of deposition, rebeating of deposits, by shot peening and process maintaining low level of humidity may be judiciously used. 4.5 Silver Migration - Silver migration following techniques as applicable. 4.5.1 Spacing as possible. between conductors shall be minimized by the

at different

voltages

shall be as wide

4.5.2 Conductors permissible. 4.5.3 4.5.4 used. 4.5.5 Contaminants Where

shall

be

protected

by

organic

coatings

where

shall be removed tin-lead, insulation

by forced

air drying. coatings shall be

practicable

gold and platinum shall be used.

Non-hygroscopic

5. TREATMENT

PREVENTION

OF

FERROUS

PARTS

FOR

CORROSION
with IS : 6005-

5.1 All carbon
1970t.

`steels shall

be passivated

in accordance

5.1.1 Precipitation hardenable steels shall be given one coat of zinc chromate primer ( ste IS : 104:19791 ) followed by a suitable top coat.

.:

*M&hod for shot peening and test for shot peened ferrous metal parts. $Code of practice for phosphating or iron and steel. $Specification for ready mixed paint, brushing, zinc chrome, priming r.wision ) .

( sacond

fS:10471- 1983
5.2 Metallic Coating - Where applicable, carbon steels shall be coated with cadmium, tin and nickel as applicable ( see Table 2 ). 5.3 Carbon steel parts, which are totally and continuously immersed in oil or contained in a heremetically seald unit, shall not be coated. 5.4 Laminations used in magnetic circuits shall not be plated or coated.

5.5 Organic coatings or lacquers shall be preferred in respect of springs and component cases which are prone to case corrosion. 5.6 Contact corrosion may be avoided by use of thick nickel plating. OF NON-FERROUS PARTS FOR CORROSION

6. TREATMENT PREVENTION

6.1 Aluminium -Anodizing of ahrminium parts shall be done in accordance with IS : 7088-1973* after punching, drilling, machining, forming and any other fabrication work is completed. 6.1.1 Anodizing shall not be carried out in areas of electrical bonding.

-6.1.2 Electrical 6.1.3 Chromate bond is involved.

bond areas shall be suitably masked before anodizing. type anodizing process shall be applied where masked

6.1.4 Other metallic coatings such as electroless nickel shall be considered for applications, involving high temperatures such as heatsinks. 6.1.5 Aluminium components may be treated for a conversion coating of either chromate/phosphate or chromate/boride type depending on the electrical conductrvny requirement for the treated components. possess a good degree of corrosion resistance to 6.2 Copper -Copper atmospheric corrosion. Where tarnish prevention is a necessity, polyurethane or silicone cured resin films may be used. Silicone oils and greases shall not be applied. possess poor resitonce to corrosion. 6.3 Magnesium - Magnesium Where magnesium is intended to be used, approval for specific application shall be obtained prior to its design incorporation from the competent authority. *Recommended prac&e for anodizingaluminiumand its alloys. 10

IS : 10471- 1983 6.3.1 Use
tropical of magnesium atmospheres. based alloys shall not be reommended in

6.3.2 Prior to its incorporation in the electronic assembly, magnesium parts shall be anodized and shall be given two coats of alkali resistant primer followed by a compatible top coat. 6.3.3 Extreme precautians shall be taken at magnesium metal contacts to avoid destructive corrosion. Where practicable alminum alloy In case use of gasket is gasket shall be interposed between two metals. the joint shall be sealed with moisture proofing not practicable, compound. 7. CORROSION

CONTACTS

PREVENTION

AT

DISSIMILAR

METAL

different emf in the galvanic series are 7.1 General - Metals having Institution and propagation of prone to corrosion due to galvanic action. corrosion at dissimilar metal contacts takes place in presence of condensed water acting as electrolyte. Anodic member of the couple is seriously corroded. 7.1.1 Dissimilar metals having wide difference of emf series shall not be used for contacts unless fully protected. 7.1.2 Effort shall be made in design electrolyte at metallic contacts. 7.1.3 Where the permissible to aviod [in the galvanic of moisture/

collection

necessary, dissimilar metals couple, as given in Table 4.

shall

be

selected

from

7.1.4 Metallic contact implies the materials existing on surfaces; for coated with nickel and copper coated nickel and silver.

contact between the two matallic example, contact between copper with silver implies contact between

7.1.5 Joining

metal

shall not be anodic

to the metal

being joined. as metal for

7.1.6 Electrically conducting graphite shall be considered the purpose of determining galvanic compatibility.

7.2 Joining of Metals--Due consideration shall be given to possible corrosion due to galvanic action while making a choice of joining method. Table 4 may be referred as a guide in selection of solders. Joints Preventive measures shall be continuous and crevices shall be avoided. that should be .taken to minimise galvanic corrosion are given in Appendix A. 11

lS:10471-1983
TABLE 4 PERMISSIBLE GALVANIC COUPLES

( Clause 7.1.3 )
ANODIC COXPONENT CATHODIC Con~~okmvr

Zinc, zinc alloys and zinc coatings Aluminium, cast and wrought other than duralumin Aluminium wrought lumin type alloys alloys

'

Hot dip zinc and galvanised Cadmium plated articles

steel

of duralead and and

Wrought ircn, malleable iron, low alloy steels

iron, armco

Tin plate, tin lead solders, solid and lead alloys Stainless ferritic Commercial bronzes Nickel, monel, alloys steels, martensitic brasses

Chromium plated articles, martenstic/ ferritic stainless steels High brasses, bronzes, munta metal naval brass,

yellow

Silver solder, german silver, coppernickel alloys, nickel chrome alloys, austenitic stainless steels Silver plated alloys , articles, high silver

titanium

high nickel

7.2.1 Crevice Corrosion -Joints where crevices may exist shall be sealed with epoxy or polyurethane based sealent. Marker tapes are to be applied on surfaces suitably coated.
7.2.2 Brazing, Soldering and WeldingCompatible materials as given in Tables 1 and 3 shall be used for joining operations. Soldering over gold Minimum joining time at minimum shall be avoided where possible. possible temperature shall be followed. Lowest acid content flux shall be used. Flux residues shall be removed and thoroughly cleaned. 7.2.3 Formation of purple silver in lieu of gold. plague may be avoided of surface is necessary in` bonding, by use of copper or

7.2.4 Surface Finish - Compatibility by referring to Table 3. 7.2.5 If bonding of dissimilar metals be coated with epoxy resin sealant. 7.2.6 If passivated. metallic washers are

finishes may be decided the bond washers area shall shall be

used

7.2.7 Caution shall be exercised finish to avoid element corrosion.

.to achieve firm

adhesion

of the surface

12

IS : 104718. USE OF METALLIC COATINGS

1983

8.1 General - Anticorrosive performance of metallic coatings is dependant on its adherence to substrate metal, porosity and uniformity of thickness. Attention shall be given to the cracks in coatings. Where possible the coatings shall be tested using neutral salt spray test method. Table 2 may be used as an aid to choose matallic coatings. The recommended minimum thickness for different types of electroplated coatings are given in Table 5 for guidance.

TABLE

5

RECOMMENDBD ELECTROPLATED

MINIMUM METALLIC

THICKNESS COATINGS

FOR

( Clause 8.1 )
COATING RECOMMENDED

MINIWJM THICKNESS, p m 13.0 For protection conditions

REMARKS

Cadmium

over mild steel mild steel

under corrosive

Chromium over and copper

0.3 7.5 0.75 30.0 12'0 20'0 6.75 0.75

Generally used for wear resistance As an undercoat or for electrical conductance purpose For better electrical To avoid contact Corrosion of components For protection conditions Moderate under severe contact

Copper over mild steel Gold over copper or silver Nickel over mild steel Nickel over copper Tin over mild steel Palladium Rhodium over silver over silver

conditions of tarnish

For prevention

8.2 Cadmium Coatings - Cadmium may be coated by vaccum Cadmium coated parts shall not be deposition or electroplating process. used in enclosed assembly containing acid, ammonia, plastics, varnishes and other organic materials. 8.3 Chromium Coatings - Chromium coatings shall be . . apphcatlons involving wear and not for corrosion resistance. used for

8.4 Copper Coatings - Copper coatings are prone to red plague Red piague may be type of corrosion which occur at pores or pin holes. avoided by a coat of nickel. 13

is : 10471-

1983 coated Gold comes over thin nickel plating is prone in contact with

8.5 Gold Coating -Gold shall be preferably coating to retard diffusion of substrate metal. to purple plague type of corrosion when gold aluminium.

~8.6 Nickel Coatings - Nickel coatings are desirable for electrical bonding. Nickel may be coated by electroplating or electroless process. Contact corrosion is minimized by use of nickel coating. 8.7 Palladium Coating - Palladium may be coated by electroplating process. Contact of organic materials shall be avoided to prevent polymerization of organic compounds. 8.8 Silver Coating - Silver may be electroplated. Silver coatings are prone to corrosion in sulphide bearing ~atmosphere and also prone to silver migration phenonmenon. Care shall be taken to avoid sulphurous fumes during storage and precautions shall be taken to avoid silver migration ( see 4.5 ). 8.9 Tin Coating - Tin may be coated by hot dipping or eleotrodeposition process. to form metal whiskers. Tin possess tendency Precautions shall be taken to avoid metal whiskers (see 4.4). Lead wire corrosion is minimized by use of tin coating. 8.10 Zinc Coating Zinc coating~shall not be used.

8.11 Vacumum Deposition - Vacuum deposition provide extremely thin coatings, and this technique may not be suitable for mechanical application like*moving contact. 9. USE OF ORGANIC COATINGS AND NON-METALLICS

9.1 Corrosion resistant nonmetallic materials shall possess low moisture absorption, resistance to fungi and microbial attack, stability in the specified temperature range, freedom from outgassing, compatibility with other materials in the assembly and resistance to weathering. 9.2 Organic materials shah be thoroughly dried or cured before use.

9.3 Polyvinyl chlorides and chlorinated rubber shall not be used in closed compartments. Where practicable use of neoprene, polysulphides and = vinyl resins shall be avoided in closed compartments. 9.4 Compatibility of materials shall be taken into account. be used as a guide for selection of materials. Table I may

IS : 10471- 1983 9.5 Silicone oils and greases are not compatible with organic finishes. These shall not be used without approval of the competent authority. 9.6 Graphite containing solid film lubricant shall not be used.

10. PACKAGING

AND PRESERVATION be donein accordance with the

10.1 Packaging and preservation shall procedures given in IS : 8221-1976*. 10.2 Volatile corrosion inhibitors against corrosion in accordance IS : 6263-19727.

may be used to with the procedure

protect metals laid down in

APPENDIX ( Clause 7.2 )
PREVENTIVE A-l. Selection MEASURES CORROSION

A

TO REDUCE AT JOINTS

GALVANIC

of materials

should be made from permissible couple. form~a cathodic member of the couple. shall be cathodic to the material difference material

A-2. Fastener should preferably A-3. Brazing and soldering being joined.

A-4. Advantage may be derived from the smaller among the members of couple.

potential

A-5. The metal contact should be so designed, so that the relative area of cathodic metal is smaller. A-6. Where coating is used, it should be applied to both members of the couple. A-7. Joints may sealent. preferably be sealed by moisture proof coating or

A-8. Corrosion inhibitor treatment

may be used at joints.

~+Code of practice for corrosion prevention of metals packages. TVolatile corrosion inhibitor ( VCI ) treated paper.

and metal

components

in

15

