( Reaffirmed 2003 )

IS:9848 - 1987

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR BRIEFCASES, PLASTIC BODY

( First Revision J
Travel
Choirman *Cm S. P. DUTT Members SHRI M. P.
P&OF SHKI SHKI MONI BAJPAI BANEHJEE

Requisites

Sectional

Committee,

CPDC

10

Representing Naval Headquarters, New Delhi

A. T. BASAI~ R. S. BHAT
UHATIA

CAPT A. C.

SHRI B.,S. B~~ATNAQA~ Sitar B. DUYI'A ( Alternnte ) SIWI S. C. BJIATNAQAIL K ANT I M I` I N A 1. SHJLI
CHAKL~A~OJ~TP SARI UIRAR &RI P.

Tannery & Footwear Corporation of India Ltd, Kanpur Prof Moni Banerjee & Associates, Calcutta Directorate of Supplies and Disposals, New Delhi Maharashtra Small Scale Industries Development Corporation Ltd, Bombay Naval Headquarters, New Delhi Bengal Waterproof Ltd, Calcutta

KUMAIL DEY

(

CHVWDHURY

Indian Airlines, New Dfalhi West Bengal State Leather Industrit s Development Corporation Ltd, Calcutta Alternate ) V. I. P. Industries Ltd, Bombay
)

Railway Board of Railways ), ( Ministry New Delhi State Trading Corporation of India Ltd, SHI~I J. K. DUTTA New Delhi Export Promotion Council for Finished Leather & SHRI JANE ALAM Leather Manufacturer, Kanpur Zip Industries Pvt Ltd, Madras SHRI J. K. JH AVER SHRI G. VISHNU VAR~HAN ( Alternate ) Air-India, Bombay SHXI R. J. KANAL SHEI K. V. BHAT ( Altcrmte )
SHRI K. K. CH~WUliUHY

SHRI S. L. KULICAKNI

( Akmmte

( Conlinued OR pap 2 )

0

Copyright the

1987 STANDARDS Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957

BUREAU This publication is protected

OF INDIAN under
In&n

) and

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Art.

IS:9848

- 1987
page

( Continuedfrom

1)
Refirescnting

Members SHRI VASANT B. KHAXAT Snnx C. K. MARFATIA

Elegant Crafts. Bombay Universal Luggage Manufacturing Co Pvt Ltd, Bombay SBRI K. RAXA~WRTHY ( Alternate ) Polytechnic, Rayagada SHIU M. S. MOHANTY Directorate General of Technical Development, SHIU IS. P. MAHXOOD New Delhi Khadi and Village Industries Commission, SKRI T. K. NAG Bombay SIIRI V. B. DESAI ( Alfcrnntc ) National Engineering Industries Ltd, Calcutta DH. R. PANDA Cent;JdrI;seather Research Institute ( CSIR ), SHRI T. K. PARTHASARATHI SHRI K. RADHARRISHAN! Ahnate ) Ministry of Defence ( DRDO ) AIR CDRE K. RAJAN SHRI V. P. &llRAYXCli ( Alternate ) Ouro Novelties, Bombay REPREBENTATIVP Rharat Leather Corporation Ltd, New Delhi SHRI D. K. SETH Nylo Plast Industries Pvt Ltd, Bombay SE~RIP~ADEEP K. SHROF~ SHRI M. P. A. MATHIAS ( Alternate ) Ministry of Defence ( DGI ), New Delhi LT-COL R. M. SlNQH SHRI Y. R. CHAWLA ( Allernnte ) Director General, BIS ( Ex-ajicio Membsr ) DR A. S. SETHI, Director ( Consr Prods & Med Instrs ) Secretary SHRI M. K. BHATIA ( Consr Prods & Med Instrs ), BIS

Joint Director

2

IS:9848

- 1987

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR BRIEFCASES, PLASTIC BODY

(First Revision)
0. FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 24 March 1987, after the draft finalized by the Travel Requisites Sectional Committee had been approved by the Consumer Products and Medical Instruments Division Council.
0.2 This standard was first issued in 1981. The clauses 1.1, 2.1 and 4.5, which called for an agreement between the purchaser and the supplier, have been deleted in this revision. In this revision the drop test has been modified and xenon arc fadeometer test for colour fastness has been added. Keeping in view the present manufacturing practice, the dimensions, some of the materials, electroplating and other requirements have been modified. 0.3 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular stz ndard is complied with, the final value, observed or ing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained value should be the same as that of the specified value 1; SCOPE requirement of this calculated, expressin accordance with in the rounded off in this standard.

1.1 This standard covers requirements for briefcases made of moulded HDPE,
2. SHAPE

and methods of sampling ABS, PP, GRPJr.

and test

AND

DIMENSIONS
of the briefcases shall conform to Fig. 1.

2.1 The shape and dimensions
*Rules tFTi:E for -

rolmding off numerical values ( r&cd ).
High Deysity Polyethylene Acrylo Nltrite Butadiene Poly Propylene Glass Remforced Plastics Styrenc

F&P

3

IS : 9848 - 1987

Site

Length CL)

Width (W

Height (HI

External I
:! 400 * 25 480 & `15

External 300 * 20 360 * 25

External 70 to 130 70 to 140

All dimensions in millimPtres.

FIG. 1 BRIEFCASE, PLASTIC BODY
3.

MATERIALS
be made designated from shall

various components of the briefcases shall materials specified in Table 1. Materials not specifically be suitable for the purpose intended. 4. MANUFACTURE,

3.1 The

WORKMANSHIP

AND FINISH

4.1 The briefcases
surface. defects. They

shall be sound in construction with texturised outside shall not have any sharp edges or other constructional

4.2 The body and thr. lid of the briefcases
nium alloy frame or any srlitable sheet

shall be reinforced metal frame.

with alumi-

4

IS a 9848 - 1987
TABLE 1 MATERIALS FOR COMPONENTS ( Clousss 3.1 and 4.6 ) S.L No. (1) i) ii) Body Reinforcing frame COMPONENT (2) HDPE, MA~TERIAI, (3) ABS, PP or GRP alloy CONBO~MXNG TO (4) OF BRIEFCASES

Aluminium Sheet met::

iii)

Lining

material

Lining leather Leather clz:h cloth

Rayon sntizlining Cotton gabzdine or Silk cloth
Or

Type 2 or 3 of IS 1979* Grade 4 of 1s: 1984p IS : 2136-1974f IS IS

: 38401259-

: 1423-19859 : 1687-1960/l
-

iv) v) vi) vii)

Channel Lock Hinges Rivets

As agreed Alumininium alloy or steel or brass or plated ABS Steel or brass or zinc aluminium alloy Steel or brass

-

Steel or aluminium or brass or German silver ( solid or tubular ) *Specification for lining leather ( jrst reuision ). tSpecification for vinyl coated fabrics ( third revision ). JSpecification for rayon satin lining cloth (first revision ). $SpeciIication for cotton gaberdine ( second reuision ). (/Specification for handloom silk XORA ( loomstate ) cloth.

4.3 The handle of the briefcases shall be made of moulded HDPE, ABS, PP or PVC and shall be reinforced with steel wire or steel strip, if necessary. The two ends of the handle shall be secured to the briefcase as agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier. A minimum gap of 35 mm shall be provided between the handle and the body to give a comfortable grip. Inside length of the handle shall be not less than 90 mm. 4.3.1 In the case of spring-action handle, the above dimensions checked after the handle is in loaded/lifted condition. shall be

4.4 Each briefcase shall be equipped with suitable locking arrangements. The locks shall bc firmly secured to the front of the briefcase. `The type, design and mode of securing the locks to the hr-icfcase shall be as agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier. 5

IS :9848 - 1987
4.5 All visible steel components, except hinges, chromium over nickel with nickel as 15 microns microns conforming to IS : 1068-1985*. The other hinges shall be given a suitable protective coatings. shall be electroplated and chromium as 0.3 components including

4.6 The inner side of the briefcases shall be neatly finished, with or without an engraved design. If desired by the purchaser, the inner side may be lined with lining material as specified in Table 1. 4.7 The briefcase feet shall be provided at the rear side of the briefcase ( opposite side of the handle ) to avoid ground contact while standing on the rear side. The rocking shall bc not more than 0.75 mm. 4.8 When overturn, the lid of the briefcase is open, the briefcase shall not topple or

4.9 Tie tapes and pockets with suitable fasteners to close the pockets be provided as agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier.

shall

4.10 The briefcases shall be free from visual defects like flow lines, poor colour dispersion, black and white spots, embedded foreign matters, waviness, pits, deformed or broken lugs, etc. 4.11 In respect briefcase shall consumer. 5. TESTS 5.1 Performance Test - The Ijricl'case, in loaded condition, shall be opened and closed 100 times. Th.ere shall not be any obstruction in this process. After opening and closing 100 times, the briefcase in further use shall open and close smoothly. 5.2 Performance Test for Locks and Latches latches shall be opened and closed 1 000 times. They sign of malfunctioning after the test. - The locks and shall not show any of appearance, general conform to the sample workmanship and finish, previously approved by the the

5.3 Drop Test - The locked briefcase shall be dropped from a height of 1 m, on a normal concrete or tiled floor or on a steel plate having a minimum thickness of 4.5 mm, with a total mass of 0.4 kg for every litre of internal volume on (a) the lugs, (b) top and bottom sides, and (c) at two diagonally opposite corners. The same briefcase shall be used for all these tests. The briefcase after these tests shall be examined. The body and the frame shall not show any cracks and the lock shall not open out.
( second revision

*Specification fur elcctroplatcd

coatings of nickel and chromium

on iron and steel

).

6

1s : 9848 - 1987
5.4 Creep Test - The handlc of the briefcase shall be tested fer tendency to come out of the fitting due to creep. For this, the briefcase, shall be hung under static conditions for 200 hours with a total mass of0.4 kg shall not come out or its for every litre of internal volume. The handle fittings. 5.5 Fatigue Test - The briefcase with a total lnass or 04 kg for evrry litre of internal volume shall be allowed to vibrate minimum 4 000 times with an amplitude of 20 mm. The handle of the briefcase shall not fail in this test. 5.6 Colour Fastness Test - The briefcase the merhods covered in 5.6.1 and 5.6.2. shall be tested by any one of

5.6.1 The briefcase shall be kept in an open atmosphere so that the outside surface is exposed to bright sunlight for at least 6 hours in a day. The briefcase shall be kept in this condition for a few days until the total exposure to sunlight is 48 hours. After this test the briefcase shall be examined with reference to a rerree sample. The colour of the outside surface of the briefcase shall not show any sign of fading. 5.6.2 A panel shall be cut from the briefcase and subjected to xenon After this test the panel shall bc arc fadeometer test for 48 hours. examined with reference to a referee sample. The sample of the outside surface of the sample piece shall not show any sign of decoloration. 6. SAMPLING 6.1 Unless otherwise agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier, shall be followed for the procedure given in IS : 2500 ( Part I )-lY73* sampling. The sampling plan and the inspection level as given in 6.2 and 6.3 shall be followed. 6.2 The scale of sampling shall correspond to Inspection Level in Table 1 of IS : 2500 ( Part 1 )-1973* for all the requirements ed in this specification. 6.3 The sampling plan shall correspond to given in Table 2 of IS : 2500 ( Part 1 )-1973*. 7. MARKING 7.1 Each briefcase shall be legibly name marked with the following: trade-mark; a) Manufacturer's or registered and AQL plans of III given mention-

4-O percent

b) Size; c) Name of the model, _ed) Batch number -~ ~. ----

if any;

and/or date of manufacture.
Part I Inspection by attributes and by collnt of dcfccts

*Sampling inspection ( ,firs2 rcuision ).

tables:

7

1s t 9848 - 1983
7.1.1 Each briefcase
may also be marked with the Standard Mark.

NATE - The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereThe Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys under. the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well-defined systc'm of inspection, testing and quality control which Standard marked is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions, under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers, may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

8. PACKING 8.1 The briefcases
may aIso be packed shall be packed to ensure safe transportation. They as agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier.

8

