( Reaffirmed 1998 )

ISr6609(PartII/Sec2)-1974

Indian Standard
METHODS OF TEST FOR COMMERCIAL BLASTING EXPLOSIVES AND ACCESSORIES
PART Section 2 II EXPLOSIVES Permitted Explosives,

Explosives
Chairman

and Pyrotechnic3
Ministry

Sectional
of Defence

Committee,
Representing (R & D )

CDC 51

DR W. D. PATW~RDBAN Members CHAIRMAN, MANA~ER'~

Bharat

Gold

Mines Ltd, Oorgaum
Ltd, Hyderabad of India Ltd (Nangal

C~M~~ITTEE DR A. K. CHATTERJEE SHRI V. Y. TAMBE ( Alternate ) SHRI L. S. CHEEMA

IDL Chemicals The

Fertilizer Corporation Unit ), Naya Nangal

ASSISTANTSUPERINTENDENT. FCI. SlNDRl ( Alttrnntt ) National Coal Development Corporation Ltd, Ranchi SHRI D P. CROUDHRY SHRI R. G. DEOLALIXER Directorate General of Ordnance Factories, Calcutta StIRI K. I'. R. PILLAt (Alternate ) Directorate General of Mines Safety, Dhanbad SHRI C. M. DE~STHALE Directorate General Border Roads, New Delhi SHRI B. P. &PTA SHRI P. C. GUPTA National Mineral Development Corporation Ltd, New Delhi SFIRI R. D. JINDAL Indian Mining Federation, Calcutta SHR~ JOOINDERSINGH Diregolmte General of Technical Development, New e SHRI JASTINDERSINCH ( Alternate ) SHRZS. C. KALE Directorate General of Factory Advice Services and Labour Institute,. New Delhi SHRI R. R. KHANNA Indian Mining Assoczation, Calcutta Central Mining Research Station, Dhanbad SHRI V. KRISHNAMURTHY SARI S. G. KULKARNI( Alternate) Sriru I. N. MARTY Chief Controller of Explosives, Nagpur SHRI K. S. SUBRAMANYAM (Alternate ) SHRI K.C. NARAYANAN The Development Commissioner, Small Scale Industries? New Delhi DR j. N. SEN Indian Explosives Ltd, Calcutta SHRI G. M. CITOPRA( Alternate ) ( Continued on finge 2 ) @ Copyright STANDARDS 1975 INSTITUTION

INDIAN

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act (XIV of 1957) and reoroduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 6609 ( Part II/&c 2 ) - 1974
Membm Rcpremting

The Associated Cement Companies Ltd, Bombay SHRI K. B. SENOUPTA SHRI M. hX.P~as~u (Alternate) Ministry of Defence ( R & D ) DR S. K. SINHA DR K. K. RAO (Alternate ) Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) DR SURJITSINGW SHRI V. SUBRAMANIUM (Alternate) Director General, ISI ( Ex-ojicio Member ) DRG.M. SAXENA, Deputy Director ( Chem ) Secretary SHRI S. K. MATHUR Deputy Director (

Chem), ISI

Methods of Test Subcommittee, CDC 51 : 2
Convener DR A. K. CHATTERJEE Members DR C. P. RAMASWAMY ( Alternate to Dr A. K. Chatterjee ) Indian Explosives Ltd, Gomia SHRI G. M. CHOPRA SHRI S. SESHAN( Alternate ) Directorate General of Mines Safety, Dhanbad SHRI C. M. DEOSTHALE Central Mming'Research Station, Dhanbad SHRXV. K~I~HNAMURTHY SHRI S. G. KULKARNI( Alternate ) Chief Controller of Explosives, Nagpur SHRI I.N. MURTY Chief Inspectorate of Military Explosives, Poona DRSURJ~T SINGH SHRI V. SUBRAMANIAN ( Alternate ) IDL Chemicals Ltd, Hyderabad

2

IS : 6603 ( Part II/Set 2 ) - 1974

Indian Standard
METHODS OF TEST FOR COMMERCIAL BLASTING EXPLOSIVES AND ACCESSORIES
PART Section 2 II EXPLOSIVES Penmitted Explosives,

0.

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part II/Set 2 ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 1 October 1974, after the draft finalized by the Explosives and Pyrotechnics Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division Council. 0.2 The explosives industry in India was for a considerable time confined However, during the last decade other only to the ordnance factories. It was, therefore, considered manufacturing units have come into existence. necessary to formulate specifications for various explosives and explosive accessories produced by the industry. Before laying down specifications, it was felt necessary to prepare standard methods of test. 0.3 Testing of commercial explosives is of utmost importance for ensuring their safety during transport and handling, stability in storage and adequate life and performance under all conditions of use. Test methods included in this standard cover these aspects for all the groups of explosives under consideration. 0.4 Depending upon the origin and type of the explosives, a large number of test methods are in vogue, which though similar in nature, differ in minor details of test procedure and expression/interpretation of results. 0.5 It is a choice has experience acceptable authorities 0.6 The and the fuses and currently difficult task to select a particular method as the best. Therefore, been effected in favour of those methods, for which sufficient and experimental data are available and which are mutually to all concerned, namely, the producers, the inspecting and the consumers in the field.

test methods prescribed in this standard cover both thegeneral permitted explosives and accessories like detonators, detonating safety fuses. They do not cover all items but include those which are used and manufactured in the country. The methods of tests for 3

IS : 6609 ( Part II/Set 2 ) 1974 various explosives and explosive accessories parts of this standard: Part I Part II/Set 1 Part lI/Sec 2 Part III Part IV Part V Gun powder Explosives, general Explosives, permitted Qetonators, general and permitted Detonating fuses Safety fuses are covered under different

0.7 Methods for assessing the fume characteristics of explosives, deflagration test and free suspension test are under investigations and would be included later, if considered necessary. 0.8 In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. 1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard ( Part II/Set 2 ) prescribes the methods permitted explosives used for commercial blasting purposes. 1.1.1 The tests prescribed in the standard are: a) the gallery test, and b) the continuity of detonation test. 1.1.2 These tests are in addition to those prescribed for general explosives in IS : 6609 ( Part II/Set 1 )-19747. 2. GROUPS OF PERMITTED EXPLOSIVES of test for

a.1 Grouping of permitted explosives is linked with the classification of mines. The seams have been classified by the Directorate General of Mines Safety, Government of India as first, second and third degree of gasiness on the basis of rate of methane emission. The explosives for these seams are divided into the following four types: Type P (o )- Permitted (ordinary); for use only in first degree gassy seams. lrpe P ( v ) - Permittt=d ( equivalent to sheath ) : they are primarily designed for use in second and third dl-gree gassy seams but also can be used for first degree gassy seams.
*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( wised ). TMethod of test for commercial blasting explosives and ackssoria: Set 1 Explosives, general. Part II Explosives;

4

IS : 6609( Part II+

2 ) - 1974

WeP(r)

- Permitted ( for ripping ) ; `they are primarily designed for delay firing in ripping. CfleP (~1 - Permitted ( for solid blasting ) ; they are primarily designed for delay firing in solid coal. They can also be used for instantaneous blasting with under-cuts, over-cuts, mid-cuts and side-cuts in all categories of seams. TEST

3. GALLERY

3.0 General - For all types of explosives, the gallery test consists of: a) firing charges into flammable atmosphere containing methane or natural gas-air mixture; and b) additionally, for Types P ( o ), P ( eqs ), and P ( s ), firing charges into coal dust. For each type of explosive, charges are fired when loaded in the bore of a cannon which discharges into a cylindrical steel gallery ( see 3.1.4 ) containing the gas mixture or the coal dust. For Type P ( r ) explosives, charges are also fired into a gas mixture contained in steel assemblies of prescribed shape and size called `break test apparatus No. I, II and III' ( see 3.1.6). The density, velocity of detonation, diameter and gap sensitivity are measured and recorded. 3.1 Materials and Appaxks 3.1.1 Flammable Gas-Air Mixture -Wherever flammable gas-air mixture is specified the flammable gas , shall be pure methane, firedamp or natural gas. 3.1.1.1 In the case of pure methane and firedamp, the flammable gasair mixture shall contain 9 f 0.25 percent of flammable gas.

3.1.1.2 In the case of natural gas, the flammable gas-air mixture shall contain 8 f 0.25 percent of flammable gas ( natural gas ) .
percentage of natural gas speeilied in 3.1.1.2 is based on the average NOTE -The composition of the gas available in Duliajan, Assam. The average composition of natural gas available at different sources ( bore holes 1 in Duliajan is as given below: Percent by Volume Consrifuent Methane Ethane Propane Iso-butane n-butane Iso-pentane n-pentane Hexanes Nitrogen Carbon dioxide Relative density 5 86.3 6-2 3.1 0.6 0.8 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.1 2-5 O-681

IS : 6699 ( Part II/k

2 ) - 1974

3.1.2 Coal Dust -Wherever coal dust is specified, it shall contain approximately 40 f 2 percent of volatile matter ( calculated on an ash-free dry basis ) and shall be ground to such a degree of fineness that 85 percent by mass passes through 63-micron IS Sieve. 3.1.3 Cannons Type II. The cannons used are of two types, namely, Type I and

3.1.3.1 Type I - It is used for all shots fired into'the cylindrical gallery and for all shots fired in break test apparatus No. I. This cannon is a steel cylinder, 45 cm or more in diameter, 154.2 cm in length and having an axial bore which when new is 55 mm in diameter (see Note under 3.2.4) and 120 cm long. The cannon is rotated successively through 90' after 60 shots bad been fired. After firing 240 shots in this way, the inner liner of the cannon shall be replaced. 3.1.3.2 Type IIIt is a steel cylinder about 30 cm long and 30 cm in diameter. It has an axial bore which when new is 55 mm in diameter and which passes right through the cannon. Two Type II cannons are used for shots in break test apparatus No. III. 3.1.4 Cylindrical Steel Gallery as shown in Fig 1. 3.1.4.1 The cylindrical gallery is a horizontal steel shell 152 cm in diameter, 19 metres in length and of minimum wall thickness of 15 mm. One end of the gallery is open while the other end is closed by a steel plate having a central hole of size bigger than that of the cannon-bore. The first 5.5 metres from the closed end is sealed by a bitumen impregnated kraft paper or polyethylene diaphragm and constitutes the ` explosion chamber `. There is a provision for the introduction of flammable gas and the circulation of the flammable gas-air mixture in the chamber. There is also provision for suspending bags containing coal dust. There are in the explosion chamber, observation windows for observing ignitions and terminals for connecting the detonator leading wires and for connecting the electrical fuse wire, besides the tap for drawing check samples of methane or natural gas-air mixture for analysis. There are vents at the top of the explosion chamber for pressure release. 3.1.4.2 In use, the cannon is charged with the explosive under test. It is subsequently moved horizontally on rails or otherwise until it presses against the closed end of the gallery, with which it makes a gas-tight seal. The axis of the cannon bore and the cylindrical gallery are in line. 3.1.5 Enclosure for Break Test - It is an enclosure in the form of a pit `240 x 240 x 150 cm, the depth of 240 cm being exclusive of the sand occupying the bottom portion of the pit. The walls of the pit are .of concrete. This pit is provided with facilities for introduction of flammable gas, proper mixing of flammable gas and air and for the circulation of the flammable gas-air mixture. This enclosure is used in conjunction with break test apparatus No. 1, II and III. 6

SLIDING FIXED

FLANGE-r

FLANGE

TAP FOR CHECKING GAS t; ..

BOX FOR UNIFORM. OlSTRlt3UTlON OF GAS 1*52m@xl9m LONG WITH 1Smm'~THICK WALL STEEL GALLERY DlAPilRAGM (Ei1TUME.NIZED KRAFT PAPER OR POLYETHYLENE FILd

7

STEEL GALLERY FOR TESTINGPERMITTED EXPLOSIVES 1 CYLINDRICAL

x w P c) N V . g 3

IS : 6699 ( Put III/&c

2 ) -1974

3.1.6 Break Test Apparatus Break test apparatus No. Z-as shown in Fig 2A. It is an of Type I cannon and two stout plates, each 160 x 160 x 7.5 cm, in the enclosure for break test. The volume of the enclosure is 5.7 m3. The cannon is mounted with its axis vertical and its mouth upwards. The plates are horizontal and the lower one is bored centrally so a's to be a close fit to the connon, the upper face of which is flush with the upper The upper plates is mounted so that its lower surface surface ofthe plate. is 15 cm above the upper surface of the lower plate and is so held by stout The enclosure for pillars passing through both plates near their corners. break test completely surrounds both plates and the mouth of the cannon. 3.1.6.1

assembly

3.1.6.2 Break test apparatus No. ZZ- as shown in Fig. 2B. It is an assembly of two stout plates, each 160 x 160 x 7.5 cm, with or without subsidiary steel plates of the same aggregate area, in the enclosure for break test. The volume of the enclosure is 5.7 m3. The plates are horizontal and are held apart at di.stances which may be varied between 5 and 15 cm by stout pillars passing through both plates near their corners. If subsidiary plates are not used, the lower plate has a semi-cylindrical groove, 45 mm in diameter, along the centre line cut from one edge to within 15 cm of the If subsidiary plates are used, a snnilar groove is cut in one opposite edge. of them, which then lies centrally on the lower plate. To either side of it, flanking plates of equal thickness cover the residual area of the lower plate. The gap between the plates is closed along that side of the square on which the closed end of the groove lies, and along one adjacent edge. The enclosure for break test completely surrounds the plates. 3.1.6.3 Break test apparatus Xo. ZZZ- as shown in Fig 2C. It is an assembly of two type II cannons and two stout steel plates, each 160 x 160 x 7.5 km in the enclosure for break test. `I`he volume of the enclosure is The 5.7 m3. Each plate is bored centrally to be a close fit to the cannons. plates are horizontal and are held 15 cm apart by stout pillars passing The axis of the cannons are in line and through them near the corners. vertical, and the lower end of the lower of the two cannons is closed by a The upper surface of the lower cannon is flush with the upper steel plate. surface of the lower of the two 160 cm square plates. The lower surface of the upper cannon is flush with the lower surface of the upper of the two plates. The enclosure for break test completely surrounds both plates and the mouths of both cannons; the lower part of the lower cannon may, for convenience, project below it. 3.2 General Conditions for Testing

3.2.1 Cartridges 3.2.1.1
types of explosives

Unless otherwise required, the cartridges for all the tests on all shall be of 3650 2 g'j5 mm diameter excepting that in 8

ISr6699(PartII/Sec2)-1974

PLATES

TYPE

I CANNON

2A Break Test Apparatus

I

l60xl60x7~5cm'lHICK
_____----___

MS
__---------d

PLATES

.

-I

.

lSO

I--

1

I

2B Break Test Apparatus

II

( Two views at right angle to each other )
TYPE 11 CANNOk

160x160~

7oScm

MS

PLATES

TYPE

II

CANNON

2C Break. Test

Apparatus

III

All dimensions in millimetra.

FIG. 2

ARRANGEMENT OF BREAK TEST APPARATUSFOR P(r) EXPLOSIVES 9.

IS t 6609 ( Pai

II/Set 2 ) - 1974

the tests prescribed in 3.2.3.2 and 3.2.3.3, the cartridges ofT *TP(yCor P (s) explosive of density less than 1 g/ml shall be 41.23 _+i 6 mm m diameter. They shall not be mis-shapen and shall be filled to an approximately uniform density. The cartridges that do not fulfil these requirements Fire the cartridge in the case, wrapper or in which the shall be rejected. explosive is proposed to be employed. 3.2.2 PrimingWhile fitting the detonator, pierce the cartridge in its envelop without unfolding any part of the latter. Insert the detonator completely until its top is flush with the end of the cartridge and then give the firing lead wires a half-hitch round the cartridge. 3.2.3 Loading and Stemming '

3.2.3.1 While loading Type I cannon for tests in the gallery, first insert a dry fireclay plug of 2.5 cm length and of diameter not less than 52 mm ( see Note ). Then load the bore of the cannon with the explosive charge for inverse or direct initiation as specified below: a) For inverse initiation, insert the primer cartridge with the detonator to the back and make up the charge with such other cartridges as are required. b) For direct initiation insert the primer cartridge last with the detonator to the front of the bore after having inserted the other cartridges which make up the explosive charge. c) When stemming is specified, take a single dry fireclay plug 2.5 cm in length and 5.2 cm in diameter and fitting the bore closely, and push it on to the chaige, but not with such a force as to distort the cartridge.
NOTE - In case of test prescribed in 3.3.5.1, first insert sufficient sand to ensure that, when loaded, there shall be a space of only 5 cm between the outer end of the charge and the mouth of the cannon.

3.2.3.2 While loading Type I cannon for break test apparatus No. I, first insert enough stemming to bring the specified charge flush with the Insert the primer cartridge first wiih the detonator mouth of the cannon. S_ . to the back ( inverse initiation ). 3.2.3.3 For tests in break test apparatus No. XI, lay the specified charge in the groove with its centre coincident with the centre of the groove and with the detonator nearer to the stopped end of the groove. 3.2.3.4 For loading the two Type II cannons for tests in break test apparatus No. III, first insert enough stemming in the lower cannon to fill it within 7.5 cm of the mouth. Then insert the test charge ( a single cartridge 30.5 cm long ) so that its lower primed end rests on the stemming; it thus bridgFs the gap between the plates. Then add stemming on top of the charge to fill the remaining portion of the bore of the upper cannon. 10

IS : 6609 ( Part II/Set 3.2.4 Method of using a strength detonator; or, with with the particular

2 ) - 1974

Firing - Every test charge shall be fired electrically, No. 6 instantaneous copper-cased low-tension electric such other type of detonator as may be used in practice explosive being tested.

NOTE- Before or during a test, shots may be'fired with permitted explosives or take In particular, care shall other steps in order to satisfy that standard conditions prevail. be taken to ensure that the cannon bore has not become so enlarged as to cause any appreciable reduction of the severity of the test. The test may be suspended or discarded completely or in part, if standard conditions do not exist.

3.3

Test Procedures Procedure.for Each Shot

3.3.1

3.3.1.1 Loading of the charge - Clean the cannon bore free of greases. Load the cannon bore with appropriate quantity of the explosive as Push the cannon so that it is prescribed in 3.3.2, 3.3.3, 3.3.4 and 3.3.5. kept pressed against the blank end of the gallery with which it makes a gastight seal. Connect the bare ends of the detonator with the first two terminals inside the gallery. Across the other two terminals, connect an electric fuse wire. Seal the vent windows and the other end of the explosion chamber using polyethylene film or bitumen impregnated paper. 3.3.1.2 Firing of the shot into gas mixture

4

Introduce adequate quantity of methane or natural gas and circulate for sufficient time to obtain a 9 -J-- 0.25 percent or 8 f 0.25 percent of methane or natural gas-air mixture as the case may be ( see 3 .l .l .I and 3 .l J-2 ) . Open the sampling pinch cock fitted on the gallery and draw a gas sample and check the percentage of methane in the mixture using a suitable meter. If the gas mixture is within the specified limits, stop circulation of the gas, and close all the plugcocks in the circulating system. Lay the cables for firing the explosive charge and for rupturing the electric fuse wire and connect these cables to the respective Check the circuit continuity using an terminals on the gallery. approved single shot exploder or intrinsically safe circuit and fire the explosive charge, using an intrinsically safe exploder firing circuit. Observe through the observation windows in the gallery from a safe distance for any gas ignition by the explosive. Also examine the polyethylene film or bitumenized kraft paper for any signs of melting or burning. In case the explosive does not ignite the gas mixture, rupture the electric fuse to ignite the gas mixture. This is done to ensure that standard condition prevails while doing the tests.

b)

cl

Is:6699(PartII/8tc2)-1974
Record the results giving the type of explosive, charge weight, diameter, method of initiation, percentage of methane in the gas mixture, relative humidity of the atmosphere and whether it %z+s an ignition or non-ignition. Before commencing the series, check the ignitability of the gas mixture by electrically rupturing the fuse wire as above.

3.3.1.3 Firing of shot in coal dust atmosphere

4 The charge is loaded as described in 3.3.1.1.1 b) In case of Type P ( o ) explosives, place a strong

wooden platform 30 cm wide and 300 cm long with its top 15 cm below the bore of the cannon in the gallery with one end touching the blank end. Scatter 2.3 kg of coal dust along the first 5.5 metres of the gallery. Lay along the first 180 cm of the platform 1.1 kg of coal dust for the first shot and 650 g of coal dust for the subsequent shots. For Type P ( eqs ) and P ( s ) explosives, suspend two paper bags each containing 550 g of coal dust and a strength No. 8 copper tube low tension instantaneous electric detonator from the top of the gallery at a distance of 75 cm and 210 cm from the blank end of the gallery. Before beginning the test, scatter 2.3 kg of coal dust along the first 5.5 metres length of the gallery. Connect the detonators in the paper bag with the strength ho. 6 halfsecond delay detonator in the explosive charge in series with each other and connect the free leads with the- first two terminals inside the gallery. Seal the gallery vents, windows and the end of the explosion chamber using polyethylene film or bitumen impregnated paper. Lay the cable for firing the explosive charge, connect it with the first two terminals on the gallery, check the circuit continuity and fire the shot as described in 3.3.1.2( b ). Observe for any ignition of coal dust through the -observation windows in the gallery from a safe distance. Also examine the polyethylene film or bitumenized kraft paper for any sign of melting or burning. Record the results giving type of explosive, charge weight, diameter, method of initiation, relative humidity of the atmosphere and whether it was an ignition or non-ignition.

4

4

3.3.2 Procedure for Type P ( o ) Exjlosives
3.3.2.1 Series 1Fire without stemming, 26 shots, each of 142 g inversely initiated and loaded as specified in 3.2.3.1 from a Type I cannon into the specified gas mixture contained in the gallery.

3.3.2.2 Series 2- Fire 5 shots, each of 795 g directly initiated and loaded and stemmed as specified in 3.2.3.1 from a Type I cannon into the specified gas mixture contained in the gallery. 12

IS : 6609 ( Part Ii/Set

2 ) - 1974

3.3.2.3 Series 3- Before starting the series 3 proceed as mentioned in 3.3.1.3. Then fire 5 shots, each of 795 g directly initiated and loaded and stemmed as specified in 3.2.3.1 from a Type I cannon into a cloud of coal dust of the nature and fineness specified in 3.1.2.
3.3.3 Procedure for T_y@eP ( eqs ) Explosives

3.3.3.1 Series 1 - Fire 26 shots, each of 397 g inversely initiated and loaded without stemming as specified in 3.2.3.1 from a Type I cannon into the specified gas mixture contained in the gallery. 3.3.3.2 Series 2Fire 5 shots, each of 1 kg directly initiated and loaded and stemmed as specified in 3.2.3.1 from a Type I cannon into the specified gas mixture contained in the steel'gallery. 3.3.3.3 Series 3Fire 5 shots, each of 565 g inversely initiated and loaded without stemming as specified in 3.2.3.1 from a Type I cannon into Prepare the preformed coal dust cloud in a preformed coal dust cloud. the steel gallery as mentioned in 3.3.1.3. 3.3.4 Procedure for Type P ( r ) Exp!osives

3.3.4.1 Series 1 - Fire 5 shots, each of the maximum permitted charge weight in cartridges of 36.5 mm diameter loaded as specified in 3.2.3.2 in the break test apparatus No. I specified in 3.1.6.1, the enclosure for break test containing the specified gas mixture. 3.3.4.2 Series 2Fire 26 shots at a chosen charge weight not exceeding 227 g loaded as specified in 3.2.3.3, in break test apparatus The gas .Vo. II ( see 3.1.6.2 ) in an atmosphere of propane-air-nitrogen. mixture shall be Prepared by adding propane to air until the proportion of propane in the atmosphere is 4.00 f 0.05 percent and then adding nitrogen to this mixture of propane and air until the proportion of propane in the mixture is 3.60 f 0.05 percent. The gas mixture shall contain not more than negligible proportion of inflammable gases other than propane. The charge weight chosen for the test shall be that weight not exceeding 227 g at which the explosive appears to have the greatest probability of igniting the specified gas mixture. This weight shall be determined by firing shots over a range of charge weights. 3.3.4.3 Series 3 - Fire 5 shots each of a cartridge 30 cm long and of 36.5 mm diameter, loaded and stemmed as specified in 3.2.3.4 in break test apparatus No. III specified in 3.1.6.3 the enclosure for break test containing the specified gas mixture. 3.3.4.4 Series 4Fire 26 shots, each of 397 g inversely initiated loaded without stemming as specified in 3.2.3.1 from Type I cannon the specified gas mixture contained in the steel gallery. 13 and into

IS t 6609 ( Part II/See 2 ) - 1974 3.3.5 Procedure for Type P ( s) Exjlosives
3.3.5.1 Series 1 - Fire 20 shots, each of 565 g inversely initiated and loaded without stemming as specified in 3.2.3.1 so as to allow only a distance of5 cm between the outer end of the charge and the mouth of the cannon from a Type I cannon into the specified gas mixture contained in the steel gallery. Additional shots at charge weights lower than 565 g similarly initiated and loaded and without stemming, may also be fired. 3.3.5.2 Series 2 -Fire 5 shots, each of 1 030 g directly initiated and loaded and stemmed as specified m 3.2.3.1 from a Type I cannon into the specified gas mixture contained in the steel gallery. 3.3.5.3 Series 3Fire 5 shots, each of 565 g inversely initiated and loaded without stemming as specified in 3.2.3.1 from a Type I cannon into a preformed coal dust cloud. Prepare the preformed coal dust cloud in the steel gallery as mentioned in 3.3.1.3. 4. TEST FOR CONTINUITY

OF DETONATION

4.0 General -

The object of this test is to determine whether detonation developed in the first cartridge of a one-metre column of explosives can be maintained throughout the length of the column.

4.1 Procedure-Make a one metre long column of cartridges of the smallest diameter and of the smallest mass in that diameter to be Keep them in loose contact without any confinement in a manufactured. three-fold manila paper or any other paper used for wrapping the explosive Initiate the end cartridge by a detonator under test on a steel bar or rail. of the type recommended by the manufacturer for use along with this explosive.. Observe whether the cartridges have detonated or not. 4.2 Precautions The following precautions shall be observed: a) In case of detonator failing to fire, wait at least for 10 minutes before approaching the shot. b) In case of incomplete detonation of the column, collect undetonzited cartridges carefully and destroy by detonation. all

14

