RAT AAF IS 11328 : 2022 
Indian Standard 


aerate ST Hae — fats 


( Teel FRAT ) 


Self-Contained Automatic 
Ice Makers — Specification 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 97.130.20 


© BIS 2022 


anda AM SAN 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Te TH AMT, ay freh 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


September 2022 Price Group 7 


Refrigeration and Air Conditioning Sectional Committee, MED 03 


FOREWARD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Refrigeration and Air Conditioning Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering 
Division Council. 


This standard was first published in 1985. 


The first revision has been taken up to keep pace with the latest technological developments and international 
practices. The major changes in this revision are as follows: 


a) The scope of the standard has been revised; 
b) New terminologies have been added; 
c) Construction requirement has been elaborated; 
d) Refrigerating system requirement has been incorporated; and 
e) Requirement for electrical equipment have been elaborated. 
The composition of the committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex B. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 11328 : 2022 


Indian Standard 


SELF-CONTAINED 
AUTOMATIC ICE MAKERS — SPECIFICATION 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard prescribes the general construction 
and performance requirements of automatic ice makers 
working on vapor compression refrigeration principle 
for rated voltage up to and including 250 V, 50 Hz, for 
single-phase and up to and including 440 V, 50 Hz for 
three-phase. The standard prescribes rating and test 
requirements for ice makers for commercial or similar 
use. 


1.2 This standard does not cover the following: 


a) Refrigeration system with water cooled 


(or remote) condensing unit; and 
b) Ice maker 
refrigerator. 


installed as part of household 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions, which 
through reference in this text constitute provision of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 


IS No. Title 


661 : 2019 Thermal insulation of cold 
storage — Code of practice 


(fourth revision) 


Code of practice for 
electrical wiring installations 
(fourth revision) 


732 : 2019 


996 : 2009 Single phase a.c. induction 
motors for general purpose 


(third revision) 


1068 : 1993 Electroplated coatings of 
nickel plus chromium and 
copper plus nickel plus 
chromium — Specification 


(third revision) 


10617 : 2018 Hermetic compressors — 


Specification (second revision) 


IS No. Title 


12615 : 2018 Line operated three phase a.c. 
motors (IE Code) “Efficiency 
classes and performance 


specification” (third revision) 


16678 (Part 2) : 2018/ 
ISO 5149-2 : 2014 


Refrigerating systems and 
heat pumps — Safety and 
environmental requirements : 
Part 2 Design, construction, 
testing, marking and 
documentation 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 


3.1 Automatic Commercial Ice-Maker — 

Factory-made appliance consisting of a condensing 

unit and ice-making section operating as an integrated 

unit, with means for making and harvesting ice, also 

including means for storing or dispensing ice, or both. 
NOTE — Ice makers are intended to produce ice in irregular 
shapes or flakes or ribbons or wafers as well as uniformly 
shaped ice cubes. 


3.2 Self Contained Unit — A unit in which ice making 
compartment and the storage compartment are integral 
and form a single unit in a single cabinet. 


3.3 Split System Unit — A unit in which condensing 
unit and ice making unit are in separate sections 
(or cabinet). The condensing unit and the ice making 
section are connected by refrigerant piping. 


3.4 Storage Compartment — The part of the 
refrigerator meant for ice storage. 


3.5 Thermal Insulation — A material of low thermal 
conductivity employed for the purpose of retarding 
heat flow. 


3.6 Ice Making Rate — The amount of ice produced, 
in kg/24 h. The temperature of ice produced should be 
0°C or less. 


3.7 Potable Water use Rate — The amount of potable 
water used in making ice, stated in litre/kg of ice. 


IS 11328 : 2022 


3.8 Energy Consumption — Total energy consumption 
stated in kWh/kg of ice produced as per 7.6.4. For split 
units, total energy should also include condenser side 
power. 


3.9 Harvesting Cycle — The cycle consists of ice 
making cycle for 24 h from initiation of ice formation. 


3.10 Ice Cube — Single piece of ice that can have 
different shapes (for example, dice, cylinder, ball, etc). 


3.11 Nugget — Single piece of ice produced by a 
continuous ice maker. 


3.12 Ice Flakes — Ice which residual water is less than 
30 percent of the mass of the ice. 


3.13 Ice Storage Bin — Factory-made container 
(not necessarily shipped in one package) that forms or 
is intended to form a non-refrigerated compartment for 
the storage of ice. 


3.14 Separate Storage Compartment — 
Non-refrigerated compartment for the storage of ice 
that is separate from the ice-making mechanism. 


3.15 Purge (Blow-Down) — Dissipation of a certain 
percentage of water to control the clarity of ice or to 
prevent scaling. 


3.16 Batch Type Ice Maker — An ice maker having 
alternate freezing and harvesting period. 


3.17 Continuous Type — An ice maker which 
continuously freezes and harvests ice simultaneously. 


4 CONSTRUCTION 


4.1 General 


The ice maker and its parts shall be constructed with 
the strength and rigidity adequate to normal conditions 
of handling, transport, and usage. There shall be no 
sharp edges or corners liable to cause injury under 
normal conditions of use. Also, under normal usage, 
all moving parts which constitute an accident hazard 
shall be effectively guarded. The ice maker shall be 
constructed to have an assembly design that permits the 
removal of any defective part and its easy replacement. 


4.2 Materials 


Materials used in the construction of the cabinet shall 
comply with Indian Standards wherever applicable, 
except when such requirements are modified by this 
standard. They shall be free from defects that are liable 
to cause undue deterioration or failure. Under normal 
conditions of use, the materials used shall not shrink, 
warp or cause mold or odours, and shall be resistant 
to attack by local vermin and destructive pests. 
Where liable to be exposed to moisture, chemically 
active substances, food or food products, they shall 
be suitably resistant and shall not contaminate stored 


products placed in contact with them. Sealing materials 
used shall not lose in service any of their essential 
properties, such as adhesion, plasticity, and moisture 
resistance due to ageing, temperature, and humidity 
variations. 


4.3 Internal and External Finishes 


Internal and external finishes shall be durable and 
capable of being cleaned effectively and hygienically 
without undue deterioration. All metal parts used 
inside the ice maker or on the outside where they are 
exposed to moisture or the ambient conditions shall 
be corrosion-resistant or adequately protected against 
corrosion. 


4.3.1 Electroplated metal parts used in the cabinet shall 
satisfy the requirements specified in IS 1068. 


4.3.2 Where vitreous enameled parts are fitted, 
ample means shall be provided to prevent chaffing 
or mechanical stress likely to cause chipping. Where 
liable to contact with food products or other chemically 
active substances, the enamel shall be suitably resistant. 


4.4 Thermal Insulation 


The quality, thickness, and application of the insulation 
material shall be such that efficient insulation of the 
cabinet is reasonably maintained. There shall be 
proper seals against moisture penetration by diffusion 
or condensation. Detachable plates and covers shall 
be provided with suitable seals to prevent the ingress 
of moisture into the insulation. Highly conducting 
external or internal surfaces shall be separated by 
insulating breaker strips or their equivalent. As far as 
possible, no member of the frame shall penetrate the 
full thickness of the insulation. The external surface 
of the cabinet shall be free from condensation under 
normal conditions of service. 


NOTE — IS 661 may be referred for recommended thicknesses 
of insulation. 


4.5 Fittings 


Linings and facings shall have sufficient mechanical 
strength to resist distortion and give reasonable 
protection to the insulation. There shall be no infiltration 
of solid objects from the door gaskets or any other 
openings. 


4.6 Hardware 


Door fasteners and hinges shall be smooth and positive 
in action and designed to maintain their proper function 
without undue wear under normal conditions of service. 
Screws and all hardware shall be of brass or other 
corrosion-resisting material. 


4.7 Water Condensation 


Suitable means shall be provided to prevent moisture 
dripping or splashing from baffles, drip trays, or other 
cold parts on the articles placed on the shelves. 


4.8 Harvesting 


Means shall be provided for collecting all the water 
from the evaporator either by a removable tray or by 
a fixed receptacle. The suitable arrangement shall be 
made for the elimination of water and, where necessary, 
suitable means shall be provided for heating the tray for 
preventing freezing of water. 


4.9 Drains 


Where drains are fitted they shall have ample capacity 
to cope with the requirements of normal service and 
shall be suitably sealed against ingress of air. They 
shall also be accessible for cleaning and shall not allow 
water to collect. 


4.10 Interior Fittings 


Rails and shelves if applicable shall be sufficiently 
strong for the duty required. Unless specified otherwise, 
the maximum height of any shelf shall be 1.5 m 
(or 5 ft.) from the floor level and the depth of a shelf 
shall be not more than 0.75 m. 


4.11 Compressor 


The compressors shall conform to IS 10617. 


4.12 Motors 


The motor used for driving the fan/blower motor shall 
be either capacitor type induction motors or brushless 
d.c. motor (BLDC). 


The capacitor type induction motor shall comply with 
the requirements given in IS 996 as applicable for fan 
duty motors. 


In the case of BLDC motors, the test for full load test 
shall be carried out at the rated frequency declared 
by the manufacturer. The measured power input and 
the speed shall be within + 10 percent of the declared 
value. In addition, BLDC motors shall comply with the 
following requirements as specified in the respective 
clauses of IS 996 as applicable: 


a) Dimensions (see 7.1); 

b) Terminal box (see 9.2); 

c) Mounting (see 9.3); 

d) Constructional features (see 9.4); 


e) Enclosure (see 10 of IS 996 and IP code as per 
IS/IEC 60529); 


f) Method of cooling (see 11); 


g) Full load test for measurement of power input and 
full load speed at the declared frequency (see 12.5 
and F-6.2.4); 


h) Insulation resistance excluding the requirement of 
temperature rise test (see 12.7); 


j) High voltage (see 13.1); and 
k) Moisture proofness (see 13.2). 


IS 11328 : 2022 


NOTE — Separate standard for BLDC motor is under 
development. Requirement of overload protector, the 
centrifugal switch and capacitor from IS 996 does not apply for 
BLDC motor. 


5 REFRIGERATING SYSTEM 


5.1 Construction 


Pipes and connections to moving or resiliently mounted 
parts shall be and arranged as not to foul, or transmit 
vibrations to other parts. Pipes and connections shall 
be securely fixed and sufficient free length shall be 
provided to minimize the risk of failure due to fatigue. 
Where necessary for normal operating conditions, 
pipes and valves shall be thermally insulated. The 
refrigerating system shall be free from undue noise or 
vibration. 


5.1.1 The evaporator may be of copper, brass, or 
aluminium. Copper evaporator shall be hot-dip tinned, 
electro-tinned, or oxidized. Stainless steel may also be 
used for this purpose. 


5.2 Water Condensation 


Suitable means shall be provided to prevent. Water 
condensed on cold parts or pipes of the refrigerating 
system from affecting the operation of the unit of its 
controls. 


5.3 Safety Features in Design 


The refrigerating system shall be assembled in 
accordance with good engineering practice and 
shall meet the requirements laid down in IS 16678 
(Part 2)/ISO 5149-2. The refrigerating system shall be 
so designed that it will suffer no damage if the door of 
the cabinet is left open accidentally in ambient air or if 
the unit starts with high pressure on the low side. When 
the door is left open under normal operating conditions, 
the automatic motor overload protective device may 
come into operation. 


5.4 Control of Operation 


Refrigerant flow and compressor driving motor 
operation shall be automatically controlled to control 
the quantity of ice produced as per the designed 
capacity of the machine and to maintain it within the 
limits of application. Strainer and dehydrator shall 
always be provided in the liquid line. 


5.5 Location of the Components 


The evaporator, screens, baffler, drip tray, etc, shall 
not obstruct access to the stored products. All control 
devices and service valves shall be readily accessible. 
Where the evaporator incorporates facilities for making 
ice, ice-trays shall be capable of being removed 
without disturbing the stored products. 


IS 11328 : 2022 


5.5.1 Fixing of the Evaporator 
Evaporator shall be fixed on suitably insulated supports. 


6 ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT 


6.1 Motors 


All motors shall be of types suitable for their particular 
applications. Motors shall conform to the requirements 
of IS 12615 or IS 996 whichever is applicable as per 
4.12. 


6.2 Motors shall be adequately protected against 
dangerous over-heating arising from the excessive flow 
of current. 


6.3 Motor Starters, Relays, Thermostat, Controls, 
etc 


All switching devices in the main motor circuit shall 
be capable of breaking the stalled current of the motor. 
Switching devices shall be so designed or located that 
they are not affected by moisture during normal use. 
They shall be suitable for operation at the applied 
voltage. Suitable types of radio interference suppressors 
shall be fitted, where required. 


6.4 Wiring 


Electrical wiring and connections shall conform to the 
requirements of IS 732, and also the /ndian Electricity 
Act, 1910 and Indian Electricity Rules, 1956. All 
electrical joints shall be electrically and mechanically 
secure. Where any wire or cord passes through metal 
holes, the metal edges shall not have sharp edges. The 
cord entry shall be provided with protection with rubber 
pieces or similar alternate protection, for example as 
shown in Fig. 1, to protect the cord from damage, if 
there are any sharp edges. 


Fic. 1 RUBBER PROTECTION FOR CORD 


6.4.1 Live parts shall be protected by suitable guards, 
shields, or screens of adequate strength and durability 
to avoid the possibility of making inadvertent contact 
therewith during normal service conditions. 


6.4.2 The entry to the cabinet for refrigerant pipes, 
electrical wires, and thermo-static capillary tubing shall 
be provided with protection against moisture ingress. 


6.5 Electrical Accessories 


All internal electrical fittings, such as lamps, switches, 
fans, etc, shall be provided with guards for protection 
against mechanical damage. 


6.6 Earth Connection 


The metal sheathing of the cables and the metal casings 
of the electrical components shall be assembled and 
bonded to ensure earth continuity and connected to a 
suitable earth terminal. The metal frame or chassis of 
the ice maker cabinet shall be suitably earthed. 


7 TESTS 


7.1 General Requirements for Tests 
7.1.1 Test Conditions 


7.1.1.1 The ice maker shall be so placed or shielded 
to prevent direct radiation from the heating equipment 
or other sources of heat. Air circulation in the test 
room shall be such that the specified uniformity of 
temperature distribution is obtained without a direct 
draught upon the ice maker under test. The ice maker 
shall be shielded from extraneous air currents, which 
exceed 15 m/min. The machine shall be placed on a 
wooden platform with a solid top. The vertical ambient 
temperature gradient in the test room to a height of 2 m 
shall not exceed 1 K/m. 


7.1.1.2 The interior of the cabinet shall be dried prior to 
start of the tests. 


7.1.1.3 The cabinet door or doors shall be kept closed 
during each test. 


7.1.2 Temperatures 


7.1.2.1 Ambient temperatures 


a) The ambient temperature shall be maintained at 
32°C to within +1°C of the specified value and 
shall be measured at 300 mm from the sides 
and front of the cabinet and at the height of 
the geometric centre of the front and sides. 
This condition shall be maintained during both 
stabilizing and test periods; 


b) The ambient temperature shall be recorded at 
one of the above positions, with a recording 
instrument. If an indicating instrument is used, 
readings shall be taken at intervals of 5 min; and 


c) The vertical temperature gradient from the floor to 
a height of 2 m shall not exceed 1.0°C for each m 
of vertical distance. 


See Fig. 2 at Annex A for thermocouple location. 


NOTE — Ambient sensor shall be shielded from any source 
or sink of radiant heat which influence measurement air 
temperature, including conditioning equipment, external 
doors, or appliance under test. 


7.1.3 Electric Power Supply 
7.1.3.1 In all tests, the supply voltage shall be within 
2 percent of the following: 

a) The voltage marked on the nameplate; or 

b) The mean if the maximum and the minimum range 


is marked on the nameplate. 


7.1.3.2 The supply frequency in the case of a.c. shall 
be within +1 percent of the frequency marked on the 
nameplate. 


7.1.4 Instruments and Measurements 


7.1.4.1 Temperature measurements shall be made with 
instruments being accurate to 0.5°C. 


7.1.4.2 Pressure measurements, when taken, shall be 
made with Bourdon tube gauge or electrical transducer. 
The accuracies of measurement shall be +1 percent of 
reading. 


7.1.4.3 Watt-hour meter shall be capable of being read 
up to 0.01 kWh with | percent of reading accuracy. 


7.1.4.4 The operating time of the unit shall be obtained 
by means of a recording meter or a self-starting 
synchronous electric clock. 


7.1.4.5 Water inlet temperature shall be 30 + 1°C and 
the water pressure should be maintained as specified by 
the manufacturer. 


7.2 Ice Weighing Instruments 


Ice shall be weighed on an instrument having an 
accuracy and readability of +1 percent of the quantity 
measured. The intercepted ice shall be obtained in one 
of the following containers of predetermined mass: 


a) Perforated pan, bucket or wire basket; and 
b) Non-perforated pan or bucket. 


7.3 Type Tests 
The following shall constitute the type tests: 
a) Capacity/ice making tests; 
b) Water consumption tests; 
c) Energy consumption test; 
d) Product density test/ice quality measurement; and 
e) Maximum operating conditions test. 


IS 11328 : 2022 


7.4 Routine Tests 


Every commercial ice maker after production 
completion shall be subjected to the following routine 
tests as per IS 302 (Part 1) at the manufacturer’s works 
which shall be carried out without loading the ice 
maker: 


a) Leakage current test — The leakage current shall 
not exceed 3.5 mA at rated voltage (see 13.2); 


b) Earth continuity test (see A-1); and 
c) Electric strength test (see A-2). 


7.5 Acceptance Tests 


If the purchaser desires any of the production routine 
tests. The tests, then where agreed to between the 
purchaser and the manufacturer, the tests specified in 
7.3 is to be repeated at the manufacturers’ works. 


7.6 Test Procedure 


7.6.1 Stabilization 


Before the measurement period, the unit should be 
stabilized. 


The ice maker shall be considered stabilized after five 
consecutive ice production capacity measurements for 
batch type ice makers and after a period of not less than 
two hours of operation for continuous type ice makers. 


7.6.2 Capacity Test/Ice Making Test 
The test shall be conducted as follows: 


a) The test for batch-type ice makers shall start at a 
pre-selected point in a cycle and shall continue 
for 3 complete cycles, ending at the same point 
in the cycle. One cycle consists of freezing and 
ice-making (harvesting); 


b) A perforated container, pre-weighed and 
pre-cooled to less than or equal to ice temperature 
shall be used; 

For continuous ice makers, the test shall run for 
1.5 h, during which time, the ice shall be 
intercepted for three periods of 15 min each; and 


c 


wa 


d) A non-perforated container pre-weighed and 
pre-cooled to less than or equal to ice temperature 
shall be used. 


The ice making capacity in kg per 24 h shall be equal to 
or greater than 90 percent of the rated capacity during 
the test period. 


7.6.3 Water Consumption Test 


The test shall be conducted as follows: 


a) The water consumption shall be determined for 
the same periods as described in 7.6.2 a) or c); and 

b) The water consumption in litres per kg of ice is to 
be calculated from consumption measured during 
the test period. 


IS 11328 : 2022 


The water consumption shall not exceed the rated water 
consumption by 10 percent. 


7.6.4 Energy Consumption Test 
The test shall be conducted as follows: 


a) The total energy consumption (kWh/kg) shall 
be measured for the unit during the test period 
(including ice making and condensing section); 
and 


b) The total energy consumed in making and 
storing the ice, excluding dispensing or other 
energy-consuming elements shall be excluded. 

The energy consumption shall not exceed the rated 
energy consumption by 10 percent. 


7.6.5 Ice Quality Measurement 
Calorimetry 


by Method of 


7.6.5.1 Instrumentation 


The instruments accuracy shall be within the following 
limits: 


a) Weighing scale, accurate to +2 g, witha range of at 
least 0 to 25 kg; 


b) Temperature measuring instrument for water, 
accurate to 0.8°C with a range of at least — 1°C 
to 50°C and a resolution of at least one tenth of a 
degree; 

c) Temperature measuring instrument for room 
(ambient) temperature, accurate to 0.8°C, with a 
range of at least — 1°C to 40°C and a resolution of 
at least one degree; and 


d) Timer readable to the nearest second. 


7.6.5.2 Procedure jor 
determination 


calorimeter constant 


The verification of the calorimeter constant of the 
apparatus used to determine specific heat of fusion 
for the ice product is to correct for the effects of heat 
transfer with ambient and heating effect of stirring the 
contents of the calorimeter. 


The test shall be conducted as follows: 


a) The room temperature shall be maintained within a 
range of 18°C to 24°C during the entire procedure; 


b) The empty calorimeter shall be weighed and 
recorded; 


c) Aquantity of water that is 5 times the mass of the ice 
to be added as in subclause e), +60 g and that has a 
temperature 10°C + 1°C above room temperature. 
The water temperature and the combined weight 
of the calorimeter and water shall be recorded; 


d 


NS 


It shall be stirred at 1 + 0.5 revolutions per second 
for 15 min and the water temperature and room 
temperature just prior to the addition of the ice 
shall be recorded; 


e) Within 1 min, a mass of ice that is within a range of 
50 percent to 200 percent of the rated ice production 
for a period of 15 min of the ice maker to be tested 
shall be added, or 2.5 kg + 150 g, whichever is 
less, in the form ofa single block of pure ice that has 
been allowed to reach an equilibrium temperature 
measured by a thermocouple embedded in the 
interior of the block of 0°C and is free of trapped 
water, recording the time when all ice has been 
added to the nearest second; 


f) It shall be stirred at the same rate as in d), recording 
the water temperature, room temperature, and 
the time (to the nearest second) when the ice 
disappears. Continue stirring at a constant rate 
after the ice has disappeared for a period of 15 min 
and record the water and room temperature at the 
end of the 15 min period. The calorimeter with the 
water and the melted ice shall be recorded; 


g) The calorimeter constant shall be determined 
following the steps and calculations in Table 1; and 


h) The calorimeter constant shall be determined at 
minimum each time the temperature measuring 
and weighing instruments are calibrated or when 
there is any change to the container or stirring 
apparatus. 


The calorimeter constant shall be in the range of 
1.0 to 1.02 for use in determining calorimetry of 
harvested ice. Apparatus improvements are needed if 
the constant falls outside this range. 


7.6.5.3 Procedure for determining net cooling effect of 
harvested ice 


The test shall be conducted as follows: 


a) Room temperature shall be maintained within a 
range of 18°C to 24°C during the entire procedure; 


b) The empty calorimeter shall be weighed and 
recorded; 


c) A quantity of water that is 5 times the weight of 
ice to be added as in subclause 7.6.5.2 e) + 60 
g, and that has a temperature 10°C + 1°C above 
room temperature. The water temperature and the 
combined weight of the calorimeter and water 
shall be recorded; 


d) It shall be stirred at 1 + 0.5 revolutions per second 
for 15 min and the water temperature and room 
temperature just prior to the addition of the ice 
shall be recorded; 

e) The quantity of harvested ice that has been used 
for 7.6.5.2 e) shall be added. It shall be stirred at 
1 + 0.5 revolutions per second, recording the 
minimum water temperature; 


f) The calorimeter with the water and the melted ice 
shall be recorded; and 


g) The results as indicated in Table 2 shall be 
calculated. 


SI No. 


xx) 


xxi) 
xxii) 
xxiii) 


xxiv) 


KKV) 
xxvi) 
xxvii) 


xxviii) 


Table 1 Calorimeter Constant 
(Clause 7.6.5.2) 


Data to be Recorded 


(2) 
Weight of the calorimeter 
Water temperature after addition of the calorimeter 
Combined weight of the calorimeter and water 
Weight of the water = (iii) — (i) 
Room temperature at time ice is added 
Water temperature at time ice is added 
Time that ice is added 
Time when ice is completely melted 
Room temperature when ice is completely melted 
Water temperature when ice is completely melted 
Combined weight of calorimeter, water, and added ice 
Weight of ice = (xi) — (iii) 
Room temperature after second 15 min stirring 
Water temperature after second 15 min stirring 
Temperature drop of water = (vi) — (x) 
Refrigeration used to cool the water 
= (xv) x (iv) x 4.19 kJ/°C; [(xv) x (iv)] 


Average temperature difference between room and water during second 
15 min stirring = [(ix) + (xiii) — (x) — xiv)]/2 


Temperature rise during second 15 min stirring = (xiv) — (x) 


Heat gain conductance factor = (xviii) — 4.19 kJ/°C — kg x [(xii) + (iv)]/ 
[(xvii) x 15 min]; {(xviii) x [(xii) + (iv)]/[(xvii) x 15 min]} 


Average temperature difference between room and water during ice melt 
period = [(ix) + (v) — (vi) — (x)]/2 


Ice melt duration = (viii) — (vii) 
Ice melt period heat gain = (xix) x (xx) x (xxi) 
Total cooling effect = (xvi) + (xxii) 


Sensible cooling from ice melt water = (xii) x (x) x 4.19 kJ/ kg —°C; {(xii) 
x [(x) — 32 °F]} 


Heat of fusion = (xxiii) — (xxiv) 
Specific heat of fusion = (xxv)/(xii) 
Average specific heat of fusion for trial 1 and trial 2 


Calorimeter constant = 335 kJ/kg/(xxvii) 


Units 


(3) 
kg 
°C 
kg 
kg 
°C 
°C 
min 
min 
°C 
He 
kg 
kg 
°C 
C 
G 
kJ 


eC 


°C 


kJ/ min/°C 


°C 


min 
kJ 
kJ 
kJ 


kJ 


kJ/kg 
kJ/kg 


Data 
Recorded 
Trail 1 


(4) 


IS 11328 : 2022 


Data 
Recorded 
Trail 2 


(5) 


NOTE — Numbers in parentheses in the calculation equations in the above steps refer to the numbers determined in each step. 


IS 11328 : 2022 


Table 2 Net Cooling Effect for Ice Sample 
(Clause 7.6.5.3) 


SI No. Data to be Recorded Units Data Data 
Recorded Recorded 
Trail 1 Trail 2 
a) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) Weight of the calorimeter kg 
ii) Water temperature after addition of the calorimeter RO 
iii) Combined weight of the calorimeter and water kg 
iv) Weight of the water = (iii) — (i) kg 
v) Room temperature at time ice is added °C 
vi) Water temperature at time ice is added °C 
vii) Time that ice is added min 
viii) Time when ice is completely melted min 
ix) Room temperature when ice is completely melted eC 
x) Water temperature when ice is completely melted iG 
xi) Combined weight of calorimeter, water, and added ice kg 
xii) Weight of ice = (xi) — (iii) kg 
xiii) Temperature drop of water = (vi) — (x) °C 
xiv) Refrigeration used to cool the water = (xv) x (iv) x 4.19 kJ/°C; [(xv) x (iv)] kJ 
xv) Heat gain conductance factor from calorimeter constant determination kJ/ min/°C 
[(item (xix) in Table 1] 
xvi) | Average temperature difference between room and water during ice melt period 1C 
=[Gx) + (v) - (vi) - (x)]/2 
xvii) Ice melt duration = (viii) — (vii) min 
xviii) Ice melt period heat gain = (xix) x (xx) x (xxi) kJ 
xix) Total cooling effect = (xvi) + (xxii) kJ 
xx) Sensible cooling from ice melt water = (xii) x (x) x 4.19 kJ/kg —°C; {(xii) x [(x) — 32 °F]} kJ 
xxi) Heat of fusion = (xxiii) — (xxiv) kJ 
xxii) Specific heat of fusion = (xxv)/(xii) kJ/kg 
xxiii) | Average specific heat of fusion for trial 1 and trial 2 kJ/kg 
xxiv Net cooling effect/ mass = 23 x calorimeter constant kJ/kg 
xxv) Ice hardness factor = [(xxiv)/(xxii)] x 100 Percent 


NOTE — Numbers in parentheses in the calculation equations in the above steps refer to the numbers determined in each step. 


The net cooling effect/mass shall not be less than 
90 percent of declared value. 


7.6.6 Maximum Operating Conditions Test 


This test should be carried out at an ambient of 
43 + 1°C. The units shall run continuously for minimum 
period of 2 h without any abnormal failure. 


The compressor might trip during the operation of 
the unit with over load protector (OLP). However, 
the appliance should not become unsafe with regard 
to electric shock, fire hazard, mechanical hazard or 
dangerous malfunction. 


8 MARKING 


8.1 Each ice maker shall have the following information 
marked on a nameplate in a permanent and legible 
manner in a location where it is accessible and easily 
visible after installation: 


a) The name and address of the manufacturer; 
b) Type, model, and serial number; 


c) Normal running current, voltage of the supply 
circuit, and in the case of a.c., the frequency for 
which the ice maker is designed; 


d) The name and the maximum weight of the 
refrigerant used and of any warning agent that has 
been added; and 


e) Ice harvesting capacity in kg/24 h. 
8.2 Information to be supplied by the Manufacturer 


The manufacturer or the supplier shall also provide 
information regarding the following: 


a) Operating instructions; 
b) Ice capacity; and 
c) Water consumption capacity. 


IS 11328 : 2022 


8.3 BIS Certification Marking 


The product conforming to the requirements of this 
standard may be certified as per the conformity 
assessment schemes under the provisions of the 
Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and the Rules 
and Regulations framed there under, and the product 
may be marked with the Standard Mark. 


IS 11328 : 2022 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 7.1.2.1) 
AMBIENT TEMPERATURE MEASUREMENT AND SOLID TOP PLATFORM LOCATION 


ae 


200mm OR DEFINED BY 


| MANUFACTURER 


WOODEN SOLID TOP PLATFORM 300 
$ FOR FREE AIR CIRCULATION ji | 
2444644444444 £££ LLL LL LLL LL LL LLLLLL LL LL LL LLLLLLLLLLLLLLLL 


FRONT VIEW 
MEASUREMENT OF AMBIENT TEMPERATURE 


NOTES 


1 T1, T2, T3 ambient measurement sensor’s location. All dimensions are in mm. Tolerance on dimensions are + 10 mm. 


2 Ambient sensor shall be shielded from any source or sink of radiant heat which influence measurement of air temperature, including 
conditioning equipment, external doors, or appliance under test. 


Fic. 2 THERMOCOUPLE LOCATION 


10 


IS 11328 : 2022 


ANNEX B 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Refrigeration and Air Conditioning Sectional Committee, MED 03 


Organization 


Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee 


Annapurna Electronics and Services Ltd, Hyderabad 


Bureau of Energy Efficiency, New Delhi 


Blue Star Ltd, Mumbai 

BSH Household Appliances Manufacturing Pvt Ltd, 
Chennai 

Carrier Aircon Ltd, Gurugram 

Central Power Research Institute, Bengaluru 

Centre for Science and Environment, New Delhi 


Danfoss Industries Pvt Ltd, Gurugram 


Electrical Research and Development Association, 
Vadodara 

Emerson Climate Technologies (India) Pvt Ltd, Karad 

Godrej & Boyce Manufacturing Company Ltd, 
Mumbai 

Honeywell International India Pvt Ltd, Gurugram 

Indian Institute of Chemical Engineers, Kolkata 

Indian Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air 
Conditioning Engineers (ISHRAE), New Delhi 

Ingersoll Rand, Bengaluru 

International Copper Association India, Mumbai 

Intertek India Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 


LG Electronics India Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 


National Thermal Power Corporation, Noida 


11 


Representative(s) 


Pror (Dr) Ravi KUMAR (Chairman) 


SHRI G. K. PRASAD 
SHRI J. S. Sastry (Alternate) 


Miss PRAVATANALINI SAMAL 
SHRI KAMRAN SHAIKH (Alternate) 
Miss DEEPSHIKHA WADHWA (Young Professional) 


SHRI JITENDRA BHAMBURE 
SHRI SUNIL JAIN (Alternate) 


SHRI VIJAYA KUMAR LOGANATHAN 
SHRI ANAND BALASUBRAMANIAN (Alternate) 


SHRI BIMAL TANDON 
SHRI D. BHATTACHARYA (Alternate) 


Suri A. R. RAVI KUMAR 
SHRI GUJJALA B.BALARAJA (Alternate) 


SHRI CHANDRA BHUSHAN 


SHRI MADHUR SEHGAL 
SHRI K. L. NAGAHARI (Alternate I) 
SHRI M. N. S. V. KIRAN KUMAR (Alternate II) 


SHRI GAUTAM BRAHMBHATT 
SHRI RAKESH PATEL (Alternate) 


SHRI CHETHAN THOLPADY 
SHRI D. P. DESPANDE(Alternate) 


SHRI BURZIN J. WADIA 
SHRI ABHIJIT A. ACHAREKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI SUDHIR KAVALATH 
DR NITIN Karwa (Alternate) 


Dr D. SATHIYAMOORTHY 
Dr Supe K. Das (Alternate) 


DR JYOTIRMAY MATHUR 
SHRI ASHISH RAKHEJA (Alternate) 


SHRI MITTAKOLA VENKANNA 
SHRI JEYAPRAKASH GURUSAMY (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJEEV RANJAN 
SHRI SHANKAR SAPALIGA (Alternate) 


SHRI BALVINDER ARORA 
SHRI C. M. PATHAK (Alternate) 


SHRI ADITYA ANIL 
SHRI RAJAT SHRIVASTAVA (Alternate) 


SHRI D. K. SURYANARAYAN 
SHRI S. K. Jua (Alternate) 


IS 11328 : 2022 


Organization 
Refrigeration and Airconditioning Manufacturers 
Association, New Delhi 


Samsung India Electronics Pvt Ltd, Noida 


Sierra Aircon Pvt Ltd, Gurugram 


The Chemours India Pvt Ltd, Gurugram 
UL India Pvt Ltd, Bengaluru 
Voltas Ltd, Mumbai 


Voluntary Organization in Interest of Consumer 
Voice, New Delhi 


In personal capacity (506/2, Kirti Apartments, Mayur 


Vihar, Phase -1 Extension, Delhi) 


In personal capacity (H.No. 03, Savita Vihar, Delhi) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


SHRI GURMEET SINGH 
SHRI R. K. Menta (Alternate) 


SHRI GAURAV CHOUDHARY 
SHRI KALICHARAN SAHU (Alternate) 


SHRI DAVESH MUDGAL 


SHRI VIKAS MEHTA 
SHRI NISHIT SHAH (Alternate) 


SHRI V. MANJUNATH 
SHRI SATISH KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI SRINIVASU MOTURI 
SHRI A. D. KUMBHAR (Alternate) 


SHRI H. WADHWA 
SHRI B. K. MUKHOPADHYAY (Alternate) 


SHRI P. K. MUKHERJEE 


SHRI J. K. AGRAWAL 


SHRI RAJNEESH KHOSLA, SCIENTIST ‘E’ AND HEAD (MED) 
[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)| 


Member Secretary 


Ms KHUSHBU JYOTSNA KINDO 
SCIENTIST ‘C’ (MED), BIS 


Panel on Self-contained Automatic Ice Makers, MED 3 : P/14 


Organization 


UL India Pvt Ltd, Bengaluru 
Blue Star Ltd, Mumbai 
Frigoglass India Pvt Ltd, Gurugram 


Indian Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air 
Conditioning Engineers (ISHRAE), New Delhi 


Panasonic India, New Delhi 


Voltas Ltd, Mumbai 


Western Refrigeration Private Limited, Mumbai 


Whirlpool India, Gurugram 


12 


Representative(s) 


SHRI SATISH KUMAR (Convener) 
SHRI SUNIL JAIN 
SHRI MAHESH KUMAR 


Dr JYOTIRMAY MATHUR 


SHRI ANIL MEHTA 
SHRI S. SUNDARAMOORTHY (Alternate) 


SHRI SRINIVASU MOTURI 


SHRI PARESH PATEL 
SHRI VISHAL NICHITE (A/ternate) 


SHRI MOHINDER SINGH 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 03 (15673). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 


Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 


Regional Offices: Telephones 


Central : 601/A, Konnectus Tower-1, 6" Floor, DMRC Building, 
Bhavbhuti Marg, New Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8" Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, 2367 0012 


| 2323 7617 
Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 | 2320 9474 


Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg 
Chandigarh 160019 


265 9930 


Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri (East), | 2821 8093 
Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


