IS 13161 (Part 2 ) : 1992

( Reaffirmed 2002 )

WIG 2

wm

Fif@

Indian Standard SHIPBUILDING - NOISE LEVELS ONBOARD SHIPS
PART 2 CODE OF MEASUREMENT

UDC

629.12 : 534.61 : 006.76

@ BIS 1992

BUREAU
MANAK

0%
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

January 1992

Price Group 2

Shipbuilding

Sectional

Committee,

TED 17

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Shipbuilding Sectional Committee had been approved by the Transport Engineering Division Council ( TEDC ). This Indian Standard is a part of the series of standards The other parts are: Part 1 Glossary of terms Part 3 Maximum noise levels - Code of practice Part 4 Noise exposure limits Part 5 Requirement for protection Part 6 Guidelines for controlling noise exposure The purpose of this standard to noise in order to: on noise levels onboard ships.

is to specify noise levels and to device

means

to reduce

exposure

a) Provide for safe working conditions by giving consideration to the need for speech communication and for hearing audible alarms, and to an environment where clearheaded decisions can be made in control stations, navigation and radio spaces and manned machinery spaces; b) Protect the seafarer from excessive noise levels which may give rise to a noise-inducted hearing loss; and c) Provide the seafarer with an acceptable degree of comfort in rest, recreation and other spaces and also to provide conditions for recuperation from the effects of exposure to high noise levels. This standard is intended as a guide and it may not be possible to implement all or any of the measures recommended on all ships. Therefore, it also does not cover detailed technical information needed for putting constructional noise control measure into effect, or for deciding measures appropriate in particular circumstances. In the preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from Publication No. 814 82.05E &`Noise levels onboard ships", issued by International Maritime Organization ( IMO ).

IS 13161 ( Part 2 ) : 1992

Indian Standard SHIPBUILDING - NOISE LEVELS ONBOARD SHIPS
PART 1 SCOPE 2 CODE OF MEASUREMENT 3.1.7 Spaces

This standard ( Part 2 ) specifies operating procedure and measurement conditions, positions for noise levels in various spaces onboard ships. 2 REFERENCE The IS 13161 ( Part 3 ) : 1992 `Shipbuilding Noise levels onboard ships : Part 3 Maximum is necessary noise levels - Code of practice', adjunct to this standard. 3 OPERATING
3.1 At Sea 3.1.1 Measurements CONDITIONS

shall be furnished with all necessary equipment. Measurements without soft furnishing may be made but no allowances shall be made for their absence. 3.1.8 Ships fitted with bow thrusters, stabilizers, etc, may be subjected to high noise levels when in operation. Measurements shall be taken at positions around such machinery when in operation and in adjacent accommodation spaces and duty stations. 3.2 In Port
3.2.1 Measurements as specified in 3.2.2, 3.2.3 and 3.2.4 shall be taken with the ship in port condition.

shall be taken ship in loaded or ballast conditions.

with

the

3.1.2 The main propulsion machinery shall be run at normal design service shaft speed. Voith-Schneider and Controllable pitch propellers, if any, should be in the normal -seagoing position. 3.1.3 All auxiliary machinery, navigation instruments, radio and radar sets, etc, normally or likely to be, in use at any one time should operate throughout the measurement period. 3.1.4 Measurements in spaces containing generators, emergency diesel engine-driven fire pumps or other emergency equipment that would normally be run only in emergency, or shall be taken with the for test purposes, equipment operating. Adjoining spaces need with such equipment not be measured operating, however, unless it is likely that the equipment will be operated for periods other than those mentioned above. 3.1.5 Mechanical ventilation and air-conditioning equipment shall be in normal operation, taking into account that the capacity shall be in accordance with the design conditions. 3.1.6 Doors and windows shall in general be closed but they shall be open in spaces where this is the normal condition, for instance in the navigating bridge where the door on the lee side is normally open.

3.2.2 Measurements shall be taken with the ship's cargo handling equipment in operation, in those areas and accommodation spaces affected by its operation. Noise originating from sources external to the ship shall be discounted as indicated in 3.3.3. 3.2.3 Where the ship is a vehicle carrier and noise during loading and discharging originates from vehicles, the noise level in the cargo spaces and the duration of the exposure shall be measured. 3.2.4 It will be necessary to take measurements in machinery spaces with the auxiliary machinery operating in the port condition if the provisions in respect of ear protection are to be met in lieu of the noise level in machinery spaces ( continuously manned ) during maintenance, overhaul or similar port conditions. 3.3 Environmental Conditions

3.3.1 The depth of water under the ship's keel and the presence of large reflecting surfaces in the ship's vicinity may affect the readings obtained, and shall, therefore, be noted in the noise survey report. 3.3.2 The meteorological conditions such as wind and rain, as well as sea state, shall be such that they do not influence the measurements. Wind force 4 and sea state 3 ( equivalent to wind speed of 11 to 16 knots ) shall not be 1

IS 13161 ( Part 2 ) : 1992

exceeded. If this cannot be achieved, actual conditions shall be reported.

the

3.3.3 Care shall be taken to see that noise from extraneous sound sources, such as people, does not repair work, construction and influence the noise level onboard the ship at the positions of measurement. If necessary, readings may be corrected for steady state background noise according to the energy summation principle.
3.4 Safe Measurement Conditions

be at least 2 m, and in large spaces not containing machinery, measurements shall be taken at intervals not greater than 7 m throughout the space including positions of maximum noise level. In large cargo holds, not more than three measurements need be taken. In no case shaI1 measurements be taken closer than 0.5 m from the boundaries of space. The microphone positions shall be as specified in 5.2 to 5.8. 5.2 Accommodation
Spaces

With the meter set to `fast response' spot checks should be made at positions of high noise level to ensure the safety of a person taking measurements. 4 MEASUREMENT PROCEDURES 4.1 During noise level measurement, only seafarers necessary for the operation of the ship and persons taking the measurement shall be present in the space concerned. 4.2 Sound pressure level readings shall be taken in `decibels using an A-weighting filter 1 dB ( A ) I. 4.3 The meter shall be set to `slow' response and the readings made only to the nearest decibel. A measuring time of at least 5 seconds shall be allowed. If a'meter fluctuates in level within a range of no more than 5 dB ( A ) maximum to minimum, an estimate of the level shall be made by averaging the excursions of the needle by eye. 4.4 If the range fluctuations are in excess of 5 dB ( A ), or the sound is cyclic, irregular or intermittent in operation an integrating meter shall be used set to A-weighting. Integration shall be made over a period of at least 30 seconds. 4.5 Exposure Measurement to the steady state measurements, the of seafarers may be measured 3.2 of IS 13 16 1 ( Part 3 ) : 19% noise level 4.6 Calibration The sound level meter shall be calibrated before and after measurements are taken. 5 MEASUREMENT
POSITIONS In addition

One measurement shall be made in the middle of the space. The microphone shall be moved slowly horizontally and/or vertically over a distance of 1 m and the mean reading recorded. Additional measurements shall be performed at other points if appreciable differences, that is greater than .O dB ( A ), in the level of sound in side the room occur, especially near the head positions of a sitting or lying person. 5.1 Machinery Spaces 5.3.1 Measurements shall be made at the principal working and control stations of the seafarers in the machinery spaces and in the adjacent control rooms, if any special attention being paid to telephone locations and to positions where voice communication and audible signals are important. 5.3.2 Readings shall not normally be taken closer than 1 m from operating machinery, or from decks, bulkheads or other large surfaces, or from air inlets. Where this is not possible, measurement shall be taken at a position midway between the machinery and adjacent reflecting surface. 5.3.3 Measurements from machinery which constitutes a sound source shall be taken at 1 m from the machinery. Measurement shall be made at a height of 1.2 m to 1.6 m above the deck, platform or walkway as folIows: a) At a distance of 1 m from, and at intervals not greater than 3 m around, all sources such as: 1) Main turbines or engines at each level 2) Main gearing 3) Turbo-blowers 4) Purifiers 5) Electrical alternators and generators 6) Boiler firing platform 7) Forced and/or induced draught fans 8) Compressors 9) Cargo pumps ( including their driving motors or turbines )
2

and fluctuating noise exposure as allowed by if necessary.

5.1 Points of Measurement

If not otherwise stated, measurements, shall be performed with the microphone at a height of between 1.2 m and 1.6 m from the deck. The distance between two measurement points shall

3s 13161 ( Part 2 ) : 1992 ( In order to avoid an unnecessarily large and impractical number of measurements and recordings in the case of large engines and of machinery spaces where the measured sound pressure level in dB ( A ) at the intervals above does not vary significantly, it will not be necessary to record each position of maximum sound pressure level shall, however,be made and recorded, subject to at least four measurements being recorded at each level ). 5.5 Normally Unoccupied Spaces 5.5.1 In addition to the spaces referred to in 5.2 to 5.4, measurements shall be made in all locations with unusually high noise levels where seafarers may be exposed, even for relatively short periods, and at intermittently used machinery locations, for example, cargo discharge pumps. 5.5.2 In order to restrict the number of measurements and recordings, noise levels need not be measured for normally unoccupied spaces, holds, deck areas and other spaces which are remote from sources of noise and where a preliminary survey shows that the noise levels are well below the limit specified in IS 13161 ( Part 3 ) : 1992. 5.6 Open I)eck Meaurements shall be taken in any areas provided for the purpose of recreation and additionally where a preliminary survey indicates that the maximum exposure limit without protection may be ex-ceeded. 5.7 Intake and Exhaust Openings When measuring noise levels at the intake and exhaust of engines and near ventilation, aircooler conditioning and systems, the microphone shall where possible, be placed outside the gas stream at a distance of 1 m from the edge of the intake or exhaust opening and at a 30" angle away from the direction of the gas stream and as far as possible from reflceting surfaces. 5.8 Navigating Bridge Wings Measurements shall be taken on both navigating bridge wings but shall only be taken when the navigating bridge wing to be measured is on the lee side of the ship.

b) At local control

stations, the main manoeuvring manoeuvring stand on the and the machinery control

for example, or emergency main engine rooms;

At all other locations c> and (b) which would

during routine and maintenance;

not specified in (a) normally be visited inspecition, adjustment

4

At points on all normally used access by positions routes, unless covered already specified above, at intervals not greater than 10 m; and within the machinery for example, workshops. space,

e) In rooms

( In order to restrict the number of and recordings, the measurements number of recordings can be reduced as in (a), subject to a total of at least four measurements, including those specified in this paragraph, being recorded at each machinery space level up to upper deck. 5.4 Duty Stations The noise level shall be measured at all points where the work is carried out. Additional measurements shall be performed in spaces containing duty stations if variations in noise level are thought to occur in the vicinity of the duty stations.

Standard

Mark The use of the Standard Mark is governed

Standards AC?, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations

by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and Standard marked products are also continuously checked by operated by the producer. BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

Bateau of lndiao Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type Director Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the or grade designations. ( Publications ), BIS. Revision of Indian Standards Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in may be possession of the latest amendments or ~editioa. Comments on this Indian Standard sent to BIS giving the following reference: Dot : No. TED 17 ( 890 )

Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN Headquarters
8

STANDARDS

Maaak Bhavaa, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, `Telephones I 331 01 31, 331 13 75

New Delhi 110002 Telegrams ; Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone

Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavaa, 9 Bahadur NEW DELHI 110002 Shah Zafar Marg

Eastern : l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maaiktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern Southern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 160036 600113

37 86 62 53 38 43 235 02 16 6 32 92 95

Western _: Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) BOMBAY 400093 Branches I AHMADABAD, BANGALORE, BHOPAL, FARjDABAD, GHAZIABAD, GUWAHATI, PATNA, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

BHUBANESHWAR, COIMBATORE, HYDERABAD, JAIPUR, KANPUR,

Printed

at Printwell

Printers,

Aligarh.

India

