IS2395

(Part1):1994

( Reaffirmed 2005 )

(mg;rfte7Q-o
Indian Standard

PAINTINGOFCONCRETE,MASONRYAND PLASTERSURFACES-CODEOFPRACTICE
PART 1 OPERATIONS AND WORKMANSHIP (

First Revision )

UDC

698.12: 667.64: 006.76

OBIS

1994

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS MAN+ BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG
NEW DELHI llooO2
September

1994

PriceGroup

6

Painting, Varnishing and Allied Finishes Sectional Committee,

CED 34

FOREWORD This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Painting, Varnishing and Allied Finishes Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. This standard was first published in 1966 and this is the first revision of the standard. In this revision the following changes have been effected: i) Referred Indian Standards have been updated. ii) `Oil Paint' which was the terminology used earlier has been replaced by `Solvent Based Paint' in accordance with the present practice. iii) Certain modifications have been made in resp.:ct of the preparation of background for lime plaster surfaces. Painting of concrete, masonry and plaster surfaces is carried out not only for hygienic or aesthetic reasons, but'also for waterproofing the surfaces and protecting then. .Igains natural weathering and chemical attack from industrial atmospheres contaminated with corrosive furies. Calcareous surfaces like lime and cement plastered surfaces are highly alkaline in the initial stages, they retain large quantities of water during constructionand it takes long time for the greater part of the water to evaporate even when the atmospheric conditions are favourable. Therefore, in applying a paint system on these surfaces, it is essential to take cognizance of the stored up moisture and also the alkalinity of the surfaces. These surfaces are porous and present problems, such asvariable suction, surface imperfections, growth of moulds, mosses, lichens and algae. As each of these have adverse effect on most of the surface coating materials, finishing of these surfaces need special care. The purpose of this standard is to explain the preparatory treatment and the painting system and provide guidance for successfully overcoming the problems connected with painting concrete, masonry and plaster surfaces. In the formulation of this standard due weightage has been given to international coordination among the standards and practices prevailing in.differetit;countries in addition to relating it to the practices in the field in this country. : For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values (revi.sed)`. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same,as that of the specified value in this standard. The committee responsible for the preparation of this standard is given at Annex G.

IS2395(Partl):1994

Indian Standard

PAINTING OF CONCRETE, MASONRY AND PLASTER SURFACES - CODE OF PRACTICE
PART 1 OPERATIONS AND WORKMANSHIP

(First Revision)
1 SCOPE

This standard (Part 1) deals with the preparatory treatment and painting operations of calcareous surfaces, such as concrete, masonry aqd plaster surfaces in building work 1.2 Schedules for painting is covered in IS 2395 (Part 2) : 1994. 2 REFERENCES The Indian Standards listed in Annex Fare necessary adjuncts to this standard. 3 TERMINOLOGY
3.0 __

1.1

to be painted, the type and nature of previous treatment, if any, b) Situations of use, namely, whether an external finish or an internal finish, and the extent to which the surface will be exposed to weather and rain; and 4 In the case of new plastered surfaces the nature of the backing, the type of plaster undercoat and finish, the approximate date of completion of the plaster work in individual rooms; and any addition of lime to the plaster finishing coat shall be nored. 4.2 Arrangement shall also be made for the proper exchange of information between those engaged in painting work and all those whose work will affect or will be affected. 5 CDARACTERISTICS OF THE SUBSTRATA AND TREATMENT 5.1 General In painting calcareous surfaces, careful consideration shall be given to the physical and chemical properties of the substrata and.the backing materials which are strongly alkaline. Concrete, lime and cement plasters are likely to cause alkali attackon paint. This will have to be clearly distinguished from materials which are neutral or nearly so, as in case of calcium sulphate plasters. The characteristics of different calcareous surfaces are described in Annex A 5.2 Planning of All Painting Operations.in Relation to Dampness in the Background When painting new walls, any type of paint system which will seal in the moisture shall be avoided. 5.2.1 The material for initial decoration shall, therefore, be chosen in due relation to the ultimate scheme for redecoration. If, for example, it is intended eventually to paint the surface with solvent based paint, the initial decoration shall be done 1

a) Type of concrete, masonty or plaster surface

For the purposeof this standard the deiiniiions given in IS 2212 : 1991, IS 2572 : 1%3, IS 1597 (Part 1) : 1367, IS 1661 : 1972, IS 2402 : 1%3, IS 2394 : 1984, IS 456 : 1978 and IS 1303 : 1983 and the following shall apply. 3.1 Clearcole Apriminglsealer coat composed ofsize or gluewith whiting and sometimes a little alum, used before applying lime wash or distemper. 3.2 Suction Absorption of liquid from a paint by a porous surface. High suction may make the paint difllcult to apply and leave the coating in an underbound condition. Uneven suction may cause lack of uniformity in the finished appearance. 3.3 Water Filler An easily rubbed down and washable distemper paste or composition of size, whiting, and fine plaster, which accepts solvent based paints in a satisfactory manner. 4 NECESSARY INFORMATION 4.1 For efficient planning and execution of painting work on plaster surfaces, detailed data and information with regard to the following shall be furnished:

IS2395(Part1):1994 either with a material which can be removed easily and completely, or with one which is suitable to receive solvent based paint. 52.2 When the surface has properly set and cured and when all excess moisture has dried out from it and from the backing and further movements of moisture will be negligible, painting may be done as specified, it being merely necessary to select an alkali resistant priming paint when solvent.based paints are used to suit the porosity of the surface. 5.23 However, where it will not be possible to allow the required time for the surface to dry out fully, the decoration in such cases shall be with a porous finish, such as lime wash, colour wash, cement paint (see Annex B), oil-free distemper or suitable emulsion paint which will allow drying to continue at a reasonable rate through their films. Gloss paint shall not be used until drying is complete. If a surface remains persistently damp, the cause shall be examined and'the surface suitably treated before attempting to decorate. If remedy is impractical, isolation of the affected surfaces by battening out and plastering or boarding may be necessary. Local areas affected by efflorescence (see Annex C) shall be cut out and replastered, or treated with metal foil to prevent the absorption of water from the exterior or the penetration of water into the interior (see Annex D). 5.3 Painting and Other Finishes on Both Sides of the Wall Painting new walls or partitions on both sides may result in an increased risk of paint failure, because the means of escape of water introduced during construction operations are restricted. A difference in the porosity of the paint tIlms applied to either side of a wall may result in one side being more affected than the other. The risk is similar and greater when only one side is painted and other side is sealed by some impermeable form of treatment, for example, wall tiling. Particularly, severe conditions may be met when walls, partitions and ceilings are built of materials that need large quantities of water for curing and setting. For all solid walls, partitions and ceilings, therefore, the precautions outlined in 5.2 shall be carefully observed. 5.4 Variation in Suction The variation in suction characteristics of the surfaces to be painted rquire corresponding variation of the priming coat or, in some cases, the use of glue size, petrifying liquid or sealers according to the type of paint to be used. Surfaces which show local variations in suction, as for example, between individual bricks or on patches produced on plastered surfaces by local over-trowelling or by efflorescence, shall be treated by the application of a suitable primer. Lime plaster finishes have a moderate suction which can easily be counteracted by use of sealers. 5.4.1 If the suction is so high or variable that a normal painting procedure is unlikely to give a good finish one of the following pretreatments shall be applied over the whole surface as a primer, according to the type of paint to be used:
Typ of Paint Retreatment

1) One-coat application 2) Two-coat application b) Dry distemper

a) Size-bound distemper

A coat of clearcole A coat of size alone will be sufficient A coat of the same distemper thinned with water or petrifying liquid supplied by the manufacturer
Or

coat of sharp colour or primer-sealerwith the addition of finely ground pumice Cl Solvent based paint A coat of thin primer or primer-scaler, preferably in consultation with the manufacturer of the paint Emulsion paint A coat of the same paint (9 thinned with water or scalers recommended by the manufacturer Cement paint and Wet the surface before e) applying paints limewash 5.5 Surface Imperfections
A

Imperfections on surface either plastered or otherwise mar the appearance of the paint finish, and are especially conspicuous if the finish is glossy. Where smooth finishes are required, particular attention shall be paid to the preparation of the surface, including any necessary rubbing down, sealing, stopping or filling. Plaster, if improperly gauged and worked, is liable to develop surface crazing (map crazing), This defect, if present, shall be treated according to the method given in 7.1.2 before painting to prevent the cracks or their positions from showing in the tinishcd work. 5.6 Growth of Mohlds, Fungi, Algae and Lichens
5.6.1 Characteristics of Mould Growth

The growth of mould is generally associated with

continued dampness, either of the material painted

IS2395(Part1):1994 or of the surrounding atmosphere. It shows itself in the form of black or vari-coloured spots or colonies which may be on, in, or beneath the paint film, and are easily recognizable under a microscope. Mould growth may occur on almost any type of building material, including plastered surfaces. Some growths may penetrate the underlying plaster or brickwork and become difficult to eradicate. On new work mould growth is unlikely to be encountered. The surface of old work (covered as it maybe with wall-paper, distemper, or solvent based paint) may already be infected with mould, particularly in premises which have been lefi unw cupied for some time or where there has been persistent damp penetration, and especially where walls have been saturated with water in the course of tire fighting. 6 SELECTION OF PAINTS 6.1 The selection of .paints shall generally be as given in the schedules covered in Is 2395 (Part2) : 1994. 7 PREPARATION OF RACKGROUND 7.1 For Lime Plaster Surf&es

7.1.1 In the case of new lime plaster, precautions with regard to the drying of background shall be observed carefully as these will considerably affect the performance of the finish In the case of new lime plaster, the essential principles with respect to drying of background will be the following: a) If possible, lime plaster shall be left unpainted for the first few months so as to allow the plaster to carbonate, harden and dry thoroughly. If the plaster has any ten5.6.2 PrecautinsAgainst Moulds, Fungi, Algae and dency to craze or crack owing to shrinkage Lichens - Exterior surfaces of porous building on drying, the movements shall be allowed material like brick, stone and cement rendering, to occur before the surface is painted, so as especially if unpainted, may develop growths of to enable provision of suitable preparatory vegetation ranging from thick beds of moss to slimy treatment. Heating the rooms, if accomstreaks or patches of algae. Any such growth shall panied by good ventilation, will assist be removed and ammoniacal copper solution (see drying, but shall be cautiously adopted. Note), shall be applied to the surface and allowed Too rapid drying may damage the plaster by to dry thoroughly before painting. causing undue shrinkage and separation of NOTE - A recommended composition and concentration the plaster coats. of the ammoniacal wash shall consist of 7 g of ooppetcxbonate d&solved in 80 ml liquor ammonia and diluted to one b) If there is any objection to leaving the litre with yater. Alternatively, 2.5 percent magnesium plaster bare, a temporary decoration of soft silicofluoride solution may be used. distemper (non-washable distemper) may 5.6.3 Prevention ofRecumence of Mould Growth be applied. This may be removed easily at a later date and replaced by a more perTo prevent recurrence of mould growth on manent-decoration. Other types of paint repainted surfaces the following procedure shall be suitable for early application are cement adopted: paints, silicate paints, and washable disa) Remove the source of dampness and dry out temper depending upon the final decoration the walls; in view. b) Improve ventilation, if necessary; Cl If the,background of the plaster is one likely c) Remove the infected paint or paper; and to contain large amounts of water, for example, new brickwork, concrete or building d) Sterilize the surface by applying any antisep blocks, no attempt shall be made to.apply tic wash, such as 2 percent sodium pensolvent based paint (especially gloss tachlorophenate or any other suitable finishes) until there is every reason to comparable material and allow to dry. believe that the walls are thoroughly dry. Many special problems regarding mould growth Some indication of the progress in drying may require individual consideration and expert can be obtained by means of the tests advice may be sought .when necessary, described in Annex E Care shall be taken to ensure that mould growth is 6) If the background. is of a drytype, for exnot transferred to a surface from dirty brushes or ample, wood or metal lath, solvent based other equipment as the organism then becomes paints may be applied with safety after a fe+ weeks drying, and oil-bound distempers more firmly embedded in the decorative finish and even earlier. is, therefore, relatively more difftcult to eradicate. In addition to the usual cleaning, the equipment shall be given a final rinse in a suitable fungicidal 7.1.2 In case of old unpainted plaster surfaces any solution, source of dampness in walls and ceilings shall be 3

IS2395(Part1):1994

removed and painting shall be deferred until the plaster has dried. Any major cracks or defects in the plaster shall be cut out in Vshape and made good. Cracks may be wetted thoroughly prior to filling, to avoid undue absorption of water and subsequent shrinkage of the filling.`For filling, a retarded hemi-hydrate calcium sulphate plaster gauged with about one-third of its volume of hydrated lime may be used.' Prior to painting, fine cracks may be primed and subsequentlyftiedwithaputtyofsuitableconsistency made out of enamel, water and whiting powder.

the primer at least shall be of the alkali resistant type. Lime fast pigments shall be used. 7.136 Water based paint or washable distemper, if in a clean, sound condition, need not be removed if similar coatings are to be applied in the new paint system. By using a mild detergent, the surface may be washed and then after a light sanding, will be ready to receive a fresh coat (with spot priming if required). 7.2 For Cement and Cement Concrete Surfaces

For new surface it is preferable the surface is left unpainted for as long as possible to allow drying. 7.13 In the case of previously painted lime plaster Before painting, the surface shall be thoroughly surfaces the following precautions given in 7.1.3.1 brushed to remove all dirt and remains of loose or powdered materials. to 7.1.3.6 shall be observed. Treatment of the surface with solution of acids or salts such as zinc sulphate is not advisable as the risk of alkali attack is not reduced appreciably and efflorescencc may be increased. But on old unpainted surface, if there is an extensive growth of vegetable material which cannot be removed by brushing, the growth shall be destroyed by applying a wash of ammoniacal copper solution in accordance with 5.6.2. The' dead and dry remains of the growth shall be brushed off prior to painting. Any loose or uneven areas or any major cracks in the cement concrete or plaster background shall be cut out in V shape and made good and the repairs allowed to dry thoroughly before painting is commenced. ,Minor repairs may be made with cement mortar. Cement plaster or concrete which is pre7.1.3.2 Any existing paint showing extensive flak- viously painted shall be prepared in the same maning, bleaching, or saponification (as shown by ner as in 7.1.3. stickiness or the presence of yellow soapy runs) shall be removed by scraping and washing and the 7.3, For Gypsum Plaster Surfaces surface allowed to dry completely. It may then be Before application of the paint it shall be ensured repainted as prescribed for new surfaces. whether the surface is alkaline or neutral and the 7.1.3.3 Local defective patches shall be treated individually by removing all loose or softened paint and bringing forward the treated patches with primer and undercoating before applying a fresh coating over the whole area. alkalinity may be tested in accordance with E-l. If the surface of the plaster has a patchy appearance and shows wide variations in suction due to efflorescence or other causes, a paint primer shall be applied before the application of a regular paint system. For old surfaces, unpainted or previously painted, the preparation of background will be the same as in the case of lime plasters. If it is a neutral surface, the application of a priming paint may not be necessary. 7.4 For Masonry Surfaces All mortar joints shall be brought to a sound condition before painting operations are started. In the case of new brickwork, painting shall be deferred for at least three months after completion 4

7.1.3.1 Any existing fungus or mould growth shall be completely removed. The surface shall be thoroughly scraped and rubbed down with bristle brush and sand paper and then washed down with clean water and allowed to dry. Acoat of fungicidal wash shall then be applied and allowed to dry after which a further coat shall be applied and left for sometime to dry thoroughly. The surface shall be .lcept under observation during the drying out period and if the mould recurs, the treatment and drying shall be repeated before painting. The surface shall be brushed with a soft bristle brush to remove any dust particles 24 hours after the wash. Painting shall be carried out over the top of the fungi&M wash without removing it with water.

7.1.3.4 Dry distempers and lime wash shall be totally removed prior to repainting. It may sometimes be necessary to wet the surface before scraping. This shall not be overdone and all surfaces shall be perfectly dry prior to the application of any ._ priming coats. .7.1.3.5 Certain wall and ceiling surfaces may reveal hairline cracks. After complete removal of the existing paint systems and if the lime plaster has cured and dried completely, use at least two coats of any of the primers for the paint system to be adopted. When solvent based paint is to be used,

IS 2395 ( Part 1) : 1994 of the masonry work and longer if the weather during this period has become unfavourable for drying. Dirt may be removed by washing with water. In the case of old masonry, wherever there is extensive growth of vegetable matter, it shall be treated suitably according to 5.6. Previously painted brickwork shall be prepared in the manner given at 7.1.3. 8 APPLICATION OF PAINT FINISH 8.1 After preparing the surfaces in*accordance with 7 the selected paint finish shall be applied. The painting operations including tools for painting shall be in accordance with the provisions suitable for the respective paints covered in IS 1477 (Part 1): 1971 and IS 1477 (Part 2) : 1971. 9 MAINTENANCE 9.1 General 9.1.1 Existing paint work shall be cleaned or rubbed down according to its type, and damage to the plaster shall be made good. 9.1.2 Defective paint on surfaces (as shown by stickiness or the presence of soapy runs) shall be removed and the surface allowed to dry completely. Repainting on such exposed plaster shall be carried out as described for new plaster surfaces. 9.1.3 Where small patches of defective paint are removed, the area may be filled with a water filler using a broad-knife to bring it level with the surrounding surface. Water fillers shall be applied to the plaster and primed when dry. Where solvent based paint is to be used, dl patches and repairs shall be primed and brought forward with undercoating. Where oil-bound water paint or emulsior paint is to be used a thin coat shall be applied prior to the general application. 9.1.4 The choice of paint system to be applied to the surface will vary according to the nature of the existing paint and that of the new finish to be applied [see IS 2395 (Part 2) : 19941. 9.2 Precautions Against Mould Growth When redecorating old work, if the surface is found to.be infected with mould growth it shall be treated in accordance with 5.6. 9.3 Repainting Over Bituminous Coatings Bitumen is liable to bleed into solvent based paints andwater paints applied over it. Repainting with bitumen paints is, therefore, recommended. If solvent based painting cannot be avoided suitable sealing treatments may be given. However, it may be noted that hard drying sealers and paints are prone to crazing when applied over a softer bituminous coating. Consequently, success is doubtful unless the bituminous material is thin and fully oxidized.

ANNEX
CHARACTERISTICS A-l CHARACTERISTICS a)

A

( Clause 5.1 )
OF CALCAREOUS SURFACES WITH REGARD TO PAINT FINISH OF LIME PLASTER

4 They develop efflorescence less frequently
than other plaster finishes.

b)

Lime plasters are highly alkaline and hence, until they are thoroughly dried and matured, they are liable to cause alkali attack on solvent based paints and distempers and fading of certain pigments. While it is true that limes vary in their tendency to attack paint according to the proportion of soluble alkalis (soda and potash) which they contain, it is wise always to take full precautions against alkali attack irrespective of the type of lime used. This is justified because, in practice a lime plaster finish frequently becomes contaminated with soluble alkalis from extraneous source, for example, from portland cement gauging or from bricks or other backing material behind the plaster. Lime plaster finishes have a moderately high suction. This may be counteracted by suitable adjustment of the first priming coat.
5

4

Lime plaster, if improperly gauged and worked, is liable to develop surface crazing. This defect,, if present, may be reduced by special treatment as described in 7.1.2 to prevent the cracks or their positions from showing in the finished painted surface. Lime plasters are softer than other types of plaster and, to this extent, they and any applied decorations are more liable to mechanical damage in certain situations. The plaster shall, however, be made to harden more quickly by suitable gauging. OF GYPSUM

e)

A-2 CHARACTERISTICS PLASTER

a)

Although finishing coats of gypsum plaster may be applied over different kinds of undercoating, for example,. plaster-sand or

IS 2395 ( Part 1) :1994 cement-sand undercoating, this fact does not seriously affect the painting procedure, it is the composition of the plaster finishing coat which chiefly needs to be considered. When the plaster is properly set and hardened and the plaster backing and background are dry, gypsum plasters may be painted successfully with almost any type of paint except cement paint. Plaster finishes gauged with lime involve a greater painting risk than other plasters, owing to the possibility of alkali attack The risk is least with retarded semi-hydrate gypsum plasters but for practical purposes, it is advisable to take precautions against alkali attack from any plaster to which lime has been added. Neat calcium sulphate plasters have no appreciable chemical action on paint, and paint defects which occur on them are, generally, associated with the action of moisture and of efflorescent salts. On anhydrite plaster, patches of efflorescence sometimes develop on areas differing in suction from the remainder of the surface and there is a tendency for paint to fail in adhesion at these places. Extra care in priming is needed to secure adequate adhesion and an even finish. The technique of `priming following the trowel' helps to overcome the difficulty. Retarded hemi-hydrate plasters, when exposed continuously to damp conditions, are liable to `sweat out', a defect characterized by a failure to harden or by disintegration. This may occur in various circumstances, for example, when the background of the plaster is permanently damp or when moisture is sealed into the plaster by the premature application of an impervious paint film. Care shall be taken, therefore, to avoid these conditions. Gypsum plasters are liable to a defect known as `dryout', characterized by a friable condition of the plaster surfacing and sometimes affecting the whole thickness of the finishing coat. It occurs when the plaster is allowed to dry too quickly before it had time to combine with all the water needed for the setting and hardening process. A `dry out' can be caused by application of the plaster finish to a highly absorbent undercoat, by conditions favoured by rapid evaporation or by the premature application of artificial heat. An impervious backing to a thin plaster finish6 ing coat may be as dangerous as one which is too absorbent; since it holds little or no reserve of water and the finish dries rapidly. The condition of `dry out' is not, usually, apparent at the time the surface is decorated but, if an impervious coat of paint is applied, water from the backing may cause expansion of the partially hydrated plaster producing ridges, blistering and disintegration in the plaster and often causing the paint to loose adhesion. 43 While, it is possible to obtain a satisfactory paint finish on any type of gypsum plaster, provided the appropriate precautions are observed, it is preferable, from the painter's point of view, that the plaster surface shall not be too highly trowelled and made nonabsorbent. A plaster surface which shows a moderate and uniform degree of suction provides a margin of safety in the matter of paint adhesion. It is particularly desirable to have a surface of this type when emulsion paints, water paints and distempers are to be used, since these adhere less strongly to impervious surfaces than do solvent based paints. A gloss paint finish shows up any irregularities in the plaster surface, and hence, in places where such a finish is required, the plaster used shall be one which can readily be brought to a smooth level finish. To some extent, this conflicts with the requirements that the plaster shall not be highly trowelled. It is desirable, therefore, that the plaster shall be trowelled only to the minimum extent needed to produce a smooth finish and no attempt shall be made to produce a high polish. A-3 CIMRACTERISTICS 6F CEMENT AND RENDERINGS A-3.1 New portland cement concrete and renderings are strongly alkaline, and for this reason solvent based paints when applied to them, are subject to saponification and bleaching. In addition, there is a risk of damage by efflorescence. A-3.1.1 The risk of failure from the above causes continues until drying of the material has reached an advanced stage, and with mass concrete this stage may require many months. The combined effect of drying and surface carbonation progressively reduces the danger of alkali attack. The process cannot be materially hastened by treatment of the surface with solutions of acids or salts, such

IS 2395 ( Part

1) : 1994

as zinc sulphate, the application of salts in solution may even appreciably enhance the risk of efflorescence. Solvent based paints, therefore, shall not be

used on such surfaces, until several months have passed, but earlier decoration may be carried out with portland cement paints or silicate paints.

ANNEX

B

(Clause 52.3 )
APPLICATION OF COLOUR WASH AND CEMENT PAINTS B-l COLOUR WASHING B-l.1 Preparation of Colour Wash The colour wash shall be prepared from fat lime conforming to IS 712 : 1984. The lime shall be slaked at site and shall be mixed and stirred with about 5 litres of water for 1 kg of unslaked lime to make a thin cream. This shall be allowed to stand for a period of 24 h and then shall be screened through a clean coarse cloth. Four kilograms of gum dissolved in hot water shall be added to each m3 of cream. About 1.3 kg of sodium chloride dissolved in hot water may be added for every 10 kg of lime. Mineral colours not affected by lime shall then be added.
As an alternative for gum, 0.14 kg of glue may NOTElbe added to 10 kg of lime so that the colourwash may not be easily rubbed off. NOTE 2 - For exterior work the colour wash may also be prepared by scattering one part by weight of,tallow in small lumps over 12 to 16 parts of quick lime, slaking it with only just sufficient water to form a thick paste, stirringoccasionally to assist in dispersing the tallow, and allowing it to stand until cool. The resultant paste shall then be.let down to thin wash which is strained through a coarse cloth. Mineral colouts not affected by lime shall then be added. If tallow is not obtainable then linseed oil or-castor oil may be used.

For new work, minimum two coats shall be applied so that the surface presents a smooth and uniform finish through which the plaster does not show. The finished dry surface shall not show any signs of cracking and peeling and the colour wash shall not come off readily on the hand when rubbed. For old work, after the surface has been prepared as in B-l.2 a coat of colour wash shall be applied over the patches and repairs. Then one, or two or more coats of colour wash shall be applied over the entire surface. The colour ,washed surface shall present a uniform finish through which the plaster patches do not show. B-l.4 Protective Measures Doors, windows, floors, articles of furniture, etc, and such other parts of the building not to be colour washed shall be protected from being splashed upon. B-2 CEMENT PAINTING B-2.1 Appropriate Usage Portland cement paints .are suitable for use on exterior and interior cement concrete and stucco surfaces not subjected to mechanical abrasion. They are recommended where it is desired to decorate or reduce the water permeability of exterior wails built of porous, open textured concrete, such as concrete block masonry. They may also by used where the concrete or stucco is damp at the time of painting or may become damp subsequently. -They are not well suited for interior surfaces requiring frequent and thorough cleaning, as coatings of these paints are not easily washed and tend to erode with vigorous scrubbing. B-2.2 Age of Concrete Cement painting shall be deferred until the cement concrete of stucco has aged at least three weeks. The application of tinted paints to cast in place concrete walls shali be postponed for several months after the curing period so that the concrete will be drier and a less likely source of efflorescence. B-2.3 ,Preparation of Background The background surface shall be prepared as described in 7. 7

B-l.2 Preparation of Surface Before new work is colour washed, the surfaceshall be thoroughly brushed free from mortar droppings and foreign matter and shall be wetted. In case of old work, all loose pieces and scales shall be scrapped off and holes in plaster as well as patches of less than 50 cm2 area shall be filled up with mortar of the same mix. The surface shall then bewetted before the application of the colour wash. B-1.3 Application The colour wash shall be applied with MOOAV brushes to the specified number of coats. The operation for each coat shall consist of a stroke of the brush first given horizontally from the right and the other from the left and similarlythe subsequent stroke from bottom upwards and the other from top downwards before the first coat dries. Each coat shall be allowed to dry before the next coat is applied. No portion of the surface shall.be left out initially to be patched up later on.

IS2395(Part1):1994 B-2.5.4 The paint shall be applied in two coats of the same colour, not less than 24 h shall be allowed Before applying a cement paint the concrete shall between coats and the second coat shall not be be thoroughly wetted to control surface suction and to provide a reServe of moisture to aid in the started until the first coat has become sufficiently hard to resist marking by the brush being used. In proper curing of the paint. A garden hose adjusted hot dry weather, the first coat shall be slightly to give a fine spray may be used for this pur@ose. For concrete masonry walls that readily absorb moistened before applying the second coat. moisture, the surface shall be wetted in one dpera- B-2.5.5 Cement paints shall be applied with a tion not more than one hour before painting. The brush with relatively short stiff hog or fibre bristles. surface shall be moist but not dripping wet when The paint shall be brushed in uniform thickness and the paint is applied. Dense concrete absorbs mois- shall be free from excessively heavy brush marks. ture so slowly that it shall be wetted in at least two The laps shall be well brushed out. operations not less than 30 min apart. It will be more effective to dampen larger areas in advance of B-2.5.6 When painting concrete masonry for the painting so that ample time is allowed for the mois- dual purpose of moisture proofing and decoration, both the coats shall be vigorously scrubbed on in ture to soak into the concrete. such a manner as to work the paint into the voids B-2.4 Preparation of Paht and provide a continuous paint,film free from pinPortland cement paints are made ready by adding holes or other openings through which water may paint powder to water and stirring to obtain a thick penetrate. B-2.3.1 Wettingof Surface

paste which shall then be diluted to a brushable consistency. Generally equal volumes of paint powder and water make a satisfactory paint. B-2.5 Application of Paint B-2.$.1 No painting shall be done when the paint is likely to be exposed to a temperature of below 7"C within 48 h after application. B-2.5.2 When weather conditions are such as to cause the paint to dry rapidly, work shall be'carried out `in the shadow' as far as possible. This helps the proper hardening of the paint film by keeping the surface moist for a longer period. B-2.5.3 To maintain a uniform mixture and to prevent segregation the paint shall be stirred frequently in the bucket.

B-2.5.7 Spray application may only be adopted for dense concrete for interior surface where the paint is not required for waterproofing purposes. B-2.5.8 The covering capacity of cement paint for two coat brush work on plastered surfaces shall be 3.0 to 4.0 m*/kg. R-2.6 Curing Hardening of paint film depend upon the availability of moisture for chemical reaction with the portland cement. Painted surfaces shall be sprinkled with water using a fog spray two or three times a day. It is recommended that this shall be done between coats and for at least two days following the final coat. The curi*ng shall be started as soon as the paint has hardened so as not to be damaged by the spray, about 12 h after the application.

ANNEX

C

(Clause 5.2.3 >
EFFLORESCENCE
c-1

cm-

CSOFEFFLORESCENCE

C-l.1 Efflorescence on painted surfaces is not very common and is often confused with chaulking of paint films. True efflorescence characterized by a deposit of crystalline salts may be easily identified under a magnifying glass through their prominent crystal structure. The efflorescent deposit is readily soluble in water or dilute acid solutions. C-2 CAUSES C-2.1 For efflorescence, moisture is the carrier of salts to the surface. Water in the masonry walls
8

eventually moves to the exterior surfaces either by vapour pressure or by liquid diffusion. In the liquid form it takes appreciable quantities of soluble salts with it, which are deposited on the surface, specially near the cracks when the water evaporates. The reduced osmotic pressure of these concentrated solutions near the surface of the masonry also plays an important part in further water movements. As these solutions get more concentrated through evaporation, water movement occurs. C-2.2 In addition to their origin from the brick and plaster, soluble salts present in the soil may also

IS 2395 ( Part 1) :1994 contribute significantly to the efflorescence. Salt solutions through capillary action may rise to appreciable heights in walls due to high porosity and give rise to efflorescence. C-3 REMEDY C-3.1 Sealing coats may not effectively hold back strong efflorescence. Dry brushing of the growth as it appears is the only remedy. Efflorescent salts shall not be removed by washing with water as it may carry some of the salts back into the pores. On redrying, efflorescence may be even worse than before if the salts were still present in the structure. Efflorescence will continue as long as there is sufficient water in the structure or plaster backings to carry the soluble salts fonvard and it is useless to attempt to seal the moisture by the paint film on the surface. The treatment of an old wall with hydrofuge silicone will frequently stop the efflorescence as the liquid blocks the passage for movement of moisture. In the case of efflorescence due to the rising of salt solutions through capillary action from sub-soil the only remedy is to provide bitumen or metallic seals in the walls above the ground level so that an effective barrier to the capillary action is created. C-4 TEST TO KNOW WIIEN EFFLORESCENCE IS FAIRLY COMPLETE C-4.1 Small areas of the plaster where the efllorescence is most conspicuous shall be rubbed down with a suitable abrasive followed by the application of a damp (not wet) cloth and left for at least one week This process shall be repeated, if necessary,until no more salts appear. Conditions shall be then reasonably safe for permanent painting. The test shall be carried out under conditions of warmth and ventilation approximating thoseofoccupational condi tions.

ANNEX

D

( Clause 5.2.3 )
APPLICATION OF ALUMINIUM FOIL TO CALCAREOUSSURFACES The aluminium foil (0.025 mm thick) shall immediately be unrolled oh the surface applied with hot D-l.1 The area to be treated shall be cleaned of bitumen. All joints shall have at least 50 mm overdust and allowed to dry prior to the application by lap and shall be hot sealed. If required the blown means of a brush of a thin coat of bitumen primer type bitumen at 175'C at the rate of 1.5 kg/m2 may conforming to IS 3384 : 1986. Blown type bitumen be applied over the aluminium foil as a sealer coat. (Penetration 10 to 20) conforming to IS 702 : 1988 Thereafter, the aluminium foil or the bitumen shall be hot applied by brush at a temperature of sealer coat shall be painted with a plastic emulsion 175OCto the surface at the rate of approximately paint or water based paint as required. 1.5 kg/m2. D-l PROCEDURE

ANNEX

E

( Clauses 7.1.1 and 7.3 )
TESTS RELATING TO TIIE FITNESS OF PLASTER FOR PAINTING E-O GENERAL E-0.1 It is possible, in certain circumstances to get some indication of the fitness of plaster for painting by simple tests indicated in E-l to E-3. E-l TEST FOR ALKALINITY E-l.1 Representative areas of the plastered,surface shall be treated with an solvent based paint or other alkali-sensitive paint (tinted with Prussian blue) and left for at least a week. If, at the end of that tim-, there is no sign of bleaching or saponification, conditions shall be reasonably safe for permanent decoration. If, on the other hand,
9

bleaching or saponification has occurred, further small areas shall be treated. This shall be repeated until sample areas remain undamaged. E-l.2 Alternative Procedure Alkalinity may also be detected by the use of moistened red litmus paper on the surface. If it turns blue the presence of alkaline background may be inferred. E-2 TEST FOR EFFLORESCENCE (see C-4) E-3 TEST FOR DRYNESS E-3.1 It shall be noted, however, that these tests covered in'E-1 and E-2 are not sufficient since a plastered wall may be neutral and show no signs

Is2395(Partl):l994 of efflorescence and yet be damp, which is liable tocause paint to fail in adhesion. Moisture meter for testing the dryness of walls may be used in deciding when a surface has reached a fixed condition to receive paint. I-Iowever, no form of test may indicate the condition of more than a small area and since a plastered wall seldom dries uniformly, the test shall be repeated at a number of places. Again it shall be noted that deep-seated moisture, which is not always detected by superficial tests maymakeits presence felt after the surface is painted.

ANNEXF (Clause 2 )
IS No. 456 : 1978 702:1988 712 : 1984 1303:1983 Tide Code of practice for plain and reinforced concrete (thirdrevision) Specification for industrial bitumen (second r&s~o~) Specification for building limes (thirdrevision) Glossary of terms relating to paints (second rev~ion)

1477 (Part 1) : Code of practice for painting of ferrous metals in buildings : Part 1 Pretreatment (Fst ra)ision) 1971 1477 (Part 2) : 1971 1597(Part 1) : 1967 1661: 1972 2212 : 1991 2394:1984 2395 (Part 2) : 1994 2402:1%3 2572 : EM53 3384:1986 Code of practice for painting of ferrous metals in buildings : Part 2 Painting (/irst revision) / Code of practice for construction of stone masonry : Part 1 Rubble stone masonry Code of practice for application of cement and cement-lime plaster finishes cfirst revEon) We of practice for brickwork (Fsf revision) Code of practice for application of lime plaster finish (Fist revision) code or practice for painting con&&, masonry and plaster surfaces: Part 2 Schedule (pstrev&@n) Code of practice for external rendered finishes Code of practice for construction of hollow concrete block masonry Specification for bitumen `primer for use in waterproofing and damp-proofing cfirst reviiion)

10

IS 2395(I'art1):1994

ANNEX G ( Foreword )
COMMI'ITEE COMPOSITION Painting, Varnishing and Allied Finishes Sectional Committee, CEf3 34
SHIU B. SHItUZI Members Representing Cole Paints& ContractsPvt Ltd, Bombay CentralBuildingResearch

SHR~ L K. AGARWAL DR S. M:.%NGH(Alternate)
SHRI R. BEHL DR A. BASU(Al-e)

Institute (CSIR), Roorkee

ICI India Ltd. Hooghly, West Bengal The Nataraj Paints Pvt Ltd. Bombay Soujanay Enterprises, Thane The Rashtriya Chemicals & Fertilizers Ltd, Bombay Indian Plywood Industries Research&Training Institute, Bangalore Indian Institute of Architects, Bombay Directorate General of Supplies % Disposals, New Delhi Tata Engineering & Locomotive Co Ltd, Jamshedpur Research, Designs and Standards Organization (Ministry of Railways), Lucknow In personal capacity (44 Basant L.ok, Basant Vihar, New Delhi) Ministryof Defence (Engineer-in-Chief's Branch), New Delhi
The Metallizing Equipment Co, Jhodhpur

SHRIN. S. BHARA~ SHRIB. V. D&u (Ahmute) SHRIC. J. BHUMKAR SHRIR. K PHADTARE (Aftetwe)
SHRIK.A.DE%I DR P. M. GANAPA'IHY DR H. N. JAGADEESH (Akmate)

SHIUH. S. -1
SHRIJ.K.JA~ SHIPD. S. CHOWI~HUR~ (Afwwzfe~ SHRIJANG BAHADUR JOINTDIIZECTOR (CHEMICAL) &!%TANT RBPARCHOFFICER (C=c.-u) (A-J DRV.M.KEWAR SHRIV. K. MEHTA SHUIL D. KAT% (Altemore) SHR~ M.D. MODI SHRI SC. MODI(Awe) SHRI G. C. MUKHFXJEE SHIUD. K MUKHERJUZ (Abemute) DR S. C. NAIK DR k PRAKASH SHRI UJIAL DE (Ahmate) Sm K D. SAWANT SHRIM. G. PATIL(Aftemute) SHRI S. M. SAXENA SHRI K 3. AtYANGER (Altemute) SHRI. R. R. SEQtJFXU SIJPEWNTENDING ENGINEER I%immV~ ~GlNEE!R (Akmae) SHR~ J. VENKATARAMAN, Diior (Cii En.&

Indian Oil Corporation, New Delhi The Institution of Engineers (I), Calcutta National Organic Chemi6al Industries Ltd, Bombay Goodlass Nerolac Paints Ltd, Bombay Berger Paints India Ltd, Bombay Gativare Paints Ltd, Bombay Central Public Works Department, New Delhi Director General, BIS (l3-qjc~o Membs)

SHRI R. S. JUNEJA Deputy Director (Civ Engg), BIS

11

Bureau of Indian Standards

! '

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards dct, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and qu#lity certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has a copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such a review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the up for revision. latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards Monthly Addition'. This Indian Standard has been developed Amendments Amend No. from Dot : No. CED 34 ( 53% ) Issued Since Date of IssuePoblication Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Telephones : 3310131,331 13 75 Regional Offices:

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephones 331.01 31 { 331 13 75 37 84 99, 37 86 26, 53 38 43, 53 23 84 235 02 16, 235 15 19, 632 92 95, { 632 78 91, 37 85 61 37 86 62 53 16 40 235 04 42 235 23 15 632 78 58 632 78 92

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NE w DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, CALCUTTA 700054 Northern Southern Maniktola

: SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH
: C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS

160036 600113

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, BOMBAY 430093

Andheri ( East )

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CGIMBATGRE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNGW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India

