( Reaffirmed 2006 )

IS : 1358 - 1967

Indian Standard
PRACTICE FOR LAY 01 JT OF LIBRARY CATALOGUE CODE (

First Revision )
Sectional
Coun$,h",'

Documentation
Chairman
SHRI B. S. KESAVAN

Committee,
Representing
Scientific

EC 2
Resoorch, New

& Industrial

Members
Hindustan Machine Tools Ltd, Bangalore SHRI ABD~L RAHMAN Delhi University Press, Delhi SHRI H. L. BALUJA The Institution of Engineers ( India ), Calcutta Pros R. N. BANERJEE SHRI S. MUKHOPADHYAY ( Alternate ) National Council of Educational Research & SHRI N. CHAKRAVARTTY Traininp " ( . Publication Unit 1. ,, New Delhi SBRI C. N. RAO ( Alternate ) Direotorate of Printing & Stationery, Government SI~RI J. W. D'SOIJZA of Maharashtra SHRI B. S. NAI% ( Alternate ) Indian Association of Special Libraries and InSoar G. B. GHOSH formation Centro, Calcutta SRRI N. C. CHAKRAVARTY ( Alternate ) Sree Saraswaty Press Limitea, Calcutta SARI S. N. GUHA RAY National Archives of India, New Delhi SBRI R. C. GUPTA SHRI R. KISHORE ( AIternare ) University Grants Commission, New Delhi DR R. C. GUPTA SHRI Y. D. SHARMA ( Alternate ) Central Board of Irrigation & Power, New Delhi SHRI S. N. GUPTA Chief Controller of Printing & Stationery, New SHRI C. E. JAMES Delhi SHRI B. A. OYMAN ( Alternate ) Bhabhe Atomic Research Centre, Bombay DR V; A. KAYATH Indian Council of Agricultural Research. New SHRI KRISHAN KUMAR Delhi CounzJlh;f Scientific & Industrial Research, New Soar A. KRISHNAMUBTHI DR S. D. LIMAYE SHRI U. K. MALLYA Commission for Scientific & Technical Terminology ( Ministry of Education ) , New Delhi National Book Trust, New Delhi

( Continued on page 2 )

INDIAN
MANAK

STANDARDS
BHAVAN,

INSTITUTION
ZAFAR MARC

9 BAHADtJR SHAH NEW DELHI

IS:1358

-1967
Representing
National Suildings Organization ( Ministry of Works, Housing t Urban Development ). New Delhi Documentcttion Reseerch & Training Centre, Bangalore

( Continued from page 1 ) Members

PB~FA.

NEELAMEGEIAN

SHRI G. BHATTACHARYYA ( Alternate ) Indian National Scientific & Documentation CenSHRI S. PABTHASARTHY tre ( CSIR ), New Delhi Thomson Press ( India ) Ltd, Feridabad SHRI R. 5. RAWAL Publications & Information Directorate ( CSIR ), SCIIENTLBT-IN-CHAROE New Delhi Defence Scientific Informat,ion & Document8tion SHRI G. S. SEARNA Centre ( Ministry of Defence ), New Delhi Director General, IS1 ( Ex-officio Member ) S;HBI RAM D. TANEJA, Director ( Pub )

Secretary
SARI P. V. GOPALAKRISHNAN Assistant Director (Pub ), ISI

Library
Convener
SHRI ABDQL RAHMAN

Technique

Subcommittee,

EC2:8

Hindustan

Machine Tools Ltd, Bangalore

Members
PROF A. NEELAME~HAN DR S. R. RAN~ANATHAN SRRI T. RANOANATHAN Documentation Research & Training Centre, Bangalore In person81 capacity ( Sarada, 100, Main Rood 4, National

Bangalore 3 )

Aeronautic81

Laboratory

( CSIR 1,

IS:1358- 1967

h&an

Standard

PRACTICE FOR LAYOUT OF LIBRARY CATALOGUE CODE

( First Revision)
0. FOREWORD

0.1This Indian Standard (First Revision ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 4 December 1967, after the draft finalized by the Documentation Sectional Committee had been approved by the Executive Committee.
0.2 Library catalogue is an essential tool for locating documents in a. library. Generally, the library catalogue has to be in the language of the locality. There is a great need in India for establishing With the developcatalogue codes for the different Indian languages. ment of library movement, other Asian countries are also on the eve of A general agreement on normative principles, a similar situation. Even at the international style, and layout would be helpful. level, thought is being turned on a comparative study of catalogue codes for arriving at some uniform practice. In thus context, the Sectional Committee considered a revision necessary and useful. 0.3 The elements to be included in a catalogue to fall into the following five categories: code may be considered

4
b) cl

4

e>

Essential elements, such as terminology and rendering of names to be included in all codes; Basic rules applicable to all kinds of documents; Supplementary rules to cover the more complex kinds of documents, such as a composite book, a multi-volumed book and a periodical publication; Modification of the basic rules, additional rules or both necessary in preparing lists, such as a union catalogue of books, a union -.atalogue of periodical publications, a national bibliography, and an abstracting or indexing periodical; and Supplementary rules to cover documents other than those mentioned above.

__"..__

._.._

--

._...

.

._..

---..~

.-._,.

-

.._.

ll_-~

IS : 1358- 1967
0.4 In the preparation of this standard, the following documents: RANGANATHAN ( S R ). Standard assistance for layout has been drawn from code

of a catalogue 1955. S. code.

2, 1955; 28-32. RANGANATHAN ( S R ). Heading and canons. Madras; and G. Blunt & Sons, London.
RANCANATHAN ( S R ). Classified Asia Publishing House, Bombay. 0.5 A necessary adjunct to this standard catalogue

An lib SC.

Viswanathan, 1964. Ed 5.

is IS : 796-1966*.

1. SCOPE
1.1 This standard specifies the essential a library catalogue code and recommends they should be given. 2. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS national, regional, or local, elements to be covered by a helpful sequence in which

2.1 Catalogue codes, whether international, should preferably have a similar layout. 3. CONTENTS 3.X The code shall have the following groups

of parts:

a) Preliminaries, b) Auxiliaries, c) e) f) General Lists entry, entry, and than conventional books and periodicals. other d) Specific

of documents,

Documents

4. PRELIMINARIES 4.1 The group preliminaries principles, and shall have the following parts:

a) Guiding

b) Terminology,

c) Name-of-person. ___-_____ *GlOsscrry of cataloguing terme (first revision ). 4

IS:13584.2 Guiding Principles -The devoted to the formulation explaining, and interpreting them.

1967

part on guiding principles shall be of the principles helpful. in drafting, the rules of the code, while applying

NOTE It will be helpful if the part on guiding principles has sets of chapters dealing with items, such as the following:

a) Canons of cataloguing, b) Laws of library science, and c) General normative priuciples.

4.3 Terminology - The part on terminology shall contain definitions of
technical terms and terms-of-art used in the code.
will be helpful if the part on terminology NOTE-It dealing with items, such aa the following: a) b) c) d) e) Work; Title; Author; Collaborator and sponsor; Document, its kind and its perts; f) Related document; g) Series; has sets of chapters

h) Elements needed in descriptive cataloguing, such as format, collation, imprint, editor-statement, authorstatement, entryand statement for author; j) Catalogue; k) Entry; and m) Heading.

4.4 Name-of-Person - The part on name-of-person shall be devoted to the structure, and the function of the successive words in the names-ofpersons belonging to difierent cultural groups.
NATE 1 - To faoilitate the rendering of names, it is desirable that a schedule of entry elements in uanres-of-persons is given in the catalogue code for each cultural group, if no general guidance is sufficient. NOTE 2 -It will be helpful if the part on name-of-person dealing with items, such as the following: a) b) c) d) Simple name, Compound name, Split given name. and Forms of name-of-person. has sets of chaptera

5. AIJXILIARIES 5.1 The group auxiliaries
a) Determination b) Rendering c) Recording. shall have the following parts:

of authorship,

of names, and

if3 :1358 - 1967
of Authorship-The part on determination of authorship shall provide guidance for the determination of the author(s) and the collaborator(s) of a document. 5.2 Determination
NOTE-It will be helpful if the part on determination of authorship has sets of chapters dealing with items, such as the following:

a) b) c) d)

Pnrson Vs person, Person Vs corporate body, Corporate Body Vs corporate body, and Xame of original author merged in title.

5.3 Rendering of Names-The part on rendering of names shall provide rules for rendering names of different kinds, that is, name of person, place and corporate body and each of its orcans, title of documents, and name of series, but not of subjects, special attention being given TV multi-worded names.
NOTE - It will be helpful if the part on rendering of names has sets of chapters dealing with items, such as the following: a) b) c) d) Name-of-person, Geographical name, Government, Institution, e) f) g) h) Conference, Title, Series, and Pseudo-series.

5.4 Recording-The part on recording shall be mechanics of cataloguing, such as language, writing, of entries.

devoted to the and arrangement

NOTE - It will be helpful if the part on recording has sets of chapters dealing with items, such as the following: a) b) e) d) e) Language of entries, Script of entries, Articles and contractions, Style of writing and printing, and Arrangement of entries.

6.

GENERAL ENTRY
entry entry, index shall and entry. subject entry shall have the following parts: a) General b) Cross subject reference

6*l The group general

6.2 General Subject Entry - The part on general prescribe the structure of such an entry. 6.2.1
a)

It shall prescribe: the rules for determining the subject of a document either with the aid of its class number or otherwise, say going up to the kernel title; 6

IS : 1358 - 1967
b) the ru:es for rendering the name of a subject in the heading of the general subject entry for a document either with the aid of its class number or otherwise, say going up to the tranformed title; and c) the individualizing element to resolve heading and the sub-headings.
NoTE

homonyms

in the
has

main
sets

chapters a) b) c) d) P)

-It will be helpful if the part on general subject entry dealing with items, such as the follolring:

of

Choice of class index ( or subject ) heading. Rendering of class index (or subject ) heading, Class index entry, Homonym in class indox headings. and Feature heading.

6.3 Cross Reference entry shall prescribe

Index Entry -The
the structure

part on cross of such an entry.

reference

index

6.3.1 It shall deal with each kind laying down the rules for the choice from and the referred-to headings.
XOTR -

of cross reference index entiy, and rendering of the referredindex entry has sets entry, and

of chapters

It will be helpful if the part on cross reference dealing with items, such as the following:

a) Structure and types of cross reference index entry, b) Alternative name ontry, c) Variant-form-of-word entry.

d! Pseudonym-real-name c) Editor-of-series entry, f) Generic-name ontry.

7. SPECIFIC

ENTRY entry parts. simple book, composite and for conventional book, book, books and periodicals

7.1 The group specific shall have the following
a) Single-volumed b) Single-volumed c) Multi-volumed d) Periodical

publication.

7.2 Single-Volumed Simple Book - The part on single-volumed simple book shall lay down rules for the choice, rendering and writing of the headings and other sections of the diverse kinds of specific entries for the conventional book.
KOTE -

of chapters

It will be helpful if the part on single-volumed dealing with items, such as the following: or subject ancllytical, and

simple book hos sets

a) Main entry, b) Cross reference entry c) Book index entry.

7

IS : 1358- 1967 7.3 Single-Volumed Composite Book - The part on single-volumed composite book shall lay down the rules necessary for covering the deviations from the rules for single-volumed simple book.
NOTE-I: will lx helpful if the part on single-volumed ,ling with items, such as the following: has sets of chapters dc.4 a) Ord;nwry composite b) Artificial composite book, and book. romposite book

7.4 Mult,i-Volumed down the additional

Book ru!es

The part on multi-volumed book shall lay necessary to cover multi-volumed books.

-The part on periodical publication shall 7.5 Periodical Publication deal with the nature of the complexities in periodical publications as viewed from the angle of cataloguing, and shall prescribe rules for the kind of entries needed, the structure of each kind of entry and the contents of each section of an entry for a periodical publication with no complexity or with any one complexity, or with any combination of complexities.
NOTE-It

of chapters

will be helpful if th3 part on periodical ?ealing with items, such as the following:

publication

has sets

a) Simple periodical publication, b) Irregularity in volume numher, c) Interrupt,ed publication,

d) Change of title and sponsor, e) Amalgamation and splitting f) Combination of complexities.

up, s.nd

8. LISTS

OF

DOCUMENTS arrangement, as abstracting and layout of and indexing and

8.1 is, code may deal with the preparation, lists other than a library catalogue, such periodicals. 8.2 It shall indicate for each deviations from the rules given

kind of list, the additional rules in the earlier parts of the code.
on lists of documents

NOTE - It, ~111 be helpful if the part ters on items, such as the following: a) b\ c) d) e) Union catalogue of books, Union catalogue of periodical National bibliography, Indexing periodical, and Abstracting periodical.

has sets of chap-

publications,

9. DlQCUlVIENTS PERIODIICALS

OTHER

THAN

CONVENTIONAL

BOOKS

AND

9.1 A code may deal with the cataloguc of other kinds of conventional docurncnts excluding books and periodical publications and nonconventional documents.

IS : 1358 - 1967 I It shall indicate for each of the special kind of documents, the ditional rules and deviations from the rules given in the earlier parts the code.
books and following: a) h) c) d)

NOTE - It will be helpful if tho part on document?
puriodicsls has sets of chapters f) g) h) j) k) dealing Incunabula, Manuscript, Reprograph, Phonograph, Tape record, Cinema reel, Picture, Map. Music notation, Braille book.

other than conventional -6th items, such as the

and

e)

