**************** 



-k t^^ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



): Misch metal [MTD 5: Ferro Alloys] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangarara Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC 669'85/'8 6 ( First Reprint SEPTEMBER 1991 ) IS : 4182 - 1988 



( Reaffirmed 2000 ) 
Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
MISCH METAL 

(First Revision ) 



1. Scope — This standard covers the requirements of misch metal used in ferrous and non- 
ferrous industry. 

2. Terminology — For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall apply. 

2.1 Cast ( Melt ) — The product of any of the following: 

a) One furnace heat, or 

b) One tap of continuous furnace, or 

c) A number of furnace or crucible heats of similar composition mixed in a ladle or holding 
furnace and used for making a cast. 

2.2 Batch — A group of lumps of one grade, cast from the same cast/melt in accordance With 2.1. 

3. Grades — This standard covers four grades of misch metal as specified in Table "!. 

4. Particulars to be Specified While Ordering — For the benefit of the purchaser, particulars 

to be specified while ordering for the material to this specification shall be as follows: 

a) Quantity of the material; 

b) Name of the material; 

c) Grade; 

d) Size range; 

e) Necessary requirements for analysis reports, packing, etc, as appropriate; and 

f) Shelf life. 

5. Supply of IV^aterials — General requirements relating to supply of material to this specifica- 
tion shall be as laid down in IS : 1387-1967 'General requirements for the supply of metallurgical 
materials ( revised )'. 

6. Chemical Composition — Each batch of the material shall conform to the requirements of 
chemical composition specified in Table 1 and if so specified by the purchaser at the time of 
enquiry and order, shall supply a test certificate of chemical analysis of the sample of material for 
each melt. 

6^1 If specified by the purchaser at the time of enquiry and order that each lump of the batch 
should conform to chemical composition specified in Table 1 , this shall be agreed to between 
the purchaser and the manufacturer. 

6.2 The chemical composition given in Table 1 shows only the main constituent elements and 
the usual impurities. If the purchaser requires closer ranges for the main element contents and/or 
different limits for specified elements and/or non-specified elements, this shall be agreed to 
between the purchaser and the manufacturer, 

6.3 The chemical composition of the material shall be determined either by the method specified 
in IS : 5425 'Methods of chemical analysis of misch metal', or any other established instrumental/ 
chemical methods. In case of dispute, the procedure given in the latest version of IS : 5425 
shall be the referee method. However, where the method is not given in IS : 5425, the referee 
method shall be agreed to between the purchaser and the manufacturer. 



Adopted 6 June 1988 



April 1989, BIS Gr 2 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN. 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 



IS: 4182- 1988 





TABLE 1 


CHEMICAL COMPOSITION OF MISCH METAL 


, PERCENT 








( Clauses 3, 6, 6.1 and e.2 ) 








Grade 






Constituents, Percent 

J* 








f — '— ■ ■ - 
Cerium 


Lanthanum 


Total Rare- Earth 
Metals' 

Mm 


Iron 
Mex 


Impurities. Such as Aluminium, 
Magnesium, Calcium, Carbon 
and Silicon 
Max 


Grade 1 
( Low iron ) 


40-55 


20-27 


99 


0*5 




0*5 


Grade 2 
( High iron ) 


40-55 


20-27 


90 


10 




0*5 


Grade 3 
Cerium free 
Lanthanum rich 
( Low iron ) 


0-5 


40, Mm 


99 


0'5 




0*5 


Grade 4 
Cerium free 
Lanthanum rich 
( High iron ) 


0*5 


35, Mm 


90 


10 




0'5 


Grade 5 


40-50 


20-25 


80 


16 




0'5 



*lt may also include other rare-earth metals, such as neodymium, praseodymium and samparium. 

7. Size Range — The material shall be supplied in lumps or as crushed and screened particles. 
The particle size ranges and tolerances shall be as given in Table 2. The undersize values shall 
be valid at the point of delivery to the purchaser. 



Grade 

1 
2 
3 



TABLE 2 PARTICLE SIZE RANGE 




Size Range, mm 


Undersize, Percent by 
Mass, Max 


2-50 


3 


2-25 


5 


Up to 2 


— 



8. Extraneous Contamination — The material shall be reasonably free from extraneous 
contaminations like slag and non-metallic inclusions, etc. 

9. Sampling - Each batch of the material shall be sampled in accordance with IS : 1472-1977 

'Methods of sampling ferro-alloys for determination of chemical composition ( first revision )'. 

10. Packing ~ The material shall be packed in suitable steel drums with the net contents 
varying from 5 to 25 kg, as mutually agreed to between the supplier and the purchaser. 

10.1 The material shall also be covered with an appropriate aluminium paint to prevent oxidation 
during transportation and storage. 

n. Marking — The material shall be marked with the following: 

a) Supplier's name or trade mark, 

b) Grade designation and size, 

c) Quantity, 

d) Date of manufacture, and 

e) Shelf life. 

11.1 Standard Markirig — Details available with the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



18:4182-1988 

EXPLANATORY NOTE 

Misch metal is an alloy of rare earth metals containing cerium, lanthanum, etc. Addition of 
misch metal to cast iron improves fluidity, oxidation resistance and strength. Misch metal 
improves the workability of austenitic stainless steels- Its addition to aluminium and magnesium 
alloys increases their strength at high temperature. In nickel alloys, addition of misch metal 
improves their resistance to high temperature oxidation. The use of misch metal in steels has a 
pronounced effect on quantity, shape and distribution of inclusions, particularly sulphides. In 
addition, misch also finds applications in manufacture of permanent magnets and materials for 
hydrogen storage and transportation. 

This standard was first issued in 1967. In view of the experience gained during these years. 
it was felt necessary to revise this standard. The following main modifications have made in 
this revision: 

a) Provision for particle size range has been made; 

b) Clauses pertaining to chemical analysis have been modified and information to be given 
while ordering the material has been incorporated for the benefit of the purchaser; 

c) Existing Grade 3 ( Lanthanum enriched ) has been deleted. Three additional grades out 
of which two grades ( Cerium free Lanthanum rich ) having low iron and high iron content 
have been incorporated; 

d) New clauses have been incorporated to avoid wide segregation of the chemical constitu- 
ents, thereby safeguarding the small consumers of this product; and 

e) Packing clauses have been modified. 



Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 



