**************** 



*■ fe^K 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 6185 (1971) : Specification and safety requirements for 
high chairs [CED 35: Furniture] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS: 6185 -1971 

( Reaffirmed 2005 ) 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION AND SAFETY 
REQUIREMENTS FOR HIGH CHAIRS 

( Second Reprint FEBRUARY 1996 ) 
UDC 634.434,2 



© Copyright 1972 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Gr 2 January 1972 



IS 1 6185- 1971 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION AND SAFETY 
REQUIREMENTS FOR HIGH CHAIRS 

Furniture Sectional Committee, BDG 35 
Chairman 

ShJU J. P. J. BlLDIORIA 

1st Floor, Dundoo Vihar, 3464 Rashtrapathi Road, 
Secunderabad 3 (AP) 

Members Representing 

Shri M. R. Bhalla Hindustan General Industries Ltd, Delhi 

Shri Harcharan Singh Nanva 
{^Alternate ) 
Shri A. M. Chaki Calcutta Cabinet Makers* and Furnishers' Association, 

Calcutta 
Shri R. M. Chaudhri Indian Aluminium Co Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri J. K. Anand ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. Dayal Small Industries Service Institute, New Delhi 

Shri Feroze Engineer The Hyderabad Allwyn Metal Works Ltd, 

Hyderabad 
Shri D. P. Wadia ( Alternate ) 
Shri Goverdhan N. Gidwani Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals 

( Ministry of Supply ) 
Shri H. C. Verma ( Alternate ) 
Shri T. S. Gill Central Public Works Department 

Shri M. J. Jal .Godrej & Boyce Manufacturing Co Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Shri Himmatlal N. Khira Jayanand Khira & Co Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Shri Jayanand N. Khira ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. S. Lauly Indian Plywood Manufacturing Co Ltd, Dandeli 

Shri M. S. Mauthia ( Alternate ) 
Dr N. T. Mathew Indian Statistical Institute, Calcutta 

Shri J. V. Mehta Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters 

Prof J. N. Moudgill University of Delhi, Delhi 

Shri B. Nandi Posts & Telegraphs Department ( Ministry of 

Communications ) 
Shri Jeet Malhotra ( Alternate ) 
Shri Ashok C. Patel Chandan Metal Products Private Ltd, Baroda 

Shri Arun C. Patel ( Alternate ) 
Shri C. T. Radhakrishnan Public Works Department, Government of 

Tamil Nadu 
Representative Curzon & Co, Madras 

Shri A: C. Sekhar Forest Research Institute & Colleges, Dehra Dun 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI1 10002 



IS *6185-1*71 

Mmtxn Ibprmmtinz 

Srau J. D. Shast*i ' India* Institute of Architect* Bombay 

Saw CD* Shamca ( internet*) 
Sbri R. D. SftxvASTAVA Central Building Research Institute (CSIR), 

Shbi T. N. Gotta ( AUtrmU ) 
Stat L. G. Toys Research, Designs & Standards Organisation 

(Ministry of Railways) 
ShriN. V. Shastri ( Altmat*) 
Smu N. Venkataiaman Western India Plywoods Ltd, Gannanore District 

(Kerala) 
Skri A. K. Ramagbandran ( AlttrnaU ) 
ftirpy p. Ajtiha Simha, Director General, ISI ( Ex-qficio Mmbcr ) 

Director ( Civ Engg ) 

StcrtUay 

Shri V. K. Goqna 

Deputy Director ( Architecture )", ISI 



Bt61S5-lt71 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION AND SAFETY 
REQUIREMENTS FOR HIGH CHAIRS 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institu- 
tion on 30 July 1971, after the draft finalized by the Furniture Sectional 
Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council, 

0.2 This standard deals with methods of check testing to ascertain the 
behaviour of the chair under normal conditions of use and supervision* 

0.2.1 It does not attempt to restrict the design of a chair leaving it 
entirely to the manufacturer to evolve a design and construction that will 
meet the tests specified in the standard. 

0.2.2 It is intended that chairs made to comply with the safety require- 
ments of the standard will give reliable service when used in a proper 
manner and for the purpose for which they have been designed. 

0.3 In the formulation of this standard due weightage has been given to 
international co-ordination among the standards and practices prevailing 
in different countries in addition to relating it to the practices in the field 
in this country, 

0.* This standard is one of a series of Indian Standards on furniture. 



0.5 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied ^th, the final value, observed or calculated, express- 
ing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS; 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded 
off value should be the same as that' of the specified value in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard specifies materials and covers safety requirements and 
tests aimed to assess the safety of a high chair for the use of infants. 



♦Rules for rounding off numerical values ( rtvistd ) . 

3 



18:6185-1971 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2*0 For the purpose of this standard the following definition shall apply. 

2.1 High Chair — A chair in which an infant can be safely and 
comfortably seated. The chair is fitted with a feeding tray. The chair 
may or may not be adjustable for height or for performing other functions. 
The height of a non-adjustable seat is such that the infant can sit at the 
normal, table with its feet resting on a foot rest appreciably above the floor 
level. 

3. MATERIALS 

3*1 Materials used for the high chair shall be robust and easily cleaned. 
Except under abnormal conditions of use they shall not be corroded by 
acids, alkalis, or other chemicals to an extent which would impair the use 
of the chair. 

3.1.1 The materials used in the construction of high chairs when tested 
in accordance with an appropriate Indian Standard shall be capable of 
withstanding a standard flammability test applicable to that material. 

4. CONSTRUCTION 

4.1 The chair shall support the child in comfort, but should not impose 
undue restriction of movement except in so far as to prevent the child 
falling from the chair. 

4.1.1 In case of chairs where adjustment in height is provided, the 
mechanism enabling these adjustments shall be fully lockable preferably 
automatically, and it shall not be possible for the child to release it. 

4.1.2 Preferably chairs shall not be fitted with castors or other wheeling 
devices but shall have their legs fitted with non-slip rubber, plastics or 
similar material, the jion-slip characteristic being either inherent in the 
material or attained by shape. 

4.1.3 There shall be no sharp edges or sharp corners, no open-ended 
tubes and no crevices in the feeding tray in which food could lodge. 

4.1.4 There shall be a strap or other retaining device across the gap 
between a tray and the seat so that the child has one leg each side of it 
when seated and cannot slip down under the tray. 

4.1.5 Safety straps, or fixing rings for them which will not permanently 
distort^ shall be provided. 



IS 1 6185. 1971 



5. TESTS 



5.1 For the tests a model dummy child shall be used weighing 12 kg ( see 



. 
























^^j ^ j| 


































-FLEXIBLE JOINT 
TO ARMS-r 














\y 




































ST FLEXIBLE JOINT 










1 TO LEGS 








600 mm HIGH 
ARMS 160 mm 
LEGS 216 mm - 
WEIGHT 12 kg 

I 






Lcbb 
ARMS, 

head] 


>-SAND FILLED 










BODY -LEAD SHOT 
PVC RESILIENT OUALIT 


if 






""lWK»*'\ 






















-_- 






. CA 














Fig. 1 


] 


Dum 


MY 





IS: 6185 -1971 

5.2 Stability — Both when containing the dummy and without it, the 
chair shall not fall over when tilted on a platform, against a floor stop* to 
an angle of 15° from the vertical in any direction. This test shall be 
applied to the chair in each of its normal adjustment positions and when 
the dummy is in position jt shall remain strapped securely during the test. 

5.3 Mechanical Devices — Visual examination of all mechanical devices 
shall be made after the test to detect any distortion or apparent weakness. 

5A Resistant to Corrosion — Plated metal parts shall have sufficient 
resistance to corrosion as a result of weather effects and shall be tested in 
accordance with IS : 5528-1968*. 

6. MARKING 

6.1 Each high chair shall bear the manufacturer's name or trade-mark. 

6.1.1 Each high chair may also be marked with the ISI Certification 
mark. 

Note — The use of the ISI Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of the 
Indian Standards Institution (Certification Marks) Act, and the Rules and Regula- 
tions made thereunder. Presence of this mark on products covered by an Indian 
Standard conveys the . assurance that they have been produced to comply with the 
requirements of that standard, under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and 
quality control during production. This system, which is devised and supervised by 
ISI and operated by the producer, has the further safeguard that the products as 
actually marketed are continuously checked by ISI for conformity to the standard. 
Details of conditions, under which a licence for the use of the ISI Certification Mark 
may be granted to manufacturers or processors, may be obtained from the Indian 
Standards Institution. 



♦Method of testing corrosion resistance of electroplated and anodized aluminium 
coatings by copper-accelerated acetic acid salt*spray ( CASS ) test. 



