]Superseding

IS/IEC 519-1 (1984) IS 9080 (Part 1) : 19791

ml

73lJTFf*w

Indian Standard

SAFETYINELECTROHEATINSTALLATION
PART 1 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS

ICS 25.180.10: 13.110

0 BlS 1995

BUREAU OF h4ANAK BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR NEW DELHI 110002

December 1995

Price Group

8

Industrial Electroheating

Equipment Sectional Committee, ETD 17

NATIONAL FOREWORD This Indian Standard is identical with IEC Pub 519-1 (1984) `Safetyin electroheat installations - Part 1 : General requirements', issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) is being brought out to align the requirements related to safety of persons working in electroheat installation and safety of various types of furnaces and equipments used in these installations in line with the corresponding requirements at the IEC level. While taking up revision of IS 9080 (Part 1) : 1979 `Safety requirements in electroheat installations : Part 1 General requirements', the Sectional Committee decided to align the standard with IEC 519-l(l984). It is also envisaged that the following Indian standards will be aligned with corresponding IEC standards :
Indian Standard Under Revision Corresponding IEC Publication Present Stage

requirements in electroheat installations : Part 1 General requirements 2) IS 9080 (Part 2/Set 1) : 1979 Safety requirements in electroheat installations : Part 2 Particular requirements for resistance heating equipment, Section 1 Protection in direct resistance heating installations 3) Section 2 Protection in indirect resistance heating installations 4) Section 3 Protection in potassium and sodium nitrate and nitrate bath furnaces 5) Section 4 Protection in installations used for drying varnishes and other similar products 6) IS 9080 (Part 3) : 1973 Safety requirements in electroheat installations : Part 3 Particular requirements for mains and medium frequency induction furnace installations 7) IS 9080 (Part 4) : 1981 Safety requirements in electroheat installations : Part 4 Particular requirement for arc furnace installations 8) Safety in electroheat installations : Part 5 Specification for safety in plasma installation 9) Safety in electroheat installation : Part 6 Specification for safety in industrial microwave heating equipment

1) IS 9080 (Part 1) : 1979 Safety

IEC Pub 519-1 (1984) Safety in IS/lEC 519-1 (1984) electroheat installations- Part 1 : standard) General requirements of IEC Pub 519-2 (1992) Safety in Formulation electroheat installations-Part2 : under consideration requirements for Particular resistance heating

(This

standard

Formulation of under consideration Formulation of under consideration Formulation of under consideration

standard standard standard

of standards IEC Pub 519-3 (1988) Safety in Formulation electroheat installation - Part 3 : under consideration Particular requirements for mains and medium frequency induction furnace installations of IEC 519-4 (1995) Safety in Formulation electroheat installations -Part 4 : under consideration Particular requirement for arc furnace installations standard

IEC Pub 519-5 (1980) Safety in New standard IS/IEC 519-5 electroheat installations -Part 5 : Specification for safety in plasma installation of standard IEC Pub 519-6 (1982) Safety in Formulation electroheat installations - Part under consideration 6 : Specification for safety in industrial microwave heating equipment
(Continued on third cover)

IS/IEC

519-1 (1984)

Indian Standard

SAFETYINELECTROHEATINSTALLATION
PART 1 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS

1. Sizope This standard is applicable to industrial electroheat installations and deals with the general safety requirements. Where requirements given in this standard differ from those given in other IEC publications, an equivalent degree of safety shall be ensured. 1.1 The present requirements apply to industrial electroheat installations, such as: direct arc furnaces, submerged arc furnaces, equipment for arc heating (other than arc furnaces), electroslag remelting furnaces, plasma electroheat equipment, induction melting furnaces, equipment for induction heating, equipment for direct resistance heating, equipment for indirect resistance heating, equipment for infra-red radiation heating, equipment for dielectric heating (high-frequency), equipment with electron guns, microwave heating equipment, industrial laser equipment. This standard is not applicable to electric cooking and heating equipment for household or welding purposes, nor does it apply to space heating of any kind.

1.2

This standard refers to the normal operation of industrial electroheat installations; it is also intended to ensure the safety ofpersons in the event of abnormal operation and when faults occur in electroheat installations, Inspection, commissioning, utilization and maintenance are dealt with in Clause 15.

1.3

lnis standard assumes that the installations are operated and/or maintained by skilled or instructed personnel according to Sub-clauses 3.4.1 and 3.4.2.

2. Object
The requirements for the safety of persons in electroheat installations are the subject, on the one

hand, ofgeneral requirements applicable to electroheat installations as a whole and, on the other hand, of particular requirements applicable to each of them. This standard gives only general requirements. These safety requirements concern the protection of persons against dangers electrical origin and also against certain dangers of nonelectrical origin.

ofparticularly

1

IS/IEC 519-l (1984

The safety requirements to be observed result from the joint application ofgeneral requirements and particular requirements concerning the industrial application of the electroheat involved. Where particular requirements exist they shall complete, modify or replace the general requirements. In the absence of particular requirements, the requirements to be complied with are those which are specified in this standard. In addition, for electroheat installations of voltage bands 1 and 2 and frequencies up to 60 Hz, the following parts of IEC Publication 364: Electrical Installations of Buildings, shall apply: 364-3 Part 3 : Assessment of General Characteristics. Chapter 31: Purposes, Supplies and Structures. Section 312 - Types of Distribution System.

364-4-41 Part 4: Protection for safety. Chapter 41: Protection against Electric Shock. 364-4-42 Chapter 42 : Protection against Thermal Effects. 364-4-43 Chapter 43 : Protection against Overcurrent. 364-4-46 Chapter 46 : Isolation and Switching. 364-4-47 Chapter 47 : Application of Protective Measures for Safety. Section 471- Measures of Protection against Electric Shock. 364-4-473 Section 473 : Measures of Protection against Overcurrent. 364-s-537 Part 5 : Selection and Erection of Electrical Equipment. Chapter 53 : Switchgear and Controlgear. Section 537 - Devices for Isolation and Switching. 364-5-54 Chapter 54: Earthing Arrangements and Protective Conductors. For voltage band 3, specifications are under consideration.

3. Definitions For definitions of fundamental and general terms in the electroheating field, refer to IEC Publication 50: International Electrotechnical Vocabulary (IEV), Chapter 841: Industrial Electroheating and Chapter 826: Electric Installations of Buildings. The following definitions apply for the purpose of this standard. 3.1 Terms used in electroheating 3.1.1 Electrical installation Assembly of associated electrical equipment to fulfil a specific purpose and having certain coordinated characteristics.
3.1.2 Electroheat installation

(IEV 841-01-06)

An installation composed of electroheat equipment and the electrical and mechanical equipment needed for its operation and use. 3.1.3 Electrical equipment
Any equipment used for such purposes as generation, conversion, transmission, distribution or utilization of electrical energy, such as rotating machines, transformers, switchgear, capacitors, measuring instruments, protective devices, wiring material and appliances.

2

IS/IEC 519-1 (1984)

3.1.4 Electroheat equipment (IEV 841-01-05) An appliance or assembly of technological devices for converting electrical energy into thermal energy. 3.2 Electrical quantities and terms
Norote. Unless otherwise stated, the terms "voltage" and "current" apply to the r.m.s. values in the case ofa.c. The electrical terms and quantities associated with the word "rated" refer to the electroheat equipment itself, unless otherwise stated. The terms "rated voltage ", "rated current" or "rated power" apply to the voltage (in the case of a three-phase system, the voltage between phases), the current or the power specified by the manufacturer and indicated on the electroheat equipment.

3.2.1 Rated voltage Voltage for which an installation (or part of an installation) is designed. 3.2.2 Rated voltage range The interval between the highest and lowest voltage specified and indicated on the equipment by the manufacturer. 3.2.3 Electric power distribution network Electric power transmission and distribution system that is not used exclusively for supplying the electroheat installation. 3.2.4 Live part
Any conductor or conductive part intended to be energized in normal use including a neutral

conductor but by convention not a PEN conductor (see Sub-clause 3.2.10).

3.2.5 Insulation All the insulating materials necessary to ensure the proper operation of the equipment and protection against electric shock. It refers also to the action of insulating.
Note. Under certain circumstances, the heat insulation materials employed for electroheat perform the function of the electrical insulation. equipment may equally

3.2.6 Electrical connection Means or actual condition that allows or ensures the passage of electric current between two conductive parts. 3.2.7 Equipotential bonding (IEV 826JJ4-09) Electrical connection putting various exposed conductive parts and extraneous conductive parts at a substantially equal potential. 3.2.8 Exposed conductive part (IEV 826-0392) A conductive part of electrical equipment, which can be touched and which is not normally live but which may become live under fault conditions.
Note. A conductive part of electrical equipment which can only become live under fault conditions through an exposed conductive part, is not considered to be an exposed conductive part.

3

IS/IEC 519-1 (1984)

3.2.9

Protective conductor (symbol PE); Equipment grounding conductor (USA) (IEV 8264445)

A conductor required by some measures for protection against electric shock for electrically connecting any of the following parts: - exposed conductive parts, - extraneous conductive parts, - main earthing terminal, - earth electrode, - earthed point of the source or artificial neutral. 3.2.10 PEN conductor (IEV 826-04-06) An earthed conductor combining the functions of both protective conductor and neutral conductor.
Note. The acronym PEN results of the combination neutral conductor. of both symbols PE for the protective conductor and N for the

3.2.11 Earthing conductor; Grounding electrode conductor (USA) (IEV 8264447) A protective conductor connecting the main earthing terminal or bar to the earth electrode. 3.2.12 `Leakage current (in an installation) (IEV 826-03-08modified) A current which, in the absence of a fault, flows to earth or to extraneous conductive parts.
Notes 1. This current capacitors. may have a capacitive component including that resulting from the deliberate use of

2. - The value of the leakage current may differ in the hot and cold state.

3.2.13 Isolation (disconnection) This is intended to cut off the supply from all or a discrete section of the installation by separating the installation or section from every source of electrical energy. This is to ensure the safety of persons carrying out work on or in the vicinity of live parts involving a risk of direct contact. 3.2.14 Switching-offfor
mechanical maintenance

This is intended to de-energize an item or items of electrically powered equipment for the purpose of preventing accidents during non-electrical maintenance on this equipment.

3.2.15 Emergency switching This is intended to remove, as quickly as practicable, hazards which may occur unexpectedly. Where this measure is applied in order to stop dangerous movement it is called emergency
stopping.

3.2.16 Functional switching (control) This is intended to switch "on" or "off" or vary the supply of electrical energy to any part of an installation or current using equipment in order to achieve control for normal operating purposes.
4

IS/IEC 519-l (1981)

3.3 3.3.1

Connecting devices Fixed connection

The connection of electroheat equipment is fixed when the connection to permanently-fixed supply circuits is such that its mounting and dismantling require the use of a tool. In all other cases, the connection is removable. 3.3.2 Permanently-Jixedflexible conductor
A flexible conductor connected to an electroheat equipment in such a way that it can be removed only by the use of a tool.

3.3.3 Removable connecting conductor A flexible conductor connected to the electroheat installation by means of a connector and to the supply line by means of a plug. It may be disconnected from the equipment without the use of a tool. 3.4 Capability of persons 3.4.1 Instructed persons Persons adequately advised or supefvised by skilled persons to enable them to avoid danger which electroheat installations may create (operating and maintenance staff).

3.4.2 Skilled persons Persons with technical knowledge or sufficient experience to enable them to avoid dangers which electroheat installations may create.

4. Classification of electroheat equipment according to voltage bands 4.1 Electroheat equipment is classified according to the voltage(s) at which it is supplied under normal operating conditions. According to the voltage specified in Sub-clause 4.1, electroheat equipment is classified as follows :

4.2

4.2.1 Equipment of voltage band I Equipment with rated voltage not exceeding 50 V a.c. or 120 V smooth d.c.

4.2.2

EquipFent of voltage band 2

Equipment with rated voltage above 50 V a.c. but not exceeding 1000 V a.c. or above 120 V smooth d.c. but not exceeding 1500 V smooth d.c. 4.2.3 Equipment of voltage band 3 Equipment with rated voltage above 1000 V a.c. or 1500 V smooth d.c.

5

IS/IEC 5.

519-l (1981)

Classification of electroheat equipment according to frequency bands

Electroheat equipment is classified according to frequency bands as follows:

5.1 Low-frequency equipment Equipment operating at frequencies less than or equal to 60 Hz.
x5.2 Medium-frequency equipment

Equipment operating at frequencies greater than 60 Hz but less than or equal to 10 kHz.

5.3

High-frequency equipment

Equipment operating at frequencies greater than 10 kHz but less than or equal to 3@ MHz.

5.4 Microwave equipment Equipment operating at frequencies greater than 300 MHz but less than or equal to 300 GHz.

6.

General requirements

6.1 Electroheat equipment
6.1.1

All parts of an electroheat equipment shall be designed, constructed and installed for the voltages and frequencies used, taking into account the mode of operation and the relevant IEC standards.

Note. -

As an example, for equipment for which the rated frequency has been defined, but whose frequency may vary within a certain range, the most unfavourable frequency for safety requirements should be considered.

6.1.2 Electroheat equipment shall be so designed and constructed that when installed and used in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions, no hazard for the personnel or the environment can arise. In particular and if necessary, by agreement between the manufacturer and user, anticipated conditions leading to danger such as mechanical shocks, vibrations, excessive heating, moisture, pressure, chemical actions, etc., shall be considered. 6.1.3 Electroheat equipment shall be so constructed and installed as to be sufficiently stable during operation in all normal positions in which it may be used. Handles, operating levers and the like shall be reliably fixed and secured. The movement of levers and controls shall, as far as possible, correspond with the direction of the mechanical movements they control.
6.1.4

Measures shall be taken to avoid abnormal overpressure, for example by safety valves or temperature limiters. 6

IS/IEC 519-1 (1984)

6.1.5 Tilting, swivelling or movable electroheat equipment shall be so designed that the electrical equipment and the pertinent auxiliary parts, when in either of the end positions or in motion, are not mechanically overstressed.

6.2 Electrical equipment of electroheat installations 6.2.1 Electrical equipment shall be designed and built so as to ensure, under normal operating conditions, the safety of personnel and the prevention of risks of fire and explosion. The equipment shall also have sufficient mechanical strength to obviate the risks of deterioration to which it may be liable. Furthermore, it shall be so constructed that at all points the current flowing under normal operating conditions will not cause dangerous heating of conductors, insulation or nearby parts of the electroheat installation. Electrical equipment shall comply with the relevant IEC standards as far as they exist. It shall also comply with the requirements for electroheat installations and/or equipment.

6.2.2 Protective measures against electric shock shall be taken (see Clause 12). 6.2.3 Circuits comprising transformers, inductors and capacitors shall be designed to obviate the occurrence of excessive voltages or currents which if maintained, could cause deterioration of the said parts of these circuits and perhaps constitute a hazard to persons. 6.2.4 Discharge of capacitors shall be carried out in accordance with IEC Publication 110:Recommendation for Capacitors for Inductive Heat Generating Plants Operating at Frequencies between 40 and 24 000 Hz. 6.2.5 When capacitors are assembled in banks, the manufacturer's instructions shall be followed.

6.2.6 The electrical equipment chosen shall be so arranged that it does not deteriorate in normal operation due to physical and chemical effects, such as those due to heat from the environment, spatter of melted materials and salts, humidity, oil, shocks or friction. If necessary, suitable structural measures shall be taken, for example by providing gutters, protective channels and similar means.

6.2.7 To facilitate efficient inspection and maintenanii, the various parts of the electrical equipment, and particularly those parts liable to wear, shall as far as possible be easily accessible.

6.2.8 Where forced cooling of components is employed, provision shall be made for monitoring the cooling action. Should the cooling be insufficient. an alarm shall be given and, if necessary, the electroheat equipment shall be switched off or sat~ty otherwise ensured.

6.2.9 Sensors of temperature controllers, temperature limiters and temperature protectors shall be attached so that they respond correctly and so that their operation is not impaired by the temperature effect of the environment or by mechanical or inductive effects.

IWIEC 519-l (1981)

6.3 6.3.1

Static charges - Stray fields

Static charges which may impair the efficient operation of electroheat equipment or be dangerous to persons, shall be suppressed or made harmless, for example by means of earthing, screening or provision of sufftcient distance.

6.3.2

Similar precautions shall also be taken concerning the effects of electromagnetic leakage (stray fields), for example eddy currents, induced voltages.
Electromagneticfields and ionizing radiation

6.4

6.4.1 Where electromagnetic fields are emitted from electroheat equipment, the equipment shall be designed so as to protect the operators from the effect of the electromagnetic field if its level is known to be harmful.
6.4.2

Electroheat equipment emitting ionizing radiation shall comply with the statutory provisions for protection.
Liquid cooling

6.5 6.5.1

Where live parts are liquid-cooled, for example inductors, transformers, capacitors, busbars, cables as well as boiler or machinery parts, the quality of the coolant, the length of the hoses and the material used for tubes and hoses shall be such as to limit leakage currents to a non-dangerous level.

65.2

The formation of bubbles in cooling systems shall be avoided as far as possible.

Note. -

Special attention

may need to be given to hose fittings employed.

6.5.3

Closed circuit cooling is preferred to reduce the risk of coolant contamination and loss.

6.5.4

All parts through which the coolant flows shall be designed to withstand 1.5 times the rated service pressure. Precautions should be taken to limit the formation of deposits, corrosion and pases. The formation of condensation shall be avoided as far as possible. The manufacturer of the installation shall give the following cooling data: type and quality of the coolant (physical, chemical and electrical properties), required flow rate, minimum and maximum inlet and maximum outlet temperatures, required minimum pressure difference between inlet and outlet.

6.5.5

6.5.6

7.

Prohibition of the use of earth as part of an active circuit

7.1 Unless otherwise specified in the particular requirements, it is prohibited to use as part of an active circuit the earth, protective conductors, sheaths and structures. This prohibition, however,
8

IS/IEC 519-1(19W does not preclude the possible earthing of neutral points or the adoption of safety devices using the earth as return circuit. 7.2 Track rails may be used as a return circuit, provided that under fault conditions the impedance of the circuit is sufficiently low to limit the step and contact voltages between the rails and the adjacent earth to values not exceeding 25 V r.m.s.

8. Marking inscriptions, labelling and circuit diagrams 8.1 Unless otherwise specified in the particular requirements, the marking shall include the following data related to the equipment:

a) symbol of origin (name or symbol of manufacturer); b) type or catalogue number; c) date of manufacture or date code ; 4 serial number ; e) rated voltage or rated voltage range (volts or kilovolts).
When the equipment is intended for supply at different rated voltages, the association of the particular voltage and corresponding supply terminals as well as the kind of connection shall be indicated on the rating plate and shall be clearly recognizable ; rated current (amperes or kiloamperes) ; rated power (kilowatts or megawatts). In the case of electroheat equipment-for several voltage ranges, the maximum values for the power input shall be stated ; connected load (kilovoltamperes or megavoltamperes). When electroheat equipment includes auxiliary equipment, the installed load (kilovoltamperes) of the latter shall also be stated; type of current, frequency and, where appropriate, frequency range, shall be stated. Standard graphical symbols shall be employed; other essential data, including non-electrical data, for identification of the equipment.

fl d
h) 9

j)

8.2 The marking specified in Sub-clause 8.1 shall be durably and legibly inscribed on a plate attached to the main part of the electroheat installation or equipment so as to be clearly visible when the installation is ready for service. The marking shall be in the language of the country in which the equipment is to be installed, unless otherwise agreed.

8.3 All positions of the actuating and control devices shall be clearly indicated by letters, words, numbers or symbols. 8.4 Operating and maintenance instructions for the electroheat installations including circuit diagrams and a list of components shall be provided in good time.
Note. Other information necessary for shipping, installation and handling such as weight and dimensions given on the instruction sheet. should be

8.5 The electrical components and their references to the diagram shall be durably marked. The designation shall comply with the indications on the diagrams. 8.6 Control and signalling devices shall be identified by letters, words or symbols.

8.7 Identification of conductors shall be in accordance with relevant IEC standards.
9

IS/IEC 519-l (1981)

9.

Protection against overcurrent

Protective measures against overcurrent shall be provided in accordance with IEC Publications 364443 and 3644473.

10. Isolation and switching Isolation, switching-off for mechanical maintenance, emergency switching, and functional switching (control) shall be provided and be in accordance with IEC Publications 364446 and 364-5-537. 10.1 Depending on the application, there may be circuits which need not be switched off such as: lighting and socket-outlet circuits for the connection of repair and maintenance tools, for example lamps, drills (irrespective of their voltage) ; circuits supplying undervoltage trips and circuit-breaker closing and tripping devices which are operated with mains voltage, but are not used for control purposes; auxiliary circuits with voltages not exceeding band 1; other auxiliary circuits supplying essential components for example pumps, fans, etc., which shall not be switched-off during the period of interruption of the mains supply. In the case of voltages exceeding band 1, the above-mentioned circuits shall employ cables or insulated conductors which shall be segregated from those following the supply disconnecting switch, and they shall be connected via separate specially enclosed terminals. They shall be provided with a separate disconnecting switch. In the case specified under Item b) of Sub-clause 10.1,this disconnecting switch can be omitted. The circuits which are not disconnected by the supply disconnecting switch shall be indicated in the description. 10.2 High-voltage circuit-breakers are permissible for supply, disconnection and isolation, providing the following conditions exist: - visible isolating distance is provided (for example disconnecting switches or withdrawn switchgear trucks) ; - facilities are provided to lock in the off-position as well as to earth the outgoing cables; - this switching device is exclusively used for the supply of the electroheat installation. 10.3 Control circuits 10.3.1 Control circuits shall be supplied at rated voltages not exceeding 250 V. The conductors shall be identified according to IEC Publication 204: Electrical Equipment of Industrial Machines.

10.3.2 Control circuits can be directly supplied from a network ofType TN or TT (see IEC Publication 364-3, Sub-clause 312.2). 10.3.3 Short-circuit protective devices shall be adequately calibrated for the switching elements in the control circuits. '
10.

IWIEC 519-1 (1984)

10.3.4 In control circuits supplied via a transformer having one end of the secondary winding coyected to earth, short-circuit protection shall be provided in the unearthed conductor of the secondary side. No such protection is required if short-circuit protection elements on the primary side ensure equivalent safety. 10.3.,5 In control circuits supplied via a transformer with earthed centre tap of the secondary winding, protection against short circuits shall be provided in both poles of the secondary side of the control circuits. 10.4 Earthing of control circuits
10.4.1

An earth fault on any control circuit shall neither cause inadvertent switching on nor prevent switching off of the load. In order to fulfil this requirement, it is recommended that one side of the control transformers be earthed and coils and contacts be connected accordingly (see Sub-clause 10.4.3). Unearthed control circuits fed from a transformer shall be provided with an insulation monitoring device which either indicates an earth fault or interrupts the circuit automatically after an earth fauit. The d.c. internal resistance of the insulation monitoring device shall be at least 15 kQ. For certain electronic devices much higher values of this resistance may be necessary.

In the case of control transformers with earthed centre tap, a differential current circuit-breaker shall be used.
Note. - The operation of an insulation monitoring device may be influenced by the existence of a d.c. component.

10.4.2 In control circuits where single-pole earthing is required for operational reasons, for example with electromagnetic clutches having an internal earth or in control circuits with electronic components, the manufacturer shall provide for earthing. In this event, separate control transformers or one control transformer with several isolated secondary windings shall be used.
10.4.3 Connection of coils and contacts

In control circuits with one side connected (or intended to be connected) to the protective circuit, one terminal (preferably always having the same marking) of the operating coil of each electromagnetically operated device (or one terminal of other electrical deyices) shall be connected directly to this side of the control circuit and a11 contacts of control devices which operate the coil (or the'device) shall be inserted between the other terminal of the coil (or device) and the other side of the control circuit (which is not connected to the protective circuit). The following exceptions to this rule are allowed: a) contacts of protective relays (for example overload relays) may be connected between the side connected to the protective circuit and the coils provided that the conductors between such contacts and the coils of the control devices on which the relay contacts operate are in the same control enclosure; b) in special cases, where a different arrangement of the contacts leads to a simpllfication of the external control accessories (trolleys, cable winders, multiple plugs, etc.), provided that the requiiements of the first paragraph of Sub-clause 10.4.1 are still fulfdled.
Note. - With the exception under Item b) very careful design is required to avoid danger in case of a fault. (According to IEC Publication 204-1, Sub-clause 6.2.3.1).

11

IS/IEC 519-l (1984)

11. Connection to the supply r&work and internal connections 11.1 General requirements 11.1.1 The connection to the supply network depends on the type of the supply system according to IEC Publication 364-3, Section 312. The conductors shall be identified according to IEC Publication 446 : Identification of Insulated and Bare Conductors by Colours, and I E C Publication 391: Marking of Insulated Conductors. 11.1.2 Steps shall be taken to ensure that interconnecting conductors in normal operating conditions undergo no abnormal mechanical stresses involving tension, flexing, torsion, friction or vibration, or effects of heat, moisture or vapours liable to damage them.

11.1.3 The enclosure of the conductors shall be such that it ensures: - protection of insulation against abrasion and laceration, - protection of conductors against tension and torsion. 11.2 Fixed connection 11.2.1 The device adopted for the avoidance of tensile stresses shall not be made live and shall also be'so designed that any damage of the conductor to be protected from abnormal tensile stresses is prevented in accordance with Sub-clause 11.1.2. 11.2.2 At the point of entry of the fixed wiring, the bending radius of the conductors shall be sufficiently large to avoid damage. It shall be possible to insert the conductors with their coverin without risk of damage. 11.3 Removable connection andflexible conductors 11.3.1 Electroheat equipment which is not permanently connected to the supply network shall have a flexible connecting cable which can only be removed by use of a tool. 11.3.2 All flexible wiring shall be provided with protective sheaths in accordance with the requirements of Sub-clause 11.1.3and the steps taken to ensure protection against tensile stress and torsion shall be readily recognizable. Any method of an improvised nature is not allowed.

11.3.3 Flexible conductors shall be protected against excessive flexing at the points of insertion in the equipment. Protective devices shall be fixed securely and shall be sufficiently long.

11.3.4 The lead-in points of connecting conductors shall be such that the protective covering of the conductors can be inserted without risk of deterioration. This can be achieved by using, for example, insulating sleeves. 11.3.5 The spacing provided for the supply leads inside the apparatus shall be such that they can be easily inserted and connected, and if a cover or lid is provided, it shall be readily secured in position without risk of damage to conductors.
12

IS/IEC 519-l (1984)

11.3.6 In the case of connection by sliding contact the live parts shall at least be protected by inaccessibility, checked by the IEC standard test linger, both when assembled and when separated but live. 11.3.7 In the case of connection by plug-and-socket devices the live parts shall not be accessible when parts are connected or when they are disconnected but are live. 11.3.8 The connecting lines of removable appliances shall contain all the active conductors and protective conductors necessary for their operation and safe use; all these conductors being electrically distinct and laid-up together. 11.3.9 In the case of an installation where several plugs are used, a risk of some plugs being mistaken for others resulting in the impairment of safety and operation. For this reason the plugs used shall be of such a type (for example shape, size,or distinct marking) that no error is possible. The same shall apply to extensions and connectors to flexible leads.

12. Protection against electric shock 12.1 Protective measures against electric shock shall be provided. For installations of voltage bands 1 and 2 and frequencies up to 60 Hz, the requirements of IEC Publications 364-441 and 3644471 shall be applied.
Note.`For the higher frequencies, specifications are given in the particular requirements.

12.2 Requirements that differ from those of IEC Publications 364441 and 364-4471, concerning direct contact with live parts at a voltage above 25 V a.c. or 60 V d.c., are permissible if made necessary by the type of installation or operating conditions, provided the following conditions are' simultaneously fulfilled: a) the rated voltage of the installation does not exceed voltage band 2; b) the operator at the operating post shall be protected by other effective measures against the consequences of contact with conductive parts which are live in normal service. Such protective measures are for instance: insulating platforms, insulated or earthed tools. 12.3 Requirements that differ from those of IEC Publications 364441 and 3644471, concerning indirect contact are also permissible if made necessary by the type of installation or operating conditions, as far as exposed and accessible conductive parts are concerned whose voltage to earth may exceed the conventional voltage limit ULspecified in Sub-clause 413.1.1.4 of IEC Publication 364441, provided the following conditions are simultaneously fulfilled:

a) the rated voltage of the installation does not exceed the limit of voltage band 2; b) the operator at the operating post shall be protected by other protective measures against the
consequences of electric shock in case of a fault. Such measures are for instance: individual measures such as insulating clothing, gloves, footwear, helmets, goggles and collective measures such as insulated platforms, insulated or earthed tools.

Note. -

When applying Sub-clauses

12.2 and 12.3, attention should be given to Clause 15.

13

IS/IEC 519-1 (1984) 12.4 Earthingprovisions

Earthing provisions shall be made according to IEC Publication 364-5-54.

12.4.1 Accessible metal parts of electroheat equipment which are liable to become live accidentally in the event of an insulation fault shall be connected electrically in a safe and durable manner, by the shortest possible path, between themselves and to an earth terminal or an earth contact of the connector' plug. If this is not possible due to the nature of the equipment, for example in the case of high frequencies, the particular requirements shall be observed. These requirements do not apply to small isolated metal parts such as screws or rivets.

12.4.2 Electroheat installations arranged for permanent connection to the supply network or with permanently fixed flexible conductors shall be provided with an earth terminal.

12.4.3 The metal of the earth terminal shall be such that there is no risk of corrosion when in contact with the metal of the earth conductor, under normal service conditions. In cases where earth terminals are in contact with aluminium alloy parts, suitable precautions should be taken for preventing any risk of corrosion due to contact between different metals. 12.4.4 It shall only be possible to loosen the screws of earth terminals by means of a tool 12.4.5 Earth terminals shall be marked with the symbol for earth terminals (0 ) according to symbol 5019 of IEC Publication 417: Graphical Symbols for Use on Equipment. Index, Survey and Compilation of the Single Sheets. 12.4.6 If the flexible conductors permanently fixed to electroheat installations of the type referred to in Sub-clause 12.4.2 have a mains plug, it shall have an earth contact.

12.4.7 The connection between the earth terminal or the earth contact and the parts which are to be connected shall be of low electrical resistance. For values see particular requirements of IEC Publication 519.
Nore. - The method of checking the resistance is at present under consideration.

12.4.8 Handles, levers, push-buttons, etc., the spindles ofwhich may become live through an insulation fault, shall be made of insulating material capable of withstanding the voltage involved, or else appropriately covered' with an insulating material or safely and reliably earthed.

12.4.9 Protective conductors and equipotential connections shall adequately withstand thermally and mechanically the maximum current which may occur in the case of fault until the fault is cleared.

13. Protection against thermal influences Protective measures against thermal influences shall be provided according to IEC Publication 3644-42.
1J

IS/IEC 519-l (19x4)

13.1 Parts of electroheat equipment, when operated under normal operating conditions, may attain high temperatures which may exceed the values given in Table 42A of IEC Publication 364442, with respect to the operators and the environment. This shall be taken into account for design of the installation and operation of the equipment to ensure the protection of personnel and environment. 13.2 Parts made of organic or inorganic insulating materials shall be heat-resistant such that their electrical and mechanical properties are not unduly impaired by operating temperatures.

13.3 Connections of the conductors to each other and to the equipment shall be such that no excessive local temperature rise of the said conductors will occur.
Note. The effect of non-uniform current distribution and the proximity effect shall be taken into account.

13.4 Precautions shall be taken for the avoidance of excessive temperature rise on the conductors and connections and adjacent metallic parts under the effect of induced currents.

13.5 The equipment shall not be used under operating conditions other than those for which it has been constructed. 13.6 The electrical accessories of electroheat equipment shall be mounted in such a way that they are not subjected to temperature ranges the values ofwhich exceed the highest temperature for which they are designed. 14. Risk of fire and danger of explosion If electroheat installations are intended for special processes and/or are operated in a location with fire hazard or in zones exposed to danger of explosion, measures shall be taken, giving consideration to these special conditions.

15. Inspection, commissioning, utilization and maintenance of electroheat installations 15.1 General requirements 15.1.1 Electroheat installations shall be supervised, inspected and maintained so that they remain in compliance with the safety requirements of this standard. All suitable precautions shall be taken to ensure that there can be no risk for personnel while defects are being remedied.

15.1.2 If it is necessary that conductors and bare conducting parts be earthed after interrupting the supply, earth terminals shall be available in the vicinity of these parts of the equipment.

15.2 Inspection and commissioning Electroheat installations shall be inspected when put into service or after an important modilication, and thereafter at intervals, depending on the working conditions and instructions (if any) of the manufacturer. The object of these inspections is to ascertain whether the installations have been built and maintained in compliance with these requirements. 15

IS/IEC 519-l (1984)

In particular, they shall be concerned with the measurement of the resistance value of the earth circuits and of the equipotential bonding, and also the insulation resistance values of the conductors with respect to earth and between them. Those responsible shall have these inspections carried out by experts in accordance with the particular requirements and the service instructions of the installations. After commissioning, the electroheat equipment shall not be made live for the purpose of measurement and inspection which would cause excessive stress of the electrical insulation which also serve as heat protection. As a rule, the maximum permissible rated voltage shall not be . exceeded. 15.3 Utilization 15.3.1 Personnel whose activities involve the operation of electroheat installations or work in the vicinity shall be notified of the safety requirements to be observed during the operation of the installation by means of orders or service instructions brought to their attention by posting-up notices or; if necessary, by handing them a book of instructions for which acknowledgement is obtained. The responsible persons shall ensure that the safety requirements are observed.
Note. - The operating manual shall draw attention to and fully explain particular risks.

15.3.2 First aid to be given to the victims of accidents of electrical origin and instructions for its application shall be brought to the notice of personnel. 15.3.3 In installations of voltages exceeding band 1, personnel shall have at their disposal the safety equipment required for carrying out the operations they are called upon to undertake and for facilitating their intervention in the event of an incident or an accident. This equipment shall be adapted to the working voltage and maintained in perfect condition. 15.4 Maintenance work 15.4.1 Only instructed or skilled persons shall be entrusted with the maintenance work of electroheat installations. 15.4.2 No maintenance work shall be carried out with equipment live. Special arrangements (such as locking devices) shall be used to prevent switching-on of the equipment while work is in* progress. If maintenance work is necessary with equipment live, relevant measures are to be taken (see particular requirements and local regulations). 15.4.3 In zones liable to risk of explosion defined in Clause 14, no live work whatsoever, even the replacement of a lamp or fuse, shall be undertaken. This applies also to voltage band 1 installations unless measures have been taken to remove the ris.k of explosion.

Note. - Authorization to work in such zones should be controlled (e.g. by "permit to work") and where it is essential to restore the supply before the equipment is re-assembled, special dispensation should be obtained (e.g. by issue of an "explosive gas-free certificate"). 16

IS/IEC 519-l (1984) 15.4.4

For carrying `outwork on the installation with electric power switched off or on, the general regulations in force in the utilization of electrical energy shall be applied, depending on the instructions given by the manufacturer. In the case of removable covers, all the gaskets must remain in good condition.

15.4.5

17

(Continuedfrom second cover) 10) Safety in electroheat installations : Part 7 Particular requirements for installation with electron guns 11) Safety in electroheat installa8 Particular tions : Part requirements for electroslag remelting installations 12) Safety in electroheat installations : Part 9 Particular requirements for high frequency dielectric heating installations Draft IEC Pub 519-10 Safety in electroheat installations : Part 10 Particular requirements for electric surface systems (under heating preparation)

IEC Pub 519-7 (1983) Safety in electroheat installations-Part 7: Particular requirements for installation with electron guns IEC 519-8 (1983) Safety in elcctroheat installation - Part 8 : Particular requirements for electroslag remelting installations IEC Pub 519-9 (1987) Safety in electroheat installation- Part 9 : Particular requirements for high frequency dielectric heating installations

Formulation of under consideration Formulation of under consideration

standard

standard

IS/IEC 5 19-9 ( 1987)

13)

Formulation of standards under consideration

The text of the IEC standard has been considered and approved by ETDC 17 Industrial Electroheating Equipment Sectional Committee of BIS as suitable for publication as Indian standard to be brought out in dual number with the corresponding IEC Publication. CROSS REFERENCES In this Indian Standard the following International place the following: IEC Publication 50 (826) (1992) International electrotechnical vocabulary (IEV) chapter 826 : Electrical installations in buildings 50 (841) (1983) Chapter 841 : Industrial electricity Standards are referred to. Read in their respective Indian Standards SP : 30 (1984) National Electrical Code Degree of Correspondence Technically equivalent

110 (1973) : Recommendation for capacitors for inductive heat generating plants operating at frequencies between 40 and 24000 HZ 1992 204-l Electrical equipment of industrial machines - Part 1 : General requirements 364 Electrical installations of buildings 391 (1972) Marking of insulated conductors 417 (1973) Graphical symbols for use on equipment index, survey and compilation of the single sheets 446 (1989) Identification of insulated and bare conductors by &ours

IS/IEC Pub 50 (841) : 1983 Electrical : Part 51 Industrial vocabulary electroheating (formerly IS 1885 (Part Sl)/IEC Pub 50 (841) : 1983) IS 9251 : 1979 Capacitors for heat generating plants operating at frequencies between 40 and 24000 Hz IS 1356 (Part 1) : 1972 Electrical equipment of machine tools : Part 1 Electrical equipment of machines for general use SP : 30 (1984) National electrical code IS 5578 : 1985 Guide for marking of insulated conductors :P

Identical

Technically equivalent

Technically equivalent Technically equivalent Technically equivalent

IS 11353 Guide for uniform system of marking and identification of conductors and apparatus terminals

Technically equivalent

* In the case of IEC Pub 417 (1973) the Technical Committce responsible for the preparation of this Standard has decided that the graphical symbols given in IEC publication are acceptable for use in conjunction with this standard.

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory

institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Acf, 2986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.
Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. Review of Indian Standards

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot : No. CHD 003 ( 0987 )

Amendments

Issued Since Publication

Amend No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 3310131,33113 7537194 02 Regional Offices : Central
: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg

Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone 33166 17 { 335 38 41 37 84 99,37 85 61 37 86 26,37 9120 60 38 43 { 60 20 25 235 02 16,235 04 42 1 235 15 19,235 23 15 832 92 95,832 78 58 832 78 91,832 78 92

NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern
: l/14 C. LT. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola

CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 335-336, Sector 34-A CHANDIGARH 160022

{

Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113

Western

: Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East)

BOMBAY 400093

BANGALORE. BHUBANESHWAR. Branches : AHMADABAD. BHOPAL. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.
Printed at Printograph. New Delhi-5 (INDIAi

