INATA Aah IS 4746 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


Yet, US AN Fas AMT A HAT SIN 
fafecrat ar uaga — tifa afear 


( TET FRAT ) 


Transport of Dogs and Cats by Rail, 
Road and Air — Code of Practice 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 65.120 


© BIS 2023 


urter Ach SET 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
AM HAF, 9 TR SITE HH AMT, Ag fått - 110002 
S ë MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


June 2023 Price Group 6 


Animal Husbandry and Equipment Sectional Committee, FAD 32 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Animal Husbandry and Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Food and Agriculture 
Division Council. 


Dogs and cats are popularly reared as domestic pets. Dogs and cats are also considered useful animals for many 
other purposes, such as guide dogs (that is, for guiding visually impaired persons; for aiding therapy); watch, 
protection; police & military services (tracking criminals, bomb squad dogs etc). Besides, dogs and cats are also 
subjected to scientific/biological tests as laboratory animals/test-subjects for research including for biomedical 
purposes. In view of the reliance of these animals/requirements of dogs and cats, they are frequently transported. 
As transport requirements of both these animals are by and large the same, a common code is prescribed for their 
transport. 


This standard was first published in 1968. This revision is undertaken to update the transportation guidelines 
prescribed in the code with present best practices to safeguard the health and welfare of dogs and cats during their 
transportation. In this revision, the following major changes have been incorporated: 


a) General conditions for transport of dogs and cats have been modified to clarify that the fitness certificate for 
animals to be transported should be from a veterinarian registered with the Indian or State Veterinary Council. 
The format for the certificate has also been provided in Annex A as per Schedule A of Transport of Animals 
Rules, 1978; 


b) Responsibilities of attendants during road travel have been elaborated and necessary documentation 
requirement for transportation have also been incorporated; 


c) Requirements for air travel have been modified to provide sufficient ventilation and oxygenated environment 
for temperature sensitive species of dogs and cats and to include appropriate adsorbent bedding material; 


d) Clause for containers for transportation has been elaborated with respect to the material of the container, 
placement, and general structure of the container to protect the animal from any sudden impacts, injuries and 
discomfort; 


e) Labelling requirements for containers have been modified to remove the term livestock and to incorporate 
suitable labelling instructions along with basic documentation for the purpose of identification and emergency 
contact information; and 


f) Responsibilities of consignor & consignees have been elaborated under clause for ‘Care in transit’. 


While formulating this standard, necessary consideration has been given to the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals 
Act, 1960 and rules framed thereunder, and Central Motor Vehicles Rules, 1989. This standard is however, subject 
to the restrictions imposed under these rules, wherever applicable. 


The composition of the committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is listed in Annex B. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of the standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 2020 'Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision). The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 4746 : 2023 


Indian Standard 


TRANSPORT OF DOGS AND CATS BY RAIL, ROAD 
AND AIR — CODE OF PRACTICE 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This code covers the essential requirements for the 
transport of dogs and cats by rail, road and air. 


NOTE — It is applicable to all breeds of dogs and cats. 


2 TERMINOLOGY 


2.1 For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 


2.2 Animal — Dog or cat. 


2.3 Size — The length, width, height and elbow size 
of dog and cat shall be defined as under. As an 
example, the dimensions are depicted for Dog in 
Fig. 1. The same applies to cat also. 


2.3.1 Length — Tip of nose to root of tail (see A in 
Fig. 1). 


2.3.2 Width — Width across the shoulders (see D in 
Fig. 1). 


2.3.3 Height— Tip of ears to toe while standing (see 
B in Fig. 1). 


2.3.4 Elbow Size — Toe to tip of elbow (see C in 
Fig. 1). 


FIG. 1 DOG 


3 GENERAL CONDITIONS 


3.1 Animals to be transported should be healthy and 


in good condition. They shall be examined by a 
veterinarian registered with the State Veterinary 
Council to certify that the animals are free from 
contagious and infectious diseases and are medically 
fit to undertake the journey, by way of a valid fitness 
certificate. 


3.2 Sick, injured, animals, animals may only be 
transported when absolutely necessary for 
medical/veterinary purposes. 


3.3 Animals transported in the same container shall 
be of the same species and breed. 


3.4 Unweaned puppies or kittens shall not be 
transported in the same container/cage with adult 
dogs or cats other than their dams. 


3.5 Any dog or cat reported to be hostile or 
exhibiting an unfriendly, shall be transported 
individually in a container/cage, muzzled and 
labelled to give warning to the handlers. However, 
muzzling can be allowed for a short duration 
transport lest there is discomfort due to dehydration 
or starvation. In extreme cases, the animals shall be 
administered with sedative drugs by a suitably 
qualified officer. 


3.6 Any female dog or cat in season (oestrus) shall 
not be transported in the same container/cage with 
any male. 


3.7 It is not desirable to transport dogs and cats in an 
advanced stage of pregnancy (that is, in the last two 
weeks prior to the estimated date of delivery as 
verified by a veterinarian registered with the Indian 
or State Veterinary Council). 


3.8 Animals should be fed and watered about two 
hours prior to their transport. Hungry or thirsty 
animals should not be transported. 


3.9 While en route, animals shall be given water 
every four hours in summer or every 6 hours during 
winter. Feeding in route shall be done at least once 
in 12 hours for adult animals and once in four hours 


IS 4746 : 2023 


for puppies and kittens or in accordance with the 
instructions of the Veterinarian. 


3.10 Animals should also be exercised as late as 
possible before 
journey/transport. 


commencement of 


3.11 Animals should become acclimated to the 
container/cage in which they are to travel 
beforehand, as this may assist the animal during its 
journey, 


3.12 Small breeds of dogs and cats may be allowed 
to travel with the owner; provided the owner takes 
reasonable precautions to prevent disturbance to 
other passengers. 


3.13 Adequate arrangements shall be made for the 
care and management of the animals during the 
journey. 


3.14 Each animal must have been administered age- 
appropriate protection from internal and external 
parasites at least within 14 days prior to travel but 
no less than 2 days prior to travel. 


3.15 Health/ Fitness Certificate 


The consignment must be accompanied by a valid 
health/fitness certificate issued by a veterinarian 
registered with the Indian or State Veterinary 
Council. Such certificates should state that each 
animal is in fit condition to travel by rail, road or air 
and are not showing any sign of infectious or 
contagious disease including rabies. The certificate 
for the animals must also include the date and type 
of vaccine administered. The certificate shall be ina 
form specified in Annex A of this standard. 


4 ROAD TRAVEL 


4.1 This mode of transport may be adopted only 
when the animals are transported over short 
distances. (Short distances may be defined as travel 
lasting less than 8 hours). 


4.2 While traveling by road, in a public vehicle, the 
animals shall be put in a cage/container. The 
cage/container shall not be put on the roof of the 
vehicle but shall be put inside the vehicle preferably 
near the rear end of the vehicle. 


4.3 The animals must be placed in a suitable air- 
conditioned and comfortable atmosphere and away 


from exhaust/smoke fumes/harmful 


substances/cleaning solutions and 
chemicals/strongly scented materials etc and 
protected from the elements. 


4.5 The vehicle used for transporting these animals 
should maintain a constant speed and shall not 
exceed 40 km per hour or recommended speed limits 
in highways/ freeways etc. Sudden stops should be 
avoided. Effects of shocks and jolts should be 
reduced to a minimum. 


4.6 At least one attendant shall be present at all times 
during transit and he/she shall ensure that proper 
transit conditions are observed. He/she shall also 
replenish food and water whenever necessary. 
Owner of the animal or anyone on his/her behalf 
may be the attendant. 


4.6.1 The attendant must have necessary transport 
documentation for the following: 


a) Origin and ownership of animals; 

b) Place, date, time of departure; 

c) Destination; 

d) Expected duration of journey; 

e) Copy of the fitness certificate as per Annex 
A; and 

f) Instructions from the veterinarian for 
feeding, giving water en route. 


4.6.2 The attendant shall be responsible for 
ensuring: 


a) the welfare of animals, with a 
knowledge and understanding of the 
behaviour of the animals being 
transported; 


b) observing the animal on a continuous 
basis to ensure that food, water, air flow 
is adequate; 


c) that there is no thermal discomfort to 
the animal; 


d) that there is preparation for emergent 
situations and should carry an 
appropriate first aid kit/ medical kit; 


e) that the interior of the container/cage is 
clean and clear of 
waste/faeces/urine/vomit etc and must 
clean the container/cage periodically; 
and 

f) that the container/cage is positioned in 
such a way that the animal can be 
removed during an emergency. 


4.7 The cage/container with the pet must not be 
exposed to direct sunlight especially during summer. 


5 RAIL TRAVEL 


5.1 In case the journey is for more than six hours, at 
least one attendant shall accompany the animals to 
provide them food, water, etc enroute. The attendant 
shall have access to the animals for feeding, giving 
water and attending to them periodically. 


5.2 The animal should not be exposed to the direct 
blast of air. 


6 AIR TRAVEL 


6.1 The containers/cages should be properly cleaned 
and sanitized before the animals are placed inside 
them. 


6.2 Brachycephalic dogs, cats and long-hair cats, 
dogs suited to cold climates (such as Persian cats, 
Norwegian cats, Siberian husky dogs, St. Bernard 
dogs, Newfoundland dogs etc) shall be transported 
with sufficient ventilation and in air-conditioned & 
oxygenated environment only. 


6.3 Materials such as paper shreds, sawdust, rice 
husk/paddy straw etc should not be used as bedding 
or litter. Appropriate absorbent bedding material 
should be used, which may be changed as necessary. 


6.4 For both domestic and international transport, 
the animals should be kept in a pressurized 
compartment with regulated temperature. 


7 CONTAINERS FOR TRANSPORTING 


7.1 Containers/cages used to transport dogs or cats, 
shall be of such material which will not tear or 
crumble. They shall be constructed in a manner that 
allows proper ventilation and designed to protect the 
animal from impact/collision safety and from 
adverse weather. Where wire mesh is part of the 
cage/container, it must be ensured that no bosy part 
of the animal is resting on the mesh for long duration 
or is injured by such mesh. A suitable material is a 
welded wire mesh of not less than 3 mm, with a 
spacing 12 mm x 12 mm, expanded metal and wire 
netting are unsuitable for this purpose. There should 
be no protruding nails or unprotected edges of wire. 
Dogs and cats kennels in rail coaches shall be so 
placed as to give protection to animals from 
extremes of temperature and disturbance from birds 


IS 4746 : 2023 


and by giving them adequate space for health and 
safety. 


7.2 Walls of containers/cages should be padded with 
soft but durable material. Additionally, non-slip and 
absorbent bedding can be provided. 


7.3 Containers/cages should have securely affixed 
and individual food and water bowls, in a manner 
such that they may be filled from outside. 


7.4 Containers/cages should be placed in a way that 
they are not obstructed and blocked. 


7.5 The attendant should have easy access to the 
container/cage the animal is being transported. 


7.6 Containers/cages with animals must not be 
stacked on top of one another. 


7.7 The containers/cages with animals must be 
placed in a suitable air-conditioned and comfortable 
atmosphere and away from exhaust/ smoke 
fumes/harmful substances/cleaning solutions and 
chemicals/strongly scented materials etc and 
protected from the elements. 


7.8 The size of the containers for transporting dogs 
shall be as given in Table 1. A model cage is shown 
in Fig. 2. 


7.9 The size of the containers for transporting cats 
shall be as given in Table 2. A model cage is shown 
in Fig. 3. 


7.10 Labelling of Containers 


7.10.1 All animal containers/cages shall be clearly 
labelled displaying the name, address and telephone 
number of the consignor and the consignee and the 
marked as following: 


a) "LIVE ANIMALS — DO NOT TIP" on all 
sides and top; and 

b) "THIS WAY UP", with arrows indicating the 
top, on all sides. 


7.10.2 A copy of the health certificate issued by the 
registered veterinarian, description of the animal 
along with its specific health issues/concerns should 
also be attached to the container. The name and 
contact/mobile details of the attendant should also 
be specified on the container/cage for emergency 
purposes. 


IS 4746 : 2023 


8 CARE IN TRANSIT 


8.1 Consignor should be responsible for the 
following during transit: 


a) Provide required documentation; 


b) Ensure the animal is identified as per 
the documentation; 


c) Feeding and watering instructions must 
be provided; 


d) Additional copy of all documents must 
be attached to the travel container of the 
animal; 

e) Suitable trained personnel must be 
available to carry out animal handling 
at security checks; and 


f) Animal must be in a fit condition for 
transport by air. 


8.2 After a booking is accepted for transport of 
animals whether by rail or road they shall not be 
detained for any reason, such animals shall be 
booked by the first-available passenger or mail train 
or bus. 


8.3 The consignee shall be informed about the time 
of arrival, train/flight/vehicle details, in advance. In 


case, there is a delayed pick-up or consignee is 


absent, following guidelines should be followed: 


a) 


b) 


c) 


d) 


e) 


Table 1 Dog Container 


The consignor must take steps to 
contact the consignee/attendant to 
ensure smooth delivery; 


Some staff at the station/airport etc 
should be allocated to ensure that 
containers/cages with transported 
animals are dealt with gently; 


An appropriate sheltered area should be 
demarcated, and adequately staffed, for 
holding the animals at the 
station/airport etc from where they can 
be collected by the consignee; 


If the animal has not been collected by 
the consignee in 4 hours to 6 hours, the 
consignor may be contacted for further 
instructions; and 


Steps should be taken to keep the 
animals in the interim period in an 
appropriate sheltered area/air 
conditioned area/quiet area. 


(Clause 7.8) 
SI No. Size of Dog By Road and Rail By Air 
Container 
(All dimensions in centimetres) 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Length (L) Ax 1.5 A+C+10 
ii) Width (W) A Dx2+10 
iii) Height (H) B+15 B+10 
Table 2 Cat Container 
(Clause 7.9) 
SI No. Size of Cat By Road and By Air 
Container Rail 
(All dimensions in centimetres) 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Length (L) Ax2 Ax2 
ii) Width (W) A A 
iii) Height (H) B+15 B+10 


IS 4746 : 2023 


VENTILATING HOLES BATTEN FRAME LIFTING HANDLE 

f CATCH FOR 

A PEDLOCK 
WELDED 
WIRE MESH 

w 
DOOR HINGES 
FLOOR BATTEN L METAL CONTAINERS 
FOR FOOD AND WATER 
FIG. 2 MODEL DOG CONTAINER 
METAL CONTAINERS FOR LIFTING HANDLE OPEN DOOR 


FOOD AND WATER 


VENTILATING HOLES 


PADLOCK CATCH 


TRAY HANDLE 
SANITARY TRAY 


PARTITION FOR FOOD AND 
SANITARY COMPARTMENTS 
FLOOR BATTEN 


FIG. 3 MODEL CAT CONTIANER 


IS 4746 : 2023 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 3.15) 


Proforma for Certificate of Fitness to Travel Dogs/Cats 


(Schedule A of Transport of Animals Rules, 1978) 


This Certificate should be completed and signed by a Veterinarian registered with the Central or State 
Veterinary Council 


Date and time of examination.................. essere eene enne 
Species. of dogs/Cate..-.. e se eene ite oe e d rete ep ee ER 
Number of cages..............sessseeeee Number of dogs/cats.............................. 

DER maren hoec 


Breed and identification marks, if any ......enreronrnoorronrnvenrnrrrrrnrnenvnnerrnenrnsnnenenrsennesnnenenn 
Transported from ......ennononnnonrnenvnverenerrvennesennr I asda snsssansssereies VIG sko costes EN 


I hereby certify that I have read rules 8 to 14 in Chapter II of the Transport of Animals Rules, 1978. 


1. That, at the request of (consignor)..................... esee I have examined the above 
mentioned dogs/cats in their travelling cages not more than 12 hours before their departure. 


2. That each of the dogs/cats appeared to be in good health, free from signs of injury, contagious and 
infectious disease including rabies and in a fit condition to travel by rail/road/inland waterway/sea/air. 


3. That the dogs/cats were adequately fed and watered for the purpose of the journey. 


4. That the dogs/cats have been vaccinated. 


(a) Type of vaccine/s: 
(b) Date of vaccination/s: 


ANNEX B 
(Foreword) 


IS 4746 : 2023 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Animal Husbandry and Equipment Sectional Committee, FAD 32 


Organization 
ICAR - Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi 


All India Poultry Breeders Association, New Delhi 


Animal Welfare Board of India, Faridabad 


Chhattisgarh Kamdhenu Vishwavidyalaya, Raipur 


Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying, Panchkula 


Federation of Indian Animal Protection Organizations, 


New Delhi 


Guru Angad Dev Veterinary and Animal Sciences University, 


Ludhiana 


ICAR - Directorate of Poultry Research, Hyderabad 


ICAR - Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izzatnagar 


ICAR-Central Avian Research Centre, Bareilly 


ICAR- Central Sheep and Wool Research Centre, Avikanagar 


ICAR-Central Institute for Research on Buffaloes, Hisar 


ICAR-National Research Centre on Equines, Hisar 


ICAR-National Research Centre on Pig, Guwahati 


Association, 


Indian Poultry Equipment Manufacturers 


Hyderabad 


National Dairy Development Board, Anand 


National Egg Coordination Committee, New Delhi 


Representative(s) 
DR BHUPENDRA NATH TRIPATHI (Chairperson) 


DR A.K. RAJPUT 
SHRI BAHADUR ALI (Alternate) 


MS PRACHI JAIN 
DR DEBALINA MITRA (Alternate) 


DR A. K. SANTRA 
DR OM PRAKASH DINANI (Alternate) 


DR RAJIV BANGER 
DR BIRENDER SINGH LAURA (Alternate) 


DR SIRJANA NIJAR 
DR DINESH MOHITE (Alternate) 


DR NAVDEEP SINGH 
DR SIKH TEJINDER SINGH (Alternate) 


DR SANTOSH HAUNSHI 
DR M. NIRANJAN (Alternate) 


DR SUBRATA KUMAR GOSH 
DR AMIT KUMAR (Alternate) 


DR JAGBIR SINGH 
DR JAIDEEP ROKADE (Alternate) 


DR RANDHIR SINGH BHATT 
DR SROBANA SARKAR (Alternate) 


DR R K SHARMA 
DR SUSHIL KUMAR PHULIA (Alternate) 


DR R. A. LEGHA 
DR THIRUMALA RAO TALLURI (Alternate) 


DR R. THOMAS 
DR SUNIL KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRIHARISH RAJARAM GARWARE 
SHRI ANIL SOMNATH DHUMAL (Alternate) 


DR R. O. GUPTA 
DR AV HARIKUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI AJIT SINGH 
SHRI BHAGWATI SINGH (Alternate) 


IS 4746 : 2023 


Organization 


National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal 


National Institute of Animal Nutrition and Physiology, 
Bengaluru 


PETA India, Mumbai 


People for Animals, New Delhi 


Poultry Federation of India, Sonipat 


Tamil Nadu Veterinary and Animal Sciences University, 
Chennai 


Uttar Pradesh Pandit Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Pashu Chikitsa 
Vigyan Vishwavidyalaya Evam Go-Anusandhan Sansthan 
University (DUV ASU), Mathura 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


DR ARUN KUMAR MISHRA 
DR SURENDER SINGH LATHWAL (Alternate) 


DR RAVIKIRAN G. 
DR RAMACHANDRAN (Alternate) 


Dr NITHIN KRISHNEGOWDA 
MS KIRAN AHUJA (Alternate) 


ADVOCATE PRIYANKA BANGARI 
MS SHREYA PAROPKARI (Alternate) 


SHRI RANPAL DHANDA 
SHRI RAMESH CHANDER KHATRI (Alternate) 


DR S. MEENAKSHISUNDARAM 
DR M.R.SRINIVASAN (Alternate) 


DR DEEP NARAYAN SINGH 
DR Y AJUVENDRA SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI SUNEETI TOTEJA, SCIENTIST ‘E’/DIRECTOR 
AND HEAD (FOOD AND AGRICULTURE) [REPRESENTING 
DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 


SHRIMATI NITASHA DOGER 


SCIENTIST ‘D’/JOINT DIRECTOR 


AND 


SHRI PRADEEP SHARMA 


SCIENTIST ‘B’/ASSISTANT DIRECTOR 


(FOOD AND AGRICULTURE), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: FAD 32 (19790). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central | : 601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, l 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8* Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri | 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


