RAT AAF IS 12011 : 2022 
Indian Standard 


Otel verdis cess ST 
man thet aT 


( Teel JAGET ) 


Code of Safety Practice for Domestic 
LPG Installation 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 75.160.30, 97.040.20 


© BIS 2022 


anda AM Sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Te TH MT, ay fref — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


February 2022 Price Group 3 


Domestic and Commercial Gas Burning Appliances (Pressure Type) Sectional Committee, MED 23 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on recommendation of the 
Domestic and Commercial Gas Burning Appliances (Pressure Type) Sectional Committee, and approved by the 
Mechanical Engineering Divisional Council. 


The Liquefied Petroleum Gases (LPG) are hydrocarbons in a gaseous state at normal atmospheric pressure, and 
under moderate pressure at normal temperature. LPG is stored, filled, and transported as a liquid in portable 
cylinders, but used as gas. Thus the large volume of gas approximately 246 volumes of gas is compressed into one 
volume of liquid LPG and stored under pressure in cylinders. 


LPG produced and marketed in India conforms to IS 4576 and designated as Commercial Butane/Propane Mixture. 
LPG is colourless, odourless, and is highly inflammable, a malodourant (foul smell) is added to detect gas leakage. 
The gas is twice as heavy as air and can form an explosive mixture with air even in very small concentrations. It 
boils at temperatures below the freezing point of water, thus at normal temperatures are exerting internal pressure, 
which is several times that of atmospheric pressure. Although cylinders are designed and tested for the requisite 
internal pressure, at excessive temperatures the gas in the cylinder can attain high internal pressures which can 
result in failure of the cylinder to stand such pressures. LP Gases in liquid form have a tendency for a very large 
expansion in volume. It expands almost 10 times as much as water and 100 times that of steel. Thus, liquid LPG 
is never filled in a cylinder up to the brim but an ullage or space for gas is left above the liquid. 


In view of the above and other safety-related properties, some simple rules/code need to be observed for its safe 
operation/installation. Because the rules are simple, they are neglected. Failure to observe these rules may lead 
to accidents of varying intensity. This code assumes particular relevance to Indian conditions where the use of 
LPG in the individual household has been widely expanding and protection of consumers from the hazards arising 
during installation and operation is of vital interest. 


While preparing this standard, it is presumed that only standardized and approved equipment and appliances are 
used in the LPG installation. The distribution equipment that is a cylinder, valve, and pressure regulator, is the 
property of oil companies loaned to the consumer against a refundable deposit. The maintenance of the same is 
the responsibility of oil companies. Customers are not to tamper with the equipment. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 12011 : 2022 


Indian Standard 


CODE OF SAFETY PRACTICE FOR DOMESTIC 
LPG INSTALLATION 


( First Revision ) 
1 SCOPE IS No. Title 
This standard covers general safety requirements to 
be observed during the installation and operation of 11480:1985 Specification for domestic grillers 
domestic appliances using LPG in cylinders as fuel. for use with liquefied petroleum 
gases 

2 REFERENCES 

4576 : 2021 Liquefied petroleum gases — 
The following standards contain provisions, which Specification (third revision) 
through reference in this text constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 3 GENERAL 


indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 


IS No. Title 


3196 (Part 1) 
: 2013 


Welded low carbon steel cylinders 
exceeding 5 litres water capacity 
for low pressure liquefiable gases: 
Part 1 Cylinders for liquefied 
petroleum gases (LPG) — 
Specification (sixth revision) 


8737:2017 Valve fittings for use with liquefied 
petroleum gas (LPG) cylinders for 
more than 5 litre water capacity — 


Specification (second revision) 


9798 : 2013 Low pressure regulators for use with 
liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) — 


Specification (second revision) 


9573 (Part 2) 
: 2017 


Rubber hose for liquefied petroleum 
gas (LPG) — Specification: Part 2 
Domestic and commercial 
application (fourth revision) 


4246 : 2002 Domestic gas stoves for use with 
liquefied petroleum gases — 


Specification (fifth revision) 


4760 : 2002 Domestic cooking ranges including 
grillers for use with liquefied 
petroleum gases — Specification 


(third revision) 


3.1 The term domestic shall mean individual household 
and installation shall mean to consist of the following: 


a) A cylinder conforming to IS 3196 (Part 1) 
fitted with a spring-actuated self-closing valve 
conforming to IS 8737 and approved by the Chief 
Controller of Explosives for India; 


b) Apressure regulator of appropriate type matching 
the cylinder valve and conforming to IS 9798; 


c) LPG resistant flexible tubing conforming to 
IS 9573 (Part 2); and 


d) An appliance, such as LPG stove conforming 
to IS 4246 and/or cooking range conforming to 
IS 4760 and/or grillers conforming to IS 11480 
or any other approved appliance for domestic use 
conforming to relevant IS code. 


4 INSTALLATION 


4.1 Place of Installation 


4.1.1 The kitchen or room where the appliance is 
installed shall be well ventilated so that leakage of gas, 
if any, during faulty/delayed ignition of the burners or 
extinguishing of flame or due to any other leakage is 
swept away by natural draft. 


4.1.2 The kitchen or room shall have at least one 
window and one door open to the atmosphere. 


4.1.3 The kitchen door shall have a minimum gap of 
3 mm under the door shutter at floor level. 


4.1.4 The door opening of the kitchen shall not be near 
lift shaft or entry/exit to the basement. 


IS 12011 : 2022 


4.2 Installation of Appliance 


4.2.1 The appliance shall preferably be installed on 
the platform approximately 75 cm high from the floor 
level, facing the wall. 


4.2.2 The appliance shall not be installed next to the 
entry/exit door and shall be installed in such a place in 
the room that in case of a fire the entry and exit for the 
occupants inside the room is not blocked. 


4.2.3 Any leakage shall not be checked with naked fire 
or lighted match stick. 


4.2.4 Appliance with open frames shall not be placed 
directly in front of a window facing a strong breeze, 
disturbing /blowing off or extinguishing the flame. 


4.2.5 Cabinets, shelves or such other mountings on 
the wall behind the appliance shall be totally avoided 
(lest loose clothing, such as sarees may come in contact 
with flames while removing the contents from wall 
mountings). 


4.2.6 Ensure that the inlet nozzle to the appliance is on 
the same side at which the cylinder is kept. 


4.3 Installation of Cylinder 


4.3.1 The gas cylinder shall always be installed in 
an upright/vertical position and at floor level. Under 
no circumstances, it shall be placed horizontally. 
If the cylinder is installed in a position other than 
vertical, in the event of a leak, liquid LPG will leak 
which is more hazardous than leakage of gas. 


4.3.2 Do not use stand for the cylinder. Cylinders shall 
always be kept on their ‘foot ring’ welded at the bottom 
of cylinders. If the cylinder is placed on a trolley, the 
trolley should have a locking arrangement to prevent 
movement of the cylinder while connected. 


4.3.3 The installed cylinder shall be easily accessible 
and shall not be placed in a closed enclosure. The 
location shall be such that leaked gas, if any, be swept 
away by natural draft. 


4.3.4 The cylinder shall be so installed that the gas 
tubing shall not get disturbed due to the movement 
of the operator during use. 


4.3.5 Gas cylinder shall not be placed near any source 
of heat, such as kerosene stove, open fire chullas, 
heaters, boilers, or any potential sources of heat. 


4.3.6 The LPG installation shall not be provided on a 
loft. 


4.3.7 The LPG installation shall not be provided in a 
basement where the floor level is below the adjoining 
ground level. Only if effective artificial floor level 
ventilation is provided, the installation could be in such 
a basement. 


4.3.8 Whenever an empty gas cylinder is replaced 
with a filled one (refill), ensure that the filled cylinder 
valve outlet carry a proper and undamaged rubber 
gasket. The absence of such a gasket will result in 
hazardous gas leakage. 


4.3.9 After installing a new connection or replacing 
the empty gas cylinder the joint between the rubber 
tube and pressure regulator nozzle and that between 
rubber tube and appliance nozzle shall be checked 
with a soap solution for any leakage. 


4.3.10 The leakage shall not be checked with naked 
fire or a lighted matchstick. 


4.3.11 The colour of the cylinder shall not be changed. 
As per the international code, the ‘Signal Red’ colour 
identifies that the cylinder contains LP gas. 


4.3.12 No flammable or combustible material 
shall be stored in the immediate vicinity of the 
cylinder/installation or in the same room in which it is 
kept. 


4.3.13 No oil or similar lubricant shall be used on the 
valves or other fittings of the cylinder. 


4.3.14 While receiving refills, due date for cylinder 
re-testing shall be checked. This is indicated at the 
back of one of the vertical stay plates below the valve 
protection ring. If the cylinder is due for testing, the 
cylinder shall not be accepted. 


4.3.15 Cylinders shall not be installed under 
conditions that will cause them to corrode. 


4.3.16 Cylinders are filled by weight. An overfilled 
cylinder is a potential safety hazard. While accepting 
refills, weight of the cylinder shall be checked with 
gas. If the gross weight of the cylinder is more 
than the sum of tare weight and net weight stenciled 
on the cylinder, such cylinder shall not be accepted. 


5 GAS TUBING 


5.1 The flexible tube used for the installation shall 
conform to IS 9573 (Part 2). 


5.2 The tubing shall be regularly checked for its 
condition, especially the ends which can develop 
cracks while in service. It is necessary to replace 
tubing immediately if found to develop defects or as 
per the due date mentioned on the hose, whichever 
is earlier. 


5.3 The end of the tubing shall be slipped onto the 
nozzle to cover the entire length of the nozzle. 


5.4 The tubing end may be moistened with 
water while slipping the tubing onto the nozzle. 
Oil/grease/lubricant/soap solution shall not be used 
for slipping the tubing. 


5.5 The tubing shall not have crimps or sharp kinks. 
It shall not unnecessarily be too long nor too short. 
The maximum recommended length of the tubing is 
2 meters. 


5.6 Tubing for domestic installation shall be 
standardized for size of the bore that is, 8 mm. The 
correct bore depending on the size of the nozzle on the 
appliance as well as on the pressure regulator shall be 
selected (see also 5.2). 


6 APPLIANCE 


6.1 Certification of the appliance by BIS shall be the 
guiding factor for its quality and safety-worthiness. In 
case of appliance manufactured to known international 
specifications, approval for use shall be verified in 
consultation with the oil company. 


6.2 Prior to connecting the appliance, it shall be ensured 
that the inlet nozzle is of the same size (outer diameter) 
as that of the nozzle on the pressure regulator. This is 
essential so that rubber tubing fits tightly at both ends 
(see also 4.6). 


6.3 The burners for LPG stoves and cooking range of 
burners are designed and approved to give greenish 
blue stable flames in full on and simmer position of gas 
taps. In case this is not obtained, the appliance needs 
to be checked/attended to by a trained mechanic of the 
LP gas distributor. 


7 INSTRUCTIONS FOR USE 


7.1 The consumer shall be guided by the operating 
instructions provided by the manufacturers of the 
appliance. In addition, the following safe practice shall 
also be ensured. 


7.1.1 Before operating the pressure regulator knob 
to the ‘gas flow’ position, it is to be ensured that the 
appliance taps are in the ‘OFF’ position. 


7.1.2 For lighting the appliance, a lighted match 
stick/flame type gas lighter shall be brought near to the 
burner ports (head). Then the gas cock of the appliance 
shall be opened to a full ‘ON’ position to avoid the 
escape of unburnt gas. 


7.1.3 In case of delay/failure in lighting the burners, 
resulting in the escape of unburnt gas, close the 
appliance taps and wait till the mal-odour/foul smell 
indicating the presence of leaked gas disappear. Light 
the burners again following earlier instructions for 
lighting. This would avoid a situation of any minor fire 
or explosion. 


7.1.4 The burner shall not be lighted in the ‘simmer’ 
position of appliance taps. 


IS 12011 : 2022 


7.1.5 The burners shall not be lighted with vessels 
on them. 


7.1.6 When the appliance is not in use, close the 
appliance taps and turn the regulator knob to the ‘gas 
off’ position before leaving the place. 


8 CHANGING OF CYLINDER 


8.1 The consumers shall ensure to follow the ‘Customer 
Instruction Card’ provided by oil companies through 
their LP gas distributor while releasing/installing a new 
connection. 


8.2 While changing the cylinders, all the flames and all 
sources of fire in the kitchen like diya lamps, agarbattis, 
etc be put out. Avoid putting on jolt any electric 
appliance. Door/window be kept open. 


9 RECEIPT OF FILLED CYLINDER AND 
RESERVE CYLINDER (UNCONNECTED) 


9.1 On receipt of a filled cylinder, pre-delivery checks 
as outlined below shall be done by the LPG cylinder 
delivery personnel in the presence of the customer. 
Delivery personnel shall remove the seal and the 
‘Safety Cap’ provided on the valve outlet during 
pre-delivery checks. 


9.2 Delivery personnel shall check the cylinders for 
pin leak and O-ring leak using suitable instruments and 
demonstrates weight to the customer before delivery. 


9.3 Delivery personnel connects the cylinder to the 
regulator and check for proper fitment. 


9.4 Press in the ‘Safety Cap’ on the valve outlet. This is 
necessary to ensure that the gas will not leak out from 
an unconnected cylinder. This also prevents ingress 
of foreign matter in valve outlet which can render the 
valve leaky when in use. When the cylinder gets empty, 
the regulator has to be turned “off” and disconnected. 
Safety cap has to be placed back on the self-closing 
valve and stored safely. 


10 TO HANDLE LEAKAGE 


10.1 If gas is smelled, following procedure to be 
adopted to prevent fire hazards: 


a) Shut burner taps and pressure regulator knob, 
to the ‘OFF’ position; 

b) Open doors and windows for free ventilation; 

c) Extinguish all flames. Do not switch ‘ON’ or 
‘OFF’ any electrical equipment to avoid any 
electric spark or other sources of fire/ignition; 

d) Light burners only after the smell disappear and 
the source of leakage has been identified and 
corrective action is taken; 


IS 12011 : 2022 


e) In case of persistent or heavy leakage, detach the 
pressure regulator from the cylinder valve, fit 
the ‘Safety Cap’ on the valve outlet and remove 
the cylinder (without tilting it) to a balcony or 
open space where it is least dangerous to life and 
property and away from any source of ignition. 
Keep away to avoid asphyxiation; and 


f) Call LP Gas distributor or emergency cell of oil 
companies for handling the emergency. 


11 CLEANING THE APPLIANCE 


11.1 The consumer shall be guided by the instructions 
as provided by the manufacturers with the appliance. If 
necessary, in addition, the following practice is 
recommended for cleaning of the appliance. 


11.1.1 Close appliance taps and pressure regulator 
knob to the ‘OFF’ position and wait till the surface 
of the appliance is cooled. Cleaning of a hot surface, 
if attempted, with a wet cloth, the surface finish may 
crack. 


11.1.2 First, the surface of the appliance shall be cleaned 
with a dry cloth. Then, the surface shall be cleaned with 
a moist cloth to remove stains from spilled cooking. 


11.1.3 To clean the burner head remove and dip it in 
a solution of soap in warm water and clean the burner 
ports with ‘tooth prick’ or a soft metal (copper or 
aluminum) wire. Clean the burner head with plain 
water and wipe it dry to prevent rusting. 


11.1.4 Neither tamper with the gas jet/orifice nor 
attempt to clean it with a steel pin. 


11.1.5 Never dip the appliance body in water as the 
grease/lubricant in the gas tap may be washed away 
resulting in the possibility of leakage of gas. 


12 REPAIR /SERVICING OF APPLIANCES 


Consumer shall not attempt to service or repair LPG 
appliances. All repairs/servicing of the appliance shall 
be done by authorized mechanics of the LPG Distributor 
or authorized personnel of appliance manufacturer. 


13 ACCIDENTS AND ENQUIRIES 


Statutory regulations demand that notice of accident(s), 
involving LPG installation be given forth with: 


a) To the Chief Controller of Explosives for India by 
email followed by a letter giving particulars of the 
occurrence within 24 h; and 


b) To the Officer-in-Charge of the nearest Police 
Station by the quickest route. 


This would normally be complied by the concerned 
LPG distributor of the oil company, after 
proper inquiry and investigation of the circumstances 
that lead to an accident. 


14 MANDATORY INSPECTION 


The mandatory inspection of the consumer’s installation 
is required to be carried out once every five years by 
authorized personnel. This is apart from the regular 
checks done by the delivery personnel at the time of 
refill delivery. 


IS 12011 : 2022 


ANNEX A 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Composition of Domestic and Commercial Gas Burning Appliances (Pressure Type) 
Sectional Committee, MED 23 


Organization 


L P G Equipment Research Centre, Bengaluru 
Agnisumukh, Bengaluru 


BSH Household Appliances Manufacturing Private 
Limited, Chennai 


Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited, Mumbai 

Bureau of Energy Efficiency, New Delhi 

Delton Industries, New Delhi 

Directorate General of Quality Assurance (Stores), 
Kanpur 


Gorani Industries Limited, Indore 


Goyal Engineers Private Limited, New Delhi 
Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited, Mumbai 
Kabsons Gas Equipment Pvt Ltd, Hyderabad 


Indian Institute of Petroleum, Dehradun 

Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, Guwahati 
Indian Oil Corporation (Marketing), Mumbai 
Indraprastha Gas Limited, New Delhi 


L P G Equipment Research Centre, Bengaluru 

Petroleum Conservation Research Association, 
New Delhi 

Ariston Thermo India Private Limited, Pune 


Rama Domestic Appliances, New Delhi 


Shri Krishna Test House, New Delhi 


Sunflame Enterprises Private Limited, Faridabad 


Superflame Enterprises Private Limited, Faridabad 


Vanaz Engineers Limited, Pune 


Representative(s) 


Suri ASHISH BERA (Chairman) 
SHRI HARI RAO 


SHRI VIJAY KUMAR LOGANATHAN 


SHRI SUDIPTA SARKAR 
SHRI Mout RANE (Alternate) 


Ms PRAVATANALINI SAMAL 
SHRI KAMRAN SHAIKH (Alternate) 


SHRI R. C. NANGIA 
SHRI VIVEK NANGIA (Alternate) 


SHRI H. H. P. TIWARI 


SHRI ANIL GORANI 


SHRI AJAY GOYAL 
SHRI NEERAJ GOYAL (Alternate) 


SHRI DILIP KUMAR RAY 
SHRI SIVA SHANKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI SATISH KABRA 
SHRI KUNAL KABRA (Alternate) 


SHRI PANKAJ KUMAR ARYA 
SHRI MUTHU KUMAR 
SHRI J. SHYAM SWAROOP 


SHRI BHUDEV SINGH 
SHRI K. C. DEWANGAN (Alternate) 


SHRI P. R. DEODHAR 
SHRI RAHUL SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI SURENDRA PRATAP 


SHRI ABHIJIT BANSHELKIKAR 
SHRI MAHESH BHANGALE (Alternate) 


SHRI AMARJEET SINGH KOHLI 
SHRI MANMOHAN KRISHNAN (Alternate) 


SHRI SUNIL TALWAR 


SHRI K. L. VERMA 
SHRI SANDEEP JUNEJA (Alternate) 


SHRI VIKRAM VERMA 


SHRI A. A. TAMBOLI 
SHRI V. N. PUJARI (Alternate) 


IS 12011 : 2022 


Organization Representative(s) 
In Personal Capacity S-139, Greater Kailash-I Suri M. K. GUPTA 
(1* & 2™ Floor), New Delhi - 110048 
BIS Directorate General SHRI RAJNEESH KHOSLA, SCIENTIST ‘E’ AND HEAD (MED) 


[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio )] 


Member Secretary 


SHRI SANDEEP KESHAV 
SCIENTIST ‘C’ (MED), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 23 (17425). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


