IS 16017 : 2013 
(Reaffirmed 2019) 


Waa HAF 
garea a fateise— dies tea eaae faseng & 
Ta fattest’ & safar tem wa wer 


Indian Standard 


TRANSPORTABLE GAS CYLINDERS — PERIODIC 
INSPECTION AND TESTING OF SEAMLESS 
ALUMINIUM ALLOY GAS CYLINDERS 


ICS 23.020.30 


© BIS 2013 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 


August 2013 Price Group 10 


Gas Cylinders Sectional Committee, MED 16 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Gas Cylinders 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering Division Council. 


The purpose of this standard is to specify the requirements for periodic inspection and testing of seamless aluminum 
alloy transportable gas cylinders (single or those from bundles) intended for compressed and liquefied gases 
under pressure, of water capacity from 0.5 litre up to 150 litre. 


This standard has been formulated as a guide to cylinder users and fillers for establishing their own cylinder 
inspection procedures and standards. It is of, necessity, general in nature although some specific limits are 
recommended. It should be distinctly understood that it shall not cover all circumstances for each individual 
cylinder type. Each cylinder user is expected to modify them to suit his own cylinder design or the conditions of 
use that may exist in his own service. Rejection or acceptance for continued use in accordance with their cylinders 
are or are not dangerous or subject to impending failure, but represents practice which has been satisfactory to a 
cross-section of the industry. 


Experience in the inspection of cylinders is an important factor in determining the acceptability of a given cylinder 
for continued service. Users lacking this experience and having doubtful cylinders should return them to a 
manufacturer of the same type of cylinders for re-inspection. 


In the formulation of this standard, considerable assistance has been derived from EN 1802 : 2002 ‘Transportable 
gas cylinders — Periodic inspection and testing of seamless aluminum alloy gas cylinders’. 


While implementing this standard, the manufacturer and the inspection agency shall ensure compliance with 
statutory regulations. 


Information on gas cylinders manufactured according to national regulations is given in Annex A. 
The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex J. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 16017 : 2013 


Indian Standard 


TRANSPORTABLE GAS CYLINDERS — PERIODIC 
INSPECTION AND TESTING OF SEAMLESS 
ALUMINIUM ALLOY GAS CYLINDERS 


1 SCOPE 


This standard specifies the requirements for periodic 
inspection and testing of seamless aluminium alloy 
transportable gas cylinders (single or those from 
bundles) intended for compressed and liquefied gases 
under pressure, of water capacity from 0.5 litre up to 
150 litre. 


This standard specifies the requirements for periodic 
inspection and testing to verify the integrity of such 
gas cylinders to be reintroduced into service for a 
further period of time. It also defines a procedure to 
qualify existing gas cylinders for free movement 
between India and other countries. 


This standard does not apply to periodic inspection 
and testing of acetylene cylinders or composite (fully 
wrapped or hoop-wrapped) aluminium alloy cylinders. 


NOTE — As far as practicable, this standard may also be 
applied to cylinders of less than 0.5 litre water capacity. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions, which 
through reference in this text constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision and parties to agreements based on these 
standards are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 


IS No. Title 


3224 : 2002 Valve fittings for compressed gas 
cylinders excluding liquefied 
petroleum gas (LPG) cylinders — 


Specification (third revision) 


8868 : 1988 Periodical inspection interval of gas 
cylinders in use (first revision) 
15660 : 2006 Refillable transportable seamless 


aluminum alloy gas cylinders — 
Specification 


3 INTERVALS BETWEEN 
INSPECTION AND TEST 


PERIODIC 


In order to ensure continued safe operation, cylinders 
shall be periodically submitted to inspection and test 
in accordance with IS 8868. A cylinder shall fall due 


for a periodic inspection and test on its first receipt by 
a filler after the expiry of the interval as per IS 8868 or 
as approved by the statutory authority. 


Provided the cylinder has been subjected to normal 
conditions of use and has not been subjected to abusive 
and abnormal conditions rendering the cylinder unsafe, 
there is no general requirement for the user to return a 
gas cylinder before the contents have been used. Even 
though the test interval may have lapsed. Once the 
contents is over cylinders to be sent for periodic 
inspection. 


NOTE — In the case of cylinders used for emergency purposes 
(for example fire extinguishers, breathing apparatus), it is the 
responsibility of the person in possession (owner or user) to 
submit it for a periodic inspection within the interval as 
specified in IS 8868 or as specified in the relevant cylinder 
design standard/regulation, if this is shorter. 


4 LIST OF PROCEDURES FOR PERIODIC 
INSPECTION AND TEST 


The inspection and test shall be carried out only by 
competent persons who shall ensure that the cylinders 
are fit for continued safe use. 


Each cylinder shall be submitted to periodic inspection 
and test. The following procedures form the 
requirements for such inspection and test, and are 
explained more fully in later clauses: 


a) Identification of cylinder and preparation for 
inspection and test (see 5); 


b) External visual inspection (see 6); 

c) Internal visual inspection (see 7); 

d) Supplementary tests (see 8); 

e) Inspection of cylinder neck/shoulder (see 9); 
f) Pressure test or ultrasonic test (see 10); 

g) Inspection of valve (see 11); 

h) Final operations (see 12); 


j) Rejection and rendering 
unserviceable (see 13); and 


cylinders 


k) Gases not to be contained in aluminium alloy 
gas cylinders (see 14). 


It is recommended that the above listed tests are 
performed in the suggested sequence. In particular the 
internal visual examination (see 7) should be carried 


IS 16017 : 2013 


out before the pressure test or ultrasonic test (see 10). 


Cylinders which fail in the inspection or tests shall be 
rejected (see 13). When, after the above tests, doubts 
still exist as to the extent of a defect or the condition of 
a cylinder, then additional tests may be performed in 
accordance with 8, until such doubts are positively 
resolved or the cylinder shall be rendered 
unserviceable. 


Some cylinders rejected during periodic inspection and 
test may be recovered in accordance with Annex B. 


Mechanical properties of aluminium alloy cylinders 
can be affected by heat. Therefore, the maximum 
temperature for any operation shall be limited 
(see 12.1.2). 


NOTE — A competent person is a person who has the necessary 
technical knowledge, experience and authority to assess and 
approve materials for use with gases and to define any special 
conditions of use that are necessary. Such a person shall also 
normally be formally qualified in an appropriate technical 
discipline. 


5 IDENTIFICATION OF CYLINDER AND 
PREPARATION FOR INSPECTION AND TEST 


Before any work is carried out, the relevant cylinder 
data and its contents and ownership shall be identified. 


The cylinders shall be de-pressurized and emptied in a 
safe, controlled manner before proceeding. Particular 
attention shall be given to cylinders containing 
flammable, oxidizing and toxic gases to eliminate risks 
at the internal inspection stage. 


Cylinders with incorrect markings, unknown gas 
contents, or those which cannot be safely emptied of 
gas, shall be set aside for special handling. 


Cylinders with in-operative or blocked valves can be 
treated as outlined in Annex C. Provided the 
requirements above have been complied with, and the 
cylinder has been de-pressurized safely, the valve shall 
be removed. Similarly in the case of cylinder bundles, 
not equipped with cylinder valves, the connecting tee 
junction shall also be checked to determine whether 
the gas is able to pass freely from the cylinder to 
atmosphere. 


6 EXTERNAL VISUAL INSPECTION 


6.1 Preparation for External Visual Inspection 


Each cylinder shall be cleaned and have all loose 
coatings, corrosion products, tar, oil or other foreign 
matter removed from its external surface by a suitable 
method, for example by brushing, shot blasting (under 
closely controlled conditions), water jet abrasive 
cleaning, chemical cleaning (see Annex D or consult 
the cylinder manufacturer) or other suitable methods. 


Alkaline solutions and paint strippers which are 
harmful to aluminium and its alloys shall not be used. 
Care shall be taken at all times to avoid damaging the 
cylinder, or removing excess amounts of cylinder wall. 


If fused nylon, polyethylene or a similar coating has 
been applied and is seen to be damaged, or prevents a 
proper inspection, then the coating shall be removed. 
If the coating is removed by the application of heat at 
a temperature/time exceeding the limits specified 
in 12.1.2 or shows signs of heat damage, the 
manufacturer shall be consulted before the cylinder is 
returned to service and the necessary tests and 
inspections carried out. 


6.2 Inspection Procedure 


The external surface of each cylinder shall then be 
inspected for, 


a) dents, cuts, gouges, bulges, cracks, 
laminations or excessive base wear; 


b) heat damage, torch or electric arc burns (as 
defined in Table 3); 

c) corrosion (as defined in Table 4); 

d) other defects such as illegible or unauthorized 
stamp markings, unauthorized additions or 
modifications; 

e) integrity of all permanent attachments; and 


f) vertical stability (if relevant) (as defined in 
Table 3); 


For rejection criteria, see Annex B. Cylinders no longer 
suitable for future service shall be rendered 
unserviceable (as defined in 13). 


7 INTERNAL VISUAL INSPECTIONS 


Each cylinder shall be inspected internally, using 
illumination to identify any defects such as those listed 
in, 6.2(a) and 6.2(c). Precautions shall be taken to 
ensure that the method of illumination presents no 
hazards to the tester whilst performing the operation. 
Any internal liner or coating which can obstruct 
optimum internal visual inspection, shall be removed. 
Any cylinder showing presence of foreign matter or 
signs of more than light surface corrosion shall be 
cleaned internally under closely controlled conditions 
by shot blasting, water jet abrasive cleaning, flailing, 
steam jet, hot water jet, rumbling, chemical cleaning 
(see Annex D or consult cylinder manufacturer), or 
other suitable method. Care shall be taken to avoid 
damage to the cylinder. If cleaning is required, the 
cylinder shall be re-inspected after the cleaning 
operation. 


Certain hydrogen production processes can involve 
contamination of the gas by mercury. Any aluminium 


alloy cylinder internally contaminated with mercury 
shall be rendered unserviceable. 


8 SUPPLEMENTARY TESTS 


Where there is doubt concerning the type and/or 
severity of a defect found on visual inspection (see 6 
and 7), additional tests or methods of examination may 
be applied, for example. ultrasonic techniques, check 
weighing or other non-destructive tests. Only when all 
doubts are eliminated may the cylinder be further 
processed (see Annex B). 


If a hardness test is required it shall only be according 
to relevant Indian standard or a suitable alternative 
method for example conductivity. The result shall meet, 
at least, the minimum required design hardness value. 
An alternative method may only be used, if it was 
employed at the time of cylinder manufacture and 
recorded accordingly on the test certificate. When the 
minimum design hardness value is not known, the 
cylinder shall be hardness tested both before and after 
any stoving operation and there shall be no appreciable 
decrease in the hardness value, as agreeable to the 
competent person. All hardness tests shall be performed 
on the parallel section of the cylinder, taking adequate 
care to ensure that deep impressions are not formed. 


9 INSPECTION 
SHOULDER 


OF CYLINDER NECK/ 


9.1 Internal Neck Thread 


The internal neck thread of the cylinder shall be 
examined to ensure that it is, 


a) clean and of full form; 
b) free of damage; 
c) free of burrs; 


d) free of cracks — examine thoroughly for 
evidence of cracks (see Annex B); 


e) free of other imperfections. 


Cracks manifest themselves as lines which run 
vertically down the thread and across the thread faces. 
They should not be confused with tap marks (thread 
machining marks). Special attention should be paid to 
the area at the bottom of the thread. 


9.2 Other Neck and Shoulder Surfaces 


Other surfaces of the neck and shoulder shall also be 
examined to ensure that they are free of cracks or other 
defects (see Annex B). 


9.3 Damaged Internal Neck Threads 


Where necessary, and where the manufacturer or the 
competent person confirms that the design of the neck 
permits, threads may be re-tapped only by competent 


IS 16017 : 2013 


persons to provide the appropriate number of effective 
threads. After re-tapping, the threads shall be checked 
by the appropriate thread gauge. 


9.4 Neck Ring and Collar Attachment 


When a neck ring/collar is attached, an examination to 
ensure that it is secure and free from thread damage 
shall be carried out. Neck rings shell only be changed 
using an approved procedure. If it is found that any 
significant damage to cylinder material has occurred 
by replacement of the neck ring/collar, the cylinder 
shall be rendered unserviceable. If the neck ring has 
been re-attached by welding or brazing, the cylinder 
shall be rendered unserviceable. 


10 PRESSURE TEST OR ULTRASONIC TEST 


10.1 General 


Each cylinder shall be subjected to a hydraulic or 
pneumatic Pressure test (see 10.2). Alternatively 
ultrasonic examination may be considered subject to 
approval of statutory authority (see 10.3). 


10.2 Pressure Test 
10.2.1 General Requirements 


When carrying out a pressure test, a suitable fluid, 
normally water shall be used as the test medium. The 
test may be a proof pressure test (see 10.2.2) or a 
volumetric expansion test (see 10.2.3), as appropriate 
to the design of the cylinder. Having decided to use 
one particular type of test, its result shall be final. No 
attempt shall be made to transfer from one type of test 
to the other. The test pressure shall be in accordance 
with the stamping on the cylinder. 


The pressure in the cylinder shall be increased 
gradually until the test pressure is reached. The cylinder 
test pressure shall be held for at least 30 s with the 
cylinder isolated from the pressure source, during 
which time there shall be no decrease in the recorded 
pressure or any evidence of any leakage. Safety 
precautions shall be taken during the test. 


10.2.2 Proof Pressure Test 


During the 30 s hold period the pressure as registered 
on the test gauge shall remain constant. 


There shall be no visible leakage or visible permanent 
deformation on the entire surface of the cylinder. This 
check may be made either during the 30 s hold or 
immediately after the pressure has been released 
(see Annex E). 


Any cylinder failing conforming to with the 
requirements of this test shall be rendered unserviceable. 


IS 16017 : 2013 


NOTE — A pneumatic pressure test may be substituted, 
provided approval from the relevant authority has been 
obtained. Take appropriate measures to ensure safe operation 
and to contain any energy, which is considerably more than 
that in the hydraulic test, which can be released. 


10.2.3 Volumetric Expansion Test 


Annex G specifies a typical method for carrying out 
the test and gives details for determining the volumetric 
expansion of seamless aluminium alloy gas cylinders 
by the preferred water jacket method or the non-water 
jacket method (see Annex F). 


The permanent volumetric expansion of the cylinder 
expressed as a percentage of the total expansion at test 
pressure shall not exceed the percentage given in the 
design specification after the cylinder has been held at 
test pressure for a minimum period of 30 s. If this figure 
for permanent expansion is exceeded the cylinder shall 
be rendered unserviceable (see IS 15660). 


10.3 Ultrasonic Test 


Ultrasonic testing may be considered in place of the 
pressure test subject to approval of statutory authority. 
Ultrasonic testing, if carried out, shall be in accordance 
with the method specified in Annex G. 


11 INSPECTION OF VALVE 


If it is to be re-introduced into service, each valve 
(or tee junction for bundles) shall be inspected to verify 
that it will perform satisfactorily and ensure gas 
tightness. An example of a suitable method is given in 
Annex H. 


12 FINAL OPERATIONS 


12.1 Drying, Cleaning and Painting 
12.1.1 Drying and Cleaning 


The interior of each cylinder shall be thoroughly dried 
(see 12.1.2 for maximum temperature/time values to 
be used) by a suitable method, immediately after 
hydraulic pressure testing, such that there is no trace 
of free water. The interior of the cylinder shall be 
inspected to ensure that it is dry and free from other 
contaminants. 


12.1.2 Painting 


Cylinders are sometimes re-painted, using paints which 
require stoving: Plastics coatings may only be re- 
applied in consultation with the cylinder manufacturer. 
Painting or coating shall be applied such that all 
markings stamped on the cylinder are legible. 


Aluminium alloy cylinders are normally manufactured 
using precize heat treatment to obtain the final 


mechanical properties. Therefore the maximum 
temperature for any operation shall be limited. 


In no case shall the temperature of the cylinder exceed 
that recommended by the manufacturer since 
overheating changes the mechanical properties of the 
cylinder. When the cylinder’s alloy/heat treatment 
cannot be established the following requirements for 
non-heat treated alloy apply. 


For cylinders manufactured from heat treated alloys 
with ageing, the maximum temperature shall not 
exceed 150°C. For temperatures between 100°C and 
150°C the exposure time shall be limited to 30 min. If 
the stoving (heating) time exceeds 30 min at a 
temperature between 100°C and 150°C or exceeds 
150°C then a hardness test shall be conducted (see 8). 


For cylinders manufactured from non-heat treated 
alloys the maximum temperature shall not exceed 
80°C. For temperatures between 60°C and 80°C the 
exposure time shall be limited to 15 min. If the stoving 
(heating) time exceeds 15 min at temperatures between 
60°C and 80°C or exceeds 80°C then a hardness test 
shall be conducted (see 8). 


12.2 Re-Valving of the Cylinder 


The valve shall be fitted to the cylinder using a sealing 
material. An optimum torque necessary to ensure both 
a seal between the valve and the cylinder and prevent 
over-stressing the neck shall be used. 


The torque applied shall take into consideration the 
size and form of the threads, the material of the valve, 
and the type of sealing material used according to the 
manufacturer’s recommendations. Where the use of 
lubricants/sealing material is permitted, only those 
approved for the gas service shall be used, taking 
particular care for oxygen service. 


12.2.1 Torque Values for Taper and Parallel Threads 


The external diameter and thickness of the formed neck 
end of the cylinder shall be adequate for the torque 
applied in fitting the valve to the cylinder. The torque 
may vary according to the diameter of thread, the form, 
and the sealant used in fitting of the valve. The cylinder 
shall have threads as per IS 3224 or any other threads 
specification approved by statutory authority. Threads 
shall be in full form, clean cut, even and without check, 
machined into gauge and concentric with axis of 
cylinder. Valving torque for aluminium alloy cylinders 
shall conform to Table 1. 


All parallel threads must have at least 6 engaged 
threads, tight fit, and a factor of safety in shear of at 
least 10 at the test pressure of the cylinder. The threads 
must extend completely through the neck. 


Table 1 Torque Values for Taper and Parallel 
Threads 
(Clause 12.2.1) 


a) Taper Threads 


Torque 


rh Or 


Stem Minimum Maximum 
Size N.m 


Taper Valve 


Without Cylinder With Cylinder Neck 


Neck Reinforcement Reinforcement 
a) (2) (3) (4) 
17E 75 95 140 
25E 95 110 180 
b) Parallel Threads 
Parallel Valve Torque 
Stem Size paee 
Minimum Maximum 
N.m 
a) (2) (3) 
M 18 85 100 
M 25 95 130 
M 30 95 130 


12.3 Check on Cylinder Tare 


This requirement shall only apply to cylinders for 
liquefied gases. The tare of the cylinders shall be 
obtained by weighing on a machine regularly checked 
for accuracy. The capacity of the weighing machine 
shall be suitable for the tare weight of the cylinders. 


The tare shall include the mass of the cylinder, valve(s) 
and all permanent fittings. If the tare of the cylinder 
differs from the stamped tare by more than the value 
shown in Table 2 and is not due to reasons of damage, 
the original tare shall be cancelled and the correct tare 
shall be marked in a permanent and legible fashion. 


Table 2 Maximum Allowable Deviation in 
Cylinder Tare Weight 
(Clause 12.3) 


SI No. Cylinder Water Maximum Allowable 
Capacity (V) Deviation in Tare 
litre Weight 
g 
a) 2) (3) 
i) 0.5< V< 5.0 +50 
ii) 5.0< V<20 + 200 
iii) V>20 + 400 


12.4 Reference to Next Test Date 


The next test date shall be shown in a clearly visible 
manner by an appropriate method such as a label or a 
disc fitted between the valve and the cylinder, indicating 
the year of the next periodic inspection or periodic 
inspection and test. 


IS 16017 : 2013 


12.5 Identification of Contents 


Before the cylinder is re-introduced into service, the 
cylinder shall be marked according to the intended 
contents. If painting is required, care shall be exercized 
in accordance with 12.1.2. If a change of gas service 
is involved, care shall be taken to follow the 
requirement of relevant Indian Standards and statutory 
requirement. 


12.6 Records 


Details of the present test shall be recorded by the test 
station and the following information shall be available: 


a) Owner’s name; 

b) Manufacturer’s or owner’s serial number; 
c) Cylinder tare, where applicable; 

d) Test pressure; 

e) Present test date; 


f) Identification symbol of the inspection body 
or the test station; 


g) identification of inspector; and 


h) Details of any modifications made to the 
cylinder by the inspector. 


Additionally, it shall be possible to obtain the following 
items of information from records, which need not 
necessarily be kept on a single file, but shall enable a 
particular cylinder to be traced. These items are: 


1) Cylinder manufacturer; 

2) Manufacturer’s serial number; 
3) Manufacturing specification; 
4) Water capacity/size; 

5) Manufacturing test date; and 
6) Result of test (Pass or fail). 


13 REJECTION AND RENDERING CYLINDER 
UNSERVICEABLE 


The decision to reject a cylinder may be taken at any 
stage during the inspection and test procedure. If it is 
not possible to recover a rejected cylinder, it shall, after 
notifying the owner, be made unserviceable by the 
testing station for holding gas under pressure so that it 
is impossible for any part of the cylinder, especially 
the shoulder, to be re-issued into service. 


In case of any disagreement, ensure that the legal 
implication of the contemplated action is fully 
understood. 


One or a combination of the following methods can be 
employed to render the cylinder unserviceable, after 
ensuring that the cylinder is empty and free of gas 
(see 6): 


IS 16017 : 2013 


a) 


b) 


e) 


Crush the cylinder, preferably in the shoulder 
area, using mechanical means; 

Burn an irregular hole in the top dome 
equivalent in area to approximately 10 percent 
of the area of the top dome or, in the case of a 
thin-walled cylinder pierce in at least three 
places; 


Cut the neck in an irregular fashion; 


Cut the cylinder including the shoulder into 
two or more irregular pieces; and 


Burst in a safe manner. 


14 GASES NOT TO BE CONTAINED IN 
ALUMINIUM ALLOY CYLINDERS 


Subject to the exceptions stated, the following gases 
shall not be contained in aluminium alloy cylinders. 
Certain of these gases may however be contained in 
aluminium alloy cylinders in small quantities as 


SI No. 
(1) 


i) 
ii) 


iii) 


iv) 


v) 


vi) 
vii) 


viii) 


ix) 


x) 


components of gas mixtures. Approval for such use shall 
be sought from the competent authority. 


a) Acetylene; 

b) Boron triflouride; 

c) Bromo trifluorethylene; 
d) Chlorine trifluoride; 
e) Cyanogen chloride; 
f) Fluorine; 

g) Hydrogen bromide; 
h) Hydrogen chloride; 
j) Hydrogen fluoride; 
k) Methyl bromide; 

m) Methyl chloride; and 
n) Nitrosyl chloride. 


NOTE — For filling station it a special warning that aluminium 
being a good conductor of heat get heated very fast while filling 
oxygen in filling station there we have to control the amount 
of flow of oxygen in order that the cylinders don’t get heated . 


Table 3 Rejection Limits Relating to Physical and Material Defects in the Cylinder Shell 


Rejection Limits 


4) 


(Clause 6.2) 
Type of Defect Definition 
(2) (3) 
Bulge Visible swelling of the cylinder 


Dent A depression in the cylinder that has neither 
penetrated nor removed metal and is greater in 


depth than 1 percent of the outside diameter 


Cut or gouge A sharp impression where metal has been 


(see Fig. 1) removed or redistributed and whose depth 
exceeds 5 percent of the cylinder wall 
thickness 

Crack (see A rift or split in the metal 

Fig. 2) 

Fire Damage Excessive general or localized heating of a 

(see Fig. 3) cylinder usually indicated by: 


a) partial melting of the cylinder; 

b) distortion of cylinder; 

c) charring or burning of paint; and 

d) fire damage to valve, melting of plastic 
guard or date ring. 


Plug or neck Additional inserts fitted in the cylinder neck, 


inserts base or wall 

Stampmar- Marking by means of a metal punch 

king 

Arc or torch Partial melting of the cylinder, the addition of 
Burns (see weld metal or the removal of metal by scarfing 
Fig. 4) or cratering 

Suspicious Introduced other than by the cylinder 
marks manufacturing process or approved repair 
Vertical — 

stability 


All cylinders with such a defect 
When the depth of the dent exceeds 3 percent of the external 
diameter of the cylinder; 

or 
When the diameter of the dent is less than 15 times its depth 
When the depth of the cut or gouge exceeds 15 percent of the 
wall thickness; 

or 
When the length exceeds 25 percent of the outside diameter of 
the cylinder; or When the wall thickness is less than the 
minimum design thickness 
All cylinders with such defects 


All cylinders in categories (a) and (b) 


All cylinders in categories (c) and (d) may be acceptable after 
inspection and/or testing 


All cylinders unless it can be clearly established that addition 
is part of approved design 


All cylinders with illegible, modified or incorrect or 


incorrectly modified markings 
All cylinders with such defects 
All cylinders with such defects 


Deviation from verticality which may present a risk during 
service (especially if fitted with foot-ring) 


IS 16017 : 2013 


Table 4 Rejection Criteria for Corrosion of the Cylinder Wall 


(Clause 6.2) 
SINo. Type of Corrosion Definition Rejection Limits 
d) 2) (3) (4) 
i) General corrosion Loss of wall thickness over an area If the original surface of the metal is no longer recognizable; or If 
(see Fig. 5) of more than 20 percent of the total the depth of penetration exceeds 10 percent of original thickness 
surface area of the cylinder of wall ; or if the wall thickness is less than design minimum wall 
thickness 
ii) Local corrosion Loss of wall thickness over an area If the depth of penetration exceeds 20 percent of the original 
of less than 20 percent of the total thickness of the cylinder wall b; or if the wall thickness is less 
surface area of the cylinder except than design thickness 
for the other types of local 
corrosion described below 
iii) Chain pitting or Corrosion forming a narrow If the total length of corrosion in any direction exceeds the 
line corrosion (see longitudinal or circumferential line diameter of the cylinder and the depth exceeds 10 percent of the 
Fig. 6) or strip, or isolated craters or pits original wall thickness b 
(see Fig. 7) which are almost 
connected 
iv) Isolated pits (see Corrosion forming isolated craters, If the diameter of the pits is greater than 5 mm, [see SI No. (ii)]. If 


Fig. 7) 


without significant alignment 


the diameter of the pits is less than 5 mm, the pits shall be 
assessed as carefully as possible in order to check that the 
remaining thickness of the wall or base is adequate for the 
intended use of the cylinder 


Fic. 1 CUT OR GOUGE 


Fic. 2 CRACK 


Fic. 3 FIRE DAMAGE 


Fic. 4 ARC or Torc Burns 


IS 16017 : 2013 


Fic. 5 GENERAL CORROSION 


Fic. 6 LINE CORROSION 


Fic. 7 ISOLATED PITS 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 


GAS CYLINDERS MANUFACTURED ACCORDING TO NATIONAL REGULATIONS 


A-1 GENERAL 


This annex specifies those checks, inspections and tests 
which shall be performed in order to qualify existing 
gas cylinders, manufactured according to IS 15660. 


A-2 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 


A-2.1 The owner of the gas cylinders shall indicate to 
the inspection body the types and the number of gas 
cylinders presented for qualification. 


For each of the cylinders the following information shall 
be made available for documentation and subsequent 
calculation: 


a) Serial number; 

b) Identification of manufacturer; 

c) Month and year of hydrostatic test; 

d) Number of this standard and aluminium alloy 
type / designation; 

e) Test pressure, in kgf/cm’; 

f) Tare weight, in kg, and nominal water capacity, 
in litres; 

g) Inspectors official mark. 


Filling pressure at 150 in case of permanent gases, in 
bar or kgf/cm?, and filling ratio, in case of liquefiable 
gases, name of chemical symbol of the gas for which 
cylinder is to be used; and inspection body shall verify 
that this list contains all the necessary information to 
clearly define the cylinder (see example of production 
testing certificate in the Annex G of IS 15560 for the 
above listed parameters only). 


A-2.2 The inspection body shall verify that these 
cylinders are not on any relevant national safety related 
recall list. Additionally, if any restrictions of use apply 
they shall be maintained for further use. 


A-2.3 The owner shall provide information to enable 
the inspection body to verify that these cylinders are 
not or have not been in service with gases corrosive to 
aluminium alloy as specified in 14. The inspection body 
shall verify that the wall thickness of the gas cylinders 
is equal to, or greater than, the minimum wall thickness, 
as calculated in accordance with, IS 15660 for the 
corresponding yield stress of the cylinder. 


A-2.4 The inspection body shall verify that the 
manufacturing certificates or equivalent records are 
available. When manufacturing certificates are not 
available, the inspection body shall verify that all 
relevant type testing and manufacturing batch testing 
have been performed. 


A-2.5 The inspection body shall perform the periodic 
inspection according to this standard. 


A-3 SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS 


If any of the general requirements in A-2.1 to A-2.5 
are not fully met, the cylinder may be qualified, if the 
inspection body is able to verify the following, as 
appropriate: 
a) Inspection body shall verify the calculation 
of the minimum wall and base thicknesses. 
b) All cylinders shall be ultrasonically tested 
according to the method indicated in Annex G 
as appropriate to verify that the minimum wall 
and base thicknesses of each cylinder are equal 
to or greater than the minimum wall and base 
thicknesses prescribed by IS 15660 and that 
the cylinders are free from harmful defects, 
as described in Annex B. 


c) A hardness test shall be performed on each 
cylinder as described in IS 15660. The results 
shall be compared to the requirements in the 


original specification, if available. Any 
significant deviation shall be indicated and 
explained. 

d) For aluminum alloy cylinders the corrosion 
test certificates (intercrystalline and stress 
corrosion) in accordance with IS 15660 shall 
be presented. 

e) Cylinder shall be hydraulically tested in 
accordance with 10.1 or 10.2. 


A-4 SPECIAL MARKINGS 


A-4.1 General 


After satisfactory completion of the periodic 
inspection and tests, each cylinder shall be 
permanently marked according to following relevant 
standard or regulation: 


a) Present test date, followed by; and 
b) Thesymbol of the inspection body or test station. 


IS 16017 : 2013 


A-4.2 Re-Test Date and Re-Tester Symbol 


The re-test date of the present test, which shall be 
indicated by the year and month. The re-tester symbol 
is the symbol of the inspection body or test station. 


A-4.3 Reference to Next Test Date 


In accordance with the relevant regulations of an 
authorized body and when regulations require, the next 
test date may be shown by an appropriate method such 
as by a disc fitted between the valve and the cylinder 
indicating the date (year and month) of the next 
periodic inspection and/or tests. 


A-5 INSPECTION REPORT 


The inspection body shall prepare a report for each 
type of cylinder. 


All relevant certificates, new tests and inspections 
performed shall be attached to this report. 


ANNEX B 
(Clauses 4, 6.2, 8, 9.1, 9.2 and A-3) 


DESCRIPTION, EVALUATION OF DEFECTS AND CONDITIONS FOR REJECTION OF 
SEAMLESS ALUMINIUM ALLOY GAS CYLINDERS AT TIME OF VISUAL INSPECTION 


B-1 GENERAL 


Gas cylinder defects can be physical or material or due 
to corrosion as a result of environmental or service 
conditions to which the cylinder has been subjected 
during its life. 


The object of this annex is to give general guidelines 
to the gas cylinder users as to the application of 
rejection criteria. 


This annex applies to all cylinders but those which have 
contained gases having special characteristics may 
require modified controls. 


Any defect in the form of a sharp notch may be removed 
by grinding, machining or other approved methods. 


After such a repair, checking of the wall thickness, for 
example ultrasonically, shall be repeated. 


B-2 PHYSICAL OR MATERIAL DEFECTS 


Evaluation of physical or material defects shall be in 
accordance with Table 3. 


B-3 CORROSION 


B-3.1 General 


The cylinder can be subjected to environmental conditions 
that could cause external corrosion of the metal. 


Internal corrosion of the metal can also occur owing to 
service conditions. 


There is difficulty in presenting definite rejection limits 
in tabular form for all sizes and types of cylinders and 
their service conditions. The limits of rejection have 
been established following considerable field 
experience. 


Extensive experience and judgement are required in 
evaluating whether cylinders that have corroded 
internally are safe and suitable for return to service. It is 
important that the surface of the metal is cleaned of 
corrosion products prior to the inspection of the cylinder. 


B-3.2 Types of Corrosion 


The types of corrosion possible are classified as 


IS 16017 : 2013 


described in Table 4. 
B-4 NECK AND SHOULDER CRACKS 


B-4.1 Cylinder Rejection 


Reject cylinders exhibiting cracks in accordance with 
Table 3. 


B-4.2 Neck Cracks 


Some cylinders with taper threads can be subject to neck 
cracks. After cleaning in a suitable way, cracks can be 
detected by visual inspection. Figure 8 shows the location 


Key 
1) 
2) 


Neck cracks 
Propagated crack in the neck 


Fic. 8 NECK CRACKS 


Key 
1) 
2) 

) 


Shoulder cracks 


3 Folds 


and likely propagation of such cracks. Neck cracks shall 
not be confused with tap markings, which normally are 
visible parallel lines. Figure 9 shows tap markings. 


B-4.3 Shoulder Cracks 


Some cylinders with parallel threads can be subject to 
shoulder cracks. They start from folds in the internal 
shoulder area and propagate into the threaded area or 
shoulder area of the cylinder. Hence, this lower 
threaded area of the neck shall be very carefully 
inspected. Figure 10 shows where shoulder cracks start 
and how they propagate. 


> 


! 


NY 
LLL) 


Wy 


Key 
1) 


Tap Marks 


Fic. 9 Tap MARKS 


fo 


Propagated crack in the shoulder 


Fic. 10 SHOULDER CRACKS 


IS 16017 : 2013 


ANNEX C 
(Clause 5) 


PROCEDURE TO BE ADOPTED WHEN A CYLINDER VALVE IS SUSPECTED 
TO BE OBSTRUCTED 


C-1 If there is any doubt when the valve of a gas 
cylinder is opened, that gas is not being released and 
the cylinder may still contain residual gas under 
pressure, a check shall be made to establish that the 
free passage through the valve is not obstructed. 


The method adopted shall be a recognized procedure 
such as one of the following or one that provides 
equivalent safeguards: 


a) For cylinders of liquefied gases, first check 
to establish that the weight of the cylinder is 
the same as the tare weight stamped on the 
cylinder. If there is a positive difference, the 
cylinder may contain either liquefied gas 
under pressure or contaminants. 

b) Introduce inert gas at a pressure of up to 5 bar 
and check its discharge; 

c) Use the device shown in Fig. 11, to pump air 
into the cylinder, by hand. 


C-2 When it is established that there is no obstruction 
to gas flow in the cylinder valve, the valve may be 
removed. 


C-3 When a cylinder is found to have an obstructed 
gas passage in the valve, the cylinder shall be set aside 


Key 

1) Rubber tube (Internal diameter 8 mm, external 
diameter 13 mm) ground to olive shape and bonded. 

2) Copper tube (Internal diameter 3 mm, external 
diameter 8 mm) 


for special attention as follows: 


a) Saw or drill the valve body until interception 
is made with the gas passage between the 
valve body stem and valve spindle seat. 
Cooling shall be provided, especially, if toxic 
gases are involved; or 

b) Loosen or pierce the safety device in a 
controlled manner. 


These methods are applicable to cylinders of non-toxic, 
non-flammable, non-oxidizing and non-CFC gases. 
Appropriate safety precautions shall be taken to ensure 
that no hazard results from the uncontrolled discharge 
of any residual gas. 


Where the contents are toxic, flammable, oxidizing or 
CFC, the preferred method is to unscrew partially the 
valve within a glanded cap, secured and joined to the 
cylinder and vented to a safe discharge. The principles 
of a suitable device are illustrated in Fig. 12. 


These procedures shall be carried out only by trained 
personnel. When the gas, if any, has been released and 
the pressure within the cylinder reduced to atmospheric 
pressure, and, in the case of liquefied gases, when there 
is no frost or dew on the outside of the cylinder, the 
valve may be removed. 


3) Bond 
4) Rubber Bulb 
5) Hand pressure 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


Fic. 11 DEVICE FoR DETECTING OBSTRUCTED CYLINDER VALVE 


IS 16017 : 2013 


m/s 
D LEY, 
Z 


AA NA 


7 
AS’ 


/ 


hee 
mi 
Mk 


@ 
Vhs 


LL LLLee 

-E 
TZ 

YY 


Mi 
i 


t 


Ka 
NS 
„År 

LLA 
= 
VELA, 
~ 

I RS 


~ 


ENLARGED 
DETAIL ATA 

Key 

1) Rubber gland packing 2) Extractor casing 

3) Control valve 4) Joint ring 

5) Clamp 

Fic. 12 TypicaL DEVICE FOR THE REMOVAL OF A DAMAGED GAS CYLINDER VALVE 
ANNEX D 
(Clauses 6.1 and 7) 
CLEANING OF ALUMINIUM ALLOY GAS CYLINDERS 
D-0 WARNING detrimentally affect use. Table 5 illustrates procedures 


cure: theveheiieal Cleaning productis miaked for cleaning the interior of aluminum alloy cylinders. 


‘Suitable for aluminum’ ; otherwise serious damage will D-2 EXTERNAL 
occur. To ensure gas compatibility completely remove ; : 
the cleaning agent, or check that the final cleansing The following procedures are examples for cleaning 


operation is compatible with the intended gas service. external surfaces: 


D-1 INTERNAL a) Soap and water; 


b) Solvent wipe; and 
Aluminum alloy cylinders in normal service can 


: ets i c) Scouring pad and water. 
accumulate internal contamination which may 


12 


IS 16017 : 2013 


Table 5 Procedures for Cleaning the Interior of Aluminum Alloy Cylinders 
(Clause D-1) 


SI No. Contamination 


d) (2) 


i) Moisture or loose particles Steam clean and blow dry 
ii) Oil and grease 

iii) Odour 
blow dry 


iv) Corrosion 


Cleaning Method 
(3) 


Degrease with suitable solvent, steam clean and blow dry 
Rinse with solution of sodium bicarbonate, then rinse with solution of acetic acid, steam cleam and 


Tumble with aluminium oxide chips or pellets, or glass beads, steam clean and blow dry 


NOTE — Ensure all traces of cleaning agent have been removed. For temperature/time limits (see 12.1.2). 


ANNEX E 
(Clause 10.2.2) 


PROOF PRESSURE TEST OF GAS CYLINDERS 


E-1 GENERAL 


This annex gives details of a method of carrying out a 
proof pressure test on gas cylinders. Other acceptable 
methods may be employed. 


E-2 TEST EQUIPMENTS 


E-2.1 All rigid pipework, flexible tubing, valves, 
fittings and components forming the pressure system 
of the test equipment shall be designed to withstand a 
pressure of 1.5 times the maximum test pressure of 
any cylinder that may be tested. Flexible tubing shall 
have sufficient wall thickness to prevent kinking. 


E-2.2 Pressure gauges shall be checked for accuracy 
against a calibrated gauge at regular intervals, and in 
any case not less frequently than once a month. The 
pressure gauge shall be chosen such that the test 
pressure is approximately between !/, and 7/, the value 
capable of being measured on the pressure gauge. 


E-2.3 The design and installation of the equipment, 
the connection of the cylinders and the operating 
procedures, shall be such as to avoid trapping air in 
the system when a liquid medium is used. 


13 


E-2.4 All joints within the system shall be leak-tight. 


E-2.5 A suitable device shall be fitted to the test 
equipment to ensure that no cylinder is subjected to a 
pressure in excess of its test pressure by more than the 
tolerances in E-3.3. 


E-3 TEST METHOD 


E-3.1 More than one cylinder may be tested at a time 
provided that they all have the same test pressure. In 
case of leakage the leaking cylinder(s) shall be isolated. 
All other cylinders shall be re-tested. 


E-3.2 Before applying pressure the external surface of 
the cylinder(s) shall be dry. 


E-3.3 The pressure applied shall not be below the test 
pressure and shall not exceed the test pressure by 
3 percent or 10 bar, whichever is the lower. 


E-3.4 On attaining the test pressure, the cylinder(s) 
shall be isolated from the pump and the pressure held 
for a minimum period of 30 s. 


E-3.5 If there is a leakage in the pressure system it 
shall be corrected and the cylinder(s) re-tested. 


IS 16017 : 2013 


ANNEX F 
(Clause 10.2.3) 


VOLUMETRIC EXPANSION TESTING OF GAS CYLINDERS 


F-1 GENERAL 


This annex gives details of the following two methods 
of determining the volumetric expansion of aluminium 
alloy gas cylinders: 


a) Water jacket method (preferred method); and 
b) Non-water jacket method. 


The water jacket method volumetric expansion test may 
be carried out on equipment with a levelling burette or 
with a fixed burette or by weighing the mass of water 
displaced. 


F-2 TEST EQUIPMENT 


The following requirements are general to the methods 
of test: 


a) Hydraulic test pressure pipelines shall be 
capable of withstanding a pressure of 1.5 
times the maximum test pressure of any 
cylinder that may be tested; 

b) Glass burettes shall be of sufficient length to 
contain the full volumetric expansion of the 
cylinder and shall have bores of uniform 
diameter such that the expansion can be read 
to an accuracy of | percent or 0.1 ml, 
whichever is the greater; 

c) Weighing scales shall be to an accuracy of 1 
percent or 0.1 g, whichever is the greater; 

d) Pressure gauges shall be of the accuracy 
class 1 with a scale appropriate to the test 
pressure. They shall be tested at regular 
intervals in any case but not less frequently 
than once per month; 

e) A suitable device shall be employed to ensure 
that no cylinder is subjected to a pressure in 
excess of its test pressure; 

Pipe work should utilize long bends in 
preference to elbow fittings and pressure pipes 
should be as short as possible. Flexible tubing 
should be capable of withstanding 1.5 times 
the maximum test pressure in the equipment 
and have sufficient wall thickness to prevent 
kinking; 

All joints should be leak-tight; and 

When installing equipment, care should be 
taken to avoid trapping of air in the system. 


g) 
h) 


14 


F-3 WATER JACKET 
EXPANSION TEST 


VOLUMETRIC 


F-3.1 General Description 


This method of test necessitates enclosing the water 
filled cylinder in a jacket also filled with water. The 
total and any permanent volumetric expansion of the 
cylinder are measured as the amount of water displaced 
by the expansion of the cylinder when under pressure 
and the amount of water displaced after the pressure 
has been released. The permanent expansion is 
calculated as a percentage of the total expansion. The 
water jacket should be fitted with a safety device 
capable of releasing the energy from any cylinder that 
can burst at test pressure. 


It should be ensured that the entire external surface of 
the cylinder is wet without any bubbles. 


An air bleed valve should be fitted to the highest point 
of the jacket. 


Two methods of performing this test are described in 
F-3.2 and F-3.3. Other methods are acceptable 
provided that they are capable of measuring the total, 
and, if any, the permanent volumetric expansion of the 
cylinder. 


F-3.2 Water Jacket Volumetric Expansion — 
Levelling Burette Method 


The equipment should be installed as shown in Fig. 13. 
F-3.2.1 Procedure 


a) Fill the cylinder with water and attach it to 


the water jacket cover. 
b) Seal the cylinder in the water jacket and fill 
the jacket with water, allowing air to bleed 
off through the air bleed valve. 
c) Connect the cylinder to the pressure line. 
Adjust the burette to zero level by 
manipulation of the jacket filling valve and 
drain valve. Raise the pressure to 2/3 of the 
test pressure, stop pumping and close the 
hydraulic pressure line valve. Check that the 
burette reading remains constant. 
d) Re-start the pump and open the hydraulic 
pressure line valve until the cylinder test 
pressure is reached. Close the hydraulic 


pressure line valve and stop pumping. 


IS 16017 : 2013 


e) Lower the burette until the water level is at g) Read the water level in the burette. This 
the zero mark on the burette support. Take a reading is the permanent expansion, if any, 
reading of the water level in the burette. This and shall be recorded on the test certificate. 
reading is the total expansion and shall be h) Check that the permanent expansion as 
recorded on the test certificate. determined by the following equation: 


f) Open the hydraulic line drain valve to release 
the pressure from the cylinder. Raise the 
burette until the water level is at the zero mark 
on the burette support. Check that pressure is Percent permanent expansion shall not exceed the 
at zero and that water level is constant. percentage given in the design specification. 


Permanent expansion x100% = Percent permanent 
Total expansion exapansion 


f 


L 


=p 


$ 
f f 
4 Ý 
f f 
f f 
f f 
f f 
f f 
f f 
f f 
f f 
f f 
f f 
f f 
f f 
f f 
f f 
f f 
j f 
J) f 
r f 
haa f 
h Oo 
f 4 16 
f 4 


15 


| 
V 
EN 
l 


Key 

1) Overflow 2) Calibrated burette sliding in fixed frame 

3) Fixed frame 4) Water supply 

5) Water and eye level 6) Pointer attached to fixed frame at water level 

7) Hydraulic line level 8) Priming valve 

9) Jacket filling valve 10) Position when pressure is released - Reading = 
Permanent expansion 

11) Position at test pressure - Reading = Total expansion 12) Position before pressurization 

13) Air bleed valve 14) Pump 

15) Relief device 16) Drain 


Fic. 13 WATER JACKET VOLUMETRIC EXPANSION TEST (LEVELLING BURETTE METHOD) 


15 


IS 16017 : 2013 


F-3.3 Water Jacket Volumetric Expansion Test — 
Fixed Burette Method 


The equipment should be installed as shown in Fig. 14. 
F-3.3.1 Procedure 


The procedure for this method of test is similar to that 
described in F-3.2 except that the burette is fixed. 


a) 
b) 
c) 


Follow procedures F-3.2.1 (a) and F-3.2.1 (b). 
Connect the cylinder to the pressure line. 

Adjust the water level to a datum. Apply 
pressure until the test pressure is reached and 
record the burette reading. The reading above 
the datum is the total expansion, and shall be 


Oe T S S thar Danner S ta Sheer A T thei E 


Overflow 

Hydraulic line valve 
Jacket filling valve 
Pump 

Drain 


l 
/ 
tv 


recorded on the test certificate. 


d) Release the pressure and record the burette 
reading. The reading above the datum is the 
permanent expansion and shall be recorded 
on the test certificate. 

e) Check that the permanent volumetric 
expansion as determined by the following 
equation: 


Permanent expansion 100% = Percent permanent 
Total expansion exapansion 


Percent permanent expansion shall not exceed the 
percentage given in the design specification. 


2) Water supply 
4) Priming valve 
6) Air bleed valve 
8) Relief device 


Fic. 14 Water JACKET VOLUMETRIC EXPANSION TEST (FIXED BURETTE METHOD) 


16 


F-4 NON-WATER JACKET VOLUMETRIC 
EXPANSION TEST 


F-4.1 General Description 


This method consists of measuring the amount of water 
passed into the cylinder under proof pressure, and on 
release of this pressure, measuring the water returned 
to the manometer. It is necessary to allow for the 
compressibility of water, and the volume of the cylinder 
under test to obtain true volumetric expansion. No fall 
in pressure under this test is permitted. 


The water used should be clean and free of dissolved 
air. Any leakage from the system or the presence of 
free or dissolved air shall result in false readings. 


The equipment should be installed as shown in Fig. 15. 
Figure 15 illustrates diagrammatically the different 
parts of the apparatus. The water supply pipe should 
be connected to an overhead tank as shown, or to some 
other supply giving a sufficient head of water. 


F-4.2 Requirement for Testing 


The apparatus shall be arranged such that all air can 
be removed and that accurate readings can be 


IS 16017 : 2013 


determined of the volume of water required to 
pressurize the filled cylinder and of the volume 
expelled from the cylinder when depressurized. In the 
case of larger cylinders, it may be necessary to augment 
the glass tube with metal tubes arranged in the 
manifold. 


If a single acting hydraulic pump is used, care shall be 
taken to ensure that the piston is in the back position 
when the water levels are noted. 


F-4.3 Test Method 


a) Completely fill the cylinder with water and 
determine the weight of water required. 

b) Connect the cylinder to the hydraulic test 
pump through the coil and check that all 
valves are closed. 


c) Fill the pump and system with water from tank 
1 by opening valves 7, 10 and 11 (see Fig. 15). 
d) To ensure the expulsion of air from the system, 
close the air-bleed and bypass valves and raise 
the system pressure to approximately one- 
third of the test pressure. Open the bleed valve 
to release the trapped air by reducing the 


Key 

1) Supply tank 

3) Air bleed valve 

5) Main pressure gauge 

7) Make-up valve 

9) Test cylinder 

11) Pump sunction isolating valve 


2) Calibrated glass burette 

4) Adjustable pointer 

6) Cylinder to be supported 

8) Bypass valve 

10) Hydraulic pressure line valve 
12) Pump 


Fic. 15 NoN-WATER JACKET METHOD: DIAGRAMMATIC LAYOUT OF CONTAINER TESTING APPARATUS 


IS 16017 : 2013 


system pressure to zero, and re-close the valve. 
Repeat, if necessary. 


leave the pump and system full of water for 
the next test. F-4.3 (d) shall, however, be 


e) Continue to fill the system until the level in repeated at each subsequent test. 
the glass manometer is approximately k) If permanent volumetric expansion has 
300 mm from the top. Close the make-up occurred, record the temperature of the water 
valve and mark the water level with a pointer, in the cylinder. 
leaving the isolating and air-bleed valves 
open. Record the level. F-4.4 Test Results 
f) Close the air-bleed valve. Raise the pressure a) The tests determine the volume of water 
in the system until the pressure gauge records required to pressurize the tilled cylinder to 
the required test pressure. Stop the pump and the test pressure. 
close the hydraulic TINE valve. After b) The total mass and temperature of water in 
approximately 30 s there should be no the cylinder are known, enabling the change 
change in either the water, level or the in volume of the water in the cylinder owing 
pressure. A change in level indicates leakage. to its compressibility to be calculated. The 
A fall In pressure, if there 18: NO leakage, volume of water expelled from the cylinder 
indicates that the cylinder is still expanding when depressurized is known. Thus the total 
under pressure. volumetric expansion and the permanent 
g) Record the fall in water level in the glass tube volumetric expansion can be determined. 
(Provided that there has been no leakage, all c) The permanent volumetric expansion shall not 
the water drained from the glass tube shall exceed the percentage given in the design 
have been pumped into the cylinder to achieve specification. 
the test pressure). The difference in water level 
is the total volumetric expansion. F-4.5 Calculation of Compressibility of Water 
h) Open the hydraulic main and bypass valves The formula used for calculating the reduction in 
slowly to release the pressure in the cylinder volume of water due to its compressibility is as follows: 
and allow the water so released to return to the 
glass tube. The water level should return to the C=WP [K —0.68P] 
original level marked by the pointer. Any 10° 
difference in level shall denote the amount of 
; ig where 
permanent volumetric expansion in the 
cylinder, neglecting the effect of the C = reduction in volume of water due to its 
compressibility of the water at the test pressure. compressibility, in cm; 
The true permanent volumetric expansion of W = weight of water, in kg; 
the cylinder is obtained by correcting for the P nee 
compressibility of the water is given in F-4.5. ee a ae 
j) Before disconnecting the cylinder from the K = compressibility factor for individual 
test rig, close the isolating valve. This will temperature as listed in Table 6. 
Table 6 Compressibility factor, K 
(Clause F-4.5) 
SI No. Temperature K Temperature K Temperature K 
°C °C ge 
a) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 
i) 6 0.049 15 13 0.047 59 20 0.046 54 
ii) 7 0.048 86 14 0.047 42 21 0.046 43 
iii) 8 0.048 60 15 0.047 25 22 0.046 33 
iv) 9 0.048 34 16 0.047 10 23 0.046 23 
v) 10 0.048 12 17 0.046 95 24 0.046 12 
vi) 11 0.047 92 18 0.046 80 25 0.046 04 
vii) 12 0.047 75 19 0.046 68 26 0.045 94 


18 


F-4.6 Calculation 


IS 16017 : 2013 


From Table 5 factor for 15°C 


= 0.047 25 
Example: 
K —0.68P 
Test pressure : 232 bar C= wee 
Weight of water in cylinder at zero: 113.8 kg 
0.68 x 232 

EAVES is eae = 115.545 x 232 (0.047 25-——__——— 
Temperature of water : 15°C 10 
Water forced into cylinder to raise : 1 745 cm? (or = 1224.314 cm? 

pressure to 232 bar 1 745 kg) Total volumetric expansion = 1745 cm? 

—1 224.31 cm? 

Total weight of water in cylinder : 113.8 + 1.745 = 520.686 cm? 

at 232 bar = 115.545 kg 3x100 
Water expelled from cylinder to : 1 742 cm? Permanent expansion percent = 520.686 

depressurize = 0.58 percent 
Permanent expansion = 1 745 em? : 3 cm? NOTE — In the above example calculation, allowance for pipe 

-1 742 cm? stretch has been neglected. 

ANNEX G 
(Clauses 10.2.3, 10.3 and A-3) 
ULTRASONIC TEST 

G-1 GENERAL are such that any longitudinal or transverse defect 


This annex specifies the ultrasonic testing (UT) of 
seamless gas cylinders of water capacity > 2 litre within 
the framework of periodic inspections. 


G-2 REQUIREMENTS 


G-2.1 General 


The cylindrical part of the cylinder, the transition to 
the shoulder, the transition at the base and critical zones 
of the base shall be tested ultrasonically. This shall be 
carried out using a mechanized test device (see Fig. 16). 
Where such a testing device is unable to carry out this 
inspection outside the cylindrical part, a supplementary 
manual examination shall be performed. 


Cylinders which are suspected of fire or heat damage 
shall not be examined ultrasonically. 


G-2.2 Testing Equipment 


The installation shall have at least 5 ultrasonic probes 
suitably arranged (for example see Fig. 17) to scan the 
whole surface of the cylindrical part of the cylinder, 
including the adjacent transitions to the base and 
shoulder. 


The arrangement described above is an example. Other 
arrangements can be possible provided that the probes 


19 


detected can be located from two opposing sides. 


The pulse echo method shall be used to detect defects 
and measure wall thickness ultrasonically. The testing 
techniques used may either be the contact or the 
immersion type (see Fig. 18). 


The cylinder wall shall be tested using UT probes (shear 
wave, angle of refraction about 45°), diameter of probe 
less than 15 mm, operating with a frequency of 2 MHz 
to 10 MHz. The examination shall cover longitudinal 
defects in both circumferential directions (Clockwise 
and anti-clockwise) and transverse defects in both 
longitudinal directions (forward and backward). 


The wall thickness measurement shall be performed 
using a normal probe (angle of refraction 0°), diameter 
of probe less than 15 mm operating with a frequency 
of 2 MHz to 10 MHz. The tolerance of the wall 
thickness measurement shall lie in the range of 
+0,1 mm. 


The cylinders to be tested and the search unit with the 
probes shall go through a rotating motion and 
translation relative to one another such that a helical 
scan is performed on the cylinder. The speeds of 
translation and rotation shall be constant within 
+10 percent (see also 8.4.1). 


IS 16017 : 2013 


The ultrasonic test unit shall have a screen. The 
installation shall have an automatic alarm level for each 
probe which gives an automatic acoustic and visual 
signal when a fault signal (defect or below minimum 
wall thickness) is registered. A distinction in the alarm 
level between internal and external defect signal from 
a probe is desirable, but not necessary [see Fig. 20(a)]. 


The equipment shall be serviced regularly at least in 
accordance with the equipment manufacturer’s 
recommendations to ensure that its accuracy is 
maintained. Inspection records shall be kept. 


G-2.3 Manual Ultrasonic Unit 


The requirements laid down in G-2.2 shall apply as 
appropriate for the selection of the probes and servicing 
of the unit. 


G-2.4 Cylinders 


The outer and inner surfaces of any cylinder to be tested 
ultrasonically shall be in a suitable condition for an 
accurate and reproducible test. In particular the external 
surface shall be free of loose paint, dirt and oil. An 
ultrasonic test is only valid when the noise signals 
caused by the surface are at least 50 percent below the 
corresponding reference signal. 


G-2.5 Personnel 


The test equipment shall be operated and its operation 
supervized by qualified and experienced personnel 
only. The tester shall be certified to level 1 for ultrasonic 
testing. The testing organization shall have a supervisor 
qualified to at least level 2 for ultrasonic testing. 


G-3 CALIBRATION 


G-3.1 General 


For calibrating the UT defect testing and wall thickness 
measurement, a calibration specimen with notches shall 
be used. A specimen of convenient length shall be 
prepared from a cylinder corresponding to the diameter, 
wall thickness, external surface finish and material 
(same range of chemical composition and mechanical 
properties) of the cylinder to be tested. 


G-3.2 Defect Detection 


For manual and mechanized defect testing purposes, 
following four rectangular notches are required as 
reference notches in the calibration specimen (see 
Fig. 19): 


a) Inner notch in longitudinal direction; 
b) Inner notch in transverse direction; 


Key 
1) 
3) 


UT probes moving 
Cylinder moving 


2) 


Ultrasonic test equipment 


Fic. 16 Two Types oF ULTRASONIC TEsT DEVICES FOR GAS CYLINDERS (SCHEMATIC) 


20 


c) Outer notch in longitudinal direction; and 
d) Outer notch in transverse direction. 
With the following dimensions in each case: 


1) Length L = 50 mm; 

2) Depth D = 5 + 0.75 percent of nominal wall 
thickness S; and 

3) Width W=<2D 


The notches may be produced either by means of 
electrical erosion or sawing. The bottom corners of the 
notch may be rounded. The notches shall be located 
such that there is no interference from any other defect 
in the reference standard. The shape and dimensions 


© 


=) = 


9 


= Longitudinal probes 
= Transverse probes 
= Wall thickness probes 


IS 16017 : 2013 


of the reference standard shall be verified. 


For the first step during the calibration procedure the 
ultrasonic testing equipment shall be adjusted in such 
a way that under test conditions an alarm signal is given 
when the UT echoes from the reference notches exceed 
the alarm level [see Fig. 20(a)]. This sensitivity is the 
basic sensitivity. 


During the second step of the calibration procedure 
the basic sensitivity shall be changed to a testing 
sensitivity such that for testing aluminium alloy gas 
cylinders the ultrasonic sensitivity shall be lowered 
from the basic sensitivity by 2 dB [Fig. 20(b)]. 


© @-O O-O 


Fic. 17 ARRANGEMENT OF PROBES (EXAMPLES) 


(a) Contact Type 


1. Water 
3. Cylinder 


(b) Immersion Type 


2. Probes 


Fic. 18 COUPLING TECHNIQUES 


21 


IS 16017 : 2013 


Key 

1 Outer notch 

L Length of notches : 50 mm 
W Width of notches : < 2D 


2 Inner notch 
Depth of notches : 5 + 0.75 percent s 
Nominal wall thickness 


S 


Fic. 19 REFERENCE STANDARDS 


G-3.3 Wall Thickness 


To calibrate the manual and mechanized wall thickness 
measurement, an area on the calibration specimen shall 
be used, of which the exact wall thickness is known. 


The minimum wall thickness of the gas cylinder 
defined in the type approval is set as the alarm level in 
the evaluation unit of the ultrasonic wall thickness 
measuring device. 


G-3.4 Time of Calibration 


The UT equipment shall be calibrated at least at the 
beginning and at the end of each shift. If, during the 
check, the presence of the respective reference notch 
is not detected, all cylinders tested subsequently to the 
last acceptable check shall be re-tested after the 
equipment has been re-calibrated. 


22 


G-4 PERFORMANCE OF THE TEST 


G-4.1 Defect Detection in Cylindrical Part By 
Mechanized Installation 


The cylindrical part of the cylinder and the transitions 
to the shoulder and to the base shall be tested for 
longitudinal and transverse defects using a mechanized 
testing device. 


The rotational speed of the cylinder and the pulse 
repetition frequency of the probes shall be mutually 
adjusted in such a way that the displacement distance 
of each probe in the circumferential direction between 
two successive test pulses is less than 1 mm. 


The rotational and axial speed used during the test shall 
be mutually adjusted in such a way that the pitch of 
the helix is less than the diameter of one probe (at least 
a 10 percent overlap shall be guaranteed) and relates 


IS 16017 : 2013 


T4 
2 
| 4 i 
| | 
t i} 
T4 
2 
6 
I | 
| I 
i} 1 
A) CALIBRATION SPECIMEN - INNER REFERENCE B) CALIBRATION SPECIMEN - OUTER 
NOTCH IN TRANSVERSE DIRECTION REFERENCE NOTCH IN TRANSVERSE 


DIRECTION 


1 Screen 

2 Calibration secimen wall 

3 UT signal trace from calibration specimen wall 
4 Inner reference notch 


UT signal trace from inner reference notch 
Outer reference notch 

UT signal trace from outer reference notch 
Alarm level 


ONO 


a) CALIBRATION PROCEDURE, STEP 1 TESTING OF BASIC SENSIVITY 


a oe 
a) BASIC SENSIVITY b) TESTING SENSIVITY 


KEY 


1 Alarm level 
2 Signal of refernce notch 


b) CALIBRATION PROCEDURE, STEP 2 ESTABLISHMENT OF SENSIVITY CONTROL 


Fic. 20 CALIBRATION PROCEDURE 


23 


IS 16017 : 2013 


to the effective beam so as to ensure 100 percent 
coverage. 


G-4.2 Defect Detection in Cylinder Ends by Manual 
Testing 


The critical areas of the ends, especially the transition 
zone of concave bases, shall be carefully checked. The 
extent of the test depends on the type of base, the 
position of the critical zones, the form of possible 
defects, the accessibility of the test surface (in the case 
of foot rings) and the roughness of the external surface. 
Figure 21 shows how the test may be conducted for 


the above mentioned conditions. 


G-4.3 Wall Thickness Measurement by Mechanized 
Installation 


One hundred percent of the cylindrical part shall be 
examined with a normal probe. 


G-4.4 Wall Thickness Measurement by Manual 
Testing 


The transition area to the base and the base itself shall 
be examined with a normal ultrasonic probe, if not 
already performed using mechanical devices. 


(45 *L) i 
(45 * T) \O 


(45% L) 
(45* L) (45° T) y 
(45% T) | | \ 
(45. 
OF eae 
(o 
Ly 
(45 7 L) 
(45* 7) (45* L) 
(453 T) 
(45 L.T) 
ban 

L = Longitudinal of the Base Shape T = Transverse of the Base Shape 


Manual (Common Practice) 


Il 


o Mechanized (Common Practice) 


Fic. 21 DEFECT DETECTION 


4 


Key 

1. Screen 

3. UT Signal from cylinder Wall 

5. UT Signal from crack 

7. Region of signals from cracks on external surface 


IS 16017 : 2013 


Cylinder wall 

Crack on internal surface 

Region of signals from cracks on internal surface 
Alarm level 


oo rN 


Fic. 22 DETECTION OF CRACK IN TRANSVERSE DIRECTION (EXAMPLE) 


G-5 INTERPRETATION OF RESULTS 


Gas cylinders tested to the testing sensitivity in 
accordance with G-3.2 and G-3.3 where no defect 
signal above the alarm level has been recorded have 
passed the test. Where a defect signal above the alarm 
level (defect or below minimum wall thickness) has 


G-6 RECORDS 


In addition to the required record according to 12.7, 
the following information shall be recorded: 
a) Identification of ultrasonic equipment used; 
b) An ultrasonic test symbol for example UT; 
and 


been recorded (see Fig. 22) the cylinder shall be c) Results of examination. If a re-evaluation 
re-evaluated with respect to the defect rejection limits according to Annex B has been necessary 
in accordance with Annex B. following detection of a defect, the basis of 
re-evaluation shall be recorded. 
ANNEX H 


(Clause 11) 


INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE OF VALVES AND THEIR 
CONNECTIONS — RECOMMENDED PROCEDURES 


H-1 Check all threads to ensure the thread diameters, 
form, length, and taper are satisfactory. 


If threads show signs of distortion, deformation, or 
burring, rectify these faults. Excessive thread damage 
or serious deformation of the valve body, hand wheel, 
spindle or other components is cause for replacement. 


Maintenance of the valve includes general cleaning 
together with replacement of elastomers and worn or 
damaged components, packing and, safety devices, 


25 


where necessary. 


Where the use of lubricants/elastomers is permitted, 
use only those approved for the gas service, particularly 
oxidizing gas service. 


After the valve has been re-assembled check for 
leakage and correct operation. 


This can be done prior to the valve being refitted to the 
cylinder, or during and after the first gas charge 
subsequent to the inspection and test of the cylinder. 


IS 16017 : 2013 


ANNEX J 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Gas Cylinders Sectional Committee, MED 16 


Organization 


Petroleum and Explosive Safety Organization, Nagpur 


All India Industrial Gases Manufacturers Association, 


New Delhi 


Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 


Bharat Pumps and Compressors Ltd, Allahabad 


BOC India Ltd, Kolkata 


Everest Kanto Cylinder Ltd, Mumbai 


Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 


Indian Oil Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 


International Industrial Gases Ltd, Kolkata 


Kabsons Gas Equipments Ltd, Hyderabad 


Kosan Industries Ltd, Mumbai/Surat 


LPG Equipment Research Centre, Bangalore 


Mahanagar Gas Limited, Mumbai 


Maruti Koatsu Cylinders Ltd, Mumbai 


Ministry of Defence (DGQA), Pune 


Praxair India Ltd, Bangalore 


Research & Development Estt (Engineers), Pune 


Sakha Engineers Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 
SICGIL India Ltd, Chennai 


Steel Authority of India Ltd, Salem 


Steel Authority of India Ltd, Ranchi 


Supreme Cylinders Ltd, Delhi 
Tekno Valves, Kolkata 


Trans Valves (India) Pvt Ltd, Hyderabad 


Vanaz Engineers Ltd, Pune 


26 


Representative(s) 


Suri P. B. YEDLA (Chairman) 
Suri D. K. Gupta (Alternate) 


SHRI KARAN BHATIA 
SHRIMATI VEENA PETER (Alternate ) 


SHRI THARTYAN GEORGE 
SHRI SANJAY PHULLI (Alternate ) 


Suri J. P. SINHA 
Suri P. G. CHoupuury (Alternate) 


SHRI K. MANOHARAN 
SHRI RAMANA VUTUKURU (Alternate) 


Suri P. M. SAMVATSAR 
Suri A. K. KHAMKAaR (Alternate) 


Suri P. P. NADKARNI 
SHRI ALOK Kumar Gupta (Alternate) 


Suri S. S. SAMANT 
Suri RAyesH HAzArnis (Alternate) 


SHRI DEVENDRA K. GARG 
Suri NIKHILESh K. Garc (Alternate) 


SHRI SATISH KABRA 
Suri S. Goralarat (Alternate) 


Suri S. K. Dey (Surat) 
Suri S. B. Boma (Alternate) 


Suri G. P. Gupta 
SHRIMATI KAROBI MUKHERJEE (Alternate) 


SHRI RAGHUNATH KULAI 
SHRI ARUN Nayak (Alternate) 


Suri Nitin J. THAKKAR 
Suri A. S. SARAN (Alternate) 


Suri J. P. TIWARI 
Lr CoL B. V. Ravi Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI MILAN SARKAR 
Suri ARINDAM Das (Alternate) 


Suri P. K. CHATTOPADHYAY 
Suri A. Basu (Alternate) 


SHRI AMARJIT S. KonLI 


SHRI FAROOQUE DADABHOY 
Suri R. PADMANABAN (Alternate) 


SHRI T. KALYANASUNDARAM 
Suri N. K. VusayAvarcia (Alternate) 


SHRI DEBASHIS KARMAKAR 
Dr B. K. Jua (Alternate) 


Suri M. L. FATHEPURIA 


Suri Y. K. BEHANI 
Suri R. BEHANI (Alternate) 


Suri A. K. JAIN 
Suri Anus Jain (Alternate) 


Suri S. K. KHANDEKAR 
Suri S. R. Sarvate (Alternate) 


Organization 


In personal capacity (Menon & Patel, 
14/1, Mile, Mathura Road, Faridabad) 


In personal capacity (303, Shantikunj, Pandav 
Bunglows Lane Athwalines, Surat) 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 16017 : 2013 


Representative(s) 


Suri EBRAHIM M. PATEL 


SHRI L. D. THAKKAR 


Suri C. K. Vepa, Scientist ‘F and Heap (MED) 
[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI VISHAL TOMER 
Scientist ‘C’ (MED), BIS 


Dissolved Acetylene Cylinders, Generators, Acetylene Pipe Lines and High Pressure 
Gas Cylinders Subcommittee, MED 16: 3 


Boc India Ltd, Kolkata 
Al-Can Exports Pvt Ltd, Distt Thane 


All India Industrial Gases Manufacturers Association, 


New Delhi 


Bharat Pumps and Compressors Ltd, Allahabad 


Everest Kanto Cylinder Ltd, Mumbai 


Hindalo Industries Limited, Mumbai 


International Industrial Gases Ltd, Howrah 


Jai Maruti Gas Cylinders Gases Ltd, Gwalior 


Klas Technology Ventures Ltd, Bangalore 


KVK Corporation, Mumbai 


Mahanagar Gas Limited, Mumbai 


Maruti Koatsu Cylinders Ltd, Mumbai 


Ministry of Defence (DGQA), Pune 


Petroleum And Explosive Safety Organization, Nagpur 


Praxair India Ltd, Bangalore 


Rama Cylinders Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


Sicgil India Ltd, Chennai 


Strategic Engineering (P) Ltd, Chennai 


Techno Valves, Kolkata 


27 


SHRI VUTUKURU RAMANA (Convener) 


SHRI Vijay K. PARIKH 
Suri D. C. Dave (Alternate) 


SHRI KARAN BHATIA 
SHRIMATI VEENA PETER (Alternate) 


Suri J. P. SINHA 
Suri P. G. CHoupuury (Alternate) 


Suri P. M. SAMVATSAR 
Suri. A. G. KHAMKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI SUBHANKAR GUPTA 
Suri S. Devaposs (Alternate) 


Suri D. K. GARG 
Suri N. K. Gare (Alternate) 


SHRI AsHOK K. NIGAM 
Suri VAISHNAV NIGAM (Alternate) 


Suri K. G. KrisHNAMURTHY 
Suri K. J. KULKARNI (Alternate) 


Suri R. CHANDGOTHIA 
Suri V. CHANDGOTHIA (Alternate) 


SHRI RAGHUNATH KULAI 
SHRI ARUN Nayak (Alternate) 


Suri Nitin J. THAKKAR 
Suri A. S. SARAN (Alternate) 


Suri J. P. Tiwari 
Lr CoL Ravi Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI AJar NIGAM 
Suri D. K. Gupta (Alternate) 


SHRI MILAN SARKAR 
Suri ARINDAM Das (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJAY R. NAPHADE 
Suri SANJAY S. MANDE (Alternate) 


SHRI RUQsHAD DADABHOY 
Suri R. PADMANABAN (Alternate) 


Dr M. RAMAKRISHNA 
Suri G. S. ViswanatuH (Alternate) 


Suri Y. K. BEHANI 
Suri R. BEHANI (Alternate) 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: ME 16 (1036). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 

FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. 

NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 
VISAKHAPATNAM. 

Published by BIS, New Delhi 


