IMA UTE IS 302-2-25 : 2014 
Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2019) 


Wey sik WAM fa 
SUBES 
A 2 RUE SAT 
AJA 25 GA AU Stas, Past ARA AA 
adaa aña 
(Tear FRAT ) 


Safety of Household and Similar 
Electrical Appliances 


Part 2 Particular Requirements 
Section 25 Microwave ovens, including combination 
microwave ovens 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 13.120; 97.100.10 


© BIS 2014 


Rds AMA AN 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
AM WH, 9 FEM AHL AP, as feee-110002 
WES MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


May 2014 Price Group 8 


Electrical Appliances Sectional Committee, ET 32 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 2/Sec 25) (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the 
draft finalized by the Electrical Appliances Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical 
Division Council. 


This standard was first published in 1994. This revision has been undertaken primarily to align the existing 
standard with the latest international standard. 


This standard covers the safety requirements of microwave ovens. This standard however, does not cover the 
performance requirements which are covered under IS 11676 “Microwave ovens for household and similar 
purposes”. 


This standard recognizes the internationally accepted level of protection against hazards such as electrical, 
mechanical, thermal, fire and radiation of appliances when operated as in normal use taking into account the 
manufacturer’s instructions. It also covers abnormal situations that can be expected in practice and takes into 
account the way in which electromagnetic phenomena can affect the safe operation of appliances. 


This standard takes into account the requirements of IS 732 : 1989 “Code of Practice for electrical wiring 
installations (third revision)’, as far as possible so that there is compatibility with the wiring rules when the 
appliance is connected to the supply mains. However, in case of any deviation, wiring rules take precedence. 


If an appliance within the scope of this standard also incorporates functions that are covered by another Part 2 of 
IS 302, the relevant Part 2 is applied to each function separately, as far as is reasonable. If applicable, the influence 
of one function on the other is taken into account. 


When a Part 2 standard does not include additional requirements to cover hazards dealt with in Part 1, Part 1 
applies. 


NOTE — This means that in such a case, it has been decided that for the part 2 standards that it is not necessary to specify particular 
requirements for the appliance in question over and above the general requirements. 


This standard is a product family standard dealing with the safety of appliances and takes precedence over 
horizontal and generic standards covering the same subject. 


NOTE — Horizontal and generic standards covering a hazard are not applicable since they have been taken into consideration when 
developing the general and particular requirements for the IS 302 series of standards. 


An appliance that complies with the text of this standard shall not necessarily be considered to comply with the 
safety principles of the standard if, when examined and tested, it is found to have other features which impair the 
level of safety covered by these requirements. 


An appliance employing materials or having forms of construction differing from those detailed in the requirements 
of this standard may be examined and tested according to the intent of the requirements and, if found to be 
substantially equivalent, may be considered to comply with the standard. 


This Part 2 is to be read in conjunction with the latest edition of IS 302-1 ‘Safety of household and similar 
electrical appliances : Part 1 General requirements’ and its amendments. This standard was formulated on the 
basis of IS 302-1 : 2008. 


NOTE — When Part 1 is mentioned in this standard, it refers to IS 302-1. 


This Part 2 supplements or modifies the corresponding clauses in IS 302-1, so as to convert that standard into the 
Indian standard: Particular requirements for microwave ovens, including combination microwave ovens. 


When a particular sub-clause of Part 1 is not mentioned in this Part 2, that sub-clause applies as far as is reasonable. 
When this standard states addition, modification or replacement, the relevant text in Part 1 is to be adapted accordingly. 


© 


NOTE — The following numbering system is used: 
a)  Subclauses, tables and figures that are numbered starting from 101 are additional to those in Part 1; 


b) Unless notes are in a new sub-clause or involve notes in Part 1, they are numbered starting from 101, including those in a replaced 
clause or subclause; 


c) Additional annexes are lettered AA, BB, etc. 
This standard is based on IEC 60335-2-25 : 2010 (Ed. 6.0) with the following modifications: 


Since this standard is to be read in conjunction with IS 302-1 ‘Safety of household and similar electrical appliances: 
Part 1 General requirements’, the differences of IS 302-1 from IEC 60335-1 would apply. 


The principal changes with respect to IS 302-2-25 : 1994 are as follows (minor changes are not listed): 


1) Microwave ovens for use in corrosive or explosive atmospheres excluded (see 1.1); 


2) Scope is extended by microwave ovens on board ships and Annex BB contains requirements and test 
specifications for microwave ovens on board ships; 


3) Scope and the requirements for the instructions are modified for better separation between household 
and similar use and commercial use; 


4) Scope is modified by so that the standard does not take into account persons whose capabilities or lack 
of experience and knowledge prevents them from using the appliance safely without supervision or 
instruction and children playing with the appliance; 


5) Intended use is defined for clarification; 

6) ISM frequency bands applicable changed to 300 MHz to 30 GHz (see 1.1); 

7) Few terminologies deleted; 

8) Water temperature for normal operations and other tests rationalized (see 3.1.7, 15.101, 32); 
9) Test sequence rationalized (see 5.3); 

10) Microwave ovens of class II added (see 6.1); 

11) Rated current for fuse to be marked (see 7.1); 

12) Marking and instructions - requirements added (see 7.1); 

13) Test condition for temperature rise test modified (see 11.2); 

14) Operation for carrying out temperature rise test method (see 11.7); 

15) Requirement for combination microwave oven now modified and covered under Annex AA. 
16) the pollution degree of combination microwave ovens is defined for clarification; 


17) the thickness requirement for sheaths of visibly glowing heating elements of combination microwave 
ovens is defined for clarification; 


18) Clarification on temperature rise measurement of external surfaces (see 11.8); 
19) Leakage current test rationalized (see 16); 

20) the door endurance test is rationalised; 

21) Endurance test modified, number of cycles increased to 50,000 (see 18); 

22) Abnormal operation test modified (see 19); 

23) There is an editorial correction of 19 of Annex AA; 


24) Stability and mechanical hazards — requirement for appliance normally used on the floor and those used 
on table are merged (see 20.101); 


25) Mechanical strength test rationalized (see 21); 
26) Modifications for requirements for constructions (see 22); 


27) Replacement of 22.103, 22.104 and 22.105 allows interlock systems with at least one concealed door 
interlock as well as alternative interlock systems without concealed door interlock; 


28) Tests on electronic door interlock systems and similar are defined for clarification; 

29) Modifications for requirements for components (see 24); 

30) Requirement for length of cord modified (see 25); 

31) Requirement of 302-1 now applicable for clearance, creepage distances and solid insulation (see 29); 


32) Requirements for appliances installed in road vehicles caravans etc. to comply with vibration tests (see 
22.116); 


ü) 


33) Clarification for applicability to resistance to heat and fire for appliances with pre selected start time 
and those with keep-warm function (see 30.2); Test for microwave ovens leakage rationalized (see 32); 
and 


34) differences due to revision of 302-1. 


(iii) 


IS 302-2-25 : 2014 


Indian Standard 


SAFETY OF HOUSEHOLD AND SIMILAR 
ELECTRICAL APPLIANCES 
PART 2 PARTICULAR REQUIREMENTS 


Section 25 Microwave Ovens, Including Combination Microwave Ovens 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 
This clause of Part 1 is replaced by the following. 


1.1 This standard deals with the safety of microwave 
ovens for household and similar use, their rated voltage 
being not more than 250 V. 


This standard also deals with combination microwave 
ovens, for which Annex AA is applicable. 


This standard also deals with microwave ovens 
intended to be used on board ships, for which Annex 
BB is applicable. 


Appliances not intended for normal household use but 
which nevertheless may be a source of danger to the 
public, such as appliances intended to be used by laymen 
in shops, in light industry and on farms, are within the 
scope of this standard. However, if the appliance is 
intended to be used professionally to process food for 
commercial purposes, the appliance is not considered 
to be for household and similar use only. 


As far as is practicable, this standard deals with the 
common hazards presented by appliances that are 
encountered by all persons in and around the home. 
However, in general, it does not take into account, 


a) persons (including children) whose, 
1) physical, sensory or mental capabilities; 
or 
2) lack of experience and knowledge 
prevents them from using the appliance 
safely without supervision or instruction; 


b) children playing with the appliance, 


NOTE 101 Attention is drawn to the fact that, 

a) for appliances intended to be used in vehicles or on board 
ships or aircraft, additional requirements may be 
necessary; aand 

b 


eS 


in many countries, additional requirements are specified 
by the national health authorities, the national authorities 
responsible for the protection of labour and similar 
authorities. 


NOTE 102 This standard does not apply to, 
a) commercial microwave ovens; 
b) industrial microwave heating equipment; 
c) appliances for medical purposes; and 
d 


= 


appliances intended to be used in locations where special 
conditions prevail, such as the presence of a corrosive or 
explosive atmosphere (dust, vapour or gas). 


2 REFERENCES 


This clause of Part 1 is applicable except as follows. 


Addition: 


IS 302-2-6 : 1993 Safety of household and similar 
electrical appliances: Part 2 Particular requirements, 
Section 6 Stationary cooking ranges, hobs, ovens and 
similar appliances 


IS 302-2-9 : 1993 Safety of household and similar 
electrical appliances: Part 2 Particular requirements, 
Section 9 Grills, toasters and similar portable cooking 
appliances 


IS 1401 : 2008 Protection of persons and equipment 
by enclosures — Probes for verification 


IS 6873 (Part 4) : 1999 Limits and methods of 
measurement of tadio disturbance characteristics — 
Part 4 Industrial, scientific and medical (ISM) radio- 
frequency equipment 


IS 9000 (Part 4) : 2008 Basic environmental testing 
procedures for electronic and electrical Items — 
Part 4 : Damp heat (Steady state) 


IS 9000 (Part 8) : 1981 Basic environmental testing 
procedures for electronic and electrical items — Part 8 
Vibration (sinusoidal) test 


IS 9000 (Part 7/Sec 1) : 2006 Basic environmental 
testing procedures for electronic and electrical items 
— Part 7 Impact test, Section 1 Shock Test 


IS 9001 (Part 1) : 1984 Guidance for environmental 
testing — Part 1 General 


IS 302-2-25 : 2014 


3 TERMINOLOGY 
This clause of Part 1 is applicable except as follows. 
3.1.7 Addition: 

NOTE 101 The rated frequency is the input frequency. 
3.1.9 Replacement: 


Normal Operation — Operation of the appliance with 
1 000 + 50 g of potable water at an initial temperature 
of 20 + 2°C in a cylindrical borosilicate glass vessel 
having a maximum thickness of 3 mm and an outside 
diameter of approximately 190 mm. The vessel is 
placed on the centre of the shelf. 


3.101 Microwave Oven — An appliance using 
electromagnetic energy in one or several of the ISM 
frequency bands between 300 MHz and 30 GHz, for 
heating food and beverages in a cavity. 

NOTE — ISM frequency bands are the electromagnetic 


frequencies established by the ITU and reproduced in IS 6873 
(Part 4). 


3.102 Combination Microwave Oven—A 
microwave oven in which heat is also provided in the 
cavity by simultaneous or consecutive operation of 
resistive heating elements. 
NOTE — The resistive heating elements are used to provide 
radiant heat, convection heat or steam. 
3.103 Cavity — Space enclosed by the inner walls 
and the door in which the load is placed. 


3.104 Shelf — Horizontal support in the cavity on 
which the load is placed. 


3.105 Door Interlock — Device or system that 
prevents the operation of the magnetron, unless the 
oven door is closed. 


3.106 Monitored Door Interlock — Door interlock 
system that incorporates a supervision device. 


3.107 Temperature-Sensing Probe — Device that 
is inserted into the food to measure its temperature and 
is a part of an oven control. 


3.107 Magnetron — Type of vaccum tube used to 
generate microwaves. 


4 GENERAL REQUIREMENT 
This clause of Part 1 is applicable. 


5 GENERAL CONDITIONS FOR THE TESTS 
This clause of Part 1 is applicable except as follows. 
5.2 Addition: 


NOTE 101 An additional sample may be required for the test 
of 19.104. 

NOTE 102 Six samples of the interlocks are required for the 
test of 24.1.4. 


5.3 Modification: 


Instead of carrying out the tests in the order of clauses, 
the following sequence of clauses and subclauses 
applies: 32, 22.113, 22.108, 22.115. 22.116, 7 to 17, 
20, 21 (except 21.101 to 21.105), 18, 19 (except 
19.104) (except 22.108, 22.113, 22.115 and 22.116), 
23 to 31, 21.101 to 21.105 and 19.104. 


5.101 Microwave ovens are tested as motor-operated 
appliances. 


5.102 Class III temperature-sensing probes are only 
subjected to the tests of 22.112. 


6 CLASSIFICATION 


This clause of Part 1 is applicable except as follows. 


6.1 Modification: 


Microwave ovens shall be Class I or Class II. 


7 MARKING AND INSTRUCTIONS 


This clause of Part 1 is applicable except as follows. 


7.1 Addition: 


Appliances shall be marked with the nominal frequency 
in megahertz of the ISM band in which they operate. 


If the removal of any cover results in microwave 
leakage exceeding the value specified in 32, the cover 
shall be marked with the substance of the following: 


WARNING 
MICROWAVE ENERGY 
DO NOT REMOVE THIS COVER 


If an appliance incorporates a socket-outlet protected 
by means of fuses, other than D-type fuses, it shall be 
marked with the rated current of the relevant fuse. 
When a miniature fuse-link is provided, this marking 
shall indicate that the fuse-link is to have a high 
breaking capacity. 


7.12 Addition: 


The instructions shall state the substance of the 
following: 


IMPORTANT SAFETY INSTRUCTIONS 
READ CAREFULLY AND KEEP FOR FUTURE 
REFERENCE 


The instructions shall include the substance of the 
following warnings: 


a) WARNING — If the door or door seals are 
damaged, the oven must not be operated until 
it has been repaired by a competent person. 

b) WARNING — It is hazardous for anyone 
other than a competent person to carry out 


any service or repair operation that involves 
the removal of a cover which gives protection 
against exposure to microwave energy. 

c) WARNING — Liquids and other foods must 
not be heated in sealed containers since they 
are liable to explode. 


The instructions shall include the substance of the 
following: 


a) This appliance is intended to be used in 
household and similar applications such as: 
1) Staff kitchen areas in shops, offices and 
other working environments; 


2) Farm houses; 

3) By clients in hotels, motels and other 
residential environments; 

4) Bed and breakfast type environments. 


NOTE 101 If the manufacturer wishes to limit the 
use of the appliance to less than the above, this 
has to be clearly stated in the instructions. 


b) Minimum height of free space necessary 
above the top surface of the oven. 

c) Only use utensils that are suitable for use in 
microwave ovens. 

d) When heating food in plastic or paper 
containers, keep an eye on the oven due to 
the possibility of ignition. 

e) Microwave oven is intended for heating food 
and beverages. Drying of food or clothing and 
heating of warming pads, slippers, sponges, 
damp cloth and similar may lead to risk of 
injury, ignition or fire. 

f) If smoke is observed, switch off or unplug 
the appliance and keep the door closed in 
order to stifle any flames. 

g) Microwave heating of beverages can result 
in delayed eruptive boiling, therefore care 
must be taken when handling the container. 


h) Contents of feeding bottles and baby food jars 
shall be stirred or shaken and the temperature 
checked before consumption, in order to avoid 
burns. 

j) Eggs in their shell and whole hard-boiled eggs 
should not be heated in microwave ovens 
since they may explode, even after microwave 
heating has ended. 

k) Details for cleaning door seals, cavities and 
adjacent parts. 


m) Oven should be cleaned regularly and any 
food deposits removed. 

n) Failure to maintain the oven in a clean 
condition could lead to deterioration of the 
surface that could adversely affect the life of 
the appliance and possibly result in a 


IS 302-2-25 : 2014 


hazardous situation. 


p) Only use the temperature probe recommended 
for this oven (for appliances having a facility 
to use a temperature-sensing probe). 

The manufacturer shall state in the instructions whether 
the microwave oven is intended to be used freestanding, 
built-in or in a cabinet. If the appliance can be used 
while placed in a cabinet, 


1) the minimum dimensions of the cabinet shall 
be given by the manufacturer; and 


2) the instructions shall state that the appliance 
must be operated with any cabinet door open. 


The instructions for microwave ovens having an 
additional decorative door shall state that the appliance 
must be operated with the decorative door open. 


The instructions for microwave ovens that are not 
tested in a cabinet shall state that the appliance must 
not be placed in a cabinet. 


7.14 Addition: 


The height of the lettering of the warning specified 
in 7.1 shall be at least 3 mm. 


Compliance is checked by measurement. 


8 PROTECTION AGAINST ACCESS TO LIVE 
PARTS 


This clause of Part 1 is applicable except as follows. 
8.1.1 Addition: 


Test probe 18 of IS 1401 is also applied, as specified 
for test probe B. However, it is only applied to parts 
that are accessible when the oven is operated in normal 
use. 


8.2 Addition: 


Test probe 18 of IS 1401 is also applied, as specified for 
test probe B. However, it is only applied to parts that are 
accessible when the oven is operated in normal use. 


9 STARTING OF MOTOR-OPERATED 
APPLIANCES 


This clause of Part 1 is not applicable. 

10 POWER INPUT AND CURRENT 

This clause of Part 1 is applicable. 

11 HEATING 

This clause of Part 1 is applicable except as follows. 
11.2 Addition: 


Appliances, other than built-in appliances, are 
positioned as specified for heating appliances. 


IS 302-2-25 : 2014 


A ceiling is placed over the appliance at the minimum 
height stated in the instructions. The ceiling has a depth 
of 300 mm from the back wall of the test corner and a 
length at least 150 mm in excess of the width of the 
appliance. 


Appliances that can be used when placed in a cabinet 
are placed in a cabinet with the minimum dimension 
given in the instructions by the manufacturer, the 
plywood specified for the test corner being used. The 
appliance is positioned against the rear wall and one 
of the side walls. 


The cabinet door is in the open position. 


11.7 Replacement: 


Appliances are operated for three cycles, each cycle 
consisting of a heating period of 10 min followed by a 
rest period of 1 min. During the rest periods, the door 
is open and the load is replaced. 


11.8 Addition: 


The temperature rises of external surfaces of microwave 
ovens are only measured on the surfaces that are 
not placed against the wall and the floor of the 
test corner. 


There are no temperature rise limits for air-outlet grilles 
and for surfaces up to a distance of 25 mm from them. 


NOTE 101 These surfaces do not include handles. 
12 VOID 


13 LEAKAGE CURRENT AND ELECTRIC 
STRENGTH AT OPERATING TEMPERATURE 


This clause of Part 1 is applicable. 


14 TRANSIENT OVERVOLTAGES 
This clause of Part 1 is applicable. 


15 MOISTURE RESISTANCE 


This clause of Part 1 is applicable except as follows. 


15.2 Addition: 


A quantity of 0.5 litre of water containing 
approximately 1 percent NaCl is poured steadily over 
the shelf over a period of 1 min. If the shelf can collect 
spilled liquid, it is filled with the saline solution and a 
further 0.5 l is then added over a period of 1 min. 


15.101 Temperature-sensing probes shall be 
constructed so that their insulation is not affected by 
water. 


Compliance is checked by the following test. 


The probe is completely immersed in water containing 
approximately 1 percent NaCl and having a 


temperature of 20 + 5°C. The water is heated to the 
boiling point in approximately 15 min. The probe is 
then removed from the boiling water and immersed in 
water having a temperature of 20 + 5°C for 30 min. 


This procedure is carried out five times, after which 
the probe is removed from the water. All traces of liquid 
are then removed from the surface. 


The probe shall then withstand the leakage current test 
of 16.2. 


NOTE — Detachable temperature-sensing probes are not 
connected to the appliance for this test. Non-detachable 
temperature-sensing probes are tested in the oven, the probe 
being immersed as much as possible. 


16 LEAKAGE CURRENT AND ELECTRIC 
STRENGTH 


This clause of Part 1 is applicable except as follows. 


16.101 The windings of the power transformer that 
supplies the magnetron shall have adequate insulation. 


Compliance is checked by the test of 16.101.1 for 
switch-mode power supplies and by the test of 16.101.2 
for other power transformers. 


16.101.1 The insulation between the primary and 
secondary windings of switch-mode power supply 
transformers is subjected for 1 min to a voltage of 
substantially sinusoidal waveform and having a 
frequency of 50 Hz or 60 Hz. The value of the voltage 
is 1.414 times the peak value of the secondary working 
voltage plus 750 V, with a minimum of 1 250 V. 


There shall be no breakdown between windings or 
between adjacent turns of the same winding. 


16.101.2 Twice the working voltage is induced in the 
secondary winding of the transformer by applying a 
sinusoidal voltage having a frequency higher than rated 
frequency to the primary terminals. 


The duration of the test is 


a) 60 s, for frequencies up to twice the rated 
frequency, or 


Rated frequency 


b) 120x s, with a minimum of 


Test frequency 
15 s, for higher frequencies. 


A maximum of one-third of the test voltage is applied 
and is then rapidly increased without creating 
transients. At the end of the test, the voltage is 
decreased in a similar manner to approximately one- 
third of its full value before switching off. 


There shall be no breakdown between windings or 
between adjacent turns of the same winding. 


NOTE — The frequency of the test voltage is higher than the 
rated frequency to avoid excessive excitation current. 


17 OVERLOAD 
TRANSFORMERS 
CIRCUITS 


PROTECTION OF 
AND ASSOCIATED 


This clause of Part 1 is applicable except as follows. 


Addition: 


The tests are not carried out on the power transformer 
that supplies the magnetron and its associated circuits, 
these being checked during the tests of 19. 


18 ENDURANCE 
This clause of Part 1 is replaced by the following. 


The door system, including hinges, microwave seals 
and other associated parts, shall be constructed to 
withstand wear that may be expected in normal use. 


Compliance is checked by the following test. 


The door system is subjected to 50 000 cycles of 
operation with the appliance supplied at rated voltage 
and containing an appropriate microwave-absorbing 
load. It is then subjected to 50 000 cycles of operation 
without microwave generation. 


The door is opened and closed as in normal use. It is 
opened from the closed position to a position 
approximately 10° before fully open. The rate of 
operation is 6 cycles/min. With the agreement of the 
manufacturer, the rate of operation without microwave 
generation can be increased to 12 cycles/min. 


After the test, the microwave leakage shall not exceed 
the limit specified in 32 and the door system shall still 
function. 


NOTE 101 Controls may be rendered inoperative in order to 
carry out the test. 


NOTE 102 Components, the deterioration of which does not 
impair compliance with this standard, may be replaced in order 
to complete the test. 


NOTE 103 Bricks or additional water of maximum 500 g may 
be added, if necessary to avoid stopping of the test due to 
overheating. 


19 ABNORMAL OPERATION 
This clause of Part 1 is applicable except as follows. 
19.1 Modification: 


Instead of subjecting the appliance to the tests of 19.2 
to 19.10, compliance is checked by the tests of 19.101 
to 19.105, the appliance being supplied at rated voltage. 


19.11.2 Addition: 


The cathode-to-anode circuit of the magnetron is open- 
circuited and short-circuited in turn. If one of these 
fault conditions results in an input current that increases 
with decreasing voltage, the test is carried out with the 
appliance supplied at 0.94 times rated voltage. 


IS 302-2-25 : 2014 


However, if the input current increases more than 
proportionally with voltage, the appliance is supplied 
at 1.06 times rated voltage. 


The filament of the magnetron is not short-circuited. 


19.13 Addition: 


The temperature of windings shall not exceed the 
values shown in Table 8. Only appliances that allow a 
pre-selected start time and those operating with a keep- 
warm function are considered to be appliances operated 
until steady conditions are established. 


During the tests, the microwave leakage shall not 
exceed 100 W/m? measured in accordance with 32 but 
with the load as specified for each sub-clause. The 
appliance shall comply with 32 if it can be operated 
after the tests. 


19.101 Appliances are operated with controls set at 
the most unfavourable position and without load in 
the cavity. 


The period of operation is the maximum time allowed 
by the timer or until steady conditions are established, 
whichever is shorter. 


19.102 Appliances are operated under normal 
operation with the timer or other controls that operate 
in normal use short-circuited. 


NOTE — If the appliance is provided with more than one 
control, these are short-circuited in turn. 


19.103 Appliances are operated under normal 
operation and with any single fault condition simulated 
that is likely to occur. The controls are adjusted to their 
most unfavourable setting and the appliance is operated 
for the maximum time allowed by the timer or 90 min, 
whichever is shorter. 


NOTE — Examples of fault conditions are, 

a) blocking of air openings in the same plane. This fault 
condition is not applied if the appliance is a built-in 
appliance; 

b) locking the rotor of motors if the locked rotor torque is 
smaller than the full load torque; and 


c) locking moving parts liable to be jammed. 


19.104 The appliance is operated with the controls 
adjusted to their most unfavourable setting and with a 
potato placed on the shelf in the position where it is 
most likely to ignite and propagate flames to other 
combustible material. 


The potato has an approximately ellipsoidal shape and 
a mass between 125 g and 150 g. The length of the 
shortest principal axis is at least 40 mm. The length of 
the longest principal axis is not more than 140 mm and 
may be symmetrically reduced in order to obtain the 
specified mass. A steel wire, having a diameter of 
1.5 +0.5 mm and approximately the same length as the 


IS 302-2-25 : 2014 


longest axis of the potato, is inserted along this axis. 


The test is terminated 15 min after the microwave 
generation has ceased or a fire in the cavity has 
extinguished. 


During the test, any fire in the cavity shall be contained 
within the appliance. 

NOTE 1 19.13 does not apply during the test. 
After the test, if the appliance is still operable, any 
damaged detachable shelf is replaced and 19.13 


applies. If the appliance does not comply, the test is 
repeated on a new appliance. 


NOTE 2 Non-compliance may have resulted from the 
cumulative effects of previous tests. 


19.105 Built-in appliances having an additional 
decorative door and appliances to be used in a cabinet 
are operated under normal operation but with the 
decorative door or cabinet door closed. 


The period of operation is the maximum time allowed 
by the timer or until steady conditions are established, 
whichever is shorter. 


20 STABILITY AND MECHANICAL HAZARDS 
This clause of Part 1 is applicable except as follows. 


20.101 Appliances having doors with a horizontal 
hinge at their lower edge and on which a load is likely 
to be placed shall have adequate stability. 


Compliance is checked by the following test. 


The appliance is placed on a horizontal surface with 
the door open and a mass is gently placed on the 
geometric centre of the door. 


The mass is, 


a) 7kg for stationary appliances; and 
b) 3.5 kg for portable appliances. 
NOTE — A sandbag may be used for the load. 


The appliance shall not tilt. 


21 MECHANICAL STRENGTH 


This clause of Part 1 is applicable except as follows. 


Addition: 


Compliance is also checked by the tests of 21.101 
to 21.105. 


21.101 Hinged doors are positioned approximately 
30° before the fully open position. Sliding doors are 
positioned so that they are approximately two-thirds 
open. A force of 35 N is applied to the inside surface 
of a hinged door at a point 25 mm from its free edge or 
to the handle of a sliding door. 


The force is applied by means of a spring balance 
having a spring constant of 1.05 N/mm. It is initially 
applied with an opposing force applied to the other 
side of the door or handle. The opposing force is then 
removed to allow the door to complete its travel to the 
fully open position. 


The test is carried out five times. 


The test is repeated on doors of stationary appliances 
and built-in appliances except that, 


a) the door is initially placed midway between 
the fully open and closed positions; and 

b) the applied force is 1.5 times the force 
required to open the door or 65 N, whichever 
is greater. However if the force cannot be 
measured or if the door is opened indirectly, 
the 65 N force is applied. 


The test is carried out five times. 


Doors are placed midway between the fully open and 
closed positions. A closing force of 90 N is applied to 
the outside surface of a hinged door at a point 25 mm 
from the free edge or to the handle of a sliding door, 
initially with the opposing force as described above. 


This test is carried out 10 times. 
The appliance shall then comply with 32. 


21.102 Side-hinged doors are placed in the fully open 
position. A downward force of 140 N or the maximum 
force that can be applied in any door position without 
tilting the appliance, whichever is smaller, is then 
applied to the free edge of the door and the door is 
closed. The door is fully opened again with the force 
still applied. 


This test is carried out five times. 


Bottom-hinged doors are opened. A force of 140 N or 
the maximum force that can be applied without tilting 
the appliance, whichever is smaller, is applied to the 
inside surface of the door at the most unfavourable 
position 25 mm from the free edge. 


The force is applied for 15 min. 
The appliance shall then comply with 32. 


21.103 A cube of wood having a side dimension of 
20 mm is attached to an inside corner farthest from 
the door hinge. An attempt is made to close the door 
with a force of 90 N applied at the other corner farthest 
from the hinge in the direction perpendicular to the 
surface of the door. 


The force is maintained for 5 s. 


The cube is then removed. The door is slowly closed 
until microwave generation becomes possible. The 


door and its opening means are then manipulated in 
order to determine the position resulting in the highest 
microwave leakage. 


The appliance shall then comply with 32. 


The test is repeated with the wooden cube attached to 
the other corner farthest from the hinge. 


NOTE — The test is not applicable to sliding doors. 


21.104 The door is closed and its outside surface 
subjected to three impacts, each having an energy of 3 
J. These impacts are applied to the central part of the 
door and may be at the same point. 


The impact is applied by means of a steel ball having a 
diameter of 50 mm and a mass of approximately 0.5 kg. 
The ball is suspended by a suitable cord that is held in 
the plane of the door. The ball is allowed to fall as a 
pendulum through the distance required to strike the 
surface with the specified impact energy. 


The door is then opened and its mating surface on the 
oven is subjected to three similar impacts. 


The inside surface of a hinged door is subjected to three 
impacts as before, the test being made with the door in 
the fully open position. The impacts are applied to the 
central part of the door and may be at the same point. 
However, if a bottom-hinged door is horizontal when 
in the fully open position, the impacts are applied by 
allowing the steel ball to fall freely through a distance 
such that the specified impact energy is obtained. 


A bottom-hinged door is further tested by subjecting 
its seal to three similar impacts. The impacts are made 
at three different locations. 


The appliance shall then comply with 32. 


21.105 A bottom-hinged door is opened and a hardwood 
dowel having a diameter of 10 mm and a length of 300 
mm is placed along the bottom hinge. The dowel is 
positioned such that one end is flush with an outside edge 
of the door. A closing force of 90 N is applied to the 
centre of the handle in a direction perpendicular to the 
surface of the door. The force is maintained for 5 s. 


The test is repeated with the end of the dowel flush 
with the other outside edge and then with the dowel 
positioned centrally within the door hinge. 


The microwave leakage is measured under the 
conditions specified in 32, and shall not exceed 
100 W/m?. 


22 CONSTRUCTION 
This clause of Part 1 is applicable except as follows. 


22.101 Built-in appliances shall only be vented through 
the front, unless provisions are made for venting 
through a duct. 


IS 302-2-25 : 2014 


Compliance is checked by inspection. 


22.102 Oven vents shall be constructed so that any 
moisture or grease discharged through them cannot 
affect creepage distances and clearances between live 
parts and other parts of the appliance. 


Compliance is checked by inspection. 


22.103 The appliances shall be constructed in 
compliance with either 22.103.1 or 22.103.2. 


22.103.1 Appliances shall incorporate at least two door 
interlocks that are operated by opening the door, one 
being a monitored door interlock. At least one of the 
door interlocks shall be concealed and not operable 
by manipulation. 


Compliance is checked by inspection and concealment 
is checked by 22.105. 


NOTE — The two door interlocks may be incorporated in the 
system of the monitored door interlock. 


22.103.2 Appliances shall incorporate two 
independent monitored door interlocks that are 
operated by opening the door. In this case, 22.105 is 
not applicable. 

NOTE — None of the door interlocks have to be concealed 


because there are two independent monitored door interlocks 
incorporating supervision devices. 


Compliance is checked by inspection and the following 
test. 


The door is slowly opened and, simultaneously, an 
attempt is made to manually defeat any accessible door 
interlock by test probe B one at a time. 


During the tests, the operation of the magnetron shall 
not be possible. 


22.104 At least one door interlock of 22.103.1 and 
both monitored door interlocks of 22.103.2 shall 
incorporate a switch that disconnects the microwave 
generator or its supply main circuit. 


Compliance is checked by inspection. 


22.105 At least one of the door interlocks shall be 
concealed and not operable by manipulation. This door 
interlock shall operate before any accessible door 
interlock can be defeated. 


Compliance is checked by the following test. 


The door is placed in the open or closed position and 
an attempt is made to operate the concealed door 
interlock by applying test probe B of IS 1401 to all 
openings. The test is repeated with a rod, as shown in 
Fig. 101, to any openings of the door interlock 
mechanism. Only one rod shall be used at a time. 


Door interlocks that operate magnetically are also 
evaluated by applying a magnet to the enclosure over 


IS 302-2-25 : 2014 


the door interlock switch. The magnet has a similar 
configuration and magnetic orientation to the magnets 
that operate the door interlock. It shall be capable of 
exerting a force of 50 + 5 N when applied to a mild 
steel armature having dimensions of 80 mm x 50 mm 
x 8 mm. In addition, the magnet shall be capable of 
applying a force of 5 + 0.5 N at a distance of 10 mm 
from the armature. 


The door is slowly opened and, simultaneously, an 
attempt is made to manually defeat any accessible door 
interlock with test probe B, the rod and the magnet. 


It shall not be possible to operate the concealed door 
interlock during the tests. 


22.106 The supervision device of each monitored door 
interlock shall render the appliance inoperable, if its 
switching part fails to control the microwave generator. 


Compliance is checked by the following test. 


The switching part of the monitored door interlock is 
rendered inoperative. The appliance is supplied at rated 
voltage from a supply source having a short-circuit 
capacity of at least 1.5 kA for appliances having a rated 
voltage over 150 V and 1.0 kA for other appliances. 


The appliance is operated with the door closed and an 
attempt is then made to gain access to the cavity in the 
normal way. It shall not be possible to open the door, 
unless the microwave generator ceases to function and 
remains inoperable. The supervision device shall not 
fail in the open-circuit position. 

NOTE 1 The supervision device is replaced for subsequent tests 

if it fails in the closed-circuit position. 


NOTE 2 It may be necessary to render other door interlocks 
inoperative in order to perform this test. 


If an internal fuse in the circuit supplying the 
microwave generator ruptures, the fuse is replaced and 
the test is carried out two more times. The internal fuse 
shall rupture each time. 


The test is carried out three more times but with an 

impedance of (0.4 +j 0.25) Q in series with the supply 

source. The internal fuse shall rupture each time. 
NOTE 3 For appliances having a rated voltage under 150 V 


and those with a rated current over 16 A, the test with the series 
impedance is not carried out. 


22.107 The failure of any single electrical or 
mechanical component that affects the operation of a 
door interlock shall not cause any other door interlock, 
or the supervision device of the monitored door 
interlock to become inoperative, unless the appliance 
is rendered inoperable. 


Compliance is checked by inspection and, if necessary, 
by simulating component failure and operating the 
appliance as in normal use. 


NOTE — This requirement does not apply to components of 
the supervision device that comply with the test of 22.106. 


22.108 The door interlocks incorporated to comply 
with 22.103 shall operate before undue microwave 
leakage occurs. 


Compliance is checked by the following test. 


All door interlocks except one are rendered inoperative. 
The appliance is supplied at rated voltage and operated 
with the load specified in 32. The door opening 
sequence is carried out in small increments during 
which the microwave leakage is measured. 


The appliance shall comply with 32. 


The test is repeated on each door interlock in turn. 


NOTES 


1 Door interlocks are only tested if they are necessary for 
compliance with 22.103. 


2 It may be necessary to render the supervision device of 
the monitored door interlock inoperative when carrying 
out the test. 


22.109 There shall be no undue microwave leakage, 
1f thin material is introduced between the door and its 
mating surface. 


Compliance is checked by closing the door on a strip 
of paper having a width of 60 +5 mm and a thickness 
of 0.15 + 0.05 mm, the paper being placed between 
the door and its mating surface. 


The appliance shall then comply with 32. 


The test is carried out 10 times with the paper in 
different locations. 


22.110 There shall be no undue microwave leakage, if 
the door seals become contaminated by food residues. 


Compliance is checked by the following test. 


The door seal is coated with cooking oil. If the seal 
has an open choke, the trough is filled with oil. 


The appliance shall then comply with 32. 


22.111 There shall be no undue microwave leakage 
when the door corners are subjected to distortion. 


Compliance is checked by the following test. 


The appliance is supplied at rated voltage and operated 
with the load specified in 32. The door and its opening 
means are manipulated until the largest door gap 
permitting microwave generation is obtained. A pull 
force is applied perpendicular to the surface of the door 
to each corner in turn. The force is slowly increased 
to 40 N. 


During the test, the microwave leakage is measured 
under the conditions specified in 32 and shall not 
exceed 100 W/m?. 


After the test, the appliance shall comply with 32. 


22.112 There shall be no undue microwave leakage, 
and the temperature-sensing probe shall not become 
damaged when a probe or its cord is trapped by the 
door. 


Compliance is checked by the following test. 


The probe is connected as in normal use, the sensing 
part or cord being allowed to rest in the most 
unfavourable position likely to occur. The door is 
closed against the sensing part or the cord with a force 
of 90 N applied for 5 s in the most unfavourable place. 
The force is then released and, if the oven can be 
operated, the microwave leakage is measured under 
the conditions specified in 32 and shall not exceed 
100 W/m?. 


After the test, the appliance shall comply with 32 and 
the temperature-sensing probe shall comply with 8.1, 
15.101 and 29. 


22.113 There shall be no undue microwave leakage 
when detachable parts are removed. 


Compliance is checked by the following test. 


Detachable parts are removed, except shelves, unless 
a horizontal surface greater than 85 mm in diameter is 
made available when they are removed. 


The appliance shall then comply with 32, the load being 
placed on the horizontal surface as close as possible to 
the centre of the cavity. 

NOTE — In order to avoid detecting non-radiating standing 


waves, the tip of the instrument probe is not inserted into an 
opening resulting from the removal of a detachable part. 


22.114 A single fault such as failure of basic insulation 
or a loose wire bridging the insulation system shall 
not allow operation of the microwave generator with 
the door open. 


Compliance is checked by inspection and if, necessary, 
by simulating relevant faults. Wires that may become 
loose are disconnected and allowed to fall out of 
position but are not otherwise manipulated. They shall 
not come into contact with other live parts or earthed 
parts if this results in all door interlocks becoming 
inoperative. 

NOTE 1 Failure of reinforced insulation or double insulation is 

considered to be two faults. 


NOTE 2 Wires secured by two independent fixings are not 
considered likely to become loose. 


22.115 There shall be no access to the cavity through 
the viewing screen. 


Compliance is checked by inspection and the following 
test. 


A straight steel rod having a diameter of 1 mm and a 


IS 302-2-25 : 2014 


flat end is pressed perpendicularly against the viewing 
screen with a force of 2 N. The rod shall not enter the 
cavity. 


22.116 Appliances for installing in road vehicles, 
caravans and similar vehicles shall withstand the 
vibrations to which they may be subjected. 


Compliance is checked by carrying out the vibration 
tests specified in IS 9000 (Part 8) under the following 
conditions. 


The appliance is fastened in its normal position of use 
to a vibration-generator by means of straps around the 
enclosure. The type of vibration is sinusoidal, and the 
severity 1s as follows: 


a) Direction of vibration is vertical; 

b) Amplitude of vibration is 0.35 mm; 

c) Sweep frequency range is 10 Hz to 55 Hz; and 
d) Duration of the test is 30 min. 


The appliance shall show no damage that could impair 
compliance with 8.1, 16.3, 29 and 32 and connections 
shall not have worked loose. 


22.117 If electronic circuits are used to provide 
protection against microwave leakage they shall be 
designed so that a fault condition shall not affect 
protection against microwave leakage. 


Compliance is checked by applying the tests in 19 in 
conjunction with the requirements and test 
specifications in 22.105, 22.106, 22.107 and 22.108. 


23 INTERNAL WIRING 
This clause of Part 1 is applicable. 


24 COMPONENTS 
This clause of Part 1 is applicable except as follows. 
24.1.4 Addition: 


Interlocks are subjected to the following test which is 
carried out on six samples. 


The interlocks are connected to a load that simulates 
the conditions occurring in the appliance when it is 
supplied at rated voltage. They are operated at a rate 
of approximately six cycles/min. The number of cycles 
is: 


: 50 000 
: 5000 


a) Door interlocks 
b) Interlocks only operated during 
user maintenance 


After the test, the interlocks shall not be damaged to 
such an extent that their further use is impaired. 


24.101 Socket-outlets incorporated in appliances shall 
be single-phase, incorporate an earthing contact and 


IS 302-2-25 : 2014 


have a rated current not exceeding 16 A. Both poles 
shall be protected by fuses or miniature circuit-breakers 
placed behind a non-detachable cover and having a 
rated current not exceeding 


a) 20 A, for appliances having a rated voltage 
up to 130 V; and 
b) 10A, for other appliances. 


If the appliance is intended to be permanently 
connected to fixed wiring, or is fitted with a polarized 
plug, the neutral pole need not be protected. 


Compliance is checked by inspection. 


NOTE — The actuating member of miniature circuit-breakers 
may be accessible. 


25 SUPPLY CONNECTION AND EXTERNAL 
FLEXIBLE CORDS 


This clause of Part 1 is applicable except as follows. 


25.14 Addition: 


For temperature-sensing probes, the total number of 
flexings is 5 000. Probes with circular-section cords 
are turned through 90° after 2 500 flexings. 


26 TERMINALS 
CONDUCTORS 


FOR EXTERNAL 


This clause of Part 1 is applicable. 

27 PROVISION FOR EARTHING 
This clause of Part 1 is applicable. 

28 SCREWS AND CONNECTIONS 
This clause of Part 1 is applicable. 


29 CLEARANCES, CREEPAGE DISTANCES 
AND SOLID INSULATION 


This clause of Part 1 is applicable. 


30 RESISTANCE TO HEAT AND FIRE 


This clause of Part 1 is applicable except as follows. 


30.2 Addition: 


For appliances that allow a pre-selected start time and 


@10 


those with a keep-warm function, 30.2.3 is applicable. 
For other appliances, 30.2.2 is applicable. 


31 RESISTANCE TO RUSTING 
This clause of Part 1 is applicable. 


32 RADIATION, TOXICITY AND SIMILAR 
HAZARDS 


This clause of Part 1 is applicable except as follows. 


Addition: 


Compliance for microwave leakage is checked by the 
following test. 


A load of 275 + 15 g of potable water having a 
temperature of 20 + 2°C, in a thin-wall borosilicate 
glass vessel having an inside diameter of approximately 
85 mm, is placed on the centre of the shelf. The 
appliance is supplied at rated voltage and operated with 
the microwave power control at the highest setting. 


Microwave leakage is determined by measuring the 
microwave flux density using an instrument that 
reaches 90 percent of its steady reading in 2 s to 3 s 
when subjected to a stepped input signal. The 
instrument antenna is moved over the external surface 
of the appliance to locate the highest microwave 
leakage, particular attention being given to the door 
and its seals. 


The microwave leakage at any point 50 mm or more 
from the external surface of the appliance shall not 
exceed 50 W/m?. 


NOTE 101 If compliance with the test is in doubt due to a high 
water temperature, the test is repeated with a fresh load. 


101 TESTS 


101.1 Type Tests 


The tests specified in Table 101 shall constitute the 
type tests and shall be carried out on a sample selected 
preferably at random from regular production lot. 
Before commencement of the tests, the appliance shall 
be visually examined and inspected for obvious visual 
defects in respect of components, parts and their 
assembly, construction, mechanical hazards, marking, 


Dimensions in millimetres 


100 + 0,2 


IEC 075/02 


FIGURE 101 — TEST ROD FOR INTERLOCK CONCEALMENT 


10 


provision of suitable terminals for supply connections, 
earthing and the effectiveness of screws and 
connections. The external surface finish shall be even 
and free from finishing defects. 


NOTE — Additional samples may be required for some tests, 
as mentioned in specific clauses.. 


Table 101 Schedule of Type Tests 
(Clause 101.1) 


SI Tests Ref to 
No. Clause 
a) 2) (3) 

1) Protection against access to live parts 8 
1i) Starting of motor-operated appliances 9 
111) Power input and current 10 
iv) Heating 11 
v) Leakage current and electric strength at operating 13 

temperature 
vi) Transient overvoltages 14 

vii) Moisture resistance 15 

viii) Leakage current and electric strength 16 

ix) Overload protection of transformers and 17 
associated circuits 

x) Endurance 18 

xi) Abnormal operation 19 

xii) Stability and mechanical hazards 20 
xiii) Mechanical Strength 21 
xiv) Construction 22 

xv) Internal wiring 23 
xvi) Components 24 
xvii) Supply connection and external flexible cords 25 

xviii) Terminals for external conductors 26 

xix) Provision for earthing 27 

xx) Screw and connections 28 
xxi) Clearances, creepage distances and solid 29 

insulation 
xxii) Resistance to heat and fire 30 
xxiii) Resistance to rusting 31 
xxiv) Radiation, toxicity and similar hazards 32 


11 


IS 302-2-25 : 2014 


101.1.1 Criteria of Acceptance 


Sample shall successfully pass all the type tests for 
proving conformity with the requirements of the 
standard. If the sample fails in any of the type tests, 
the testing authority, at its discretion, may call for fresh 
samples not exceeding twice the original number and 
subject them again to all tests or to the test (s) in which 
failure (s) had occurred. No failure should be permitted 
in the repeat tests (s). 


101.2 Acceptance Tests 


The following shall constitute the acceptance tests: 


Sl Tests Ref to 
No. Clause 
(1) (2) (3) 

1) Protection against access to live parts 8 
11) Starting of motor operated appliances 9 
111) Power input and current 10 
1v) Heating 11 
v) Leakage current and electric strength 13 

at operating temperature 

vi) Moisture resistance 15 
vii) Leakage current and electric strength 16 
viii) Provision for earthing 27 


NOTE — For the purpose of acceptance tests, the humidity 
treatment shall be done for 24 h while conducting the test for 
moisture resistance (see 15) 


101.2.1 A recommended sampling procedure for 
acceptance tests is given in Annex J of IS 302-1. 


IS 302-2-25 : 2014 


ANNEXES 


The annexes of Part 1 are applicable except as follows. 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 5.1) 
ROUTINE TESTS 


This annex of Part 1 is applicable except as follows. 
A-2 ELECTRIC STRENGTH TEST 


Modification: 


The current in the test circuit may be increased up to 
100 mA. 


A-101 MARKING AND INSTRUCTIONS 


The covers are checked to ensure that they are marked 
with the warnings concerning microwave energy. 


The appliance is checked to ensure that the 
corresponding instructions are provided with it. 


A-102 CONSTRUCTION 


The operation of the door interlock system is checked 


to ensure that microwave generation ceases when the 
door is opened. 


A-103 MICROWAVE LEAKAGE 


The microwave oven is supplied at rated voltage and 
operated with the microwave power control adjusted 
to the highest setting. The energy flux density of 
microwave leakage is measured at any point 
approximately 50 mm from the external surface of 
the appliance. An appropriate load may be used. The 
measuring instrument is moved over the external 
surface of the oven and the microwave leakage 
measured. 


The microwave leakage shall not exceed 50 W/m’. 


ANNEX AA 
(Clause 5.101) 
COMBINATION MICROWAVE OVENS 


The following modifications to this standard are 
applicable for combination microwave ovens. 


For stationary combination microwave ovens, IS 303- 
2-6 is also applicable. For portable combination 
microwave ovens, IS 302-2-9 is also applicable. 
However, the requirements of these standards do not 
take precedence over this standard. 


NOTE — If a combination microwave oven has a mode of 
operation independent of microwave generation, then this mode 
has to be tested only according to the requirements in the 
relevant standard. If a combination microwave oven has a mode 
of operations without the use of resistive heating elements, it is 
tested to comply with the relevant requirements of this standard. 


12 


3 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 
3.1.9 Addition: 


The appliance is operated with the controls adjusted 
to the most unfavourable setting in accordance with 
the instructions for the intended mode of operation. 


5 GENERAL CONDITIONS FOR THE TESTS 


5.3 Addition: 


NOTE 101 When testing the different modes of operation, only 
those tests having the most unfavourable conditions are carried 
out. 


5.101 Addition: 


Combination microwave ovens are tested as combined 
appliances. 


7 MARKING AND INSTRUCTIONS 


7.12 Addition: 


The instructions for use shall also include the substance 
of the following. 


WARNING — When the appliance is operated in the 
combination mode, children should only use the oven 
under adult supervision due to the temperatures 
generated. 


11 HEATING 


11.7 Replacement: 


Microwave ovens having a grill that can be operated 
simultaneously with microwave generation are 
operated for 30 min, the microwave power output being 
approximately 50 percent. 


Microwave ovens having convection heating that can 
be operated simultaneously with microwave generation 
are operated for 60 min, the microwave power output 
being approximately 50 percent. 


Microwave ovens having a grill or convection heating 
that can be operated sequentially with microwave 
generation are operated for 15 min with the microwave 
power output control adjusted to the highest setting, 
followed by 30 min of operation without microwave 
generation. 


If more than half the water evaporates during the test, 
the vessel is refilled with boiling water, the door not 
being opened for more than 10 s. 


NOTE 101 These tests are considered to cover appliances having 
programmers or timers. 


13 


IS 302-2-25 : 2014 


11.8 Addition: 


NOTE 101 When combination microwave ovens are operated 
under the combination mode, the limit values in IS 302-2-6 
should be applied for stationary appliances and the limit values 
in IS 302-2-9 should be applied for portable appliances. 


18 ENDURANCE 
Addition: 


Before measuring the microwave leakage, the 
following additional conditioning is carried out, 


a) 


resistive heating elements for radiant heating 
are operated for 15 min; 


b) resistive heating elements for convection 
heating are operated for 30 min; and 
c) pyrolytic self-cleaning ovens are operated for 


one cleaning cycle. 
19 ABNORMAL OPERATION 
19.1 Modification: 


The test of 19.102 is carried out with the appliance 
supplied at 1.06 times rated voltage. 


29 CLEARANCES, CREEPAGE DISTANCES 
AND SOLID INSULATION 


Replacement: 


This clause of Part 1 is applicable except as follows. 


29.2 Addition to the Second Paragraph: 


c) the insulation is exposed to exhaust air from 
the oven cavity, in which case pollution 
degree 3 applies. 

29.3 Addition: 


There are no thickness requirements for sheaths of 
visibly glowing heating elements, if the door interlocks 
provide all-pole disconnection. 


IS 302-2-25 : 2014 


ANNEX BB 
(Clause 1) 
MICROWAVE OVENS INTENDED TO BE USED ON BOARD SHIPS 


The following modifications to this standard are 
applicable for microwave ovens intended to be used 
on board ships. 


3 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 


3.BB.101 Open Deck — Area that is exposed to marine 
environment. 


3.BB.102 Day Room — Area that may be exposed to 
marine environment from time to time 


6 CLASSIFICATION 
6.2 Addition: 
Appliances for open deck use shall be IPX6. 


7 MARKING AND INSTRUCTIONS 
7.12 Addition: 


The instructions for use shall also include the substance 
of the following. 


a) usage on board ships; 

b) installation place (open deck protective 
enclosure, dayrooms); 

c) fastening means. 


22 CONSTRUCTION 


22.BB.101 Appliances shall withstand the pulses to 
which they may be subjected. 


Compliance is checked by carrying out the half-sine 
pulse tests specified in IS 9000 (Part 7/Sec 1) under 
the following conditions. 


The appliance is fastened in its normal position of use 
to a shock-testing machine by means of straps around 
the enclosure. 


The type of pulse is a half-sine pulse and the severity 
is as follows: 


a) Application of the half-sine pulse is in all 3 
axes; 

b) Peak acceleration: 250 m/s?, 

c) Duration of each half-sine pulse: 6 ms; 

d) Number of half-sine pulses in each direction: 


1 000 + 10. 


The appliance shall show no damage that could impair 
compliance with 8.1, 16.3, 29 and 32, and connections 
shall not have worked loose. 


14 


22.BB.102 Appliances shall withstand the vibrations 
to which they may be subjected. 


Compliance is checked by carrying out the vibration 
tests specified in IS 9000 (Part 8) under the following 
conditions. 


The appliance is fastened in its normal position of use 
upon a vibration table by means of straps around the 
enclosure. The type of vibration is sinusoidal and the 
severity is as follows: 


a) Direction of vibration is vertical and 
horizontal; 

b) Amplitude of vibration: 0.35 mm; 

c) Sweep frequency range: 10 Hz to 150 Hz; 

d) Duration of the test: 30 min. 


The appliance shall show no damage that could impair 
compliance with 8.1, 16.3, 29 and 32, and connections 
shall not have worked loose. 


31 RESISTANCE TO RUSTING 


Replacement: 


This clause of Part 1 is applicable except as follows. 


Addition: 


Compliance is checked by the salt mist test Kb as given 
at Annex CC, 


a) for “open deck’ use severity | is applicable; 


b) for ‘dayrooms’ use severity 2 is applicable. 


Before the test, coatings are scratched by means a 
hardened steel pin, the end of which has the form of a 
cone with an angle of 40°. Its tip is rounded with a 
radius of 0.25 + 0.02 mm. The pin is loaded so that the 
force exerted along its axis is 10 + 0.5 N. The scratches 
are made by drawing the pin along the surface of the 
coating at the speed of approximately 20 mm/s. Five 
scratches are made at least 5 mm apart and at least 
5 mm from the edges. 


After the test, the appliance shall not have deteriorated 
to such an extent that compliance with this standard, 
in particular with 8 and 27, is impaired. The coating 
shall not be broken and shall not have detached from 
the metal surface. 


IS 302-2-25 : 2014 


ANNEX CC 
(Clause 31 (Annex BB)) 


ENVIRONMENTAL TESTING - TEST Kb: SALT MIST, CYCLIC 
(SODIUM CHLORIDE SOLUTION) 


CC-1 INTRODUCTION 


This test is intended for application to components or 
equipment designed to withstand a salt-laden 
atmosphere, depending on the chosen severity. Salt can 
degrade the performance of parts manufactured using 
metallic and/or non-metallic materials. 


The mechanism of salt corrosion on metallic materials 
is electrochemical, whereas the degradation effects 
experienced on non-metallic materials are caused by 
complex chemical reactions of the salts with the 
materials involved. The rate at which corrosive action 
takes place is dependent, to a large extent, on the supply 
of oxygenated salt solution to the surface of the test 
specimen, the temperature of the specimen and the 
temperature and humidity of the environment. 


Apart from the corrosive effects, this test may be used 
to indicate deterioration of some non-metallic materials 
by assimilation of salts. In the following test methods, 
the period of spraying with the relevant salt solution is 
sufficient to wet the specimen thoroughly. 


Because this wetting is repeated after intervals of storage 
under humid conditions [severities (1) and (2) and - in 
some cases severities (3) to (6)] - supplemented by storage 
under a standard atmosphere for testing, it goes some way 
to reproducing the effects of natural environments. 


Severities (1) and (2) are intended to be used for testing 
products which are used in a marine environment, or 
in close proximity to the sea. Severity (1) should be 
used to test products which are exposed to the 
environment for much of their operational life (for 
example ship radar, deck equipment). Severity 
(2) should be used to test products which may be 
exposed to the marine environment from time to time 
but will normally be protected by an enclosure (for 
example navigational equipment which will normally 
be used on the bridge or in a control room). 


Additionally, severities (1) and (2) are commonly used 
as a general corrosion test in component quality 
assurance procedures. 


Severities (3) to (6) are intended for products where, 
under normal use, there is a frequent change between 
salt-laden and dry atmosphere, for example 
automobiles and their parts. 


Severities (3) to (6), compared to severities (1) and 
(2), therefore include an additional storage under a 
standard atmosphere for testing. 


15 


The period of dry atmosphere may happen, in practice, 
during breaks of operation, for example during the 
weekend. This inclusion of such a dry period in 
severities (3) to (6) leads to corrosion mechanism 
which can be quite different from those under constant 
humid conditions. 


CC-2 GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF THE TEST 


For severities (1) and (2), the test procedure is 
separated into a specified number of periods of 
spraying by a salt mist at a temperature between 15°C 
and 35°C, each followed by a storage period under 
humid conditions at 40 + 2°C, 93+3 percent relative 
humidity. 


For severities (3), (4), (5) and (6) the test procedure is 
separated into a specified number of test cycles. Each 
test cycle consists of four periods of spraying by a salt 
mist at a temperature between 15°C and 35°C, each 
followed by a storage period under humid conditions at 
40 + 2°C, (931) percent relative humidity, and of one 
storage period under a standard atmosphere for testing at 
23 + 2°C and 45 percent to 55 percent relative humidity 
after these four periods of spraying and storage under 
humid conditions. 


If the spray period and storage period are carried out 
in different chambers, care should be taken to avoid 
loss of salt solution deposits on the specimen and to 
avoid any damage to the specimen due to handling. 


The specimen is never energized during the spray 
period, and not normally during the storage period. 


CC-3 TEST APPARATUS 


CC-3.1 Salt Mist Chamber 


The chamber for this test shall be constructed of such 
materials that will not influence the corrosive effects 
of the salt mist. 


The detailed construction of the chamber, including 
the method of producing the salt mist is optional, 
provided that, 


a) the conditions in the chamber are within the 
limits specified; 
b) a sufficiently large volume with constant, 


homogeneous conditions (not affected by 
turbulence) is available; these conditions 
should not be influenced by the specimen 
under test; 


IS 302-2-25 : 2014 


c) no direct spray impinges upon the specimen 


under test; 

d) drops of liquid accumulating on the ceiling, 
the walls, or other parts cannot drip on the 
specimen; and 

e) the chamber shall be properly vented to 


prevent pressure build-up and allow uniform 
distribution of the salt mist. The discharge end 
of the vent shall be protected from strong 
draughts which can cause strong air currents 
in the chamber. 


CC-3.1.1 Atomizer(s) 


The atomizer(s) shall be of such a design and 
construction as to produce a finely divided, wet, dense 
mist. The atomizer(s) shall be made of material that is 
non-reactive to the salt solution. 


CC-3.1.2 The sprayed solution shall not be re-used. 
CC-3.1.3 Air Supply 


If use is made of compressed air, that air shall, when 
entering the atomizer(s), be essentially free from all 
impurities, such as oil and dust. 


Means shall be provided to humidify the compressed 
air as required to meet the operating conditions. The 
air pressure shall be suitable to produce a finely divided 
dense mist with the atomizer(s) used. 


To ensure against clogging of the atomizer(s) by salt 
deposition, the air is recommended to have a relative 
humidity of at least 85 percent at the point of release 
from the nozzle. A satisfactory method is to pass the 
air in very fine bubbles through a tower containing 
water, which should be automatically maintained at a 
constant level. The temperature of this water shall be 
not less than that of the chamber. 


The air pressure shall be capable of adjustment so that 
the collection rate as specified in 9.2 can be maintained. 


CC-3.2 Humidity Chamber 


The chamber shall conform to the requirements of 
IS 9000 (Part 4), and. it shall maintain a humidity of 
93 + 3 percent at a temperature of 40 + 2°C. 


CC-3.3 Chamber for Standard Atmosphere 


The chamber shall maintain a humidity of 45 percent 
to 55 percent at a temperature of 23 + 2°C. 


CC-4 SALT SOLUTION 
CC-4.1 5 percent Sodium Chloride (NaCl) Solution 


CC-4.1.1 The salt used for the test shall be high- 
quality sodium chloride (NaCl) containing, when dry, 
not more than 0.1 percent sodium iodide and not more 
than 0.3 percent of total impurities. 


16 


The salt solution concentration shall be 5 + 1 percent 
by weight. 


The solution shall be prepared by dissolving 5 + 1 parts 
by weight of salt in 95 parts by weight of distilled or 
demineralized water. 
NOTE — The relevant specification may call for other salt 
solutions, the composition and characteristics (density, pH 


value, etc) of which should be stated clearly in the specification, 
e.g. to simulate the special effects of a marine environment. 


CC-4.1.2 The pH value of the solution shall be 
between 6.5 and 7.2 at a temperature of 20 + 2°C. The 
PH value shall be maintained within this range during 
conditioning; for this purpose, diluted hydrochloric 
acid or sodium hydroxide may be used to adjust the 
DH value, provided that the concentration of NaCl 
remains within the prescribed limits. The pH value shall 
be measured when preparing each new batch of 
solution. 


CC-5 SEVERITIES 
CC-5.1 The severity of the test is defined as follows. 


a) For severities (1) and (2):' by the combination 
of the number of spray periods and the 
duration of the storage under humid 
conditions following each spray period. 

b) For severities (3) to (6)' by the number of 
test cycles consisting of four spraying periods 
with storage under humid conditions after 
each one, and one additional storage period 
under a standard atmosphere for testing after 
these four periods of spraying and storage 
under humid conditions. 


CC-3.2 The relevant specification shall indicate which 
of the six following severities shall be used. 


Severity (1), four spray periods, each of 2 h, with a 
humidity storage period of seven days 
after each. 


NOTE — The humidity storage period should be 
suitably reduced so that the spray period plus 
storage period is seven days. 


Severity (2), three spray periods, each of 2 h, with a 
humidity storage period between 20 h 
and 22 h after each. 

Severity (3), one test cycle consisting of: 


four spray periods, each of 2 h, with a 
humidity storage period between 20 h 
and 22h after each; afterwards one 
storage period of three days under a 
standard atmosphere for testing at 23 + 
2°C and 45 percent to 55 percent 
humidity. 

Severity (4), two test cycles as specified in severity 


(3). 


Severity (5), four test cycles as specified in severity 
(3). 

Severity (6), eight test cycles as specified in severity 
(3). 

CC-5.3 A schematic survey of time-scale of all the 

test severities is given in Fig CC-1. 


CC-6 INITIAL MEASUREMENTS 


The test specimen shall be visually inspected and, if 
necessary, electrically and mechanically checked as 
required by the relevant specification. 


CC-7 PRE-CONDITIONING 


The relevant specification shall prescribe the cleaning 
procedure to be applied immediately before the test; it 
shall also state whether temporary protective coatings 
shall be removed. 
NOTE — The cleaning method used should not interfere with 
the effect of the salt mist on the specimen, nor introduce any 


secondary corrosion. Touching of the test su rfaces by hand 
should be avoided as far as possible before the test. 


CC-8 TESTING 


CC-8.1 The specimen shall be placed in the salt mist 
chamber, and sprayed with the salt solution, for a 
period of 2 h at a temperature between 15°C and 35°C. 


CC-8.2 The salt mist conditions shall be maintained 
in all part s of the exposure zone, that a clean collecting 
receptacle with a horizontal collecting area of 80 cm’, 
placed at any point in the exposure zone, shall collect 
between 1.0 ml and 2.0 ml of solution per hour, 
averaged over the collecting period. A minimum of 
two receptacles shall be used. The receptacles shall be 
placed such that they are not shielded by the specimen 
and so that no condensate from any source shall be 
collected. 

NOTE — When calibrating the spray rate of the chamber, a 


minimum spray period of 8 h should be used, for accurate 
measurement purposes. 


CC-8.3 Severities (1) and (2) 


At the end of the spray period, the specimen shall be 
transferred to the humidity chamber and stored at a 
temperature of 40 + 2°C and a relative humidity of 
93 + 3 percent in accordance with IS 9000 (Part 4). 


The spraying with salt solution as in 9.1 and the storage 
as in this sub-clause constitutes one cycle. 


The required severity for the number of cycles and the 
duration of storage shall be in accordance with 6.2. 


17 


IS 302-2-25 : 2014 


CC-8.4 Severities (3) to (6) 


At the end of the spray period, the specimen shall be 
transferred to the humidity chamber and stored at a 
temperature of 40 + 2°C and a relative humidity of 
93+3% in accordance with IS 9000 (Part 4) for a period 
of 20 to 22 h. This shall be repeated a further three times. 


The specimen shall then be stored under a standard 
atmosphere for testing at 23 + 2°C and 45 percent to 
55 percent relative humidity for a period of three days. 


The four spray periods (see CC-8.1) and storage periods 
of this subclause followed by three days under a standard 
atmosphere for testing constitutes one test cycle. 


The required severity for the number of test cycles shall 
be in accordance with 6.2. 


CC-8.5 The removal of the specimen from the salt 
mist chamber to the humidity chamber shall be carried 
out so as to minimize the loss of salt solution from the 
specimen(s). 

NOTE — If the salt mist chamber can maintain the humidity 


and temperature conditions of IS 9000 (Part 4), the specimen 
may remain in it for the humidity storage period. 


CC-8.6 If the specimen consists of more than one item 
they shall not be in contact with each other or with 
other metal parts and shall be so arranged as to exclude 
any influence of one part upon another. 


CC-9 RECOVERY (AT THE END OF TESTING) 


The relevant specification shall state whether or not the 
specimen shall be washed. If the specimen is to be 
washed, it shall be washed in running tap water for 5 min, 
rinsed in distilled or demineralized water, shaken by 
hand or subjected to air blast to remove droplets of water, 
then dried for 1 h at 55 + 2°C and allowed to cool under 
controlled recovery conditions 4.4.1 of IS 9000 (Part 1) 
for not less than 1 h and not more than 2 h. 


The relevant specification shall specify, if needed, other 
methods to be used for washing and drying the 
specimen. It shall be stored under controlled recovery 
conditions 4.4.1 of IS 9000 (Part 1) for not less than 
1 h and not more than 2 h. The temperature of the water 
used for washing shall not exceed 35°C. 


CC-10 FINAL MEASUREMENTS 


The specimen shall be submitted to the visual, 
dimensional and functional checks prescribed by the 
relevant specification. The relevant specification shall 
provide the criteria upon which the acceptance or 
rejection of the specimen is to be based. 


2014 


IS 302-2-25 


y z poned keds = pz RS 


AAA sheep gg: sepdoserg -mo Ce A] (9) 
ai em ia aan e shep oro S049 ISA y o z-zMMMMMM¿MN HA ts) 
ae = saphi Y gape eZ -eo AMAN tv) 


shep ¿ = ej9 ko 3581 | 


É y yes apko | z 


Bunssy 103 A NE) 


aieydsoune pIepuezs e opun obeos obesas ÁNpHUNH 


IN, O 
l— ------ ——| — .--- M — -- -- ila ~~ - IN 


shep e = sejoko ç 
e y va = 01949 t y 


SBEJOJS APTN} tz) 


| — ane ef HEB e 4 
skep ge = seko p , 
mm y E FS 


ebelojs ÄHPIUNH (1 


PARA 


como ERAN -o a - ZZA 


ÁNIGAOS 


Fic. CC-1 — TIME-SCALE OF THE DIFFERENT TEST SEVERITITES (1) TO 95) 


18 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


“BIS Catalogue” and “Standards : Monthly Additions”. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: ETD 32 (6592). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: Www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. KOCHI. 
LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


