IS 15684:2006

Indian Standard

EXTENDERS FOR USE IN SYNTHETIC RES~ ADHESIVES (UREA-FOMALDEHYDE) FOR PLYWOOD -- CODE OF PRACTICE

ICS 79.060. 10; 83.040.30; 83.180

@ BTS-2006 BUREAU OF MANAK BHAVAN, INDIAN STANDARDS 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR NEW DELHI 110002 MARG

,Teptember 2006

Price Group 1

Wood and Other Lignocellulosic Products Sectional Committee, CED 20

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, afier the draft finalized by the Wood and Other Lignocellulosic Products Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. Adhesive is a substance capable of holding materials together by surface attachment and form one of the most important raw materials used in the plywood industry. The selection of an adhesive and its correct use are important factors that affect the quality of the plywood produced. Adhesives for bonding pl~ood are primarily based on synthetic resins, namely, phenol and aminoplastic, the requirements of which are laid down in IS 848:2006 `Specification for synthetic resin adhesives for plywood (phenolic and aminoplastic)'. The requirements governing the quality of the chemical raw materials used .in the manufacture of these resins are laid down in the respective Indian Standards. The adhesives based on synthetic resins, namely, phenol and aminoplastic require compounding with one or more additives such as solvents, fillers, extenders, catalysts, hardeners, fortifiers and preservatives so as to obtain the adhesives for bonding pl~oods. An extender is a substance having some adhesive action primarily based on organic materials of starch or protein in nature, is added to an adhesive to reduce the amount of the primary binder required per unit area, thereby reducing the cost of thejoint.and to also reduce penetration of the adhesive through the veneers or both. Generally extenders are in powder form. The main requirements of an extender are that: a) b) c) it should readily disperse in the liquid resin giving a smooth and uniform adhesive mix which maintains its viscosity during its application, it should improve the bonding capacity of the adhesive and give adequate pot life to the adhesive, and it should help in spreading a specified quantity of adhesive solids without excessive dripping or squeeze out.

Extenders may also serve the purpose of fillers when used in small proportions to alter the characteristic behaviour of an adhesive during its application as well as in the cured product. The proportion of extender that can be added to an adhesive mix varies considerably, depending on the density, particle geometry, chemical composition of the material, etc, and finally the bond quality and grade of the plywood intended to be produced. Extenders are used in the range of 15 to 30 percent on solid resin basis, while fillers normally are limited to 10 to 15 percent on solid resin basis. As the incorporation of-extenders in adhesives are expected to have a direct influence on the overall performance of the adhesive during its application as well as on the panel bonded with the resin adhesives, it is important to assess the quality parameters of such additives and employ appropriate methods of mixing and use. As commonly used extenders for synthetic resins (phenolic and aminoplastic) for bonding plywood are based on starch and proteinous materials originating from cereals, oil bearing seeds, etc, it is imperative to ascertain the quality of such materials. The important requirements are moisture content, fineness of the granules, fat content, nitrogen content and ash content, as well as acidity as these materials are perishable in nature and are expected to deteriorate in storage and become rancid due to bio-deterioration. The relevant quality requirements and the criterion for their acceptability as extenders to be suitably used with synthetic resins are described in this standard. This standard isTrimarity based on IS 1508:1-972 `Specification for extenders for use in synthetic resin adhesives (urea-fQrrnaldehyde) for pl~ood @rst raision)' and is intended to.serve as a guide to good-practice.

IS 15684:2006

Indian Standard

EXTENDERS FOR USE IN SYNTHETIC RESIN ADHESIVES (UREA-FO~ALDEHYDE) FOR PLYWOOD -- CODE OF PRACTICE
1 SCOPE

4 CLASSIFICATION

OF EXTENDERS

Extenders covered under this standard covers materials used with synthetic resin adhesives (urea-formaldehyde) for plywood, their method of use and the desired quality requirements when tested. Extenders covered under this standard are proteinous materials and starch based or amylaceous materials and that are widely used in the plywood industry. 2 REFERENCE The following standard contains provision, which through reference in this text, constitutes provision of this standard. At the time of publication, the edition indicated was valid. All standards are subject to revision and parties to agreements based on this standard are encouraged -to investigate the possibility of app$ing the most recent edition of the standard indicated below: [S No. 1508:1972
Ztle

Extenders are broadly classified as protein based and starch based or amylaceous.
4.1 Proteineous Extenders

These types of extenders contain protein to the extent of 40 to 60 percent. When added to the resin in the presence of an alka!i, they swell and increase the volume of the resin. In addition, the protein extracted, uncoil to avail the reactive positions to react with the formaldehyde present in the resin, thus exhibiting better strength properties compared to starch extenders. Typical examples ofporteineous extenders are de-oiled groundnut cake powder, de-oiled maize gluten, de-oiled soybean meal, casein, blood albumin, etc. 4.2 Amylaeeous
Extenders or Starch Extenders

Specification for extenders for use in synthetic resin adhesives (ureaformaldehyde) for plywood @rst
revision)

3 MATERIALS 3.1 Extenders are substances, generally having some adhesive properties, which are added to an adhesive to reduce the amount of primary binder required per unit, without impairing the bond quality. Proteineous and amylaceous materials are included in this category. Extenders improve the tackiness of the film. They also help to-reduce the penetration of the adhesive into the wood substrate and improve the gap filing property of the adhesive. When added to the synthetic resin, extenders increasethe pot life of the adhesive mix and impart greater assembly time tolerance. 3.2 Extenders used shall be of uniform colour. 3.3 On visual examination, extenders shall be free from weevil or other insects and also free from mould or fungus attack. Extenders that have been infested with weevil or insect are not suitable for use as their protein or starch content would be reduced to a considerable level due to the weevil or insect attack. 1

These type of extenders contain starch to the extent ~f 90 to 95 percent. When added to the resin, they swell and increase the volume of the basic resin. Starch by itself being an adhesive when modified, contribute to the adhesive property of the basic resin. Typical examples of starch extenders are tamarind seed powder, tapioca starch, A4AIDAand wheat flour. 5 REQU-IREMENTS FOR QUALITY that meet the requirements of the following tests as specified by the purchaser shall be considered to be of acceptable quality. The tests shall be carried out in accordance with the respective test methods specified in IS 1508. 5.1 Fineness of Granules The powder shall completely >ass through 1S sieve No. 100. Though extenders of higher particle size can be sofiened by the addition of small percentages of sodium hydroxide or liquid ammonia, they tend to separate in the adhesive mix thereby creating nonuniform spread of the adhesive onto the veneer, which in turn lead to poor bonding or patchy bonding sometime leading to blisters. Proteineous extenders perform better if protein is extracted by treating them with small percentage of
5.0 Extenders

IS 15684:2006 sodium hydroxide or liquor ammonia (preferably liquor ammonia). The extraction is achieved by mixing the chemicals with extenders in presence of water and allowing more time in mixing. An ideal time of mixing would be around 15 to 20 min. 5.2 Moisture Content The moisture content of extender maybe kept around 12 to 14 percent, as a higher moisture content may cause fungus or mould attack thus leading to deterioration of the extender material. 5.3 Ash Content Ash content of starch based and proteineous extenders normally vary from 0.3 to 3 percent. Higher ash content indicates the presence of inorganic materials and result in the abrasive action on saws and other cutting tools used.in the panel industry. Another problem envisaged is the settling of the extenders as the inorganic materials do not swell and are of higher density compared to starch and proteineous extenders. 5.4 Fat Content Fat content of 2 to 3 percent in the extenders do not normally exhibit any adverse effect on the quality of bond. However, higher percentage of fat content especially in proteineous extenders can cause foaming in the spreader as these types of extenders are generally dispersed with low percentage of alkali before they are admixed with synthetic resin. Fat in the proteineous extender react with sodium hydroxide resulting in soap formation which cause foaming in the adhesive mix, specially while on the mechanical roller spreader. This foam in turn would result in poor bonding as sometimes foam alone would get spread on to the veneer. 5.5 Nitrogen Content The nitrogen content in the extender indicates the percent of protein present in the material. This value depends upon the type ofproteineous extender and may be as agreed to by the purchaser and the manufacturer. 5.6 Acidity The titratable acidity of the material is termed as acidity of the extender. The quantity of 0.1 N sodium hydroxide expressed in millilitre used by one gram of moisture free and fat free material & termed as the acidity of the sample. Higher acidity may necessitate corrective measures so as to maintain the finalpH of the adhesive mix to the desired level. If the pH of the final adhesive mix is not corrected, there are chances of the adhesive mix applied on the veneer getting pre-cured before the veneer assembly is hot pressed leading to poor bonding. 6 METHOD OF MIXING Extenders are mixed with a part of the resin and stirred thoroughly to obtain a paste like mix. Addition of the entire quantity of resin to the extenders would result in extender powder floating on the surface, forming small lumps. Ifproteineous extenders are used, a small percent of liquid ammonia is added to extract and uncoil the protein. Balance quantity of the resin is then added to the paste and stirred thoroughly to obtain a smooth resin mix of the required viscosity. To this mix other ingredients are added as required. This order of mixing shall be followed to obtain best results. If the resin is in powder form, then part of the water required for converting-powder resin into Iiquid resin is used for making a paste of extender before adding the remaining quantity of water and powder resin to the mix.

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.
Copyright

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Catalogue' and `Standards : Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. CED 20 (7349).

Amendments

Issued Since Publication

Amend No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones :23230131,232333 75;2323 9402 Regional Offices : Central Eastern Northern Southern Western : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgzchi KOLKATA 700054 : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093 Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) TelephQne 23237617 { 23233841 23378499,23378561 { 23378626,23379120 2603843 { 2609285 22541216,22541442 { 22542519,22542315 28329295,28327858 { 28327891,28327892

Branches : AHMEDABAD. BANGALO~. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FAMDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. -NAGPUR. NALAGARH. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPUMM. VISAKHAPATNAM.
%Inted at Rabhat Otiset Ress, New DeWi-2

