(Reaffirmed 2003)

IS : 4616 - 1968

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR SHEE.PSFOOT ROLLER
Construction
Chainan LT-GEN R. A. L~OMBA

Plant and Machinery

fkktional Committee,
Rc~wnting

BDC 28

Engineer-in-Chief';

Branch, Army Headquarters New Delhi

MOllL SHRI
B. D. AHUJA SHRI A. V. JNN ( Altemaic ) SHR~ARDAMAN Suwx SHIU N. S. GILL ( Altrmatc ) SHRI R. S. BHALLA SHRI G. V. CHELL.U ( A1t.tmat-t) SHRI CHANDRAMOHAN National Buildings Organization, Beas Project Roads Wing, Ministry of Transport & Aviation

Central Mechanical Engineering Research Institute ( CSIR ), Durgapur SHRI R. K. hfurHERJEE ( AI&male ) Jcssop & Co Ltd, Calcutta SHRI A. B. CHAUDWURI Itlab Engineering Private Ltd, Bombay SHRI J. D. DAROGA The Concrete Association of India, Bombay SHRI J. DA= SHRI K. C. PRINJA ( Alttrnatt ) Railway Board, Ministry of Railways DIRECTOR, CIVIL ENGINEERING JOINT DIRECTOR ( WORKS ) ( Alftmatt ) Central Water & Power Commission DIRECTOR ( P & M ) SHRI H. C. GHULATI Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals BRIQ N. B. GRANT Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters SHRI P. N. GULATI Tata Engineering & Locomotive Co Ltd, Bombay SHRI K. G. K. RAO ( Al&ma& ) Killick, Nixon & Co Ltd, Bombay SHRI S. Y. KHAN SHRI A. T. KOTHAVALA ( Alftmatt ) Linkers Private Ltd, Patna SHRI K. M. KIJUR SHRI R. K. VAR~A ( Alftmafc) Heatly and Gresham Ltd, Calcutta SHRI N. KUMAR SHRI V. GULATI I Al&ma&t ) BRIG P. R. KUMAR Bharat Earth hlovers Ltd, Bangalore SHRI M. M. PARTWASARATHY (Al&n&) COL S.C.L.hIALSK Research & Development Organization ( Ministry of Defence ) LT-COL N. C. GUPTA ( Alftmak ) SHRIM. R. MALYA Burmah-Shell Oil Storage & Distributing Co of India Ltd, Bombay DR B. S. BA~SI( Alttmalt ) SHRI S.C. MAZUMDAR Gannon Dunkerley & Co Ltd, Bombay SHRI S. K. Gutr~ THAKURTA I Al&mafc) SliRlY. G. PATEL Builders Association of India, Bombay SHRI H. J. SHAH ( Alftmatt )

INDIAN STANDARDS MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR
NE*%' DELHI

INSTITUTION
SHAH ZAFAR MARG

110002

I5:4616-1966 ( Continued frm page 1)
Members SHRI D. M. PRASAD Repre.renting
William Jacks & Co Ltd, Calcutta

SHRI G. K. SETHI ( Altematc ) Engineer-in-Chief'sBranch, Army Headquarters BRXQ S.N.PUNJ SHRI H.V. MIRCIUNDANI (Altcmatc) Khandelwal Udyog Ltd, Bombay SHRIRAMRSH~~ANDELWAL Armstrong Smith Private Ltd, Bombay SHRI G. S. Rovsmxx Swnr U. G. KALYANPuR ( Al&mate ) Hindustan Construction Co Ltd, Bombay SENIOR ENGINEER Directorate C+n~ral of Technical De$opment SHRI S. K. SINHA SaruB.C. SRIVASTAVA Ccn~~~ldmg Research Institute ( CSIR

),

SXRI J. P. KAUSHIX ( Altern& ) DR BH. SUBBARAJU

Ccn&?al& 20&d

Research

Institute

( CSIR ),

SLPERINTENDING ENGINEER,DELHI Central Public Works Ikpartmcnt CENTRAL ELECXRXAL CXRIXE No. III Ez;~,=~ Eh'GINEEB ( ELEC&`iEZHAlUlCAL & WORKS&P DIVISION( Alkmate ) SRRI N. H. TAYLOR Recondo Private Ltd, Bombay SHRI T. H. PESHORI ( Al&mote ) SHRI N. S. VISWANATHM Marshall Sons & Co Mf Ltd. Bombay SHRI R. NAGARAJAN, Director General, ISI ( B +cio Member) Director ( Civ Engg ) sccretag SHRI Y. R. TANEJA Deputy Director ( Civ

Engg ), ISI

2

IS:4616-1968

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR SWEEPSFOOT ROLLER
0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 23 May 1968, after the draft finalized by the Construction Plant and Machinery Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 0.2 Sheepsfoot rollers are intended for use in compaction of earth embankments, localized breakups of existing earth or gravel roads, and subgrade Subject to the limitations of soil soil to increase the bearing capacity. characteristics, this type of roller permits positive solid compaction with a minimum number of passes over surface areas, such as built up solid fills for highways, air-ports, dams and bridges approaches. One, two or sometimes three drum models with different type of tamping foot are obtainable, and their selection is governed by the type of job and the characteristics of soil to be compacted. This standard is intended to deal with the essential features of sheepsfoot roller to serve as guidance to both manufacturers and purchasers. 0.3 This standard contains clauses 3.2.1, 4.1 and 4.1.1 agreement between the purchaser and the supplier. which calls for

0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-196W. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. l._ SCOPE 1.1 This standard lays down the requirements for materials, construction and performance of sheepfoot roller. 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definition shall apply. sizes, design,

2.1 Sheepsfoot Rollcr- Roller consisting of hollow cylindrical steel These feet penetrate drum or drums on which pojecting feet are mounted. into the fill as the roller moves forward and cause compaction.
*Rules for roundiigdf

numericalvalues ( revised ) . 3

IS:4616-1968 3. SIZE DESIGNATION AND CLA!%IFICATION

3.1 The size of the roller shall be indicated

by number and external diaThe type of meter in millimetres ( excluding feet) of the drum it carries. the roller shall be indicated by the shape of its tamping feet.

Exmples:
SiIJgk

Drum,, Double Drum, Single Drum, Double Drum, Single Drum, Double Drum, drum,

1 000, 1 000, 1 060, 1 000, 1 000, 1 060, mm

sheepsfoot sheepsfoot club foot cone foot pyramid foot cylinder foot 1 000; 1 000; 1 060 1 060; 1520 by mutual

3.2

The standard

sizes shall be as given below:

Single

Two drums in line, mm

3.2.1 Sizes other than those specified above may be supplied agreement between the purchaser and the supplier. 4. MACHINE

CHARACTERISTICS

4.1 Unless

otherwise agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier, the roller shall have the machine characteristics specified in Table 1.

4.1.1 The shape of the tamping feet shall conform to any one of the types indicated in Fig. 1, depending upon the requirements of the job and the agreement between the purchaser and the supplier.
4.2 For sizes other than those specified in 3.2, the machine characteristics may be varied to suit the job requirements by agreement between the purchaser and the supplier, but the total tamping area of the tamping feet should be generally greater than 6 percent of the drum surface area. 5. MATERIALS

5.1 Materials

used in the construction of sheepsfoot rollers with the requirements of the relevant Indian Standards. 5.1.1 Steel Sections, Bars and Plutes conform to IS: 226-1962;. 5.1.2 5.1.3 kfiild Steel Sheets Rivet Bars Rivet Steel sections,

shall comply

bars and plates shall to IS : 1079- 1963t.

Mild steel sheets shall conform bars shall conform

to IS : 1148-19641.

*Specification for structural steel ( standard quality ) ( tiird rcuirion). i S&e mvk& 1. fSpeeification for hot rolled carbon steel sheet and strip ( rev&d ). ( `J&hd revisian in 1Y73 ). @pecification for rivet bars for struettrral purposes t ret&& ).

4

IS : 4616- 1968

TABLE

1

MACHINE

CHARACTE`RIS (
Cl4u.w

TICS 4.1 )
SINGLY3

OF SHEEPSFOOT

ROLLER

.

DRUM ROLLER

DOUBLE DRUM ROLLER 96 Min 4.5 Max 3.0 Ma'n 3-5 Max 1220*20 or 1800*10+

9
ii) iii) iv)

Ozvcc

l..gz ,

of roller including

3.2 Mist (Max l-5 Min l-55 Max 1220120 1000*20 1060*20 64Min 112 Max or

Overall width of roller, m Length of each drum, mm Diameter ( less tamping feet ) of each drum, mm Number of tamping feet:

1 OOO=t20 or 1060=~20 or 1 520t20* 64 Min 112 Max ( 120 Maxwith size 1 800~10 mm only ) 178 Min 203 Max 25 Min 77.5 Max

v)

a) Length of tamping b) Tam;inge area of

feet, mm tamping

-178 Min 203 Max 25 Min 77-5 Max

>
-J+) Total weight of the roller, kg: a) Drum empty b) Ballasted with water c) Ballasted with sand and water vii) Ground pressure under tamping foot, kg/cm% a) b) c) Drum empty Ballasted with water Ballasted sand with water and each

14OOMin 1650 Max 2 200 Min 24OOMax 3000 Min 3200 Max

2 600 Min 31OOhfax 4 200 Min 4700 Max 5 000 Min 6 500 hfax

f I-5 Min 18.5 Min 21.5 Alin

IO-5 .Ifin Ii.5 him 20.5
Afir:

*Diameter 1 520*20

mm to match only with length 1 800* 10 mm.

5

IS:4616-N68

/, 8
1A SHE EPS-FOOT lB CLUB FOOT k PYRAW5 FOOT

&&
ID COME FOOT

tE CYLINDER FoOT

FIG. 1

ALTEMATIVE TYPES OF TAMPING FEET FOR SSSEEPSFOOT ROLLER

6. CONSTRUCTN3N 6.1 Geneml --- TIIe ro}!er shall he mounted in a frame that will permit ~ndcpendent oscillation of each chum. The roller shall wMwtand the strains imposed by operation over rough and rocky ground at a speed of 8 krn;h. 6.2 Frame -- Drum frames shali be made of structural steel or formed The drum frames shall be con.xcel plate and shall be rigidly braced. nected so that each drum oscillates independently of the other drums through an angle of at least 30 degrees, and the horizontal @ane through the axis of oscillation shaH bisect this angle. A positive means shall be provided to IirnJt osciliaticm of drums and it shaU prevent drums from interkking. 6

IS : 4616- 1968 6.3 Drawbar - The drawbar shall be removable and replaceable without cutting or welding. The drawbar shall be of such design and construction as to permit either pulling or pushing of the roller. The drawbar shall be equipped with an adjustable, universal-type, joint coupler which will attach to a standard drawbar for industrial ( track-type ) tractors except the towing pin hole shall accommodate a 50 mm pin. 6.4 Rear LevisA clevis shall be attached to the rear main-frame member and shall contain a hole to accommodate a 50 mm pin to permit tandem operation of rollers. The shell and heads of each drum shall be constructed of 6.5 Dnamssteel plates not less than 12 mm thick. The joints shall be welded and watertight. 6.5.1 Ballasting Arrangement - A ballast hole with an area of not less than 325 ems and a drainage hole for accommodating a 50 mm pipe plug shall be provided for ballasting the drums with water or sand. The holes shall be located on the outside end near the perimeter of the drum and shall be equipped with removable watertight covers. 6.5.1.1 Any other suitable ballasting arrangements, such as, ballast boxes mounted on the frame in front of and/or behind the drum may be provided. 6.6 Tamping Feet - The tamping feet shall be of any of the type indicated in Fig. 1. The tamping feet shall be arranged in equally spaced rows circumfiientially around the drum with those in successive rows staggered. The tamping feet shall be arranged to provide not less than one tamping foot per 900 ems of drum cylinder circumferential surface area. 6.6.1 The tamping feet shall have tapered shanks and shall have replaceable tamping tips. The tamping feet shanks shall be cast or forged from steel and shall be welded to the drum. The tamping tips shall be steel heat treated to a Brine11hardness of not less than 260 and replaceable without burning or welding. 6.7 Nes and Bearings - Each drum shall be equipped with an independent axle extending entirely through the drum. The axle or drum shall be mounted on anti-friction bearings with dust tight, and watertight seals. Bearings shall be adjustable without removal of drum from axle or axle from frame. cleaners shall be provided and shall prevent 6.8 Cleaners -Adjustable accumulation of material on the drums when the drums are operated in either the forward or reverse direction. Cleaners shall be replaceable. 6.9 Lifting Attachments - The roller shail be provided with lifting attachments. The attachments shall enable the roller to be lifted in its normal travelling or operating position. The attachments shall be located 7

X6:4616-1968
so that clearance is maintained between the slings and all exterior parts Spreader bars may be provided. Each attachment shall of the roller. withstand not less than 2f times the normal load imposed on the attachment. Attachments for multiple slings shall be located so that the slings will converge not more than 5.5 m above the lowest extremity of the load when such limitation is possible. Attachments shall be positioned SO that the lifting strain will be in line wvith the longitudinal axis of the eye of the attachment. The inside diameter of the eye shall be not less than 75 mm. Members to which attachments are fastened, and the fastenings shall withstand stresses in the amount and direction of pull specified for the attachment. Where required, structural members shall be reinforced to meet the lifting reLifting attachments may also be used as tiequirements specified herein. down attachments when such attachments meet the requirements specified in 6.10. 6.10 Tie-Down Attachments - The roller shall be provided with integral attachments to permit tie-down to the floor or deck of the transportation medium. The tie-down attachment shall withstand static loads of 8G, RG, 2.25 G and 1.5 G forward, rearward, upward and sideward respectively, where G is the cargo weight of the roller. Tie-down attachments may also be used as lifting attachments when such attachments meet the requirements specified in 6.9. 6.11 Workmanship - All parts, components, and assemblies of the roller including castings, forgings, moulded parts, stampings, bearings, seals, machined surfaces, and welded parts shall be clean and free from sand, dirt, fins, pits, sprues, scale, flux, and other harmful extraneous material. External surfaces shall be smooth, and all exposed edges shall be rounded or bevelled. 6.11.1 St&l Fabrication-Steel used in the fabrication of the roller shall be free from kinks and sharp bends. The straightening of material shall be done by methods that will not cause injury to the metal. Shearing and chipping shall be done neatly and accurately. Corners shall be square and true, and all burrs shall be removed. Flame cutting may be employed instead of shearing or sawing.. Burned surfaces of flame-cut material shall be ground smooth. Precautions shall be taken to avoid overheating, and heated metals shall be allowed to cool slowly. All bends of a major character shall be made with metal dies or fixtures to insure uniformity of size and shape. 6.11.2 Bolted Connections-Bolt holes shall be accurately punched or drilled and shall have the burrs removed. Washers or lock-washers shall be provided in accordance with accepted practice, and all bolts, nuts and screws shall be tight. Devices securing bolts or cap screws shall be of sufficient strength to withstand the tensile strength of the bolt. 6.11.3 Riveted Connections - Rivet holes shall be accurately punched or drilled and shall have the burrs removed. Rivets shall completely fib the

8

IS : 4616 - 1968
holes. Rivet heads shall be full, neatly made, concentric holes, and in full contact with the surface of the member. with the rivet

6.11.4 Welding - The surface of parts to be welded shall be free from rust, scale, paint, grease, and other foreign matter. Welds shall transmit stress without permanent deformation or failure when the parts connected by the welds are subjected to proof and service loadings. 6.52 Finishirag - All parts of the roller normally painted shall be cleaned, treated and painted in accordance with relevant Indian Standards. 7. LUBRICATION

7.1 All surfaces requiring
for lubricating.

lubrication

shall be provided

with suitable

means

8. MAINTENANCE 8.1 Tools

TOOLS

AND ACCESSORIES

for normal maintenance, adjustments and lubrication together with instructions and inventory of tools shall be provided with the machine.

9. MARKING 9.1 The
marked following information on the roller: shall be permanently and conspicuously

a) Manufacturer's b) Manufacturer's

name or trade-mark, reference number of the roller, and

c) Year 9.1.1 marked

6f manufacture. and indelibly

The gross weight of each roller shall be conspicuously on each side of the frame.

9.1.2 A transportation data plate ( see 6.9 and 6.10 ) shall be permanently affixed to the roller frame in a conspicuous place and shall indicate !ocation and capacity of lifting and tie-down attachments. 9.1.3 The roller may also be marked with the IS1 certification Mark.

NOTE-The use of the IS1 Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of the Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks) Act and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The IS1 Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys devised and supervised by ISX and operated by the producer. ISI marked products are also continuously checked by IS1 for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard.
Detailsofconditionv under which a licence for the use of the ISI Certification Xfark may he granted to manufacturers or processors, may be obtainrd fro& the Xndian Standards Institution.

the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is

9

IS:4616-1968 10.PERFORMANCE 10.1The roller shall conform to the performance tests specified 1x110.2.
For the purpose of these tests, a test roller is defined as the roller being tested when more than one roller is used to accomplish the test. The test roller shall be lubricated in the usual manner prescribed by the manufacturer. 10.2.2 Operational Test-The test roller shall be filled with water and hitched to a tractor. A second roller filled with water and of the same size as the test roller shall be hooked in tandem with the test roller. The roller assembly shall be towed over rock and earth fill for a period of 8 hours. A speed of approximateI% 8 km/h shall be maintained and all turns shall be made in the shortest possible turning radius. The roller assembly shall then be towed for 4 hours over loose fill with a moisture and fine material content which will cause fill material to stick to the roller drums. Ten percent of the replaceable tamping tips shall be removed upon completion of 8 hours of towing, and replaced with new tamping tips, The test roller shall be observed during this test. Any evidence of water leakage, inability of drums to oscillate as specified, inability of cleaners to prevent buildup of material on drums, inability to remove and replace tamping tips as specified, or any permanent deformation or breakage of components or parts shall constitute failure of this test. 10.2.3 Ground Pressure of Tamping-Foot Face - The roller shall be weighed with drums empty, with drums full of water, and with drums and/or ballasting box full of sand and water. The ground pressure of the tamping-foot face shall be determined for the roller with empty drums, for the roller with drums filled with water, and for the roller with drums and/or ballasting box filled with sand and water by the following formula:

IO.2Tests 10.2.1 Test Conditions -

ground pressure of tamuing-foot face in kg/cm2, weight of roller in kg, number of tamping-feet per drum on the ground, number of drums, and A = area of tamping-foot face in cm2. Computed ground pressure of tamping-foot face not complying with 4 shall constitute failure of this test. 10.2.4 Tie-down and L;fting Attachments-The static load as specified in 6.9 for lifting attachments and in 6.10 for tie-down attachments shall be applied to each attachment when mounted on its structural member. Weld failure or permanent deformation of the attachment, the fastening, or the structural member shall constitute failure of this test, 10

where

P W M N

= = = =

