( Reaffirmed 2004 )

IS : 10746( Part 2 ) - 1963

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR SHELL AND TUBE TYPE MARINE HEAT EXCHANGERS
PART 2
Marine Chairman
SHRI

GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
Sectional Committee, Rejresenting Directorate General of Shipping, Bombay MCPD 3

Engineering

N. C~AKBABORTY Members

SHRI K. N. S. RAO ( Albnate to Shri N. Chakraborty ) The Scindia Steam Navigation Co Ltd, Bombay SHRI S. C. Cn~ronvnnr SHRI B. J. D'SILVA (Alternate ) Voltas Limited, Bombay SHRI V. V. GAITONDE SHRI S. K. TAMHANE ( Alternate) Cummins Diesel Sales and Service ( I ) Pvt Ltd, SHRI &NIL GOVID GADGIL Calcutta SHRI JAQADISH V. JOSHI ( Alternate ) The Great Eastern Shipping Co Ltd, Bombay SHRI P. C. JAIN South India Shipping Corpn Ltd, Madras SHRI A. T. JOSEPII SHRI ASIM. DAS ( Alternute ) AFCO Industrial & Chemicals Ltd, Bombay SHR~ A. KAPUR SHRI A. K. MISKRA ( Alternate) The Indian National Shipowners Association, SHRI~KIRPAL SINGH Bombay American Bureau of Shipping, Bombay SHRJ MADAN L. KOCHHAR SRRI P. K. BANERJEE ( Alternate) Indian Register of Shipping, Bombay SERI S. KTJMAR SHRI S. R. KHARE (Alternate) Ministry of Defence ( NHQ) CDR L. A. LOWE LT N. K. SHARMA ( Alternate ) Lloyd's Register of Shipping, Bombay SHR~ D. MADHOK SHRI S. M. BHOLA ( AlternateI ) SHBI A. SEN~UPT~ ( Alternate II ) Greaves Cotton & Co Ltd, Bombay CDRE I. K. MALHOTRA SHRI MONOJIT SXN ( Alternate I ) LT-CDR K. P. MENON (Alternate II ) Escorts Limited, Bombay SHR~ SHIV NAI~AIN SHRI HARISH BH~RCAVA ( Alternate )

( Continued on page 2 )
@ Copyright 1984

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 10746 ( Part 2 ) - 1983
( Continued f rom page 1 ) Members
SHRI M. A. NOORUDDIN

Representing Siemons India Limited,

Bombay SHRI K. JAIRAM (Alternate ) Scindia Workshop Ltd, Bombay SHRI G.M. RANA SHRI S. U. VORA (Alternate ) Hindustan Shipyard Ltd, Visakhapatnam SHRI M. R. S. RAO SHRI G. RAMASASTRY ( Alternate 1 Calcutta Port Trust, Calcutta REPRESEITATIVE The Institute of Marine Engineers, Bombay SHRI B. SARASWAT SHRI H. K. TANEJA (Alternate ) KirIoskar Oil Engines Ltd, Pune SRRI S. G. SARDESAI SHRIA. V. CRITALE ( Alternate ) Cochin Shipyard Ltd, Cochin SHRI S. S. SASTRY SHRI P. KOTESWARA RAO ( Alternate I ) SHRI A. K. MUEHERJEE ( Alternate II ) Directorate General of Technical Development, SHRI H. K. SHARMA New Delhi SHRI K. S. SADASIVAN ( Alternate ) Garden Reach Shipbuilders & Engineers Ltd, SHRI S. K. SINHA Calcutta CAPT P. K. MITRA ( Alternate ) Institute of Marine Technologists, Bombay SHRI K. S. SUBRAMANIA~ SHRI P. K. BANE~JEE ( Alternate I ) SHRI J. S. BHATIT ( Alternate II ) CAPT B. D. KATARIA ( Alternate III ) Ministry of Shipping and Transport ( DevelopSHRI A. B. TRXKUR ment Wing ) SHRIS.N. SUMAN ( Alternate ) Bureau Veritas, Bombay SHRI P. B. WARRIER SHRI B. NU~UES ( Alternate ) Director General, IS1 (Ex-ojicio Member ) SHRI P. S. DAS, Director ( MCPD ) Secretary

SRRIV. K. SEH~AL
Deputy Heat Convener SHRI N. V. VISWANATHAN Members SHRI M. C. KESAVA RAO ( Alternate to Shri N. V. Viswanathan j Ministry of Defence ( NHQ), New Delhi DEPUTY DIRECTOR Directorate General of Shipping, Bombay SHRI S. DUTTA SHRI K. RAMAKRISHNAN ( Alternate ) The Indian Sugar & General Engineering SHRI ALBERT JEAVONS Yamunanagar SHRI D. D. SHARMA (Alternate) Hindustan Shipyard Ltd, Visakhapatnam Exchangers and Director Fittings ( Marine ), IS1 MCPD 3

Subcommittee,

:3

Corp,

( Continued on Page 16 )

2

IS : 10746 ( Part 2 ) - 1989

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR SHELL AND TUBE TYPE MARINE HEAT EXCHANGERS
PART 2 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS

0.
0.1 This Indian

FOREWORD

Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 30 December 1983, after the draft finalized by the Marine Engineering Sectional Committee had been approved by the Marine, Cargo Movement and Packaging Division Council. 0.2 Shell and tube type heat exchangers are widely used on boardships for This standard lays down duties such as heating, cooling and evaporating. the general requirements and gives guidance for the design and construction of such heat exchangers. 0.3 The requirements given in this standard in IS : 4503-1967* which mainly caters to industry. 0.4 The design requirementsgiven given in IS : 2825-1969t. 0.5 The Indian in Appendix A. Standards referred are in addition to those given the needs of chemical process are based on those 2 are given

in this specification to in Table

1 and Table

1. SCOPE 1.1 This specification covers the general requirements for construction and testing of shell and tube type heat exchangers boardships.
2. TERMINOLOGY the design, for use on

-2.1 For the purpose
shall apply.

of this standard

definitions

given in IS : 4503-1967*

*Specification for shell and tube type heat exchangers. tCode for unfired pressure vessels.

3

IS : 10746 ( Part 3. TYPES 3.1 Types
broadly a)

2 ) - 1983

AND NOMENCLATURE
for marine use may be

-- Shell and tube type heat exchangers classified into three types:
Fixed tube plate--non-removable tube bundle, heat floating and type). given in

tube bundle,

b) U-tube-removable c) Internal

( pull-through

3.2 Nomenclature - The nomenclature apply far the purpose of this standard. 4. MATERIALS

IS

: 4503-1967*

shall

4.1 All ferrous and non-ferrous materials used in the manufacture of marine heat exchangers shall conform to one of Indian Standards of designated alloys given in Table 1 and Table 2, respectively. If no standard exists for a particular material, the use of this material shall be agreed to between the purchaser, the manufacturer and the inspecting authority.
5. GENERAL

REQUIREMENTS

5.1 All heat exchangers

shall be designed in accordance with IS : 2825-1969t and shall in addition take into account the requirements given in subsequent clauses in the design of marine heat exchangers.

5.2 Salt water cooled heat exchangers other than main and auxiliary steam condensers shall be of the straight-through single pass design wherever possible. The water entry may be either axial with the tubes or across the tube plate face as may be dictated by design considerations, but whichever form of entry is used the doors must be capable of easy removal without disturbing connecting water service piping, so that water spaces Alternatively, the doors may be and tubes plates may be readily cleaned. fitted with adequate handholes for ready access to the water space. In multipass coolers the water inlet shall be at the bottom of the water space and outlet at the top or both at the bottom itself in case of two passes. 5.3 Heads shall be so designed that it will not be necessary piping to gain access to the inside of the heads and tubes. 5.4 The tube bundle maintenance. shall be of the removable type to disassemble and

for easy cleaning

5.5 In the design of cooling water spaces and connections, path shall be provided to minimize erosion-corrosion attack. and projecting edges shall be avoided. *Specification for shell and tube type heat exchangers.
for unfired pres\ure vessels.

a smooth flow Sharp corners

tCode

4

IS : 10746 ( Part 5.6 The minimum tube sheet thickness

2 ) - 1983

shall be usually not less thon 20 mm.

5.7 When external fins are applied to tubes, one end of the tubes shall be enlarged to the outside diameter of the fins to enable the removal and insertion of individual tubes. 5.8 Holes in the tube sheet at the inlet end of the tubes allow for belling the ends of the tubes. shall be flared to

5.9 In order to diffuse the entering stream and reduce erosion of tube ends, for single-pass coolers the waterbox depth measured normal to the tube sheet shall be not less than one-half the equivalent diameter of the tube sheet area exposed to the flow of the cooling water into the tubes. For cylindrical two-pass coolers, the water box head depth shall be not less than 35 percent of the inside shell diameter. 5.18 In the design of marine heat exchangers, consideration shall be given to the varying degrees of inclination encountered in service. In marine practice, heat exchangers are to be designed so that they will remain efficient with the ship inclined from the normal up to 15" transversely and when pitching 10" longitudinally and when rolling up to 22.5" from the The conditions for permanent list and roll or for trim and pitch vertical. are not considered additive. 5.11 All heat exchangers shall be provided with adequate foundation supports. When required by the conditions of service, provision is made in the design of the supports to provide for expansion or contraction of the shell. Heat exchanger supports are usually independent of any attached Supports must be given special consideration when designing for piping. high-impact shock conditions and vibrations. Tubes should be adequately supported by baffle plates over the length in order to obviate vibrations causing shearing at tube end. Baffles when fitted should be a good fit within the shell, and the holes through which the tubes pass should be chamfered in order to obviate sharp edges. 6. CONSTRUCTION 6.0 All heat exchangers shall have the constructional features in accordance with IS : 2825-196c3* and shall in addition take into account the points specified in 6.1 to 6.7. 6.1 Lifting 30 kg shall bolts. Devices bc provided Channels, bonnets or covers which weigh over with lifting lugs, rings or tapped holes for eye

6.2 End Flange Finish - All end flanges shall be finish machined l~hcrc necessary after completion of all welding and postweld heat treatment.
*Code for unfired pressure vessels.

7

IS : 10746 ( Part 2 ) - 1983 6.3 Bosses and plugs shall be provided,
6.4 wherever necessary. with IS :

Shell
thickness of shells shall be in accordance

6.4.1 The minimum 4503-1967".
6.5

Tubes 65.1
tube patterns, as viewed from the tube

The four most common sheet end are shown in Fig. 1.

.a) Triangular ,Tube Pitch b) Rotated Triangular Tube Pitch

F--

~0 c!3-c9 0
c) Square Tube Pitch

00

FIG. 1

d) Rotated Square Tube Pitch COMMONTUBE PATTERNS

*Specification for shell nncl tub<> type heat exchangers.

8

IS : 10746 ( Part 6.5.1.1 The triangular pitch and most compact forms and the triangular used for marine heat exchangers. 6.5.1.2 Square through lanes which of the tubes.
be

2 ) - 1983

rotated pattern

triangular pitch are the is the one most commonly

pitch and rotated square pitch patterns have seefacilitate manual or mechanical cleaning of the outside patterns specific other than the four design considerations and thicknesses illustrated in Fig. 1 may as to pressure drop or with tube

6.5.1.3 Tube used to satisfy turbulence. 6.5.2 The tube IS : 4503-1967*.

diameters

shall be in accordance 1.25 times the

6.5.3 Tube centre-to-centre distances shall be diameter, or greater and uniform over the tube field.

6.5.4 Since the shell and tubes operate at different temperatures, means shall be provided to accommodate the difference in their expansion, as high stresses may be developed within the heat exchanger. 6.6 Tube Sheets Double tube sheets may be used when operatdesirability.

6.6.1 Double Tube Sheets ing conditions indicate their

6.6.1.1 Double tube sheets of the edge welded type shall be provided with vent and drain connections at the high and low points of the enclosed space. 6.6.1.2 Special attention shallbe given to the ability of the tubes to withstand without damage, the mechanical and thermal loads imposed on them by this construction. 6.6.2 Expanded Tube Joints

6.6.2.1 Length of expansion - Tubes shall be expanded into the tube sheet for a length of 50 mm or tube sheet thickness minus 3 mm whichever is smaller. In no case shall the expanded portion extend beyond the shell side face of the tube sheet. When specified, tubes may be expanded for the thickness of the tube sheet. 6.6.2.2 Contour of expanded tube - The expanding procedure shall be such as to provide substantially uniform expansion throughout the expan_ ded portion of the tube, without sharp transition to the unexpanded portion. *Specification for shell and tube
type heat exchangers.

9

IS : 10746 ( Part 2 ) - 1983 6.6.2.3 Tube projection - Tubes shall extend beyond the face of each tube sheet by 3+ 1.5 mm except that tubes shall be flush with the top tube sheet in vertical exchangers.
6.6.3 Clad and Faced Tube Sheets - The nominal cladding thickness at the tube side face of a tube sheet shall not be less than 8 mm when tubes are rolled only, and 3 mm when tubes are welded to the tube sheet. The nominal cladding thickness on the shell side face shall not be less than 10 mm. All surfaces exposed to the fluid, including~gasket seating surfaces, shall have at least 3 mm nominal thickness of cladding. 6.7 The requirements relating channels and channel-covers, 7. CORROSION to flanges, baffles and support plates, tie-rods, gaskets etc, shall be as per IS : 4503-196T*.

AND CORROSION Allowance

ALLOWANCE

7.1 Corrosion

7.1.1 Unless otherwise required, the corrosion parts of the heat exchanger shall be as follows:
a) b)

allowance

for the various

Carbon steel and cast iron pressure parts - 1.15 mm on all parts except tubes, in the case where severe conditions are not expected; Stainless steel and non-ferrous be specified by the purchaser. pressure parts none or as may

Floating head backing devices, internal bolting, ~such as tie-rods, spacers, baffles and support plates allowance for corrosion. 7.1.2 Internal Covers on each side. Internal covers shall have

non-pressure parts, need not have any a corrosion allowance

7.1.3 Tube Sheets - Tube sheets shall have the corrosion allowance on each side with the provision that on the grooved side of a grooved tube sheet, the depth of the pass partition groove may be considered as available for corrosion allowance, 7.1.4 External Covers - Wherever external of the groove may be considered as available 7.1.5 End Flanges - Corrosion inside diameter of flanges. allowance covers are grooved, the depth for corrosion allowance. shall be applied only to the

7.2 Electrolytic Corrosion - Although galvanic corrosion can result from using dissimilar metals, the majority of heat exchangers in cooling water service use both copper-alloy and carbon-steel materials. Due consideration shall be given to the selection of materials and to mother
*Specification for shell and tube type heat exchangers.

IS : 10746 ( Part 2 ) - 1983 anticorrosion measures, such as sacrificial anodes when a heat exchanger is required to handle a fluid which would cause galvanic corrosion. 8. INSPECTION 8.1 The purchaser shall be offered all reasonable facilities to inspect at any reasonable time the fabrication at any stage and to reject any part which does not comply with this specification ( see also IS : 2825-1969* ). 9. TESTING 9.0 The testing procedure outlined under 9.2 and 9.3 covers only the mechanical design and construction of the heat exchanger, and does not include the process performance. Each completed heat cxchangrr shall bc hydraulically manufacturer's works to the appropriate pressure. Pneumatic testing except in circumstances cannot be tolerated. tested at the

of heat exchangers shall normally be carried out, where even the smallest trace of the testing liquid

shall supply free of charge the 9.1 Test Facilities - The manufacturer labour and appliances for testing of complete heat exchangers for hydraulic and pneumatical testing as may be carried out on his premises in accordance with this standard. In the absence of facilities at his own works for making the prescribed tests, the manufacturer shall bear the cost of carrying out the tests elsewhere. 9.1.1 Gaskets on Test Equipment -- Heat exchangers shall be tested using the service gaskets so that the exchanger may leave the fabricator's shop in If this is not possible then special gaskets may the ` as tested ' condition. be used by agreement provided they are of the same type as the service gaskets. 9.2 Hydraulic Test

9.2.1 Fresh Water or any non-hazardous, non-corrosive liquid may be used by agreement between the purchaser and the fabricator for hydraulic testing. The test pressure shall be such that at every point in the vessel, it is at least equal to 1.5 times the design pressure. The minutes. test pressure shall be maintained for a period not less than 30

applying pressure the equipment shall be 9.2.2 Precautions - Before inspected to see that it is tight and that all low pressure lines and other
*Code for unfired pressure vessels.

IS : 10746( Part 2 ) - 1983
non-pressure parts been disconnected, that should not be subjected to the test pressure, have

Vents shall be provided at all high points of the vessel in the position in which it is to be tested to purge possible air pockets while the vessel is being filled. 9.2.3 Test Procedure

9.2.3.1 Fixed tube sheet ty@e exchangers - When the shell side and tube side test pressures are not the same, then the test at the lower pressure shall be done first. When carrying out the shell side pressure test, the channel shall be removed so that leakage from the shell side may be detected. cover

9.2.3.2 Floating head type exchangers ( Shell side test pressure less than tube side test pressure ) - When the required shell side test pressure is less than the required tube side test pressure, the hydraulic test shall be carried out in the following manner: a) The tube bundle, with channel and floating-head shall be tested to the appropriate test pressure. b) cover in place, into the

After the above test, the tube bundle shall be inserted shell and checked for freedom from binding.

c) The shell side with the tube bundle and channel in position shall then be subjected to the appropriate hydraulic test pressure. During this test, the channel cover shall be removed to detect any leakage from the shell side. 9.2.3.3 Floating greater than tube side pressure is equal to or hydraulic test shall be head obe exchanger ( Shell side test pressure equal to or test pressure ) - When the required shell side test greater than required for tube side pressure, the carried out in the following manner: separately and the for freedom from

a>The
b)

shell and tube bundle shall be inspected tube bundle inserted into the shell and checked binding.

With the tube bundle, test ring assembly and channel in position, but with the shell cover, floating head cover and channel cover removed for detecting leakage, the sheli side shall be subjected to the appropriate test pressure. With the test ring assembly and shell cover removed, but with the floating head cover, channel and channel cover in position, the tube bundle shall be subjected to the appropriate test pressure. With the shell cover in position ( heat exchanger fully assembled ), the shell side shall again be subjected to the appropriate hydraulic test pressure to determine the tightness of the shell cover joint.

12

IS : 10746 ( Part 2 j - 1983 9.3 Pneumatic Testing - Air testing shall be carried out under close supervision of the testing authority. Adequate protection such as blast walls or pits, and means for remote observation and control should be provided. 9.3.1 Test Pressure - The pneumatic test pressure shall be at least equal to the design pressure multiplied by the ratio of the safe stress value of the material of construction at the test temperature to that at the design temperature, or 1.25 times the design pressure. 9.3.2 Procedure - The pressure shall gradually be increased to not more than 50 percent of the test pressure. Thereafter the pressure shall be increased in steps of approximately ten percent of the test pressure till the required test pressure is reached. Then the pressure shall be reduced to a value equal to 80 percent of the test pressure and held there while the vessel is inspected. 10. MARKING 10.1 The manufacturer shall provide a name plate of a suitable corrosion resistant material, securely attached to the heat exchanger in a position that is accessible and, if the exchanger is to be lagged, where it will not be obscured, stamped with the following information: a) Manufacturer's b) Manufacturer's c) Design d) Test e) f) pressure: pressure: `SK' `XR' name, serial number shell...kgf/cms tube...kgf/cms shell,,,kgf/cms tube.. .kgf/cm* The letters The letters number if stress relieved, if completely radiographed, and and identification,

( gauge ) at...%, ( gauge ) at...%, ( gauge ) at...%, ( gauge ) at.. ."C,

g) The

of this standard.

10.2 The shell marked on the exchanger.

cover, floating head cover and channel shall be clearly edge of the flanges with the serial number of the heat with removable tube bundles, the stationery tube on its edge so as to indicate its correct orientation in as mutually agreed upon between information, shall be given on a separate name plate. 13 the

19.3 For exchangers sheet shall be marked the shell. 19.4 Any additional

purchaser and the fabricator,

IS : 10746 ( Part 2 ) - 1983 11. PREPARATION 11.1 Cleaning FOR DESPATCH

The inside of all shells shall be ground or wire brushed Dirt, weld if necessary to remove loose scale prior to insertion of bundles. rod stubs and other foreign materials shall be removed from all units. 11.2 Draining - Al! liquids used for hydraulic be drained from all units before shipment. testing or cleaning stainless shall

11.3 Painting - All external ferrous parts, other than be painted with temporary corrosion-preventive paint.

steel shall

11.4 Protection of Nozzles -.- All flanged faces of nozzles shall be protected to prevent damage, for example, by covering with wooden blank flanges. All threaded connections shall be plugged. 11.5 Protection of Parts - Separate parts, such as tube bundles heads, shall be suitably protected to prevent damage during shipment. 12. CERTIFICATE and

OF COMPLIANCE

12.1 Pressure Test Certificates - The fabricator shall supply to the purchaser a certificate stating that the exchanger complies in all respects with this Indian Standard and that it has passed the pressure test specified by this standard.
12.2 Material Test Certificate - A detailed materials of construction, may be supplied, if agreed facturer and the purchaser. certificate, to between including the manu-

APPENDIX ( Clause 0.5 )

A

LIST OF INDIAN STANDARDS
IS : 1s : IS : IS : IS : IS : IS : 226-1975 288-1981 291-1977 3 18-I 98 1 407-1981 410-1977 961-1975 Structural steel ( standard rods quality boiler ) (J;ft/z revision ) stay bolts and rivets and

Arsenical copper ( second revision )

for

iSava1 brass rods and sections forging ) ( second revision ) Leaded Brass tin bronze tubes for general

( suitable

for machining

ingots and castings purposes

( second revision )

( third revision )

Cold rolled brass sheet, Structural

strip and foil ( third revision )

steel ( high tensile ) ( second revision ) 14

IS: 10746 ( Part
IS : 1545- 1982 Solid-drawn Schedules purposes copper alloy tubes ( second revision ) for wrought steels for general tubes and IS : 1570-1961 IS : 1914 ( Parts IS : 1972-1977 IS : 1978-1971 IS : 1979-1971 IS : 1990-1973 IS : 2002-1962 IS : 2004-1978 IS : 2041-1962 IS : 2062-1980 IS : 2416-1963 IS : 2501-1972 IS : 2611-1964 IS : 2856-1979

2)-

1983

engineering superheater

Carbon 1 to 4 j-1977 tubes (`&st revision ) Copper plate, revision ) Line

steel boiler

sheet and strip for industrial

purposes

( jrst

pipe ( jirst revision ) (first revision ) (jrst revision ) purposes

High test line pipe

Steel rivet and stay bars for boilers Steel plates for boilers Carbon steel forgings ( second revision ) Steel plates for pressure Structural Boiler and superheater Copper tubes for general Carbon chromium temperature service Carbon steel castings for high temperature ( second revision ) for general vessels

engineering

steel ( fusion welding

quality

) ( second revision ) and naval purposes ( jirst revision) for high forgings

tubes for marine engineering molybdenum steel

purposes

for pressure containing parts suitable service ( fusion welding quality ) parts suitable for

IS : 3038-1974 IS : 3444~~1978 IS : 3609-1966 IS : 4171-1983

Alloy steel castings for pressure containing for high temperature service ( jirst revision )

Corrosion resistant alloy steel and nickel based castings general applications ( jirst revision ) Chrome molybdenum heater tubes C opper rods for general steel, seamless, boiler

and super-

engineering

purposes

(jht

revision )

IS : 10746( Part 2 ) - 1983
( Continued from page 2 ) Representing Members American Bureau of Shipping, Bombay SHEI MAYAN L. KOCHHAIZ SHRI P. K. BANERJEE ( Alternate ) Lloyd's Register of Shipping, Bombay SHRI D. MADKOK SHRI S. M. BHOLA ( Alternate I ) S HRI A. SENCIUPTA ( Alternate II ) Mirex Heat Transfer Pvt Ltd, Bombay SHRI C. D. M. MALANI Vulcan-Level Ltd, Bombay SHRI K. R. K. MENON SHRI K. K. SHANKARANARAYAN ( Alternate ) Mazagon Dock Ltd, Bombay SHRI K. M. PARIKH Airauto Engg Co, Bombay SHRI S. M. PATEL Indian Chemical Manufacturers Association, SHRI U. B. RAO Calcutta SHRI G. S. RATRA ( Alternate I ) SHRI N. C. BRAHMB ( Alternate II ) Reliant e Heat Transfer Pvt Ltd, Bombay SHRI K. SWAMINATHAN Bureau Veritas, Bombay SHRI P. B. WA~RIER S~rnr L. NORBED~ ( Alternafe )

16

