***•••*•**•••••• 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 


Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 


Mazdoor  Kisan  Shakti  Sangathan 
The  Right  to  Information,  The  Right  to  Live' 


Jawaharlal  Nehru 
'Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New' 


&VIJIA:^:^ifc^^:V/fflJ4^^N:^.^3^^ISba^!rr^^>^»^>^ 


IS  10450  (1983) :  Code  for  transport  of  fresh  water  aquarium 
fish  [FAD  5:  Livestock  Feeds,  Equipment  and  Systems] 


C^IJIA^=JCsS^ff71l^vS^3g^TN:^a^ITFSggg 


5?5im  l7*55^!S&^N5«^^ 


^^-^^^^W.^^ 


Satyanarayan  Gangaram  Pitroda 
Invent  a  New  India  Using  Knowledge 


Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge  is  such  a  treasure  which  cannot  be  stolen" 


BLANK  PAGE 


Vii^ 


i4> 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


IS;  T0450  ^  19B3 

(Reaffirmed  2000) 

Indian  Standard 

CODE  FOR  TRANSPORT  OF 
FRESil  WATFR  AQUARIUM  FISH 


UDG     m'^^^3'^7  :  e,39M 


INDIAN     STANDARDS     I  N  S  T  I  T  U  T I  O  K 

MANAK      BNAVAN,      9      JiAUADt'R      SHAH    ZAFAR      MARO 

NEW     DFLIH     llCCHKi 

Gr  2  ^prii   \9m 


IS:  10450 -1983 

Indian  Standard 

CODE  FOR  TRANSPORT  OF 
FRESH  WATER  AQUARIUM  FISH 

Live  Animals  Sectional  Committee,  AFDG  24 

Chairman  Representing 

Db  H.  G.  Sen  Organon  (  India  )  Limited,  Calcutta 

Members 

Dk.  V.  S.  Alwak  Animal  Welfare  Board  (Ministry  of  Agriculture  ), 

Madras 
Dk  S.  R.  Chadha  (  Alternate  ) 
Animal       Husbandry     Gommis-     Animal  Husbandry   Commissioner   to   the   Govern- 
STONEE  ment  of  India  {  Ministry  of  Agriculture  ),  New 

Delhi 
Db  B.  R.  Baliga  Central    Food    Technological     Research     Institute 

(  CSIR  ),  Mysore 
Dr  M.  a.  Halbem  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  M.  S.  Bhamji  Indian  Council  of  Medical  Research,  New  Delhi 

Db  S.  Jayaeaman  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  K.  R.  Bhardwaj  Central  Drug  Research  Institute  (  CSIR  ),  Lucknow 

Dr  J.  N.  S,  Yadava  (  Alternate  ) 
Db  D.  p.  Budtjk  HaflFkine  Bio-pharmaceutical  Corporation  Limited, 

Bombay 
Db  a.  Y.  Nimbkar  (  Alternate  ) 
Db  p.  R.  ChaNdkan  Zoological  Gardens,  Trivandrum 

Shbi  G.  P.  Ghandbasekharan        Railway    Board    (Ministry     of     Railways),    New 

Delhi 
Db  G.  P.  Das  Sarabhai  Research  Centre,  Vadodara 

Dr  D.  G.  Banik  (  Alternate  ) 
Db  P.  J.  Deobas  In     personal     capacity      {341-A     Sahitya  Sahawas, 

Bandra  East,  Bombay  ) 
Dr  P.  K.  Gangopadhyay  Indian   Institute   of    Ciiemical    Biology    (CSIR), 

Calcutta 
Db  S.  K.  Mitba  (  Alternate  ) 
Shbi  a.  D.'  Lima  Air  India,  Bombay 

Shbi  Felix  Nobonha  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  Dev  Raj  Nabang  Delhi  Society   for    the    Prevention    of    Cruelty    to 

Animals,  Delhi 
Honorary  Seoretaby  (  Alternate  ) 

(  Continued  on  page  2  ) 


©  Copyright  1983 

INDIAN  STANDARDS  INSTITUTION 

This  publication  is  protected  under  the  Indian  Copyright  Act  (XIV  of  1957  )  and 
reproduction  in  whole  or  in  part  by  any  means  except  with  written  permission  of  the 
publisher  shall   be  deemed   to   be   an  infringement  of  copyright  under  the  said  Act. 


IS  I  10450  -  1983 

(  Continued  from  page  1  ) 

Members  Representing 

Db  a.  V.  Natarajan  Central  Inland  Fisheries  Research  Institute  (  ICAR  ), 

Barrackpore 
Dh  K.  L.  Sehgal  (  Alternate  ) 
Da  P.  R.  Pabbai  Directorate  General  of  Health  Services,  New  Delhi 

Shri  S.  C.  Gtjpta  {  Alternate  ) 
Shki  T,  E.  Patterson  T.   E.     Patterson    ( India  )    Private   Limited^   New 

Delhi 
Shut  D.  D.  Dhawan  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  R.  S.  Prasad  University  of  Kerala,  Trivandurm 

Dr  R.  R.  Rao  Ciba-Geigy  Research  Centre,  Bombay 

Shri  M.  M.  Matjikws  (  Alternate  ) 
Db  K.  a.  Reddy  Central  Poultry  Breeding  Farm  (  Ministry  of  Agri- 

culture ),  Bombay 
Baio  P,  D.  Saksena  In  personal  capacity  (  E-20,  Saket,  New  Delhi ) 

Db  Satish  Ktjmar  Indian  Veterinary    Research    Institute    (  ICAR  ), 

Izatnagar 
Dr  H.  S.  Pandbv  (  Alternate  ) 
Dk  (  Smt  )  Saraljit  Sehoai,  National  Institute  of  Communicable  Diseases,  New 

Delhi 
Db  Haki  Om  Gupta  (  Alternate  ) 
Shbi  U,  K.  Shakma  Indian  Airlines  Corporation,  New  Delhi 

Shbi  G.  p.  Bhatnaoab  (  Alternate  ) 
Db  BaiJPAL  Singh  Central  Avian  Research  Institute  (  CSIR  ),  Bareilly 

Db  Manohar  Singh  Director       of      Animal        Husbandry        Haryana, 

Chandigarh 
Dr  G.  p.  Gboveb  (  Alternate  ) 
Prof  P.  N.  Siuvastava  University  Grants  Commission,  New  Delhi 

Maj-Gen  S.  N.  Srivastava  Directorate  of   Remount  Veterinary  Services,  Army 

Headquarters,  New  Delhi 
Shri  M.  E.  Thomas  Chief  Controller  of  Imports  and  Exports,  New  Delhi 

Shrimati  p.  Mohan  (  Alternate  ) 
Da  T.  R.  Thyaoaeajan  Indian  Drugs  and  Pharmaceuticals  Ltd,  Rishikesh 

Dr  S.  p.  Shabma  (  Alternate  ) 
Db  T.  N.  Vaishnay  Director      of    Animal   Husbandry,   Gujarat    State, 

Ahmadabad 
Db  B.  M.  L.  Vabmani  Industrial  Toxicology    Research    Centre    (  CSIR  ), 

Lucknow 
Dr  J.  L.  Kaw  (  Alternate  ) 
Shbi  T.  Pubnanandam,  Director  General,  ISI  (  Ex-officio  Member  ) 


Director  (  Agri  &  Food  ) 


Secretary 

Shri  Lajinder  Sin^gh 
Deputy  Director  (  Agri  &  Food  ),  ISI 


IS  :  10450  .  1983^ 


Indian  Standard 


CODE  FOR  TRANSPORT  OF 
FRESH  WATER  AQUARIUM  FISH 


0.     FOREWORD 

0.1  This  Indian  Standard  was  adopted  by  the  Indian  Standards 
Institution  on  31  January  1983,  after  the  draft  finalized  by  the  Live 
Animals  Sectional  Committee  had  been  approved  by  the  Agricultural 
and  Food  Products  Division  Council. 

0.2  The  live  fish  transport  has  been  practised  in  India  since  time  im- 
memorial in  open  containers,  with  renewal  of  water  at  intervals.  Recent 
advancements  in  thermal  insulating  materials  and  techniques  of  packing 
in  polyethylene  bags  sealed  with  oxygen  have  almost  replaced  the  tradi- 
tional system.  The  aquarium  fish  stand  well  in  this  type  of  transport. 
The  fish  are  properly  conditioned  to  avoid  heavy  mortality  during  trans- 
port. The  conditioning  involves  isolation  of  healthy  specimen  species- 
wise  and  keeping  them  in  a  tank  either  made  of  cement  concrete  or  cloth 
HAP  A  planted  in  lenitic  or  lotic  waters  for  a  period  (  not  beyond  6  hrs  ), 
which  is  regulated  depending  on  the  length  of  the  distance  and  duration 
of  transport. 

0.3  For  the  purpose  of  deciding  whether  a  particular  requirement  of  this 
standard  is  complied  with,  the  final  value,  observed  or  calculated, 
expressing  the  result  of  a  test,  shall  be  rounded  ofF  in  accordance  with 
IS  :  2-1960*.  The  number  of  significant  places  retained  in  the  rounded 
off  value  should  be  the  same  as  that  of  the  specified  value  in  this 
standard. 


1.  SCOPE 


1.1  The  scope  of  this  code  is  restricted  to  the  conditions  for  transport  of 
live  aquarium  fish  { tropical  and  ornamental  fresh  water  species  )  for  ex- 
hibition and/or  breeding  purposes. 


*Rules  for  rounding  off  numerical  values  {  revised ). 

3 


IS  :  10450  -  1983 

2.  GENERAL  REQ,UIREMENTS 

2.1  The  fresh  water  fish  selected  shall  be  disease-reistant  and  healthy  be- 
fore conditioning  and  packing  for  transport. 

2.2  The  fish  shall  be  protected  from  extreme  climatic  conditions  and  any 
kind  of  stress. 

2.3  As  far  as  possible  the  fish  to  be  packed  and  transported  shall  be  of  the 
same  species/ variety /strain  and  size.  The  number  of  fish  to  be  packed 
in  each  container/shall  depend  on  species/variety/strain  and  size. 

2.4  All  aquarium  fish  shall  be  transported  by  air  and  direct  flights  for 
long  distances  and  by  the  fastest  train  for  short  distances. 

2.5  The  polyethylene  bags  holding  live  aquarium  fish  shall  be  filled 
50  percent  of  its  capacity  with  oxygen  under  a  pressure  of  0'5  kg  per 
cm2  and  mouth  of  the  bag  shall  be  tied  tightly  so  as  to  prevent  escape 
of  oxygen  during  transport. 

2.6  During  transport,  as  far  as  possible,  jolts,  splashes  and  any  other  kind 
of  shocks  shall  be  avoided. 

3.  PACKING  REQjUIREMENTS 

3.1  Only  tested,  leakproof  and  thick  (  not  less  than  75  micron  )  polyethy- 
lene bags  of  the  following  dimensions  shall  be  used  for  packing  of 
aquarium  fish: 

a)  62  X  40  cm, 

b)  60  X  30  cm,  and 

c)  55  X  20  cm. 

3.2  The  polyethylene  bags  of  the  dimensions  given  above,  used  to  hold 
live  fish,  shall  be  packed  in  16"5  litres  rectangular  oil  cans  provided 
with  lids  or  reinforced  cardboards  cartons  of  sturdy  texture. 

3.3  The  reinforced  cardboard  cartons  shall  be  insulated  with  thermocole 
lining  from  inside. 

3.4  The  polyethylene  bag  shall  be  filled  with  fresh,  pure  and  filtered 
water  to  40  to  50  percent  of  its  capacity. 

3.5  Certain  fishes  like  trigger  fish,  catfish,  prawns,  lobsters,  etc,  shall 
first  be  packed  individually  in  a  separate  bag  having  sufficient  holes  and 
then  put  in  the  outer  polyethylene  bag  containing  fresh,  pure  and 
filtered  water. 


IS  :  10450  •  1983 

3.6  Loading  9.nd  unloading  shall  be  undertaken  quickly  and  be  done 
immediately  after  the  arrival  of  the  consignment.  When  cardboard  car- 
tons are  used  they  shall  be  handled  carefully  and  gently  during  storage 
operations  in  aircraft,  train,  etc. 

4.  LABELLING 

4.1  Each  packing  box,  whether  rectangular  can  or  cardboard  carton, 
shall  bear  a  label  giving  following  information  legibly  and  indelibly; 

a)  Name  of  the  fish  species; 

b)  Strain  of^sh; 

c)  Name,  address  and  telephone  number  of  the  consignor;  and 

d)  Name,  address  and  telephone  number  of  the  consignee. 

4.2  Each  container  shall  be  also  marked  with  cautionary  notice  reading 
as  under: 

'TOP  PRIORITY,  LIVE  FISH,  HANDLE  WITH  CARE' 

4.3  Further  the  cardboard  carton  or  can  shall  bear  on  the  face  a  red 
arrow  showing  the  upper  side. 


INDIAN    STANDARDS 

ON 

TRANSPORT  OF  LIVE  ANIMALS 

IS  : 

3059-1981  Code  for  transport  of  monkeys  by  air  {first  revision  ) 

3699  Code  for  transport  of  monkeys  by  land; 

(  Part  I  )-1978     Transport     from     trapping    area     to     the       nearest      rail       head 
( first  revision  ) 

(  Part  II  )-1978     Transport  from  rail-head  to  th«  nearest  airport  (  second  revision  ) 

3907  Code  of  practice  for  transport  of  laboratory  animals: 

(Part  I  )-1977      Transport  of  mice,  rats,   rabbits,  guinea  pigs  and  cotton  rates  and 
hansters  (first  revision  ) 

(  Part  II  )-1967     Transport  of  snakes 

(  Part  III  )-1967  Transport  of  frogs 

4157  Code  for  transport  of  livestock: 

(  Part  I  )- 1981       Code  for  transport   of  equines   (horses,    ponies  mules  and  donkey 
by  rail,  road,  air  and  sea  {first  revision  ) 

(  Part  II  )-1968  Transport  of  cattle  by  rail  and  road 

(  Part  III  )-1983  Transport  of  sheep  and  goats  by  rail  and  road 

4746-1968  Code  for  transport  of  dogs  and  cats  by  rail,  road  and  air 

5236-1982  Code  for  transport  of  pigs  by  rail  and  road  {first  revision  ) 

5237-1969  Code  for  transport  of  small  and  medium  size  seed  eating  birds 

5238  Code  for  transport  of  poultry: 

(  Part  I  )-1982  Transport  of  day-old  chicks  and  turkey  poults  {first  revision  ) 

(  Part  II  )-I982      Transport  of  poultry  other  than  day  old  xhicks   and  turkey  poults 
( first  revision  ) 


