IS 14665 (Part 5) :1999

( Reaffirmed 2004 )

faad*
(-'

RI-mw1715fMhJr+i=gFi

W Ilw .,

h ;,

Indian Standard
ELECTRIC TRACTION LIFTS -- SPECIFICATION
PART 5 INSPECTION MANUAL

ICS 91.140.90

0 BIS 1999

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

May 1999

Price Group

5

Lifts and Escalators

Sectional Committee,

ETD 25

FOREWORD

This Indian Standard (Part 5) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized Lifts and Escalators Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council. A large number of well as components a standard manual standard shall be states/union and to

by the

Indian Standards have been published to cover the requirements of different types of lifts as of lifts. In order to maintain uniformity in inspection of lifts, a need has been felt to prepare for inspection of lifts and this standard is prepared to meet this need. It is felt that this of great help to the regulatory staff who are implementing lift rules in their respective the technical staff of the lift manufacturers and lift maintenance contractors.

IS 14665 (Part 5) :1999

Indian Standard 13LECTRIC TRACTION LIFTS -- SPECIFICATION
MANUAL precaution the overhead distance available from the top lauding should be painted on the wall to warn the persons on top of the car, particularly when the overhead distance is inadequate. 3.2.2 Inspectors should never enter lift pits containing water. A fatal accident due to electric shock may occur under such conditions. When working in the lift pit, the inspector should always note the position of the car and also keep clear distance from descending counterweight in the hoistway of the lift being inspected and those in adjoining hoistway. 3.2.3 The power supply line disconnect switch should be opened, locked and tagged out when it is desired to prevent movement of the lift or when inspecting electrical parts, to ensure that no unauthorized person operates the switch. 3.2.4 Before starting the inspection of a lift, the Inspector should first determine that the operating device, emergency stop switch, and any other safety devices or switches are in proper working order and in the proper position for inspection. 3.2.5 When dual or attendant operation is provided, the changeover switch should be in the position for operation from the car only. Before inspecting a lift in a bank of "Group Supervisory Control Lifts", disconnect the lift to be inspected from the group operation." When means of communication is provided in the car, determine that it is Operative. While car operating device is provided on the top, use it to operate the car when on top of the car instead of depending on an Operator in the car. 3.3 Duties of Inspectors The following are the duties of the Inspectors. 3.3.1 While inspecting new lift or altered installation of a lift, determine whether lift installation confirms to the requirements of the relevant Indian Standard or lift regulations and whether the required safety devices function as required therern. 3.3.2 While making initial inspections, or periodical inspections and tests of existing installations after they have been approved for operation by the enforcing authority, determine that the equipment is in a safe operating condition and has not been altered except in conformity to the applicable BIS Code or lift regulations.

PART 5 INSPECTION 1 SCOPE 1.1 This standard (Part 5) applies to electric traction passenger/goods lifts erected at any place and intended for use by passengers. 1.2 This standard does not apply to: a) b) c) d) Service lifts (dumbwaiters) Hydraulic lifts Escalators Cranes

1.3 This standard is concerned with inspection of lifts from safety point of view and does not cover perfonmmce requirements and corresponding tests. 2 TERMINOLOGY 2.1 The definitions given in various Indian Standards on lifts are applicable. 2.2 Additional Definitions

Inspector -- Inspector means Inspector of lifts or any other officer appointed by State/Union Government to maintain Lift Act/Rules or any other Actllldes connected with safety of lifts and framed by State/Union .Government. 3 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS divided into three

3.1 This topic has been further parts: a) b) c) Personal .safety Duties of inspectors Arrangement Safety

for inspection

3.2 Personal

3.2.1 Inspectors should know the danger involved in inspection of the lifts, since any accident may not only disable the person but may prove to be fatal. Inspector should at all times be alert for moving objects, and when on top of an elevator car for moving counter weights, hoistway, projections such as beams, adjacent moving cars, cams and other equipment attached thereto or . mounted in the hoistway. The overhead clearance should always be noted as number of fatal accidents occur due to cars running into limited overhead space while inspections are made from top of the lift cars. As an added

IS 14665 (Part 5) :1999 3.4 Arrangement for Inspection c) d) e) From top of the lift car (Table 3) From the machine room (Table 4) From each (Table 5). and every landing of the lift

The .Inspector should request the owner or his agent to make the following arrangements, prior to inspection or test, on receipt of completion reports from the owner for the lift or his agent: a) Provide a qualified personnel from the lift manufacturer for initial inspection and from the approved lift maintenance contractor for subsequent periodical inspections to perform the tests specified in 4 and regulations .of the State/Union Government. Provide a qualified person of Government Licensed Electrical Contractor who has carried out the wiring works such as lift mains (Lighting and power), machine room lighting, ventilation of machine room and any other wiring work connected with lift installation and not being the lift wiring work carried out by lift manufacturer. NOTES ON TESTS can

4.2 Instruction given at the top of each table shall be read carefully and followed properly before starting inspection. 4.3 The points given .in tables are general guidelines. If art Inspector desires to carry out some more test as per provision contained in relevant Indian Standards, he is free to do so. 4.4 Before starting inspection from any of the position mentioned in 4.1 above, a sign board indicating that the lift is under maintenance and inspection shall be displayed at ground floor landing (preferably at all landings if possible). 4.5 The actual position of each and every point of the table shall be compared with the requirements `satisfactory' or and accordingly a remark `unsatisfactory' shall be written in remark column. 4.6 A detailed recommendation on each and every point when the remark `unsatisfactory' has been written in remark column shall be given at the end of the Table in the following format:

b)

4 GENERAL

4.1 The inspection and tests on lift installations be done from the following five places: a) b) From the lift pit (Table 1) From inside of the lift car (Table 2) Table No. S1 No. of Table

General S1 No.

Detailed Recommendation

Relevant IS or Lifi Rule

Table 1 Inspection Made from the Lift Pit [Clause 4.1 (a)] Instruction
1

Before Entering the Lift Pit
landing. Open the landing gate/door of the gate/door, thereby ensuring that the in `STOP position and once again check call. Open the bottommost landing gate/

Enter the lift pit only if it is dry. For this purpose take the lift car above the bottommost bottommost landing by a special key and check that the moving lift stops on opening electrical contact of the bouommost landlng is in the safety circuit. Put the pit switch that the lift does not operate by closing the bottommost landing gate/door and giving a door, put the pit light `ON' and enter the lift pit. From safety considerations, it is not recommended

2 3

to move the lift when inspecting from the lift pit.

As an additional precaution, keep the landing gate/door open by a small distance (say 50 mm) and keep pit switches in `STOP position. a) b) c) d) The car shall be moved only when directed by the inspecting person. The directives of the inspecting person shall be repeated and only on receipt of OK signal from the inspecting person, the car shall be moved. The car door and landing door (if possible) shall be kept open. person to start lift. They shall be closed only when asked by the inspecting

These doors shall be opened as soon as the operation of lift is over.

2

IS 14665 (Part 5) :1999 Table 1 (Concluded)

SI
No.
1

Description Dimensions b

Requirement I per approved plan or in its absence, as per relevant Indian Standard. Shall be in clean and dry condition. _cms _cms

Position _cms

Remarks

2

Clean and dry

3

Provision of ladder

4 ladder shall be provided if pit depth exceeds j 300 mm `as measured below tbe bottommost landing sill. Mention actual numbers and also mention whether it is spring buffer or oil buffer. Oil buffers are required when rated speed of the car is more than 1.5 metres per second. Mention actual numbers and also mention whether it is spring or oil buffer. Oil buffers are required when rated speed for the cm is more than 1.5 metres pe r second. Buffers shall not be in bent condition. In case of oil buffers a device for determining the quantum of oil shall be provided. Buffers shall not be in bent condition. In case of oil buffers a device for determining the quantum of oil shall be provided. Measure clearance when dle car is Ievelled at bottom most Iandlng, Measure clearance when the car is levelled at top most landing. Shall -be provided up to a height of two metres from the floor of the pit except where rope compensation sheave is provided, Shall be provided and should be accessible from the lowest landing. When pit depth is more than 2 m there should be two pit switches, one accessible from the lowest landing and other from the pit. The lift shall stop on opening of pit switch. It shall have free movement. It shall have free movement, The trailing cable shall be properly terminated 50 as to avoid detachment from termination box,

4

No. of buffers for car

clean and dry. Clean but not dry. Dry but not clean. Ne-ither dry nor clean. Depth does not exceed 1300 mm. I Depth exceeds 1 300 mm and a ladder is provided. DeDth exceeds 1 300 mm but a `ladder is not provided. One/two buffer(>) is/are provided, Spring/oil buffer(s) is/are provided. Oil buffers are not provided even though the speed exceeds 1.5 metres per second,
I

5

Number of buffers counterweight

for

6

Condition of car buffers

One/two b~ffers (s) is/are provided, Spring/oil buffer(s) is/m-e provided. Oil buffers are not provided even though the speed exceeds 1.5 rnetres per se~ond. Normal/Bent/Missing Device for de~ermining the quantum of oil is provided/rrot provided (Applicable only for

-1

Condition buffer

of counterweight

determining

the quantum of oil

8

9

10

Vertical clearance between and buffer ('car car rmrby') Vertical clearance be[wcerr counterweight and buffer (counterweight runby) Counterweight guard screen

=

=mA--provided. Guard screen is provided but not up to a height of two metres. Pit switch unit provided. is prcrvided/not I

II

Provision of pit switch and arrangemet;t for lighting the pit

12 13 14 15

Operation of pit switch Crrndkion of tension pulley of governor rope Condition of rollers of limit switches Condition of trailing cable and its termination, if termination is provided under the car exiting from the ffft pit:

Pulley is havinghrot =

having

free

~

satisfactory/U nsatisfactory.

Instruction.for 1 2 3 4

Put tbe bottom pit switch if provided to `RUN' position, Come out of the lift pit by using pit ladder. Put pit light switch off and return the upper pit stop switch to ran position. Closing the landing gate/dcror.

3

IS 14665 (Part 5) :1999 Table 2 Inspection Made from Inside of the Lift Car [Clause 4.l(b)]
Instruction 1 2 3 .Bring lift to bottommost landing by giving a hall call and enter the lift car. Obserwe points 1 to 10 first by keeping the car door and the Iandlng gate/door oyn. Close the car door and the landing gate/door and take the lift in `UP' and `DOWN' direction and observe points 11 onwards. Description Requirements Position Remarks

SI
No. 1 2 3 4 5

I
6 7 8

I

3=
9

10

Car capacity is displayedhrot displayed. is provided/not Provision of fan/trlower Fan/blower shall be pro~,ided. Fan/blower provided. Faniblower is tested and found Fanilrlower shall be in working Condition of fardblower order. OK/rrot OK. is Emergency alarm bell shall be Emergency alarm hell Provision of emergency provided. providedlnot provided. alarm bell. Emergency alarm bell shall be in of emergency Emergency alarm bell is tested Condition and-found OK/not OK aiarm bell I I working order. I Light point shall be provided, Provision of light point Light point is provided/not provided. terminating in socketholder. Car light shall be in working order. Car light is tested and found Condition of car lighting OK/not OK. lift car is General Condition of condition shall be General condition of the lift satisfactory. satisfactoryhrot satisfactory. car sides, to and floorin Ventilation shall be provided as per Ventilation is provided/rrot Provision of natural air relevant Indian Standard. provided. ventilation in case of solid car door and landing doors inside the lift car I I General condition of the car door Condition of car door General condition of the car door is satisfactoryhrot satisfactory. shall be satisfactory. ;ill gttp between ~ar sill and landing sill at each landing .anding level of car with respect to landing sill at all Iandhrg for up and down direction ~xperience of jerk in the car at the time of starting or Stopp ing Operation of stop button (Push button t e on] ) in case of manual operated car door, open the car door while the Iift is movin In case of power opemtcd car door, while lift is moving, operate the "DO" Sill gap shall not exceed 30 mm. Sili gap is normal/ abnormal. * The car shall stop at landing level within the specified limits. The car stops/does not stop within the specified limits of the landing level.

Display of car capacity

Car capacity shall be displayed.

No appreciable jerk shaii noticed at the time of starting.

jerk is Appreciable not noticed/rroticed at tbe time of I startirrg/stopping. I On pressing the stop button, the lift I Stop button is tested and found shtill stop. OK/not OK. On opening the car door, lift shall Lift stopsflift continues to move. stop.

be

Tbe car door shall not open.

The car open.

door

opens/does

not

~
17

The doors shall open.

The doors operr/do not open.

W 18

`. The doors shall open. The doors operr/tend to close.

In case of power operated car find kdnding doors, when they start to close at landings, actuate the door safety mechanism In case of manually operated doors, while inside the car and the control is on attendant mode, operate landing side call button

The lift shall respond to calls as per type of control.

Tbe lift responds to calI/does not respond to calls.

4

IS 14665 (Part5) Table 2 (Concluded)
sl
No. 2(I In case of manually operated doors, put the control in an automatic position, enter the lift car, manwally close the landing door and the car door In case of power operated doors, while lift is floor moving, is the correctly position displayed? h case of goodsasmp~s.senger tift, open the emergency exit, it' provided, when the lift is moving In case of gcsxis<umpassenger lift, when the lift halt either above or below the landing level say by about ~140 rnrn, operate the inching device if provided The lift shall not operate for four to six seconds after arrival of car at that landing. The lift operates instantIy/does not operate instantly. Description Requirements Position Remarks

:1999

1

21

The floor position shall be correctly displayed.

The floor positions displayed.

displayedhot

22

The lift shall stop.

The lift stops/does not stop.

23

The lift shall come to landing level.

The lift comes to/does not come to landing level.

"Table 3 Inspection Made from Top of the Lift Car [Clause 4. l(c)]
Instruction Before Entering Top of the Lift Car I In case of manually operated doors: a) b) 2 Take the lift car with two persons to the.top landing. Ask one person to come out of the carat the top landing.

Ask the person in the lift car to take the lift in the `DOWN' direction. c) In case of power operated doors: a) b) Take the lift car to the top banding and come out of the car. Give a car call to a lower landing and let the car move in the `DOWN' direction. in level with

3 4 5 6 7

Open the landing door with the special key to stop the moving lift car so that the top of the lift car is approximately the top landing level, Put car in inspection mode by putting maintenance switch `ON' before entering car top. Close the landing gate/door and run on inspection speed for elevators with contract speed of 1.0 m/s and above Switch `ON' the hoistway lighting and a light point on the car top. Description Provision of maintenance switch on car top Testing of maintenance switch `UP' and in `DOWN' Direction Provision of switch-board on car top consisting of batten holders with properly guarded light bulb and 3 pin socket Operation of lever of landing gate/door locks that is pressing of the door lever fmm the car top Earthing of metal parts of lift car Requirements Maintenance switch shall be provided. when maintenance switch is in `ON' position, the cafls fmm the landings and car shalI not get registered when traveling in either dkection. Switch board shall be provided. Position Provided/not provided. Tested and found OK/not OK.

Check stop switch on top of lift car is working and that the elevator does not move when the stop switch is in `STOP' position.

SI
No. 1 2

Remarks

3

Provided/not

provided.

4

The lift shall not start if the lever is pressed.

Lift starts/does not start.

5

The metal parts shall be efficiently earthed.

Metal part earthechre earthed.

are not

efficiently efficiently

5

IS 14665 (Part 5) :1999 Table 3 (Concluded)

T
No.
6 7 8

Description Provision of hoistwa) ~ Condition of Hoistway Observe whether cam comes with ,the lever gate locks Condition of car liners the retirin~ ]n contacl of' landing guide shoe

Requirements Hoistway lighting provided. Hoistway shall be clean condition. Retiring cam shall contact with the locks while the lift shall maintained be in

Position Hoistway lighting is provided /not provided. Hoistway is clean and needs no repairhequires plastering or repairs. Retiring cam comes in crmtactidoes not come in contact, with the lever of gate locks. The guide shoe liners are in goodhot good condition.

Remarks

not come in lever of gate is in motion.

9

10

Condition of counterweight guide shoe liners

The guide shoe finers shall be in good condition. There may be reasonable play, but it shall not he so much as to cause the shoe to jump the rails under any condition. The guide shoe liners sh~ll be in good condition. There nmy be reasonable play, but it shall not be so much as to cause the shoe to jump the rails under any condition. The wiring shall be properly terminated in midway junction box where installed. The trailing cable shall be in good condition that is the insulation shall not get frayed or damaged mechanically. Gang switch shall be in good working condition. On operation of safety switch the car shall stop. The car top shall be in good and strong condition. rhe guides shall be in properly lubricated condition.

The guide shoe liners are goodhot good condition.

in

11

CcmdiLimr of junction box

midway

Wiring terminated neatly/Needs adequate termination. The trailing cable is in izood condition and insulation is not frayed/not in good condition and insulation is frayed. Gang switch is in good condition/not in good condition. I'he car stops/does not stop. rbe car top is in good/not good condition. rhe guides are in properiy/not properly lubricated condition.

12

Condition of trailing cable

13

14 15 16

Condition of floor-gangway switches along the hoistway, if provided Operation of safety switch on car top Condition of car top
car and Lubrication of counterweight guides. (Roller guide shoes do not require lubrication of rails) Observe whether the counterweight stacks are firmly secured to the frame by tie-rod or other suitable means Condition of rope Fastening of suspension ropes Condition of facia plates

17

[t shall be firmly secured.

~ounterweight stacks ar~ firmly/ loosely secured.

[8 9

!0 !1

3-

Earthing of landing gate locks, gang switches, etc In case of manually operated doors, reverse the order of closing the doors by first closing the car door and then the landing door. Operate tbe floor button from inside the car or from landing side Condition of compensator Iinkchain/rope " -

rhe suspension rope shall be adequately fastened: vI.S. facia plates shall be provided below each landing to h;ve flush hoistway if required. Zarthing shall be satisfactorily done. rhe lift shall operate independent of sequence of closing of landing car door.

rhe suspension ropes are properly/ not properly fastened. " " ~acia plates provided/not provided. 3artbing is efficiently donehrot efficiently done. rhe lift operates/does not opemte.

t

shall be in good working condition whenever provided,

.inkchain

is in good/not

good

=+

Instruction 1 2 3 4 5 6

for Exiting from Top of the Lift Car Take the lift car to the top landing level and open the top landing gate/door. Come out from car top onto the top landing. Return car to normal mode by putting maintenance switch in `NORMAL' position. Also switch `OFF' car top light. Close the top landing gate/door. In case of manually operated doors, ask the person inside the lift car to come out at tbe top landing.

6

IS 14665 (Part 5) :1999 Table 4 Inspection of Lift from Machine Room [Clause 4.l(d)]
Instruction 1 2 Proceed to the machine room. Unlock the machine room. Description Locking arrangement machine room of the Requirements Locking arrangement shall be provided and machine room shall he kept locked. rhere shall be an easy access from the top landing to the machine I room. I rhere shall be an adequate cross ventilation preferably with exhaust fan. kfachine room shall be kept in clean condition. kdequate number of light points shall be provided and maintained in working order. Separate main switches for light and power are provided. rhree pin plugs shall be provided and maintained in working order. Brake releasing device shall be provided. DeIocklng key for landing gates shall be provided. Log book shall be maintained in up to dale condition. Hand lamp/torci~ shall be provided and maintained in working order. Lift equipment shall be protected.
I

sl
No. 1

Position .ocking arrangement is providedl provided/not but machine provided room was not locked. is an :here easy accessfinadequate access to the machine room from the top landing. rhe cross ventilation is adcquatefinadequate.

,

Remarks

I

2

ipproach to the machine from the top landing
I

room

3

I rhe machine room is kept ., I clean/is not kept clean. 4dequate number of light points are provided/not providectlprovided but not working. separate main switches for power and light provided/ not provided. pin plugs are Ihree provided/ providedhot provided but not working. Brake releasing device is provided/not provided Delocking key for landing gate is .providedhrot

4 5

~leanliness in the machine room Provision of light points and their working part

6

Provision of separate main switches for power and light Provision of three pin plugs

7

8 9

Provision of brake releasing device Provision of dek)cking key for landing gates Provision of maintenance book and entries therein Provision of hand lamp/torch log

10

11

12

13

Protection of lift equipment in case of phase failure or phase reversal Operation of overload tripping

14

Condition of various the panel

contacts

at

Overload tripping device for motor when provided shall be maintained in working order. All contacts shall be in proper condition .

Overload device tested and found OK/not OK.

15

Earthing arrangement of main switches, lift motor, control governor panel, overspecd, switch. etc

16 17 18 19

Adjustment of brakes Condition of brake shoe liners Operation of gear box if provided Operation of motor

The earthing arrrrngement shall be and electrical proper the contractor/owner shall ensure that earth resistance shall not exceed one ohm as per Indhrr Electricity Rules. The lift shall stop on application of brakes within specified limit. The brake liners shall be in good condition. The gear box shall be smooth in operation The motor shall be smooth in operation.

Earthing arrangement is tested and found OK/not

OK.

I

operation. The motor is smoothhroisy in operation.

I I

7

IS 14665 (Part 5) :1999 Table 4 (Concluded)

-s1
No.

Description Condition of gear box Lubrication of gear box

Requirements llrcre shaU not be any oil leakage from gear box (oozing acceptable). The gear box shall .be well lubricated. The condition of grooves shall be such that the rope does not move when the traction sheave stops. The ropes shall not be in frayed condition. The ropes shall not be in frayed condition. The rope shall not be in frayed condition. The control panel wiring shall be neatly grouped and the insulation of wires shall be more than one mega ohm with 500 volt megger. The lift, when operated on power or mantrafly, from tep most landing shall travel in upward direction till the final limit switch cuts off electric supply to motor. The Mt, when operated on pwer or manually, from bottornrnost landing, shatl travel in downward dmtion titf the final firnit switch cuts off the electric supply to motor. The overspeed governor and safety gear shall be tested as per requirement of 10 of IS 9878, for new lit% and in case of arty additionhlteration which changes the characteristics of overspeed govemnr and safety gear. hr case of periodic inspection, the overspeed and safety gear shall be tested with kift car stationary; after the test, the lift car shall be lowered to check that the safety gear has functioned properly. The trap dmr, if provided in machine room, shall be in sound condhion. The motor, when the lift car is loaded with balanced load in the car, shall draw approximately same current in all three phases separately. The linear speed of the fifi when the lift car is loaded with full contract bad, shall be measured in `UP' and `DOWN'dwtion, and mean rated Sp4 cafctdatcd in accordance with 2.48 of IS 1860. The linear speed of the lift can be measured dtily on the tmction sheave or aftematively cart be calculated by measuring motnr RPM and using the foflowing formula: 3.14 x Diameter of traction sheave in metre x measured motor r.p.m. Gear Ratio x Roping Factor x 60

Position There is an oil leakageltro oil leakage. The gear box does not need lubrication/needs lubrication. The rope movesldoes not move. The suspension rope is not frayed/ frayed, The governor rope is not frayecflfrayed. The limit switch rope is not frayedJfrayed. The control panel wiring is neat and insulation is one meg. above ohrrr/below one meg.ohm. Tested and found OKhrot OK,

Remarks

20
21

22

Condition sheave

of grooves of traction

23 24 25 26

Condition of main suspension ropes Condition of ropes of overspeed governor Condition of limit switch operating rope when provided Condition of wiring at control panel

27

Operation of up final limit switch

28

Operation switch

of

down

final

limit

Tested OK,

and found

OKhrot

29

.Operation of overspeed governor

Tested OK.

and

found

OK/not

30

Condition of trap door.

31

Testing of contract load and linear speed of the lift at the time of initial inspection, and in case of any addition/alteration which changes the contract load/speed

The trap door is in sound conditionhrot in sound conditioo/missing. The motor draws current as follows: up Down

Direcrion Direction
R phase Y phase B phase ... . ........ .. . . . ,..,,.,, . . .... . .... .

Contract Speed
,,,..mtrkc

Calculated Speed
......mtrlsec

Lineat speed of metres per second.

lift

in

8

IS 14665 (Part 5) :1999 Table 4 (Concluded)
Instruction 1 2 Before Exiting from the Lift Machine Room Lock the machine room. Proceed towards the floor landing.

Table 5 Inspection

Made from Floor Landings

[Clause 4.1 (c)l .,.

SI
No. I

Description Provision of delocking every landing arrangement at

Requirements shall arrangement Delocking provided at every landing. be

Position The delocking arrangement is providedhrot provided. The light points are provided/not provided. The landing doors are in operating conditiorrhot in operating condition. The hall buttons are in good conditionhrot in good condition. Tested and found OKhrot OK. indicators The are working/not working. Tested and found OK/not found OK.

Remarks

2 3

Provision of lights at every landing Condition of landing doors at every floor

4

Condition of hall buttons at every floor

A light point shall be provided on all landings. The landing doors shall be maintained in good operating and sound condition. The hall buttons shall be in good condition. The hall buttons shall respond to the type of operation of the lift. These shall be in working condition wherever provided. The switch, when made `ON shall make the landing calls inoperative and the car shall report to ground floor and shall remain on car control. When the switch is put `OFF' the car shall return to normal working. The landing door, on pull or sliding, shall not open and the car shall continue movement.

5 6

Operation of landing hall buttons Condition of floor indicatorhr use indicator or direction call registering light Opemtion fireman switch and test

7

8

Opening of any landing doors while lift is passing through a landing zone to another floor

The landing doors operr/ do not open.

9

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau harmonious development of the activities of standardization, and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. Review-of Indian Standards of comments. Standards are also reviewed such review indicates that no changes are up for revision. Users of Indian Standards or edition by referring to the latest issue of of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote marking and quality certification of goods

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments `BIS Handbook' and `Standards: Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed

from Doc : No. ET 25 (3481).

Amendments Amend No.

Issued Since Publication Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters : Telegrams : Manaksamtha (Common to all oftlces) Telephone 3237617 3233841

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones :3230131,3233375,323 9402 Regional OffIces : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELI-II 110002 : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi CALCUTTA 700054 : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022

{

Eastern

3378499,3378561 { 3378626,3379120 603843 602025

Northern

{ Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 { Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093 {

2350216,2350442 2351519,2352315 8329295,8327858 8327891,8327892

Branches

: AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. ` Printed at Printograph,
New Delh, Ph.: 5726847

