NAT lA IS 8997 : 2022 
Indian Standard 


Üye Rarer eb Tere Gras SURUT 


( TEAM FRAT ) 


Specification for Coupling Devices 
for Power Line Carrier 
(PLC) Systems 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 33.200 


© BIS 2022 


anda AM Sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Teg TH AMT, ay İde — 110002 


zf MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


November 2022 Price Group 6 


Power System Control and Associated Communications Sectional Committee, LITD 10 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Power System Control and Associated Communications Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. 


The Standard was first published in 1978. This revision has been brought out to bring the standard in the latest 
style and format of the Indian Standards. In addition, the following changes have been made: 


a) Clause 4.3, ambient temperature requirements has been explicitly mentioned for metallic equipment 
mounted outdoors in line with Regulation 27 (10) of the Central Electricity Authority (Technical Standards 
for Communication System in Power System Operation) Regulations, 2018. 


Coupling devices are connected between the coupling capacitor(s) and the carrier-frequency connection to the 
PLC terminal (or to a similar coupling device, directly or via additional equipment, in the case of retransmission). 
The coupling device, in conjunction with the coupling capacitor(s) ensures: 


a) The efficient transmission of carrier-frequency signals between the carrier-frequency connection and the 
power line, and 


b) The safety of personnel and the protection of the low-voltage parts of the installation against the effects 
of the power frequency voltage and transient overvoltage. 


This standard cover requirement of coupling devices. Methods of tests for coupling devices are covered in 
IS 8998. 


While preparing this standard, assistance has been derived from IEC 60481 : 1974 ‘Coupling devices for power 
line carrier systems’, issued by the International Electro Technical Commission. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


CONTENTS 


1 SCOPE 
2 REFERENCES 


3 TERMINOLOGY 

3.1 Methods of Coupling 

3.2 Coupling devices and terminals 
4 SERVICE CONDITIONS 


4.1 Exposure 

4.2 Altitude 

4.3 Ambient Temperature 

44 Power Frequency 

4.5 Operating Voltage 

4.6 Provision for Unusual Service Conditions 
5 REQUIREMENTS 


5.1 o Safety and Protection Requirements of the Coupling Device 
52 Insulation Requirements 
5.3 Carrier-Frequency Requirements 


6 MARKING 
6.2 BIS Certification Marking 


LIST OF FIGURES 
Fig. | Examples of Coupling 


Fig. 2 Examples of Coupling Through a Capacitor Voltage Transformer 


Fig. 3 Nominal Impedances For a Phase-Earth Coupling Device 


IS 8997 : 2022 


Page No. 


— 


a AY DAD A O GS da Aa Mü 0 


This page has been intentionally left blank 


IS 8997 : 2022 


Indian Standard 


SPECIFICATION FOR COUPLING DEVICES FOR 
POWER LINE CARRIER (PLC) SYSTEMS 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard covers performance requirements of 
coupling devices for power line carrier (PLC) systems. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards given below contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to revision, 
and parties to agreements based on this standard are 
encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the 
most recent editions of these standards. 


IS No. Title 


2071 (Part 1): 2016/ o High-voltage test techniques: 
TEC 60061-1 :2010 Part 1 General definitions 
and test requirements 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions 
shall apply. 


3.1 Methods of Coupling 


3.1.1 Phase-to-Earth Coupling — Coupling to the power 
line effected between the conductor(s) of one phase of 
the line and earth (see Fig. 1A and 2). 


3.1.2 Phase-to-Phase Coupling — Coupling to the power 
line effected between the conductor(s) of one phase 
and the conductor(s) of another phase of the same line 
(see Fig. 1B and 1C). The two phases may belong to 
the same circuit or to different circuits of the power line 
(inter-circuit coupling). 
NOTES 
1 Coupling is usually affected to one or more phase conductors of 
the power line (poles in the case of de power line), phase to earth 
and phase to phase being the most common forms of coupling. 
Coupling to all three phase of a circuit may be required in certain 
cases. Coupling to one or more associated insulation earth-wire 
conductors is also employed. 


2 Coupling between individual conductors of a phase bundle is a 
special application. 


3.2 Coupling devices and terminals 


3.2.1 Coupling Device — An arrangement of elements 
which contribute to ensure, together with one or more 


associated coupling capacitors, the transmission, under 
prescribed conditions of carrier-frequency signals 
between one or more conductors of the power line and 
the carrier frequency connection (see Fig. 1 and 2). 


3.2.1.1 These elements, alone or together, contribute to 
all, or part of, the following functions: 


a) Tuning, designed to compensate for the reactive 
component of the coupling capacitor(s) impedance, 
in order to promote the efficient transmission of 
carrier-frequency signals. This function may be 
performed by a tuning device; 


b) Impedance matching between the power line and 
the carrier frequency connection. This function may 
be performed by a transformer; 


c) Galvanic isolation between primary and secondary 
terminals of the coupling device. This function may 
be performed by the above mentioned transformer; 

d) Draining to earth of the power-frequency current 
derived by the coupling capacitor(s). This function 
may be performed by an inductance, termed drain 
coil; 

e 


wa 


Limitation of voltage surges coming from the power 
line, at the terminals of the coupling device. This 
function may be performed by lightning arresters 
suitably arranged in the coupling device; and 


f) Direct and efficient earthing, when necessary, of 
the primary terminal(s) of the coupling device. This 
function may be performed by an earthing switch. 


3.2.2 Earth Terminal — A terminal of the coupling device 
which is intended to be connected directly to the local 
station earth. 


3.2.3 Primary Terminal — A terminal of the coupling 
device which is intended to be connected to the 
low-voltage terminal of the coupling capacitor. 


3.2.4 Secondary Terminal — A terminal of the coupling 
device which is intended to be connected to the 
carrier-frequency connection. 


3.3 Communication Terms for Coupling Devices 


3.3.1 Nominal Line-Side Impedance (Z,) — The 
impedance which the coupling device, together with the 
associated coupling capacitor(s), is designed to match 
on the line side, and to which the requirements refer 
(see Fig. 3). 


IS 8997 : 2022 


D BRUON 


POWER LINE 


LINE TRAP 


COUPLING CAPACITOR 


b COUPLING DEVICE 
4 
£ l oo] 
| e 
| 
| 
> | 5 å TO THE c-f 
| CONNECTION 
| 
| 


Drain coil a = High-voltage terminal of coupling capacitor 
main arrester b = Low-voltage terminal of coupling capacitor 
Earthing switch C, C,,C, = Primary terminals of coupling device 
Matching and isolation transformer d = Earth terminal of coupling device 

Tuning device e, f = Secondary terminals of coupling device 


Secondary arrester 


Fic. 1A PHASE EARTH COUPLING 


IS 8997 : 2022 


POWER LINE 


LINE TRAP 


COUPLING CAPACITOR 


PHASE - EARTH COUPLING DEVICE 


TO THE c-f 
CONNECTION 


NOTE — See Fig. 1A for explanations. 


Fic. 1B COUPLING BETWEEN Two PHASES USING A PHASE-TO-PHASE COUPLING DEVICE 


| | PHASE - EARTH COUPLING DEVICE 


TO THE c-f 
CONNECTION 


NOTE — See Fig. 1A for explanations. 


FIG.İC COUPLING BETWEEN Two PHASES WITH Two PHASE-EARTH COUPLING DEVICES 


Fic. 1 EXAMPLES OF COUPLING 


IS 8997 : 2022 


POWER LINE 
LINE TRAP 
a 
INTERMEDIATE 
C VOLTAGE UNIT 
ooo] 

COUPLING 
CAPACITORS 


e 
6 TO THE c-f 
CONNECTION 
f 
C, = High voltage capacitor C, = Intermediate voltage capacitor 


NOTE — See Fig. 1A for explanations. 


FIG. 2 EXAMPLES OF COUPLING THROUGH A CAPACITOR VOLTAGE TRANSFORMER 


COUPLING CAPACITOR 


NOMINAL LINE-SIDE 
IMPEDANCE 


IS 8997 : 2022 


COUPLING 
DEVICE 


NOMINAL 
EQUIPMENT - SIDE 
IMPEDANCE 


FIG. 3 NOMINAL IMPEDANCES FOR A PHASE-EARTH COUPLING DEVICE 


3.3.2 Nominal Equipment-Side Impedance (Z,) — The 
impedance which the coupling device is designed 
to match, on the equipment side, and to which the 
requirements refer (see Fig. 3). 


3.3.3 Composite Loss — The composite loss brought 
about by the quadripole made up of the coupling 
device and associated coupling capacitor(s) having 
the specified capacitance and assumed to have no 
losses, terminated by the nominal line-side and 
equipment-side impedance. 


3.3.4 Return Loss — The return loss of the quadripole 
made up of the coupling device and associated coupling 
capacitors(s) having the specified capacitance and 
assumed to have no loss, respectively terminated by the 
nominal line-side and equipment-side impedance. 


3.3.5 Available Bandwidth — The frequency band within 
which the composite loss does not exceed, and the return 
losses do not fall short of the specified values. 


3.3.6 Carrier-Frequency Working Range — The range 
of carrier frequencies within which the available 
bandwidth of a coupling device can be set. 


3.3.7 Nominal Peak-Envelope Power — The 
peak-envelope power for which the coupling device 
has been designed compatible with the reguirements 
for intermodulation. 

NOTE — In case of double side band, nominal power shall be 


the carrier power plus the side band power with 100 percent 
modulation at a frequency of 800 Hz. 


4 SERVICE CONDITIONS 


Unless otherwise specified, coupling devices shall be 
suitable for operation in the service conditions given 
below. 

4.1 Exposure 

Outdoor service, exposed to sunshine, rain, fog, hail, 
frost, snow, ice, etc. 

4.2 Altitude 

The height above sea level shall be up to and including 
1 000 m. 

4.3 Ambient Temperature 


Unless otherwise agreed between manufacturer and 
purchaser, the ambient temperature shall be between 
—5°C and + 50°C and shall not exceed the following 
limits: 


a) + 40°C for the daily average, and 


b) + 32°C for the annual average. 
Metallic equipment mounted outdoor is expected 
to rise up to 65°C as per Regulation 27 (10) of the 
Central Electricity Authority (Technical Standards for 
Communication System in Power System Operations) 
Regulations, 2018. 


4.4 Power Frequency 


Power systems shall have a rated frequency between 
zero (dc) and 60 Hz inclusive. 


IS 8997 : 2022 


4.5 Operating Voltage 


The rated operating voltage of the power line shall be 
not less than 1 000 V. 


4.6 Provision for Unusual Service Conditions 


In all cases where the above conditions are not met 
and severe atmospheric conditions such as salt spray 
and industrial pollution are to be expected, special 
arrangements should be made between manufacturer 
and purchaser. 


5 REQUIREMENTS 


5.1 Safety and Protection Requirements of the 
Coupling Device 


5.1.1 General 


The coupling device shall meet the following 
requirements irrespective of whether or not the 
protective devices of an associated coupling capacitor 
or capacitor voltage transformer contribute to the 
safety and protection of the coupling device. The 
design of the coupling device shall be, such as to 
prevent the occurrence of dangerous potentials on the 
carrier-frequency connection due to the service voltage 
or transient overvoltage which may occur on the power 
line. 

NOTE — There are two types of transient overvoltage to be 

taken into account: 


a) Overvoltage due to the operation of switchgear. Such 
overvoltages may have amplitudes of the same order of 
magnitude as the service voltage and be transferred to the 
low-voltage side of the coupling capacitor because of the 
steep-fronted or high frequency nature of the transients; and 


b) Atmospheric overvoltages which are also transferred to 
the low voltage side of the coupling capacitor for the 
same reason. The coupling device shall be designed and 
built to ensure that a fault on the power line shall not in 
general cause a permanent interruption in the functioning 
of the coupling device. If, under abnormal power system 
conditions, the values specified in 5.1.5, 5.2.1 and 5.2.2 
are exceeded, this shall be a matter for special agreement 
between manufacturer and purchaser. 


5.1.2 Earthing of the Primary Terminal 


The coupling device shall be so designed that the 
impedance at power frequency between the primary 
terminal and the earth terminal is as low as possible and 
in no case in excess of 20 Q. This low impedance shall 
be ensured by a device, such as a drain coil or matching 
transformer winding as specified in 5.1.3. 


5.1.3 Drain Coil Winding 


The drain coil winding shall: 


a) Offer a maximum guarantee of continuity of 
connection to the earth terminal; and 


b) Withstand any of the above mentioned overvoltage 
which may, occur on the power line, taking into 
account the effect of the, main arrester (see 5.1.5). 


5.1.4 Earthing Switch 


An earthing switch shall be provided for making. A 
temporary direct connection between the primary and 
earth terminals. The rated current of the earthing switch 
shall be not less than 200 A. 


The method of operating the earthing switch shall take 
due regard of requirements for safety in accordance 
with the IE Rules. In case earthing switch is enclosed, 
an indication of ‘on’ and’ off” positions of the earthing 
switch shall be clearly visible. 


5.1.5 Main Arrester 


A lightning arrester shall be connected as directly as 
possible between the primary and earth terminals and 
shall be capable of protecting the coupling device and 
the carrier-frequency connection. The lightning arrester 
shall be of non-linear resistor type. 


NOTES 


1 It is recommended that rated voltage of the lightning arrester 
be of the order of 1 kV (corresponding to an impulse spark over 
voltage of about 4 kV) and that it be able to sustain an impulse 
discharge current of wave shape 8/20 us of at least 5 kA 
[see IS 2071 (Part 1) : 2016]. 

2 Where the coupling capacitor is remote from the coupling 
device, it may be necessary to provide, at the coupling 
capacitor, an additional arrester, similar to the main arrester. 

3 It may be advisable, both for the protection of the 
carrier-frequency connection and the PLC terminal, to provide 
an arrester which will limit the voltage across the secondary 
terminals of the coupling device to a value compatible with 
the withstand voltage of the carrier-frequency connection and 
that of the protection device, if any, at the other end of the 
carrier-frequency connection. Gas-type arresters, having 
a power-frequency spark over voltage of the order of a few 
hundred volts are generally suitable. 


5.2 Insulation Requirements 


5.2.1 Power Frequency Level 


For the isolation between primary and secondary 
terminals of the coupling device, the power frequency 
voltage tests shall be applied using a voltage of 
5 kV rms for one minute. 


5.2.2 Impulse Level 
The coupling device shall be so designed as to be able to 
withstand a 1.2/50 us impulse voltage of 10 kV (peak). 


5.3 Carrier-Frequency Requirements 


5.3.1 Composite Loss 


The composite loss shall be the least compatible with 
the bandwidth and design requirements called for by 
safety considerations and shall be not greater than 
2 dB over the whole of the available bandwidth of the 
coupling device. 


5.3.2 Return Loss 


The line-side and equipment-side return losses shall 
preferably be not less than 12 dB over the whole of 


the available bandwidth of the coupling device. In 
certain cases, values less than 12 dB may require to be 
accepted, subject to agreement between manufacturer 
and purchaser. 


5.3.3 Nominal Line-Side Impedance 


The nominal line-side impedance shall be in the range 
200 to 400 Q for phase-to-earth coupling and in the range 
400 to 700 Q for phase-to-phase coupling. 
NOTE — These ranges of impedance are derived from the parallel 
combination of the most common line-trap and line impedances 
in the case of overhead power lines. Special applications such 


as underground power cables or insulated earth wires would be 
subject to agreement between manufacturer and purchaser. 


In certain cases, the coupling device may offer the facility of 
being set to several different nominal line-side impedance values, 
if called for by the purchaser. 


5.3.4 Nominal Equipment-Side Impedance 


The nominal equipment-side impedance of the coupling 
device shall be 75 Q (unbalanced) or 150 Q (balanced). 
Other values would be subject to agreement between 
manufacturer and purchaser. 


5.3.5 Carrier-Frequency Working Range 


The carrier-frequency working range of the coupling 
device shall be subject to agreement between 
manufacturer and purchaser. 


5.3.6 Distortion and Intermodulation 


The level of individual distortion and intermodulation 
products arising within the coupling device shall be 
at least 80 dB below the level corresponding to the 
peak-envelope power. 


IS 8997 : 2022 


6 MARKING 


6.1 The coupling device shall be provided with a 
rating plate of weatherproof material, fitted so that it 
is readily visible, the inscriptions shall be indelibly 
marked. The rating plate shall give the following data: 

a) Manufacturer’s name; 

b) Type; 

c) Manufacturer’s serial number; 

d) Nominal peak-envelope power; 

e) Capacitance of coupling capacitor to which the 
carrier-frequency requirements of the coupling 
device are referred; 

f) Nominal line-side 
impedances; and 


and O equipment-side 
g) Available bandwidth or carrier-freguency working 
range. 
NOTE — Where it is not possible to include all the above 
data on the rating plate, or additional data are reguired such 
as, for example, information on the relative polarities of the 


transformer windings, other means of informing the user shall 
be provided. 


6.2 BIS Certification Marking 


The product(s) conforming to the reguirements of 
this standard may be certified as per the conformity 
assessment schemes under the provisions of the 
Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and the 
Rules and Regulations framed thereunder, and 
the products may be marked with the Standard 
Mark. 


This page has been intentionally left blank 


This page has been intentionally left blank 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: LITD 10 (17229). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 


Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 


Regional Offices: Telephones 


Central : 601/A, Konnectus Tower-1, 6" Floor, DMRC Building, 
Bhavbhuti Marg, New Delhi 110002 


Eastern (o : 8" Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, 2367 0012 


| 2323 7617 
Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 


Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg 
Chandigarh 160019 


265 9930 


Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri (East), | 2821 8093 
Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


