( Reaffirmed 2006 )

18: 7% - 1966

Indian Standard
GLOSSARY OF CATALOGUING TERMS

(First Revision)
Documentation
Chairman
DR S. R. R.&NGANATHAN

Sectional Committee, EC 2
Reprasenting In personal capacity (Sarada. 100, Main Road 4. Bangaldre 3) Hindustan Machine Tools Ltd, Bangalore Central Board of Iirigation & Power, New Delhi All India Federation of Master-Printers, Calcutta Directorate of Printing & Stationery, Government of Maharashtra, Bombay

Members SHRI ABDUI.RAHMAN SHRI K. I.. BHATIA SHRI H. K. DASS SHRI J. W. D'Sodza

SHRI B. S. NAIK (Altt'male) SHRI BARNEYFERNANDES Asia Publishing Ho& (P) Ltd Calcutta SHRI G. B. G~ostr Indian Association of Special Libraries and Ihformation Centre, Calcutta SHRIN. C. CHAKRAVARTY (Altcmnafe) SHRI GIRJA KUMAR Indian School of International Studies, New Delhi National Archives of India, New Deihi SHRI R. C. GUPTA SHRI. R. KISHORE(Alter%&), . SHRI R. E. HAWICINS Oxford University Press, Bombay SHRI C. E. JAMES 05ce of the ~Chief Controller of Printing & Stationery, New Delhi SWRIV. A. -MAN (AlteLnete) SHRI N. M. KETKAR Central Secretariat Library, New Delhi SHRI A. KRISHNAYURTHI Coun$~,;if Scientific & Industrial Research, New ., SHRI G. J. NARAYANA (Alternate) SHRI Y. M. MULAY National Library, Calcutta PROP A. NEELAMEGAAN Documentation Research & Training Centre, Bangalore SHRI S. PARTHASARATFIY Indian National Scientific Documentation Centre (CSIR), New .Delhi PRO-VICECEANCBLLOR Banaras Hindu Universigy, Banaras DEPUTY LIBRARIAN (AItevnat~) SHRI R. S. RAWAL Hind Pocket Books (P) Ltd. Delhi SHRI C. S. SIVARAMAN Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce & Industry, New Delhi (Continued on page 2)

INDIAN

STANDARDS

INSTITUTION
MARG

MAlrjAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR
NEW DELHI 110002

IS:7%-1%6

Members
%RIMATI TARA TIKKU SH~I JAINATH KAUL, Directer (Pub)

Representing
Central Hiltdi Directorate (Ministry of Education), New Delhi Director General, IS1 (2%oficio Member) . Setietary SHRI P. 1'. GOPALAXRISHNAN As&&ant Director- (prtb), ISI

Library

Technic@

Subcommi ftee, EC 2 : 8
Machine Tools Ltd,

conv~ncr &SRI A%DUL&l'IUAN
Members -08 A. NBEUMEGHAN
DR S. R. RANGANATHAN

Hindustan

Bangalore

Documentation Research and Training Cent% Bangalore In personal capacity (Savnda, 100, Maiii had 4, Aeronautical National Rangalore

'

%u

T. RANGANATHAN

Bungalow 3)

Laboratory

(CSIR),

2

IS:7% CONTENTS

- 1966

PAGE 0. FOREWORD 1. SCOpE CHAPTERA CHAPTERB CHAPTERC CHAPTERD CHAPTERE CHAPTERF CHAPTERG CHARTER. H CHAPTERJ CHAPTERK C&"&R L . .. ... . ... ... .. . ... . .. . .. ..* ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .i. 4 5 6 7 10 13 19 29 32 34' 35 38 39 40 46 53 -56 61 65 ....... ...... ...... ...... ... .. . 73 75 78 79 81

UNIVERSE OF SUBJECT? UNIVERSE OF WORKS TITLE . ..

AUTHOR AND COLLABORATOR UNIVERSE OF DOCUMENTS. .. RELATED DOCUMENT CATALOGUER'S NEEDS PRELIMINARYPAGES CATALOGUE . .. .. . . ,. .. . .,. . ..

CATALOGUING . ..

PHYSICALFORM OF CATALOGUE RECORDING ENTRY .. . ... . .. . .. . .. ...

CBA~TERM C&AFTERN CHAPTERP CHARTER Q CHAPTERR CHAPTERS CHAPTER T CHAPTERU CHAPTERV CHAPTERW

SECTIONS OF AN ENTRY HEADING .. .

NAME-OF-PERSON AND NAME OF CORPORATE BODY CHAIN PROCEDURE .........

ARRANGEMENT OF ENTRIES CANONSOF CATALOGUING .;. LAWS OF LIBRARY SCIENCE GENERAL NORMATIVEPRINCIPLES ... *..

ALPHABETICAL INDEX

3

IS:794: 1966

Indihn Standard
GLOSSARY OF CATALOGUING TERMS

(First Revision)
0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 12 August 1966, after the draft finalized by the Documentation Sectional Committee had been approved by the Executive Committee. 0.2 with the large increase in literacy and phenomenal expansion of library facility in the country there is a need, at the present time, to have an .authoritative- and more comprehensive glossary for the guidance of technical staff engaged in cataloguing work and those working in the schools of iibrary science.

03.1Recent developments in the field of cataloguing have brought out a number of new concepts, thereby introducing new terms to represent them. In order to avoid ambiguity and confusion arising out of misinterpretation of terms it is necessary to standardize the catalog&g termiuologL as far as possible. This consideration led the Documentation Sectional Committee to take up the revision of the glossary of cataloguing terms; The original standard, of which. this is a revision, was intended to help fix. precise meanings to words used as terms-of-art in cataloguing.
0.2.2 An Indian Standard on a similar subject, namely, Glossary dussa$cation terms (ISL;r550-1963), has already been published. of

0.3 Taking into consideration .the special nature of the subject and the convenience of readers, this glossary has been presented in a classified form. An alphabetical index has also been provided. There are 21 chapters, each denoted by a capital letter in the alphabetical order. Each item in the glossary is given an entry number and this, preceded by the capital letter denoting the chapter, is used as index number in The numbering system followed in this glossary the alphabetical index. is different from- that recommended in IS: 12-1964*. The numbers of sections have been given in accordance with the principle of mnemonics This system automatically makes certain which pervades all classification.
*Guide for drafting

Indian Standards

(second revision).

IS: 796 - 1966
that the relevant terms and their definitions will cohere together. This It is hoped-the glossary style is the same as that used in IS: 2550-1963*. in this form would be more expressive to the members of the profession, who would, therefore, be in a position to make a better use of it. 0.3.1 Against each entry number in the glossary, the first paragraph This is followed by gives the approved standard term and its definition. terms alternate to the approved term, if any. Such alternate terms arenot, however, recommended for use. 0.3.2 At the end of each paragraph, thl: source from which the term In the case of and the definition are taken is given within parentheses. terms originated by the. Sectional Committee itself. no source is indicated. 0.3.3 The abbreviations
ABBREVIATION

used for the sources cited are as given below:
SOURCE

ALA ccc Dot Encyc Glos Thompso?

BEETLE (Clara).

and title entries. Ed 5.

Ed. ALA cataloguing 1949..

rules for author code. 1964.

RANGANATHAN (S R). RANGANATHAN(S R)

Classified catalogue Ed. Documentation Encyclopaedia of classification of

1963. LAy9;i

and its facets, librarianship. terms; Indian

JJ&mas)

.

IS: 2550-1963 Glossary Standards Institution.
THOMPSON (Anthony). terms. International

Basic vocabulary

of catalogumg

pZes (Paris).

conference 1961; P 112-19.

on catalogacjng @hCi-

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard
covers definitions of technical terms current in the
field of library mtaloguing.

*Glossary

of classification

terms.

5

CHAPTER

A

UNIVERSE
A0 Subject -Assumed
Alterndte Term

OF SUBJECTS
term. (CCC, KAlO. GZos, C2).

Knowledge

Mass

NOTB - Its exposition may extend in print to several volumes at one extreme or only to a single sentence or even a single word at the other extreme. For example, the knoWledge masses, contained in and denoted by the following, stand arranged in the decreasing sequence of their extension: ' i) Encyolopaedia of general knowledge, 2) Encyclopaedia of library science, 3) The knowledge content of this standard (IS: 796-1966). 4) The knowledge content of Chapter A of this standard, and 5) The knowledge content of this very section -Section AO.

Al A2 A3

Thought - Knowledge

mass.

(G&X,' C3). usually em-

Macro-thought - Subject of great extension. bodied in the form of a book. (Glos, C31).

Micro-thou@t - Subject of small extension, usually embodied in the form of an article in a periodical, or of a pamphlet, or of a section or a paragraph in a book. (Glos, C32).
Examjdes : 1) Examples 1, 2 and 3 under Set A0 may be taken to em-

body Macro-thought. 2) Examples 4 and 5 under Set AU may be taken to embody Micro-thought.
NOTF -Macro-thought and hficro-thought are relative terms without a sharp line of demarcation.

A4

Spot Thought - Subject of very small extension, usually embodied in a sentence or even a word.

6

CHAPTER B

UNIVERSE
Bl

OF WORKS

Expressed Thought -Thought expressed in language, pictures, or other symbols, or in any other medium, and thereby made communicable. (GZos, DO).
Exampte: The above definition itself is Expressed Thought. It is expressed in the English language. A picture is also an Expressed Thought. A mathematical or a chemical formula is again an Expressed Thought. A gesture is equally an Expressed Thought. Alternate Term

Work B2 Quasi-Clam - Work which is treated as a class in a classification scheme or whose title is used as a subject-heading in cataloguing practice. (CCC, FAS).
NOTE - A Quasi-Ciass is usuallqi a Sacred Work, a Work of Literature, a Classic or a Periodical Publication. Such works are usually governed by special rules in a catalog& code.

B21

Sacred Work -Basic work of a religion, generally accepted as such among its followers. (CCC, FAS.. GLos;Dl).
Examples : vcaas \ Upanishads Tantras Tripitakas
NOTE-

Talmud Bible New Testament Koran

A Sacred Work is often treated as if it were a classor a subject.

B22

Work of Literature -Work (other than a Sacred Work) in the form of a poem, drama, fiction, prose, champu or any other literary form, of which the outstanding qualities are beauty of form, emotional or intuitional appeal, and endless 1 yers of suggestions in regard to meaning and/or which is of . tuitive or trans-intellectual origin. (CCC, FA6. Gios, D2). J
Examples ; Ramayana Iliad Post office Sakuntala Canterbury Tales Apple Cart Hamlet Hound of Heaven

NOTE 1 -This involves judgement particularly in the case of a poem, drama, fiction and champu. The judgement may not be unanimous.

7

B23
NOTE 2 - A Literary Work is treated as if it were a class or a subject unless its primary purpose is the exposition of specialized knowledge.

B23

Classic -Work usually having embodiment in several versions, adaptations and translations, inspiring other works on itself, and getting copied out or brought out in print or both even long after its origin. (CCC, FA7. Glos, D3).
Exam+& :

Aristotle's Poetics Newton's Priltcipia Marx's Das Capital
NOTE -- A Classic is often treated as if it were a class or a subject.

B24 B3

Periodical
NOTE-A

Publication -

[Sei Set E32).
is often treated as if it were i

class

Periodical or a subject.

Publication

Multi-focal Work -Work treating several collateral subjects not having a common universe, of the first remove according to the preferred scheme of classes. (Glos, D53). Pedestrian Work - Work which is not a Sacred Work, a Classic or a Work of Literature and is not treated as if it were a class or a subject in usage. (CCC, FA91. Glos, D4). Pseudo-Clasdc - A Pedestrian Work provoking other works, such as criticisms or parodies of itself and other kinds of dependent works. (Glos, D41). Associated Work -Work on a Pseudo-Classic. (Dot, B242). got by some modification of Deuendent Work -Work another work or by the augmentation of it. (CCC, GB4. Glos, D80).
Examples :

B4

B41

B411 B5

Abridgement Commentary Concordance Continuation

Index Paraphrase Sequel Translation

NOTE - The modification or augmentation, as the case may be, need not necessarily be by the author of the original work. It may also be done by any other person or corporate body.

B51

Version - One of several forms of exposition in the same or another language of a work. (Thompson, 2).
NOTE-If the version has sufficient new qualities in thought or expression or both, it is deemed to be an independent work in its own right.

Example:

See examples under Set B53, D56, B59. 8

B59 B52 Abridgement -Reduced form of a .work got by the condensing or omitting of details or both, but retaining the general quality and sense as a whole and the unity of the original work. (CCC, FA41). Example: Part 1 of the Library manticd of S. R. Ranganathan gives an Abridgement of his work entitled Five laws of library science. Adaptation - A version `of a work, re-written for a parti-' cular purpose, but not so changed as to be deemed an independent work on the basis of its quality of thought and expression. (CCC, FA42). Exam@: Part 7 of the Library mamal of S. R. Ranganarhan is an adaptation of his work entitled Cololz classification for the is use of small libraries. But Lamb's Tales from Shabakespearc an independent work, and not an adaptation of Shakespeare's dramas on account of its individualistic quality of thought and expression.
(Glos, D83).

I353

B54 B55

Catechism

-Work

in the form of question and answers.

(G&X, Parody - Work in which another work is mimicked. D84). Example: F. D. Downey's When we were rather older is a parody of A. A. Mime's Whelz we were very young.

B56

Translation-Work which is the expression of another work in a language different from that of the original but not deserving to be deemed ,an independent work on the basis of the quality of its thought and expression. (Glos, DSS). Example: Kamban's Ramuyana is not' a translation of Valmiki's Rumayana. But R. C: Dutt's Rum~yyalza is an English translation of Vahniki's Ramayana. Sequel -Work eontinuing another work. (Glos, D86). Exam$le: L. P. Jacks' Education of the whole man, etc .is a sequel to his Inner sentinel. Concordance - An alphabetical index of .the principal words

B5'7

B58

in a work, `showing their location in the text, sometimes giving their context, and sometimes defining words. Exumpb: Broughton (Leslie Nathan). Concordance to the poems of Robert Browning.

B59

Commentary-A collection of explanatory or critical notes on a work, either issued independently or accompanying the text. Example: Ramananda Saraswathi. Vedanta darsana with comm Brahmamritavarsini.
9

Cl
CHAPTER C

TITLE
Cl Title -Name
of work. (CCC, FBl. Glos, D6).

Exam@: Glossary of catalog&g present work.

terms is the title of the

Cl1

Title Proper of a Periodical Publication -Title of a periodical publication which includes the name of the sponsor if it occurs at the beginning and excludes it if it occurs at the end. (CCC, EB94).
Examjdes: * .. jwoceedings. bulletin for librapies.

1) ASLIB

2) UNESCO

3).Annals in the case of the Annals. of the Indian Library Association.
4) Trartsactions
Society. in the case of the Transactions of the Royal of the

c2

Partial Title r A title consisting of only a part Title as given on the `title page. (ALA).

NOTE - It may be a secondary part of the Title, as a Sub-title or an Alternative Title'or the Title with some of auxiliary words or other less significant words omitted.

c21

Catchword Title-A Partial Title consisting of some striking word or phrase likely to be remembered by a reader. (ALA).
Exam@: Bible for the Holy Bible.

c22

"or" or its equivalent FB3).

Alternative

Title - A Sub-title introduced

by the `word and forming part of the title. (CCC,

Example: In the full title of the work contained in the book Soc'ial bibliograehy or physical bibliography for librarians, authors and publishers, the part Physical bibliography for librarians, authors and publishers is Alternative Title.

C23

Sub-title - A secondary or subordinate title usually explanatory and forming part of the title. (CCC, FB2).
Example: In the full title of the book Documedation and its facets, being a symposizcm of seventy papers by thirty-two 10

c52
auttcors, edited by S. R. Ranganathan the part A symposium of seventy papers by thirty-two authors is the Sub-title. C24 Short Title -The name of a work, briefer than its full title, without prejudice to intelligibility and help in identifying the work. (CCC, FB4). Alternate Term Abbreviated Title Example: Library development plan is the Short Title of the book with the title Library development plan with draft library bills for the Union Government and the Constituent States by S. R. Ranganathan.
NOTE--Generally such as Elements, be preserued. speaking, initial words other than an article, Handbook, Introduction, Primer and Treatise may

c3

Uniformized Title - Title uniformized by popular or cataloguing usage in lieu of listless, and often unintended, variants of the title of one and the same work in different editions or the titles of different volumes of one and the same work of the different volumes or of the same periodical publication. (CCC, FB91). Example: Many governmental and other annua1 reports change their titles listlessly. For example, it may be Administration report on agriculture in one year, Annual report om agriculture in another year and Review of agriculture in still another year. This is a case where a Uniformized Title is called for.

c4

Polyglot Title - Title given on the title page in two or more languages. (CCC, EA521). C5 TITLE BY POSITION IN A DOCUMENT

Half Title -Title, usually short, given on the half title page of a document. (CCC, FB5). Example: Classijied catalogue code is printed as the Half Title of the work contained in the book Classi$ed catalogue code with additional rules for dictionary catalogue code by S. R. Ranganathan. Running Title - Title, shortened if necessary, usually found printed at the top of each verso page or all the pages of a book. (CCC, FB6). Example: Classijied catalogue code is printed as Running Title at the top of each verso page of the book Classijed

11

a3
catalogue code with additional rules for dictionary cdalopu by S. R. Ranganathan. c53 code

Binder's Title -Title, shortened if necessary, usually found tooled on the spine of a book. (CCC, FB7). Example: Classijied catalope code is tooled on the spine' of the book, CCassi$ed catalogue code with additional r&es for dictionary catalogue code by S. R. Ranganathan.
NOTE -

It may be the same as the Half Title or the Running Title. BY ITS SIGNIFICANCE that discloses the subiect- of the

C6 TITLE C61 Tell-Tale work. Example: C62

Title-Title

The title of thii standard is a Tell-Tale Title.

Fanciful Title -Title that does not disclose the subject of the work. (CCC, FB92). Example: Library cheque-book of jive leaves, the name of a work by S. R. Ranganathan based on an address to the German Library Conference in 1956, is a Fanciful Title.

C63

Proper Name Title - Either a Fanciful Title or a title beginning with a proper noun and, for this or other reasons, having the status of a proper name. (CCC, FB93). Examples : 7 1) Oxford book of English prose 2) Hider's international classi@atiolz

12

Dlll CHAPTER D AUTHOR DO Dl PersonAND COLLARORATOR

An assumed term. (CCC, FCl).

number of persons taken Corporate Body - Sense 1 -A collectively; usually a united, or organized, or informal; coming together in a common cause or for common action, such as governmental business or commercial or industrial or service or political or any other business, or for deliberation, or for collective expression of opinion or statement. number of corporate bodies, in Sense 1, taken Sense 2 -A collectively. (CCC, FC2). Examples : Sense 1 1) Government of India 2) Madras Chamber of Commerce 3) Indian National Congress Sense 2 1) United Nations 2) Afro-Asian Conference 3) International Federation of Library Associations

Dll

Organ of Corporate Body-Non+autonomous corporate body formed by:

part of a

1) the constitution of the parent body; or 2) a legislative, executive or administrative measure, or deliberative work, for an indefinite period within the field of function of the parent body ; or 3) a legislative, executive or administrative measure for a specific piece of work for a specified duration, within the field of function of the parent body. (CCC, FC21). Dill Constitutional Organ -Organ Section Dll. (CCC, FC211). of category 1 mentioned in

Examples : 1) President of India 2) Supreme Court 3) Syndicate of the University of Mysore 13

D112 D112 Administrative Organ - Orgkn of category 2 mentioned in Section Dll (CCC, FC212).
Examples :

1) Ministry of Education of the Government of India 2) Publications Committee of the Mysora Libra@ Association. 3) Documentation Sectional Committee of the Indian Standdards Institution D113 Permwent Organ - Orgap of categories 1 ad 2 mentioned in Section Dll. (CCC, FC213). r Exam$es : See. examples under Sections D 111 and D112 D114 Temporary Section Dll. Or&an - Opgan of eategory ,3 mentioned in (CCC, FC214): .

Exa&es : 1) Select Committee on Mysore Public Librari&&ll 2) Library Committee' of the' Univeksity Grands Commi&on of `1958 _. 3) Library Techniques S&zommittee .of the Documehtation SecTioxial Committee of thei Indian S,tandards Institution
.

DlZ

Government - Sense 1 - &rporatt body with full or limited sovereign power over a territ6i-y: It. has ~generall~executive, legislative, judicial and administrative `functions. Other funktions, such as defence, taxation, regulation of commerce, public transport and communication will vary with the degree of limitation in the sovkreign power.. (CCC, FC22). Examples : 1) Government' of India 2) Government of Mysore . 3) Government of the United Kingdom Sense 2 - Local Authorit in charge of the regulation, promotion and/or provisiofi` oP sp`ecified l&z&lpublic services in an area, under power delegated with the .Govemment within the territory of which its own area lies, and with a defined extent of autonomy. (CCC, FC22).
Examples :

1) District Board of Kolar 4 Corporation of Bangalore
14

3) Panchayat Board of Sirkali

D14 Sense 3 FC22). Organ of Government in Sense 1 or Sense 2. (CCC,

Examples : 1) The President of India 2) Supreme Court of India 3) Council of the Corporation D13
Institution

of Bangalore

or autonomous corporate body Sense I- Independent other than a government. It may be created by a government or constituted under a statute or formed voluntarily, either It has or it is intended to have contiformally or informally. nued existence and functions beyond that of merely convening a conference. (CCC, FC23). Examples : 1) Indian Standards Institution 2) Indian Statistical Institute 3) Mysore Libra@. Association Sense 2 - Organ of an Institution (CCC, FC23). in Sense 1 d.eefined above.

Examples : 1) Documentation Sectional Cemmittee of kbe Indian dards Institution 2) %oveming Council of Mysore Library Association DlS. Conference - Ad hoc assembly for deliberation tion and expression of opinion -or sentiments.

Stan-

or formula-

Sense 1 - Not convened by: 11 A government and made up solely of its own pgnn;t or as a Constituent Assembly to form a Sovereign
I

12 An Institution and made up solely of its members. or as a Foundation Assembly to form an Institution; or 13. More than' one government jointly and confined solely to its own .personnel; or 14 More than one institution jointly and confined solely to their members. Sense 2 - Convened and conducted by: A number of persons or corporate bodies or both 21 spontaneously to consider matters of common interest; or 15

D141
A body with no function or existence beyond the 22 conference convened and held by it; or A body with only the convening and holding of 23 (CCC, FC24). cQnferences at intervals as its primary function.
Eiatn#les:

Sense 1 - Indian Mathematical Conference of 1957 Committee of the above Conference Sense 2 -Reception D&41 Organ Conference - Any category of assembly excluded from the definition of a conference in Section D14. It is an organ of the corporate body or corporate bodies convening it. (CCC, FC241). I Author (as `Applied to. a ' Work) (Personal and Corporate) Sense 1 - Person creating a work, that is, the thought and the expression constituting it. (CCC, FC3). Example: S. R. Ranganathan is, the Personal Author of Chassi$ed catalogwe c&k 1964. Ed 5. body owning responsibility for a work, Sense 2 -Corporate that is, for the thought and the expression constituting it. (CCC, ,FC3). Exam?&: Indian Standards Institution `is the corporate author of this work. as author, the responsibility for Sersonal Author -Person the thought and expression constituting the work resting solely on his private capacity and not on the capacity of any otllce being held by him within `a corporate body nor on the capacity of that body. (CCC, FC31).
Example: S. R. Ranganathan work Classijed catalogue code.

D2

D21

is the personal

author of the

The work in a document is of personal authorship if its primary function is the extension of the boundary of a field of knowledge or its intensification and the responsibility for the thought and expression of it rests on the person and not on the office held by him in the corporate body in spite of his being a paid or an honorary employee or a member of the corporate body. The mere mention of the personal name of an official of the corporate body in the space in which author's name is usually mentioned in a book, is not sufficient reason to deem the work to be of personal authorship and not of corporate authorship.

16

D7 D211 D22
as author, the responsibility for the thought and expression constituting the work resting solely on it or any organ of it and not on the private capacity of any person or persons forming part of or holding office in or in any other way connected with the body. (CCC, FC32). Examples : 1) the Library Committee of the University of Rangoon is the Corporate Author of the Catalogtie of periodicals in the ultiversity and other libraries of Ra?rgoon. 1937. 2) The Mayor of Madras is the Corporate Author of Rdings of S./ Satyamwthi, the Mayor of Madras.

Contributor - (See Section E342). Corporate Author -Corporate body

D23

sonal or corporate. Exam$es :

Anonymous

Work-Work

(CCC, FC7).

of unknown

authorship,

per-

1) The Vedas 2) The Upanishads

D3

Compiler -Author, personal or corporate, making up a work by collecting information from various sources and arranging them in a particular way. (CCC, FC4). Example: The compiler of the concordance of the Bible is its author. Joint Author -Two or more authors, personal or corporate, sharing responsibility for the thought and expression constituting work, the portion for which each is separately responsible being neither specified nor separable. Example: S. R. Ranganathan and C. Sundaram are the Joint Authors of Reference service and bibliography. Joint Compiler -Two or more compilers, personal or corporate, making up a work by collecting information from various sources and arranging it in a particular way. Pseudonymous Author -An author assuming a false or fictitious name or any other specification different from the real name. A pseudonym may also be given to an author by others or it may even get started in a casual way either in his own time or in later times. (CCC, FC6). Example :
Libra is the Pseudonym of Dr S. R. Ranganathan.

D4

D5 D6

D7

Collaborator - Person or corporate body associated with a work or its author(s) or both in a secondary capacity not
17

DS amounting to authorship, for example, director, guide, assistant, commentator, illustrator, engraver, translator, reviser, editor, reporter, writer of introduction or foreword, epitomiser, adapter, libratist, writer of the words in a musical corn osition and writer of the words in a pictorial book. (CCC, F !) 1). Example: A Neelameghan is a C;ll;~on& nathan's Classijed catalogue code. . D8 of S. R. Ranga.

Sponsor-Person or corporate body with whose goodwill, authority, or finance or under whose auspices a work is published, though the responsibility for the thought and the expression constituting the work instead of resting with the said person or corporate body, rests solely on the author of the work as a whole or on the respective authors of the different contributions in the work. (CCC, FD2). Examples : 1) Sarada Ranganathan Endowment for Library Science is the Sponsor of Library science with a slant to documentation. 2) Government of India is the Sponsor of the Fauna.of British India. 3) Indian Mathematical Society is the Sponsor of the Mathematics statdent.

18

E22 CHAPTER E

UNIVERSE OFDOCUMENTS
El

Embodied Thought - Record of work on paper or other material fit for easy physical handling, transport across space Glos, EO). and preservation through time. (CCC, FEl.
Alternate Tern

Document
NOTE -This term is introduced for brevity. It includes any embodied thought, micro or macro, whether the physical embodiment is exclusive to one work or is shared by more than one work.

El1

Volume - Physical entity formed of several leaves of paper or other material used for recording either the whole or a part of a work, fastened together so as to be opened at any desired place. (CCC, FE7. Glos, EOl).
Thought-Content - Expressed thought embodied within a document or a volume of it. (CCC, FE& Glos, El). E2 STATUS OF DOCUMENT embodying Macro-thought.

El2

E21 E211

Macro-document - Document (CCC, FE3. Glos, E21). Host Document angle of a document E211). Examples :

Macro-document when viewed from the forming part of it. (CCC, FE5. GZos,

1) A periodical is the Host Document for each of the articles contained in it. 2) A book is the Host Document for each of its chapters and sections, which may be looked upon as Micro-documents. E212 E2 13 Referring Document - Document referring to (citing the name of) some other document. (Lib SC. 2; 1965; Set EDll). Referred-to-Document - Document name only) by the Referring Document. E012). Micro-document - Document (CCC, FE4. GZos, E22). 19 referred (cited by its (Lib SC. 2; 1965; Set Micro-thought.

E22

embodying

E23 E23

Locus - Specific place in the Host Document where a Microdocument occurs. (CCC, FE6).
Example: The Locus of the Micro-document Puded card system by Jack Belzer is the Library scietice with a dad to docummtatiolz, 2; 1965; 69-77, that is, pages 69 to 77 of volume 2 of the said periodical published in 1965.

KINDS OF DOCUMENT
E3

Conventional Document of Kind 1 - Document with paper as the basis for its physique and with the work recorded on it in the phonetic symbols forming the script of an articulate natural or artificial language, with or without illustrations as a help in the communication of the thought-conteut. The recording may be by printing or by some near-printing process. This may also be a reprograph of any of the above or of a manuscript (CCC, FPl).
Alternate Terms

Book Printed Book (See E33).
Examples : 1) A conventional book 2) A periodical publication 3) A facsimile reproduction dical publication E31 E32

of a conventional

book. or perio-

Fascicule - A part of a document separately published. Publication - Conventional Periodical Kind 1 with the following attributes:
Document of

- A volume or a small group of volumes of it, is published or intended to be published or completed normally once in a year or at other regular intervals though irregularity in interval is not altogether ruled out; 2) Disthzgcishing Number - Each successive volume or periodical group of volumes, is usually distinguished by the year of publication and/or by a number belonging to a system of simple or complex ordinal numbers usually called a I VOLUME NUMBER; and

1) Periodicity

3) Continrcity - The intention had been to continue the publication for ever and with the same title in all the volumes 20

E3212 *though may not be actually Glos, E3). E321 carried out. (CCC, FFll.

Periodical - Sense 1 - Periodical Publication of which each volume is made up of distinct and independent contributions, not forming a continuous exposition, normally by two or more pkrsonal authors and the specific subjects and the authors of the contributions in successive volumes also being, in general, different, but all the subjects falling within one and the same region of knowledge contemplated to be brought within its It is not usually released complete as a~vohnne but ~~~$v&scieules or numbers as they are called. Each contribution in it essentially expounds knowledge and does not repeat the same kind of information usually in the same pattern, in each of its volumes, just bringing the information up-to-date from volume to volume. (CCC, FFlll. Glos, E31). Sense 2 A single volume of a periodical in Sense 1.

Examples :
1) Library science with a slati to documentation 2) Proceedkgs, Royal Society of London 3) Zeitschrift, Deutschen Morgenlandischen Gesellschaft E3211 House Organ - A periodical, usually containing technical information, produced by a corporate body-usually by an industrial or commercial enterprise - for circulation among its staff and/or customers. (Encyc).

NOTE -This does not usually include personal the House Magazine.
Ahwnate Term House Journal

social news as does

Examj5les: 1) E?tdeavour (Imperial Chemical Industries Limited) 2) Research (Unilever Limited) 3) Ciba review
E3212 House Magazine - A periodical, usually containing personal and social news, produced by a corporate body, often an industrial or commercial enterprise, for circulation among its staff or customers or both.

Examples : 1) CSIR news
21

E3213
2) Malzak jyoti 3) TELCO news NOTE - House magazinesmay also contain technical informaticm. E3213 periodical assocfated with Su#dement -A another periodical and which lis desirable to be put in juxtaposition to it. 2) Book Stipplement - A book published in one or more instalments in the issues of a periodical with independent pagination. 3) Special %&%ement - An issue, usually extra, of a periodical brought out for a specific purpose or on a specific occasion or at specified intervals. It may or may not have (Glos, E3 11). independent pagination. Examples : 1) Periodical Supplement i) Acta anaesthesiologica Belgica is a periodical supplement to Acta Chirurgica Belgica. ii) Bibliotheca paediatrica is a periodical supplement to Annales paediatrica. lzacional de lepra is a periodical iii) Boletim do se&co supplement to Boletim trimestrial do Central de Sande Teojlo Otoni. 2) Book Supplement Ananda vikatan deepavali mallar is a book of the periodical Analzda vikatan. 3) Special Supplement Homage to Nehru 1 and 2 are the special supplements of the periodical Illustrated weekly of India issued on the 75th birth anniversary of Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru. E322 supplement

Supplement 1) Periodical

to a Periodical

Serial - Sense 1 - Periodical Publication of which each volume or each periodical group of volumes embodies more or less the same kind of information, usually in the same pattern, It is mainly relating to its year (or other period) of coverage. It is not made of usually released complete as a volume. diverse contributions, each by itself forming a continuous exposition of knowledge. (CCC, FF112. Glos, E32).
Sense 2 -Any single volume of a serial in Sense 1. FF112. Glos, E32).

(CCC,

22

/ E3 2321

1) Ann&

re$ort of the Director 2) Mysore telephone directory 3) Who's who in America

of Agriculture,

Madras

NOTE - In American practice, the term Serial is used as equivalent to the term `Periodical publication'.

E323

Documentation Periodical - Sense 1 - Periodical giving a catalogue of articles bearing on a stated subject and appearing in the current fascicules of periodicals. It may also include entries of books currently published. Sense 2 -Periodical giving a catalogue of books currently published. (Glos, E4).
Alternate Term

.

Bibliographical
NOTE -Avoidance

Periodical
of Sense 2 is recommended.

E3231

Indexing Periodical - Periodical giving a bare catalogue of articles be-.ring on a stated subject and appearing in the current fascicules of periodicals. It may also include bare entries of books currently published. (CCC, FF21. GZos, E41).
Examples : 1) Agrictiltural index 2) Technical index 3) INSDOC list

E3232

Abstracting Periodical - Periodical giving a catalogue of articles bearing on a stated subject and appearing in current fascicules of periodicals, each entry being provided with an abstract of the article described by it. It may also include annotated entries of books currently published. (CCC, FF22. Glos, E42).
Examples : 1) Biological ubstracts 2) Library science abstracts 3) Science abstracts, Series B: Electrical engineering

E32321

published simultaneously
NOTE periodical. Usually,

Synopsis -Author's

summary of an article in a periodical, with the article itself. (CCC, UC61).
have had scrutiny by the editor of the

it might

23

E32322
E32322

1

Abstract - The summary, usually by .a professional (abstractor) other than the author, of the essential contents of a work, usually an article in a periodical, together with the specification of the Host Document and the Locus within it. (CCC, UC62). Reviewing Periodical -A periodical, giving in a narrative form, an account of the contributions bearing on a stated subject and appearing in the current fascicules and the books published during its period of coverage. (CCC, FF23. Glos, E43). Examples : 1) Year's work in librarianshifi 2) Report cw @ogress in p1~ysics 3) Annlcal review of biockemistry Book -Conventional Document

E3233

E33

of Kind 1, Periodical Publication, having been completed or be completed in a finite number of volumes. It is one volume. Some books are in several volumes. Glos, ES).
understood

other than intended to generally in (CCC, FF3.

NOTE-- The above

by the term

definition really connotes what is commonly ' Book `. (See E3 Alternate Term).

E331

Pamphlet -An independent publication consisting of a few leaves of printed matter stitched together (but not necessarily bound), usually enclosed in paper covers. (CCC, EEl. Encyc). Trade Catalogue - A book or a pamphlet issued by a manufacturer or a dealer, or by a group of manufacturers, essentially for illustrating and describing their products or goods and sometimes including or accompanied by a price list. Supplement -Volume forming a continuation of a book or a volume of it, making good its deficiencies, correcting its errors (Glos, E51). or adding more information.
book in two or more volumes Multi-volumed Book -A deemed to be inseparable and to form a single book on the ground that: 1) the set of volumes together gives a continuous exposition of the subject treated; or 2) the thought-content is so distributed that it is unhelpful to treat each volume as if it were a separate book; or 3) the same sequence of pagination is continued in all the volumes of the set; or 4) the set possesses a common index. (CCC, FF31. Glos, E6). Example : The bookscience and sensitiility by James R. Newman published in two volumes in 1961. 24

E332

E333

E334

E33512 E335 Composite Book - A book with two or more contributions, each with its own title, not forming a continuous exposition and often, though not necessarily, by different authors. (CCC, FF4). Ordinary Composite Eook - Composite book provided with a single, generic title to denote all the contributions collectively. (CCC, FF41).
NOTE - Anthology of several authors, christomathy, hymn-book, prayer-book, song book, symposium, festschrift and similar compilations come under this category.

E3351

Examples : 1) RANGANATHAN (S R), Ed. Documentation and its facets. 1963. This symposium contains seventy contributions by thirty-two authors. 2) HOLT (Emmett), Ed. Happy baby. 1926. butions by four authors. It has contri-

3) WINTER (Erno) etc, Ed. Proceedings of the symposium on electron and vacuum physics. 1962. It has contributions by several authors. E33511 work offered in hc..iage to an individual, or Festschrift -A an institution or dedicated to an individual's memory. Alternate Terms Volume (if pertaining to a deceased person)

Commemoration Memorial Volume

NOTE - This usually takes the form of a collection of essays, lectures or biographical, bibliographic 1 or other contributions, often dcvotep to the subject in which the m . ?rrvidual or the institution specializes.

Exaqbles

:

1) KAULA (P N), Ed. Library science to-day: Ranganathan festschrift, Volume I -Essays offered to S. R. Ranganathan on his seventy-first birthday. 2) DAS GUPTA (A K), Ed. An essay in personal bibliography: Ranganathan festschrift, Volume II - Bibliography of the writings on and by Dr S. R. Ranganathan. E33512 ' Artificial Composite Book - Composite book without a generic title to denote all the component works collectively. (CCC, FF42).
NOTE - An Artificial Composite Book may be created by the publisher by issuing two or more different books within one and the same.

25

E336
cover, but without a common title-page. It may also be created a library by binding several books together into a single v&me. by

E336

Simple Book - Book which is not composite, that is, which embodies work by a single author or by joint authors. It may also be anonymous. (CCC, FF6). Incunabula - A book printed within a few decades invention of printing, say in the fifteenth century. FF7). of the (CCC,

E3361

E34

Contribution - Sense 1 - Work forming a part of a composite book, a periodical or a serial. (CCC, FF5). Sense 2 - Micro-document embodying a contribution. (Glos, E7). Article Contribution -Author in a periodical. of a contribution. (CCC, FF51). (CCC, FF52). Document similar to the difference that the such as Braille, steno(CCC, FF31). Contributor

E341 E342 E4

Conventional Document of Kind 2 Conventional Document of Kind 1 with recording is in a non-conventional script, graph, music in notation, and cipher.

E5

Conventional Document of Kind 3 - Document similar to Conventional Document of Kind 1 with the difference that the graphic medium consists of drawings, pictures, maps, etc, instead of phonetic symbols. (CCC, FF92). Conventional Document of Kind 4 - Document similar to Conventional Document of Kind 1 with the difference that the recording is in handwriting. (CCC, FF93). Alternate Term Manuscript Non-conventional Manuscript - Manuscript other than paper. (CCC, FF931). Example: A recording on palm-leaf. using material

E61

E7

Reprograph -A photographic, chemical or mechanical reproduction of any kind of Conventional (CCC, FF95). E8 NON-CONVENTIONAL DOCUMENT

any .other Document.

E81

Non-conventional Document of Kind 1 - Reprograph of any kind of Conventional Document on an extremely reduced scale needing the use of special reading apparatus. (CCC, FF94). Examples : 1) Micro-card 26

E913 2) Microfilm 3) Microfiche ES2 Non-conventional Document of Kind 2 - Document of sound-record, whether of articulate sound or of music. FF96); Alternate Term Audio-document E821 E83 Speaking Book-Printed book with a companion attachment of the sound-record of the words in it. (CCC, FF961). Non-conventional Document of cinema reels. (CCC, FF97). Alternate Visual E84 Term Document of Kind 4 Document made of Kind 3 Document made made (CCC,

Non-conventional Document of talkie reels. (CCC, FF98). Alternate Term Document Audio-visual

ES5

Non-conventional Document of Kind 5 - Document made of record of natural or social phenomena made directly by an instrument without being passed through human mmd and without being woven into thought created and expressed by human mind. (CCC, FFF91). Alternate Instrument Terms Record Phenomenon

Meta-document E91 E911 BY CIRCULATION AND COPYRIGH'; intended to be and individuals. distri'

Restricted buted only B1351).

Document-Document to selected institutions

(Dot,

E912

House Document -Document intended for use only within the commercial, industrial or other similar institution producing it. (Dot, B1352). Private Document - Document lation only. (Dot, B1353). intended for private circu-

E913

E914 E914 E915

Secret Document -Document not intended for circulation to beyond a specified circle of users. (Dot, B1354).. Copyright Document - Document whose copyright is vested in an individual or a corporate body during the pendency of the copyright and which cannot be reproduced without the consent of the owner of the copyright. (Dot, B1355). Non-copyright Document - Document free from copyright encumbrances and available for reproduction by anybody. (Dot, B1356).

E916

F3 CHAPTER F

RELATED
Fl

DOCUMENT

Related Books - A set of books whose Main Entries do not always file consecutively, but which, all the same, call for their being linked up by the catalogue on account of their being (CCC, FJl). related to one another for some reason or other.
type.

F2 F21

Impression

-Book

printed at one time from one setting of a printed book

reproduction of Reprint - Sense 1 -A without alterations or with slight alterations. Sense 2 A Separate. (See Section F5).

F22 F23

1 or an earlier edition of a book with substantial changes in the thoughtcontent, each being distinguished from the other or others, either numerically or by some other equivalent term, such as New, Revised, and Enlarged.

Edition 1 -The first production of a book. Edition 2 Onwards - Reproduction of Edition

F24 F25

Edition -Sense 1 -Edition change in the thought-content.

1 or 2 with or without slight

Edition - Sense 2 - One of the different forms in which one and the same work is published, each form having a distinctive name almost amounting to a proper noun, such as Ardeo Edition, Variorum Edition, Memorial Edition and Vani Vilas Edition.
An Edition in Sense 2 forms a Pseudo-series of Kind 1. NOTE lNOTE 2 - Each book in a Series or a Pseudo-series may be brought out in successive editions in Sense 1. independently of one another.

F3

set of books, not constituting a Multi-volumed Series -A Book, and with the following attributes: bv one 1) The books are issued. normallv successivelv publisher or by one sponsoring body or person, usually in a uniform style, and having some similarity of subject or standard or purpose; 2) Each book has normally a distinct and independent title or other features of its own or both ; 3) Each book has normally a different author; 4) There is a collective name, Na_me of the Series, to denote the set and given in all or at least in one of the books of the set; and 29

F31
5) Each book is or may be assigned a distinct number called the Serial Number belonging to a system of simple or complex ordinal numbers. (CCC, FHl). Examples : 1) Library 3) World F31 of Philosophy Series in Library Science Classics of Kind 1 - A set of books, not const-ituting Book, and with the following attributes: are of common authorship; in Sense 2; to part in addition 2) Ranganathan Pseudo-series a Multi-volumed

1) All the books

2) All the books. belong

to the same Edition

3) The title of each book has a distinctive the name of the Edition in Sense 2;

4) Each book is or may be assigned a Serial Number belonging to a system of simple or complex ordinal numbers; and 5) The name of the author taken along with the name of the Edition in Sense 2 is suitable for use as if it were the Name of a Series. (CCC, FH2). Example ; Works of Leo Tolstoy/Childhood, Boyhood and Youth/ Centenary Edition/3/1928. This may be represented as ` Tolstoy (Leo). Centenary ed.' F32 Pseudo-series a Multi-volumed of Kind 2 - A set of books, not constituting Book, and with the following attributes: are of common authorship; part capable

1) All the books

2) The titles of the various books have a common of being used as their common generic title;

3) The title of each book has a distinctive part of its own in addition to the generic part; 4) Each book is or can be assigned a Serial Number belouging to a system of simple or complex ordinal numbers; and 5) The name of the author taken along with the generic title is suitable to be used as if it were the Name of a Series. (CCC, FA3). Example : E. Grimsehl/Text-book of physics/Edited by R. Tomaschek/ Volume 4 Optics . . .Translated . . . by L. A. Woodward/1933. This may ` Grimsehl be represented (E). Text-book 30 as: of physics. Ed by R. Tomaschek '

. F33 Pseudo-series Multi-volumed of Kind 3 - A set of books, Book, and with the following are not of common not constituting attributes: part cap-

1) All the books

authorship;

2) The titles of the various books have a common able of being used as a common generic title: 3) The title of each book has distinctive addition to the generic part; part

of its own in

4) Each book is or may be assigned a Serial Number belonging to a system of simple or complex ordinal numbers; and title is suitable for use as if it were the Name (CCC, FH4). Example: The volumes edited by Charles Oman under the generic title ` History of England `. F4 Extract-A document which embodies a portion of another document. (CCC, FJ3). Examjde: The book Library science and scient#c method is an extract from the book Five laws of library science. 1957. Ed 2.. Separate-A portion of a document-usually, but not necessarily, a Periodical Publication - issued in the same format as the original, whether printed from the types or plates of the original, or reset. (CCC, FJ3).
AZternate Terms

5) The generic of a Series.

F5

Offprint Reprint in Sense F51

2 but not released in

Pre-print - A portion of a document -usually, necessarily a Periodical Publication - issued and advance of the whole document.

F6

Merger Book-A book formed by the merging of two or more books. (CCC, F JS). Example: The book Theory of economic dy+aamics, mz essay cyclical and long range changes in capitalistic econom_v (1953) by M. Kalaeck is in lieu of the second editions of Essay in the theory of economics jluctuations and Studies in economic dynamics.

31

Gl
CHAPTER G

CATALOGUER'S
NOTE--It will be helpful if the with the sections of Chapter H.

NEEDS
matter from G3 onwards is read

Gl

shape and size of a book expressed Format - Sense 1 -The in terms of the size of the full sheet of paper and the number of times it has been folded to get the leaf of a document. Sense 2 -A statement of the height and width of a typical leaf of a document. (CCC, FLI). statement of the number of volumes, pages, Collation -A plates, maps and other illustrations of a Conventional Document and an equivalent statement in the case of a Non-conventional (CCC, FL2). Document. Imprint - Record, in a document or a volume of it, of the name(s) of its publisher(s), place(s) of publication and the year of publication. (CCC, FL3). Edition-Statement - Record, in a document or a volume of it, of the number of each of the successive editions or a distinctive edition of it with a proper name along with the year of publication of each. (CCC, FL4). Title-Statement-Record, in a document or a volume of it, of the title of the work embodied in it. (CCC, FL5). Author-Statement - Record, in a document or a volume of it, of the name(s) of the author(s) of the work embodied in it. (CCC, FL6). Entry-Statement for Author - Record, in `a document or a volume of it, of the year of birth (and also the year of death in the case of a deceased person) and of the alternative name(s), if any, of each author of the work embodied in it, and in addition an indication of the Entry Element and the Secondary Element in each name. (CCC, FL7). Collaborator-Statement - Record, in a document or a volume of it, of the name(s) of collaborator(s) in respect of the work embodied in it along with an indication of the role of each. (CCC, FL8).
NOTE- Whenever warranted, borator-statement in the page Author-Statement.
a modern document gives the Collagiving the Title-Statement and the

G2

G3

G4

G5
G6

G61

G7

32

G8

G71

Entry-Statement for Collaborator - Record, in a document or a volume of it, of the year of birth (and also the year of death in the case of a deceased person) and of the alternative name(s), if any, of each collaborator in respect of the work embodied in it, and, in addition, an indication of the Entry Element and the Secondary Element in each name. (CCC, F28). Anonymous Document - A document Statement. (CCC, FL91). without Author-

G8

33

CHAPTER H

PRELIMINARY
Hl

PAGES

Title-Pa#e -Page of a document or a volume of it containing its Title-Statement. Usually, it also contains the Author-Statement and the Imprint. It also indicates the edition of the document in many cases. (CCC, FGl).
Overflow of Title-Pa'ge - Page(s) immediately succeeding or preceding the title-page of a document or a volume of it and containing part of the information usually given on the Title-Page or other statements, such as Edition-Statement, Entry-Statement for Author, and Entry-Statement for Collaborator, and information about other additional factors, such as the Series to which the document may belong. (CCC, FG2). In the case of a Composite Book, Overflow of Title-Page is deemed to include every page in which the name(s) of author(s) and collaborator(s) and the title of any of the contributions or constituent works, as the case may be, are found. (CCC, FG21).

H2

H3 H4

Title-Leaf-The (CCC, FG3).

leaf of which the recta is the Title-Page.

Half-Title Page-The recta of the leaf usually preceding the Title-Leaf and containing the Half-Title of the document. (CCC, FG4). Half-Title Title Page. Leaf-The leaf of which the recta is the Half(CCC, FG5).

H5

34

J211 CHAPTER J

CATALOGUE Jl
in a library Library Catalogue - List of documents collection forming a portion of it. (CCC, FMl). or in a

NOTE - A catalogue may be printed, or it may be in manuscript form. It may be on cards or in loose leaves. It may also be in the form of a continuous book or in the paste-down form with gaps for the interpolation of new entries in between existing entries.

J11

in two or Union, Catalogue - List of all the documents more libraries giving the names of all the libraries where copies of each document may be found. @CC, FM2).
NOTE of them. It may cover all kinds of documents or any restricted kind

Examples : (S R) and others. Union catalogue of learned periodical publications in the libraries of South Asia. 1953. of scientific periodicals (K). Catalogue 2) Bhattacharyya in Calcutta libraries. 1961. General of -), Central 3) India, Health Services (Direct&$& Medical Library. Union catalogue of medical periodicals in gf~ libraries. (Corrected up to January 1962). 1962.

1) Ranganathan

J2

Bibliography - List of documents purpose. (CCC, FM3).

listed

together

for some

purpose is usually to bring to the notice of the reader NOTE -The an exhaustive or select list of documents relevant to the pursuit of his enquiry or study. Originally, it was mostly a list of Macro-documents. Now it may also include Micro-documents.

521
5211

Micro-bibliography of Micro-documents.

- Bibliography (CCC, FM41).

exclusively

or mostly emphasis

Documentation List - A Micro-bibliographyqith on nascent documents in the, subject field cuncerned. . Examples : 1) INSDOC list 2) Chemical titles 3) Index medicus

522 522
Macro-bibliography - Bibliography (CCC, FM42). documents. Examfiles : 1) British national bibliography 2) Indian national bibliography 3) Cumulative book index exclusively of Macro-

J3 NATZONAL

BIBLIOGRAPHY books and

J31

National Bibliography - Sense 1 - List of periodicals published in a country. (CCC, FM5). Examples: See examples 2 and 3 in Section 522.

532

Sense 2 -List of books published in a country, those published on the country and its citizens and the bo.oks written by any citizen of the country published in any region of the world. (CCC, FM51). State Bibliography lished in a constituent - List of books and periodicals state of a country. (CCC, FM6). and pub-

54 J5

Linguistic Bibliography - List of books published in a language. (CCC, FM7). Example : Cumdative book Alex.

periodicals

J6 CATALOGUE

AND

ITS PARTS

J61 J62

Unipartite Catalogue part, with all the entries
NOTE Normally

catalogue in a single - A library in a single sequence. (CCC, DBl).
Catalogue is Unipartite.

a Dictionary

Bipartite Catalogue - A library catalogue in two parts, with the entries giving information about what the library has on various subjects arranged in one sequence and all the other (CCC, DBZ). entries arranged in a second sequence.
NOTE .Normally a Classltied Catalogue is Bipartite.

563

Classified some entries (CCC, FPl).

Catalogue are Number

-

A Bipartite Catalogue in which Entries and some are Word Entries.
consists of two parts the Classified

NOTE - A Classified Catalogue Part and the Alphabetical Part.

36

IH J7 J631 5632 part of a Classified Catalogue which Classified Part -That (CCC, FP2). contains all its Number Entries. part of a Classified Catalogue Alphabetical Part -That which contains all its Word Entries. (CCC, FP3). Dictionary Catalogue - A Unipartite Catalogue in which all the entries are Word Entries. (CCC, FZDl).
NOTE 1 - A Dictionary Catalogue consists of one part only. entries in a Dictionary Catalogue are arranged NQTE 2 -The alphabetically as in a dictionary.

564

J7

Shelf List - Record of the documents in a library on Standard Catalogue Cards, written on the principle of one-title-onecard with the Call Number in the leading line, the cards being arranged in a sequence absolutely parallel to the sequence of the documents on the shelves.
Alternate Tern

Shelf Register
NOTE -The Shelf List is mainly used for verifying reading material in a library. the stock of the

37

Kl CHAPTER `K

CATALOGUING
Kl Kll Cataloguing Construction and maintenance of a catalogue.

set of rules for the guidance of cataCatalogue Code -A loguers in the construction and maintenance of a library catalogue. list of the headings selected for use in a Authority List -A catalogue compiled as an official work of reference, each heading being in an approved form in order to eliminate fresh thinking should the same heading be required again for a later book. (Encyc) . Cataloguer A person who constructs a catalogue'.

K12

K2 `K3

Selective Cataloguing - Sense 1 - The practice of cataloguing only certain preferred kinds of reading material in a library, leaving the rest as uncatalogued. practice of varying the extent of details to Sense 2 -The (CCC, CF91). be given in an entry. Sense 3 - The practice of determining entries to be made. the number of added

K4

.

Co-operative Cataloguing - The production of catalogue entries or printed book catalogues jointly by two or more independent libraries so that each library, and usually other noncooperating libraries also, may share the benefits of such a joint effort. (Encyc). Centralized Cataloguing - The cataloguing, by one library or a cataloguing agency within a system of libraries, of all books acquired by all those libraries so that the results of sdch cata(Encyc). loguing are used by the individual libraries. Cataloguing-in-Soimce - Tie provision of full cataloguing information within a book even as it is published. (Encycj. Pre-natal Cataloguing - The catalogumg of a book by a centralized cataloguing agency from copy of the page-proof supplied by the publisher prior to publication so that the catalogue cards are available on the day of publication and may be ordered by means of a reference number appearing in the book. (CCC, DE5).

KS

KS1 K52

38

L4 CHAPTER L .

PHYSICAL
Ll L2

FORM OF CATALOGUE
in bound-book form

Book-Form Catalogue - A catalogue with the entries usually printed,

Paste-Down Catalogue - A catalogue in book form, bound or in the form of loose-leaves held in binders, the entries bemg written, typed, printed, or made on slips, and pasted on blank pages.
Alternate Term

Guard Book Cataloguf
NOTE -Tile entries are spaced widely to allow for the insertion of additibns and, when a page becomes full or correct interfiling is no longer possible they are cut out and distributed over two pages.

L3

bearing a single entry, labelled and shelved, (EnW. I Alternate Term

Sheaf Catalogue - A catalogue

consisting of slips, each held in loose-leaf binders which are usually in specially-designed racks.

Loose-Leaf L4

Catalogue

,

Card Catalogue - A catalogue on cards of a uniform size, usually 75 x 125 mm, each card bearing a single entry, filed vertically in special drawers housed in a c,abinet. (CCC,. ED12. Encyc) .

39

Ml1 CHAPTER M

RECORDING
Ml LANGUAGE Ml1 Ml2 OF ENTRY

Favoured Language -The language in which the majority of the documents of the library occur. (CCC, EAl). Scale of Languages-A list of languages, to be kept by a library, in which the Favoured Language is given the first place and the other languages are entered in the descending scale of popularity. (CCC, EA2). Most Popular Language - Among a given set of languages, the language occurring earliest in the Scale of Languages. (CCC, EA3). M2 SCRIPT OF ENTRY

Ml3

M21

script of the Favoured Language Favoured Script -The of a library or, in exceptional cases, any other script chosen by the library as the Eavoured Script. (CCC, EBl). Transliteration - A representation of the characters (CCC, EB3). alphabet by those of another. M3 NOTATION of one

M22

M31

set of consecutive numbers Inclusive Notation -A sented by a symbol consisting of: 1) the first number of the set, 2) a dash, and 3) the last number of the set. (CCC, ED910). Exam+ : 5-25 1935-6 1935-65

repre-

M32

Open Notation - An indefinite continuation of consecutive numbers beginning from a specific number and represented by a symbol consisting of: 1) the specific number forming the beginning, and 2) a dash. (CCC, ED912). 40

IN MS4 Example: 55 Library Hand - The words and numbers in an entry, written in a bold, upright, impersonal hand, the letters and digits being detached from one another. (CCC, ED23). MS CARD TECHNIQUE MS1 Catalogue Card -A plain or ruled card, &&ly of the standard size of 75 x 125 mm, on which an entry is written. PVC) Unit Card - A catalogue card bearing the Main Entry for a work and with the Leading Section vacrint such that copieg of it can be converted into specific added entries by inserting the appropriate heading in the Leading Section. (CCC, CE3). Unit Caq'd System - Catalogue in printed or near-printed cards in which the Main Entry is printed with the Leading Section vacant, and the copies of which are converted into specific added entries by inserting the appropriate heading in the Leading Section. (CCC, CE3). MS2 LINES IN A CARD MS21 MS22 Leading Line (CCC, ED251). The top-most horizontal line of a card. (CCC,

M4

MS11

MS111

First Vertical - The left-most vertical line of a card. ED252) AZtemate Term First Indention

MS23

vertical line to the right Second Vertical -The first vertical of a card. (CCC, ED253). AZtemate Term Second Indention

of the

MS3 MS4

Main Card - A catalogue card bearing the Main Entry for a work. catalogue card in which an entry Continued Card -A the preceding card is continued. (Encyc). Alternate Term Continuation Card Extension Card 41 of

MS5 MS5 card, having a projecting edge or tab at Guide Card -A the top, suitably labelled, inserted among catalogue entries, to indicate arrangement and to facilitate the location of entries. (CCC, KLl).
NOTE - Guide Cards are usually made of thicker and heavier board than that used for Catalogue Cards. They are also distinguished by their different colours. Besides, different lengths and positions of projecting tabs are provided. These are termed wholes or singles, centre halves, side halves, thirds, fourths and fifths.

M:

MS6

Feature Heading - The Class Number and the name of the subject written on the tab of the Guide Card taken together in the Classified Part of a Catalogue. (CCC, KLl).
NOTE -Feature Headings can be got by Chain Procedure, (5s Chapter S). They are got by translating each successive digit in the Class Number, subject to the Canon of Context, into its equivalent term in the natural language, proceeding from left to right. In a printed catalogue these Feature Headings, usually iu e distinctive type are easily picked up by the eye in its first sweep.of the pages, thus facilitating quick location of the entries for documents on subjects in which the reader is interested.

:, p: ,. M6 CALL bf61 M62

_. NUMBER
;&`:

Class Number -Ordinal number r&presenting a class in a scheme of classification. (GZos, A72). Book Number-Ordinalnumber' fi%ing the position of a document in a library relative to other documents having the same ultimate class. (Glos, Vl).
Alternate

Tamr Notation other

Internal M63 M64

Collection Number - Symbol to denote a cbhection, than the main one. (Glos, V791.1). Call Number -Ordinal of a document in a library.
Alternate Tern

number which (Glos, V7920).

fixes the position

Call Mark
NOTE - It includes the Class Number, Book Collection Number. if any.

Number

and the

42

M7 Contractions The following are the contractions entries : WORD Abkurzung Abridged Abteilung(en) Annotated Annotation Annotator(s) Assistant Auflage (-n) Ausgabe(n) Ausgewahlt Author(s) Band Bearbeiter Bearbeitet Before Christ Century Commentary Commentator(s) Compiled Compiler(s) Dedicated Dedicatee(s) Dedication Director Edited ;z;;;s) . . Edizione Epitome Epitomized Epitomizer(s) Erklarung(en) Fascicule Gekurzt Gesammelt 43 to be used in writing CONTRACTION Abkurz Abr Abt Annot Annot Annot Assis Aufl Ausg Ausgew Auth B Bearb Bearb BC Cent Comm Comm Comp Comp Ded Ded Ded Dir Ed :: Ed Epit Epit Epit Erkl Fast Gek Ges

M7
WORD

CONTRACTION H Her Her Ill Ill Ill Introd Introd Introd Introd

Heft Herausgeber Herausgereben Illustration Illustrator(s) Illustrazione Introduction Introduction Introductory Introduzione Joint Nouveau Nouvelle Number(s) C)rearr!ide (t )

writer(s)

J
Nouv Nouv N Omarb Overs P Pop Pref Pro1 Pseud Red Rep Rep Rep Rev Rev Rev Rev Sam Sam SP Te T Tr Tr Tr 44

Pa&s) Popular `Preface Prolog0 Pseudonym Redigirt Report Reported Reporter(s) Revidierte Revised Revision Revisor(s) Samlede vaerker Sammlung Special Teil(e) Tome Tradottn Traduction Traduit

.

WORD

CONTRACTION Tr Tr Tr Tr Udg Udg Ubers Ubers Uitg Vert V

Traduzione Translated Translation(s) Translator(s) Udgave(r) Udgiver(e) Ubersetzt Ubersetzung Uitgaaf Vertaler Volume(s)

NOTE l- As far as possible, cognate words are provided the/same contraction. NOTE 2 -Some of the contractions prescribed are homonymous. For example, the contfaction ' Tr ' denotes ' Translated `, ' Translation ' The context of its occurrence will resolve a and ` Translator(s) ' homonym. (CCC, EG2).

45

CHAPTER

N

ENTRY
Nl Nil Entry -Ultimate unit record bibliography. (CCC, FNl). Specific Entry (CCC, FNll) Entry in a library a catalogue or a

mentioning

specific

document.

N12

Examples : 1) 2: 55N3 N58 RANGANATHAN (Shiyali Ramamrita) (1892). Classified catalogue code with additional rules for dictionary catalogue code. Ed 4. (Madras Library Association, publication series. 24). "For extract see 2: 55y (Pill) N58 " 122519 (Shiyali Ramamrita) (1892). 2) RANGANATHAN Classified catalogue code. Ed 4. 2: 55N3 N58 MADRAS LIBRARY ASSOCIATION, PUBLICATION 3) SERIES. Ed 4. 24 Ranganathan: Classified catalogue code. 2: 55N3 N58 General Entry -Entry not mentioning any specific document. (CCC, FN12). Exam files :

1) CLkSIFIED

4

CATALOGUE CODE. For documents in this Class and its Subdivisions see the Classified Part of the catalogue under the Class Number 2: 55N3 CLASSIFIED CATALOGUE. For documents in this Class and its Subdivisions see the Classified Part of the catalogue under the Class Number 2: 55AS

LIBRARY SCIENCE. i 3) CATALOGUE, For documents in this Class and its Subdivisions see the Classified Part of the catalogue under the Class Number 2 : 55 SCIENCE. . 4) LIBRARY For documents in this Class and its Subdivisions see the 2 Classified Part of the catalogue under the Class Number 46

N41
5) BHARAT. See INDIA N2 N21 Consolidated Entry - Two or more into a single entry. (CCC, FN2). Consolidated Specific Entry - Entry more specific documents. (CCC, FN21). entries consolidated two or

mentioning

Example : 2: 55N3 N34, N45, N51 RANGANATHAN (Shiyali Ramamrita) (1892). Classified catalogue code. Ed 1, 2, 3. (Madras Library Association, publication series. 4,13, 17). 63421, 87453, 111601 N22 Consolidated General Entry - A single General replacing two or more general entries. (CCC, FN22). Examples : 1) LIBRARY SCIENCE. Entry

See also BOOK SELECTION. CATALOGUE, LIBRARY SCIENCE. CLASSIFICATION, LIBRARY SCIENCE. 2) RANGANATHAN. See also RANGANATHAN. RENGANADAN. RUNGANATHAN. N3 Number Entry - Entry beginning with a Call Number Class Number. (CCC, FN31). Exam@le: The entry given as example 1 under Section Word Entry-Entry beginning with a word, or cases, with a symbol given in the Author-Statement of ment as a substitute for t-he name of the author. (CCC, Example: Entries given as examples under Section N4 VARIETIES N41 OF ENTRY giving maximum (CCC, FN41).
or general

or a Nil.

N31

in rare a docuFN32). N12.

Main Entry - Specific entry about *the whole of a document.

information relating to the

NOTE -All the other entries specific document are normally derived from the

Main Entry.

47

.

N42 Examples : 1 given under Set Nl 1. Ramamrita) (1892). rules 24). 2: 55N3 Entry. for additional series. (Shiyali

1) Example

2) RANGANATHAN

Classified catalogue code with dictionary catalogue code. Ed 4. ras Library N42 N421 Added FN42). Specific document. EntryAssociation, Entry other publication than

N58 (CCC,

the Main

Added Entry (CCC, FN43).

Added

Entry

mentioning

a specific

NOTE 1 - In the book form and multiple it is briefer than the Main Entry.
Main Entry by typing.

card system of catalogue,

NOTE 2 -

In the unit-card-system of catalogue it differs from the only in its top-most line, which is filled up by hand or draw any information from outside

NOTE 3 - It does not usually the Main Entry or its back.

Examples: N43

The entries

given

as examples

2 and 3 under Set Nil.

Cross Reference Index Entry - General Added Entry referring, from one word or set of words, to another synonymous word or set of words. (CCC, FN45). AZternate Terms See Entry See aIso Entry
five types:

NOTE 1 1. Alternate Examples:

A Cross Reference Index Entry may be one of the following Name Entry Quiller) (1863). (1863). (1863).

i) C%yeCH (Arthur

QUILLER-COUCH

(Arthur) (Arthur)

8..
ii) QUILLER-COUCH See also

Q. 2. Variant-Form-oi-Word
3. Pseudonym-Real-Name

Entry Entry (1867),

Example: Entry given as example 2 under Set N22. Example : t:SSEL
(George)

A E, Pseud-

48

N51
4. Editor-of-Series Entry Example: EGERTON (Clement), Ed. See BKOADWAY ORIENTAL LIBRARY. 5. Gene&-Name Entry ExampIe: UNIVERSITY. See also UNIVERSITY OF BANGALORE. NOTE 2 - A Cross Reference Index Entry may draw information from outside the Main Entry and even from outside the document.

N431

N432

N44

N45

N451

N51

Referred-to Heading - The word or set of words with which a Cross Reference Index Entry or a See also Subject Entry in a Dictionary Catalogue. ends. (CCC, FN451). Example: In examples (i) and (ii) under Note 1 of Set N43 given above. QUILLER-COUCH (Arthur) (1862) and Q respectively are Referred-to Headings. Referred-From Heading - The word or set of words with which a Cross Reference Index Entry or a See also Subject Entry in a Dictionary Catalogue begins. (CCC, FN452). Example: In examples (i) and (ii) under Note 1 of Set N43 given above. COUCH (Arthur Quiller) (1863) and QUILLER-COUCH (Arthur) (1863) respectively are Referred-From Headings. Author Analytical - Specific Added Entry referring from the name of the author and the title of a contribution occurring in a Host Document to its Locus, (CCC, FN46). Example: WEBB (Sydney) (1859). Diseases of organized society. Forming part of Adams: Modern state. W N35 Title Analytical - Specific Added Entry referring from the title of a contribution occurring in a host document to its LOCUS. (CCC, FN47). Example: *DISEASES OF Organized society By Webb. Forming part of Adams: Modern state. W N35 Catchword Entry -An entry in which the Leading Section is occupied by a catchword from the title of a book. (Encyc). N5 SUBJECT ENTRY Subject Entry - Entry giving information about a subject. (CCC, FN51).
49

N52

Specific Subject document in which

Entry - Subject Entry the subject is treated.

which mentions (CCC, FN52). Nil

a

Examples: Entries given as example 1 under Section and as example under Set N21 and the following: CLASSIFIED CATALOGUE CODE. RANGANATHAN Classified catalogue N53 (Shiyali Ramamrita) (1892). code. Ed 4. 2: 55N3 N58

Cross Reference Subject Entry - Specific Subject Entry which mentions the Locus of a document in which the subject. is treated. (CCC, FN53). Alternate Term Subject Analytical Example :

%

1) B7e~M87
See also BxM87 N27 Ramanujan: Collected papers. P xi-xix (S) (1887-1919). works. P xi-xix BxM87 N27

2)

BIOGRAPHY, See also Ramanujan

RAMANUJAN (S): Collected

N6 ENTRY N61

IN A CLASSIFIED

CATALOGUE Class Set N53. Number

Cross Reference Entry in a Classified Example: Entry

Entry - Specific Added Catalogue. (CCC, FPS). as example 1 under

given

NOTE 1 - It refers from the Class Number of a subject to its LOCUS in a Host Document. NOTE 2 -It is a Kumber Entry. NOTE 3 - It belongs to the Classified Part of the Catalogue.. NOTE 4 - It corresponds to the Subject Analytical in a Dictionary Catalogue.

N62

General Added Word Entry in a Class Index- EntryClassified Catalogue, referring from the name of a Class to its Class Number. (CCC, FP6). Example: Entries given as examples l-4 under Set N12.
NOTE 1 - It may be derived, by chain procedure, from the Class Number of the Main Entry or of a Cross Reference Entry of a doculnent. NOTE 2 - It enables a reader to know the Class Number of thei subject on which he seeks documents.

50

N75

N63 N64

Cross Reference Book
Classified

Index Entry-Same
Added (CCC, FP8).

as in Set N43. Word Entry in a

Index

Entry -Specific

Catalogue.

N7 ENTRY IN A DICTIONARY N71 Subject Index Entry -

CATALOGUE
types:

It is of the following

1) Specific Subject Entry, 2) Subject Analytical, and 3) See also Subject Entry.

(CCC, FZD4).

N72

Specific Subject EntrySpecific Added Word Entry in a Dictionary Catalogue, entering a document under the name of the subject treated in it, if it is unifocal, or under that which is most dominant, if it is multifocal. (CCC, FZD41).
Example : CLASSIFIED CATALOGUE CODE. Ranganathan (Shiyali Ramamrita) (1892). Classified catalogue code. Ed 5. 2: 55N3 N64

N73

Subject Analytical - Specific, Word Entry in a Dictionary Catalogue entering a document under the name of the subject treated in it in a subsidiary way, that is the one occurring as a secondary focus in the document. (CCC, FZD42).
Example

: (S) (1887-1919).

BIOGRAPHY, RAMANUJAN Ramanujan (S). Collected works. P xi-xix BxM87

N27

N74

See nlso Subject Entry - General Added Word Entry in a Dictionary Catalogue referring from the name of one subject to that of another. (CCC, FZD 43).
E.wn$e:

LIBRARY See also

SCIENCE.

BOOK SELECTION. CATALOGUIKG, LIBRARY SCIENCE. CLASSIFICATION, LIBRARY SCIENCE.

N75

Cross Reference

Index Entry-Same
51

as in Set N43.

,'

N76 N76 A Specific Added Word Book Index EntryDictionary Catalogue. (CCC, FZDS). Example: BIOGRAPHY, Ramanujan RAMANUJAN (S). BxM87 N8 NAMES N27 Entry in a

(S) (1887-1919).

Collected works, P xi-xix

OF ENTRIES

1) In Author Entry, the name of .the Author occupies the Leading Section. 2) In Series Entry, the name of the Series occupies the Leading Section. 3) In Title Entry, the title of the document occupies the Leading Section.
NOTE -A its Leading Specific Entry Section. (CCC, is usually F6). named after the occupant of

52

P411
CHAPTER P

SECTIONS OF AN ENTRY
Pl

Section of an Entry -That which is prescribed to be a separate paragraph in an entry in a Card Catalogue. (CCC,

FQW

NOTEWh&i an entry occurs in a Book-Form Catalogue sections may occur as separate sentences of a single paragraph.

all its

P2 P3

Leading Section-Section Heading Section

1 of an entry.

(CCC, FQl).

1) Leading Section of 2) Section 2 of a Call

a Word Entry.

Number Entry of a book or of a Class Number Entry of a Periodical Publication, that is, of a Main Entry in a Classified Catalogue. (CCC, FQ2).

P4

3) Section 3 of a See also Subject Entry. 4) Section 3 of a Cross Reference Index Entry. Title Section

1) Section of a Main Entry giving the title of the document catalogued, along with the names of the collaborators and the edition, if any. (CCC, FQ3). 2) Section of any other Specific Added Entry giving the title of the document catalogued. I'41

Bibliographical Section - Section giving Format, Collation, and Imprint, in the Main Entry of a Macro-document. (CCC, FQ31).
NOTE - In a National Bibliography, consists of Format and Collation only. section. the Bibliographical Section The Imprint forms a separate

P411

of the following:

Imprint

Section - The Imprint Section consists successively

1) Name(s)

of place(s) of publication in abbreviated form where possible without prejudice to intelligibility, a comma separating the names if there be more than one name;

2) Semicolon;
3) Name(s) of publisher(s) in the shortest form, consistent 4) Full stop;
53 with intelligibility, a comma separating the names if there I be more than one name;

P42
5) Month of publication, 6) Year of publication; 7) Full stop; and 8) Published price, a comma separating the different currencies if there be more than one. (CCC, SE14).
NOTE - In a National Bibliography, the Bibliographical and the Imprint Section taken together form the Book-Trade (CCC, SEl). Section Section.

if necessary and possible;

P42 P43

the Host Document

Host Section-

Section in the Main Entry giving the name of and the Locus of a Micro-document in it.

Locus Section
1) Section in a Cross Reference Entry of a Classified Catalogue, giving the Locus. 2) Section in a Subject Analytical in a Dictionary giving the Locus. (CCC, FQ32). Catalogue,

PS

Note Section - Section of a Main Entry or of a Book Index Entry giving the name of the series or the name(s) of the related book(s) or both and, in the case of a Periodical Publication certain other information, such as periodicity, holdings and changes in publication. (CCC, FQ4). Annotation Section - Section of a Main Entry giving Annotation, ,Synopsis or an Abstract of the document catalogued. (CCC, FQ41). Annotation -Explanation in a few words, usually cataloguer, about the importance or special features of and the status of the author, without introducing any opinion of the cataloguer. This is added to the Main (CCC, MB9).
NOTE - The Annotation is added as the penultimate before the Accession Number Section. section,

P6

P61

by the a book critical Entry.
that is,

P7

Accession Number Section - Last section in the front of a Main Entry Card, giving the Accession Number of a document. (CCC, FQS). Tracing Section - Section, usually in the back of a Main Entry Card, giving the Headings and the Referred-From Class Numbers or Call Numbers to all the Added Entries of the document. (CCC, FQS).
NOTE-Tracing Catalogue. Section is not normally given in a Book-Form

P8

54

P93 P91 Directing Section - Section in an Added Entry directing attention to a document, Class Number, Name of a Class or an Alternative Name. (CCC, FQ91).
NOTE-This section occurs in a Cross Reference Entry, a Class Index Entry. a See also Subject Entry and a Cross Reference Index Entry. _

P92 P93

Second Section - Section in a Book Index Entry giving the specification of the concerned document(s). (CCC, FQ12). Index Number Section 1) Section in a Book Index Entry, giving the Call Number of the document; 4 Section in a Class Index Entry, giving the Class Number of the Class: 3) Section in a Specific Subject Entry, giving the Call Number of a document; 4) Section in a Subject Analytical, giving the Call Number of a document; 5) Section in the Main Entry of a Dictionary Catalogue, giving the Call Number in general and Class Number in the case of a Periodical Publicafion. (CCC, FQ93).

55

CHAPTER Q HEADING QQ
Heading-Occupant
NOTE

of a Heading Section.

(CCC,

FRO).

1-

A Heading may be the name of a

1) 2) 3) 4) 5) 6) 7)

person, geographical entity, corporate body, series, document, subject, or language. person or corporate body whose name is used as

NOTE 2 -The Heading may be 1) 2) 3) 4) 5)

an author, a joint author, a collaborator, a joint collaborator, or the subject of a document. entity, used as Heading, may

NOTE 3 - The name of a geographical represent the name of a 1) government, 2) document, or 3) subject.

Ql

Homonym in Sense 1 - One and the, same name denoting two or more entities of any one of the following categories: 1) persons, 2) geographical entities, 3) corporate bodies, 4) documents, 5) series, 6) subjects, and 7) languages. (CCC, FRl). Homonymous Heading in Sense 1 - A Heading which IS a Homonym in Sense 1. (CCC, FRll). Individualizing Element in Sense 1 - Term(s) added to a name in a Heading to resolve Homonym in Sense 1 so as to individualize the intended entity. (CCC, FR12). 56

Qll Q12

Q32 Exam@s :

1) Names-of-Persws
Hall (James) (1'755) Hall (James) (1761)

2) Geogra$hical'

Names

Tanjavur Tanjavur (City) Tanjavur (Taluk)
NOTE - The firstof the above headin s is the name of the geographical area of the largest extent denoted by t a e Homonym being considered.

3) Namtis of Books Ramayana (Kamban) Ramayana (Tulsidas) Ramayana (Valmiki)

Q2 Q21
Q22

Homonym in Sense 2 - One and the same name denoting entities of any two or more of the categories mentioned in Section Ql. (CCC, FR21).
Homonym in Sense 2.

Homonymous Heading in Sense 2 - A Heading which is a
(CCC, FR21).

name in a Heading to resolve a Homonym so as to individualize the intended entity. Examples : Salisbury Salisbury (Book)
NOTE -

Individualizing Element in Sense 2 -Term(s)

added to a in Sense 2, that is, (CCC, FR22):

Salisbury (City) Salisbury (Subject)

The first of the above headings is the name of a person.

83
Q31

Senses 1 and 2.

Homonym

fn Sense 3 -A
(CCC, FR3).

Homonym

simultaneously

in

Homonym in Sense 3.

Homonymous Heading in Sense 3 -A
(CCC, FR31).

Heading which is a

Q32

Individualizing Element in Sense 3 -A succession of Individualizing Elements in Senses 1 and 2 added to a name in a Heading to resolve Homonym in Sense 3 so as `to individualize the intended entity. (CCC, FR32).
57

.

Q4
Cambridge (Massachusetts) (Book). ' is the Individualizing Element in Here, ' Massachusetts Sense 1 and ` Book ' is the Individualizing Element in Sense 2. Both taken together form Individualizing Element in Sense 3.

Q4 Q41

Individualized Heading - Heading
mg Element(s) added to resolve

including Individualiz(CCC, FR4). a Homonym.

Word-Group in a Heading - One or more words, constituting the name forming the heading, which are inseparable and should be taken together, to make the specification of the entity intelligible. (CCC, FR41).
Exam$les : Cambridge Oxford 1) Word-grou$ of one word: Hall Tan j avur

2) word-grou$ of two words: Rajendra Prasad De Quincy Madhya Pradesh Chin Hills Digestive System Book Selection 3) Word-groups of three words: Basu Ray Chaudhuri Martin Du Gard Clacton-on-Sea New South Wales Q42

Individualized Word-Group
in a Heading any. (CCC Alternate taken along FR42). Term with

in a Heading - A word-group
the Individualizing Element, if

Block in a Heading
Examples : 1) Ranganathan fS R) (1892) 2) Cambridge (Massachusetts) (Book) Q5 KINDS OF HEADING

Q5l

Simple Heading-Heading
(CCC, FRSl). Examples : 1) Hall (James)

consistmg

of a single

Block.

(1755) 58

Q56
2) Tanjavur (City) 3) Cambridge (Massachusetts) (Book) Q52

Multiple Heading -Heading consisting of two or more Blocks, usually separated by a punctuation mark, such as a comma. (CCC, FR52).
Examples : 1) MADRAS, MINISTERS (Council of -) GREAT BRITAIN in a Multiple Heading. 2) LAW, CONSTITUTION,

Q53

(CCC, FR53). Alternate

First Heading-The
Term

First Block

Main Heading
Examples : 1) In example 1 in Set Q52 ` MADRAS ' is the First Heading. 2) In example 2 in Set Q52 ` LAW ' is the First Heading.

Q54

(CCC, FR54). Alternate Examples :

Second Heading - The Second Block in a Multiple Heading
Term

First Sub-heading
1) In example 1 in Set Q.52 `MINISTERS (Council of -)' is the Second Heading. 2) In example 2 in Set Q52 ` CONSTITUTION ' is the Second Heading.

Q55

Multiple Subject Heading - Subject Heding having, in its successive Blocks, the names of successive isolates or subjects (CCC, FR56).
Exam$les : 1) MEDIUM SPEED, 2) DIAGNOSIS, 3) INDIA, LABOUR, TWO STROKE, JUTE, DIESEL ENGINE TUBERCULOSIS, LUNGS

INDUSTRY

Q56

Multiple Corporate Heading - Corporate Heading having in its successive Blocks, the name of a corporate body and the names of its successive organs of/increasing remove. (CCC, FR57).
,59

CHAPTER

R

NAME-OF-PERSON AND NAME OF CORPORATE BODY
Rl word or set of words arranged in a Name-of-Person -A definite sequence and used to denote a person. (CCC, HBZ). Ahvhate Term
where it is

Name
NOTE- The briefer term may be used in any context not likely to denote any entity other than a person.

R2 SIMPLE NAME

R21

Given Name - A word or word-group, usually given to a person, shortly atier birth, as the individual's name, by the parents or their deputy. It consists of proper nouns. (CCC, HB31).
Alternate Term 1) Christian Name

2) Persona% Name R22

3) Forename 4) First Name

Family Name - A word or word-group normally inherited by a person as denoting the name of his family. It is a proper noun. (CCC, HB32).
Alternate Term 1) Surname
NOTE Japanese,

2) Last Name

The term Last Name is valid only in cases, such as Western. Marathi, and modem Gujarathi, Bengali and Hindi names. Kanncda,

In some cases, such as Chinese, Viet-Namese, Malayalam, and Telugu names, the Family Name is the First Name.

R23

or word-group made up Irremovable Attachment -Word of common nouns attached after the given name, deemed to be an Irremovable Attachment, and always taken along with it. (CCC, HB33). Examples : 1) Acharya 2) Reddy 3) Singh
NOTE For a fuller list see Set HB331 of CCC. ..

61

R24 R24 or word-group made of Removable Attachment -Word common nouns or adjectives, attached as an honorific or a term of courtesy after or before or in the middle of a name, deemed removable, and not to be retained in the heading of an entry. (CCC, HB34). Examples : 1) Baba 2) Pandit 3) Sardar
NOTE For a fuller list see Set HB341 of CCC.

._

R25

Irremovable Auxiliary Word - An article, a prepositi?n, a combination of an article and a preposition or any other auxiliary word occurring between the given Name and the It is usually retained in the heading of an entry. Family Name. (CCC, HB35).
Examples : For articles 1) Arabic: ad, al, ar, as, at, ez 2) German: das, der, die, ein, eine For names with articles 1) Albiruni 2) Thomas A'Beckett 3) Van Der Brugghen
Note For a fuller list see Set EC1 of CCC.

R26

proper noun in a name, not fully Abbreviated Word -A spelt out but abbreviated to one or more initial letters, either habitually by the person himself or in public usage or reference, or in the Title-Page or anywhere else in the Preliminary Pages, or elsewhere in a document.' (CCC, HB36). Examples 1) B. C. 2) S. N. 3) A. J. : Pal for Bepin Chandra Pal Sen for Surendra Nath Sen Wells for Arthur James Wells R3 COMPOUND

NAME
Family Name made up of

R31

Compound
two or more

Family
proper

Nameor

nouns:

1) connected

by a hyphen, 62

R45
2) connected word, or 3) written auxiliary Examples : 1) A. T. Quiller-Couch 2) G. Levi Della 3) S. Das Gupta R32 Vida by a conjunction or any other kind connecting of auxiliary symbol or

separately without any word. (CCC, HCl).

Compound
more proper 1) connected 2) connected 3) written auxiliary Alternate Examples :

Given Name - Given Name made up of two or
nouns: by a ,hyphen, by a conjunction or or any other auxiliary word, or symbol or connecting

separately without any word. (CCC, HCS). Term

Split Given Name
1) K. Yogesha Ananda Row 2) U. Ganapathi Subramanian 3) D. Subra Manian R4 FORM R41 R42 OF NAME-OF-PERSON used in denoting as it occurs a person on the

Usage
for public Title-Page
NOTE -

Name-Name-of-Person
purposes. (CCC, HEl).

Title-Page
chapter.

Name -

of a document.
For examples

Name-of-Person (CCC, HE2).

for the succeeding

sections see

the end of the as the case

R43 R44 R45

Full Name - Usage Name
may be. (CCC, HE3).

or Title-Page

Name,

Pure Name -Name
all the removable

derived from Full Name by removing attachments, if any. (CCC, HE4).

Reduced Name-Name derived from Pure Name by temporarily coupling together with a hyphen the components of a compound or multi-worded Given Name or Family Name, if any, if they are not already coupled together by a hyphen
63

RI6
or an auxiliary word, and coupling the Irremovable -Attachment at the end, if any, with the preceding word or compound word as the case may be. (CCC, HES).
R46

Entry Element - In the case of a Name-of-Person other than Chinese and Viet-Namese, the Entry Element consists of the last word or the last coupled word-group in the Reduced Name. If it is Chinese or Viet-Namese, the entire Pure Name, without any change in the sequence of its words, is used as the Entry Element. (CCC, HE6). Secondary Element - In the case of a Name-of-Person other than Chinese and Viet-Namese, the Secondary Element consists of all the words of the Recluced Name not included in the Entry Element. (CCC, HE7). Entry Name-Entry Element followed by the Secondary Element, if any, in a Name-of-Person with all the temporary hyphens removed. (CCC, HBEB). Examples :

R47

R48

Kind of Name Full Name

Westevn
M Magnus Gabriel De la Gardie Magnus Gabriel' De la Gardie Magnus Gabriel De-la-Gardie De la Gardie Magnus Gabriel Janab Farid al-Din Abu Hamid Mohammad Ibrahim al-Din Abu Farid Hamid Mohammad Ibrahim al-Din Abu Farid Hamid Mohammad Ibrahim Mohammad Ibrahim Abu IBRAal-Din Farid al-Din Hamid MOHAMMAD HIM (Farid .4bu Hamid) Doctor Sir Chetput Pattabhirama Ayyar Ramaswamy Iyer PattabhiChetput rama Ayyar Ramaswamy Iyer PattabhiChetput rama Ayyar Ramaswamy Iyer Ramaswami Iyer PattabhiChetput rama Ayyar RAMASWAMY (Chetput IYER Pattabhirama Ayyar)

Pure Name

Reduced

Name

Entry

Element Ele-

Secondary ment

Entry name

DE LA GARDIE (Magnus Gabriel)

64

s211 CHAPTER S

CHAIN PROCEDURE
Sl Sll s12 s13

CLASS
` Subject `, in discussion, ' in

Class - The term used to denote in the idea plane. (CCC, KA11). Class
discussion,

Number -The
in the notational

term used to denote ' Subject plane. (CCC, KA12).

Focus -The generic term used to denote ' Class ' in the idea plane, ' Subject ' in the verbal plane, and ' Class Number ' in the notational plane. (CCC, KA13). Main Class=Main Subject=Main Class Number=Main in the schedule of Main Classes Focus -Any focus enumerated
in the Scheme for Classification used. (CCC, KA14).

s14

s15

as a Canonical Class of a Main Class in the Scheme for Classification used. (CCC, KA15). S16

Canonical Class= Canonical Subject = Canonical focus enumerated Number= Canonical Focus -Any

Class

Basic Class= Basic Subject = Basic Class Number= Basic Focus - Any Main Class or any Canonical Class. (CCC,
KA16). S2 ISOLATE

AND FACET

s21

Isolate (Generic Term)=Isolate Idea (in the Idea Plane)= Isolate Term (in the Verbal Plane)= Isolate Number (in the Notational Plane)= Isolate Focus-Any of the divisions
of a Basic Class based on a characteristic or a succession or train of (homogeneous) characteristics and enumerated in the Scheme (CCC, KA20). for Classification used as a Focus in a Facet.

s211

Idea in the idea plane Common Isolate - An Isolate denoted by the same Isolate Term in the verbal plane and represented by the same Isolate Number in the notational plane, to whatever Basic Class it is attached. (CCC, KZDl91).
KOTE - Any Geographical Isolate is a Common Isolate. The Isolates denoted by the following terms are also Common Isolates:

Anthology Bibliography Biography Collection

Cyclopedia Directory History Periodical

Report of Conference Serial Syllabus

65

s22 s22
s221

Digit - Each (CCC, KA22).

of the

distinct

symbols

in a Class

Number.

Connecting Digit - Digit used in an Analytico-Synthetic Classification to connect an Isolate Number to a Basic Class Number or to another Isolate Number. (CCC, KA221). Quasi-digit-Group
together formed of Digits to be treated a single Digit. (CCC, KA222). as if they

s222 S23

Compound FOCUS= Compound Class= Compound Class consisting of one Basic Focus and one or Number -Focus
more Isolate Foci. (CCC, KA23).

S3 DEVICES s3 1 Chronological Device - Device of using the appropriate Chronological Number for the formation or the subdivision of an Isolate, which is capable of chronological formation or subdivision, or when the individualization of the Isolates or Subisolates are made to depend conveniently on the period of origin or birth, the year of first investigation, or discovery, initiation, commencement or occurrence, or the year that may be definitely associated with the respective Isolates in any Some of the cases where other manner or for any other reason. this Device may be employed are generally indicated either in the Schedules or in the Rules of the Scheme for Classification used. (CCC, KA30. Glos, Q30).
Example : 0111, 2364 denotes ` \Villiam Shakespeare ' Here 0 = Literature, 111 = English language, is Connecting Digit, 2 = Drama, and J64 = 1564. writer of drama in the Therefore, 0111,2J64 = A English language born in 1564, that is, William Shakespeare. S32

Geographical Device - Device of using the appropriate Geographical Number (that is, of continent, country, state, district, etc, as the case may be) for the formation or the subdivision of an Isolate, which is capable of geographical formation or subdivision, or when the individualization of an Isolate, or a Sub-isolate may be made to depend conveniently on the place of 66

s34 origin or prevalence or habitation or one that may be definitely associated with the respective foci in any other manner or for any other reason. The cases where this Device may be applied are generally indicated either in the Schedules or in the Rules of the Scheme for Classification used. (CCC, KA40. @OS,

Q4W
Example: V44 denotes History of India. Here V is the Basic Class Number meaning .` History `. 44 is an Isolate Number got by Geographical Device. It means India. s33 Subject Device - Device of using the appropriate Class Number for the formation or the subdivision of an Isolate, which is capable of such formation or subdivision, or when the individualization of the Isolates or Sub-isolates may be made to depend conveniently on a Class Number that may be Befinitely associated with the respective classes in any manner or for any reason. The cases where this Device may be applied are given jn the Schedules or in the Rules of the Scheme for Classification used. (CCC, KAS. Glos, QSO).
Packeted
NOTE 1 - In Colon Classification, the Subject Device part of an Isolate Number is to be enclosed in circular brackets; and it is called

Number.

Example : T9 (Y31) Here T 9 (Y31) (Y31) denotes `Rural education`

= Education, T Other educants, and = Rural social group (got by Subject Device) is put within brackets to show that it is got by Subject Device. It is a Packeted Number

NOTE 2 - In Decimal Classification also, Subject Device is often There used. Rut the number got by Subject Device is not packeted. The Committee is nothing to show that it is got by Subject Device. on the General Theory of Classification (FID/CA) of the International Federation for Documentation has recommended that the Universal Decimal Classification may adopt Packeted Notation as in Colon Classification.

s34

Alphabetical Device - Device of using the first, the first two or the first three, etc, initial letters of the name of an entity, existential or conceptual, for the formation or the sub(CCC, KA60. Glos, Q60). division of an Isolate. Examples : D5125H = Hind cycle D5125HU = Hudson cycle D5125HUM = Humber cycle 67

s41 S4 PHASE s41

RELATION

Phase Relation-Relation between the phases of a Complex Class or those of a Complex Isolate or those of a Complex Array Isolate. (Glos, H5). Complex Class -Class formed by combining two or more (CCC, KA710. classes by a device other than Subject Device. Glos, Hl). Example: BObD denotes ` Mathematics interested in engineering `.
Here B = Mathematics, 0 is a Connecting Digit, b = Inter-Class Bias Relation, and D & Engineering. for those primarily

S42

S421

forms a Complex Class.

Inter-Class

Phase - Each of the classes whose combination
(CCC, KA711).

Example: In BObD Mathematics for engineers,
B Mathematics is the First or the Basic Phase. D Engineering is the Second Phase. It is a Biasing Phase as the relation is a Bias Relation. S422 CHo5;~)onentClasses of a Complex

Inter-Class

Phase

Relation - The relation between

the C.lass. (CCC, KA712. Glos,

s43

Complex Isolate - Isolate formed by the combination of two or more Isolates of the same Facet by other than Superimposition Device, on the basis of their mutual relation. (CCC, KA720. Glos, H2). Example: X555.440klN48 in India's commerce `.
Here X555 = Foreign Commerce, is a Connecting Digit, = India, -44 0 is a Connecting Digit, = Intra-Facet Bias Relation, k lN48 = The Commonwealth, and 44OklN48 is a Complex Isolate. 68 denotes ` Commonwealth preference

s53
s431 S432 tion forms a Complex Isolate. Components H502). S44

Intra-Facet

Phase -Each Phase
a

of the Isolates whose combina(CCC, KA721). Isolate. (CCC, KA722. Glos,

Intra-Facet

of

Complex

Relation - The relation between the

Isolate formed by the Complex Array Isolate -Array combination of two or more Array Isolates of the same Array by other than Superimposition Device on the basis of their mutual relation. (CCC, KA730. Glos, H3).

Example: Y31Ow35 denotes ` Difference and city folk `.
Here Y = Sociology, 31 = Rural folk, 0 is a Connecting Digit, w = Intra-Array Relation of Difference, 35 = City'folk, and 310~35 is a Complex Array Isolate. s441 combination

between

rural. folk

Ihtra-Array

Phase -Each of the Array Isolates whose forms a Complex Array Isolate. (CCC, KA731). AND CHAIN
Coordinate Classes or Isolates.

S5 ARRAY s51 S52 (CCC, KA901.

Array -A

sequence of Glos, A3).

Immediate Universe-A Class or Isolate of which the Classes or Isolates of an Array are Sub-classes or Sub-isolates respectively. (CCC, KA902). Exam$les :
the Isolates forming the Natural Group of Plants in Botany, the Isolates, Algae, Fungi, and Lichen form an Array with Thallophyta as the Immediate Universe. 4 Among the Isolates forming the Systems of Philosophy, the Isolates Advaita, Visishtadvaita, and Dvaita form an Array with Vedanta as the Immediate Universe. 3) Among the Isolates forming the Social Groups in Sociology, the Isolates, Rural, Urban and City Residents form an Array with Groups-by-Residence as the Immediate Universe.

1) Among

S53

Isolates.

Chain -A

modulated (CCC, KA905).

sequence* of Subordinate 69

Classes or

s531
Examples : 1) Thallophyta, Fungi, Basidiomycetes and Mushroom form a Chain of Isolates. 2) Vedanta, Advaita, Pratyabhijna and Virasaiva Schools of Indian Philosophy form a Chain of Isolates. 3) Social Activity, Ceremonial, Ceremonial of Childhood and Ceremonial of Naming form a Chain of Isolates. s531 s532

Link - A class in a chain.

(Glos, A42).

First Part of a Chain -The part of the Chain of Class Number, ending with the digit just preceding the digit representing a Common Isolate, if any. (CCC, KZD291). Common Isolate Part of a Chain - The Part of the Chain of a Class Number beginning with the digit representing a Common Isolate, if any, and ending with the digit just preceding the digit representing the second Common Isolate, if any. It may also be called Second Part of a Chain. Telescoped Array - An Array of Isolates in a Schedule for Classification, made of an Isolate and its Sub-isolates, as viewed from the idea plane, but whose Isolate Numbers appear to be co-ordinate ones, as viewed from the notational plane. (CCC. KA91). Example: R5 Vedanta, R6 Advaita, R7 Visishtadvaita and R8 Dvaita form a Telescoped Array in the Schedules of the Cololz Classification. Isolate-at-Telescoping-Point - The Isolate in a Telescoped Array of which succeeding Isolates in the Array are Sub-isolates. (CCC, KA911). Chain-with-Gap -A Chain of Isolates in a Schedule of Classification, in which an Intermediate Isolate is not given as a result of failure to conform to the Canon of Modulation. (CCC, KA92).
&amPle: In Decimal Classification, 2 Religion, 22 Sacred Books, 225 New Testament is a Chain-with-Gap as the Isolate `gg;risstianity ' is missing between 2 Religion and 22 Sacred %'

s533

s54

s541

s55

s551

Missing Isolate - The Isolate missing in a Chain-with-Gap, (CCC, KA921). example for Chain-with-Gap, Example : In the above ` Christianity ' is the Missing Isolate. Its Isolate Number may, as the last resort, be written as 22128.
70'

S65 S6 CHAIN S61 S62 PROCEDURE in the Chain produced

Last Link - Link occurring last by a Class Number. (CCC, KBl). False Link-Link which is:

digits, intelligible according to the Rules of Classification that is, it has no meaning; or 2) The Last Link of a Compound Class Number and does not have a name in the verbal plane in common usage in a natural language. In other words, it does not represent a subject with a definite name. (CCC, KB2). A link is a False Link if it ends with a 1) connecting symbol; or 2) digit representing an Inter-Class Phase Relation; or 3) digit representing an Intra-Facet Phase Relation; or 4) digit representing an Intra-Array Phase Relation; or 5) time-isolate representing Time itself in the Time Facet of the Class and not representing any other Fundamental Category - Space, Energy, Matter, or Personality - in their respective facets in the Class Number. S63 Unsought Link - Link which 1) ends with a part of the Isolate Focus in a Facet of a Class Number; and 2) represents a subject on which reading material is not likely to be produced or sought or which is not likely to be looked up by any reader seeking material on the Specific Subject forming the Last Link of the full Class Number. (CCC, K63). NOTE - This rule admits of local variation in its application. In

1) Not a Class Number - that is, it is not a concatenation of

the light of the reading material organized, the interest of the readers served and the nature of the service attempted, each library may define in an exact way suited to itself the links which should be deemed to be Unsought Links. This local definition should be consistently followed. A similar local definition may also be made by an organization engaged in the production of International /or National Bibliographies and Union Catalogues of Books or of Periodical Publications or both.

S64

Sought Link - Link which is neither False nor Unsought and ends with an After-Time Anteriorizing Common Isolate Digit. (CCC, KB4). Upper KB5). Link - Link other 71 than the Last Link. (CCC,

,S65

Y-

-

S66

term is a relative one when two links Lower Link -This are engaging attention. Lower Link is that one ot the two links which occurs lower in a chain than the other of the two. (CCC, KB6). -A link in a Telescoped Chain Link-at-Telescoping-Point whose Class Number ends with a digit representing an Isolateat-Telescoping-Point. (CCC, KB91). Missing Link - A Link in a Chain-with-Gap corresponding to the Missing Isolate in the Chain. (CCC, KB92).

S67

S671

72

CHAPTER

T

ARRANGEMENT
Tl T2

OF ENTRIES

Filing - The arranging of Entries in a catalogue. Classified Arrangement - Arrangement of the Number Entries in a catalogue by the Class Numbers in their respective Leading Sections. Alphabetical Arrangement - Arrangement Entries in a catalogue by the alphabet. of the Word

T3 T31

AR-Through Alphabetization - Alphabetical arrangement, ignoring the presence of space, punctuation marks, accents, apostrophes, brackets and differences in the style of writing or the printing of letters, treating the contractions in the way in which they occur and not according to the words for which they stand. Nothing-Before-Something Alphabetization - Alphabetical arrangement which gives the space between words an ordinal value lower than that of any letter of the alphabet or any other symbol. Gestalt Alphabetization - Alphabetical gives definite ordinal value not only to the bet and other symbols but also to their style space between words, clauses, sentences EH70). arrangement letters in the of writing and and sections. which alphato the LCCC,

T32

T33

NOTE - The following `ascending scale of ordinal values is to be borne m mind while arranging the entries in the alphabetical part: 1) Section space;

2) Full stop: 3) Comma; 4) Numerals in their natural 5) Bracket 6) Words sequence;

;
in Xoman;

7) Words ifl italics, or underlined words; 8) The word 9) Etc.

` and ' or its substitute semicolon;

and

73

T33
Examele : S1 No. All-Through Nothing-BeforeSomething New Caledonia New Guinea New Shakespeare New South Wales New York New Zealand Fewa& ($) Newark Newcastle Newcomb (J) Newcomb, Jr Newman (MS) Newton Newton (I) Newton. Ill Gestalt

Newall (JT) Newall, Tr Newark New Caledonia Newcastle Newcomb (J) Newcomb, Jr New Guinea Newman (MS) New Shakespeare New South Wales Newton Newton (I) Newton, Ill New York New Zealand

New Caledonia New Guinea New Shakespeare New South Wales New York New Zealand Newall, Tr Newall (JT) Newark Newcastle Newcomb, Jr Newcomb (J) Newman (MS) Newton Newton, Ill Newton (I)

74

99s

Ul CHAPTER U

CANONS OF CATALOGUING
following convention is adopted about the term to be NOTE-The used to denote Normative Principles in different contexts: LAWIn the context of a major discipline, such as Library Science. CANON - In the context of divisions of the first order of the major discipline, such as Cataloguing. PRINCIPLE - In the context of the second or later order of the major discipline, such as Alphabetization in Cataloguing. uo

applicable

Canons of Cataloguing
to cataloguing.
NOTE lj fl$ting

- The specific Normative Principles

These principles are applicable to of a Catalogue Code, including the formulation of each

2) interpretation of the rules to meet new situations brought up icular document or by changes in the practice of book zo&gn ; and 3) provision of suitable guidance for cataloguing work. (CCC, BAO).

Ul

-The principle according to which the information found in the title-page of the document catalogued and its overflow pages should determine the choice and rendering of 1) each section of the Main Entry other than the ExtractNote, Extraction Note and Related Book Note; 2) each section of a Cross Reference Entry (in a Classified Catalogue) and Subject Analytical (in a Dictionary Catalogue) other than the Leading Section and the Directing Section ; 3) the heading of each Book derived from the Extract Related Book Note ; Index Entry other than any Note, Extraction Note and

Canon

of Ascertainability

4) all sections other than the Heading and Directing Section of each Book Index Entry; 5) alJ sections other than the Heading and Directing Section of a Class Index Entry (in a Classified Catalogue), Specific Subject Entry and See also Entry (in a Dictionary Catalogue) ; 6) each section other than the Directing Section in each Cross Reference Index Entry other than Name Entry; and 7) similar sections in any other kind of Entry. 75 (CCC, BBO).

u2 u2 Canon of Prepotence - The principle that
1) the potency to decide the position of an entry among the entries in a catalogue should, if possible, be concentrated totally in the Leading Section; and even there 2) it should be concentrated, as much as possible, Entry Element; and further in the

3) if total concentration in the Leading Section is not possible, the minimum possible potency should be allowed to overflow beyond it to later Sections; and 4) even this spill-over shouId be distributed in the later sections in a decreasing sequence of intensity. (CCC, BCO). u3 principle that the name Canon of Individualization -The of any entity be it of a person, a geographical entity, a corporate body, a series, a document, a subject or a language - used as the heading of a catalogue entry should be made to denote one and only one entity by adding to it the necessary and suffi(CCC, BDO) cient nutnber of Individualizing Elements.

Exameles :
I) ADAMS (Mary) (1898) ADAMS (Mary) (1929) 2) HY DERABAD (India) HYDERABAD (Pakistan) 3) HISTORY, CLASSIFICATION HISTORY, (of) CLASSIFICATION u4 whether an entry

Canon of Sought-Heading

- The principle that the decision

1) with a particular type of Heading, or 2) with a particular choice for that Heading, or 3) with a particular rendering of that choice, or 4) a particular Added Entry arising out of it should be based on the answer to the question; ' Is a reader or library staff likely to look for a book under the particular type or choice or rendetig of Heading or in the particular Added Entry ?`. (CCC, BEO). U5

Canon of Context - The principle 1) that the rules of a Catalogue Code should be formulated
in the context of 11) the nature of the cataloguing features prevalent in the mode of book production; 76 of the book

US 12) the nature of the organization of libraries prevalent in regard to the mode and quality of library service; and 13) the coming into existence of published bibliographies, particularly bibliographical periodicals; and 2) that the rules should be amended from time to time to keep step with the changes in the context. (CCC, BFO).
NOTE - For example, the rules in Cutter's Rules recommend Cataloguing ' in service libraries in place of ` Full Cataloguing is over-weighted with details of physical bibliography.

' Short ' which

U6

Canon of Permanence -The principle that no element in an entry, the Heading in particular, should be subjected to change by the Rules of Catalogue Code except when the rules themselves are changed in response to the Canon of Context. (CCC, BGO).
NOTE - For example, the rule in the ALA Code, that the later name of an author should be used as heading violates this Canon.

u7

Canon of Currency-The principle that the term used to denote a subject in a Class Index Entry of a Classified C.atalogue and in a Subject Entry of a Dictionary Catalogue should be the one in current usage. (CCC, BHO).
NOTE-For example, these days subject heading instead of ` Political

` Economics ' should be used as
Economy `.

U8

Canon of Consistence - The principle that 1) the rules of a Catalogue Code should provide for all the Added Entries of a document to be consistent with its Main Entry; and
2) the entries of all documents should be consistent with one another in certain essentials, such as choice, rendering, and style of writing, the heading and the other sections.
NOTE - For example, the rule in the ALA Code prescribing Subject Sub-heading to a Corporate Author Heading violates this Canon.

77

VO CIJAPTER V

LAWS OF LIBRARY
VO

SCIENCE
specific Normative Prinarising in library science, (CCC, C-40).

Laws of Library

Science -The

ciples applicable to any problem library service and library practice. Vl

v2 v3 V4 v41 V5

First Law - Books Are For Use. Second Law -Every Reader His Book. -Every Book Its Reader. Third Law Fourth Law - Save the Time of the Reader. Corollary to the Fourth Law - Save the Time of the Staff. is a Growing Organism. Fifth Law -Library

78

WS CHAPTER W

GENERAL NORMATIVE

PRINCIPLES

Wl

Law of ImpartialityThe principle that, between two or more claimants say for use as Heading, the preference of any one should be made on sufficient grounds only and not arbitrarily. (CCC, CCO).
Example: In the case of joint authorship, the Law of Impartiality would recommend equal right to the names of all the authors for choice as Heading.

w2

Law of Symmetry -The principle that of two entities or situations which admit of being regarded as symmetrical counterparts of each other, if one of the entities or situations is given weight, in any particular context, the other should also be given a corresponding weight. (CCC, CDO),. Law of Parsimony-The principle that between two or more possible alternative rules bearing on a particular phenomenon, the one leading to overall economy of man-power, material, money and time considered together with proper weightage is to be preferred. (CCC, CEO). Principle of Local Variation - The principle
1) the International Catalogue Code should factors to be left to the care of each National 2) a National Catalogue Code should mark to be left to the care of each Linguistic in a multilingual country, such as India; that mark out the Catalogue Code; out the factors Catalogue Code

w3

w4

3) a National Catalogue Code or a Linguistic Catalogue Code, as the case may be, should mark out the factors to be left to the care of the Local Catalogue Code of each individual library; 4) the Catalogue Code in each hierarchical line consistent with one another without any mutual tion; and should be contradic-

5) each lower link in each hierarchical line should be a supplement to all the upper links taken together. (CCC, CFO). W5

Principle of Osmosis -The principle that, when a change in the Catalogue Code or the Scheme for Classification becomes necessary in difference to the Canon of Context, on and after a
79

chosen date : 1) all the new accessions be catalogued and classified according to the new Catalogue Code and the new Scheme for Classification;

2) just
3)

4) 5) 6)

such of the old collection as are known to be m much use be re-catalogued and reclassified, with an additional temporary staff, if necessary, during the first few months; the new accessions and the re-catalogued and re-classified books be kept as New Collection, also keeping their catalogue cards as such; the rest of the old collection be kept as Old Collection and also keeping their catalogue cards as such; readers attention be invited by the Reference Librarian to the existence of the two Collections; and if any book is taken out by a reader from the Old Collection, on its return by him it be re-catalogued and re-classified and absorbed in the New Collection, also repeating the process with its catalogue cards. (CCC, GGO).

80

IS : 796 - 1966

ALPHABETICAL

INDEX

The index number in each entry consists of the number of the chapter and the section in which the item occurs in this standard. The first letter in the index number denotes the chapter. The Hindu-Arabic numerals following the first letter denote the section. Exaw@k: C22 = Section 22, Chapter C. Abkeviations used:

alter = alternate term to the approved term

irt =

in relation to

A Abbreviated title C24 alter word R26 Abridgement I352 Abstract E32322 Accession number section P7 Adaptation B53 Added entry N42 Administrative organ D112 All-through alphabetization T31 Alphabetical arrangement T3 device S34 part 5632 Alphabetization T3 Alternative title C22 Annotation P61 section P6 Anonymous document G8 work D23 Arrangement of entries T Array S'S1 Telescoped S54 Article E341 Artificial composite book E33512 Ascertainability Canon of Ul Associated work 33411 Audio document ES2 alter Audio-visual document E84 alter Author D2 analytical N44 statement G6 Authority list K12 B Basic class S16 focus S16 number S16

Basic (Co&d) subject S16 Bibliographical periodical E323 alter section P41 Bibliography 52 Linguistic J5 Macro J22 Micro 121 National 53 State 54 Binder's title C53 Bipartite catalogue 562 Block in a heading Q42 alter Book E3 alter E33 form catalogue Ll index entry irt Classified catalogue N64 Dictionary catalogue N76 number M62 supplement E3213
s--

c
mark M64 alter number M6 Canonical class S15 number S15 focus s15 subject S15 Canons of catalogue Card catalogue I_.4 Ca;;;gg5 ll code Kll Cataloguer K2 Cataloguing Kl Canons of UO in-source KS1 Catchword entry N451 title C21

Call

UO

.

81

IS : 7% - 1966
Catechism B54 Centralized catalogue KS Chain S53 with gap S55 Christian name R21 alter Chronological device S31 Class Sll index entry N62 number M61; Sl2 Classic B23 Classified arrangement T2 catalogue 563 part 5631 Collaborator D7 statement G7 Collation G2 Collection number M63 Commemoration volume E34511 Commentary B59 Common isolate S211 part of a chain S533 Compiler D3 Complex array isolate S44 class S42 isolate S43 Comnosite book E335 Cornhound class S23 number S23 family name R31 focus S23 given name R32 Concordance B58 Conference D14 Connecting element Q7 Consistence Canon of U8 Consolidated entry N2 general entry N22 specific entry N21 Constitutional organ Dill Context Canon of US Continuation card MS4 alter Continued card MS4 Continuity E32 Contractions M7 Contribution E34 Contributor E342 Conventional document of kind 1 E3 kind 2 E4 kind 3 E5 kind 4 E6 Co-operative cataloguc K4 Copyright document E915 Corporate author D22 body Dl Cross reference entry N61 index entry N43 ivt classified catalogue N63 dictionary catalogue N75 subject entry N53 Currency Canon of U7

D Dependent work B5 Descriptive element Q6 Device Alphabetical S34 Chronological S3 1 Geographical S32 Subiect S33 Dictionary catalogue J64 Digit S22 Connecting S221 Quasi S222 Directing section P91 Distinguyshing number E32 Document El alter Documentation list J211 periodical 1~323

E Edition 1 F22 2 onwards F23 in sense 1 F24 in sense 2 F25 statement G4 Embodied thought El Entry Nl Consolidated N2 element 08 General g22 Specific N21 ivt Name-of-person R46 Name R48 Section of Pl statement for author G61 Collaborator G71

82

IS: 796 - 1966
Expressed thought Bl Extension card MS4 alter Extract F4 F False link S62 Family name R22 Fanciful title C62 Fascicule E31 Favoured language Ml 1 script M21 Feature heading MS6 Fe&s&rift E33511 Fifth law VS Fiiing Tl First heading QS3 sub QS4 alter law Vl name R21 al&r part of a chain SS32 vertical MS22 Focus S13 Forename R21 alter Format Gl Fourth law V4 Corollary to the V41 Full name R43 document E211 section P42 House document E912 journal E3211 alter magazine E3212 organ E3211 I Immediate universe SS2 Impartiality Law of Wl Impression F2 Imprint G3 section P411 Inclusive notation M31 Incunabula E3361 Index number section P93 Indexing periodical E3231 Individualization Canon of U3 Individualized heading Q4 word-group in a heading Q42 Individualising element sense 1 Q12 sense 2 Q22 sense 3 Q32 Institution D13 Instrument record phenomenon ES5 a&r Inter-class phase S421 relation S422 Intraarray phase 5441 facet phase S431 relation S432 Irremovable attachment R23 auxiliary word R2S Isolate S21 at-telescoping-point SS41 J Joint author D4 compiler DS Jointed heading QS7

G
General entry N12 Geographical device S32 Gestalt alphabetization T33 Given name R21 Government D12 Guard1 book catalogue L2 alter Guide card MSS H H&tit& Csl

page H4 Heading QO section P3 Homonym sense 1 Ql sense 2 Q2 sense 3 Q3 Homonymous heading sense 1 Qll sense 2 Q21 sense 3 Q31

K
Knowledge mass A0 al&~

83

IS : 796 - 1966
L Language Favoured Ml 1 Most popular Ml3 Scale of Ml2 Last link S61 Last name R21 alter Law of impartiality Wl symmetry W2 parsimony W3 Laws of library science VO Leading line MS21 section P2 Library catalogue Jl hand M4 Lines in a card MS2 Linguistic bibliography JS Link S531 at-telescoping-point 567 Local variation Principle of W4 Locus E23 Section P43 Loose-leaf catalogue L3 a&r Lower link S66 Multiple corporate heading Q56 heading Q52 subject heading Q55 Multi-volumed book E334 N Name Rl alter of-person Rl National bibliography J3 sense 1 J31 sense 2 J32 Non-conventional document E8 manuscript E61 Non-copyright document E916 Notation M3 Internal M62 alter ' Note section P5 Nothing-before-something alphabetization T32 Number entry N3 0 Off print F5 alter Open notation M32 Ordinary composite book Organ Administrative D112 conference D141 Constitutional Dill of corporate body Dll Overflow of. title-page H2

E3351

M Macro bibliography J22 document E21 thought A2 Main card MS3 class S14 number S14 entry N41 focus s14 heading Q53 alter subject S14 Manuscript E6 alter Memorial volume E34511 alter Merger book F6 Meta-document ES5 ah Micro bibliography J21 document E22 Missing isolate S551 link S671 Most popular language Ml3

P
Pamphlet E331 Parody B55 Parsimony Law of W3 Partial title C2 Paste-down catalogue L2 Pedestrian work B4 Periodical E321 Abstracting E3232 Bibliographical E323 alter Documentation E323 Indexing E3231 publication B24, E32 Reviewing E3233 Supplement to E3213 Periodicitv E32 Permanence Canon of U6

IS : 796 - 1966
Permanent organ D113 Personal author D21 Personal name R21 alfer Phase relation S41 Polyglot title C4 Pre-natal cataloguing KS2 Prepotence Canon of U2 Pm-print F51 Princiole of locai variation W4 osmosis W5 Printed book E3 alier Private docllment E913 Proper name title C63 Pseudo-classic B41 Pseudonymous author D6 Pure name R44 See also subject entry N74 Selective cataloguing K3 Separate F5 Sequel B57 Serial E322 Series F3 Pseudo of kind 1 F31 of kind 2 F32 of kind 3 F33 Sheaf catalogue L3 Shelf list J7 register 57 u&v Short title C24 Simple book E336 heading Q51 Sought heading, Canon of U4 link S64 Speaking book E821 Special supplement E3213 Specific added entry N421 entry Nil subject entry N.52 irt Dictionary catalogue N72 Split given name R32 alter Sponsor D8 State bibliography J4 Status of document E2 Sub-title C23 Subject analytical N73 irf Classified catalogue N53 aL* as assumed term AP device S33 entry N51 See also N74 index entry N71 Supplement E333 to a periodical E3213 Surname R21 alter Symmetry Law of W2 Synopsis E32321 T Telescoped array ,554 Tell-tale title C61 Temporary organ D114 Third law V3 Thought Al content El2 Expressed Bl

Q
Quasi class B2 digit S222 R Reduced name R45 Referred from-heading N432 to-document E213 to-heading N431 Choice of irt Cross reference index entry N43 Referring document E212 Related books Fl Removable attachmert R24 Reprint F21 in sense 2 F5 alter Reprograph E7 Restricted document E911 Reviewing periodical E3233 Running title C52 S Sacred work B21 Scale of language Ml2 Second heading QS4 section P92 law v2 vertical MS23 Secondary element irt Name-of-person R47 Secret document E914 Section of an entry Pl

85

IS : 796 - 1966
Macro A2 Micro A3 Spot A4 Title Cl analytical N45 irt its significance C6 irt its position C5 leaf H3 page Hl name R42 -Overflow of H2 proper Cl1 section P4 statement G5 Tracing section PS Trade catalogue E332 Translation B.56 Transliteration M22 Upper link S65 Usage name R41 V Version B.Sl Vertical First MS22 Second MS23 Visual document Volume El1

E83 alter

W
Word entry N31 group Q41 Work Bl alter Anonymous D23 Associated B411 Dependent B5 Multi-focal B3 of literature B22 Pedestrian B4 Sacred B21

U
Uniformized title C3 Union catalogue Jll Unipartite catalogue J61 Unit card MS11 Unsought link 563

86

