**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 11206 (1984) : Glossary of Textile Terms-wool and other 
Animal Fibres, their Processing and Products [TXD 4: Wool 
and Wool Products] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS : 11206-1984 

Indian Standard 

GLOSSARY OF TEXTILE TERMS- 
WOOL AND OTHER ANIMAL FIBRES, 
THEJR PROCESSING AND PRODUCTS 



UDG 677':V02 : 677-3'Or) : 001 - -1 




(§) Copyright 1985 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK HMAVAN, y BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARO 
NKW DELHI UOOOy 

Gr II October 1985 



AMENDMENT NO. 1 DECEMBER 1998 

TO 

IS 11206 : 1984 GLOSSARY OF TEXTILE TERMS — 

WOOL AND OTHER ANIMAL FIBRES, THEIR 

PROCESSING AND PRODUCTS 

( Page 50, Definition of 'Shoddy' ) — Substitute the following for the 
existing: 

Shoddy — Yam made wholly or predominantly out of pulled or gametted 
wooJJe!! Of wooUen-^synfhetic nigs/clipping^./hard wast nr admixtiirr of such wool 
with any other Qbit would be called shoddy yam. If the percentage of wool 
content exceeds 51 percent it is called woollen shoddy otherwise it would be 
called synthetic shoddy.' 



(TX04) 



Repiognphy Unit, BIS. New Delhi. IikIU 



IS t U206 • 1984 

Indian Standard 

GLOSSARY OF TEXTILE TERMS — 
WOOL AND OTHER ANIMAL FIBRES, 
THEIR PROCESSING AND PRODUCTS 

Wool and Wool Products Sectional Committee, TDG 4 

Chairman Representing 

Shri Upendha M. Patel Shri Dinesh Mills Ltd, Vadodara 

AI embers 

Shri A. T. Basak Inspection Wing, Directorate General of Supplies 

& Disposals, New Delhi 
Shri D. K. Nakdy ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. N. Chatterjee Ministry of Defence ( R&D ) 

Shri S. N. Haldau ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. N. Ghoudhary Jaya Shree Textiles, Rishra 

Shri K. Gopinath ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. P. Gupta Central Sheep & Wool Research Institute, 

Avikanagar 
Lt-Col RakeshJha Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Maj U. S. Paint a i^ ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. MaNivannan Directorate of Industries, Government of Haryana, 

Chandigarh 
Shri N. Goswami ( Alternate ) 
Dr (SmuMA'ii) Usha Nanuurkar Wool Research Association, Bombay 

Shrtjiati G. p. Rane ( Alternate) 
Shri G. Ranoanath TtxtiUs Committee, Bonibay 

Shri A. S. Ramarao ( Alternate ) 
Representative The Oriental Carpet Manufacturers ( India ) 

Ltd, Amritsar 
Shri N. S. Sidhu Directorate of Industries, Government of Punjab, 

Chandigarh 
Shri J. S. Grewal ( Alternate ) 
Dr G. S. Sinoh The Raymond Woollen Mills Ltd, Thane 

Shri J. K. Banerjke ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. V. Sivananda Directorate of Industries, Government of Uttar 

Pradesh, Kanpur 
Shri S. P, Dhaudiyal ( Alternate ) 
Shri T. N. Srivastava The British India Corporation Ltd, Kanpur 

( Continued on pag$ 2 ) 



© Copyright 1985 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Aft. 



IS t 11206 - 1984 

( Contintied from page 1 ) 

Mimhtrs 
Shri R. K. Tandon 

Dtt S. N. TOSIINIWAL 

Shki a. K. Vemma 

Shri V. B. Veuma 

Shri S, P. Kala ( AlUrnaU ) 
Shri S. M. Chakraborty, 
Director ( Tex ) 



Rtprtstniing 

British India Corporation Ltd, Dhariwal 

Government of Rajasthan 

Wool & Woollens Export Promotion C!ounci], 

Bombay 
Office of the Textile Commissioner, Bombay 

Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Msmbir ) 



Secretary 



Shri A. R. Banbrjbb 
Senior Deputy Director ( Tex ), ISI 



Wool Subcommittee, TDC 4 : 1 



Convener 

Aoricultural Marketing 
Adviser to the Govern- 
ment OF India 

Members 



Directorate of Marketing and Inspection, 
Faridabad 



Shri S. C. Aqarwal 
Shhi.Jayantil.al K. An j aria 
Shri A. T. Basak 

Siiui Autar Singh Bedi 
Shri K, C. Bothua 
Shri S. K, Chopra 

Shri J. S. Grewal 



Shree Digvijay Woollen Mills, Jamnagar 
Walker Anjaria & Sons Pvt Ltd, Bombay 
Inspection Wing, Directorate General of Supplies 

& Disposals, New Delhi 
The British India Corporation Ltd, Kanpur 
Bikaner Woolk-n Mills, Bikaner 
Central Sheep & Wool Research Institute, 

Avikanagar 
Directorate of Industries, Government of Punjab, 
Chandigarh 
Shri Mohindbr Sinoh ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. K. Mukhbrjbb Woolcombers of India Ltd, Calcutta 

Da ( Shrimati ) Usha Nandurkar Wool Research Association, Bombay 

Shrimati G. P. Ranb ( Alternate ) 
Shri Dekpak Raj Nath Raj Woollen Industries, Panipat 

Maj U. S. Paintal Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Shri D, K. Srivastava ( Alternate ) 
Shri Parmanand Issardas The All India Wool Trade Federation, Bombay 

Phatnani ) 
Rep RESENT ATI VE The Oriental Carpet Manufacturers ( India ) 

Ltd, Amritsar 
Shri M. V. Sapre Government of Rajasthan 

Db G. S. Sinoh Raymond Woollen Mills Ltd, Thane 

Shri J. K. Banerjee ( Alternate ) 
Shri J. N. Vohra Punjab State Hosiery and Knitwear Develop* 

ment Corporation Ltd, Ludhiana 
Shri P. T. Banerjee ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 64 ) 



ISt 11206-1984 

Indian Standard 

GLOSSARY OF TEXTILE TERMS - 
WOOL AND OTHER ANIMAL FIBRES, 
THEIR PROCESSING AND PRODUCTS 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institu- 
tion on 14 February 1984, after the draft finalized by the Wool and Wool 
Products Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textile Division 
Council. 

0.2 The definitions given in this standard are based on the prevalent 
practices and usage in the Indian textile industry and trade. 

0.3 In the preparation of this standard, considerable assistance has been 
derived from the following: 

Textile Terms and Definitions, Ed 7, The Textile Institute, 
Manchester, UK. 

Watson's Textile Design and Colour, Ed 7, 1975. Newman-Buttcr- 
worth, Kent { UK ). 

Objective measurement of wool in Australia. October 1972. 
Australian Wool Board. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard defines textile terms relating to wool and other animal 
fibres, their processing and a very wide variety of products made out of 
these fibres. 

2. DEFINITIONS 

A 

Aba ( also Abaya^ Abba ) — Sleeveless outergarment, made from camel 
or goat hair, worn by Arabs. 

Afgalaine ( also Afghalaine ) — Originally, cloth made from Afghan 
wool, now the term covers plain-weave all-wool dress fabric containing: 

a) woollen warp with woollen weft, or 

b) worsted warp with woollen weft. 



IS 1 11206 - 1984 

In both types, the warp is usually S and Z twist, arranged end and 
end, while the woollen weft is S twist. 

Airflow — ' A method of measuring the average fibre diameter of a 
sample of wool. 

Alaska Yarn — Same as Merino Yarn. 

Albatross — A fine light weight plain weave wool fabric with a pebbly 
surface created by crepe yarn. 

All- Wool — Material comprising 100 percent wool. 
Alpaca — Denotes an animal fibre, yarn as well as fabric. 

a) Yarn — Worsted or woollen spun yarn made from alpaca fibres. 

[Alpaca — Fibre from the fleece of the semi-domesticated animal of 
the same name or of the llama which inhabits the high mountain 
regions of South America. The fibre is soft, lustrous and of 
various colours ( see IS : 232-1967*)]. 

b) Fabric — A fabric made wholly or partly from alpaca fibre. 

Note — The Textile Institute ( UK ), in Textile Terms and Definitions, 
seventh edition, deprecates the use of this term to describe union fabrics made 
from alpaca weft and cotton warp. 

Alwan — An Indian term denoting fabric in plain weave made from 
pashmina or merino wool or other fibres and used as shawl. 

Amazon — A fine, lightly milled and raised dress fabric, generally woven 
in 5 thread warp satin with worsted warp and woollen weft. 

American Mink ( Mink ) — A most valued fur fibre ( genus : Mustela- 
Lulreola Vision ). 

American System — See ^Drawing'. 

Anglo-Continental System — See 'Drawing'. 

Angola — Denotes yarn as well as fabric: 

a) Angola Tarn — Yarn made from wool and cotton, or wool and 
man-made fibres, blended together. 

b) Angola Fabric — A plain or twill weave fabric made from angola 
yarn warp and angola yarn weft. 



♦Glossary of textile terms — natural fibres {Jirst revision ). 

4 



IS : 11206 . 1984 

Angora 

a) Angora Fibre — The hair of Angora rabbit (genus : l^.pus caniculus). 

Note — The hair of Angora goat is referred to as mohair. 

b) Angora Tarn — An extremely soft yarn made from the hair of 
Angora rabbit. It may contain a small proportion of other fibres 
to facilitate spinning. 

c) Angora Fabric — A fabric woven from Angora yarn. 

NoTB — The use of this term to refer to union fabrics containing mohair weft is 
not recommended. 

Angora Goat — Goat ( genus : Capra hircus acgagrus ) producing long 
lustrous fleece called mohair. 

Animal Fibres — Fibres derived from domesticated animals such as 
sheep, goat, rabbits, camel and other fur-bearing animals primarily for 
use as textile fibres. 

Anti-shrink — Descriptive of textile materials that are dimensionally 
stable under normal conditions of usage. However, in case of fabrics of 
yarns containing wool, the term anti-shrink or shrink-resistant denotes 
non-felting. 

Armure — A dress fabric in modified or broken warp rib weaves exhibi- 
ting horizontal waved lines. The wave ctfect is rendered conspicuous by 
using in the warp, mohair and merino wool or merino wool and cotton 
yarns, in S and Z twist arranged end and end. 

Artificial Wool — Jute or other type of non-wool fibres which have been 
given a chemical finish to impart a woolly handle. 

Astrakhan — Pelt along with the curled wool of a stillborn or very young 
lamb from the Middle East. Typical example is black Karakul lamb skins. 

Astrakhan Fabric, Woven — A curlcd-j)ile fabric made to imitate the 
fleece of a still-born or very young Karakul lamb. The effect is obtained 
by special manufacturing processes or by a pretreatment of the pile yarn, 
which is set while held in the form of a helix. 

Autolevelling — Automatic and continuous adjustment of draft in accor- 
dance with chani^cs in the thickness of the incoming silver in worsted pro- 
cessing with a view to obtaining an uniformity in the linear density of 
the silver. 

Axminster Carpet - A machine-woven carpet in which successive weft- 
wise rows of pile are inserted during weaving according to a predetermined 
arrangement of colours. 



IS I 11206 -1984 

There are four main types of Axminster weave, namely, spool, 
gripper, gripper- spool and chenille. 

NoTR — Many trade names, by force of long uFage, have acquired definite 
significant meanings of some kind in the minds of the public. Whereas the names 
Axminster, Wilton and Brussels, as applied to carpets, may originally have referred 
to the place of origin, this grographical significance has been gradually changed into 
one implying a quality or method of manufacture. 

a) Spool Axminster —- A carpet in which the yarn for each weft-wise 
row is wound on a separate spool according to the design. The 
tufts are severed from the yarns presented at the point of weav- 
ing after insertion in the backing structure. 

b) Gripper Axminster — A carpet in which tufts of yarns are inserted 
at the point of weaving by means of 'grippers'. The colours are 
selected by jacquard-opcrated carriers, which present the appro- 
priate ends of yarns to the *grippers' before the tufts are severed 
from the yarns. 

c) Gripper-Spool ( Spool-Gripper ) Axminster — A carpet in which 
the yarns for each weft-wise row are wound on a spool as for 
spool Axminster weaving. Tufts severed from the yarns are inser- 
ted at the point of weaving by *grippers' as in gripper Axminster 
weaving. 

d) Chenille Axminster — A carpet that has pile of chenille weft. 

B 

Backs — A trade term used in Australia to denote wool removed from the 
back region of the fleece when it is unsound, has a very perished tip or 
extreme amount of dust and sand, and is distinctly different from the rest 
of the fleece. 

Backwashing — The continuous washing of dyed or undyed wool ( or 
man-made fibre ) slivers before or after gilling and/or combing. 

Note — Usually, in the Bradford system of wool top-making, it is done before 
combing, and in the French system after combing. 

In the case of dyed slivers, backwashing is always done before recombing. 

Backwashing Machine — A chain of two or more bowls set up with 
provision for continuous washing of dyed or undyed worsted slivers and 
having provision for drying the washed slivers ( either by hot air or by 
contact with heated cylinders ), and for gilling them after drying. 

Badger — Fur fibre of badger ( genus: Afele meles ). 



IS } 11206 - 19M 

Bagging ( Finishing ) — The tacking together of the two selvedges of a 
fabric to form a tube in order to prevent the selvedges or lists from curling 
during scouring of woollen fabrics on dolly. 

Baize — A plain woven, heavily milled, woollen-spun, fine merino wool 
fabric with raised pile surface, piece dyed in bright colours, usually red or 
green, and used for covering tables, screens, lining for instrument boxes 
and the like. 

Ball Top — A cross-wound self-supporting sliver package produced on the 
worsted system. 

Banner Cloth — A plain weave fribric of cotton, wool or silk, used for the 
fabrication of flags, banners and buntings. 

Bannockburn — A firmly woven cheviot tweed in 2/2 twill weave 
( straight twill or herringbone ) having single and two-ply yarns one-and- 
one in both warp and weft. Originally the two-ply yarns were made by 
plying a single yarn identical to the one used in the fabric with a white 
yarn for use in the warp and with a dark yarn for use in the weft, but 
modern Bennockburn tweeds favour the count of the coloured single yarns 
approximating to the resultant count of the ply yarns, which are white- 
colour and/or light-dark woollen grandrelle or marl yarns, warp and 
weft. 

Barathea — Heavy worsted fabric of pebbled appearance, in rib or twilled 
hopsack weave. It may be made from merino wool or its blends with man- 
made fibres and given a clear finish for use as dress material for officers. 

Baulk Finish — A finish in which the material is milled in the grease to 
the desired dimensions, scoured, dyed, lightly stentered to width and 
lightly pressed. 

Note — The object of this finish, which is applied only to woollen materials, is 
to preserve the original character of the cloth. The material is finished without be- 
ing raised. 

Beaver Cloth — A heavy, firm textured cloth made from woollen yarns, 
which is milled, raised and cut close on the face so as to simulate natural 
beaver skin. 

Beaver Fur — The undercoat of fine but mcdullated fibres from North 
American aquatic rodent of genus: Castor canadensis. 

Beige — Soft dress fabric made in worsted warp and wpft in 2 and 2 twill 
weave. 

Bellies — A trade term used in Australia to denote wool which has been 
removed from the belly region and which is free from pizzle stain and skin 
pieces. 



IS X 11206 - 1984 

Bengallne — A cloth with more or Jess striking warp-rib appearance 
running across the fabric, produced wholly or partly from worsted yarns. 

Berlin Wool Yam — A brightly coloured knitting yarn used chiefly for 
emboridery and fancy knitting by hand. 

9illiard Cloth — A plain woven, heavily milled woollen cloth with 
closely cropped fibrous finish, made from fine merino wool and usually 
dyed in green colour. 

Black — A trade term used in Australia to denote wool which is pigmen- 
ted. However, this term is recommended to be used only to denote black 
pigmented wool. In case of pigmented wools of other colours, either the 
term * coloured ' should be used or the specific colour may be mentioned, 
for example * off white wool ', * grey tinged ', * dark brown wool '. 

Blanket — A heavy compact fabric of plain or twill weave made from 
wool, cotton, rayon, man-made fibres or their blends and given a soft 
nappy finish. Blankets made from wool are usually felted by heavy milling. 
Their size varies considerably but usually it is 1 -5 to 2 m in width and 
2 to 2*5 m in length. The weight of the blanket may vary from 1 to 3 kg. 

Blanket Cloth — A heavy-weight all-wool overcoating fabric with a soft 
raised finish. 

Blazer — A wool flannel somewhat heavily milled and raised and finished 
with a short nap. 

Blending 

a) General — A process of mixing fibres of difl'erent lots, types and 
varieties to produce yarns having desired characteristics. 

b) Wool for Market — A process of mixing small lines of similar type 
and yield of wool fibres having desired characteristics. 

Bleanding Machine — See Willey. 

Blister Cloth — A double cloth with merino wool face and mohair back 
wherein diff^erential shrinkage of the face and the back during finishing 
leads to blister cflect. 

Blobby — A trade term adopted by the Australian Wool Board to indi- 
cate short dense, square tipped wool, usually possessing good felting pro- 
perties. 

Blocky — A trade term adopted by the Australian Wool Board to indi- 
cate a staple of dense construction and square tip. 

Blood — The extent of exotic strain like merino in cross-bred sheep. 

8 



IS : 11206 - 1984 

Bloom — A trade term adopted Ijy tlie Australian Wool Board to indicate 
wool of excellent condition, colour and brightness. 

Blowing ( Steam ) — A part of woollen and worsted (inishing process in 
which steam is blown through the cloth, which is usually wound on a per- 
forated roller. 

Blown Finish — A finish applied to wool materials, obtained by blowing 
dry steam through the fabric, which is wrapped on a perforated cylinder 
with an interlacing cotton fabric. 

Botany — The term originators from Botany buy ( New South Wales, 
Australia), from where merino wools were exported to different countries 
for several decades. 

Botany Twill - • A variety o( worsted twill fabrics made from merino 
wool. 

Botany Wool — All tops, yarns and fabrics matlc from merino wool of 
60s and above fineness grades. 

Botany Worsted Yarn — Worsted yarn from hne merino wool. 

Boucle — A fabric with unevt^n looped surface made IVom plied worsted 
or woollen yarns from wool of mohair. 

Boulivia — A wool, alpaca or mohair pile fal)ric with a pebbled, cord or 
ridge effect. 

Box Cloth — An all-wool, woollcn-sj)un fabric with a fibrous surface and 
firm handle. 'I'he surface is comj)l( tely covered with librcs so that no 
threads are visiijle. It is woven in a variety of weaves, depending on the 
weight r( quired. Tt is used for such purposes as leggings, coachman cloths 
and billiard cloth. 

Bradford Lustre Fabrics — Chiefly used as dress material or for lining, 
these fabrics arc generally made troni cotton warp and worsted weft froin 
lustre wools, mohair or alpaca. Typical fabrics include: 

a) Brilliantines b) Glaccs c) Grenada 

d) Lorraine lustres c) Lustre lining f) Melange lustre 

g) Puritan h) Parkin stripes j) Sicilians 

Bradford Spun — Worsted yarn spun on the Bradford system. 

Bradford System — One of the systems of worsted drawing and spinn- 
ing which originated in Britain. This is based on the use of oil combeci 
tops and twisted rovings. 



18:11206*1984 

Breaker Card — Feed section of woollen card. 

Bribe — Synonym for a woollen fcnt. 

Bright — A trade term adopted by the Australian Wool Board to indi- 
cate wool having an attractive white colour. 

Brilliantine — See Bredford Lustre Fabrics. 

Broad ( Wool ) — Wool that has no natural crimp or elasticity, particu- 
larly straight fibres. 

Broad Cloth ( Wool ) — Merino wool fabric in plain or twill weave, 
heavily milled and given a dress Hice fhiish. 

Broadloom ( Carpets ) — Descriptive of seamless carpeting tradition- 
ally made 2 m or more in width. 

Broadtail — The grade of karacul lambskin lower than astrakhan. It 
has hair in swirls rather than curls and a very attractive wavy pattern. 

Brushing — A fmishing process in which circular brushes raise a nap 
and remove unwanted surface fibres from knitted or woven fabrics. 

Brusselette Carpet A ribbed carpet woven from a loosely tensioned, 
coarse warp and from a fine chain. 

russels Carpet - - A loop-pile carpet woven over an unbladed vertical 
liat ( elliptical ) wire inserted on edge. 

Ndtk — Weaving is carried out in a similar mannt^r to that for Wilton carpc;t on 
a Wilton loom and the carpet is therefore often referred to in the industry as a Brus- 
sels Wilton. 

Many trade names, by force of long usage, have acquired definite significant 
meanings of some kind in the minds of the public. Whareas the names Axminster, 
Wilton and lirussels, as applied to carpets, may originally have referred to the place 
of origin, this geographical significance has gradually changed into one implying 
a quality or method of manufacture. 

Brussels Wilton — See Brussels Carpet. 

Buckskin Fabric — A fabric similar in handle and appearance to, but 
heavier than, a doeskin fabric, made from fine merino wool, closely set, 
heavily milled, dressed and closely cut. 

Bulk Classing — A trade term adopted by the Australian Wool Board 
to indicate pooling of small quantities of wool from a number of owners 
into standard lines. 

10 



IS : 11206 - 1984 

Bump Top or Bumped Top — A pack.ige made by press-packing layers 
of hori'/onlally coiled top, built up in cylindrical form round a vertical 
spindle centrally situated in the removable false base of the sliver can. 

Bump Yarn — Very coarse condenser yarn. 

Bundle Yarn — Yarn, in hank form, transported in bundles. Carpet and 
hosiery yarns are usually transported as bundle yarns. 

Bunting Cloth — See Banner Cloth. 

Burl Dyeing — The coloration of cellulosic imparities in wool piece- 
goods. 

Burling - Removing knots and similar defects in yarn from the fabric 
during mending prior to finishing a woollen or worsted fabric. 

Burnt Ends — A trade term adopted by the Australian Wool Board to 
indicate urine stains ( on fleece ) having a dark colour. 

Burried Pile Design ( Tufted Carpets ) — A design formed by high- 
low-pile tufting with alternate needles threaded with different colours so 
that the \\\^\\ pile forms an area of one colour overlaying the low (burried) 
pile of a different colour. 

Burrs — Dry seeds of certain weeds which get entangled in the fibrous 
coat of the sheep before it is shorn. 

Burry — A trade term adopted by the Australian Wool Board to indi- 
cate wool carrying a degree of burr fault. 

Burry Wool — Raw wool containing burrs. 

C 

Camel Hair — The hair of the camel. The outercoat is coarse and long 
( up to 35 cm ) and the undercoat is soft, light tan in colour and short 
( 5 to 10 cm ). 

Camel Hair Fabric — Fabric made partly or wholly from camel hair. 

Camel Hair Yarn — Soft worsted yarn from the undercoat of camel hair 
with or without blending with wool. 

Camlet — A very sturdy plain weave fabric made from hard-twisted 
worsted yarns containing either camel hair or lustre wools. 

Camlet Yarn — Hard-twisted worsted yarn made from lustre wool. 

11 



18:11206-1984 

Canary Colouration — A canary yellow coloured staining of fleece on 
the sheep particularly during the hot and humid climate. It is unscourablc 
but light fugitive. 

Canton — Plain merino wool worsted fabric occasionally also made from 
cotton warp and merino wool weft. This should not be confused with 
'Canton Flannel ' or * Cantoon ' both of which are cotton fabrics. 

Carbonized Rag Fibre — The animal fibre recovered by carbonizing 
process, whether wet or dry carbonizing. 

Note — Wool or hair recovered by the wet process is sometimes known as 
extract. 

Carbonizing — A chemical process of removing vegetable matter from 
wool, wool yarn or fabric by treating the stock widi acid and than baking 
it in an oven. 

Cardigan — A knitted outergarment with long sleeves and front-opening 
with a closing device generally buttons and with border. 

Carpet — A floor-covering having a pile surface. 

Carpet Square — A term applied to a carpet in rectangular form ( with 
or without a border ), traditionally at least 2 m at the shortest dimension 
and normally loosely laid. 

Carpet Wools — Coarse wools which are generally, but not necessarily, 
mixed fleeces used for the production of carpets and druggets. 

Carpet Yarns — Bulky soft twisted yarn for use in carpets. 

Carpetting — A collective term for carpets and other manufactured fib- 
rous floor coverings. The back may be covered by a supplementary coating 
of a bonding or cushioning material. 

Carrier ( Dyeing ) — Organic chemical compounds usually aromatics 
which assist diflTusion of disperse dyes into synthetic fibres such as 
polyester. 

Carrier ( Spinning ) — A positive driven smooth metal roller set between 
the major drafting rollers on some worsted drawing boxes and spinning 
frames to control the fibres during drafting. 

Note 1 — This is used in ( onjunctlon with a tumbkT. 

Note 2 — One, two or throe lin<'s ofrarriers may bi^ employed, depending on 
the fibri' length of the material be ing proc«ss((l. 

12 



IS : 11206 -1984 

Garrotting — The modification of the lips of fur fibre ( rabbit fur ) by 
chemical treatment to improve their felting capacity. Reagents generally 
used are mercury in nitric acid and mixtures of oxidizing and hydrolysing 
agents 

Carved Pile Carpet - See Pile. 

Casement Cloth — One type of Bradford lustre fabric. This fabric, how- 
ever, is commonly made from cotton. 

Cashmere Fabrics — A variety of fme merino weft face dress fabrics 
woven in 1 and 2 twill with a larger number of picks than ends per centi- 
metre. Such fabrics are shrunk in width during finishing to render the 
weft more conspicuous. These fabrics do not contain any Cashmere 
( Pashmina ) hair and hence should not be confused with Cashmere, 
Henriettas and Paramattas which arc similar in structure to cashmere 
fabrics. 

Cashmere Goat ( genus: Capra hircus laniger ) — Found in Ladakh 
and Tibet. It produces a mixed fleece of coarse outercoat and soft super- 
fine undercoat. In India, Cashmere goat is known as Pashmina goat. 

Cashmere Wool Fibre — Undercoat of Caslmiere goat popularly known 
as Pashmina or Pashmina wool. 

Cashmere Yarn — Yarn made from the undercoat of Cashmere wool. 

Note 1 — Yarns, fabrics and garments prodticrd from the fine undercoat of 
other Asiatic goats, such as Iranian, are currently also referred to as Cashmere. 
This usage is deprecated. 

Note 2 ~ Tlic terms Cashmere, Cashmere fabric and 'Cassimerc' have nothing 
to do with Cashmere that is Pashmina. This is deprecated. 

Cashmeres — Cashmere Fabrics This term should not he confused 
with Cashmere. 

Cassimiere — Twill weave fabrics made from Hne wools either in wors- 
ted warp and welt or in worsted warp and woollen weft. 

Ceylons — Plain weave fabrics from cotton warp and woollen weft used 
for underwear and shirts. 

Chaharbagh Shawl — A woollen fabric of fine mesh produced in the 
Kashmir valley for use as veil by women. It is generally square in shape 
and has an area of about 4 m*. 

Chahar Gul — A lii.^ii cjuality woollen dress faliric made in Kashmir. 

13 



IS 1 11206 - 1984 



Chain 



a) Carpet — Warp threads, usually woven in pairs, between the 
warp way lines of pile and alternating over and under the weft. 

b) Axtninster: Spool-loom Overhead - - A portion of the overhead 
mechanism of a spooI-Axminster or grippcr-spool loom. The 
number of links corresponds to the number of rows of pile in one 
complete repeat of the design, or multiples thereof. The correct 
row is presented by means of the gripper, or transfer arms to the 
weaving point as required. 

Challis — A light weight soft fabric in silk warp and worsted weft origin- 
2dly made in Norwich ( Britain ). 

Chand — A square woollen shawl made in Kashmir for use of veil by 
women. 

Chaporaot — A very fine woollen dress fabric made in plain or twill 
weave from undercoat of Cashmere goat. 

Character — A trade term adopted by the Australian Wool Board to 
indicate well-defined even crimp in the staple. 

Charmelines — A merino wool dress fabric with a warp rib effect, pro- 
duced by a three-shaft twill weave in two fold yarns. 

Cheese — A cylindrical package of yarn usually cross-wound on a flange- 
less tube of wood, paper or other material. 

Chenille Axminster See Axminster Garpcrt. 

Cheviot 

a) A British mountain breed of sheep producing coarse wool. 

b) A medium wool of 56s quality or coarser. 

c) Rough woollen tweeds produced from Cheviot or similar breeds 
of sheep. 

Cheviot Woollen Yarn — Woollen spun yarn made from cross-bred and 
medium wools and used for Cheviot type tweed cloths which require little 
felting. 

Chinchilla — Soft grey fur of a Peruvian and Bolvian rodent. 

Chlorinated Fabrics — All wool fabrics which are chlorinated in order 
to render them nonftrlting or to improve their dyeability or printability. 
The term is also applied to fabrics made from chlorinated wool sliver or 
yarn. 

14 



IS : 11206 . 1964 

Chlorinated Yarn — Yarn composed of wool fibres treated with chlo- 
rine by virtue of which they are rendered nonfelting simultaneously with 
increased dye absorption. 

Ghlorlnation — When used with reference to textile processing, a term 
indicating the reaction of a fibre with chlorine. Wool and wool materials 
are chlorinated for imparting nonfelting property. 

Note — The chlorine may bo in the form of thn gas, or its solution in wat^r, 
or it may bn obtainptl from a suitablo compound. 

IVet chlorination implies that the goods are treated in aqueous solutions contain- 
ing a chlorine-yielding reagent. 

Dry chlorination implies treatment under non-aqueous conditions, for example by 
chlorine gas. 

Glassing — A trade term adopted by the Australian Wool Board to indi- 
cate grouping of fleeces into evenly defaied lines according to fineness, 
length, colour, etc, see also Wool Classing. 

Glean Wool Content — The amount of wool base adjusted to standard 
contents of residuals and regain. 

Glearer Cloth — An all wool or wool blended machinery fabric, with a 
short dense nap, used for covering cleaning devices. 

Clear Finish — Finish usually given to fine worsted suitings or dress 
material to render the face side napless and to show the surface structure 
clearly. 

Clear Woollen Finish — Clear fare finish given to warp- face woollen 
fabrics such as buckskin, Venetian and whipcord by manipulations in 
manufacturing and finishing processes. 

Clipped Wool — Same as Shorn Wool. 

Clipped Carded Wool — Clipped wool with an admixture of carded 
wool up to 25 percent. Wool containing admixture of over 25 percent of 
carded wool is known as carded wool. 

Cloth, All Wool Melton Finish — Melton cloth woven from woollen- 
spun yarns using superfine wools. 

Cloth, Blanket for Followers Coats — Heavy twill fabric made from 
homogenised natural brown grey wool. 

Cloth, Collar, White — An undyed all wool heavy weight fabric woven 
in 2-and 2 twill weave from woollen-spun yarns. 

15 



IS : 11206 - 1984 

Cloth, Drab Mixture, Woollen, Water Resistant — A heavy, all 
wool or wool-synthetic fibre blendetd twill fabric, made from woollen spun 
yarns, heavily milled and treated for water repcUency. It is a khaki mix- 
ture shade obtained by blending dyed and undyed fibres. This fabric is 
used for making overcoats for army personnel. 

Cloth, Woollen Kersey — All wool piece dyed 2-and-2 twill fabric. 

Cloth, Woollen, Superfine — Fabric made from fine merino wool and 
used mainly for making berets. 

Cloth, Woollen, Twill Dyed — An all wool or wool-nylon blended 2- 
and-2 twill weave fabric made from woollen spun yarns, piece dyed and 
given a milled finish. 

Clothing Wool — Virgin wool of short staple length generally used for 
processing in the woollen system. 

Coarse — A trade term adopted by the Australian Wool Board to indicate 
wool of large fibre diameter. 

Coating — Any fabric used for making coats. 

Cobourg — Coarser, heavier and stiffer variety of Cashmere fabric. 

Cockle — The wrinkled appearance, particularly of a ^vorsted fabric 
made from wool, caused by non -uniform contraction or shrinkage of the 
greasy fabric, 

Cockspur Willey — See Willey Tenterhook. 

Colour ( Coloured ) — Refers to those wools containing non-scourable 
colour, for example, canary yellow, heavy charcoal stain, non-scourable 
brands, and fleece rot. 

Coloured Fibres - A trade term adopted by the Australian Wool Board 
to indicate natural brown, grey or black fibres or tufts grown by an other- 
wise white sheep and also fibres discoloured and stained by urine or un- 
scourable marking fluid. 

Combing ( Worsted ) - A process for preparing comb sliver by remo- 
val of noils and impurities such as vegetable matter, kemps and neps from 
the worsted carded sliver. 

Comb Sliver — Continuous assembly of parallel fibres, delivered by the 
comb, for use in the worsted spinning industry. 

Comber's Waste — Waste from the combing operation. It is a soft 
waste. 

16 



IS : 11206 - 1984 

Combing Wool — Virgin wools long enough, generally above 45 mm, 
to be capable of processing on the worsted system. 

Comeback 

a) A cross-bred sheep with 7/8 merino blood, and 

b) Wool from crossbred sheep with 7/8 merino blood. Usually it is 
of 58-60s fineness grade. 

Condenser ( Ring-Dofifer or Tape ) — The last section of a woollen 
card. It divides a broad thin web of libres into narrow stri])S, which are 
then consolidated by rubbing into stubbing of circular cross-section. 

Condenser-Spun — Descriptive of yarn spun from slubbing that has 
been consolidated from strips of card web by rubbing. 

Condition - A trade term adopted by the Australian Wool Board to 
indicate the presence of grease, wax, saint, moisture, etc. 

Cone System — See Drawing. 

Continental System — See Drawing. 

Cord Carpet — A loop-pih^. carpet woven over an unbladed round wire. 

Note — Weaving is carried out in a similar manner to that for Wilton carpet 
on a Wilton loom, and the carpet is therefore often referred to in the industry as 
cord Wilton. 

Core Sample — A trade term adopted by the Australian Wool Board to 
indicate wool sample drawn by coring methods from a lot, bulk or con- 
signment. 

Corkscrew Fabrics - A fine worsted fabric in which a warp rib twill 
effect is formed running at a Mat angle. 

Corkscrew Yarn — A two ply yarn in which a soft-twisted thick thread 
is wound spirally round a hard-twisted one. 

Correct Invoice Weight - The wcigiit of the material calculated from 
the oven-dry weight and the recommended allowance. 

Cortex — The body of wool or hair fibres. It consists of several elongated 
cortical cells. In merino type wool, these cortical cells are of two types, 
namely, reactiv(t component called ortho-cortex and less reactive compo- 
nent called para-cortex. 

Cot ted ( Cotty ) — A trade term adopted by the Australian Wool Board 
to indicate wool p<irtially felted or matted during its growth on the body 
of the sheep. 

17 



IS t 11206 . 1984 

Covert Coating — A light warp- face shower-proofed overcoating in twill 
weave charactrrized by its mottled appearance due to the use of gran- 
drellc yarns or marl yarns in the warp. Usually, it is made with union 
twistwarp ( that is, cotton and wool yarns twisted together ) and worsted 
woollen weft. 

Crabbing — A process used in the worsted trade to set the fabric in a 
smooth flat state so that it will not cockle, pucker or wrinkle during subse- 
quent wet processing. The fabric is treated in open width and under warp- 
way tension in a hot or boiling aqueous medium, the tension being main- 
tained while the fabric is cooling. 

Crepe ( Crape ) Fabric — A fabric, characterised by a crinckled, puc- 
kered or pebbly surface, with highly twisted yarns in the warp or weft or 
both. Similar effect is also obtained by using normal twisted yarn and 
crepe weave. 

Crepe Flannel —■ An all wool fabric of plain or twill weave with a soft 
handle and crepe effect. 

Crepoline — A worsted dress fabric from lustre wools, woven in various 
modifications of 2-and-2 warp rib weave which give a greater proportion 
of warp on the surface and produce an irregular effect of a crepe 
character. 

Crepones Crepe effect obtained by utilizing differential shrinkage 
properly of mohair and merino wool in a variety of fabric structures as in 
blister clotli. 

Crimp ( Fibre ) — The waviness of fibre. 

Note — This fibre characteristic may be expressed numerically by reference to 
the number of waves or criirips per unit length or, as in USA, by the difference in 
distance^ between points on the fibre as it lies in aa unstretched condition and the 
same two points when the fibre is straightened under suitable tension, expressed as 
a percentage of the unstretched length. 

Crimp ( Yarn ) — The waviness or distortion of a yarn due to interlac- 
ing in the fabric. 

Note 1 ~ In woven fabrics, the crimp is measured by the relation between the 
cloth length and the corresponding length of yarn wh' n it is removed from the cloth 
and straightened under suitable tension. 

Note 2 — Crimp may be expressed numerically as (a) percentage crimp, which 
is 100 X difference b(tw(>en yarn and clotii length divided by cloth length, or (b) 
crimp ratio, which is the ratio of yarn lengtli to cloth length. 

Note 3 — This definition could logically be applied to knitted fabrics or fabrics 
of pile construction, but it is preferable to employ special terms, such as, * slitcli 
length ', * take-up ' and ' terry ratio *. 

18 



IStll2M-l&i4 

Groililiiig — A process of shearing the protruding fibres from the surface 
of the cloth in order to give the cloth an improved app(^arance. 

Gross-Bred — The term used to denote sheep and the wool. 

a) Sheep — Progeny of two different breeds of sheep in the broad 

sense of the term, though this term is often applied to 
indicate a cross l)etween merino and other sheep, such 
as Lincoln. 

b) Wools — Wool produced generally, though not necessarily, by 

the cross-bred sheep. This is of three types, namely, 

i) Fine cross-bred wool — of 56 to 58s fineness grade 
(26-29 ^m). 

ii) Medium cross-bred wool — of 48 to 54s fineness grade 
(30-35 fxm ). 

iii) Coarse cross-bred wool — below 48s fineness grade 
( above 36 ^m ) . 

Crutchings — Wool from the breech area and hind legs ( can include 
wiggings ). It is usually inferior compared to the rest of the fieece. 

Gumblee ( Kamblee ) — An Indian term for fibrous coarse blanket 
made out of wool or a mixture of wool and other an i mil fibres which are 
not milled. 

Carled Pile Garpet — See Pile. 

Gurled Yarn — Worsted yarn in which the curls are introduced by over- 
twisting a large number of yarns, setting tliem and then untwisting into 
individual yarns. 

Guticle — See Epidermis. 

Gut Pile Garpet — See Pile. 



Dags — Staples or locks of wool from the breech area heavily coated 
with dung. Such wools should not be classified as crutchings. 

Damping — Applying moisture to woollen or worsted fabric, prior to 
pressing, by forcing the mist through the fabric. 

Dead — Wool collected in the paddock from sheep which have been dead 
for some considerable time; wool quality is of inferior grade to pulled 
wool. 

19 



IS s 11206 - 1984 

Dead Fibre — A term commonly applied to denote kemps in wool or 
wool materials. 

Dead Frame Yarn ( Carpet ) — Pile type yarn embedded totally in the 
substrate. It may be of various types and colours and may replace pile- 
forming yarn in one or more frames, thus avoiding variations of the thick- 
ness of the substrate. Alternately, it may also be included as complete 
frames to give extra filling and cushioning to the substrate. In this case it 
may be substituted for stuffer warp yarns. 

Dead Wool — Wool taken from sheep that have died from natural causes. 
It should not be confused with dead fibre. 

Dead Yam ( Carpet ) ~ The pile yarn in a multiframe Wilton carpet 
which lies completely flat in the substrate and is not being raised by the 
jacquard mechanism. It excludes all yarn forming the effective pile and 
the pile root. 

Decatizing — A finishing process, chiefly to improve the handle and 
appearance of fabric, in which the fabric, wound in open width tightly on 
a perforated roller, is cither immersed in hot or boiling water, which may 
be circulated through the fabric ( wet decatizing ), or has steam with or 
without pressure blown through it ( dry decatizing ). Dry decatizing with 
steam under pressure is called kier decatizing ( K.D. ). 

Note — The process is used mainly for finishing worsted fabrics containing 
wool. 

Degreasing 

a) The removal of grease, suint and extraneous matter from wool 
by an aqeuous or solvent process; and 

b) The removal of natural fats, waxes, grease, oil and dirt from any 
textile materials by extraction with an organic solvent. 

Delaine — A plain woven, elaborately printed, fine worsted dress 
material. 

Dense — A trade term adopted by the Australian Wool Board to indicate 
a compact fleece due to a high follicle density. 

Depilatory Process — A process for removing wool from the pelt using 
sodium sulphide. The pulled wool so obtained is also called ^Tannery 
Wool' in India. 

Dermatitis — Wool affected by mycotic dermatitis. 

Devil ™ See Willey Wool. 

20 



IS : 11206 - 1984 

Dingy — A tmde term adopted by the Australian Wool Board lo in dicatc 
wool having a dull inferior colour. 

Discolouration — A trade term adopted by the Australian Wool Board 
to indicate any departure iVoni the natural colour of wool except scoura- 
ble discolouration. 

Doeskin — Fme merino wool fabric in 5-thread satin weave, finished by 
heavy milling and raising. 

Doggy — Wool showing a distinct loss of crimp and is usually found in 
old sheep. 

Dolly ( Washer ) 

a) A term used for a woollen or worsted piece-scouring machine 
having two bowls rotating above the surface of the liquor to 
squeeze the fabric and usually a suds-box l)encath the bowls to 
carry away the liquor squeeze d out from the fabric; and 

b) A term applied to a hosiery-scouring machine of the tom-tom 
type, that is, bee-failing bcat'^rs droppjtig on to goods immersed 
in the scouring liquor in rectangular troughs, which arc moved 
forwards and backwards. 

NoTK — rhis trrni, has, by association, tended to be used loosely for any type 
of rope-scouring machine by processors olvvtxjlli'us or worsted. It is never usfd for 
a milling niaciiinc? of the usual rotary tyi.(% or for tlie fulling stocks. 

Donegal — A plain-we.avc fa])ric woven from woollen-spun yarns charac- 
terized by a random distribution of brightly coloured Hecks or slubs. It 
was originally produced as a coarse woollen fabric ( twccd ) in Irish 
county Donegal. 

Donegal Tweed — A rough woollen fabric made from thick yarn in plain 
or 2-and-2 twill and finished with little or no milling-named after an Irish 
county. 

Double Cloth — A compound fabric in which a face cloth and a back 
cloth each with its own warp and wcfl are combined during weaving. It 
is used for coatings, blankets, tij)holstry clothes, beltings, etc. 

Double Marl Yarn ~ A two-fold yarn made from two identical single 
marls. 

Doubling 

a) A process of c<'mbing seveial ends of sliver duiint; thawing with 
a view to reducing irregularity ah^ng and across the sliv( r: and 

b) Twisting two or more yiuns together. 

21 



IS t 11206 . 1984 

Down Wools — Wools of medium qualities produecd by selectively bred 
dual purpose sheep ( that is, meat and wool ) in Britain. Some of these 
sheep are Soulli down, Dorset down, Oxford down, etc. 

Drawing — Operations by which slivers arc blended ( or doubled ), 
levelled and reduced to the stage of roving by drafting. 

NoTji — Various systems of drawing are practised but with the advent of man- 
made staple fibres and recent machin«»ry development the boundaries between the 
various systems described below are becoming less distinct. In the worsted section 
of the textile industry, following the initial gill boxes ( see Gill Box ), the systems 
differ mainly within the means of librc control between the major pairs of drafting 
rollers and the metliods of driving the spindles and bobbins, if these are employed. 
They are briefly described as follows: 

a) Open System ( Oil-Combed Tops ) — The fibre control is attained by giving 
twist in the slubbings, a pair of bottom carrier rollers and a pair of top 
rollers of tumblers. The flyer spindles arc driven by single belts or bands 
and the bobbins, fitted loosely on the spindles, are retarded by drag 
washers. 

b) Cone System ( Oil-Combed Tops ) — TIk; fibre control is obtained in xhv. same 
manner a.s in the open system. The llyor s|)indles are positively driven by 
wheel-gearing at a uniform speed to insert twist into the slubbings, while 
the bobbins are driven at a variable speed, by means of concave and convex 
cones and diHerential and wheel gears, to wind the material uniformly on to 
the bobbins. 

c) Conlinental System ( DryCombed Tops ) — The fibre control is attained by pass- 
ing the slivers through falbrs or over nvolving porcupine rollers, studded 
with rows of pins set at JiO** to the radius of thes*^ rollers. The slivers are 
drafted in a twisthss state and ihvn consolidated by rubbing leatliers before 
being wound on to barrels in bnll form. 

d) Anglo-Continental System ( Oil-Ccmbed 'Jopsi — A compromise between tlicCon- 
tin<mtal and c(3ne systems. 'I he first half of the drawing boxes are conducted 
on a modifitd Continental syst<'m, the p(jrcLipines being (itted with stripping 
bars inserted between each alternate row of pins to eject the slivers. The 
remaining stages are cone boxes. 

e) Rapper System ( Oil-Combed Tops ) — A modifud open system, incorporating 
autolcvelling devices in the first two operations to regularize the slivers and 
thereby to reduce the number of operations in the drawing set. 

f) American System ( Oil-Combed Tops ) — A system that generally consists of 
three pin-drafters in series, followed by a long-draft apron rover. 

Dress Face Finished Fabrics — Heavily felted and raised woollen fab- 
rics wherein the nap of short ril)res is laid along the length of the fabrics 
so as to conceal the weave. Such fabrics include doeskins, beavers, box 
cloths, billiard cloths, pilots, etc. 

Dress Materials /Goods — General term used for a wide range of 
woollen, worsted, cotton, silk, rayon, syntlietic fibres and blended fibre 
fabrics used mainly for women's and children's outerwear. 

22 



IS: 11206- 1984 

Drugget — Compactly woven heavy woollen fabric mainly used as floor 
covering. 

Dry-Combed Top — A top made principally for the continental system 
of worsted spinning without the addition of oil. 

Note — A top combed in oil and backwashod to reduco oil and fatty matter 
not more than one percent may also be described as a dryrombed top. 

Dry Decatizing — See Decatizing. 

Dry-Spun 

a) Descriptive of a worsted yarn produced from dry-combed top; and 

b) Descriptive of man-made filaments, the coagulation of which is 
effected by evaporation of the solvent from the spinning solution. 

Dry Spun Top — See Dry Combed Top. 

Dumped Wool — A trade term adopted by the Australian Wool Board 
to indicate conventional wool bales compressed tightly for shipment and 
held by bands or wire. 

Durrie ( or Durry ) — An Indian term for coarse plain weave weft faced 
fabric generally used as a floor covering. While most of the durries are 
made from cotton, some are made from coarse wools and are often refer- 
red to as druggets. 

Dussa — It is a woollen fabric having a fine texture and coloured sel- 
vedge. It is manufactured out of merino or pushmina wool, having a 
length of 5-5 m and weighing between 1 and 1*5 kg. It is used as shawls 
by men. 



ElGrective Pile ( Carpet ) - See Pile, EfTective ( Carpet ). 

Elastic — A trade term adopted by the Australian Wool Board to indi- 
cate the condition of wool fibres able to return to their original form after 
being deformed by either stretching or compression. 

Epidermis — The outer layer of wool and hair fibres. The cuticular 
structure is made up of a series of overlapping scales whose free margins 
point towards the tip of the fibre. By virtue of their alignment these scales 
impart to wool fibres a directional or difTercntial frictional effect (D.F.E.) 
with friction always higher in the direction of tip to root in comparison 
with that in the direction of root to tip. 

Epingline — A warp rib dress material made of silk warp and worsted 
weft. The cloth has pebbled effect and feel similar to crepe. 

23 



ISt 11206-1984 

Estamene — A milled cross-bred worsted cloth, piece-dyed, and finished 
with a rough fibrous siutacc, usually woven in 2-and-2 or 3-and«3 twill. 

Extract — Wet carbonized rag fibre. 

F 

Face-Finished ( Fabric ) — Descriptive of a finish given, for example, 
to wool fabrics, in which the face side is treated selectively, as in raising. 

Face-to-Face Carpets — Carpets made in pairs face-to-facc with the pile 
yarns interchanging from one substrate to the other. The pile yarns are 
severed to separate the two fabrics. 

Fadge — A trade term adopted by the Australian Wool Board to indicate 
wool pack partly filled or several bags sewn together. 

Fadging — A trade term adopted by the Australian Wool Board to 
indicate the replacement of sliorn wool in its original bales. 

Fallers 

a) Straight, pinned metal bars employed in the control of fibres 
between drafting rollers; 

b) Curved, pinned metal bars employed in the feed mechanism of 
Lister and square- mot ion ( Hoi den ) combs; and 

c) Curved arms fixed to two shafts on a mule carriage and carrying 
the faller wires. 

False Twist — Turns inserted in opposite directions and in equal num- 
bers in adjacent elements of yarn, sliver or similar aggregations of fibres 
or filaments, characterized by their tem|)orary nature. 

Note 1 — The extreme ends of the yarn or sliver are prevented from rotating, 
and the false-twisting element, through which the yarn or sliver passes, is situated 
between these ends. 

Note 2 — At the start of the operation, turns of twist are inserted by the 
revolution of the twisting element ( one turn in each direction on either side of the 
twisting element ) but, as the yarn or sliver passes through the twisting element, 
each turn of twist carried through one side cancels a turn present on the other side. 

Note 3 — The amount of twist actually inserted depends not only on the 
relative speeds of the twisting clement ( rtv/min ) and ) am or sliver ( m/s ), but 
also on the effectiveness of the means adopted in the twisting element to resist 
rotation and on the restoring torque exerted by the twisted yarn or sliver. 

Note 4 — False twist may be used: 

a^ to produce effects, that is ( a ) the entanglement of fibres while false- 
twisted, ( b ) a measure of permanence to the twisted form by heat- 
setting the false twisted yarns. 

b) to assist processing, that is ( a ) the passage of sliver from Noble comb to 
can, ( b ) the attenuation of rovings on a condenser ring frame. 

24 



IS : 11206 - 1984 

Fancy Yarns — Yarn with special effects such as knop, loops, snarls, 
slubs, etc, at short but irregular intervals. 

Fault — A trade term adopted by the Australian Wool Board to indicate 
vegetable matter in wool. 

Fearnought — A stout, thick woollen cloth with a heavy appearance, 
used chiefly as a covering for port-holes and the doors of powder magazi- 
nes and also for scarves and coats. 

Fearnought Blending Willey — See Willcy, Tenterhook. 

Fellmongering — A trade term adopted by the Australian Wool Boards 
to indicate the process of removing wool from pelts by bccterial action or 
by treatment with chemicals. ( .see also Skin Wool, Slipe and Pulled Wool ), 

Felt — A textile characterized by the densely matted condition of moBt or 
all of the fibres of which it is composed. 

Note 1 — Three broad classes of felt can bo distinguished as: 

a) Materials having a woven or knitted fabric striictun ,* 

b) Materials relying for their construction upon the ability of the cons- 
tituent fibres, such as wool and fur, to mat together to form a composite 
body with neither warp nor weft; and 

c) Needle-lVlts. 

Note 2 — I'he ftdts that rlotlu' tlu jjress sections <jf j)ap( r-making machines 
conform to the above definition. In the case of the so-called fryer felts, which clothe 
the drying sections, the term 'felt' is a misnomer because the great majority of 
dryer felts have a woven structure and are not subjected to any wet-finishing. 

Felt ( Floor Covering ) — A non-woven felt highly matted by heavy 
milling generally embroidered and primarily used as a floor covering 
( see also Nam da ). 

Felting — The matting together of wool fibres during processing, wash- 
ing or wear ( see also Milling ). 

Felts, Woollen — All wool fabric produced by milling of carded web to 
soft, medium, hard and extra hard varieties depending on the degree of 
felting induced. 

Fents — Short lengths of fabric cut from an end, piece or lump of fabric. 
They may or may not be imperfect material. 

Note — The term * remnants * has been used as a synonym for * fents '. These arc 
usually short lengths of fabric that accumulate in the marketing of textile material. 

Fine — A tradt* term adopted by the Austrahan Wool Board to indicate 
wool of small fibre diameter. 

25 



IS t 11206-1984 

Fineness — A general term used for textile fibres, yarns and fabrics with 
special reference to their transverse dimensions and measured in a variety 
of units, such as weight per unit length, or length per unit weight, cross- 
sectional area and diameter. 

Fineness Grades — Classification of wool fibres, before or after combing, 
according to average fibre fineness. This is only one of the attributes of 
wool quality. 

Fingering Yarn — Piled yarn specially produced for hand-knitting. 

Finisher Gilling — Subjecting cornbed slivers to a series of gilling oper- 
ations with a view to aligning the libres parallel, bringing about unifor- 
mity in sliver weight and packing the slivers in the form of balls if neces- 
sary to facilitate transportation. 

Fireproof ( Flameproof) — Term applied to material showing resis- 
tance to burning. This resistance may be imparted by special chemical 
treatments. 

Flameproof — See Fireproof 

Flannel — An all-wool fabric of plain or twill weave with a soft handle. 
It may be slightly milled and raised. 

Flannelette — A fabic originally made from cotton warp and soft-spun 
cotton weft, the fabric bcin^ subsequently raised on both sides to give an 
imitation of wool [laniiel. The weave may be plain or twill with two warp 
threads woven as one. 

Flannel, Hospital, Grey — Plain weave hospital clothing made from 
woollen-spun strong merino wool or wool-nylon blend. 

Fleece Finish — Very bulky woollen fabrics with a relatively long, tangled, 
raised pile. The pile fibres lie loosely and are of fairly uneven length. The 
fabrics are soft and full ( fleece ). The reason for liaving such a long, 
tangled pile is to trap as much air as possible, thus increasing the insulat- 
ing pro[>erties c)f these fabrics. The intensive raising process loosens the 
fabric considerably. A high level of insulation is thus achieved in cold but 
not draughty conditions. 

Fleece Wool — A coat of wool shorn from a live sheep. 

Fleecy — Resembling a wool fleece in appearance and handle, or descrip- 
tive of fabrics having a fine, soft, open and raised structure. 

Flock — A material obtained by reducing textile fibres to fragments as by 
cutting, tearing, grinding, milling, raising, etc. 

Floor Rug — See Rug, Floor. 

26 



IS: 11206- 1984 

Florentine — A type of Bradford lustre fabric wherein cotton warp and 
lustre wool weft is used. 

Flushing — A heavy woollen coating cloth originally made in Flushing, 
Holland. 

Follicle — Skin structure which is difTcrcntiated fronn the epidcrniis or 
*outer skin' and in which the animal fibres develop and grow. 

Frame ( Wilton or Gripper-Axminster Carpets ) — The yarns com- 
prising all or a portion of the pile«warp yarns in a woven carpet. The 
number of frames corresponds to the number of pile -warp ends per dent 
and from which the tufc or loop is selected by tlie jacquard mechanism. 
The bobbins or cheeses for any frame may be all of onr. colour or of a 
variety of colours. 

French Combing — See Rectilinear Combing. 

French ( or Dry-Spun ) -Worsted Yarn — Yarn made from wool fibres 
combed on rectilinear combs and containing less than one percent oil. 

French Merino 

a) A breed of sheep known as Raml)ouillet, and 

b) A fabric similar to merino warp cashmere, but in 2-and-2 twill. 
The twill runs at a very flat ani:^le with w(^ft predominating on 
the surface. 

Fresco — Generic name for worsted or woollen fibrics made from tightly 
twisted ply yarns in plain weave ( original fresco: 3-fold twist in 2 move- 
ments ). 

Fribby Wool — Short tufts of wool obtained as a result of second cuts 
during one shearing. 

Fribs — A trade term adopted by the Australian Wool Board to indicate 
shorter wools adhering to the fleece, often sweaty. 

Frieze — A heavily felted and raised woollen fabric made of coarse or 
medium wools and finished with a rough fil)rous surface. 

Fud — Droppings from the woollen card consisting of very short fibres 
that arc heavily charged with oil. 

Fulling — .SV^ Milling. 

Fur — Hair from domesticated animals other than goat or sheep. The 
important fiu' Ixniring animals include badger, mink, otter, angora rabbit, 
beaver, musk-rats, etc. 

27 



IS : 11206 « 1984 

Fur Fabric — A wide range of pile fabrics made to immitate various furs. 
In most cases the pile is comparatively long and the fabric is subjected to 
special finishing processes to immitate a particular fur. 



Garaetting — A process of recovering the fibres from hard- twisted wastes, 
rags, clippings, etc, especially of wool. The object is to thoroughly break 
up the material and return it to a fluffy fibrous condition so that it may 
be reused in blends, or in some cases, alone. 

Geelong Convertor — Apparatus consisting of three intersector gill 
boxes arranged in tandem with intermediate feed and transfer mechanism. 
This is used as a substitute for carding. 

Genappe Yarn — A smooth worsted thread in which all the loose fibres 
have been removed from the surface by gassing ( for example singeing ). 

Gill Box — A drafting machine, used in worsted processing, in which the 
motion of the fibres is in part controlled by pins fixed on moving bars 
( pinned fallers ). 

Gill Drafting — A method of attenuation of fibres in which the motion 
of the fibres is in part controlled by pins fixed on moving bars ( pinned 
fallers ). 

Ginned Wool — Short wool fibres retrivcd from burrs by passing them 
through a ginning machine. 

Giace — A type of lustre dress fabric { see Bradford Lustre Fabrics ). 

Glaze ~ The smooth, glossy and plain appearance of the surface of a fab- 
ric produced by the applications of heat, heavy pressure of friction. 

Goat Hair — Hair from a domesticated ruminant of genus Capra, How- 
ever, the most important ones are angora goat ( Capra hircus aegagrus ) and 
cashmere goat ( Capra hircus lanigar ). 

Grandrelle Yarn - A two-ply yarn composed of single yarns which 
difTer from one another in colour or lustre. 

Greasy Blowing — Dry decatizing of greasy wool fabric that is, unsecu- 
red woollen or worsted fabric, in open width. 

Greasy Wool — Wool which has not been washed or scoured ( see also 

*Raw Wool' ). 

Greasy Yarn ( Wool ) — Yarn which has not been washed or scoured. 

28 



IS : 11206 - 1984 

Greasy Cloth ( Greasy Fabric, Greasy Piece ) — Same as grey cloth 
but the term is generally reserved Tor all-wool or wool blended woollen or 
worsted faV^rics. 

Great Coat Cloth: Woollen Dyed A heavy weight dyed overcoating 
used by armed force personnel as winter uniform, made from cross-bred 
wool, woollcn-spun yarns in 2-and-2 twill weave. 

Grenada - - A type of Bradford lustre fabric. 

Grey Cloth — Cloth in the loom state before it is scoured, bleached or 
dyed. 

Gripper-Axminster — See Axminster Carpet. 

Gripper-Spool Axminster — Sec Axminster CaijH t. 

Guanaco ( Huanaca ) — Ruminant of the small ungulate family ( Lama 
guanicoe ) in S. America and believed to be the common ancestor of llama 
and alpaca producing soft brown fur. 

Guard Fibres — Relatively coarse outer-coat fibres which often project 
above the inner coat for example in the coats of fur-bearing mammals. 
They may have a shield-like apical portion, \vh('n tliey are named shield 
fibres. 

H 

Habit Cloth — - A line woollen costume clolh generally made in 5-thread 
warp satin weave and finished with a dress face. 

Hair ( Hair Fibres ) — Fibrous growth on tlie body of manuuals other 
than slieep. Sheep hair is called wool irrespective of its coarseness. 

Hairiness — The condition of a tt'xlile material with numerous loose 
fibre ends or loops or both, projecting from its surface. 

Hair Carpet - - Carpet with a surfac(' made entirely of hair and wool. 
The purpose of the wool when used is to facilitate! spinning and dyeing. 

Haircord Carpet — A hair carpet produced by weaving over unbladed 
wires. 

Note — 'l'hi> use ofthe torrn haircord is d«.'prc'f ated for carpets made from other 
than loo percent hair. Other carpets having similar construction should be referred 
to simply as cord carpets. 

Hair Fibres - .S'^^' Hair. 

Hairy Fibres — Com])letely medullated fibres ( see also Kemps ). 



IS: 11206- 1S84 

Half Marl — A two-fold yarn made from a solid single yarn and single 
marl yarn. 

Hand-Knotted Carpet — A carpet obtained by knotting the tufts into 
the surface by hand. 

Note — The two most common types of knot are the Persian ( or sehna ) and 
the Turkish ( or ghiordcs ). 

Handloom Woollen Blanket, Scarlet — Hand woven 2-and-2 twill 
blanket from woollen-spun yarn made from scarlet stock-dyed cross-bred 
wool. 

Hand-Tufced Carpets — Carpets, wherein the pile is inserted with the 
aid of a hand operated tufting gun and then the tufts fixed by coating the 
underside of the carpet with rubber latex or similar polymers. 

Handle — The degree of smoothness ( and compressibility ) of wool to 
the touch. 

Hard Waste — Fibres recovered from unused yarn waste from spinning, 
doubling warping and weaving sections. 

Harris Tweed - - Patented name for hand-made tweeds originally from 
the island of Harris off the north coast of Scotland. Harris tweed is made 
from fairly coarse and kempy woollen yarns and from stock dyeings. 

Harsh — Wool lacking in softness to the touch. 

Henrietta - Similar to cashmere fabric but warp is ol )>ure silk. 

Heterotype ( or Heterotypical ) Fibres — Fibres showing discontinu- 
ous medulla. Such fibres are very useful in imparting resiliency to the car- 
pet pile. 

Hill ( Paharl ) Wool ( Clipped ) — Clipped wool obtained from the 
body of sheep from the hill districts in the Himalayan region. 

Hill ( Paharl ) Wool ( Pulled ) — Pulled wool obtained from the pelts 
of slaughtered slieep ( in the same manner as in Pulled Wool ) from the 
hill districts in the Himalayan region. 

Heavy Conditioned Wool — Wool containing a large amount of yolk 
and foreign matter. 

Hog — See Hog Wool. 

Hog Wool — The first clip from a shet^p not shorn as a lamb ( see also 
Teg Wool and Hogget Wool ). 

30 



IS: 11206 -IdiM 

Hogget Wool — A trade tnrtn adopt<xl by thr Australian Wool Board to 
indicate wool from a young shec]) of either sex from about niiKr and ten 
months until it is a two-tooth. 

Homespun — Term applied to woollen cloths composed of yarns spun 
from local wools and woven on handlooms — generally a tweed in 2-and-2 
twill. This term is apph'ed generally to various woollen fabrics made in 
Scotland, Ireland and England. The appropriate Indian term for home- 
spun is 'Khadi\ 

Hosiery Marl — A multiply yarn made from identical single marl yarns. 

Hosiery Yarn — Soft twisted yarn for use in knitting. It can be made 
from natural or man-made fibres or their blends. Hosiery yarns are of 
many different types ( see also Alpaca and Camel Hair Knitting Yarns, 
Berlin Wool Yarn, Cashmere Hosiery Yarn, Fingering Yarn, Lambs Wool 
Yarn, Shetland Yarn, Wheeling Yarn, Worsted Hosiery Yarns ). 

Hospital Blankets, Woollen, Dyed — Milled and raised stock-or piece- 
dyed blankets woven in 2-and-2 twill weave from woollen-spun yarn from 
wool or wool nylon blend. 

Huarizo 

a) A cross-breed of Llama ( Llama iilarna glama ) father and Alpaca 
( Llama glama pacos ) mother. 

b) Fur produced by this cross-breed. 



Imperial Cloth — A fine piece dyed mcriwy wool worsted coating in 
2-and-2 twill weave. 

Indian Carpets — A term applied to all-wool hand-knotted pile carpet* 
made in India in a variety of Indian, Persian, Furopean or Tibetian 
designs. They are produced from worsted ( 2 or 3 ply ) or woollen yarns 
of 2-5 Nm resultant count and the density of knots varies from 6 to 60 
per cm2. 

Indian Wool — Wool produced by Indian sheep. It is essentially a mixed 
fleece often kernpy and is suitable for carpets and blankets. 

Indo*Persian Carpets — Indian carpets with well known Persian design 

( see also Persian Carpets ). 

Ingrain Carpet - A reversible coarse carpctting woven on a jacquard 
loom acconmiodating up to six coloured wefl threads, which may be two- 
ply ( Kidderminster carpet ) or three-ply ( Scotch carpet ). 

31 



IS: 11206. 1984 



Inner Coat — See Undercoat. 



Italian Cloth — Dyed cotton warp and undyed woollen weft fabric 
woven in 5-thrcad weft Sateen in which the wool portion is piece dyed. 
This cloth is lustre finished and used as a lining cloth. 



Jamawar ( or Jamavar ) Shawl — Fine worsted or cotton warp, and 
worsted weft Jacquard shawl woven with intricate design border as shoul- 
der wear for ladies. 

Jaspe Carpet — A carpet in which the constituent pile yarns have been 
previously dip-dyed in hank form in two different colours. In the course 
of weaving the carpet, these yarns form a perfectly regular flame-like 
effect. 

Jaspe Yarn — Jaspe yarn may be woollen-spun or worsted-spun yarn 
produced by folding two space dyed yarns. They are usually used in car- 
pets called jaspe carpets. 

Jersey Fabric — A term applied to knitted piece-goods. 

K 

Kambli — See Cumblee. 

K. D. ( Kier Decatizing ) — A fmishing process for dimensionally stabi- 
lizing and flat setting wool fabrics ( see Decati/ing ). 

Kashmir Shawls — Shawls made in Kashmir, usually embroidered. 

Kashmir Worsted ~ See Lohi. 

Kemp — A coarse animal fibre with a wide lattice-type medulla, which is 
shed from the skin at least once a year; it is often shorter than fibres of 
the fleece, has a long tapering tip and, when comi)leteIy shed, tapers sharp- 
ly towards the root end. 

NoTK — Kemp fibres are usually chalky white in appearance, but may be 
coloured either very dark brown to black or reddish. Kemps arc usually very 
strongly inherited. When dyed, because the cortex is relatively thin, they appear 
very much lighter in colour ihan normal fil)res. 'I'hey may, therefore, be 
used for special surface effects in cloth, for example in tweeds and dress fabrics, and 
have even been imitated by the production of synthetic kemp '. 

Keratin — Basic ingredient of all horny tissues and wool, hair and fur 
fibres. It is a sulphur containing protein. 

32 



IS: 11206. 1984 

Kersey — A compact, lustrous woollen fabric, diagonally ribbod or 
twilled, which is heavily milled and finished with a short nap. It is similar 
to melton. 

Khadi ( or Khaddar ) — An Indian term for fabric woven on hand- 
looms from hand-spun yarns of natural fibres or blend of two or more 
such fibres. 

Kidderminster carpet — See Insrain Carpet, 

Kier Decatizing — See Decatizing and K. D. 

Knicker Boker Yarn A f^xncy woollen spun yarn with coloured spots 
due to unopened tufts of fibre. 

Knop Yarn — A fancy yarn with knops or lumbs of one or more com- 
ponents at regular or irregular intervals. 

Kolinsky — Kolinsky [ Mustela ( Lutreola ) sibirlca ] is the finest species 
of Asiatic mink. Fur fibres are usually reddish brown, 20 /xm in diameter 
and generally exhibit ladder type medulla. 

Kumbal ( Kumblee, Cumblee ) — Indian term for coarse woollen 
blanket. 



Lambs — Wool from young sheep up to about six months of age. 

Lamb's Wool — First clip of wool sheared off lambs which are less than 
6 months old. 

Lambs' Wool Yarn - - Woollen-spun knitting yarn made from short and 
fine wools, which may not necessarily be larnb^s wool. 

Lap Waste (Wool) - A sheet of fibres accidentally wound round 
rollers or aprons. It is substantially without twist and can be carded 
without fiuther processing. 

Lapping Cloth - A compact machinery fabric made of wool or its 
blends with natural or man-made fibres, spun into yarns on woollen or 
scmiworsted system and woven in twill weave. 

Lasting - A very stout, closely woven fabric made from hard- twisted 
yarns. A * worsted lasting \ usually a seven-shaft weave, is used for protec- 
tive clothing in munition works. 

Light Conditioned Wool - Wool containing a small amount of yolk 
and foreign matter. 

33 



IBs 11206 -1984 

Limed Wool ( Tannery Wool ) — Wool removed from the pelts of 
slaughtered shetp with the aid of slaked lime paste as a depilatory. 

Lincoln — Name of a British long histre wool producing sheep. Wool 
produced by this shctep is called Lincoln wool. Many medium wool pro- 
ducing sheep have been based Lincoln and merino cross-breeds. 

Linseys — Woven with a linen warp and worsted weft in white and blue 
stripes, resulting in a coarse, strong and durable fabric which is used as a 
hard wearing apparel. 

Llama — Hair of the South American llama ( see also Alpaca ). 

Llama Yarns — Same as Angola Yarns. 

Locks 

a) Second cuts and small portions of wool from the lower parts of 
the legs and edges of the fleece containing fribs and sweaty 
ends. 

b) Bunch of wool fibres of which the fleece is composed. 

Lohi — An Indian term for a heavy, rough wollen fabric in twill weave 
with two picks in shed, made in Kashmir from wool of local sheep. Its 
length is about 2 m and weighs from 600 to 900 g. It is used as shawl in 
colder climates by men. 

London Shrinkage — Removing strains in the fal)ric in the final stages 
of woollen and worsted finishing by wetting the fabric and then drying it 
tensionless in open width. 

Loop Pile Carpet ~ See Pile { Carpet ). 

Lorraine Lustres — A type of Bradford lustre fabric with cotton warp. 

Lot — A trade term adopted by the Australian Wool Board to indicate 
any parcel of wool catalogued and offered for sale as one line. 

Lustre — The display of different intensities of light, reflected both specu- 
larly and diffusely from different parts of a surface exposed to the same 
incident light. Due to this reflection of light, the surface of textiles { fibre, 
yarn or fabric ) looks glossy or shining. 

Lustre Linings — A type of Bradford lustre fabric with cotton warp. 

Lustres ( Lustre Fabrics ) — Term appUed to Bradford lustre fabrics. 

Lustre Wools — Long lustrous wools, usually produced by sheep such as 
Lincoln, Leicester, Romney Marsh, Devon, Wensleydale, etc, in Britain, 
New Zealand and S. America. 

34 



t& 1 11206 - 1984 

Lustre Woollen Yarn — - Similar to clieviot yarn but made from lus- 
trours medium wools and used for rugs and pile fabrics. 

Lustre Worsted Yarn — Worsted yarn made from long lustrous wools, 
mohair and alpaca. 

M 

Malida — An Indian term for an all wool embroidered fabric of fine and 
soft construction made from pashmina wool and slightly felted, used for 
coating, jackets, etc. 

Marbled Cloth — A dress fabric of silk and wool with a mottled face, 
produced by using multi-coloured weft. 

Marl ( Local, Mottle ) — To run together and draft into one, two slub- 
bings or rovings of different colour or lustre. 

Marl Yarn — Yarn produced by spinning from two differently coloured 
rovings. 

Matching 

a) General — A process in which the proportions ol the dyes present 
in material arc adjusted so that the final colour resembles that of 
a given sample as closely as possible; or 

b) Woo! — A process in wool sorting which consists of putting 
together these portions of different flecri^s which correspond in 
quality. 

Maud — A woollen cloth in check design, used as plaid or as a travelling 
rug, in which different tones of grey yarns are ustd in forming the 
pattern. 

Medium Cross-Bred Wool — All wools which can be spun from 36 to 
40s ( woollen count ). 

Medulla — The central hollow portion of wool or hair fibres due to open 
meshwork of cell walls. Medulla can be continuous as in hairy fibres dis- 
continuous as in heteroiype fibres or ladder type as in case of Angora 
rabbit hair fibres. 

Medullated Fibres — A trade term adopted by the y\ustralian Wool 
Board to indicate fibres possessing a hollow core and, consequently, a ten- 
dency to uneven dyeing. 

Melange Lustre — A type of Bradford lustre fabric wherein printed tops 
are used 

35 



t& X 11206 . 1984 

Melange Printing ( Vigonreux Printing ) -— A printinej process in 
which bands of thickened dye paste, with iru«Mvening blank areas, are 
applied across slubbings of wool or other fibres. The slubbing is subse- 
quently steamed, washed, and then combed to produce a very even mix- 
ture of dyed and undyed lengths of fibre. 

Melange Yarn — A yarn produced from coloured printed tops or slivers. 
It is distinguishable from a mixture yarn in that the fibres have more than 
one colour upon them. 

Melton — A heavy-weight fabric, all wool, or with cotton warp and 
woollen weft, which is finished by heavy milling and cropping. The fibres 
in the cloth are tightly matted togetlier by the milling process and this 
gives the fabric a felted appearance. It is usually made in a 2/2 twill, 
especially if all-wool, but it is sometimes made in other weaves to facili- 
tate milling and the covering of the cotton warp. 

Merino 

a) A breed of finest wool producing sheep originating in Spain but 
during the past two centuries, extensively developed in Australia. 
Australian merino sheep are of three types, namely, superfine, 
fine and strong merino. 

b) Wool from merino sheep. Superfine merino wool is finer than 
19 /tm; line merino wool is ID 1-22'r) fxin and strong merino 
wool is 22*(>24 /xm in av^eragc diameter. Length varies from 
60 nmi up to 120 mm. Medullation is absent. 

Merino Yarn — Yarn made from merino quality wool. 

Micron - A unit of measurement equivalent to one-millionth of a metre. 

Properly known as micrometre ( /xm ). This unit is used to indicate 
average fibre fineness ( diameter ) of wool. 

Mildew — A superficial growth produced by certain species of fungi. 

Mildew Proofing — Imparting, usually by chemical treatments, resis- 
tance to textiles from attack by mildew. 

Milling ( Cloth Finishing ) — The process oi consolidating or compac- 
ting woven or knitted fabrics which usually, though not exclusively, con- 
tain wool. 

Mill Rigs — Creases produced in milling. 

36 



IS : 11206 - 1984 

MUti 

a) A cross-breed of alpaca ( Llama glama pacos ), father and Llama 
( Llama glama glama ) mother. 

b) Fur produced by this cross-breed. 

Mixed Fleece — Fleece which contains mixture of two coats namely 
undercoat of short fine true wool fibres and outercoat of long coarse 
medullated fi])ics. Mixed fleece is a sign of lack of domestication of the 
sheep. 

Mixture Shades — Yarns of fabrics in which the individual fibres have 
been dyed differently either in loose form or by melange printing, and 
then mixed together and spun. Both worsted and woollen yarns can be 
produced in this fashion. These elftcts can also be produced by mixing 
different fibres ( for example natural with man-made ) and than dyeing in 
piece form. 

Mixture Yarn — Yarn made by blending together fibres of difTcrcnt 
characteristics. 

Mob — A group of sheep of the same breeding run together as a unit of 
flock during a season, whose wool may l)e significantly diiferent from that 
of other mobs in the flock. Mobs may dilTcr from one to another in res- 
pect of age ( for example hoggets ), sex, breed or strain, husbandry prac- 
tice and pasture. 

Mock Grandrelle Yara — Yarn produced to imitate grandrelle yarn by 
drafting and twisting two rovings of diff'Tcnt colours together. 

Mock Marl — Hosiery yarns composed of difTerent coloured solid or 
mixture of single yarns giving an imitation marl efTect. 

Mohair 

a) The hair of the angora goat. 

b) Descriptive of yarns spun from mohair. 

Mohair Braid — Any type of braid made from mohair yarns. 

Mohair Floor Rug — A Ooor rug or mat that has a surface pile, cut or 
uncut, entirely of mohair. 

Moit — A trade term adopted by the Australian Wool Board to indicate 
vegetable material other than burr and seed namely, fern, twigs, bark and 
straw. 

37 



IS t 11206 - 1984 

Molleton — A heavy reversible cloth with a nap on both sides. It was 
originally made of wool. Now it is made of cotton and used as a blowing 
wrapper for delicate fabric. 

Molleton Flannel — A high quality 2-and-2 twill woollen flannel, heavily 
milled, raised and finished with a dense fibrous nap, dyed in delicate 
colours and used for making dressing gowns and jackets. 

Moquettes — Wool loop-pile fabrics with a ground warp of cotton wor- 
ked two end together. Loop-pile is produced in the same manner as for 
Brussels and other carpets, but the pile may be left looped, cut or partly 
looped and partly cut. 

Mo08 Finished Cloth — A soft woollen fabric mostly in fancy colours, 
which is heavily milled and finished with a fibrous face which obscures the 
weave and structure. 

Moth-Proofing — Imparting resistance to wool, hair or fur fibres from 
attack by insect such as moth and beetles. 

Mottle — See Marl. 

Mottle Yarn — Folded yarn produced by twisting together two yarns of 
different colours. 

Mouline — Moulinrs are folded yarns of two or more yarns of different 
colours or twist levels. Fabrics made from such yarns have a lively appea- 
rance and a smooth springy handle when the constituent yarns have 
different twist factors. 

Mountain Wools — Coarse wools produced by sheep in the hilly regions 
of Britain. Typical breeds include Scotish blackface, Welsh mountain, 
Cheviot, etc. 

Muffler ( Woollen ) — A long narrow knitted or woven piece of fabric, 
made of wool and worn as a protection for the neck against cold. Usually 
it is less than 1 m long and 30 cm wide. 

Mungo — The fibrous material made in the woollen trade by pulling 
down new or old hard-woven or milled cloth or felt in rag form ( see also 
Shoddy ). 

Mushy Wool — Wool without any regularity of staple, obtained usually 
from old sheep in bad seasons. It is usually not combed as its yield of top 
is poor and the quantity of noil is large, 

38 



IS : 11206 . 1984 

N 

Namdas — An Indian term for handmade, Telted rug made of all wool 
or blends of wool with cotton and man-made fibres with embroidery work 
done with woollen yarn and used mainly as floor covering. 

Nap ( Wool ) — Pile or cover obtained on cloth by raising, rubbing, etc. 

Nap Finish — A process wherein the fibres are raised and made to stand 
vertically from the foundation of a woollen fabric and then rubbed to 
form curls or nubs. 

Napping — A finishing process used for obtaining nap on the surface of 
cloth. 

Necks — Wool removed from the neck region of the fleece. Should only 
be removed if distinctly different from the rest of fleece because it contains 
heavy burr, dust or seed. 

Nep — A small knot-like aggregate of tighUy entangled fibres, usually not 
larger than a common pin-head ( about 2 mm in diameter ). 

Nep Count — The number of neps per unit weight of material, usually 
expressed in terms of number of neps per gram. 

Noble Combing — A circular combing machine for worsted slivers, 
wherein the combing and the removal of tufts is combined into a continu- 
ous process. 

Noil ( Wool ) — The shorter fil>res separated from longer ii])res during 
the process of coml)ing. 

Noil Percentage It is the ratio of weight of noil to the combined 
weight of noil and comb sliver exjncssed as peirentage It differs from the 
term *Tcar' which is simply the ratio of weight of comb sliver to the weight 
of noil. 

Non*felting — A process for modifying, mainly the scaly surface structure 
of wool or hair fibres so as to reduce their tendeney to felt. 

O 
Oil-Combed Tops — Wool or hair tops that contain added oil. 

Oiled Wool — Unscoured or undyed knitting wool or wool dyed before 
spinning and containing added oil not subsecpiently removed. 

Open System — See Drawing. 

39 



18 1 11206 - ld84 

Orleans — A plain Bradford lustre fabric mostly used as lining. 

Otter — Fur fibre ( from genus: Lulra lutra ). 

Ottoman — A warp-faced fabric showing a bold weftway-rib effect on 
the face. Originally made with silk warp and wool weft. 

Outercoat ( Guard Fibres ) — Long, hairy and coarse fibres projecting 
above the undercoat of fur bearing animals and undomcsticatcd sheep and 
goat. 

Overcoatings — A term embracing a large and greatly varying range of 
fabrics for overcoats. 



Pack ( Wool ) — A traditional unu weight l()8-86 kg ( that is 240 lb ) 
of wool. 

Paisley Shawl — Hand-woven shawl made in the nineteenth century in 
Paisley ( UK ) with a view to imitating Pashmina shawls from Kashmir. 

Palm Beach Suiting — A mohair cloth used for the tropical suiting. 

Panama — A piece-dyed, light-weight and smooth-finished worsted dress 
fabric in plain weave made from hard-twisted yarns used for tropical 
suitings. 

Panama ( Sheep ) — A cross-bred American sheep, from Rambouillct 
( French merino ) rams and Lincoln ewes, yielding 56-()()s fineness grade 
wool. 

Paper Pressing — A part of the worsted finishing sequence, particularly 
for imparting a pressed finish to all wool worsted suitings, wherein a dam- 
ped fabric is sandwhiched between glazed electrically heated cardboard 
sheets and pressed for several hours at high pressure with the aid of a 
hydraulic press in a discontinuous operation. 

Paramattas — Type of cashmere fabrics woven in 2-and-l weft twill 
weave. 

Pashmina 

a) Pashmina Coat — A goat of genus Capra hircus laniger found in 
Ladakh region of Kashmir and in Tii)et. Also known as Gash- 
mere goat. 

40 



IS : 11206 . 1984 

b) Pashmina Wool — Superfine fleece of pashmina goat —particularly 
the undercoat separated from the fleece by manual separation of 
hairy outercoat. 

c) Pashmina Tarn — Yarn made from pashmina wool or their blend 
with wool. 

d) Pashmina Shawl — Shawls made from pashmina wool or their 
blend with wool. 

NoTK 1 — Pashmina is an Indian term for cashmere. 

Note 2 — Ste also Cashmere and Cashmeres. 

Perching — Inspection of cloth in a vertical ( hanging ) position or at an 
angle with the aid of light reflected from the surface and/or transmitted 
through the fabric with a view to detecting yarn, weaving and other 
defects. 

Perkin Stripes — See Bradford Lustre Fabrics. 

Permanent Set — Permanent dimension stabilization of fabric, yarn of 
fibre either chemically or with the aid of steam ( or hot air ). 

Persian Carpets — Name of world famous all-wool hand-knotted carpets 
made in Persia ( Iran ) in a vericty of designs originating in different parts 
of Persia. Famous Persian designs now used in carpets all over the world 
include Afschar, Ahar, Ardebil, Bakhtiar, Bokhara, Gharadji, Ghiordes, 
Ghoum Heriz, Hcrck(.*, Hamadan, Kaimuri, Kashan, Kerman, Kardy, 
Lichi, Meshad, Mahal, Sarah, Sarabend, Tabriz, etc. 

Picking — Removal by picking locks and bellies from the fleece during 
skirting. 

Piece — A length of fabric of customarily accepted unit length. In the 
woollen and worsted fabric trade, it is usually above 40 m but generally 
less than 75 m in length. 

Pieces — Skirting from the edpje of the fleece containing shorter wool, 
fiibs, clumpy burr or seed. Should not contain bellies, stains, or locks or 
second cuts or skin pieces. 

Piece Dyed — Term applied to cloth woven with the yarn in grey condi- 
tion ( that is undyed ), scoured and then dyed; this being the most con- 
venient and economical method of applying colour to a fabric. 

Piece Dyeing - - The dyeing of fabrics in the piece. 

Piece^Goods - - Cloth sold by or from the piece. 

41 



IS I 11206 . 1984 

Pile — The raised loops or tufts forming all or a portion of the surface of 
certain types of fabrics and carpets. 

Carved Pile — The pile of a carpet that is subjected, after manufacture, 
to a shearing operation with the object of creating different levels of 
pile, often on the periphery of certain elements of design formed by the 
pile. 

Curled Pile — The pile of a carpet in which the curl has been induced in 
the pile yarn by over-twist or by other means. 

Cut Pile — A pile surface that consists entirely of severed ends of 
fibres or yarns. 

Loop Pile, Uncut Pile - A pile, the fibres or yarns of which are caused to 
form loops during manufacture of the fabric. 

Sculptured Pile ~ A pile in which a pattern is created by having 
areas of difTcrent height or by omitting pile in certain areas. 

Textured Pile — A pile in which the surface character is varied, for 
example, by having areas of different characteristics, by combinations 
of loop and cut pile, etc. 

Pile, ££fective { Carpet ) That part of the pile which is above the 
substrate and which can be separated from it by shearing [ see Pile Height, 
EfTective ( Carpet ) ]. 

Pile Fabrics — Fabrics in which a part of either the weft or the warp 
threads is made to project from the foundation forming a nap on the sur- 
face. Types of pile are warp pile, weft pile, knotted pile, cut pile, looj) pile 
and pile on pile. Pile fabrics include velvets, velveteens, rordumys, plushed, 
moquettes, carpets and the like. 

Pile Height, EflTective ( Carpet ) — Tlie difference in the thickness of 
a carpet before and after shearing away the pile above the backing. 

Pile Root ( Carpet ) — The yarn(s) or ribre(s) from a tuft that will 
remain in the substrate after removal of the (effective pile by shearing. 

Pilot Cloth — A heavily milled 2-and-2 twill wooUen cloth dyed blue with 
nappy finish and used for overcoats and jackets. 

Pin Drafter — A high-speed gill box without back rollers, used in 
American system of worsted drawing. 

Pin Drafting — Any system of drafting ( for example, gill drafting ) in 
which the oriented position of fibres relative to one another in a sliver is 
controlled by pins. 

42 



IS: 11206- 1984 

Pinstripe -- Used in worsted suitings The pattern is formed by using 
alternate pale and dark yarns in the warp giving a very fuic stripe design. 
Woven in twill or panania. 

Pitch — The average knot of tufts or knots in carpets per unit length or 
area. 

Plaiding Cloth — A heavy machinery fabric in twill weave from woollen 
spun yarns made of wool fil^res or their blends with nian-iriade fibres. The 
cloth is made with or without a soft finish on one side of the fabric to im- 
part a smooth feel. 

Plucked Wool — ■ See Pulled Wool. 

Potting — A finishing process applied mainly to woollen fabrics. The 
dyed fabric ( which may have been crabbed) is batched on a roller which 
is then immersed in water. The temperature of the liquor and the duration 
of treatment depend on the effect desired. 1 he fabric is cooled on the 
roller and rebatched end for end, and the process is repeated. The fabric 
is wound ofT the roller and dried. 

Presidents — A cotton warp and wool weft fabric in 5-thread satin weave 
on the double cloth principle. Lower qualities with shoddy or mungo in 
their composition are also made and nap finished. 

Prince of Wales — Characteristic black check pattern, obtained by using 
a specifu: colour sequence in warp and \v( ft. Woven in twill, panarna and 
plain. Worsted yarns are mainly used but woollen yarn may also be used 
for special articles. 

Proof — Resistant to a specified ai^ency, eitheu' by r(^ason of physical 
structure or inherent chemical non-reacti\^ity or arising from a trt^atment 
designed to imj>art the desired characteristics. 

Proofed -Descriptive of material that has been treated to render it resis- 
tant to a specified agcuicy. 

Pull ( Sampling ) — The act of manually a])slracting a sample of fibres 
from a bulk lot of raw material or sliver with a view to assessing the length 
and/or distribution of length of hbre within the sample. 

Pulled-Down Yarn — A yarn specially prepared in the spinning process 
so that the tufts it produces in a carpet contract in finishing to produce a 
relief pattern. 

Pulled Wool — Wool plucked from the pelts o'^ slaughtered shee[) with 
the aid of bacterial ac lion ( sweated wool ) or by treatment with lime 
( lime wool ) or with sodium sulphide ( tannery wool ). Also called 

43 



IS 1 11206 - 1984 

plucked wool or fellmongcrcd wooL All pulled wools show skin portions 
and root ends under microscope. ( see also Fellmongcred Wool, Skin Wool, 
and Skin Pieces ) . 

Pulling ( Rag ) — The operation of reducing rags and thread waste to a 
fibrous state. 

Pulling ( Wool ) — The removal of wool from skins. 

Punching ( Wool Industry ) — A winding operation to prepare four- 
end balls of sliver for the noble comb. 



Quality — Various attributes of wools which include* primarily fineness 
and also uniformity, length, colour and soundness. 

Quality Number — A trade term adopted by the Australian Wool Board 
to indicate a series of numbers related to spinning ability of greasy wool 
and determined principally by fibre fineness. 



Rabbit Hair — Fur removed from common rabbit, angora rabbit { Lepus 
caniculus ), and the liair ( Lepus europaeus and Lrpus timidus ). I'he fine fur 
fibres ( undercoat ) exhibit a typical ladder type medulla ( see also 
Angora ). 

Rag Pulling — Breaking up a garment into individual fibres to yield 
shoddy or mungo. 

Rags ( New ) — The waste cloth, whether woven or knitted, that is left 
after a garment has been cut out. The term also covers piece ends and 
discarded pattern bunches. 

Rags { Old ) — Worn garments that have been discarded. 

Raising - The production of a layer of protruding fibres on the surface 
of fabrics by brushing, teasing or rubbing. 

Rambouillet — French merino sheep and its wool. 

Rams — Wool from rams. Often contains a strong odour. 

Rapper System — See Drawing. 

44 



IS: 11206.1984 

RatcJb 

a) The distance between the nips of the front and back rollers in a 
roller-drafting system. ( Syn. Reach ). 

b) A slight additional drafting of the yarn, which takes place 
towards the end of the mule draw. 

Ratine Originally a thick woollen cloth with a curled nap. This term 
or ratine' the past participle of the French verb ratiner ( meaning to cover 
with a curled nap ), is also applied to a cloth, made from a veriety of 
fibres, with a rough surface produced cither by using a fancy yarn in a 
cloth to which a special finishing technique may or may not be applied or 
by using ordinary yarns in a cloth to which the special finish is applied. 

Raw Wool - Wool as shorn from the sheep or wool which is pulled, 
limed or ginned and carded, contains varying amount of impurities like 
sand, grease, suint, vegetable matter, tags and dung. It is, therefore, pur- 
chased on the basis of either laboratory scoured yield or clean wool libre 
content. 

Reach - See Ratch. 

Reclaimed Wool — Wool recovered from rags known as ^shoddy' or 
*mungo'. 

Recoznber's Noil The shorter fibres separated in combing tops ( that 
is, in recombing ) . 

Recommended Allowance The percentage that, in the calculation 
of comercial weight and of yarn liner density, is added to the oven-dry 
weight with or without previous washing to remove natural or added oils 
and dressings. For such materials, the recorruiicnded allowance is arbitra- 
rily chosen according to conimeicial pra( tice and includes the moisture 
regain. It may also include the normal finish that is added to impart satis- 
factory textile qualities to the material. 

Recovered Wool — A vague term the usage of which is not recommen- 
ded. It is used synonymously with reclaimed wool. 

Rectilinear Combing — Combing of worsted sliver by the use of straight 
combs wherein tin- tufts are presented to the combs intermittently by 
movements of the slivers into nipper jaws, which grip them firmly and 
release thern after coiril)int^ onto a pair of rollers. These rollers draw the 
tufts which are subsequently reconibined automatically by overlapping 
them, the resultant com))ed sliver being continuous but uneven. 

45 



IS t 11206 . 1984 

Regain — The weight oi moisture present in a textile material expressed 
as a percentage of the oven-dry weight. 

Regenerated Wool — A vague term indicating reused wool. The use of 
this term is not recommended. 

Remanufactnred Wool — Reused wool. However, the use of this term 
is not recommended as it is vague and is often confused with reprocessed 
wool. 

Remnants — Fents. 

Repco — See Self- Twisted Yarn. 

Reprocessed Wool Wool recovered from processed but unused mater- 
ials for example, remnants, tailors' clipping waste, soft waste and hard 
waste. 

Note 1 — This term should not be confused with Reused wool* or 'remanufac- 
tured wool*. 

Note 2 — Pulled wool is also rcfTered to as reprocessed wool. This usage is not 
recommended. 

Residuals — Small amounts of dirt and fatty matter remaining in washed 
samples, and measured as part of the standard method for determining 
yield or wool base. 

Residual Shrinkage The potential shrinkage remaining in a fibre, 
yarn or fabric after treatment designed to reduce or eliminate that 
shrinkage. 

Reused Wool —Wool reclaimed from used garments, for example, shoddy 
and mungo extract This term excludes soft waste and hard wastes. 

Reversibles — Fabrics on which the pattern appears on both sides of the 
cloth, so that either side can be used. Examples include reversible shawls, 
blankets or hosiery. 

Rigging — In milling, the creasing of cloth; in warehouse or finishing 
room, the folding of cloth down the middle usually with the face inside. 

Ripple Cloth — A fabric made from coarse woollen yarns. The face is 
raised and finished to give the fabric a rippled or wavy appearance usually 
used for dressing gowns. 

Robust A trade term adopted by the Australian Wool Board to indi- 
cate thick well-grown sound staples of wool. 

46 



IS: 11206 -1984 

Rope Mark ( Running Marks ) — Long crease marks in dyed or finished 
goods running approximately in the warp direction. They are caused 
during wet processing in the rope form and may be the resuU of (a) the 
formation of creases along which abrasion or felting may occur, or 
(b) imperfect penetration or circulation of the processing liquors. 

Rotary Pressing — Continuously pressing medium or lieavy woollen or 
worsted fabrics between a steam heated rotating metal roller and concave 
static metal bed at a high pressure and temperature. 

Roving — A name given, individually or collectively, to the relatively fine 
fibrous strands used in the later or final processes of preparation for spin- 
ning. 

Rug — A vague term indicating both floor covering and blankets. 

Rug Blankets — Either all wool, woollen spun warp and weft, type of 
travelling rugs or cotton warp and woollen weft type of blankets generally 
in twill weaves and bold checks. The wool iil)re used is cheviot and 
coarse cross-bred type. These rugs may also be made from shoddy. 

Rug, Corridor — Carpetting traditionally 0-7 to 1 in wide and in any 
required length greater than 2 m. 

Rug, Floor — A collective term for pile floor coverings of small size. 

Rug, Sofa — Carpetting traditionally 1 to 2 m wide, in varying lengths. 

Rug Wool — A wool yarn, generally woollen-spun, twisted six-fold, the 
single thread before plying being not finer than 350 tex. 

Running Marks — See Rope Marks. 



Sagathies - A worsted fabric made from undyed warp and dyed weft, 
usually with a 2-and-2 twill weave. 

Sappy Wool — Wool containing a super-abundanc<^ of grease; conse- 
quently the yield of such wool is low. 

Saxony Cloth - Woollen textures, made from Saxony or meiino quality 
of fine wool, with a smooth surface, soft handle and compact structure. 

Saxony Woollen Yarn — A typical woollen spun yarn made from fine 
merino wool. 

Scarves, Woollen -- Long rectangular woven or knitted strip, nude from 
wool or its blends, mainly lor protection of neck against cold. 

47 



IS : 11206 - 1984 

Scouring — Treatment of textile material in aqueous or other solutions 
in order to remove natural fats, waxes, proteins and other constituents, 
as well as dirt, oil and other impurities. 

Sculptured Pile — See Pile ( Carpets ). 

Seedy Wool — Wool containing a veriety of grass seeds difficult to 
remove. 

Self- Acting Teaser — See Willey Wool. 

Self-Twist Yarn Production — A method of making a yarn from 
rovings fed to a drafting unit. The emerging strand of fibres is subjected 
to a false-twisting action, which can be imparted in a number of ways. 
Two adjacent strands delivered from the false-twist system are brought 
together through a guiding means, and tlu^ twist energy in the two strands 
causes them to wrap around eacli other. This wrapping action is defined as 
self-twist and produces a self-twist pattern of S-zero-Z-zero, etc, in the 
yarn produced. The self- twist yarn is then taken up on a package in 
cheese form. Self- twist yarn is also referred to as ST yarn or as Repco 
yarn. 

Average Self-Twist - The numl)er of turns of self-twist in one twist 
zone of a self-twist yarn divided by the length of that zone. 

Cycle Length ~ The length of two consecutive zones of opposite twist in 
a self- twist yarn. 

Pairing Twist The minimum cjuantity in turns per metre of unidi- 
rectional twist required to produce a yarn configuration in which the ply 
twist has become either zero or unidirectional throughout. 

Phasing A method of descri])ing the relative linear positions ( with 
reference to the twist zones ) of the two strands in a self-twist yarn. 

Self-Twist Twisted ( STT ) Tarn - A self-twist yarn to which unidi- 
rectional twist has been added in a separate operation. 

Strand Twist per Half Cycle — The number of turns of twist in the 
strand between two changeovers after the removal of self-twist. 

Sen&iworsted-Spun -- A term applied to yarn spun from sliver produced 
by carding and gilling in which tlie fibres ar(* substantially parallel, the 
carded sliver not having been condensed or combed. Alternatively, a rov- 
ing produced from such a sliver may be used. 

Serge - - A medium-coarse textured twill weave fabric made from worsted 
or woollen-spun yarns, usually spun from merino or cross-bred wools or 
their blends with other libres and given a clear finish. 

48 



IS: 11206-1984 

Serge Battle Dress — A water -r(!pellant, heavy cross-bred wool 2-and-2 
twill fabric made from worsted warp and woollen weft in khaki drab mix- 
ture shade in clear fmish. 

Serge Blue for Naval Ratings - All wool fabric, woven in 2/2 twill 
weave with worsted spun warp and woollen spun weft. 

Serge Blue No. 1 — A 2-and-2 twill weave merino wool serge dyed in 
blue shade and woven from fine worsted-spun yarns. 

Serge Blue Grey No. 2 — Cross-bred wool fabric woven in 2/2 twill 
weave with worsted spun warp and woollen spun weft. It is used mainly 
for the manufacture of uniforms for airmen. 

Serge, White, Lining — Crossbred wool or wool blended undyed fabric, 
woven in 2-and-2 twill weave from worsted spun yarns and given a milled 
and raised finish. 

Serge, Worsted, Dyed ( Superior ) — 6^s quaUty all wool fabric spun 
on the worsted system into fine counts woven in 2/2 twill weave and given 
a clear cut finish. 

Setting — The process of conferring stability on fibres, yarns or fabrics, 
generally by means of moist or dry heat. 

Shading ( Carpet ) — A permanent and localized change of appearance 
of the pile of a carpet due to changes in the direction ( lie ) of the pile. 

Shafty — A trade term adr)pted by the Australian Wool Board to indicate 
wool well-grown, bold-stapled, arul essentially of good length. 

Shahtosh ( Shah tush ) — The finest animal hair of textile use having 
average fibre fineness of 10-12 /xm ( undercoat ), derived fiom Ibex goat 
in Ladakh and Tibet. Used almost exclusively for production of the ligh- 
test, softest and expensive luxury shawls. 

Shaker — See Willy, Dust. 

Shake Willey — See WiUey, Dust. 

Shalloon — A 2/2 twill-weave cloth made from cross-bred worsted yarns, 
used as a lining for coats, liveries, etc. 

Shawl — An Indian term for an usually oblong piece of fabric worn as a 
loose covering for the shoulders. Mixde in a wide range of sizes and from 
many difTerent materials. 

49 



IS : 11206 . 1984 

Shearing — Shearing indicates: 

a) cutting fleece from live sheep, 

b) trimming nap or pile to the required uniform height, and 

c) removing all protruding fibres from the surface of the fabric that 
is cropping. 

Sheepskin — Pelt of sheep with wool. This should not be confused with 
lambskin which is all cotton fabric with fleece finish. 

Shepherd's-Check Effect — Small check efTect developed in black and 
white, or in contrasting colours, generally by groups of lour, six or eight 
threads of the two colours and in twill weaves, commonly the 2/2 twill. 
The description applied to the effects probably originates from the tradi- 
tional plaids worn at one time by shepherds in the hills of the Scottish 
borders. 

Shetland — Takes its name from the wool produced in the Shetland 
Isles. Collective name for fabric produced from coarse woollen yarn with 
a pleasant handle, woven in twill, or more generally knitted, for men's 
and women's outerwear. 

Shetland Wool — Fine and soft wool from Shetland-British Isles, north 
of Scotland. Mostly used in hosiery, shawls and scarves. 

Shetland Yarn — Yarn made from soft natural-coloured wool alone or 
in mixture with white wool. This is a hosiery yarn made in imitation of 
Shetland wool. 

Shield Fibres — A special kind of guard fibre ( see Guard Fibres ) with 
a flat ended shield-like apical portion, 

Shieve — Vegetable matter of a thin, long formation, which is difficult to 
estimate and to remove from wool during processing. 

Shivy Wool — Wool that contains small particles of vegetable matter 
other than burrs. 

Shoddy — The fibrous material made in the woollen trade by pulling 
down new or old knitted or loosely woven fabric in rag form ( see also 
Mungo ). 

Shoddy Shaker ( Local Issit's Shaker ) — A machine used for shaking 
fud reclaimed from under the carding engines. 

Shoddy Yarn — 11 ic cheaper class of woollen yarn made from reused 
wool. 

50 



IS : 11206 - 1984 
Shorn Wool — Wool obtained by shearing live sheep. 

Showerproof Fabric — Water-n pcllcnt fabric which retains porosity and 
allows air circulation. Such fabrics are treated with chemicals which im- 
part water repellency in sharp contrast to waterproofed fabrics generally 
produced by surface coating with rubber or wax r^^ndering them impervi- 
ous to air and water. 

Shrink-Resist — See Shrink-Resistant and Non-fching. 

Shrink-Resistant — Descnptiv(! of textile materials that exhibit dimen- 
sional stabihty conforming to specified standards based on tests designed to 
simulate normal conditions of usage. 

Shrink-Resistant Finish — A treatment appHed to a textile material to 
make it shrink-resistant. In case of wool material, this ttim gmerally 
implies non-felting. 

Shrink-Resisting — See Shrink-Resistant and Non-felting. 
Sicilian — A type of Bradford histre fabric. 

Singeing - Burning olF the surface nap from the fabric on one or both 
the sides in a continuous manner and in an oprn widtii. 

Singeing Marl — A single! yarn sp\m from a roving produced from two 
diflerently coloured reducers ( that is reduced slivers ). 

Single Mottle Yarn A single yarn made from two half weight rovings 
of (lifferent colours spun together. 

Siro Spun Yarn — Two ply worsted yarn produced direcdy on the ring 
frame by combining fibre strands from two different rovings after drafting 
them serparatcly. The yarn resembles a tw^ist on tw^ist two-ply yarn. 

Sizing Flannels — Fabrics used for wrapping the rollers of sizing 
machines. Tlu^y ar(^ usually all wool fabrics, made from cross-bred wools. 
The fabric s usually have their face side raised to provide a spongy surface 
for absorbing the sizing solution and arc finished in natural white or 
bleached condition. Si/ing flannels may also be made with linen or synthe- 
tic fibre warps for increased strength and life. 

Skin Pieces — A trade term used in Australia to denote wool that has 
skin attached. 

Skin Wool ~ Wool o])lained from the skins of dead or slaughtered sheep, 
also known as Pulled wool. 

51 



IS t 11206 . 1984 

Skirting — Removing from the fleece, all objectionable parts such as 
burry or stained portions, inferior fibres, etc, so as to homogenise and 
improve the quality of fleece. 

Slipe 

a) A trade term adopted by the Australian Wool Board to indicate 
fellmongered unscoured wool; and 

b) Lime steeped skin wool. 
Slipe Wool — See Skin Wool, 

Sliver — A continuous assemblage of a strand of fibres without twist. 

Stubbing — A slightly twisted continuous strand of fibres produced on a 
slubbing machine. 

Slubbing Dyed Yarn — Yarn spun from wool which has been dyed in 
top or sliver form. 

Slub Yarn — It is a type of fancy yarn having slubs at intervals. 

Snarl Yarn — A compound yarn with snarl of highly twisted yarn pro- 
jecting from the core. 

Soft Twist Yarn — A yarn with twist less than normal. 

Soft Waste — Fibres recovered from combing, backwashing and drawing 
sections in untwisted form, for example, noiJs, laps from cards, roving 
waste. 

Solid Yarn — Yarn in which all the fibres are of the same colour. 

Sorting ( Wool ) — Classification and separation of a fleece into parts on 
the basis of quality of the fibre. 

Sound — A trade term adopted by the Australian Wool Board to indicate 
the condition of wool with the necessary tensile strength to undergo pro- 
cessing economically. 

Soundness — Capacity of wool to withstand tension. 

S/P Ratio — The ratio of the number of secondary follicles in skin to the 
number of primary follicles. The latter are formed early in the embryonic 
life of the lamb and produce fibres 10-20 p(*rcent coarser than those pro- 
duced by the secondary follicles of the sheep. 

52 



IS : 11206 - 1984 

Speciality Hair Fibres — Term a])pHcd to all commercially useful tex- 
tile fibres from domesticated animals other than sheep but usually implies 
to angora goat hair, pashmina and fur fibres. 

Spiked Willey — See Willey, Double or Single Cylinder. 

Spiral Yarn — A yarn made by twisting a thick, soft twist thread with a 
fine hard twist thread. 

Splash Yarn — Yarn spun from printed roving prepared from bleached 
top. 

Spool ( Axminster and Gripper-Spool ) — A double-flanged bobbin in 
which a number a threads of pile yarn are wound in a predetermined 
order for use in spool Axminster and gripper-spool looms. 

Spool Axminster — See Axminster Carpet. 

Spool Bobbin — A term used in worsted spirming for a single-flanged 
bobbin on which weft yarn is spun. 

Spool Gripper Axminster — See Gripper-SpooI Axminster under 
Axminster Carpet. 

Springy — A trade term adopted by the Australian Wool Board to indi- 
cate the ability oi" wool to recover readily from compression. 

Stains — A trade term adojHcd by the Australian Wool Board to indicate 
wools, discoloured by urine, sweat, rain, brands, bacterial or fungal attack, 
which are unscourable. 

Staple — A lock or tuft of fibres of similar properties. Hence a lock or 
tuft prepared to demonstrate fibre length. In bulk, a mass of fil)res having 
a certain homogeneity of properties, usually length. 

Steely — Wool lacking charact(^T, with a glassy sheen. Produced on pas- 
tures deficient in certain trace elements. 

Stock Dyeing Dyeing of staple fibres before carding and spinning — 
a process commonly used in production of woollen spun yarns. 

Stoving ■— Bleaching wool, silk, hair or other keratinous materials in a 
moist condition with sulphur dioxide in chamber. ( Wet stoving is the 
treatment of materials with a solution of a sul])hite or bisul])hite. ) 

Strong Merino ( Wool ) — See Merino. 

53 



IS : 11206 - 1984 

Style — A trade term adopted by the Australian Wool Board to catego- 
rize wool in relation to character, soundness, condition, degree orvege^table 
matter contamination, weatiiering and degree of dust contamination. Style 
categories are described as *Extra Super Spinners', 'Good Spinners', 
'Average Topmakers,' etc. 

Sueded Cloth — A fabric finished in such a way as to imitate suede 
leather. 

Suint — The water soluble fraction of the yolk. It is perspiration of the 
sheep dried in the fleece. 

Superfine Merino Wool — See Merino. 

Sweat Ends — A trade term adopted by the Australian Wool Board to 
indicate sweaty staples adhering to fleece extremities and pieces. 

Sweated Wool - See Pulled Wool. 

T 

Taffetta — Plain weave woollen shirting made in Bradford. The use of 
this term is deprecated as generally, in India, taffetta signifies rayon or 
silk fibre fabrics. 

Tammies — Plain weave piece-dyed glazed fabric from cotton warp and 
wool weft. 

Tannery Wool — See Pulled Wool. 

Tartan — 2-and-2 twill woollen and worsted fa])rics woven in elaborately 
coloured check designs and worn as shawls or plaids over the shoulder and 
as kilts in Scotland. 

Tear — The ratio of weight of top to noil produced in combing, 

Teaze — See Willey. 

Teazer — See Willey Dust. 

Teddy Cloths — Fleece finished coating fabrics made of wool or mohair. 

Teg — Same as hog but the term is used to denote finer wool. 

Teg Wool — Hog wool. 

Tender Wool that will break relatively easily when tension is applied, 

54 



IS : 11206 - 1984 

Tennis Cloth — Cotton warp and wool weft 2-and-2 twill weave fabrics. 

Tennis Flannel — All wool 2-and-2 twill weave fabrics made from wors- 
ted yarns of white or off-white colours. 

Tenter — A machine for holding the fabric with the aid of pins or clips 
and drying ( or heat-setting ) it in an open width through multiple 
passages within the same machine. Similar, long and single passage 
machine is referred to as stcntcr. 

Textured Pile -~ See Pile ( Carpets ). 

Tinted Yarn — Yarn coloured with a pale fugitive dye to distinguish it 
from other similar yarns. 

Tippy — A trade term adopted by the Australian Wool Board to indicate 
the upper end of the ( wool ) staple: 

a) Thin and tapered, usually weathered. 

b) Black tipped staples, usually heavy in condition. 

Tippy Wool — Wool in which the tip portions of the fibres hav(^ l)een so 
damaged by natural weathering as to have markedly difffrent dyeing pro- 
perties from the root portions. 

Top 

a) Tlu^ sliver that forms the starting material for the worsted and 
certain other drawing systems, and that is usually obtained by 
the pr(Kess of combing and is characteri/.cd by the following 
properties: 

1) The absence of fibres so short as to be uncontrolled in the 
preferred system of drawing, 

2) A substantially parallel formation of the fibres, and 

3) A substantially homogeneous distribution thioughout the 
sliver of fibres from each length-group present. 

b) The form or package in which the sliv(*r is delivered, for example, 
ball top and bump top ( see also Oil-Gombed Tops, Dry-Combed 
Tops and Wool Tops ). 

Top Dyeing — Dyeing of wool fibres in the form of worsted tops. 

Top Finishing — Post-combing gilHng of slivers. 

Top Sliver — Combed and finisher-gilled slivers ready for drawing. 

55 



IS : 11206 - 1984 

Tow to Top Converter — Machine to cut or break continuous filaments 
and to form them into continuous sliver ready for further processing on the 
worsted system in a single step without necessitaling carding. 

Tricotine — A piece dyed worsted serge costume cloth woven in warp 
face weave forming steep twill lines. 

Tropical Worsteds - Light-weight worsted suitings. 

True Wool — Ncm-mcdullated wool fibre. 

Tweed — Originally a coarse, heavy-weight, rough-surfiiced woo) fabric 
for outerwear, woven in Southern Scotland. The term is now applied to 
fabrics made in wide range of weights and c]ualities from woollen-spun 
yarns in a variety of weave effects and colour-and-weave effects. The name 
tweed is derived from a riv^er Tweed in Scotland. 

Type — A trade term adopted by tlie Australian Wool Board to indicate 
style, fineness, length, fault and colour, and defines ultimate processing 
system that is woollen or worsted suitability. 

U 

Undercoat ( Innercoat ) — Short fine growth of downy woolly fibres in 
a mixed fieece of undomesticated sheep, goat and fur bearing animals. 

Union Fabric — A fabric made with warp and weft of different fibres. 

Union Yarn — Yarn made by mixing and spinning two or more different 
kinds of fibres. ( For example, wool and polyester or cotton and polyester 
fibres, etc. ) 



Velours — Woollen costume cloth which has been felted and raised and 
finished with a fibrous surface. 

Velvets — A warp pile fabric having a cut pile, rich in appearance and 
soft to the touch. 

Venetians — All wool linnings or dress-iabrics woven In eight-thread 
warp satin. 

Vicuna ( Fibre ) — Undercoat hair of the vicuna, an animal of the llama 
family. 

Vicuna Cloth — Usually a worsted warp and woollen weft cloth, felted, 
raised but close cropped to reveal the weave. It has nothing to do with 
vicuna. 

56 



IS : 11206 . 1984 

Vfgourenx Printing -- See Melange Printing. 

Virgin W<h>1 — * Pure new wool ' according to International Wool Sec- 
retariat. Commercially it means wool that has not been processed or used 
before and is thus distinctly different from reprocessed wool or reused 
wool, 

W 

Wasty — A trade term adopted by the Australian Wool Board to indicate 
wool thinly grown and/or weathered, producing excessive waste during 
processing. 

Water-Repellent — A state characterized by the non-spreading of a glo- 
bule of water on a textile material. 

Weaners — A trade term used in Australia to denote first shearing wool 
from sheep of over six months age. 

Weathered — A trade term adopted by the Australian Wool Board to 
indicate wool degraded and wasty as a result of exposure to sunlight and 
moisture. 

Well Bred — A trade term adopted by the Australian Wool Board to 
indicate wool true to type, embodying style, character, evenness and 
handle. 

Wet Decatizing — See Decatizing. 

Wether 

a) A castrated ram, and 

b) Wool from second and subsequent shearing. 

Wheeling Yarn — Coarse multifold knitting yarn spun on the woollen 
system. 

Wiggings — A trade term used in Australia to denote wool that has been 
shorn from around the eyes and head of the sheep. 

Willey { Local, Willow, Teaze ) — To open and disentangle fibres prior 
to carding. 

Willey, Battering — A machine often employed for the opening of short, 
fine, dusty and sandy wools. It has a more gentle action than the double 
or single-cylinder willey, in which four-bladed beaters are used instead of 
the spiked cylinders. Otherwise, the construction is similar to the wool 
willey with spiked cylinders. 

57 



IS s 11206 . 1984 

Willey, Double or Single-Cylinder ( Spiked WiUey ) — A machine 

usually employd with greasy merino, cross-bred and the long lustre wools 
prior to washing and generally preceded by an automatic feed. Its 
action is to open out the greasy and dirty wool and remove dust and 
heavy foreign matter from the wool before it passes into the washbowl. 

WiUey, Dust ( Cleaning WiUey, Shake Willey, Shaker, Picker, 
Teazer, Wool, Plucker, Blending ) — A machine used primarily for 
opening wool fibre and removing dust and also as a preliminary blending 
machine. 

Willey, Tenterhook ( Tenterhook Willow, Tenterhook Teazer, 
Gockspur Willey, Fearnought Blending Willey ) — An opening 
and mixing machine which delivers the material in a suitable state 
for carding. 

Willey, Wool ( Self Acting Teazer, Wool Willow, Wool Opener, 
Devil ) — A machine generally used for the cleaning of wool. 

Wilton Carpet — A woven carpet in which the pile threads run continu- 
ously into the carpet and are treated as an integral part of the weaving 
process being raised above the surface of the backing to form a pile by 
means of wires or hooks ( warp wires ) , or by being stretched between two 
backings ( face-to- face weaving ). After being woven, the pile may be left 
as a loop or cut by a bladed wire or, in the case of face-to-face weaving, 
by the separation of the two fabrics. 

Wilton, Figured — A carpet usually woven on a jacquard loom, which 
bears a design obtained by the use of two to five frames, each of a 
different colour. Additional colours may be obtained by substitution 
( planting ) of colours in any frame. 

Wilton, Mottled ( Stippled Wilton ) — A carpet similar to plain wilton 
but woven form phcd yarns that have been folded from singles of different 
colours. 

Wilton, Plain — A Wilton carpet which bears no surface design. It is 
normally of a single colour, and if it has a cut pile it may be described as 
plain velvet. In a variation, hard-twist yarn is used. 

Wincey — Alight-weight fabric of the flannel type, finer in texture than 
baby flannel. Originally it was made with cotton warp and wool weft but 
it may now be made from mixture yarns containing wool. 

Wool — Primarily hair from the fleece or coat of the sheep, but extended 
by usage to include also that of the alpaca, camel, dromedary, llama, 
vicuna, cashmere goat and angora rabbit. 

58 



IS : 11206 - 1984 

Wool Base — The oven-dry weight of wool fibre free from all impurities, 
expressed as a percentage of the weight of the greasy core sample. 

Wool Glassing — A highly skilled process by which whole fleeces are 
separated into different classes before being baled and sold, which assists 
buyers to obtain their requirements. 

Wool Dyed Cloth — Wool fabric in which wool is dyed in yarn or fibre 
form as distinguished from piece dyed fabric. 

Wool Felt ( Pressed ) — A textile material composed of wool fibres 
physically interlocked by the inherent felting property of wool and 
produced by a suitable combination of mechanical work, chemical action, 
moisture and heat but without weaving, knitting, stitching, thermal 
bonding or adhesives. The wool fibres used are in the range of quality 
from 64/70S to 48s. 

Wool Opener — See Willey. 

Wool Plucker — See Willey. 

Wool Quality — The spinning quality of wool assessed primarily on the 
basis of fibre fineness. Crimp, waviness, handle, etc, also influence wool 
quality. 

Wool Sorting — A highly skilled process by which fleece and skin wool is 
divided into various qualities. It is usually carried out by the wool user. 

Wool Top — Continuous untwisted sliver of wool fibres from which the 
shorter fibres or noils have been removed and the fibres brought parallel 
to each other by combing. 

Wool Willow — See Willey Wool. 

Wool Yield ( Clean Wool Fibre Content ) - -The weight of wool fibres, 
free from vegetable matter, grease, dirt and other impurities and adjusted 
to the standard condition of 13'8-percent moisture content, l*5-percent 
alcohol extractable matter content and OS-percrnt ash cont(Mit; the latter 
two calculated on the basis of the oven-dry weight of the scoureds pecimen 
( IS : 1349-1984* ). 

Woollen — Descriptive of yarns, or fabrics or garments made from yarns, 
which have been produced on the condenser system wholly from wool 
fibres, new or otherwise, within certain tolerances and allowances. 

Note 1 — As an adjective appertaining to wool gonerally, the term * wool ' and 
not * woolen ' should be used. 



♦Method for determination of wool fibre content of raw wool ( revised ). 

59 



IS t 11206 . 1984 



Note 2 — The trade term * wooUcn-spun * is descriptive of any yarn carded^ 
conde nsed and spun on woollen machinery. As such yarn might not contain any vvool. 
It is preferable, therefore, to avoid the use of the term where possible. The term 
* condenser spun ' is recommended instead. 

Woollen and Worsted Weaves — Term applied usually to fabric 
structures using woollen-spun or worsted-spun yarns in a variety of weaves, 
for example: 



Corded velveteen 
Corkscrew weave 
Crepe weave 
Double plain weave 
Gaberdine twill 
Herringbone weave 

Honeycomb weave 
Plain weave 

Steep twill weave 
2/2 Twill 

Twilled hopsack 
Warp face satin 

Warp rib 

2/2 warp rib weave 
2/1 warp twill 
Weft face sateen 
2/1 weft face twill 
Weft rib weave 



Corduroys 

Corkscrew fabiic 

Oatmeal fabric 

Hairline blankets. All wool shawl 

Gaberdine worsteds 

Overcoatings, Suitings and Worsted 
trouserings 

; Honeycomb fabric 

: Baize, Blazer cloth, Broad cloth, 
Camlet, Woollen shirting, Delaine, etc 

Whipcords 

Blankets, Donegal tweed, Imperial 
cloth, Kersey, Pilot cloih, Serge, 
Angola, Tartan 

Barathea 

Amazon, Doeskin, Habit cloth, Lasting, 
Presidents, etc 

Bengal ine 

Crcpolinc 

Prunella twill 

Italian cloth, Velours, etc 

Cashmere, etc 

Bradford lustre fcibrics 



Woollen, Blended — Descriptive of yarns, or fabrics or garments made 
from yarns, spun on the condenser system and containing not less than 50 
percent of wool. 



eo 



IS: 11206-1984 

Woollen Carding — Carding with rollers and strippers with inter- 
mediate cross-feeds and condenser deUvery to obtain a slabbing ready for 
spinning. 

Woollen Cloth — Wool fabric woven from woollen-spun yarns. 
Woollen Count 

a) Dewsbury — The linear density of woollen yarn, expressed as 
number of yards per ounce; and 

b) Yorkshire — The linear density of woollen yarn, expressed as 
256-yd skeins per pound. 

Woollen-Spun — A term applied to staple yarn produced by carding, 
condensing and spinning on machinery ori ginally designed for the pro- 
cessing of wool into yarn, ^uch yarns may be from wool, its blends or even 
non-wool {see also Note 2 under Woollen.) 

Woollen Yarn — A yarn spun from wool which has been carded but not 
gilled or combed before spinning and in which the fibres cross each other 
in every direction presenting a rough surface. 

Woolley — Like wool. The term is used to denote soft handle like wool. 

Worsted-Spinning ~~ A system of spinning long staple fibres, for 
example Bradford system and Continential system. 

Worsted, Blended — Descriptive of yarn in which the fibres are reason- 
bly parallel and which contains not less than 50 percent of combed wool, 
or of fabric manufactured from such yarn. 

Worsted Carding — Carding with rollers and strippers but with no 
condenser delivery or intermediate cross-feeds io obtain sliver. 

Worsted Cloth — Wool fabric woven from worsted-spun yarns. 

Worsted Gaberdine, Khaki, Drab — Khaki drab mixture of dyed 
merino wool sHvers worsted-spun, woven in 2/1 twill weave and given a 
clear finish. 

Worsted Lasting — ^<»<? Lasting. 

Worsted-Spun — A term applied to yarn spun from staple fibre proces- 
sed on worsted-spinning machinery by carding or preparing, combing and 
drafting; or by converting a continuous-filament tow and drafting; or 
from a combination of slivers or rovings from both systems. 

61 



IS 1 11206 - 19SS 

Worsted-Span Yam — Yarn spun from long fibre (natural, man-made 
or blends) slivers after removal of short fibres on the rectilinear or noble 
comb and drawing through gill boxes. 

Worsted Yam -< Yarn made from long parallelised wool sliver from 

which the short fibres have been removed by combing. 



Yarns, Worsted, Colour Terms — In all the definitions given below, 
the expression * Colour * includes black and white. 

Solid Colour — A yarn made from fibres of a single colour. 

Mixture — A yarn made from fibres of two or more colours blended 
together. 

Twist — A yarn consisting of two single ends of different colours 
twisted together, the single ends being cither solid colours or mixture 
shades. 

Marl — A yarn consisting of two identical single ends twisted to- 
gether, the single ends being composed of two colours that have been 
roved together. 

Single Marl — A single yarn composed of two colours that have 
been roved together. 

Half-Marl — A yarn consisting of one end of mixture shade or solid 
colour, twisted with one end of two colours that have been roved together 
(as in marl). 

Double Marl — A yarn consisting of one end of two colours that 
have been roved together ( as in marl ) twisted with one end of another 
two colours that have been roved together. 

Single Mottle — A single yarn made as single marl in respect of 
combination of colours, but the marl effect is obtained by spinning from 
two half-weight rovings of different colours into the single end. ( The 
effect is a sharper contrast of colour than in a single marl. ) 

Melange — A yarn spun from tops that have been melange printed 
(see Melange Printing). 

Yam Dyed Cloth — Fabric made from warp and weft which have been 
previously dyed in the yarn form. 

62 



I8ill206-19M 

Yield — A genersd term expressing the proportion of clean wool in a 
greasy sample. Various specific definitions of yield exist (for example 
Schlumbcrger dry, Noble oil). 

Yolk — A trade term adopted by the Australian Wool Board to indicate 
combined grease, wax and suint secretions in wool from the skin follicles. 



Zibeline — A heavy wool costume fabric, heavily milled and raised, and 
finished with a long pile of fibres on the surface laid in one direction. 



63 



IS 1 11206- 1984 

( Continued from page 2 ) 

Wool Products Subcommittee, TDG 4 : 2 

Convener Representing 

Shri P» p. Cuandarana International Wool Secretanati Bombay 

Members 

Shui a. T. Basak Inspection Wing, Directorate General of Supplies 

& Disposals, New Delhi 
Dr N. R. Buasin Rajasthan State Co-operative Sheep & Woal 

Marketing Federation Ltd, Jaipur 
Dr P. V. Bhave ( Alternate ) 
Guaikman/Secrktary Wool and Woollens Export Promotion Gouncil, 

Bombay 
Dr (Shrimati) U8ha Nandurkar Wool Research Association, Bombay 

Shrimah G. p. Rane ( Alternate ) 
Shri Deepak Raj Nath Raj Woollen Industries, Panipat 

Representative The Oriental Carpet Manufacturers ( India ) 

Ltd, Amritsar 
Shri K.. N. Seth Panipat Woollen Mills, Kharar 

Shri N. N. Shah Shri Dinesh Mills Ltd, Vadodara 

Shri N. S. Sidhu Directorate of Industries, Government of Punjab, 

Chandigarh 
Shri R. C. Vasudeva ( Alternate ) 
Dr G. S. Singh The Raymond Woollen Mills Ltd, Thane 

Shri J. K. Banerjeb ( Alternate ) 
Shri U. S. Singh Central Sheep & Wool Research Institute, 

Avikanai^ar 
Shui D. K. Srivastava Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Shri O. P. Sharma ( Alternate ) 
Shri T. N. Skivastava The British India Corporation Ltd, Kanpur 

Shri K. D. Shiauthia ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. K. Skivastava Office of the Textile Commissioner, Bombay 

Shri P. D. Keny ( Alternate ) 
Shri J. N. VoHiiA Punjab State Hosiery and Knitwear Develop- 

ment Corporation Ltd, Ludhiana 
Shri P. T, Banerjeb ( Alternate ) 



64 



JSf) INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 



Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 
Telephones : 3310131, 3311375 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 

( Common to all offices ) 

Regional Offices : Telephone 

^Western : Manakalaya, E9 MiDC. Marol, Andher.i ( East ), 6 32 92 95 
BOMBAY 400093 



36 24 99 



tEastern : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M. V. I. P. Road, 
Maniktola, CALCUTTA 700054 

Southern : C. I. T. Campus, MADRAS 600113 

Northern ; B69 Phase VII, Industrial Focal Point. 
S. A. S. NAGAR 160051 ( Punjab ) 

Branch Offices : 

Pushpak*, Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, 
AHMAOABAD 380001 

*F' Block, Unity BIdg, Naraslmharaja Square, 

BANGALORE 560002 
Gangotrl Complex, Bhadbhada Road, T. T, Nagar, 

BHOPAL 462003 
22E Kalpana Area, BHU8ANESHWAR 751014 
5«.8-56C L. N. Gupta Marg, HYDERABAD 500001 
R14 Yudhlster Marg. C Scheme, JAIPUR 302005 
117/418 B Sarvodaya Nagar, KANPUR 208005 
Patliputra Industrial Estate, PATNA 800013 
Hantex BIdg ( 2nd Floor ). RIy Station Road, 

TRIVANDRUM 695001 

Inspection Office ( With Sale Point ) j 

Institution of Engineers ( India ) Building, 1332 Shivaii Nagar, 5 24 35 
PUNE 411005 



41 24 42 


8 73 28 


f2 63 48 
{2 63 49 


22 48 05 


6 27 16 


5 36 27 
22 10 83 

6 98 32 
4 72 92 
6 23 05 

32 27 



•Sale« Omc« in Bombay Is at Novelty Chambers, Grant Road, 89 65 28 
Bombay 400007 

fSalaa Office Jn Calcutta is at 5 Cbowrlngha^ Approach, P. O. Princep 27 68 00 
Street. Calcutta 700072 

i>rlnt*d at ti»w Jndm Prtntlno PruunH, Khurja. \nd\a 



