Waa Wah IS 16507 : 2017 
Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2022) 


Utada tra fatter ares — 
faforite 


Transportable Gas Cylinders 
Cascade — Specification 


ICS 23,020.30 
© BIS 2017 
ads Aah equ 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
© HAF WH, 9 E ART AM, ae feeeit-110002 
vuuxmsz MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


April 2017 Price Group 5 


Gas Cylinders Sectional Committee, MED 16 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Gas 
Cylinders Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering Division Council. 


This standard specifies the requirements for the design, manufacture, inspection and testing of a transportable 
refillable seamless steel cylinder cascade subjected to the vibration, loads or handling withstanding rough 
handling including being dropped or toppled. 


A cascade is a portable assembly which is designed for being routinely lifted or transported and which 
consists of a frame and two or more cylinders connected to a manifold by cylinder valves or fittings such that 
the cylinders are filled, transported and emptied without disassembly. Unless otherwise stated, individual 
cylinders within cascade should conform to applicable standards for single cylinder. This standard specifies 
the additional requirements that apply when individual cylinders are assembled into a cascade. 


Assistance has been taken from OISD 179 ‘Safety requirements on compression, storage, handling and 
refuelling of natural gas for use in automotive sector’. 


While implementing this standard, the manufacturer and the inspection agency shall ensure compliance with 
statutory regulations. 


The relevant SI units and corresponding conversion factors are given below for guidance: 


Pressure 1Pa (Pascal) = 1 N/m? 
I kgf/mm? = 9.806 65 MPa 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final 
value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance 
with IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 16507 : 2017 


Indian Standard 


TRANSPORTABLE GAS CYLINDERS CASCADE — 
SPECIFICATION 


1 SCOPE 


This standard specifies the requirements for the 
design, manufacture, inspection and testing of a 
transportable refillable seamless steel cylinder 
cascade. It is applicable to cascades containing 
permanent compressed gases and mixtures there of 
excluding toxic gases and acetylene. 


This standard does not apply to cascades in which 
cylinders are manifolded together in a support frame 
which is designed to be an integral part of a railway 
wagon or fixed to the ground as a customer storage 
vessel , for use in extreme environmental or 
operational conditions when additional and 
extraordinary requirements are imposed to maintain 
safety standards, reliability and performance (for 
example off shore cascades are a specific example) 
and cascade for gases dissolved in liquid under 
pressure. 


Some special applications (for example electronics) 
require an alternative design approach. With the 
agreement of the inspection body, the manifold and 
its piping components may be designed and tested 
at a pressure which is appropriate to the service 
conditions. 


Unless otherwise stated, individual cylinders within 
cascade shall have to conform to applicable 
standards for single cylinders. This standard 
specifies the additional requirements that apply when 
individual cylinders are assembled into a cascade. 
Cascades complying with this standard may be used 
for stationery application. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions 
of this standard. At the time of publication, the 
editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of 
the standards indicated below: 


IS No. 
3224 : 2002 


Title 


Valve fittings for compressed gas 
cylinders excluding liquefied 
petroleum gas (LPG) cylinders — 
Specification 


IS No. Title 

4379 : 1981 Identification of contents of 
industrial gas cylinders (first 
revision) 

5334 :2014 Magnetic particle flaw detection of 
welds — Code of practice (third 
revision) 

7241 : 1981 Glossary of terms used in gas 
cylinder technology (first revision) 

7307 (Part1): Approval tests for welding 

1974 procedures: Part 1 Fusion welding 
of steel 

7310(Part 1): Approval tests for welders working 

1974 to approved welding procedures — 
Part 1 Fusion welding of steel 
7743 : 2006 Recommended practice for 


magnetic particle testing and 
inspection of steel forgings (first 
revision) 


IS/ISO11114-1 Transportable gas cylinders — 
Compatibility of cylinder and valve 
materials with gas contents : Part 1 


Metallic materials 


IS/ISO11114-2 Transportable gas cylinders — 
Compatibility of cylinder and valve 
materials with gas contents : Part 2 


Non-metallic materials 


ISO 13585 : 2012 Brazing — Qualification test of 
brazers and brazing operators 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions 
given in IS 7241 and the following shall apply: 


3.1 Authorized Inspection Authority — Competent 
inspection authority mutually agreed by cascade 
manufacturer and buyer for the supervision of 
construction and testing of cascade. 


3.2 Burst Pressure of Cascade Assembly — It is 
the lower of the design minimum burst pressure of 
the cylinder or the design minimum burst pressure 
ofthe manifold assembly. 


3.3 Cascade — A cylinder cascade is a portable 
assembly which is designed for being routinely lifted 
or transported and which consists of a frame and 
two or more cylinders each of capacity up to and 


IS 16507 : 2017 


including 400 litre water capacity and with an 
aggregate capacity of not more than 15 000 litre water 
capacity connected to a manifold by cylinder valves 
or fittings such that the cylinders are filled, 
transported and emptied without disassembly. 


NOTE — Subject to the permissible limits specified by 
the Road Transport Authority for the vehicles load and 
stability considerations under Central Motor Vehicle Act. 


3.4 Cascade Test Pressure — Lower of test 
pressure of the cylinder or test pressure of manifold. 


3.5 Compressed Gas — Compressed gas means 
permanent gas or gas mixture which in a closed 
gas cylinder exercises a pressure either exceeding 
2.5 kgf/cm? absolute (1.5 kgf/cm? gauge) at +15°C or 
a pressure exceeding 3 kgf/cm? absolute (2 kgf/cm? 
gauge) at +50°C or both. 


3.6 Cylinder Fitting — Device with no gas shut-off 
capability which serves as a method for connecting 
a cascade’s manifold to its individual cylinder when 
cylinder valves are not fitted to the cylinders. 


3.7 Cylinder Valve — Valve which is fitted into a 
cylinder and to which a manifold is connected in a 
cascade. 


3.8 Filling Pressure — Pressure to which a cascade 
is filled at the time of filling. 


3.9 Frame — Structural and non-structural members 
of a cascade which combine all other components 
together, whilst providing protection for the 
cascade’s cylinders, valves and manifold and which 
enable the cascade to be transported. 


3.10 Helium Test Gas — Leak testing gas mixture 
containing not less than 2 percent Helium. 


3.11 Main Connection — Means of making a gas 
connection to a cascade. 


3.12 Main Valve — Valve which is fitted to a 
cascade’s manifold and used for the isolation of the 
cascade/individual bank. 


3.13 Manifold — Arrangement of interconnected 
pipes for connecting a cascade’s cylinder valves or 
cylinder fittings to the main valve(s) or main 
connection(s). 


3.14 Manufacturer — Organization responsible for 
the design, manufacturing and testing of cascade. 


3.15 Maximum Gross Weight — Sum of tare weight 
of the cascade and the weight of the maximum 
permissible gas filled. 


3.16 Maximum Permissible Filling/Operating 
Pressure — Maximum pressure experienced by the 
cascade during filling or usage. 


3.17 Proof Test Pressure of Manifold — Hydraulic 
pressure which demonstrates the structural integrity 
of the manifold piping assembly without accessories. 


3.18 Sundry Items — Those parts other than 
cylinders, frame, manifold, cylinder valves, cylinder 
fittings and main connections which make up a 
complete cascade 


NOTE — Sundry items typically include labels, cylinder 
neck rings, data plates, fasteners, clamps, dip tubes, 
pressure gauges, protective caps, etc. 


3.19 Tare Weight — Weight of the cascade when 
empty of gas product. 


3.20 Cylinder Test Pressure (P,) — Test pressure 
means the internal pressure required for the 
hydrostatic test or the hydrostatic stretch test of 
the cylinder. 


3.21 Toxic Gases — Gases which are known to be 
so toxic or corrosive to humans as to pose a hazard 
to health or are presumed to be toxic or corrosive to 
the humans because they have a LC,, value equal to 
or less than 5 000 ml/m? (ppm). 


3.22 Working Pressure — Working pressure for 
permanent gas means the internal pressure of 
compressed gas in the cylinder at a uniform 
temperature of 15?C. 


NOTE — All the pressures referred to in this standard 
are gauge pressures. 


3.23 Bank of Cylinders — It is a sub group of 
cylinders manifolded together and isolated by 
independent main valve. 


3.24 Stability Ratio — It is the ratio of height of 
center of gravity of filled cascade from the ground to 
the distance between the outermost contact points 
of tyres on load carrying axle when the cascade is 
placed on a vehicle. 


3.25 Permanent Gas — Permanent gas means a gas 
whose critical temperature is below -10°C, that is to 
say a gas which cannot be liquefied under any 
pressure at a temperature above -10?C. 


4 DESIGN 
4.1 General 


Unless stated to the contrary, standards applicable 
to individual elements shall apply to elements within 
the cascade. 


All pressurised components shall be designed to 
operate in the temperature range of -20°C to +65°C. 
For use in extreme environment conditions, they shall 
be designed to withstand temperature conditions 
outside this range. 


Cascades where gas is filled by weight shall not 
feature component parts which are demountable 
without the use of tools, with the exception of the 
main valve outlet protection cap. 


Cylinders installed horizontally in a cascade shall be 
separated from another cylinder in the cascade by a 
distance not less than 30 mm. 


4.2 Material 


Materials for cylinders, valves and all parts which 
are in contact with the intended gas shall conform to 
IS/ISO 11114-1 and IS/ISO 11114-2 for compatibility. 
Material not specified in above standards may be 
used with approval from the statuary authority. 


4.3 Frame 


4.3.1 The frame structure shall securely retain all 
the components of the cascade and shall protect 
them from damage which might cause leakage. Such 
damage can be caused by vibration, impact loads or 
handling loads which can be expected in normal 
operation. The method of cylinder restraint shall 
prevent any vertical or horizontal movement or 
rotation of the cylinder. All cylinder displacement 
which would impose undue strain on the manifold 
shall be prevented. While lifting or handling of 
cascade , the structural members of the frame shall 
not show visible bend, buckle or distortion. The total 
assembly shall be capable of withstanding rough 
handling or mechanised handling. 


4.3.1.1 No leakage of gas shall be caused during 
the lifting and handling of the cascade (see 4.3.3). 


4.3.2 While transporting the cascade, the vehicle 
shall be so selected that no part of the cascade 
protrudes outside the allowable limit of vehicle 
dimensions. Where required height barrier shall be 
provided on the cascade frame. 


4.3.3 The frame structure shall include features 
designed for the handling and transportation of the 
cascade. Cascade may be lifted typically by fork-lift, 
lift-jack trolley or overhead crane. If the bundle is 
designed to be lifted by an overhead crane, lifting 
eyes shall be provided on the frame. In case when 
the frame is designed as permanently attached to 
the chasis of road vehicle, it shall be capable of lifting 
by crane without any distortion of the structural 
members and without causing any damage to the 
manifold. 


The lifting eyes shall be designed to withstand a 
design load of 2 x maximum gross weight. Cascade 
with more than one lifting eye shall be designed such 
that a minimum sling leg angle (a) of 45° to the 
horizontal can be achieved during lifting using the 
lifting eyes (see Fig. 1). 


IS 16507 : 2017 


Where four lifting eyes are used their design shall 
be such that they are strong enough to allow the 
cascade to be lifted by only two. 


Where two or four lifting eyes are used, diametrically 
opposite lifting eyes shall be aligned with each other 
to allow for correct lifting using shackle pins. 


Where a cascade is moved by fork-lift truck it shall 
feature two fork apertures on each side it is to be 
lifted from. The fork apertures shall be positioned 
symmetrically about the centre of gravity and their 
size shall be appropriate to the forks which are to be 
used to move the cascade. The fork apertures shall 
be designed such that the cascade cannot accidently 
disengage from the forks. 


4.3.4 Frame structural members in the cascade shall 
be capable to withstand 4g impact (four times gravity) 
from any direction without any distortion. 4g static 
calculation of one complete assembled cascade with 
all cylinders mounted and filled with the gas shall be 
carried out. 


4.3.5 The frame design shall ensure that there are 
no protrusions from the exterior frame structure 
which could cause hazards. 


4.3.6 There shall be no features in which water, 
debris get accumulated to increase the tare weight 
of cascade filled by weight, or to cause corrosion. 


4.3.7 The base of the cascade frame shall not buckle 
during normal operational conditions and shall 
facilitate the drainage of water and debris around 
the base of the cylinders. 


4.3.8 The design shall ensure stability under normal 
operating conditions. Cascade shall not topple over 
when its resting face is inclined by 15° to horizontal 
in any direction. Stability ratio shall not exceed one. 


4.3.9 Ifthe frame design includes any movable doors 
or covers then these shall be capable of being 
secured in position with latches, which shall not be 
capable of being dislodged by operational impact 
loads. 


4.3.10 Access shall be maintained to all valves which 
need to be operated in normal service or in an 
emergency. 


4.3.11 Impact Protection 
There are three types of impact protection: 


a) Rear end protection — An arrangement shall 
be fitted at the rear of the cascade to provide 
adequate protection to the rear pipe work 
and fittings to prevent accidental leakage 
of gas in the event of a rear impact. There 
shall be a clearance of atleast 100 mm 
between the arrangement and the rearmost 


IS 16507 : 2017 


LIFTING EYE 


SLING LEG ANGLE (a) 


GAS CYLINDER 
BUNDLE 


Fic. | MINIMUM SLING LEG ANGLE 


point of the piping, fittings and valves under 
gas pressure during transport. 


b) Side and rollover protection — Manifold 
shall be designed such that they are 
protected from impact in the event of a 
cascade rolling onto its side or upside down. 


c) Conspicuousness — Florescent reflector 
tape paint shall be applied on the cascade 
frame to improve conspicuousness at night 
time. 


4.4 Cylinders 


Cylinders within a cascade shall be approved by the 
statuary authority suitable for the gas service. They 
shall all have the same nominal water capacity, test 
pressure and shall conform to the same Indian 
Standard covering individual cylinders. 


4.5 Cylinder Valve Fittings 


4.5.1 Cylinder valve fittings shall be determined by 
the gas product within the cascade and operational 
requirements. 


4.5.2 When cylinder valves are fitted, their outlet 
connections shall conform to IS 3224 or as approved 
by statutory authority. 


4.5.3 Cylinder valves fittings shall be compatible 
with the neck thread of the cylinder. 


4.6 Manifold 


4.6.1 The manifold shall be designed and 
constructed so as to avoid the risk of damage due to 
thermal expansion and contraction, mechanical shock 
and vibration and compatible with the gas and the 
pressure for which the cascade is intended. 


4.6.2 Where the manifold is made of metal, the 
necessary flexibility shall be achieved by the use of 
bends or coils. Flexible hoses or non-metallic pipe 
work shall only be used as part of the fixed pipe work 
on the cascade after trials have proved their 
acceptability, and the length of such hoses and pipe 
work shall be kept to a minimum. 


4.6.3 The manifold shall be designed to be capable 
of withstand minimum hydraulic pressure 
requirements of the cylinders. 


4.6.4 The maximum stress of the manifold 
arrangement at the 1.5 x working pressure shall not 
exceed 75 percent of the guaranteed yield strength 
of the material. 


4.6.5 For compressed gases, the manifold shall be 
designed in such a way that the burst pressure shall 
be greater than or equal to 2 times the working 
pressure of the cylinders in the cascade. 


4.6.6 No metal parts of the cascade shall bear against 
other metal parts/components in the cascade except 
at cylinder valve/fitting interfaces or at defined 
attachment points to the frame. The securing/gripping 
of the cylinders in position shall be done by using 
suitable spacers. Contact between dissimilar metals 
which could result in damage by galvanic action shall 
be avoided. 


4.6.7 When threaded joints are used, the tubing 
thickness shall be suitably increased to compensate 
for reduced thickness at threaded areas. 


4.6.8 In the case of flammable gases, electrical 
continuity shall be maintained throughout the pipe 
work system and between the pipe work, the elements 
and their supports. An earthing connection shall be 
provided for use during loading and discharging and 
its position shall be clearly indicated and be readily 
accessible. Flexible hoses shall have electrical 
continuity with a resistance not exceeding 10 Q. 


4.6.9 A means of immobilising the cascade vehicle 
whilst it is connected for filling or emptying shall be 
provided. 


4.6.10 Reclosing type Safety Relief Valve (SRV) shall 
be provided at appropriate place in the manifold. The 
SRV should release the pressure 20 percent above 
the cylinder working pressure. The discharge of the 
SRV vent shall be provided at the highest point of 
the cascade and flame arrestors shall also be provided 
in case of flammable gases. Common header shall be 
provided for pressure relief devises (PRD). Vent 
manifolds shall be provided for the cylinder valves 
provided with PRD’s. 


4.6.11 Pressure gauge provided in the manifold shall 
be located at such a place that it is easily readable 
and shall have isolation valve. Pressure range shall 
be at least 1.5 times the cylinder working pressure. 


4.7 Assembled Cascade 


The assembled cascade shall be designed so that it 
withstands the following statically applied loads: 


4.7.1 Frame structural members for individual 
cylinder having more than 250 litre water capacity 
for Jumbo Cylinder Cascade, permissible stress 
calculations shall be based on : 


IS 16507 : 2017 


a) 2 x the maximum gross weight in all 
horizontal directions and vertically 
downwards; and 


b) 1x the maximum gross weight in the vertical 
direction upwards. 


In case when the cascade is permanently attached to 
the road vehicle, the frame design shall include chasis 
member of the road vehicle for structural calculations. 
This shall be checked by carrying out structural 
analysis. 


4.7.2 Frame structural members for individual 
cylinder up to 250 litre in the cascade shall be capable 
of withstanding 4g impact (four times gravity) from 
any direction without any distortion. 


In case, when the cascade is permanently attached 
to the road vehicle, the frame design shall include 
chasis member of the road vehicle for structural 
calculations 


This shall be checked by carrying out structural 
calculations as mentioned in 4.3.4 and submission 
of the same to inspection authority. 


5 MANUFACTURING 


Cascade shall be manufactured in accordance with 
the design criteria listed in 4. Where metal joints are 
made the following conditions shall be observed: 


a) Welding procedure in accordance with 


IS 7307 (Part 1). 

b) Approved welders in accordance with 
IS 7310 (Part 1). 

c) Approved brazers in accordance with 
ISO 13585. 


6 IDENTIFICATION 
6.1 Colour Coding 


The individual cylinder in the cascade shall be 
painted as per IS 4379 according to gas application. 
The colour of a cascade frame shall carry no 
significance with respect to the gas contained in the 
cascade cylinders. 


6.2 Cascade Identification for Filling 
6.2.1 General 


In addition to the information on individual cylinders 
in accordance with relevant standard, the information 
specified in 6.2.2 shall be clearly identified on a 
corrosion resistant plate permanently fixed on the 
outside of the cascade. The characters in marking 
shall be at least 6 mm in height. 


6.2.2 Cascade Marking 


Each cascade shall be permanently stamped with the 


IS 16507 : 2017 


following: 


a) Identification of the cascade manufacturer, 
b) Cascade owner's name, 


c) Serial number assigned by the cascade 
manufacturer, 


d) In addition, each frame shall include a 
unique identification number which shall be 
permanently marked. This number may be 
independent from the cascade serial number, 


e) Cylinder working pressure, in kgf/cm? or Bar, 

f) Cylinder test pressure in kgf/cm?or Bar, 

g) Cylinder water capacity, in litre, 

h) Cascade Total water capacity, in litre, 

p) Cylinder serial numbers in the cascade, 

k) Cascade maximum gross weight with gas, in 
kg, 

m) Gasapplication, 

n) Number of this Indian Standard, 

p) Inspector's official mark, 


q) Date of inspection, such as 03/2012 for 
March 2012, and 


r) Next due date for cylinders restesting. 
6.2.3 BIS CERTIFICATION MARKING 


Each cascade may also be marked with the Standard 
Mark. 


6.2.3.1 The use of the Standard Mark is governed 
by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards 
Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made 
thereunder. The details of conditions under which a 
license for the use of the Standard Mark may be 
granted to the manufacturers or the producers may 
be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards. 


6.3 Other Useful Information 


The following information is useful in practice and 
may be marked on the cascade in addition to the 
information given in 6.2: 


a) Maximum gross weight of the cascade, in 
kilograms, which should be visible from all 
directions from which lifting can be 
performed. The minimum height of the 
lettering shall be 30 mm. 


b) Other critical operating instructions, for 
example closure of individual cylinder 
valves in transit when this is required. 


c) Name or identification of the owner. 
7 TESTING AND INSPECTION 


7.1 Test and Inspection at Time of Manufacture 


7.1.1 Frame 


One frame of a design shall be proof load tested to 2 
x the maximum gross weight as follows: 


a) Lifting eyes shall be tested for crack defects 
in accordance with IS 7743 prior to coating 
ofthe frame; 


b) All primary structural welded joints shall be 
subjected to crack detection in accordance 
with IS 5334, prior to coating of the frame; 
and 


c) The frame shall be loaded with the requisite 
weight in the form of empty cylinders or any 
other steel/concrete/water containers and 
then lifted with the crane. 


The frame shall be visually inspected to ensure that 
there is no deviation from the design drawings and 
that there 1s full and free movement of panels and 
covers, where applicable. 


Ifthe tested frame fails one ofthe above tests, all the 
frames of the corresponding lot shall be tested. All 
defective frames shall be either scrapped or repaired 
and then subjected to test again. During 
manufacture, all frames shall be tested as per (a) and 


(b). 
7.1.2 Manifold 


Each manifold shall conform to 4.6. The manifold 
shall be subjected to a hydraulic proof test pressure 
with a pressure specified in 4.6.3. 


All manifolds that fail this test shall be either 
scrapped or repaired and then tested again. 


NOTE — In case of manifold with compression fittings, 
this test need not be performed. 


7.1.3 Cascade 
7.1.3.1 General 


Leak testing shall be performed using Nitrogen, 
compressed air or gas mixture containing more than 
2 percent of helium. 


7.1.3.2 Assembly leak test 


Under the responsibility of the cascade manufacturer, 
the completed cascade shall be leak tested at a 
pressure 1.1 times the working pressure to check the 
integrity of all joints and gas connections. 


7.1.3.3 First fill leak test 


The completed cascade shall be tested for leaks with 
the gas for which the cascade is manufactured, at 
the filling pressure, using appropriate methods and 
acceptance criteria as agreed to between the cascade 
manufacturer and the user. This operation can be 


performed under the supervision of the cascade 
manufacturer or by the filling centre during the first 
fill after assembly as a part of the ‘inspection at time 
of filling’. 
NOTE — Depending on the gas type, more 
sophisticated leak test methods might be suitable. 


7.2 Periodic Testing 


7.2.1 Owner ofthe cascade shall ensure that cascade 
cylinders for which prescribed periodic re-test has 
become due shall be retested. 


7.2.2 At the time of retest of cylinders, cascade 
frame, manifolding etc. shall also be subjected to test 
and inspection. Defective parts shall be replaced or 
repaired. 


8 DOCUMENTATION 


8.1 Records of the components used to produce a 
cascade and where the cascade was assembled and 
tested shall be maintained for every new cascade. 
The record shall be maintained by both the cascade 
manufacturer and the owner of the cascade. The 
records shall contain the following information: 


a) Reference to this standard; 


IS 16507 : 2017 


b) Unique serial number of the cascade; 
c) Unique serial number of the frame; 
d) Component used for making the manifold; 


e) Gas type(s) for which the cascade is 
intended; 


f Cascade manifold test pressure (in 
accordance with the test pressure of the 
cylinders); 


g) Cylinder serial numbers and their loading 
positions in the cascade 
frame; 


h) Name and address of the cascade 
manufacturer; 


j) Date of manufacture of the cascade (in the 
format MM / YYYY); and 


k) Cylinders retest date 


8.2 Original test records and/or certificates of 
individual components or batches of components 
shall be maintained by the cascade manufacturer 
such that they can be cross-referenced to individual 
cascade records. 


8.3 All records shall be maintained at least as long as 
the cascade and / or components exist. 


IS 16507 : 2017 


ANNEXA 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Gas Cylinders Sectional Committee, MED 16 


Organization 


Petroleum and Explosive Safety Organization, Nagpur 

All India Industrial Gases Manufacturers Association, 
New Delhi 

Ashok Leyland Limited, Chennai 

Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 

Bharat Pumps and Compressors Ltd, Allahabad 

BOC India Ltd, Kolkata 

Everest Kanto Cylinder Ltd, Mumbai 

GSPC Gas Company Ltd, Gandhinagar 

Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 

Indian Oil Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 

Indraprastha Gas Limited, Delhi 

International Industrial Gases Ltd, Kolkata 

Kabsons Gas Equipments Ltd, Hyderabad 


Kosan Industries Ltd, Mumbai/Surat 


LPG Equipment Research Centre, Bangalore 


Luxfer Uttam India Pvt Ltd, Faridabad 


Mahanagar Gas Limited, Mumbai 


Maruti Koatsu Cylinders Ltd, Mumbai 


Ministry of Defence (DGQA), Pune 


Research & Development Estt (Engineers), Pune 


Sakha Engineers Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 
SICGIL India Ltd, Chennai 


Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers (SIAM), 
New Delhi 


Steel Authority of India Ltd, Ranchi 


Supreme Cylinders Ltd, Delhi 
Tata Motors Ltd, Pune 


Representative(s) 


Suri T. R. Thomas (Chairman) 
Suri ASHENDRA SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI SAKET TIKU 
SHRIMATI VEENA PETER (Alternate) 


Suri M. Ravi 
SHRI S. ARUN (Alternate) 


SHRI VISHNU D. SONAWANE 
Suri A. PRABHAKAR (Alternate) 


Suri MOHAN Kumar 
Suri P. G. Cuoupuury (Alternate) 


SHRI RAMANA VUTUKURU 
Suri PRADEEP (Alternate) 


Suri P. M. SAMVATSAR 
Suri A. K. KHAMKAR (Alternate I) 
Suri H. D. Kuarni (Alternate IT) 


SHRI K. S. R. PRASAD 


Sun S. NANDI 
Suri P. N. Kantu (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHUTOSH TIWARI 
SHRI S. M. Rampuat (Alternate) 


SHRI PRAVEEN K. PANDEY 
Suri ALOK SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI DEVENDRA K. GARG 
SHRI NikuiLEsh K. GarG (Alternate) 


SHRI SATISH KABRA 
SHRI Kunar Kaerra (Alternate) 


Suni S. K. Dey 
Suri S. B. Bomat (Alternate) 


SHRI P. KRISHNAN KUTTY 
Dr A. Krishna (Alternate) 
SHRI KARAN BHATIA 


SHRI SANDEEP BHASIN (Alternate) 


SHRIS. MURALI 
Suri ARuN Nayak (Alternate) 


Suri Nitin J. THAKKAR 
Suri A. S. Saran (Alternate) 


Suri J. P. Tiwari, JASG 
Suri K. SUDHAKARAN (Alternate) 


Suri P. K. CHATTOPADHYAY 
Suri A. Basu (Alternate) 


SHRI AMARJIT S. KOHLI 


SHRI FAROOQUE DADABHOY 
Suri R. PADMANABAN (Alternate) 


SHRIK. K. Gandhi 
Suri AMIT Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI DEBASHIS KARMAKAR 
Dr B. K. Jua (Alternate) 


SHRI M. L. FATHEPURIA 


Suri P. K. BANERJEE 
SHRI AMUL VERMA (Alternate) 


Organization 


Tekno Valves, Kolkata 


The Automotive Research Association of India, Pune 


Trans Valves (India) Pvt Ltd, Hyderabad 


Vanaz Engineers Ltd, Pune 


BIS Directorate General 


Member Secretary 


SHRI CHANDAN GUPTA 


IS 16507 : 2017 


Representative(s) 
Suni Y. K. BEHANI 
Suri R. Benan! (Alternate) 


Dn S. S. THIPSE 
Sun S. D. RAIRIKAR (Alternate) 


Sun A. K. Jain 
Suri P. K. Martuor (Alternate) 


Suri K. P. VELAYUDHAN 
Sarı S. J. Vispute (Alternate) 


Suri T. V. Singh, Scientist ‘F’ and Head (MED) 
[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Scientist ‘B’ (MED), BIS 


Dissolved Acetylene Cylinders, Generators, Acetylene Pipe Lines and High Pressure 
Gas Cylinders Subcommittee, MED 16:3 


Organization 
BOC India Limited, Kolkata 
Al-Can Exports Private Limited, Distt Thane 


All India Industrial Gases Manufacturers Association, 
New Delhi 
Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 


Bharat Pumps and Compressors Limited, Allahabad 


Everest Kanto Cylinder Limited, Mumbai 


Hindalo Industries Limited, Mumbai 


Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


Indian Oil Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 


Indraprastha Gas Limited, New Delhi 


International Industrial Gases Limited, Howrah 


Jai Maruti Gas Cylinders Gases Limited, Gwalior 


KVK Corporation, Mumbai 


Maruti Koatsu Cylinders Limited, Mumbai 


Ministry of Defence (DGQA), Pune 


Petroleum and Explosive Safety Organization, Nagpur 


Rama Cylinders Private Limited, Mumbai 


Sahuwala High Pressure Cylinder (P) Limited, 


SICGIL India Limited, Chennai 


Representative(s) 
SHRI VuTukuru RAMANA (Convener) 


Suri Vuay K. PARIKH 
Suri D. C. Dave (Alternate) 


SHRI SAKET TIKU 
SHRIMATI VEENA PETER (Alternate) 


SHRI VisuNU D. SONAWANE 
Suri A. PRABHAKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI MOHAN KUMAR 
Suri P. G. Cuoupuunv (Alternate) 


Suri P. M. SAMVATSAR 
Suri A. G. KHAMKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI SUBHANKAR GUPTA 
Suri S. Devposs (Alternate) 


SHRI M. SELVAKUMAR 
SHRI ALOK Kumar Gupta (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHUTOSH TIWARI 
Suri S. M. RAMBHAL (Alternate) 


SHRI PRAVEEN K. PANDEY 
Suri UrwAL BHANDARI (Alternate) 


Suri D. K. GARG 
Suri N. K. GarG (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHOK K. NIGAM 

Suri Manu Kumar NIGAM (Alternate) 
SHRI R. CHANDGOTHIA 

Suri V. CHANDGOTHIA (Alternate) 


Suri Nitin J. THAKKAR 
Suri A. S. Saran (Alternate) 


SHRI J. P. TIWARI 
SHRI K. SUDHAKARAN (Alternate) 


Suri T. R. THOMAS 

SHRI ASHENDRA SINGH (Alternate) 
SHRI Sanzay R. MANDE 

Suri PRAMOD W SANGWAI (Alternate) 


Suri T. SUBRAMANIAN Visakhapatnam 
Suri Evny MURALIDHAR (Alternate) 


SHRI S MARAGATHVEL 
Suri Nauzer. F DApABHOY (Alternate) 


IS 16507 : 2017 


Organization Representative(s) 
Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers (ARATI), Suri K. K. GANDHI 
New Delhi SHRI PANKAJ KUMAR Karn (Alternate) 
Tata Motors Limited, Pune SHRI P. K. BANERJEE 


SHRI AMUL VERMA (Alternate) 


Tekno Valves, Kolkata SHRI Y. K. BEHANI 
Suri R. Bruant (Alternate) 


The Automotive Research Association of India, Pune Suri M. K. CHOUDHARI 
Dn S. S. Turse (Alternate) 


10 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in course of implementing the standard, 
of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be 
addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 16 (1201). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amendment No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 10002 
Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg ee 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14, C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi ped 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 23378626,23379120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 e 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 pen 1216,2254 1442 
22542519,22542315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


