NAT HA IS 11060 : 2020 
Indian Standard 


tag Afa MEA ch AT d 
«eft Wet sra ch fero firma 


( Teel FRAT ) 


Specification for Moulded 
Rubberized Coir Cushioning 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 55.040; 59.060.10; 59.080.40 


© BIS 2020 


anda AM St 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 serere TH HM, 4 freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


March 2020 Price Group 6 


Coir and Coir Products Sectional Committee, TXD 25 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Coir and Coir Products Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textile Division Council. 


This standard was first published in 1984. Further it has now been revised to incorporate the additional 
requirements for Ecomark (optional). 


This standard covers requirements for moulded rubberized coir cushions. Requirements for rubberized coir 
sheets for cushioning (mattresses) have been separately covered in IS 8391. 


In the formulation of this specification, assistance has been derived from ‘IND/TC/2449 Specification for 
rubberized coir sheet’, issued by the Chief Inspectorate of Textiles and Clothing, Ministry of Defence, Government 
of India. 


The Ministry of Environment and Forests, Government of India has instituted a scheme for labelling 
environment friendly products known as ‘Ecoamrk scheme’. This standard is based on the criteria as notified by 
the Government of India vide Gazette Notification No. 893(E), dated 18 September 2018 for labelling Coir and 
Coir products as environment friendly. 


The Ecomark scheme is being operated by the Bureau of Indian Standards. However, to obtain the licence to 
use the Ecomark on a product, it is also essential to obtain BIS licence to use the Standard Mark as per the 
relevant Indian Standard for that product. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex K. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2: 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised). The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 11060 : 2020 


Indian Standard 


SPCIFICATION FOR MOULDED RUBBERIZED 
COIR CUSHIONING 


( First Revision ) 


1SCOPE 


1.1 This standard prescribes requirements and methods 
of test for resilient moulded rubberized coir cushioning 
for use as seats, backrests and other cushionings. 


1.2 It does not cover rubberized coir sheets which 
is covered in IS 8391 or other articles made from 
rubberized coir, such as, fabricated articles, rubberized 
coir sheets enclosing springs, industrial and packing 
materials. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A contain provisions 
which through reference in this text, constitute 
provision of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards. 


3 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 


3.1 Moulded Rubberized Coir — A resilient product 
of porous structure containing curled coir fibre coated 
and bonded with natural rubber, synthetic rubber or a 
combination of both containing suitable ingredients 
and formed to the desired size and shape in moulds and 
vulcanized for the final set. 


3.2 Indentation Hardness Index — The indentation 
is the load in kg required to produce an indentation 
equivalent to 40 percent of the original thickness of 
the sample measured by the method described in 
Annex E. 


3.3 Lot — All rubberized coir products of the same size 
and shape, manufactured under similar conditions 
shall constitute a lot. 


3.4 Sample — That part of the lot which is drawn to 
represent the lot. 


3.5Test Specimen — A piece taken from the sample 
for use in a physical or chemical test. 


4 MATERIAL 


4.1 Moulded rubberized coir products shall be 
manufactured using coir fibre curled to effectively 
utilize the resiliency of the fibre material, the fibres 
being bonded to each other by vulcanized rubber 
utilizing rubber latex  contemning vulcanizing 
ingredients and suitable antioxidants of such nature 
and quality that the finished product complies with the 
requirements of this specification. 


4.2 Reinforcement of Edges — The moulded 
rubberized coir cushions shall be reinforced at the 
edges with strips of latex coated curled coir fleeces up 
to 25 mm width at the edges and the apparent density 
at the edges as determined by the method described 
in Annex C shall not exceed 120 g/dm? for seats and 
100 g/dm’ for backrests. 


5 MANUFACTURE, WORKMANSHIP AND 
FINISH 


5.1 Moulded rubberized coir products shall be of 
resilient nature and porous structure and shall have 
reinforced edges up to 25 mm width at the edges 
around. The surface of the cushions shall be provided 
with calendared surface with higher rubber latex 
content, at least about 2 mm deep on all sides other 
than bottom and shall present uniform appearance 
throughout and shall not contain loose fibres or voids. 
Any special characteristic other than those prescribed 
in the specification, which may be desired for specific 
application, shall be as agreed to between the purchaser 
and the supplier. 


5.2 The moulded rubberized coir products shall present 
uniform appearance and shall not contain loose fibres 
or voids, 


5.3 Due to manufacturing conditions the material may 
have to be altered or repaired. The altered material shall 
be acceptable provided the material used in such repairs 
or alteration is of the same composition and quality as 
the original product and provided such alterations do 
not affect the requirements given in the specification. 


5.4 Odour 


The odour of moulded rubberized coir shall be as mild 
as possible and shall not be objectionable. 


IS 11060 : 2020 


6 SHAPE AND DIMENSIONS 


6.1 Moulded rubberized coir products may be supplied 
in any size and shape. 


6.2 The dimensions of moulded rubberized coir 
products when tested according to the method 
prescribed in Annex D shall be as specified by the 
purchaser subject to tolerance given below: 


Length or width Permissible Tolerance 
mm 
Up to 1 m +5 
1to1.5m +7 
Over 1.5m +9 
Thickness 
Thickness up to 12 mm £3 
Over 12 mm up to 38 mm +6 
-3 
Over 38 mm +12 
-5 


7 PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS 


7.1 Standard Conditions 


The sample selected and prepared for test as in 
Annex B shall be conditioned for a minimum period of 
24 h at 27 + 2°C and 65 5 percent relative humidity 
(see IS 196) prior to testing and testing shall be in the 
same atmosphere, when the testing cannot be carried 
out in the same atmosphere, then the testing shall be 
commenced within 2 min of withdrawal of specimen 
from the conditioning atmosphere. 


7.2 Indentation Hardness 


When tested according to the method given in 
Annex E, moulded rubberized coir products shall 
have the indentation hardness as given below unless 
otherwise agreed to between the supplier and the 
purchaser. 


Indentation Hardness Index 


Seat cushions of 50 mm 
thickness and above 10 


+ 20 percent 
Backrests of 50 mm 
thickness and above 8 


7.3 Apparent Density 


7.3.1 The apparent density of the moulded rubberized 
coir seat cushions and backrests below 50 mm thickness 
shall be as follows when tested according to Annex C: 


Apparent Density, g/dm? 


Seat cushions 100 


+ 15 percent 
Backrests 90 


7.3.2 The apparent density of the moulded rubberized 
coir seat cushions and backrests of 50 mm thickness 
and above shall be as follows when tested according 
to Annex C: 


Apparent Density, g/dm? 
Max 


Seat cushions 100 


Backrests 80 


7.3.3 The apparent density of the material at the edges 
of the cushions up to 25 mm portion from the edges 
shall not exceed 120 g/dm? for scats and 100 g/dm? for 
backrests. 


NOTE — For mouldings of irregular shape the mass per piece 
shall be as prescribed by the buyer. 


7.4 Resistance to Ageing 


When tested according to the method prescribed in 
Annex F, the indentation hardness of sample after 
ageing shall not vary by more than + 20 percent of the 
value obtained with unaged sample. 


7.5 Resistance to Flexing 


When tested according to the method given in Annex G, 
the indentation hardness of the test specimen shall not 
vary by more than + 25 percent. This shall be calculated 
on the resultant thickness. 


7.6 Compression Set 


The compression set of the sample determined by 
the method prescribed in Annex H, shall not exceed 
25 percent. When tested under normal atmospheric 
conditions the compression set shall not exceed 
15 percent after 3 h of recovery. 


7.7 pH Value 


pH value of aqueous extract of the material when 
determined by the method prescribed in Annex J, shall 
be within 5 to 8.5. 


7.8 Chloride Content 


The chloride content of the material calculated as 
chlorine when determined by the method prescribed in 
Annex J, shall not exceed 0.3 percent by mass. 


7.9 Sulphate Content 


The sulphate content of the aqueous extract of the 
material prepared as in J-2 and tested by the method 
prescribed in IS 2317 shall not exceed 0.2 percent by 
mass. 


8 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS 
ECOMARK (OPTIONAL) 


FOR 


8.1 The product(s) shall meet the requirement specified 
in this Indian Standard. 


8.2 The manufacturer shall produce the consentclearance 
as per the provisions of Water (Prevention and Control 
of Pollution) Act, 1974 and Air (Prevention and Control 
of Pollution) Act, 1981 and the authorization(s), if 
required under the rules notified under the Environment 
(Protection) Act, 1986 and the rules made there under 
while applying for the Ecomarkas per Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act, 2016. 


8.3 The product(s) or product packaging(s) may display 
in brief the criteria based on which the product(s) has/ 
have been labeled environment friendly. 


8.4 The material used for product packaging(s) shall be 
recyclable, reusable or biodegradable. 


8.5 The product shall meet the specific requirements as 
given in Table 1.’ 


Table 1 Specific Requirements for Ecomark 
(Optional) 


( Clause 8.5 ) 


SI No. Parameter Requirement Method of Test 
a) 2) (3) (4) 
i) Residual pesticides 1.0 IS 15651 

(Sum parameter) 
(ppm) (Max) 
ii) pH of aqueous 6-7 IS 8391 (Part 1) 
extract 
9 MARKING 


9.1 Moulded rubberized coir products shall be legibly 
and indelibly marked or a label giving the following 
particulars shall be attached to it: 


a) Grade; 
b) Dimensions; 


c) Manufacturer's name, initials, trade-mark or any 
other identification mark; and 


d) Criteria for which rubberized coir sheets has been 
labeled as Ecomark. 
9.2 BIS Certification Marking 


The product(s) conforming to the requirements of 
this standard may be certified as per the conformity 


IS 11060 : 2020 


assessment schemes under the provisions of the Bureau 
of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and the Rules and 
Regulations framed thereunder, and the products may 
be marked with the Standard Mark. 


10 PACKING 


The moulded rubberized coir products shall be packed 
as agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier. 


11 INSTRUCTIONS FOR STORAGE 


Moulded rubberized coir products shall be kept in well 
ventilated store in an atmosphere free from combustion 
from any heating appliance and solvent vapours out of 
contact with damp surface. Under no circumstances 
shall the product be stored in direct from sunlight 
or exposed to ultraviolet light. When products are 
stacked in stores, care shall be taken to avoid undue 
compression or distortion. 


12 SAMPLING AND 
CONFORMITY 


CRITERIA FOR 


12.1 Unless otherwise agreed to between the buyer 
and the seller, the number of rubberized coir cushions 
selected from a lot shall be according to column 1 
and 2 of Table 2. The cushions shall be selected 
at random and in order to ensure the randomness 
of selection, methods given in IS 4905 shall be 
followed. 


Table 2 Sample Size 


Lot Size No.of Cushionsto be Sub-Sample Sizes 
Selected 
a) (2) (3) 
Up to 100 5 1 
101 to 300 8 2 
301 to 500 13 2 
500 and above 20 3 


12.2 The cushions selected according to 12.1 shall be 
inspected for dimensions that is, length, width and 
thickness. The lot shall be considered conforming to 
the requirements of the dimensions if all the cushions 
satisfy the relevant requirements. 


12.3 From the lots found satisfactory for dimensions, 
the number of cushions to be taken for physical and 
chemical tests shall be according to column 3 of Table 
2. One test specimen shall be prepared for testing 
of each of the characteristics. In case the size of the 
cushion is not adequate for drawing the test specimen, 
additional cushions may be drawn. 


12.4 The lot shall be considered conforming to the 
requirement of the standard if all the test specimens 
meet the relevant requirements. 


IS 11060 : 2020 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 2 ) 


LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 


IS No. Title IS No. Title 

196 : 1966 Atmospheric conditions for 1070:1992 ^ Reagent grade water — 
testing Specification (third revision) 

2317 : 1975 Method for gravimetric 15651 : 2006 Textiles = Requirements for 
determination of sulphates (first environmental labelling — 
revision) Specification 

4905 : 2015 Random sampling and 8391 (Part 1) : Rubberized coir sheets for 
randomization procedures (first 2018 cushioning — Specification: Part 1 
revision ) Curled (second revision) 

ANNEX B 


( Clause 7.1 ) 


METHOD OF PREPARATION OF THE TEST SAMPLE 


B-1 The specimen shall be cut to size 100 x 100 mm 
as far as possible from the center of the sampling 
piece leaving a minimum of 50 mm width all around. 
For determination of apparent density at the edge, the 
test specimen shall be 100 mm long and 25 mm wide 
along the edges of the sample leaving 50 mm from the 
corners. Wherever practicable apparent density shall be 
determined on the whole sample. 


B-2 In case of oversize samples which are not 
amenable for being accommodated in the conditioning 
chamber, suitable portion of the samples large enough 
to be contained in the chamber and adequate to reflect 


the characteristics of the sample may be cut and 
conditioned. 


B-3 When differences due to the difficulty in obtaining 
suitable test pieces from the finished product arise, 
the manufacturer and the purchaser may agree on 
acceptable deviations. 


B-4 Test shall be carried out not before 48 h after 
vulcanization of the sample. The samples and test 
pieces shall be protected from light as completely as 
possible and from any stress or strain whenever they 
are not actually in the process of being tested. 


ANNEX C 
( Clauses 4.2, 7.3.1 and 7.3.2 ) 


METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF APPARENT DENSITY 


C-1 METHOD 


C-1.1 Determine the length, width and thickness of the 
test sample as described in Annex D. 


C-1.2 Weigh the test sample correct to 0.1 g. 


C-1.3 Determine the density of the specimen by 
dividing the mass in grammes by the volume in cubic 
decimetre. 


C-1.4 In the case of mouldings of irregular shape 
that are not amenable to measurement of volume the 


apparent density shall be determined on the mass and 
volume of a test specimen of appropriate size cut out 
from suitable location of the sample. 


C-1.5 To determine the apparent density at the edges, 
the test specimen shall be 100 mm long and 25 mm 
wide along the edges; the length, width and thickness 
being determined to the nearest millimetre. Weigh the 
test specimen correct to 0.1 g and determine the density 
by dividing the mass in grams by volume in cubic 
decimetre. 


IS 11060 : 2020 


ANNEX D 
( Clause 6.2 ) 


METHOD OF TEST FOR MEASUREMENT OF DIMENSIONS 


D-1 DETERMINATION OF LENGTH AND 
WIDTH 


Measure the length and width of the sample using a 
steel rule nearest to 1 mm, ensuring the measurement 
along the line perpendicular to opposing faces of the 
sample. 


D-2 DETERMINATLON OF THICKNESS 


D-2.1 A test specimen 100 x 100 mm cut out from the 
sample leaving a minimum width to 50 mm all round 


shall be placed between two larger horizontal plates 
suitably loaded so as to obtain the original thickness 
of the moulded cushioning. The distance between the 
plates is determined at about the middle of each side 
correct to the nearest millimeter and the average of four 
readings taken as the thickness of the sample. 


D-2.2 The thickness shall be measured with reference 
to the order and or the drawing accompanying the 
order. In the absence of the order and or the drawing 
accompanying the order the thickness shall be measured 
with reference to the declaration by the manufacturers. 


ANNEX E 
( Clauses 3.2 and 7.2 ) 


METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF INDENTATION HARDNESS 


E-1 SAMPLE 


E-1.1 Cut out a test specimen measuring 100 x 100 mm 
leaving a apace of 25 mm from the edges of the whole 
piece, from the portion where the original thickness 
was measured as per D-2.2. 


E-1.2 Sample shall not be tested less than 48 h after 
having been vulcanized. They shall be stored for 
24 h immediately before testing, at a temperature of 
27 + 2°C and 65 + 5 percent relative humidity. The test 
shall also be conducted under similar conditions. 


E-2 APPARATUS 


E-2.1 The testing apparatus shall be capable of applying 
an indentor in such a way that the load applied on the 
sample shall be at the rate of 0.5 kgf/min and shall have 
a dial scale platform balance of suitable capacity for 
measuring the load required to produce the specified 
indentation. The sample shall be placed on the smooth 
flat horizontal surface of the platform of the dial scale 
balance, the surface of the platform being larger than 
the size of the sample. 


E-2.2 The essential parts of the testing apparatus 
(see Fig. 1) are an adjustable indentor of the dimension 
specified in E-2.2.1, which can be moved vertically up 
or down by a threaded shaft working through a sleeve 
of same pitch and dimension, operated by a hand wheel. 
The sleeve is fitted to a framework which rests on the 
horizontal surface of a table without having contact 


with the platform of a dial scale balance of 20 kg 
capacity graduated in 50 g sub-division. The thickness 
of the sample can be measured by means of a pointer 
mounted on the indentor 


With suitable guides and sliding in front of a vertical 
scale graduated in millimeters. The pointer is so 
adjusted that when the indentor touches platform of the 
balance, the reading of the pointer on the scale is zero. 


E-2.2.1 Indentor 


A 105 x 105 mm mild steel plate of 3 mm thickness 
shall constitute the indentor, fitted to the threaded 
shaft by a ball and socket joint, so that the surface of 
the indentor can adjust itself to the contour of the test 
specimen. 


E-3 TEST PROCEDURE 


The test specimen shall be of size 100 x 100 mm cut 
out from the portion where the original thickness was 
determined. Raise the indentor to a height greater than 
the thickness of the sample and place the sample over 
the platform of the balance below the indentor. Lower 
the indentor by rotating the handle so as to press the 
sample to its original thickness as determined in D-2.1 
and note the load as W. Gradually lower the indentor to 
apply a load at the rate of 0’5 kgf/min until the sample is 
pressed to 60 percent of its original thickness. The load 
recorded is to be noted as W,. The difference between 
W, and W, shall be taken as indentation hardness index 
of the specimen. 


IS 11060 : 2020 


POINTER 


VERTICAL 
SCALE 


DIAL SCALE 
BALANCE 


HAND WHEEL 


GUIDE 


FRAME WORK 


INDENTOR 


PLATFORM 


TABLE 


Fic. 1 APPARATUS FOR INDENTATION TEST 


ANNEX F 
( Clause 7.4 ) 


METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF RESISTANCE TO AGEING 


F-1 GENERAL 


F-1.1 The ageing test consists in subjecting samples to 
controlled deterioration by air at elevated temperature 
and atmospheric pressure after which the physical 
properties are measured and compared with those of 
unaged samples. The deterioration is measured by the 
observed change in the physical properties concerned 


in the service application of the article as determined 
by visual examination. 


F-1.2 The sample used in any of the ageing test 
shall be that required for the particular determination 
which is to be employed for measuring the effect of 
ageing exposure. Only samples having approximately 
the same dimensions shall be compared with each other. 


F-2 PROCEDURE 


F-2.1 Arrange for an air oven of such size that the total 
volume of test pieces does not exceed 10 percent of the 
free space in the oven. Make provision for suspending 
samples so that they are not within 12 mm of each 
other or the oven sides. Control the temperature of the 
oven thermostatically so that the test pieces are kept 
at 70 + 2°C. Place thermometer near the centre of the 
oven to record the actual ageing temperature. 


IS 11060 : 2020 


F-2.2 Adjust the oven to 70 + 2°C. Place the test pieces 
in the oven adjusted as indicated in F-2.1. Arrange the 
test pieces so that they are stationary, free from strain, 
freely exposed to air from all sides and not exposed 
to light. Continue the ageing for 48 h. Test the unaged 
test piece within the same 24 h period as that in which 
ageing commences. At the completion of the ageing 
period, remove the test pieces from the oven and 
place on a flat surface to cool at room temperature. 
Allow them to cool for not less than 24 h. Measure the 
indentation hardness of the aged sample as in Annex E. 


ANNEX G 
( ClauseT.5 ) 


METHOD FOR DETERMINATIONOF RESISTANCE TO FLEXING 


G-1 METHOD 


The method involves submitting a sample to continued 
flexing with an indentor for 250 000 cycles at the rate of 
4 cycles per second and measuring the loss in hardness. 


G-2 SAMPLE 


G-2.1 Cut out a test specimen measuring 100 x 100 
mm, leaving 25 mm from the edges of the whole piece 
from a region where the original thickness was 
determined. 


G-2.2 Sample shall not be tested less than 48 h after 
having been vulcanized. They shall be stored for at 
least 24 h immediately before testing, at a temperature 
of 27 + 2?C and 65 + 5 percent relative humidity. The 
test shall also be conducted under similar conditions. 


G-3 APPARATUS 


G-3.1 The essential part of one apparatus (see Fig. 2) 
which has been found suitable, consists of an indentor 
of dimensions specified in F-3.2, connected through a 
threaded adapter and held by a locking nut to a pushrod 
This push rod is constrained to move vertically by fixed 
sleeves and is driven vertically by a motor which rotates 
a crank disc. The crank disc and push rod being joined 
by a connecting rod. This connecting rod is adjustably 
mounted in a radial slit in the crank disc, the length 
of the strokes therefore, being adjustable. The motor 
is mounted upon a steel beam above the table upon 
which the specimen to be tested is placed. A square 


frame made of mild steel angles with a clear internal 
dimension of 107 x 107 mm is positioned on the table 
just below the indentor to prevent lateral movement 
of the specimen in the course of its repeated flexing 
by the indentor. The fixtures are adjusted for effecting 
4 flexes/s. A revolution counter is attached to the 
machine to record the number of flexes for the 
specimen. 


G-3.2 A 105 x 105 mm mild steel plate of 3 mm 
thickness shall constitute the indentor. 


G-4 PROCEDURE 


Measure the thickness of the sample as described 
in D-2. Determine the hardness index as given in 
Annex E. Adjust the stroke of the crank shaft for 
a depression of the indentor by a distance equal to 
40 percent of the original thickness of the sample. This 
is done by adjusting the position of the connecting rod 
in the crank disc. Raise the indentor to the topmost 
position of the stroke and place the test specimen in the 
mild steel angle box below the indentor. Place wooden 
blocks of suitable thickness below the specimen to 
ensure that the top surface of the specimen is in contact 
with the bottom side of the indentor when the indentor 
is at the topmost position of the stroke. Subject the 
specimen to flexing at a rate of 4 flexes per second. After 
flexing 250 000 cycles, allow the sample to remain for 
30 min. Thereafter, determine the indentation hardness 
by test described in Annex E. This variation in the 
indentation hardness 1s calculated as percentage of the 
initial hardness index. 


IS 11060 : 2020 


ine vOLUTION COUNTER 
A 


CRANK DISC 


Fic. 1 APPARATUS FOR FLEXING TEST 


ANNEX H 
( Clause 7.6 ) 


METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF COMPRESSION SET 


H-1 METHOD 


H-1.1 The compression set under constant deflection 
is the residual strain in a test piece after it has been 
strained under compression to a given extent for a given 
time and then allowed to recover for a given time, the 
temperature being substantially constant during the test. 


H-1.2 The test piece shall be of size 100 x 100 mm. 
H-2 APPARATUS 


The compression device shall consist of two flat steel 
plates between the parallel faces of which the test piece 
is compressed. Steel spacers in the form of bars and 
of thickness such as to give the required 40 percent 
compression shall be provided to control the thickness 
of the test piece during the test. 


H-3 PROCEDURE 


H-3.1 Measure accurately the initial thickness of 
the test piece as in D-2. Compress the test piece by 
40 percent of its original thickness between the parallel 


steel plates, which shall be larger than the test piece. 
Use steel spacers, between the plates, sufficient 
clearance being allowed for tilting of the test piece 
and care being taken to avoid displacement of the test 
piece. After being compressed for 22 h at a temperature 
of 70 + 2°C remove the test piece from the clamp while 
still at the test temperature and allow to recovering for 
3 h at room temperature. Then measure the thickness 
of the test piece again. Test at least two test pieces and 
take the average of test results. 


H-3.1.1 Calculation 


Calculate the compression set as follows: 
Compression set at constant strain, percent — 
T, - T, 
2—1 x100 
T, 
Where, 
T,= Original thickness of the test piece, and 
T,= Thickness of the test piece after recovery. 


IS 11060 : 2020 


ANNEX J 
( Clauses 7.7 and 7.8 ) 


METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF pH VALUE ANDCHLORIDE CONTENT 


J-1 TEST SPECIMENS 


Draw a square piece of rubberized coir product 
weighing about 10 g. 


J-2 PREPARATION OF AQUEOUS EXTRACT 


Cut the piece taken into about 5 mm square pieces 
and weigh. Transfer to a clean, chemically resistant 
glass flask, fitted with ground glass joint for reflux 
condenser. Add distilled water (see IS 1070) weighing 
20 times the mass of the rubberized coir under test, to 
the flask. Fit the flask to the reflux condenser and heat 
the contents of the flask to boil. Continue boiling for 
one hour. Remove the flask and close while the liquid is 
still boiling gently using a clean ground glass stopper. 
Cool to room temperature. 


J-3 DETERMINATION OF pH VALUE 


Transfer a portion of the water extract to the electrode 
of pH meter and determine the pH. 


J-4 DETERMINATION 
CONTENT 


OF CHLORIDE 
J-4.1 Principle 


Chlorides are determined volumetrically by titration 
with standard silver nitrate solution. 


J-4.2 Reagents 

J-4.2.1 Calcium Carbonate 

J-4.2.2 Standard Silver Nitrate Solution, 0.1 N. 
J-4.3 Procedure 


Take a portion ofthe aqueous extract prepared as in J-2. 
Neutralize with calcium carbonate till a pale yellow 
colour is obtained (usually 0.5g is sufficient). Titrate 
with standard silver nitrate solution till a red colour is 
obtained. 


J-4.4 Calculation 
3.456 (V, -V,)N 


Chloride (as Cl), percent by mass = 


W 
Where, 
V = Volume (ml ) of standard silver nitrate solution 
used in the titration with the material, 
V,= Volume (ml ) of standard silver nitrate solution 


used in the blank determination, 


N= Normality of standard silver nitrate solution, 
and 


Mass ( g ) of the material taken for test. 


IS 11060 : 2020 


ANNEX K 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Coir and Coir Products Sectional Committee, TXD 25 


Organization 


Central Coir Research Institute, Kalavoor 


Coir Pith and Allied Products Manufacturers and 
Exporters Association, Coimbatore 


All India Rubberized Coir Products Manufacturers 
Association, Tirunelveli 


Central Institute of Coir Technology, Bengaluru 
Coconut Development Board, Ernakulam 

Coir board, Kkochi 

Coir Mats and Mattings Association, Ernakulam 
Coir on Foam Products, Coimbatore 

Coir Shippers’ Council, Cherthala 


Federation of Indian Coir Exporters’ Associations, 
Alleppey 


Hindustan Coir, Coir Board Complex Alappuzha 


Karnataka State Coir Development Corporation Ltd, 
Bangalore 


Kerala Organic Manure and Fertilizer 


Kerala State Coir Corporation Ltd, Alappuzha 


Kerala State Small Scale Coir Manufacturer’s Federation, 
Alappuzha 


Kerala State Coir Marketing Federation 


Kurlon Enterprises Limited, Bangalore 


M M Rubber & Co, Chennai 


National Coir Research & Management Institute 
(NCRMI), Thiruvanthapuram 


National Coir Training & Design Centre, Alappuzha 


Natural Green Tech (P) Ltd, Bengaluru 


Orissa Co operative Coir Corporation Ltd, Bhubaneshwar 


10 


Representative(s) 
Dn Anita Das RAVINDRANATH (Chairman) 
SMT SuMI SEBASTIAN (Alternate) 


PRESIDENT 
SECRETARY (Alternate) 


SHRI SUNDARESAN 
SHRI MATHEW GEORGE (Alternate) 


Joivr DIRECTOR 
SENIOR SCIENTIFIC OFFICER (Alternate) 


SHRI SUGATA GHOSH 
Dr K. MURALIDHARAN (Alternate) 


SECRETARY 
JomT DIRECTOR (Alternate) 


Suri V. A. JOEPH 
SHRI PAVITHRAN (Alternate) 


SHRI HARIRAJAN 
SHRI PHILIP VARGHESE (A/ternate) 


Suri K. S. SANJEEV 
SHRI Sasan B. Nai (Alternate) 


SHRIJOSPAUL MATHEW 
SHRI SAjAN B. Nair (Alternate) 


WEAVING MASTER 
SENIOR SCIENTIFIC OFFICER (Alternate) 


SHRI G. KUMARASWAMY 
Suri K. R. KumaraswaMY (Alternate) 


Suri G. RAJESH 


SHRI G. SREEKUMAR 
Suri N. SUNURAJ (Alternate) 


PRESIDENT 
SECRETARY (Alternate) 


SHRI SURESH KUMAR 


SHRI NARENDRA KUDVA 
Suri P. ANIL (Alternate) 


SHRI JOSEPH CHERIYAN 


Dr K. R. ANIL 

Suri C. ABHISHEK (Alternate) 
ASSISTANT DIRECTOR 

ALAPPUZHAREGIONAL OFFICER (Alternate) 
SHRI Tommy MATHEW 

SHRI ABHISHEK THOMAS (Alternate) 


MANAGING DIRECTOR 
GENERAL MANAGER (Alternate) 


IS 11060 : 2020 


Organization Representative(s) 
Rubber Board, Kottayam Dr J. Thomas 
Dr James Jaco (Alternate) 
Shaa Pith Media Co, Coimbatore SHRI S. PRABHU 


SHRI RAMESH (Alternate) 


Sivanthi Joe Coirs, Tuticorin SHRI DUNSTEN JOSEPH 
SHRI K. Sivakan (Alternate) 


Tamil Nadu Coir Cooperative Federation, Chennai MANAGING DIRECTOR 
GENERAL MANAGER (Alternate) 
Venugopal Fibre Industries, Pattukottai Suri R. B. SHYAM SUNDER 
BIS Directorate General Suri A. K. Bera, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (TXD) 


[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


Suri P. N. MURALI 
ScIENTIST ‘D’ BIS 


11 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TXD 25 (14748). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


