**************** 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 


Mazdoor  Kisan  Shakti  Sangathan 
"The  Right  to  Information,  The  Right  to  Live'' 


IS  981  (1988)  :  Method  for  determination  of  colour  fastness 
of  textile  materials  to  acid  milling  [TXD  5:  Chemical 
Methods  of  Test] 


Jawaharlal  Nehru 
'Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New" 


aj^&vi  iJii^s:y%K^  isb^^ni^seg 


:<>5&i|  mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 


K^^^iXSVCd^ 


Satyanarayan  Gangarara  Pitroda 
Invent  a  New  India  Using  Knowledge 


Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge  is  such  a  treasure  which  cannot  be  stolen" 


^'^^^r 


k 


BLANK  PAGE 


^*-^^^ 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


IS  :  981  - 1988 

(Reaffirmed  2004) 

Indian  Standard 


METHOD  FOR 

DETERMINATION  OF  COLOUR  FASTNESS  OF 

TEXTILE  MATERIALS  TO  ACID  MILLING 

( First  Revision  ) 


UDC  67701 6-474  ;  5356S5-32 


©  Copyright  1989 
BUREAU   OF  INDIAN  STANDARDS 

MANAK  BHAVAN,  9  BAHADUR  SHAH  ZAFAR    MARG 
NEW  DELHI  110002 

^'  1  January  1989 


IS   :  981  -  1988 

Indian  Standard 

METHOD  FOR 

DETERMINATION  OF  COLOUR  FASTNESS  OF 

TEXTILE  MATERIALS  TO  ACID  MILLING 

( First  Revision ) 

0.  FOREWORD 


0.1  This  Indian  Standard  (  First  Revision )  was 
adopted  by  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  on 
15  June  1988,  after  the  draft  finalized  by  the  Che- 
mical Methods  of  Test  Sectional  Committee  had 
been  approved  by  the  Textile  Division  Council. 

0.2  This  standard  was  first  published  in  1957 
and  has  been  revised  on  the  basis  of  experience 
gained  during  its  use.  Changes  have  been  made 
in  the  sampling,  preparation  of  composite  speci- 
men, apparatus  and  procedure  so  as  to  bring  it 
in  line  with  other  similar  standards  on  colour 
fastness   tests. 

0.3  Colour  fastness  of  textile  materials  is  of 
considerable  importance  to  the  consumer.  The 
fastness  depends  not  only  upon  the  nature  and 


depth  of  shade  of  the  dyestuff  used  but  also  upon 
the  nature  of  the  fibre  and  the  method  of  dyeing 
or  printing  employed;  the  same  colouring  matter, 
when  used  in  dyeing  or  printing  different  fibres 
or  when  applied  by  different  methods  upon  the 
same  fibre,  may  give  vastly  different  results. 
Formulation  of  standard  methods  of  test  for 
determining  colour  fastness  of  textile  materials 
to  different  agencies  likely  to  effect  change  in 
colour  is,  therefore,  necessary. 

0.4  The  method  of  test  prescribed  in  this  stan- 
dard is  intended  for  evaluating  colour  fastness 
of  textile  materials  to  the  action  of  dilute  and  hot 
mineral  acids  as  used  in  the  hat-making  and  felt 
industries  and  also  in  the  manufacture  of  blan- 
keting and  service  materials. 


1.  SCOPE 

1.1  This  standard  prescribes  a  method  for  the 
determination  of  colour  fastness  of  textile  materials 
of  all  kinds  and  in  all  forms  to  the  action  of 
dilute  and  hot  mineral  acids  as  used  in  milling. 

2.  PRINCIPLE 

2.1  A  specimen  of  the  textile  in  contact  with 
adjacent  fabrics  is  milled  in  a  container  contain- 
ing steel  balls  and  a  solution  of  sulphuric  acid. 
The  severity  of  the  action  is  standardized  by 
means  of  a  test  control  dyeing  milled  separately 
in  the  same  way.  The  change  in  colour  of  the 
specimen  and  the  staining  of  the  adjacent  fabrics 
are  assessed  with  grey  scales. 

3.  SAMPLING 

3.1  Sample  to  determine  conformity  of  a  lot  of 
coloured  textile  material  to  a  specification  shall 
be  selected  so  as  to  be  representative  of  the  lot. 

3.2  Sample  drawn  in  compliance  with  the  relevant 
material  specification  or  as  agreed  to  between 
the  buyer  and  the  seller  to  evaluate  colour  fast- 
ness of  the  material  in  the  lot  shall  be  representa- 
tive of  the  lot. 


4.  COMPOSITE  SPECIMEN 

4.1  Two  Adjacent  Fabrics  —  each  measuring 
10  cm  X  4  cm,  one  piece  made  of  the  same  kind 
of  fibre  as  that  of  the  textile  to  be  tested,  or  that 
predominating  in  the  case  of  blends,  the  second 
piece  made  of  the  fibre  as  indicated  below  or 
in  the  case  of  blends,  of  the  kind  of  fibre  second 
in  order  of  predominance,  or  as  otherwise  speci- 
fied: 


If  the  First  Piece  is 

Second  Piece   to  be 

Cotton 

Wool 

Wool 

Cotton 

Linen 

Wool 

Viscose 

Wool 

Acetate 

Wool 

Polyamidc 

Wool 

Polyester 

Wool 

Acrylic 

Wool 

4.2  Preparation  of 

Composite  Specimen 

4.2.1  If  the  textile  to  be  tested 

is  fabric,  place 

a  specimen  10  cm  X  4  cm  between  the  two  adjacent 


1 


IS  :  981  -  1988 


fabrics  and  sew  along  all  four  sides  to  form  a 
composite  specimen. 

4.2.2  If  the  textile  to  be  tested  is  yarn,  knit  or 
weave  it  into  fabric  and  treat  it  as  in  42.1  or 
form  a  layer  of  parallel  lengths  of  it  between  the 
two  adjacent  fabrics,  the  amount  of  yarn  taken 
being  approximately  equal  to  half  the  combined 
mass  of  the  adjacent  fabrics.  Sew  along  all  four 
sides  to  hold  the  yarns  in  place  and  to  form  a 
composite   specimen. 

4.2.3  If  the  textile  to  be  tested  is  loose  fibre, 
comb  and  compress  an  amount  approximately 
equal  to  half  the  combined  mass  of  the  adjacent 
fabrics  into  a  sheet  10  cm  X  4  cm.  Place  the 
sheet  between  the  two  adjacent  fabrics  and  sew 
along  all  four  sides  to  hold  the  fibre  in  place  and 
to  form  a  composite  specimen. 

4.2.4  Prepare  the  composite  specimen  of  the 
test  control  in  the  way  outlined  for  fabric  in  4.2.1. 

5.  APPARATUS 

5.1  Suitable  Mechanical  Device  —  consisting  of 
water  bath  containing  a  rotatable  shaft  which 
supports,  radially,  glass  or  stainless  steel  con- 
tainers (  75  ±  5  mm  diameter  X  125  ±  10  mm 
high)  of  approximately  550  ±  50  ml  capacity, 
the  bottom  of  the  containers  being  45  +  10  mm 
high  from  the  centre  of  the  shaft.  The  shaft/ 
container  assembly  is  rotated  at  a  speed  of  40  ± 
2  rev/min.  The  temperature  of  the  water  bath 
is  thermostatically  controlled  to  maintain  the 
test  solution  at  the  prescribed  temperature 
±2°C. 

Suitable   devices    are: 

a)  Laimderometer,  as  described  in  the  Tech- 
nical Manual  of  the  American  Association 
of  Textile  Chemists  and  Colourists  (  AATCC). 

b)  Linitest,  as  described  in  Mellian  Textil- 
berichts  49  (1968),  6,  pp.  709-711. 

c)  Wash  wheel  sponsored  by  the  Society  of 
Dyers   and  Colourists. 

Note  —  Other  mechanical  devices  may  be  used  for 
the  test  provided  that  the  results  are  identical  to  those 
obtained  with  the  apparatus  described  above. 

5.2  Non-corrodible  (  Stainless  )  Steel  Balls  —  6  mm 

diameter. 

53  Test  Control  —  A  dyeing  of  CI  Acid  Blue  7 
(  Coloiu"  Index,  3rd  edition )  on  wool  cloth.  A 
well  wetted-out  pattern  of  wool  serge  is  entered 
at  40°C  into  a  dye-bath  containing  3  percent  CI 
Acid  Blue  7,  10  percent  sodium  sulphate  decahy- 
drate  (  Na2S04.  lOHgO )  and  3  percent  sulphuric 
acid  [relative  density  (sp.  gr.)  1-84],  all  percen- 
tage being  calculated  on  the  mass  of  the  wool, 
at  a  liquor  ratio  of  1   :  40. 

The  dye  bath  is  raised  to  the  boil  in  30  minutes 
and  continued  for  45  minutes.  The  pattern  is 
removed,  rinsed  and  dried. 

5.4  Grey  Scales  —  for  evaluating  change  in  colour 
and   staining. 


6.  REAGENTS 

6.0  Quality  of  Reagents  —  Unless  otherwise 
specified,  pure  chemicals  shall  be  employed  in 
tests  and  distilled  water  ( see  IS  :  1070  -  1977* ) 
shall  be  used  where  the  use  of  water  as  a  reagent 
is  intended. 

Note  —  Pure  chemicals  shall  mean  chemicals  that  do 
not  contain  impurities  which  affect  the  test  results. 

6.1  Sulphuric  Acid  Solution  —  containing  50  g  of 
concentrated  sulphuric  acid  [  relative  density 
(sp.gr.)  1*84]  per  litre  of  distilled  water. 

7.  PROCEDURE 

7.1  Carry  out  the  operations  described  in  7.2 
to  7.6  with  the  composite  specimen  and  the  com- 
posite test  control  specimen,  in  parallel  in  separate 
baths. 

7.2  Put  the  composite  specimen  and  the  compo- 
site test-control  specimen  in  separate  containers 
in  the  device  each  with  three  times  its  own  mass 
of  the  milling  solution  and  50  stainless  steel  balls. 
Run  the  device  for  2  h  at  40  ±  2X. 

7.3  Add  sufficient  distilled  water  at  40  ±  2°C  to 
give  a  liquor  ratio  of  1  :  40  and  run  the  device 
for  an  additional  10  minutes. 

7.4  Remove  the  composite  specimen,  rinse  twice 
in  cold  distilled  water,  then  rinse  for  10  minutes 
in  cold  running  tap  water.  Open  out  the  com- 
posite specimen  by  breaking  the  stitching  on  all 
sides  except  one  of  the  shorter  sides  and  dry  it 
by  hanging  in  air  in  shade  at  a  temperature  not 
exceeding  60°C  with  the  three  parts  in  contact 
only  at  the  remaining  line  of  stitching. 

7.5  Assess  the  change  in  coloxxr  of  the  test  control 
and  the  staining  of  adjacent  fabrics  with  grey 
scales.  If  the  change  in  colour  is  not  equal  to 
rating  3  on  the  appropriate  grey  scale,  the  test  has 
not  been  carried  out  correctly,  and  the  operations 
described  in  7.1  to  7.4  should  be  repeated  with 
a  fresh  composite  specimen  and  a  fresh  composite 
test-control  specimen  (see  Note  under  7.6  ). 

7.6  Assess  the  change  in  colour  of  the  specimen 
and  the  staining  of  adjacent  fabrics  with  grey 
scales. 

Note  1  —  Treated  test  specimen  or  the  test  control 
should  have  cooled  after  drying  and  should  have  regained 
their  normal  moisture  content  before  evaluation. 

Note  2  —  In  cases  of  doubt  in  the  colour  fastness 
rating  as  assessed  by  an  observer,  the  assessment  should 
be  done  by  at  least  three  observers  and  the  overall  average 
rating  should  be  reported. 

8.  REPORT  \ 

8.1  Report  the  numerical  rating  for  change  in 
colotir  of  the  test  specimen  and  the  numerical 
ratings  for  staining  of  the  two  pieces  of  adjacent 
fabrics  used  in  the  preparation  of  the  composite 
specimen. 


♦Specification  for  water  for  general    laboratory    use 
{second  revision). 


The  Central  Electric  Press,  Delhi-7 


