( Reaffirmed 2001 )

IS :10&M -'1983

Indian Standard
METHODS OF MEASUREMENT OF COLOUR TELEVISION PICTURE TUBES
Electron
Chairman*
SHRI

Tubes

Sectional

Committee,

LTDC

9

RepresenGng Bharat Electronics Limited, Bangalore

K. R.

SAVOOR

Members Shri K. R. Savoor ) Dx S. S. S. A~AR~ALA
SHRI B. S. VENUQOPALAN ( Alternate to

'

Central Electronics Engineering ( CSIR ), Pilani

Research

Institute

DR G. S. SIDHU ( Alternate ) Directorate Genera! of Civil Aviation, New Delhi SHRI D. ANRALAGAN SHRI R. V. ISRANI ( Alternate ) National Test House, Calcutta SHRI B. P. GHOSH SHRI B. C. M~~IZHERJEE ( Alternate ) Ministry of Defence ( R & D ) SHRI P. K. JAIN West Bengal Electronics Industrial Development DR J. N. MAITI Corporation Ltd, Calcutta Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay REPRESENTATIVE Posts and Telegraphs Department, New Delhi DR D. P. S. SETH SHRI D. VENKATASUBAIAH ( Alternate ) Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) COL R. K. Sun SHRI G. N. SAHAI ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Technical Development, SHRI K. K. TANEJA New Delhi SHRI R. SOUNDHIRARAJAN ( Alternate ) Department of Electronics, New Delhi Dti R. C. TRIPATHI SHRI TEK CHANDAN~( Alternate ) Directorate General of All India Radio, New Delhi SHRI V. N. VAIDYAN~THAN SHRI V. K. MEHRA ( Alternate ) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-o#icio Member ) SHRI R. C. JAIN, Head ( Electronics ) SHRI PAVAN KU~MAR Assistant Director ( Electronics ), IS1 *Shri K. R. Savoor finalized. was the chairman for the meeting in which the standard was

( Continued on #ace 2 ) @ Copyright 1983
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by anv means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an &fr,tigement of copyright under the said Act.

Is:10!503-1983 (Continued from
page 1 )

Panel for Cathode-Ray Tubes and Television Camera Tubes, LTDC 9 . P4
Convener SHRIG.K.BHIDE Members SHRI J. S. ISAAC ( Alternate to Shri G. K. Bhide ) National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi DR KAILASH CHANDRA SHRI JOGINDER Sa-GH ( Alternate ) All India Instrument Manufacturers' and Dealers SHRI P. GOSWAXY Association, Bombay SHRI S. K. VA~D ( Alternate ) Ministry of Defence ( R & D ) SHRI P. K. JAIN Punjab Display Devices Ltd, Chandigarh SHRI C. S. KAPOOR Applied Electronics Ltd, Thane SHRT J. S. PANDIT SHRI V. D. BASUTKAR ( Alternate ) Directorate General of All India Radio, New Delhi DR C. S. R. RAO Representing Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore

IS : 10503 - 1983

Indian Standapd
METHODS OF .MEASUREMENT OF COLOUR TELEVISION PICTURE TUBES

0.
0.1 This

FOREWORD

Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 16 February 1983, after the draft finalized by the Electron Tubes Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. standard deals with picture tubes. the methods of measurement television picture for colour

0.2 This television

0.3 Methods of measurements covered by IS : 4579-1968*.

of monochrome

tubes are

0.4 While preparing this standard, assistance has been derived from IEC Pub 151-28 `Measurements of the electrical properties of electronic tubes Part 28 : Methods of measurement of colour television picture tubes' issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission. 0.5 In reporting the result of a test made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960t.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This television
standard covers the methods picture tubes with their electron of measurement for colour beams and shadow mask.

2. TERMINOLOGY

2.0 For

the purpose of this standard, the definitions given in IS : 1885 ( Part IV/Set 4 )-1970: shall apply in addition to the following.
*Method of mensurements on television picture tubes. TRules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). $Electrotechnical vocabulary : Part IV Electron tubes, Section 4 Cathode-ray

tubes.

3

IS : 10503 - 1983 - Uncontrolled electron emission that 2.1 Stray Emission undesired luminance on the screen of a cathode-ray tube under conditions. 2.2 Cathode Emission measured in electron current causes cut-off

The electron emission from the cathode at the specified operating conditions. beam trio which passes through the

2.3 Beam Trio - The electron same shadcw mask aperture.

2.4 Purity Shift - The register movement at the centre of the screen, with respect to a phosphor trio, when the strength of the purity magnetic field is reduced, from the value which gives the optimum register, to zero. 2.5 Raster Centring Displacement - The horizontal and vertical distance between the geometrical centre of the tube face and the just currents are cut visible focused spot when the deflectin g and centring
Off.

2.6 Static Convergence of the screen by converging of the screen. 2.7 Dynamic Convergence

-

To converge the three beams at the centre the three beams at the same spot in the plane

To converge

the three beams the

at any point on the entire fields derived

screen:

a) by varying circuits, or

magnetic

from the scanning yoke in the case of

b) by adjusting the position a self-converged system.

of the deflection

2.8 Radial Convergence Shift ( For Delta Gun Arrangement ) The radial displacement of the red, green and blue electron beam spots from their point of convergence in the centre of the screen when the three static radial convergence magnetic fields are all reduced to zero strength. 2.9 Lateral Convergence Shift ( For Delta Gun Arrangement ) The lateral displacements between the blue beam spot and the converged red and green beam spots at the centre of the screen when the strength of the lateral convergence magnetic field is reduced to zero. 2.10 Horizontal Convergence Shift ( For-in-Line Gun Arrangement ) - The horizontal displacements of the outer beams from the centre beam when the two convergence fields are reduced to zero. 2.11 Vertical Convergence Shift ment ) - The vertical displacements centre beam when the two convergence 4 ( For-In-Line Gun Arrangeof the outer beams from the fields are reduced to zero.

IS : 10503 - 1983 2.12 Outer Beam Convergence Shift ( 4-Pole Correction : For-InLine Gun Arrangement ) - The vertical and the horizontal displacements of the outer beams from the initial convergence point when the two convergence fields are reduced to zero. 2.13 Centre Beam Convergence Shift ( 6-Pole Correction : For-In Line Gun Arrangement ) - The displacement of the converged outer beams from the centre beam when the two convergence fields are reduced to zero. 2.14 Anode Current For White Light Output - The sum of the red, green and blue anode currents which are required to provide a white light output of specified luminance and chromaticity co-ordinates at the screen centre with the best focusing voltage, and under such conditions that the white unblanked raster size corresponds with the specif:ed useful screen dimensions. 2.15 Current Ratios For White Field - The red to blue, and blue to green anode currents white field designated in 2.14. 2.16 Uniformity of a designated 2.17 Useful luminescent axis. ratio of red to green, required to produce the and the brightness

- Uniformity of the chromaticity raster over the entire screen. Dimensions visible when

Screen screen,

- The dimensions of the part of the viewing in the direction of the tube

2.18 Screen Blemish - The luminescent screen blemish exclusive of faceplate blemish as found on the useful screen under operating or nonoperating conditions. 2.19 Faceplate Blemish push through picture tubes; non-useful visible Fart. 2.20 Limiting Resolution discerned per picture height. 2.21 Register - The the associated phosphor `The glass blemish on the useful screen, for facepiate blemishes may be extended to the Maximum number of lines which can be to

relative position dot or line trio.

of the beam

trio with respect

2.22 Degaussing - The process of magnetic field, and slowly removing built-in correction for the register error other stray magnetic fields.

applying a strong alternating that field, in order to provide a caused by tte earth's field and/or

IS:10503

- 1983 CONDITIONS

3. MEASUREMENT 3.1 General

3.1.1 The colour picture tube shaI1 be assembled deflection yoke, convergence components, purity necessary, a magnetic shield.

with the component

specified and, if to each following

3.1.2 The specified operating voltage shall be supplied electrode and electrical signals shall be applied to achieve the conditions: a) Anode voltage: focus, ( constant, all tests ); the voltage area, of the focus plus 10 percent b) Best centre and by adjusting

electrode; overscan

c) Full scan of luminescent unless otherwise specified. 3.2 Degsussing

screen

3.2.1 Before starting a measurement, the tube and its magnetic shield ( if any ) shall be degaussed in the position in which measurements will take place. This shall be done using a suitable coil, carrying a high ac current which is then slowly cut off.
NOTE -When necessary, immersed in a compensating cm the measurement. the tube should be brought into such a position or so field that the earth's magnetic fitld will have no influence

3.3

Adjustment

Procedure manufacturer, the following

3.3.0 Unless otherwise stated by the adjustment procedure shall be applied.

3.3.1 Using a cross-hatch or dot signal, the convergence of red, green and blue beams shall be adjusted in the centre of the screen with the static convergence components. 3.3.2 The blue and green beams ( in case of the delta type tube ), or the outer beams ( in case of the in-line tube ) shall be cut off. With a blank raster and the yoke positioned either in the most forward or most rearward position ( depending on the specific yoke/tube combination ) the direction and strength of the purity magnetic field shall be adjusted until a uniform colour zone is achieved in the central area of the screen. Then the deflection yoke shall be moved axially to The beams shall obtain the most uniform raster over the entire screen. be reset which were initially cut off. The convergence shall be readjusted as outlined in 3.3.1. The register shall be adjusted for its optimum condition at the centre of the screen, preferably with the help of a microscope. 6

' IS : 10503 - 1983 3.3.3 The raster shall be centered, and raster size shall be adjusted dimensions.

horizontal and vertical linearity to the specified useful screen shall be adjusted. shall be repeated

3.3.4 The static and dynamic

convergences

3.3.5 Adjustment of static and dynamic convergences to obtain the best possible compromise.

The purity adjustment shall be checked, readjusted and if required repeat after 10 min running at half of the maximum beam current. 4. METHODS
4.1 Heater OF MEASUREMENT

Current

The current 4.1.1 The rated voltage shall be applied to the heater. shall be measured when thermal equilibrium is reached after a preheating time of at least 5 minutes. During the measurement, no voltage shall i be applied to any other tube-elements and they may be left floating unless otherwise stated. 4.2 Heater-cathode
dc Leakage Current 4.2.1 For tubes having unipotential cathodes not connected to the heater within the tube the rated heater voltage shall be applied to the The potential of any part of the heater shall not be heater terminals. less than the specified voltage with respect to the cathode.

4.2.2 The heater-cathode leakage current shall be measured when thermal equilibrium is reached after the preheating time of at least 5 minutes. 4.3 Electrode
Leakage Current 4.3.1 With cathode at cut-off bias the leakage current between the specified electrodes shall be measured when thermal equilibrium is reached after the preheating time of at least 5 minutes.
obtain the correct measuring results, subtract NOTE -To measuring equipment from the measured leakage current. the leakage of the

4.4 Flashover 4.4.1 The tube shall be placed in a given circuit, with stated voltages applied. The number of flashes observed on the face of the tube during a given time shall be measured.

4.5 Stray Emission
4.5.1 The tube under test shall be placed in a given circuit, with stated voltages including a cut-off voltage and deflection voltage applied. 7

IS : 10503 - 1983 The ambient illumination shall not exceed The observer shall screen of the tube. observing the screen of the tube. 4.6 Focusing Voltage tube with 5 lx when measured at the have adapted his eyes before

4.6.1 The tube under test shall be set up as described in 3. The shall be placed in a given circuit including the deflection system, specified voltages applied. 4.6.2 A suitable signal to the modulation a defined pattern shall be applied. electrode in order

to obtain

4.6.3 The beam current ( final electrode current ) shall be adjusted to the specified value after thermal equilibrium conditions are reached. As an alternative, measurements can be made with a pulsed spot. The ambient illumination, measured at the screen of the tube, shall not exceed 5 lx. 4.6.4 The voltage on the focusing electrode shall be adjusted to obtain The the best focus of the pattern at a specified portion of the screen. voltage on the focusing electrode obtained under the above conditions is measured. The measurement shall be carried out for each gun in turn. 4.7 Cut-off Voltage in 3. The cutfalling on the current

4.7.1 The tube under test shall be set up as described The ambient illumination off voltage shall be measured. screen shall be at a low level with a maximum of 1 lx. 4.7.2 Alternatively, the voltage measured ( typically 0.1 PA ) could be used as cut-off

at a stated low beam voltage.

4.7.3 Special care shall be taken since it is sometimes difficult to distinguish the beam current from the leakage current. The measurement is carried out for each gun in turn. 4.8 Ckthodk Emission See IS : 4147-1981*.

4.8.1 The tube shall be operated under stated conditions. Grid No. 1 of the gun under test shall be connected to cathode and the cathode The measurement shall be carried out current shall then be measured.

for each gun in turn.

$JOTE 1 -The above condition shall not be maintained for more than IO s at a time since permanent damage to the tube may result otherwise.
NOTE 2 conditions. During the measurement, the other two beams shall be set at cut-off

*Method of measurements on conventional 8

receiving electron tubes (first revision ).

IS : 10503 - 1983 4.9 Purity Shift The

4.9.1 The tube under test shall be set up as described in 3. purity shift shall be measured. 4.10 Raster Centring Displacement in 3.

4.10.1 The tube under test shall be set up as described raster centring displacement shall be measured. 4.11 Radial Convergence Shift ( For Delta

The ) The )

Gun Arrangement

4.11.1 The tube under test shall be set up as described in 3. radial convergence shift shall be measured. 4.12 Lateral Convergence Shift ( For Delta Gun Arrangement

4.12.1 The tube under test shall be set up as described in 3. convergence shift shall be measured. 4.13 Horizontal ment ) Convergence Shift ( For In-Line

The lateral

Gun Arrange-

4.13.1 The tube under test shall be set up as described in 3. The horizontal convergence shift shall be measured. 4.14 Vertical Convergence Shift ( For In-Line Gun Arrangement ) The Shift:

4.14.1 The tube under test shall be set up as described in 3. vertical convergence shift shall be measured. 4.15 Outer Beam Convergence For In-Line Gun Arrangement Shift ) ( 4-Pole Convergence%

4.15.1 The tube under test shall be set up as described in 3. The outer beam convergence shift shall be measured. 4.16 Centre For In-Line Beam Convergence Gun Arrangement Shift ) The ( 6-Pole Convergence Shift:

4.16.1 The tube under test shall be set up as described in 3. c-ntre beam convergence shift shall be measured. 4.17 Anode Current for White Light Output

4.17.1 The tube under test shall be set up as described in 3 and 2.14. The anode current shall be measured for white light output. 9

IS:10503 4.17.2

- 1983 The sum of these currents is expressed as: la = &r + lag +
Iab

.

where Lr I& 4.18 Current = anode current of a red solid field, = anode current of a blue solid field. Ratios for White Field

lag = anode current of a green solid field, and

4.18.1 The tube shall be measured as described in 4.17 and the current ratios shall be calculated according to the following formulae: Red current Green current Red current Eue current
-~.

I &r -I ag I $
Iab

Blue current Green current and Colour Spectral

--

I at3

4.19 Chromaticity

Characteristic

4.19.1 That tube shall be operated as described in 4.17. The chromaticity and colour spectral characteristic of each colour shall be measured by a calorimeter or spectroradiometer. 4.20 Uniformity 4.20.1 The tube shall be operated as described in 4.17. The quality of the white, red, green and blue uniformity shall be evaluated with the naked eye at the designated distance ( normally three times the picture diagonal ) from the tube screen. The ambient illumination, measured at the face of the tube, shall be approximately 5 lx. 4.21 Screen and Faceplate Blemish The screen at a miniof the tube,

4.21.1 The tube shall be operated as described in 4.17. blemish on red, green, blue and white fields shall be viewed mum distance of 60 cm. 4.21.2 The ambient shall not exceed 5 lx. illumination, measured at the face

4.21.3 In the non-operating condition, the faceplate blemish may be observed under high-level incandescent light of 700 lx to 1 000 lx at the faceplate surface. 10

IS: 10503-1983 .4.22 Resolution 4.22.1 The tube to be measured shall be set up as described in 3. The specified video test pattern shall be applied and the focus voltage adjusted for the best balance of vertical and horizontal resolutions at a specified portion of the screen. 4.22.2 Vertical and horizontal resolution shall be measured on the white, red, green and blue fields in the centre and on the edges of the screen. 4.23 Capacitance Anode Between External Conductive Coating and

4.23.1 The capacitance between the external conductive coating and anode shall be measured in accordance with the method described in 1s : 4147-1981*. 4.24 Gas-content Factor shall be measured . using the method 4.24.1 The gas-content factor described in 9 of IS : 4579-19687. 5. PRECAUTIONS 5.1 External influences on the magnetic characteristic be eliminated. -5.2 Electron bombarment beam should be avoided. of the tube should of the

on the neck due to extreme adjustments

-5.3 When measuring the raster centering displacement, the current shall be reduced to a very low level to avoid damage of the shadow mask and screen. 5.4 The pre-heating time shall be such that the internal dimensions of the tube structure are not appreciably altered by longer heating. 5.5 Grounding of external coating of the picture tube and casing on the sides of the picture tube should be ensured. the metal

*Method of measurements on conventional receiving electron tubes *Methods of measurements on televiGon picture tubes.

( jrst se&ion ).

INTERNATIONAL
Base Units QUANTITY Length
hhS

SYSTEM

OF UNITS

( SI UNITS

)

UNIT

SYMBOL m kg s A K cd mol

metre kilogram second ampere kelvin candela mole

Time Electric current Thermodynamic temperature Luminous intensity Amount of substance Supplementary
QUANTITY

Units UNIT radian steradian SYMBOL rad sr

Plane angle Solid angle Derived Units
QUANTITY

UNIT

SYMBOL N

DEFINITION I 1 N = 1 kg.m/hz. J = 1 N.m

Force Energy Power Flux Flux density Frequency Electric conductance Electromotive force Pressure. stress

newlon
joule watf weber tesla hertz siemens volt pascal

J w
Wb T HZ S V Pa

1 W = 1 J/s lWb=lV.s 1 1 1 T = 1 Wb/m2 -S = I A/V V = 1 W/A 1 Hz = 1 c/s (s-l)*

w

I Pa = 1 N/m2

