UDC

621.867.8-11

( First Reprint

JUNE 1985 )

6647
(Reaffirmed 2006)

Indian Standard DESIGN CRITERIA FOR PNEUMATIC SYSTEMS
1. Scope systems. Lays down the design criteria for low, medium and high

CONVEYING

pressure pneumatic

conveying

2. Terminology - Pneumatic conveying is defined as the art of transporting a pipeline by using either a negative or a positive pressure air stream. 3. Limitations to be conveyed, -

dry bulk materials through is usually the material partial degradation of

The principal limiting factor in the use of pneumatic conveyors Materials to be conveyed should be dry and relatively free-flowing.

3.1 Friable materials as a rule should not be conveyed _pneumaticalty, except when the material being conveyed is inconsequential to end use of the material. 3.2 Without booster stations, to 2 km or more. 4. Types 4.0 The following a) low are the main conveying systems :

vacuum systems are practical up to 500 m in length and pressure systems up

Pressure System,

1) Positive pressure system, 2) Negative pressure system, 3) Combined negative-positive b) Medium c) Pressure System, and

pressure system,

High Pressure System.

4.1 Low Pressure System - Low pressure systems are ideal for inplant use to convey non-abrasive or Air pressure used is normally limited to 760 mmHg (1 atmosmildly-abrasive dry pulverized materials. phere), and the air supply is provided by a positive displacement lobe type of blower. Because Of the low pressure, these systems are restricted to a relatively short distance and small flow rate. 4.1.1 Positive pressure system is normally used for conveying material from~one source motely located discharge points. A typical positive pressure system is illustrated in Fig. 1.
to several re-

VENT LIN-

COLLECTOR

ROTARY

AIRLOCK

FEEDER

FIG.

1

POSITIVE

PRESSURE

SYSTEM

Adopted

29 November

1977

I INDImAN
MANAK

0 April STANDA~RDS
BHAVAN,

1978,

ISI

I

Gr

3

INSTtTUTlON
SHAH 110002 ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR NEW DELHI

IS : 8647 - 1977
4.1.2 Negative pressure system is normally used for conveying material from several sources to one remotely located discharge point. A typical negative pressure system is illustrated in Fig. 2.
FlLlER AIR LINE RECEIVER ROTARY `71ik~0C~ FEEDER

FIG.

2

NEGATIVE

PRESSURE

SYSTEM

4.1.3 A combined negative-positive pressure system is generally used for conveying materials from several sources to several discharge points. This type of system is quite versatile and is commonly used for conveying materials from railway container wagons and/or storage bins to different points of use. A typical negative-positive pressure system is illustrated in Fig. 3.

BIN VENT FILTERS

I----

CYCLONE -

FEEDERS

FIG.

3

NEGATIVE-POSITIVE

PRESSURE

SYSTEM

4.2 Medium Pressure System - In medium pressure system, the material is first compacted in a variable pitch screw before it is mixed with compressed air in the mixing chamber of the screw type pump. This system thus requires a screw directly coupled with motor in addition to a compressor for providing air at pressures ranging between 760 to 2 280 mmHg (1 to 3 atmospheres). Air pressure which can be used in this system is limited because of the necessity of providing a seal-between the screw and the mixing chamber. This type of pump conveys continuously. A single stage rotary compressor is generally connected directly with the screw type pump for supplying the required compressed air. 4.3 High Pressure System - High pressure system uses dense stream conveying with low ratio of air to material resulting in lowest particle degradation when handling friable materials. Because of higher air pressure used, smaller pipelines can be used in this system. 2

IS : 8647 - 1977
4.3.1 High pressure conveying pumps are batch type units which use compressed air only when These pumps are used for continuous, intermittent or batching operations. conveying. In a continuous process operation, a surge hopper is provided above the pump for collecting the material during the discharge cycle of the pump. A typical high pressure system is illustrated in Fig. 4.
L-COMPARTMENT /---BULK CAR BINS

r --

Z-WAY OISTRISUTING VALVE

3-WAY

DIS~RIEHJTING

VALVE -J i PNEUMATIC PUMP

FIG.

4

HIGH

PRESSURE

SYSTEM

4.3.2 For high pressure conveying system a double stage compressor is normally used for supplying compressed air at pressures ranging between 3 040 to 5 320 mmHg (4 to 7 atmospheres). Pumping being a batch operation, an air receiver is required for the compressed air. The air receiver should he sized in such a way that full pressurein the air receiver is recovered in the time the pump performs the filling and discharging operation. The compressor delivers air continuously during the discharge cycle and should be completed by the time the pump is filled again with material. 5. Factors for Design and Use density, particle abrasiveness and

5.0 The material to be conveyed should be known by all its characteristics including.bulk size and shape, temperature, susceptibility to moisture, corrosiveness, nature of material, moisture.

5.1 Bulk Density - The mass per unit volume should be known under three conditions, namely, in poured condition, stored in bin and when under influence of ~aeration. The material may enter the system in the poured state, but when it is discharged, it may be in the aerated state, which means that more bulk is inVolumetric capacity, as well as flowability is vitally effected volved at the discharge than at the entrance. by this phenomenon. 5.2 Particle Size Very fine Fine Granular Lumpy and irregular The particle size of material to be conveyed may be classified as below: All passing 150-micron sieve [see IS : 460-l 962 `Test sieves (revised)`] All passing I.00 mm sieve All passing 12.5 mm sieve (c) More than 12 mm in any direction. stringy, etc Irregular materials are those that are fibrous,

The conveying rate of material 5.3 Moisture Content - The moisture content of material should be known. For satisfactory operation, free moisture should normally not exceed reduces with increase in moisture. 1 percent by mass. 5.4 Corrosiveness - The pH (a symbol denoting acidity on alkalinity) value of material should be known. This information is necessary for selecting the material of construction for conveying equipment and also A highly corrosive material may require special materials of the type of cloth to be used in dust collector. construction. Even though pneumatic conveying is amongst the 5.5 Explosive or Combustible Nature of MaterialHowever in-handling explosive or combustible materials, precautions safest material handling techniques. in the system must be taken. Sorne of these materials may require inert gas to be used as conveying medium. 5.6 Abrasiveness Abrasiveness may be classified Class : : Materials having hardness above that of `highly handled in pneumatic conveyors. 3 as follows: Abrasiveness Non-abrasive Slightly abrasive Medium abrasive Highly abrasive abrasive' materials are mostly too abrasive to be

IS : 8647 -1977 5.7 Duty Requirement In conjunction with conveying rates, the severity of operation should also be determined. The construction of pneumatic conveyor can be linked to the degree of design and construction of speed reducer. Severity of operation can be classified as follows
Class :

Hours of Operation Per Week 160 :I: 20

: 3 4

With the above classification. the degree of sturdiness to which the conveyor must be constructed, It will also tell the -appurtenances necessary to meet the requirements of the operation. can be determined. 5.6 Elevation and Environmental Condition a) Elevation of the installation in relation to sea level should be known. Difference in air density is very pronounced in the operation of pneumatic conveyors and should always be considered. b) Environmental condition, that is, whether system is exposed to hazardous dusts and gases or corrosive elements should be known. 6. Design determining Procedure - Based on the factors mentioned the type of conveying to be used.
TABLE Particle Size 1 SYSTEM TYPE ACCORDING

above, the Tables 1, 2 and 3 may be used for
TO PARTICLE-SIZE

---...--

_

Lumpy or irregular Granular Fine Very fine Note x indicates suitability.

TABLE Material Charecteristic

2

SYSTEM

TYPE

ACCORDING

TO

MATERIAL

CHARACTERISTICS

Type of System Low Pressure Negative Positive Negative*. positive X X I * X X X s X Y X .* .% `r: Q High Pressure

Non-abrasive Abrasive, slightly Abrasive, medium Abrasive, high Hygroscopic Deliquescent Combustible Explosive Acid Alkaline Toxic Fragile Corrosive Thermoplastic

X X L X * X X X X X * s

X X * _X + X X X X __ X * X

x
* -

Note - x indicates suitability. The asterisk mark (*) indicates that a pilot plant study will be necessary to establish Arrangements are being made to conduct such study. the suitability of the material for pneumatic conveying.

. 4

IS : 8647 - 1977
TABLE 3 Material
Low Pressure Negative Positive Negativepositive
X X X X X X X X
l

SYSTEM TYPE ACCORDINQ

TO MATERIAL

Type of System
Medium Pressure High Pressure

Alum Alumina, floury Alumina, sandy Aluminium Aluminium hydrate oxide

X X X X X X

X -

X X X -

X -

Arsenic oxide Asbestos dust Barites Bauxite Best pulp, dried Bentonite Borax Calcium carbonate Calcium phosphate Carbon, activated Carbon black, pefletized Catalysts, petroleum Cellulose acetate Cement, portland Cement, raw materials Cereals Cerelose Clay, kaolin Coal, pulverized Coffee beans Coke, fines and flour Corn grits Cottonseed meal Detergent powders Diatomaceous Dolomite Feed ingredients Feeds, soft Feldspar Fertilizers Flaxseed Flint Flour, wheat Fluorspar Fly ash Fuller's earth Gluten meal Grain. whole Grain, ground Graphite Gypsum earth

X

X X X X + X X . X X

X X X ,

X X X X X X X X

X X

-

X X X x X X X X X X X X X X + X X X X X X X X

X

-

X -

-

X X X X

X X X X X X X X * X X ~X X X X X X

X ,-

-

X x X -

X -

X + X X X X -

+ X -

-

-

X

5

IS : 6647 - 1977
TABLE 3 SYSTEM TYPE ACCOBDINO TO MATERIAL - Conzd -~
Material

I
Low Pressure Negative Positive

Type of System Medium Pressure Negativepositive High Pressure

Lime, hydrated Lime, pebble Limestone, puhrerfzed Magnesium oxide

fl ,.*J

X X

X

X -

X * -

X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X x X c X X X X X X . X X * X X X X X X + X X X X X X X X X -

x X

Malt, brewers Milk, dried Ores, pulverized Petroleum coke Phosphate rock,

X X X

X X X -

pulverized

Polyethylene Pyrites
Resins Rice Rubber pellets Salt Salt cake Sawdust seed@ `," Semofina &/I) Silica, pulverized Soap ingredients Soda ash, light Soda ash. dense Sodium carboneta Sodium phosphates Sodium sulphate Starch Sugar, granulated Talc Titanium dioxide Wood chips Wood flour Zinc oxide

-

e \

X X X X ... .

-

X -

Note - x indicates suitability. The asterisk mark (*) indicates that a pilot plant study wrll be necessary IO eSIBDllsD Arrangements are being made to conduct such study. the suitability of the material for pneumatic conveying.

_..*.

E.XPLANATORY

NO-TE
systems of three types, In low pressure system, pressure systems have it was felt that to begin criteria for its design and systems at a later stage.

This standard lays down in brief design criteria for pneumatic conveying namely, low pressure system, medium pressure system and high pressure system. positive pressure system, negative pressure system and combined negative-positive Instead of preparing standards for individual types of systems, been discussed. with it will be useful to deal pneumatic conveying system as a whole and evolve use. It is proposed to prepare individual standards for different types of conveying 6

Reproduced by Reprography Unit. ISI New Delhi

