IS 1200 (Part 5) : 2013 


(Reaffirmed 2018) 


IRRA HAF 


al AMA asia 
am 5 pita 
(Ae тд) 


Indian Standard 


METHOD OF MEASUREMENT OF BUILDING AND 
CIVIL ENGINEERING WORKS 


PART 5 FORMWORK 


( Fourth Revision ) 


ICS 17.020; 91.040.01; 93.010 


© BIS 2013 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 


July 2013 Price Group 2 


Method of Measurement of Works of Civil Engineering (Excluding Water Resources Development) Sectional 
Committee, CED 44 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 5) (Fourth Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Method of Measurement of Works of Civil Engineering (Excluding Water Resources Development) 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 


Measurement occupies a very important place in the planning and execution of any civil engineering work from 
the time of first estimates to the final completion and settlement of payments for a project. Methods followed for 
measurement are not uniform and considerable differences exist between practices followed by different 
construction agencies and also between various Central and State Government departments. While it is recognized 
that each system of measurement has to be specifically related to administrative and financial organizations 
within a department responsible for the work, a unification of various systems at technical level has been accepted 
as very desirable, specially as it permits a wider range of operation for civil engineering contractors and eliminates 
ambiguities and misunderstandings of various systems followed. 


Among various civil engineering items, measurement of buildings was the first to be taken up for standardization 
and this standard having provisions relating to building work was first published in 1958 and then revised in 
1964. 


Since various trades are not related to one another, the Sectional Committee decided that each type of trade as 
given in IS 1200:1964 ‘Method of measurement of building works (first revision)’ be issued separately as different 
parts which will be helpful to specific users in various trades. This part of IS 1200 covering formwork as first 
issued in 1972 and revised further in 1982. 


This fourth revision of the standard has been brought out to incorporate the changes found necessary in light of 
usage of this standard and suggestions made by various implementing bodies. The significant modifications in 
this revision are: 


a) Incorporation of Amendment No. 1; 
b) Inclusion of new item on ‘slip forms’; 


c) Provision of method of measurement for slip forms, the formwork details inclusions/exclusions has 
been included; and 


d) Inclusion of new 6.7 on ‘jack rods’ used in slip forming. 


SP 27:1997 “Handbook on method of measurement of buildings works (first revision)’ published earlier by the 
Committee covering the consolidated provisions of all the parts of this standard shall be revised after the revision 
of the other parts of this standard. 


For standards on method of measurement of river valley projects, the Indian Standards formulated by the 
Measurement and Cost Analysis of Works for River Valley Projects Sectional Committee, WRD 23 under the 
Water Resources Division Council of BIS may be referred. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a measurement shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
“Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 1200 (Part 5) : 2013 


Indian Standard 


METHOD OF MEASUREMENT OF BUILDING AND 
CIVIL ENGINEERING WORKS 


PART 5 FORMWORK 


( Fourth Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard (Part 5) covers the method of 
measurement of formwork, where it is required to be 
measured separately. 


2 GENERAL RULES 


2.1 Clubbing of Items 


Items may be clubbed together provided these are on 
the basis of the detailed description of items stated in 
this standard. 


2.2 Booking of Dimensions 


In booking dimensions, the order shall be consistent 
and generally in the sequence of length, breadth or 
width and height or depth or thickness. 


2.3 Description of Items 


The description of each item shall, unless otherwise 
stated, be held to include where necessary, conveyance 
and delivery, handling, loading, unloading, storing, 
fabrication, hoisting, lowering, all labour for finishing 
to required shape and size, and levels of striking and 
removal. 


2.4 Measurements 


All works shall be measured net in decimal system, as 
fixed in its place as given in 2.4.1 and 2.4.2. 


2.4.1 Dimensions shall be measured to the nearest 
0.01 m. 


2.4.2 Areas shall be worked out to the nearest 0.01 m?. 


2.5 Work to be Measured Separately 


Work executed in the following conditions shall be 
measured separately: 


a) Work in or under water, 

b) Work in liquid mud, 

c) Work in or under foul positions, and 
d) Work interrupted by tides. 


2.5.1 The levels of high and low water tides, where 
occurring, shall be stated. 


2.5.2 Where springs requiring pumping are likely to 
be encountered, the work shall be measured against a 
separate specific provision made for the purpose 
(see 2.5.3). 


2.5.3 Special pumping, where resorted to, shall be 
measured separately for all stages of pumping, 
including intermediate stages, unless stated otherwise, 
in kilowatt hours or HP hours, against specific 
provision made for the purpose. 


2.6 Bills of Quantities 


The bills of quantities shall fully describe the materials 
and workmanship, and accurately represent the work 
to be executed. 


2.7 Measurement of Stages 


Work shall be measured under the following categories 
in convenient stages stating the height or depth: 


a) Below ground/datum level, and 
b) Above ground/datum level. 


NOTE — The ground/datum level shall be specified in 
each case. 


3 DESCRIPTION OF FORMWORK 
The formwork shall include the following: 


a) Splayed edges, notchings, allowance for 
overlaps and passings at angles, sheathing 
battens, strutting, bolting, nailing, wedging, 
easing, striking and removal; 

b) All supports, struts, braces, wedges as well 
as mud sills, piles or other suitable 
arrangements to support the formwork; 

c) Bolts, wire ties, clamps, spreaders, nails or 
any other items to hold the sheathing together; 

d) Working scaffolds, ladder, gangways, and 
similar items; 


e) Filleting to form stop-chamfered edges or 


IS 1200 (Part 5) : 2013 


splayed external angles not exceeding 20 mm 
wide to beams, columns and the like; 

f) Ifrequired, temporary openings in the forms 
for pouring concrete, inserting vibrators, and 
cleaning holes for removing rubbish from the 
interior of the sheathing before pouring 
concrete; 

g) Dressing with oil to prevent adhesion; and 


h) Raking or circular cutting. 


4 TYPE OF FORMWORK 


Separate items shall be provided for formwork with 
type of contact surface, such as: 


a) wrought formwork (that is, sheathing having 
planed surfaces or sawn timber); 

b) sheathing formed from tongued and grooved 
boards; 

c) sheathing having plywood lining; 

d) sheathing having special lining or any other 
arrangement to give extra smooth finish or 
texture or decorative surface for architectural 
concrete; 

e) sheathing of steel sheeting, tubing or other 
varieties; and 


f) slip form technique extrusion process. 


5 CLASSIFICATION 


Formwork shall be generally classified as follows and 
measured separately, unless specified otherwise: 


a) Foundation, footings, bases of columns, etc; 
and mass concrete; 

b) Flat surfaces, such as, soffits of floors, roofs 
landing and the like; where floors exceed 
200 mm in thickness the formwork shall be 
measured separately stating the thickness; 


c) Vertical surfaces, such as, walls, partitions and 
the like, including attached pilasters, 
buttresses, plinth and string courses and the 
like, etc; 

d) Sloping or battering surfaces, including folded 
plates: 


1) Where inclination to horizontal plane 
does not exceed 30° (requiring shuttering 
only on the underside); 

2) Where inclination to horizontal plane 
exceeds 30° (where shuttering may be 
provided both on underside and upper- 
side, if required) (only underside area to 
be measured); 


e) Arches: 


1) upto 6m span, and 


2) above 6 m span; 


f) Cylindrical shells (area of underside to be 
measured): 


1) radius less than 3 m, and 
2) radius above 3 m; 


g) Wafle or ribbed slabs where shuttering is 
required for bottom inclined surface; 

h) Dormer vaults and shell roofs having curved 
surfaces in both directions (only the area of 
underside shall be measured); 

j) Sides and soffits of beams, beam haunchings, 
cantilevers, girders, bressumers and lintels; 
beams and girders | m deep and over shall be 
measured separately; 


k) Sides of columns, piers, pillars, posts and 
stanchions and struts (square/rectangular/ 
polygonal/circular/curved to be measured 
separately); 

m) Edges of slabs and breaks in floors and walls 
(to be measured in running metres where 
under 200 mm width or thickness); 

n) Cornices and mouldings; 


p) Small surfaces, such as, cantilever ends, 
brackets and ends of steps, caps and bases to 
pilasters and columns and the like; 

q) Chullah hoods, weather shades, Chhajjas, 
corbels, etc, including edges; 

r) Staircases with sloping or stepped soffits, 
including risers and stringers, excluding 
landing; 

s) Spiral staircases; 

t) Chimneys and shafts; 

u) Elevated water reservoirs; 

v) Well steining; 

w) Fins; and 

y) Slip forms. 


6 METHOD OF MEASUREMENT 


6.1 Formwork shall be measured, in square metres, 
as the actual surfaces in contact with the concrete or 
any other material requiring formwork. Formwork to 
small features, such as, in 5 (s) shall be enumerated. 
Formwork ‘left in’ shall be so described. 


6.2 Where formwork is required to be lined with 
wallboard, hardboard, polyethylene sheet or paper 
lining or to be coated with mould liquid or lime white, 
such formwork shall be so described and measured 
separately. 


6.3 Where lining of wallboard, asbestos, cork slab and 
the like is of a permanent character and is to be left in, 
such lining shall be measured separately; the 


description shall include any necessary fixing to the 
concrete. 


6.4 No deduction shall be made for each of opening 
up to 0.4 m?. No deduction shall be made for any 
opening/cutouts when slip form technique is used. In 
case slip form technique is used, the formwork 
provided as stoppers to the openings/cutouts shall be 
measured separately as conventional formwork; and 
no deduction shall be made for any opening/cutout. 


6.5 Raking or circular cutting and rounded or moulded 
edges shall be measured in running metres. Moulded 


IS 1200 (Part 5) : 2013 


stoppings shall be enumerated. 


6.6 Formwork to secondary beams shall be measured 
up to the sides of main beams, but no deduction shall 
be made from the formwork of the main beam where 
the secondary beam intersects it. Formwork to beam 
shall be measured up to sides of column, but no 
deduction shall be made from the formwork to 
stanchion or column casings at intersections of beam. 


6.7 Jack rods (bread bar) used in slip forming, if 
required to be left in position in the concrete shall be 
measured separately by weight. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


“BIS Catalogue” and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 44 (7797). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: Www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. Р. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 

FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. 

NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 
VISAKHAPATNAM. 

Published by BIS, New Delhi 


