dr IS 101 (Part 1/Sec 1) : 2023 
Indian Standard 


Mr, APA ai CEE SIE ferw 
TA SR UT At EA 
APT 1 ART AT ATT RARO (AAA AR A) 


(RAT TRITT) 


Methods of Sampling and Test for 
Paints, Varnishes and Related 
Products 
Part 1 Tests on Liquid Paints (General 
and Physical) 

Section 1 Sampling 
( Fourth Revision ) 


ICS 87.040 
© BIS 2023 
A HAR Sat 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR UA, 9 FR TE AH AM, AE feet - 110002 
Ve MANAR BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


June 2023 Price Group 6 


Paints, Varnishes and Related Products Sectional Committee, CHD 20 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 1/Sec 1) (Fourth Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the 
draft finalized by the Paints, Varnishes, and Related Products Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Chemical Division Council. 


This standard (Part 1/Sec 1) is one of a series dealing with methods of sampling and test for paints, varnishes, and 
related products. The other sections of this Indian Standard (Part 1) are: 


Section 2 Preliminary examination and preparation of samples for testing; 

Section 3 Preparation of panels; 

Section 4 Brushing test; 

Section 5 Consistency; 

Section 6 Flash point; 

Section 7 Mass per litres determination of density Pycnometer method; and 

Section 8 Pigments and extenders determination of pH value of aqueous suspension. 


This standard prescribes methods of sampling for paints, varnishes and related products. Correct sampling forms 
the basis for the subsequent tests and their results. The various sampling procedures need to be carried out with 
great care by operators having the required knowledge and experience. This standard intended to supplement 
general instructions to obtaining uniform and samples of convenient size and adequately representative of the 
product being sampled. 


In the third revision, this standard superseded 3 of IS 82 : 1973 ‘Method of sampling and test for thinners and 
solvent for paints (first revision)”, IS 85 : 1950 “Methods of test for oil pastes for paints" and IS : 197-1969 
“Methods of sampling and test for varnishes and lacquers (second revision). 


This revision has taken to bring out the standard in the latest style and format of the Indian Standard. It also 
incorporates amendments issued to the last version of the standard. In addition, the following changes have been 
made: 


a) Terminology of batch, lot, individual sample, representative sample, etc has been added for better 
understanding; 

b) Valve sampling tube and bottom or zone sampler apparatus have been added; 

c) Criteria for storing sample has been prescribed; and 

d) References of Indian standards have been updated wherever required. 


The composition of the committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is listed in Annex A. 


In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, If the final value, observed or 
calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 2022 'Rules for rounding off numerical 
values (second revision)’. 


IS 101 (Part 1/Sec 1) : 2023 


Indian Standard 
METHODS OF SAMPLING AND TEST FORPAINTS, 
VARNISHES AND RELATED PRODUCTS 


PART 1 TESTS ON LIQUID PAINTS (GENERAL AND PHYSICAL) 
SECTION 1 SAMPLING 
( Fourth Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard prescribes methods of sampling for 
paints, varnishes and related products. It is one of a 
series of standard dealing with sampling and testing 
of these products. This standard aims at obtaining 
uniform samples of convenient size and adequately 
representative of the product being sampled. The 
sample or samples so obtained are suitable for 
examination and preparation prior to testing. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions, 
which through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of and necessary adjuncts to this 
standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of 
the standards listed below: 


IS No. Title 
IS 1303 Glossary of terms relating to 
1983 paints (second revision) 

3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions 
given in IS 1303 and following shall apply. 


3.1 Batch 


Definite quantity of material produced under 
uniform conditions. 


3.2 Lot 


In a single consignment, all the packages containing 
paints, varnishes and related products of the same 
type, grade and form, and drawn from the same 
batch of manufacture, shall continue a lot. If the 
consignment consists of packages containing paints, 
varnishes and related products of different types, 
grades and forms, packages containing paints, 
varnishes and related products of same type, grade, 
form and batch of manufacture shall be grouped 
together and each such group shall constitute a 
separate lot. 


3.3 Individual Sample 


Part of a product taken from a bulk material by one 
sampling operation. 


3.4 Representative Sample 


Sample which complies, within the precision of the 
test methods used, in all of its characteristic features 
with the material sampled. 


3.5 Average Sample 
Mixture of equivalent portions of individual sample. 
3.6 Top Sample 


Individual sample taken at or near the surface of a 
material. 


3.7 Middle Sample 


Individual sample taken at a level corresponding to 
approximately half of the total volume below the 
surface. 


3.8 Bottom Sample 


Individual sample taken at or near the lowest level 
of a material. 


3.9 All-layer Sample 


Individual sample taken through the total height of 
the material, so that all layers are collected 
proportionately. 


3.10 Composite Sample 


Individual sample taken from a number of different 
levels of a material 


3.11 Intermittent Sample 


Individual sample taken intermittently from a flow 
of material. 


3.12 Continuous Sample 
Sample taken continuously from a flow of material. 


3.13 Storage Sample 


Individual sample average sample or continuous 
sample which is taken and stored for a specified 
period for reference purpose. 


IS 101 (Part 1/Sec 1) : 2023 


4 TYPES OF PRODUCTS 


The sampling procedures appropriate for use with 
paints, varnishes and related products depend on the 
nature and the physical properties of the products. 
The following types of products may conveniently 
be distinguished. 


4.1 Type A 


Fluid products consisting of a single homogeneous 
liquid phase, such as varnishes and thinners. 


4.2 Type B 


Fluid products consisting of two liquid phases, such 
as emulsions. 


4.3 Type C 


Fluid products consisting of one or two liquid phases 
together with one or more solid phases. Such 
products are normally called ‘paints’ and include 
‘emulsion’ paints. 


4.4 Type D 


Viscous products (which usually consist of one or 
more solid phases with small amounts of a liquid 
phase) such as putties, mastics, lutes, cements and 
pigment pastes in oil or varnish. This type also 
includes very viscous resinous materials. 


4.5 Type E 

Products in powder form. 

5 SAMPLING EQUIPMENT 
5.1 General 


The choice of sampling device depends on the type 


of material being sampled, the type of container, 
the level to which the container is filled and the 
sample size required. The sampling tools in general 
used for sampling raw materials, may also be used 
for sampling finished products. Sampling 
equipment is required for two separate operations 


a) Mixing the product to make it as 
homogeneous as possible; and 


b) Taking a truly representative sample. 


5.2 Materials and Design 


All sampling equipment shall be made of material 
not subject to deterioration, unaffected by the 
products being sampled and incapable of 
contaminating the sample. The design of the 
equipment shall take into account convenience in 
use and ease of cleaning (for example, any grooves, 
acute internal angles, or areas which are inaccessible 
or difficult to inspect for cleanness, shall be 
avoided). 


5.3 Apparatus for Mixing 


Broad-bladed stirrers of suitable length to reach the 
bottom of the container being sampled. Mechanical 
stirrers may also be used. 


NOTE — In certain circumstances, when stirring a product 
of low flash point or where an explosive hazard exists the 
only metal permitted is bronze. 


5.4 Apparatus for Taking Samples 
5.4.1 Sampling Tubes Glass or Metal, (see Fig. 1). 


IS 101 (Part 1/Sec 1) : 2023 


eí je- 5 TO 10 0 


- 20 TO 40 Q 


400 TO 800 


ls TO 10 ® 


All dimensions in millimetres, 
Fin. 1 SurramLe DESIGN OF SAMPLING TUBE 


IS 101 (Part 1/Sec 1) : 2023 


FIG. 2 BOTTOM OR ZONE SAMPLER 


5.4.2 Small Dip Cans 


5.4.3 Weighted Sampling Cans, with valve closures, 
for taking samples at all levels. 


5.4.4 Scoops, Triers or Spatulas 
5.4.5 Valve Sampling Tube 


5.4.6 Bottom or Zone Sampler, (see Fig. 2) 
particularly suitable for taking sample from large 
containers. 


5.5 Sample Containers 


New containers of suitable size and with large 
apertures shall be used. These may be: 


a) Metal containers of which the interior is not 
coated with varnish and which are fitted 
with tight metal closures; and 


b) Glass containers which can be tightly 
closed with closures which are not affected 
by the sample. Amber glass provides a 
partial protection against the action of light 
and the contents can be further shielded, if 
necessary, by an external opaque covering 
or packaging. 


5.6 Labels 


Suitable labels or other means of marking or 


identifying samples shall be provided. 
5.7 Cleaning of Sampling Equipment 


Strict cleanliness must always be observed. All 
sampling apparatus must be dry and free from 
residue, so as not to contaminate the sample. After 
each use, the apparatus shall be thoroughly cleaned 
with the aid, if necessary, of a brush or clean cotton 
rag, and shall then be rinsed with a suitable solvent. 


6 SAFETY PRECAUTIONS 


A number of hazards may arise in the course of 
sampling. Many volatile products which are 
flammable or toxic may be present and hazards may 
arise from sparking or static electricity. The 
samplers must always be informed (this must be 
stated on the labels or packaged products) of the 
dangers arising from the nature of the products and 
must handle them with due care, using protective 
equipment, if required. 


NOTE — All statutory regulations concerning safety and 
hygiene shall be complied with. 


7 TYPES OF SAMPLING 


There are two main types of sampling, which may 
be carried out corresponding to the following stages: 


a) When the manufacture of the product has 
been completed but the product is still in 
the final manufacturing vessels, or when it 
is being transferred into the delivery 
containers (cans, drums, barrels, etc); and 


b) When sampling from the delivery 
containers which may also be bulk 
transport containers. Such sampling shall 
take place at the manufacturer’s premises 
unless, by special agreement between the 
purchaser and the vendor, sampling is 
permitted at the purchaser’s premises, in 
which case the product after receipt must 
not have been treated in any way. 


8 METHODS OF SAMPLING 


8.1 When the type of sampling specified in 7 (a) is 
required, the following procedures shall be 
applicable. 


8.1.1 For Fluid Products (Types A, B and C) 


When the sample is to be taken directly from the 
final manufacturing vessel, the product shall first be 
thoroughly stirred (see Note 1) and the sample taken 
by means of a suitable weighted sampling can from 
different levels (see Note 2) in the vessel. When the 
sample is to be taken in the course of transferring the 
product into the delivery containers, it shall be made 
up from small sub-samples taken at regular intervals 
during the filling process. In the former case, it is 
important to strain the sample before filling the 
sample container, using the same procedure as 
normally used when filling the delivery containers. 


NOTES 


1 Clear varnishes and similar products in settling tanks shall not 
be stirred before sampling. 


2 An additional safeguard to check the relative densities of 
samples taken from different levels and if these are not within 


IS 101 (Part 1/Sec 1) : 2023 


the agreed tolerances, to continue stirring until the agreed 
tolerances are met. 


8.1.2 For Viscous or Powdery Products (Types D 
and E) 


The product shall be inspected in the final 
manufacturing vessel and, if uniform in appearance, 
the sample shall be taken from various parts of the 
bulk using a sampling tube, scoop or trier. 
Alternatively, a number of small samples can be 
taken at regular intervals during filling of the 
delivery containers. 


8.2 When the type of sampling specified in 7 (b) is 
required, the following procedures shall be 
applicable. 


8.2.1 For Fluid Products (Types A, B and C) 


If the product is supplied in a bulk container, the 
same procedure applies as in 8.1.1 for sampling 
from the final manufacturing vessel. However, in the 
absence of a circulating pump or other means of 
agitation, it is usually necessary to take 
approximately equal size samples at different levels 
(see Note) in order to obtain a representative sample 
of the whole. 

NOTE — An additional safeguard to check the relative 

densities of samples taken from different levels and if these are 


not within the agreed tolerances, to continue stirring until the 
agreed tolerances are met. 


8.2.1.1 If the product is supplied in a consignment 
of containers, the total number of containers shall be 
noted and then a selection made at random of the 
containers for sampling. It is recommended that 
approximately Vn/2 containers shall be sampled, 
where n is the total number of containers in the 
consignment (see Table 1). Only sound, unopened 
containers shall be chosen for sampling, unless it is 
desired specifically to examine damaged or opened 
containers. 


Table 1 Sampling Scheme 


SINO. Number of Containers Number of Containers 
in Consignment (7 ) to be Sampled 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) 2-10 2 
ii) 11 - 20 3 
ili) 21-35 4 
iv) 36 - 50 5 
v) 51-70 6 
vi) 71 - 90 7 
vii) 91 - 125 8 
viii) 126 - 160 9 
ix) 161 - 200 10 


and thereafter one container for every additional 58 containers. 


IS 101 (Part 1/Sec 1) : 2023 


The following procedures shall then be adopted: 


a) Each selected container shall be opened in 
turn and examined for the presence of 
surface skin, separation of the contents (for 
example, water or solvent) or the presence 
of foreign matter; 


b) After completing the removal of any 
surface skin if present, the stirrer shall be 
inserted into the container and the extent 
and type of settling, namely soft, hard or 
hard-dry, shall be noted. The presence or 
absence of a gel shall also be noted, care 
being taken not to confuse gelling and 
thixotropy (see Note); 


NOTE — Both thixotropic and gelled Paints and 
varnishes have a jelly-like consistency, but whereas 
the consistency of the former is markedly reduced by 
stirring or shaking, the consistency of a gelled paint or 
varnish cannot be reduced in this way. 


c) Any settled pigment shall be redispersed 
with the stirrer and the ease of redispersion 
noted. The closure shall then be replaced 
securely, the container shall be inverted 
and left inverted while the other containers 
are examined. Finally, the containers shall 
be shaken and rolled to effect complete 
redispersion and re-incorporation of the 
pigment, preferably using mechanical 
means; 


d) The containers shall be re-opened and 
examined for uniformity. Successive 
stirring, shaking and rolling shall then 
be continued until the contents are 
homogeneous, the bottom end of the stirrer 
being examined for undispersed pigment 
from time to time during the stirring, The 
time required to attain uniformity shall be 
noted; and 


e) When the contents of the containers have 
become homogeneous, they shall be 
sampled, using the small dip can to transfer 
the product to the sample container, which 
shall be filled so that there is an ullage (air- 
space) of about 5 percent. The container 
sampled and the sample container shall be 
closed and the sample container shall be 
cleaned on the outside and immediately 
labelled in accordance with 9.1. 


8.2.2 For Viscous Products (Type D) — These 
products are normally supplied in wide-aperture 


containers. Examine the condition of all the 
containers and select at random for sampling an 
appropriate number in accordance with Table 1. 
Open each of the selected containers, remove any 
protective covering and inspect the contents for 
homogeneity or separation of phases (for example, 
phases of oil, solvent or water). If the product 
appears homogeneous, or is made so by stirring, take 
a sample from the whole depth of the product in each 
selected container, using a suitable metal sampling 
tube or other suitable equipment, and place it in a 
suitable sample container which shall be filled so 
that there is an ullage (air-space) of about 5 percent. 
Close the sample container and label it in 
accordance with 9.1. 


8.2.3 For Powdery Products (Type E) — These 
products are normally supplied in sacks, paper or 
plastics bags, drums, barrels or plywood containers. 
Examine the condition of all the packages and select 
at random for sampling an appropriate number in 
accordance with Table 1. Open each of the selected 
packages and take, from various parts of each 
package, small portions of the product by means of 
a suitable sampling instrument and close the 
packages. Place these portions in a suitable sample 
container, close the container, mix the contents 
thoroughly by shaking, and label in accordance with 
9.1. 


9 LABELLING, SEALING AND STORAGE OF 
SAMPLES 


9.1 Labelling 


The containers shall be labelled as soon as the 
samples are taken; the labels shall bear all the 
necessary information to enable the samples to be 
identified without dispute. The labels and marking 
ink used shall be capable of withstanding moisture 
and any solvents contained in the sample. The label 
shall not be attached to the stopper, but to the neck 
or body of the containers. 


It is recommended that the following particulars, 
whatever applicable shall be given on the label: 


a) The name of the manufacturer code, if 
necessary, and a description of the product; 


b) The quality and particulars of the 
consignment; 


c) The reference number of the batch, storage 
tank, barrel, etc; 


d) The dates of manufacture and of sampling; 


e) The total number of samples taken from the 
consignment; 


f) The designation and reference number of 
the sample (where the samples are drawn 


from a certain number of selected 
containers, the latter shall be numbered); 

g) The consignor; 

h) The place of sampling; 

j) The name of the sampler; and 

k) Any hazard symbols necessary 


9.2 Sealing 
After a sample container has been closed and 


IS 101 (Part 1/Sec 1) : 2023 


contents and label cannot be removed 
without breaking the seal. 


9.3 Storage 


The storage sample shall be stored under suitable 
storage conditions in an airtight container and, 
where required, protected from light and moisture 
for the period specified, taking into consideration all 
relevant safety regulations. 


IS 101 (Part 1/Sec 1) : 2023 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Paints, Varnishes and Related Products Sectional Committee, CHD 20 


Organization 


Institute of Chemical Technology, Mumbai 
Akzo Nobel Coatings India Pvt Ltd 


Asian Paints Ltd, Mumbai 


Berger Paints India Ltd, Howrah 


Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Tiruchirapalli 


Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


Central Public Works Dept, New Delhi, 


Consumer Voice, New Delhi 

Controllerate of Quality Assurance (Materials), Ministry 
of Defence (DGQA), Kanpur 

Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


Harcourt Butler Technical University, Kanpur 


Indian Institute of Technology, Mumbai 


Indian Paints Association, Kolkata 


Indian Small Scale Paint Association 


Institute of Chemical Technology, Mumbai 


J K Cement Limited, Kanpur 


Kansai Nerolac Paints Ltd, Mumbai 


Meta Chem Paints and Adhesives Private Limited, 
Nashik 


Representative(s) 


PROFP. A. MAHANWAR, (Chairperson) 
SHRI SANATAN HAJRA 


SHRI RAJEEV KUMAR GOEL 
SHRIRAJES BARDIA (Alternate) 


SHRI TAPAN KUMAR DHAR 
SHRI SWAGATA CHAKROBORTY (Alternate) 


SHRI K. SRINIVASAN 
SHRI V. RAJESHKHARAN (Alternate) 


DR SUKHDEO R. KARADE 
DR P. C. THAPLIYAL (Alternate) 


SHRI AMAR SINGH 
SHRI M. L. PRASAD (Alternate) 
SHRI DIVAKAR AGRAWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI M. A. U. KHAN 


DR GURBACHAN SINGH 
SHRI A. K. PATRA (Alternate) 


SHRI S. GHOSHAL 
SHRI A. SATYA SRIDHAR (Alternate) 


PROF P. K. KAMANI 
PROF ARUN MAITHANI (Alternate) 


PROF SMRUTIRANJAN PARIDA 


SHRI SUBROTO BANERJEE 
DR M. B. GUHA (Alternate) 


SHRI MUKESH GOYAL 
SHRI H. SATHYANARAYAN (Alternate I) 
SHRI NIRAV RAVESHIA (Alternate ID) 


PROF V. V. SHERTUKADE 


SHRI RANA PRATAP SINGH 
DR PRITI PILLAY (Alternate) 


SHRI LAXMAN NIKAM 
SHRI MANOJ KUMAR SOMANI (Alternate) 


SHRI BISWANATH PANJA 
SHRI HEMANT KULKARNI (Alternate) 


Organization 


Ministry of Defence, Department of Standardization, 
New Delhi 


Ministry of Industry, New Delhi 


National Test House (ER), Kolkata 

Naval Materials Research Laboratory (NMRL), Thane 

Office of the Micro Small & Medium Enterprises 
(MSME), New Delhi 

Paint and Coating Technologists Association, Ranpur 

Pidilite Indusries Ltd, Mumbai 


Research Designs & Standards Organization, Lucknow 


Shriram Institute for Industrial Research, Delhi 


SSPC India Chapter, Kolkata 


The Shipping Corporation of India Ltd, Mumbai 


In Personal Capacity (Flat 1303, Blooming Heights, 
Pacific Enclave, Powai, Mumbai 400076) 


In Personal Capacity (2, Block Mann Street, Kolkata, 
West Bengal, 700013) 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 101 (Part 1/Sec 1) : 2023 


Representative(s) 
LT COL PRAVEEN DEO 
SHRI V. K. CHHABRA (Alternate) 
SHRINAND LAL 


SHRIMATIP. NATARAJAN 
DR A. B. MONDAL (Alternate) 


DR T. K. MAHATO 
DR G. GUNASERARAN (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI M. ANNABACRIAM 
SHRIMATI M. S. RAMMIYA (Alternate) 


SHRI USHENDRA SINGH 
SHRI VIVER RUMAR SAXENA (Alternate) 


SHRI RAMESH RASHYAP 
SHRI SUSHANT PANGAM (Alternate) 


SHRI P. K. BALA 
SHRI K. P. SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI A. K. MAJUMDAR 


DR BUDDHADEB DUARI 
SHRI ANIL SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRIN. K.TRIPATHI 
SHRI SUSHIL ORAON (Alternate) 


DR B. P. MALLIK 


DR SUNIL KUMAR SAHA 


A. K. LAL SCIENTIST ‘F’/DIRECTOR AND HEAD 
(CHEMICAL) [REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL, 


BIS (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI PUSHPENDRA KUMAR 
SCIENTIST ‘B’/ASSISTANT DIRECTOR 
(CHEMICAL), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication 8 Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.:CHD 20 (20407). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRE Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern :8® Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


