*ml%

IS 14907:2001 ISO 10227:1996 ( Reaffirmed 2005 )

Wl=FVwl?
.

WmTTR"lmg (qmum)wtw-rqti
I*1

T&k#iiW!JdiW
Indian Standard

ft?@Tt?T

HUMAN/HUMAN SURROGATE IMPACT (SINGLE SHOCK) TESTING AND EVALUATION -- GUIDANCE ON TECHNICAL ASPECTS

ICS

13.160

@ BIS 2001

BUREAU
MANAK

OF

IN DIAN

ST ANDA
ZAFAR

RDS
MARG

BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

February

2001

Price Group

3

Mechanical

Vibration and Shock Sectional Committee,

ME 28

NATIONAL

FOREWORD 10227:1996 `Human/human surrogate impact (single on technical aspects' issued by the International adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the and Shock Sectional Committee and approval of the

This Indian Standard which is identical with ISO shock) testing and evaluation -- Guidance Organization for Standardization (ISO) was recommendations of the Mechanical Vibration Mechanical Engineering Division Council.

The text of ISO standard has been approved as suitable for publication as Indian Standard without deviations. In the adopted standard, certain conventions are not identical to those used in Indian Standards. Attention is especially drawn to the following: a) Wherever the words `International read as `Indian Standard'. Standard' appear referring to this standard, they should be

b)

Comma (,) has been used as a decimal marker, while in Indian Standards, is to use a point (.) as decimal marker.

the current practice

In this adopted standard, reference appears to certain International Standards for which Indian Standards also exist. The corresponding Indian Standards which are to be substituted in their place are listed below along with their degree of equivalence for the editions indicated: /nternationa/ Standard ISO 5805:1997 Corresponding Indian Standard IS 13281:1999 Mechanical vibration and shock affecting man -- Vocabulary IS 14910:2001 Mechanical vibration and shock -- Human exposure -- Biodynamics coordinate system Degree of Equivalence Identical

ISO 8727:1997

do

IS ISO

14907:2001 10227:1996

Indian Standard

HUMAN/HUMAN SURROGATE IMPACT (SINGLE SHOCK) TESTING AND EVALUATION -- GUIDANCE ON TECHNICAL ASPECTS

1

Scope

3 Definitions
For the purposes of this International Standard, the definitions given in ISO 5805 and the following definitions apply. 3.1 test subject Human being or human surrogate (e.g. cadaver, animal, manikin) that serves as the test occupant of the vehicle. 3.2 test subject coordinate system: Right-handed orthogonal coordinate system (x, y, z), in accordance with ISO 8727, which is used to locate the position of the instrumented segments of the test subject. 3.3 vehicle: Structure to which the driving force or impact is delivered. This includes all elements of the system which transmit forces to the test subject, including any integrated support/seat and restraint system. 3.4 vehicle coordinate system: Right-handed orthogonal coordinate system (x, y, z) which is used to locate the occupant position and restraint or impact surface configuration. Its origin should be defined relative to a rigid structure (one that is not significantly deformed during the test) on the vehicle.

This International Standard defines technical aspects of experiments dealing with human or human surrogate testing and procedures for collecting and reporting biomechanical data. Recommended practices regarding measurements, instrumentation and reporting of results are outlined. These recommended practices are provided as guide for ease of interpretation and comparison of data among different organizations. This International Standard `is limited to experiments involving indirect (inertial) impact and does not address direct impact with vehicle surfaces or the use of the airbag-type of active restraining device.

2 Normative references
The following standards contain provisions which, through reference in this text, constitute provisions of this International Standard. At the time of publication, the editions indicated were valid. All standards are subject to revision, and parties to agreements based on this International Standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent editions of the standards indicated below. Members of IEC and ISO maintain registers of currently valid international Standards. ISO 5805:-- 1), Mechanical ing man -- Vocabulary. vibration and shock affect-

4 Measurement requirements
4.1

Initialconditions

vjbratjon and shoc& -- ISO 8727:-- 2), Me~hanj~a/ Human exposure -- Biodynamics coordinate systems.

All measurements of location and orientation should be transformable to the vehicle coordinate system.

1) To be published. (Revision of ISCI5805:1981) 2) To be Dublished.

1S 14907:2001 ISO 10227:1996

4.1.1 The numbers, surveyed locations, orientations, mounting and coupling characteristics of all transducers and photometric targets should be reported. 4.1.2 The initial position of the test subject, the restraint, and support or seat configuration should be described as fully as possible. The restraint system description should include the following: a) b) location points; and orientation of anchor attachment

such as segment mass, centre of gravity, moment inertia, etc., can be used in extrapolating results populations of interest. 4.3.1 Anthropometric measures

of to

These should include, but need not be limited to, the following: a) b) c) d) e) f) g) h) i) i) k) mass; stature; sitting height; shoulder height; head height; head breadth; head length; head circumference; neck circumference; shoulder breadth; shoulder/elbow elbow-rest elbow/finger length;

angles of belt restraints relative to body contact points and anchor attachment points; distances along webbing from anchor points to the points where the belts contact the occupant; webbing properties, hardware; dimensions and type of

c)
d)

e) webbing
f) g) h) webbing

retractor characteristics; connector characteristics;

preloads on restraint components; webbing force-elongation properties. fixture should in-

The description of the support/seat clude the following: a)

1) m) n) o) P) q) r)

height; tip length;

geometry and materials adequate to establish the deformation and friction characteristics of the support/seat surface; dimensions and orientations hicle coordinate system; relative to the ve-

chest circumference; thoracic thickness; popliteal height; buttock/knee length;

b) c)

energy absorption or deformation characteristics of support structures between the origin of the vehicle coordinate system and the occupant, if pertinent; location of point of impact. the

knee height (sitting). Condition and prehistory

4.3.2

d)

4.1.3 Ambient environmental factors affecting outcome of the experiment should be reported. 4.2 Input

variables

The input variables include time-dependent displacement, velocity, acceleration and force. All measurements of variables should be transformable to the vehicle coordinate system and should be accomplished in the number of degrees of freedom matching those included in the response measures. Typical amplitude-time histories of the input are desirable; otherwise, a statement of the methodology used to measure these variables should be reported. 4.3 Subject parameters \

For live human subjects, complete medical histories including age and gender should be recorded and any anomalies noted. Similar information, where possible, should also be provided for cadavers. Cadaveric experiments should be conducted on specimens free from injuries, wounds, or other anomalies which may interfere with the conduct of the test or interpretation of results. Cadavers should be as fresh as possible and embalming procedures should be completely described. Storage conditions of the cadaver, up to the time of the experiment, should also be described. Any ancillary procedures, such as vascular injection or control of the thoracic volume of cadavers, should be completely defined. For all types of testing (live human subject, human surrogate), anatomical landmarks should be identified, marked and measured in relation to defined anatomsystems (in accordance with ical coordinate ISO 8727). If possible, radiographic records of the subjects with instrumentation mounts and measurement scales should be made. Insufficiently visible anatomical landmarks should be enhanced via the use of radio-opaque spheres. Photographs or schematics with dimensions identified should be maintained if radiographic records are not possible.

Measurement of body dimensions are crucial for describing the test subject and estimating mass distribution properties. Mass distribution properties of the whole body and anatomical segments can be obtained directly in cadaveric research but must be estimated for live volunteer subjects. Biomechanical parameters

2

IS ISO

14907:2001 10227:1996

5 5.1

Instrumentation
Transducers

tracking systems. Subclauses requirements for displacement 5.2.1 The requirements 5.1.4 apply with "target" and other sensors".

5.2.1 to 5.2.5 give the tracking.

Data collected from transducers mounted on the subject and within the seat, restraint or other forcetransmitting structure, as well as physiological sensors, are used to quantify both the severity of the test and local responses of the anatomy to crash and impact forces, and to delineate transmission characteristics and transfer functions of anatomical segments. Subclauses 5.1.1 to 5.1.6 give the required transducer characteristics. 5.1.1 Transducers and other sensors mounted on the subject should have low mass so as to affect minimally the responses of the monitored anatomical segment. 5.1.2 Transducers and other sensors mounted on the subject should be mounted as solidly as possible to well-defined anatomical structures relative to the skeletal system so that their data are unaffected by relative motion artifact. If solid attachment is not possible (as may be the case in the testing of live human subjects), a complete description of the attachment method should be provided. 5.1.3 Transducers- and sensors should have appropriate frequency response with respect to the anticipated phenomena to be measured. In cases where the frequency characteristics of the body segment are not known, broad-band frequency measurements should be attempted, with subsequent analysis conducted to identify the significant frequency content of the signal. 5.1.4 All transducers and other sensors mounted on the subject should be surveyed with respect to the anatomical coordinate system of the particular anatomical segment. If translation to other points of interest is warranted, then both linear and angular response shall be monitored. 5.1.5 Transducers mounted within the seat, restraint system or other force-transmitting sTructure should be surveyed with respect to the vehicle coordinate system. 5.1.6 Transducers and sensors should be in current calibration. Each data path should also be calibrated to assess the effects of environmental factors such as drift of the data signal, etc. 5.2 Displacement tracking

given in 5.1.1, 5.1.2 and substituted for "transducers

5.2.2 If motion is confined to one plane, and a camera can be located on an axis perpendicular to this plane, then only one camera is required. Othetwise at least two cameras are needed. 5.2.3 Camera location and orientation should be measured relative to the target and other cameras, in the vehicle coordinate system. 5.2.4 If time-dependent measurenlepts are made from dispbcement data, then an accurate timing source shall be preeisely synchronized to the displacement recording system. Timing signal accuracy and frame rate measurement techniques should be described. 5.2.5 If applicable, the lens type, focal length and aperture opening should be described and calibrated as used in the test. 5.3

Data acquisithm

The data channel includes the entire signal path from the transducer to the recording device. All procedures implementing the requirements given in 5.3.1 to 5.3.6 should be documented. 5.3.1 Each data channel should be calibrated against a reference signal traceable to known standards. 5.3.2 The entire data channel should be calibrated as a unit. As a less desirable alternative, each subsystem in the data channel path may be calibrated individually and the overall accuracy of the channel computed from these results. 5.3.3 If used in data analysis, the linearity each data channel should be determined. error of

5.3.4 For each channel, the amplitude-frequency response, phase-frequency' response, damping characteristics and the roll-off rate and phase lag should be determined and reported. The cut-off frequency should be consistent with the anticipated frequency response of the anatomical segment monitored. 5.3.5 For each transducer, should be determined. the cross-axis sensitivity

Data from surface-mounted targets is used to quantify the displacement responses of the anatomy to crash and impact forces. Photographic or video cameras and targets may be used as well as solid-state target

5.3.6 For each transducer, the sensitivity coefficient should be determined. A recommended method is the linear least-squares computation to determine the sensitivity coefficient on the basis of calibration data.

IS ISO

14907:2001 10227:1996 7.1.2 Neck inertial response

6 Data retrieval and processing
This clause deals with storage, retrieval and processing of data. The guidelines given should be considered the minimum requirements.

6.1

Filtering

and recording

Neck response can be characterized by the relationship between the measured accelerations at TI (first thoracic vertebral body) and the accelerations at the occipital condylar point computed from the head inertial response. The shear and axial forces, as well as the equivalent torque at the occipital condyles, can be calculated using results which should include a) b) linear and angular head accelerations the occipital condylar point, translated to

The data channel (see 5.3.4) filtering should be compatible with the dynamic range of the recorder, precluding high-frequency saturation of the recorder or aliasing error in the digitizing process.

6.2

Digitization c)

orthogonal components of linear acceleration at the origin, and along the axes, of the T1 anatomical coordinate system, and angular acceleration tomical axes. or velocity about the TI ana-

6.2.1 In cases where the analog signal is digitized, the amplitude resolution should be a minimum of ten bits. Twelve bit or greater resolution is preferred for minimizing digitization error in the analog-to-digital conversion. 6.2.2 The sampling frequency used should be compatible with the cut-off frequency and roll-off rate to minimize aliasing error associated with non-bandlimited signals.

7.1.3

Thorax inertial response

6.3 Processing
All filtering of recorded data should be reported in terms of amplitude response, cut-off frequency, rolloff characteristics and phase shift. The cut-off frequency should be consistent with the anticipated frequency response of the anatomical segment monitored

For live human subjects, the thorax is not rigid so is not easily instrumented, and measurements are subInvasive methods have been ject to inaccuracies. used in the case of human surrogates to improve the coupling between the transducer and the bony anatomical landmark. Since tissue and bone properties may be affected, resulting data may be less valid than those obtained from rigid anatomical segments such asthe head. Documented procedures should be used to minimize these effects. Results should include the orthogonal components of the linear accelerations at the chosen anatomical locations. 7.1.4 Pelvis inertial response

7
7.1

Repotiing of results
Inertial response

The pelvis, although rigid, poses unique problems in mounting transducers, due to its complex interaction with the seating and restraint system. These interactions can severely degrade the mechanical coupling between the transducers and the bony anatomy, introducing measurement errors. Documented procedures should be used to minimize these effects. Invasive methods (i.e. rigidly mounting transducers to bony anatomical features) have been used in the case of human surrogate testing. Results should include a) orthogonal components of linear accelerations at the origin, and along the axep, of a well-defined anatomical coordinate system, and angular accelerations or Wdocities about the yaxis, used to define pelvis-lap belt interaction (possible submarining, etc.). Additional inertial responses

The inertial responses used to quantify both the severity of the test and local responses and transfer properties of the anatomy to crash and impact forces should include the results described in 7.1.1 to 7.1.5. Results should be translated to anatomically based reference points to provide a basis for comparison among subjects. 7.1.1 Head inertial response

b)

Results should include 7.1.5 a) orthogonal components of linear acceleration at the centre of gravity of the head along the axes of the head anatomical coordinate system, and angular acceleration or velocity tomical axes of the head. about the ana-

The inertial response of body segments other than the head, neck, thorax or pelvis should include a) orthogonal components of linear accelerations at the origin, and along the axes, of a well-defined anatomical coordinate system, and

b)

4

IS 14907:2001 ISO 10227:1996

b)

when appropriate, about well-defined

angular acceleration anatomical axes.

or velocity

7.3.4

Pelvis displacement

Results should include 7.2

Force transmission

a)

If the transmission of forces through the restraint system, seat and other supporting structures is measured, the data should include the force components with respect to the vehicle coordinate system.

orthogonal components of linear displacements with respect to the initial location, and along the axes, of a welldefined anatomical coordinate system, and angular displacements about the initial location of the y-axis, used to define pelvis-lap belt interaction (possible submarining, etc.). Additional body segment displacement than the

b)

7.3 Displacement
If displacement results are reported, the considerations regarding transducer placement discussed in 7.1.1 to 7.1.4 also apply to target placement. 7.3.1 Head displacement

7.3.5

The displacement of body segments other head, neck, thorax or pelvis should include a}

Results should include a) orthogonal components of linear displacement with respect to the initial location of the head anatomical coordinate system, and angular displacement about the initial location of the head anatomical axes. Neck displacement b)

orthogonal components of linear displacements with respect to the initial location, and along the axes, of welldefined anatomical coordinate systems, and when appropriate, angular displacements about the initial location of well-defined anatomical axes.

b)

7.4 Physiological data
Physiological data collected during tests with live human subjects or live human surrogates should be reported where these data represent deviations from the normal range for the measurement. Other physiological data should be reported in the form of a summary.

7.3.2

Neck displacement can be characterized by the relative displacement between T1 and the occipital condyIar point. Results should include a) head linear and angular displacements (see 7.3.1) translated. to the occipital condylar point with respect to the initial location of the TI anatomical coordinate system, and orthogonal components of the linear and angular displacements at the origin of the T1 anatomical coordinate system with respect to the initial location of the T1 anatomical coordinate system. Thorax displacement

7.5 Subjective data
Written or verbal data collected from live human subjects to determine their subjective response to the test variables should be collected in a reliable and consistent manner. This should enable comparison with physical and physiological data.

b)

7.6 Medical findings
7.3.3 Observations of injury, physiological changes or other indications of medical significance should be reported. Records of these findings should be permanently maintained for each live subject used in impact tests.

Results should include the orthogonal components of the linear displacements at the chosen anatomical lo_ cations with respect to the initial locations of welldefined anatomical coordinate systems.

5

IS ISO

14907:2001 10227:1996

Annex A

(informative)
Bibliography

[1]

ISO 1503:1977,

Geornetrica/ orientation

and directions

of movements.

[21 ISO 2041:1990, [31 ISO 7250:J~,

Vibration and shock -- Vooabu/ary. Basic list of anthropometric measurements.

3) To be published.

6

Bureau of Indian Standards 61S is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright 61S has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed Review of Indian Standards publications maybe reproduced in any not preclude the free use, in the course as symbols and sizes, type or grade to the Director (Publications), BIS.

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review ind icates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Catalog ue' and `Standards: Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. ME 28 ( 0541 ).

Amendments Amend No.

Issued Since Publication Text Affected

Date of Issue

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones :3230131,3233375,3239402 Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 : 1/14 C. I.T. Scheme Vll M, V. 1.P. Road, Kankurgachi cALcu-f-rA700054 160022 Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone 3237617 3233841

{

Eastern

3378499,3378561 { 3378626,3379120 603843 { 602025 2350216,2350442 { 2351519,2352315 8329295,8327858 { 8327891,8327892

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH

Southern: C. 1.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113

Western

: Manakalaya, E9 MlDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUM BA1400093

BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. Branches AHMADABAD. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. ` Printed at Printogmph, New Delh, Ph.: 5726847

