Waa HTA IS 14581 : 2019 
Indian Standard 


Ue Got À gpa oh Pear 
ait Ware & fer artasit 
fergie 


(Far Fra ) 


Guidelines for Formulation and 
Operation of a Suggestion 
Scheme in an Organization 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 03.100 


© BIS 2019 


ada AM Rt 
BUREAUOFINDIANSTANDARDS 
® HAF WH, 9 gNm BAHL HM, Ae fercit-110002 
aii MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


February 2019 Price Group 3 


Management and Productivity Sectional Committee, MSD 04 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Management and Productivity Sectional Committee had been approved by the Management and Systems 
Division Council. 


A Suggestion Scheme is a management driven scheme through which the employees can offer their ideas, voluntarily 
for improvements leading to better method of work and/or financial savings, better work culture, environment and 
rectification of deficiencies in the system, if any. 


Suggestion Scheme is a total employee involvement programme. The progress of the organization depends upon 
the creative ability of its employees and this directly contributes to the enrichment of the organization. It is a 
medium through which the hidden ideas in a person are brought out and put to meaningful and productive use for 
betterment of the organization. 


This standard was first published in the year 1998 and later revised in the year 2006. Second revision of this 
standard has been carried out to incorporate the changes in the light of experience gained and the current practices 
being followed by organizations for their suggestion schemes. 


The revised version contains the following major changes: 


a) Provision has been made for the organization to consider receiving suggestions from business partners 
like suppliers/vendors; 


b) Areas for inclusion and exclusion of making/considering suggestions have been broad based; and 
c) Provision for recognition through awards/financial incentives has been incorporated. 


It is believed that every individual will find his work more meaningful and challenging when he/she is provided an 
opportunity to make continuous improvement and create value to it. The objective of the scheme is to enthuse the 
employees to come forward voluntarily with suggestions that they have in mind which could contribute to the 
enhancement of production/brand image, safe work practices, quality, cost/waste/overhead reduction and 
conservation of environment etc. 


Success of the suggestion scheme depends primarily on cooperation from the employees and top management’s 
commitment (not mere support). It provides a direct upward communication channel for the employees to put 
forward their ideas and thus providing an open environment. To give a boost to this scheme, head of unit/organization 
recognize and award valuable suggestions. 


IS 14581 : 2019 


Indian Standard 


GUIDELINES FOR FORMULATION AND OPERATION 
OF A SUGGESTION SCHEME IN AN ORGANIZATION 


(Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard provides guidelines for the formulation 
and implementation of a Suggestion Scheme in an 
organization. 


2 AIMS OF SUGGESTION SCHEME 


2.1 A Suggestion Scheme is a formal mechanism, which 
encourages employees to contribute constructive ideas 
for improving their organization including its working 
environment. 


2.2 The main emphasis of the Suggestion Scheme is to 
motivate employees to come forward with their ideas 
and contribute to the management of change for 
betterment of the organization. It basically aims to 
generate ideas from employees at all levels in order to 
improve existing system/procedures for enhancing 
productivity, brand image, safety, quality and cost 
reduction besides addressing concerns for environment. 
However, the success of such schemes depends on the 
cooperation from the employees as well as commitment 
of the top management (not mere support). 


2.3 In the context of employee involvement process, 
suggestion scheme fulfils a variety of purposes. It can: 


a) drive both, employee involvement and work 
improvement; 

b) improve organizational performance; 

c) embrace both the team and the individual; 

d) look at the strategic value of an idea yielding 
tangible and/or intangible benefits; 

e) help in identifying ways for design and 
development of knowledge management 
systems; and 

f) help in identifying and encouraging creative 
talent in the organization. 


2.4 The critical success factors for any suggestion 
scheme will be: 


a) Employee creativity, innovativeness and his/ 
her participation; 

b) Top management’s continued support for 
providing a conducive work environment; 


c) Periodic review by the top management for 
effective functioning of suggestion scheme; 


d) Prompt, fair, transparent and evaluation of the 
suggestions based on merit; and 

e) Management’s encouragement to employees 
by way of proper reward/recognition. 


2.5 The major indices of success of such a scheme are 
evaluated normally annually and are: 


a) Participation Rate — Percentage of 
employees participating in the scheme; 
b) Suggestion Rate — Percentage of suggestions 


accepted; 

c) Implementation Rate — Number of 
suggestions implemented out of accepted 
suggestions; 


d) Benefit Rate — Tangible savings accrued per 
suggestion per year; 

e) Intangible gains; and 

f) Average time taken for evaluation of 
suggestions. 


NOTE — With a view to enhance inter unit competitiveness, 
data’s are to be worked out unit-wise. 


3 DEVELOPMENT/AREAS OF SUGGESTIONS 


3.1 The progress of an organization comes through well 
implemented good ideas. Any idea to improve upon an 
existing condition can be turned into a suggestion. For 
evolving effective suggestions, some of the questions 
that can be asked are given as follows: 


a) Is this activity/process necessary? 
1) Can it be eliminated? 
2) Can it be combined with some other 
activity? 
3) Can it be simplified? 
4) Can the activity be split for benefit? 
5) Can the effort and time be reduced? 


6) Can the sequence of activity be changed 
for the better? 


b) Is there any wastage of resources? 
1) Can it be reduced/eliminated? 
2) Can these resources be optimally utilized? 


3) Can the waste including electronic waste 
be reduced? 


4) Can there be safer disposal of waste? 


IS 14581 : 2019 


c) 


d) 


g) 


h) 


j) 


Are there any unsafe equipments or practices? 
1) Can suggestions be made regarding safety 
aspects? 

Can it improve the services/product quality/ 
service standards/service time? 

Can it improve process efficiency? 

Is there any scope for improvement in 
housekeeping or environment? 


Is there any reduction in the amount of paper 

handling/consumption/movement? 

1) Can the number of copies be reduced? 

2) Can the size of paper be reduced? 

3) Can there be printing on both sides? 

4) Can the font size be reduced (without 
straining eyes for reading)? 

5) Does everyone receiving copies really 
require that information? 

6) Is there any duplication of information? 

7) Can the information provided in different 
forms/fields be combined/clubbed in 
one? 

8) Whether all the information relevant? 

9) Can the paper work be reduced or 
eliminated through use of alternate mode 
like electronic media, etc? 

10) Can paper usage/movement be avoided/ 
bypassed for printing at desired place to 
save time and postage? 

Can the processing of documents be made 

faster? 

Does your organization have a formal 

mechanism for 

1) assessing customer satisfaction level? 

2) enhancing the customer satisfaction? 

3) utilizing the feedback received from 
customers for continual improvement? 

4) taking follow-up action on complaints 
and dissatisfaction of customers? 


NOTE — The answer to above questions will lead to generation 
of a number of effective suggestions. 


3.2 Some of the areas in which suggestions can be made 
are as follows: 


a) 
b) 


Image building of the organization; 
Achieving organizational goals more 
efficiently and effectively; 

Quality issues; 

Improving productivity; 

Improving working processes and procedures, 
including communications; 

Reduction in input cost, wasteful expenditure 
and wastages; 


g) 


h) 


Development of Human Resources and 
increasing morale, motivation and job 
satisfaction; 


Standardization and variety reduction/ 
enhancement within the organization; 


Economic indigenization; 


Improving environment both at workplace and 
surroundings; 


Improving satisfaction of stakeholders; 
Improvement in service level; 


Improvement in product design and 
development; 


Improving health and safety; 


Improvement in supply chain management 
including materials handling; 


Improvement of layout of the work area; 
Proper disposal of waste; and 
Reduction in use of paper. 


3.3 The following areas are excluded from being 
considered as an eligible suggestion: 


a) 
b) 


c) 


j) 


k) 


Organization’s/Government policies, etc; 
Personal grievances or complaints regarding 
wage, promotion, transfer or any other such 
matter; 

Company’s Personnel Policies, regarding 
collective bargaining, requiring negotiation 
with unions, Government authorities or any 
external agencies; 

A criticism directed at other staff/employee; 
Suggestions already received/adopted/ 
implemented; 

Missed actions converted to suggestions; 

A proposal which draws attention to a problem 
but offers no solution; 

Matters which are already under consideration 
by the Management; 

Suggestions discussed in any of the company’s 
forums as a result of referred assignment; and 
Any assigned work, task under any 
programme. 


4 SUGGESTION EVALUATION COMMITTEE 


4.1 A Suggestion Evaluation Committee should be 
constituted by the organization comprising 
approximately 5 senior level persons from various 
disciplines/functions who should be assigned the task 
of assessing the practicability including accrued 
savings, one time or recurring, from the suggestions 
and recommend awards based on the merit. One of the 
members of this Committee should be designated as 
Member Secretary of Suggestion Evaluation 


Committee. All suggestions should be forwarded to the 
Member Secretary, who will be assigned the task of 
operating the Suggestion Scheme within the 
organization. The senior most member should Chair 
the meeting. The depart-mental head of the area in 
which the suggestion is given should be invited in the 
meeting where suggestion is to be considered. 


4.2 In case of large organizations, department-wise 
coordinator should be designated for better handling 
of the suggestion scheme. 


4.3 The responsibilities of the Member Secretary should 
be as follows: 


a) Interaction with the Suggestion Evaluation 
Committee and, wherever needed, with the 
suggestor; 

b) To receive all suggestions and promptly 
acknowledge in the prescribed format 
alongwith the serial number allotted. A single 
suggestion proposed by two or more people 
jointly should also be admissible and a single 
acknowledge-ment should be issued to the first 
person; 

c) To scrutinize these suggestions for their 
eligibility as per 3.3 and forward only eligible 
suggestions to the concerned Department(s) 
for their views regarding implementability of 
the suggestions; 

d) To arrange to obtain from the suggestor, if 
required, further details/clarifications about 
his suggestion; 

e) To put up eligible suggestions alongwith the 
comments of the departments wherever 
received; 

f) To maintain records of all suggestions 
received/scrutinized; 

g) To compile the suggestions received and 
organize meeting of the Suggestion Evaluation 
Committee for assessment of the suggestions 
and recommendations; 

h) To invite suggestor(s) to the Suggestion 
Evaluation Committee meeting, if required; 

j) To inform the suggestor about the result of 
the evaluation; 

k) To carry out all such acts that calls for smooth 
functioning of the scheme; 

m) To periodically provide feedback of the 
Scheme to the top management for ensuring 
its continued effectiveness, suitability and also 
for continual improvement; and 

n) To notify the suggestor whose suggestion is 
not accepted, with a Thanks Letter (note of 
encouragement) to the suggestor(s) to look for 


IS 14581 : 2019 


their continued participation. This should be 
done within a stipulated time period — say 
within 15 to 30 days after receiving of 
suggestion. 


4.4 The responsibility of Suggestion Evaluation 
Committee should be: 


a) to meet at periodic intervals for evaluating 
suggestions; 

b) to co-opt experts for assessing certain 
suggestions requiring specialized knowledge; 

c) to have a positive approach to all the 
suggestions and recommend awards on merits; 

d) to advise the concerned departments for 
implementation of the accepted suggestion at 
the earliest; 


e) to get feedback on suggestions already 
implemented and recommend necessary 
changes, if needed; 

f) to review the suggestions received requiring 
substantial cost involvement and/or longer 
time frame for recommending or otherwise to 
the top management for its implementation; 

g) to review the suggestions which though 
feasible but not immediately implementable, 
such suggestions may be approved for 
consideration at a later date; 


h) to make final recommendation of the award; 
and 

j) to maintain confidentiality till such time the 
awards are announced. 


5 RECEIPT OF SUGGESTIONS 


5.1 Suggestions can be given by individual/group of 
employees of the organization. The organization may 
decide to consider suggestions received from their 
retired employees. The organization may also think of 
receiving suggestions from business partners like — 
suppliers/vendors. 


5.2 The suggestion forms may be printed in Hindi, 
English and/or local language which may be used for 
receiving suggestions from the employees. A typical 
form is given in Annex A. 


5.3 Each suggestion is to be submitted separately in 
the prescribed form. 


5.4 Suggestions could be placed in the suggestion box 
installed by the organization at prominent locations. 
Suggestions can also be forwarded by any other mode 
including electronic. 


5.5 The suggestions may be given in simple Hindi or 
English/local language. It should describe the existing 
method, the proposed method and an explanation as to 


IS 14581 : 2019 


why this suggestion is better. If necessary, sketches/ 
flow diagrams may be made to explain the ideas. 


5.6 While suggestions necessarily mean employees 
coming forward with a solution to a perceived problem, 
at times, an employee may perceive a problem for which 
he may not have a direct solution to offer but the 
organization may be benefitted once the problem is 
solved. The suggestor may have only some sketchy idea 
regarding the solution. In such cases, an official of that 
department may help the suggestor in crystallizing his 
thoughts and giving the suggestion to the Member 
Secretary. 


5.7 The information regarding previous suggestions 
should be readily available to employees for guidance 
and to avoid duplication of efforts. 


6 CRITERIA FOR EVALUATION 


6.1 As a first step, an employee should be made aware 
about this scheme and its benefits. A conducive 
environment must be created and the employee must 
be enthused to participate wholeheartedly. Suggestor(s) 
should be encouraged by suitable recognition/reward. 


6.2 The basis for selecting the suggestions for award 
should be improvements proposed in any areas of 
suggestions given under 3.2. The Committee should 
not make comparative evaluation of suggestions 
received but each suggestion should be evaluated on 
its own merit. Various criteria could be used for giving 
consideration for selection of suggestion like, 


a) Reduction in input cost in areas like men, 
material, machine and money leading to 
— Cost Savings per annum 


— Foreign Exchange Savings (recurring/ 
non-recurring) 


— Cost reduction 

— Quality improvement 

— Productivity improvement 

— Improvement in Service Levels 
b) Ingenuity of Suggestion (depth of study) 
c) Applicability (in work area/entire plant) 


d) Improved Productivity by way of reduction 
in wastage, wasteful expenditure, improved 
systems including for marketing, etc. 


6.3 Similar type of suggestion received from two or 
more individuals/team should be decided on first come 
first serve basis for evaluation of suggestions. 


6.4 The suggestion could not be considered for any of 
the following reasons: 


a) The suggestion is not presently feasible and/ 
or implementable; 


b) The new method may be a safety/health/ 
environmental hazard; and 


c) The cost of implementation outweighs the 
benefits. 


NOTE — There may be cases where suggestion though may 
not be presently feasible but considered for review at a later 
date, these suggestions be kept for review subsequently. 


6.5 The Suggestion Evaluation Committee constituted 
above, will be empowered to judge and select the 
suggestions for the reward/recognition. In case there is 
a need to modify the suggestion for its effective 
implementation, the Suggestion Evaluation Committee 
may do so in consultation with the respective 
Departmental Head. 


6.6 Specified time norms should be laid down for 
evaluation of suggestions received. 


7 REWARD AND RECOGNITION 


7.1 The type of reward/recognition should be decided 
by the committee depending on the merit of the 
suggestion. 


7.2 The employee, whose suggestion has been accepted 
for implementation by the Suggestion Evaluation 
Committee, should be suitably rewarded/ recognized. 
If, the suggestions given by a team are accepted for 
implementation, equal credit should be given to each 
team member for reward etc. 


7.3 The names of the employees, alongwith their 
photographs, whose suggestions are accepted, may be 
prominently displayed on the notice board for a 
specified period. They may be suitably recognized 
through in-house magazines, newsletters, etc, and the 
same should also be reflected in their annual appraisal 
report. 


7.4 A financial incentive may also be considered for 
accepted/implemented suggestion appropriately. 


8 IMPLEMENTATION 


8.1 The suggestions accepted for implementation 
should be forwarded by the Member Secretary to the 
concerned department(s) preferably, alongwith the 
specified time period for its implementation. 


8.2 The concerned departmental head, dealing with the 
activity relating to the suggestion which has been 
accepted, should take necessary steps to get the 
suggestion implemented and apprise status of 
implementation to the Member Secretary. 


8.3 If the concerned departmental head is of the opinion 
that it would take some more time to implement the 
suggestion, the same may be conveyed to the Member 
Secretary. If there is need for modification, he may do 
so under intimation to Member Secretary. 


8.4 The Member Secretary should submit a report on 
the progress of implementation of accepted suggestions 
to the Suggestion Evaluation Committee during its 
meetings. If considered necessary, on review of position 
of implementation, the Suggestion Evaluation 
Committee may request the respective activity heads 
for expediting the implementa-tion of suggestion. The 
Member Secretary should receive feedback on 


IS 14581 : 2019 


suggestions implemented and review for changes, if 
required. He will also ensure horizontal deployment of 
implemented suggestions across the organization. 


9 FLOW CHART FOR SUGGESTION SCHEME 


A typical flow chart for the scheme is given in 
Annex B. 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 5.2) 
AN EXAMPLE OF A TYPICAL FORM FOR RECEIVING SUGGESTIONS FROM EMPLOYEES 


Name and Designation 


Employee ID No. 
Department 


Office address for communication 


Address for communication 
(in case of retired employee/others) 


Email-id 


Telephone No. 


Phone/Mobile No. 
(in case of retired employee/others) 


Area of suggestion 


Suggestion Details (enclose details and 
analysis/sketch/justification etc on separate 
sheets, if required) 

a) Existing 

b) Suggested 


Direct Benefit (financial, time etc) 


(Signature) 
Date: 


For Official Use Only 


Suggestion Serial No. 


Acknowledgement Reference 


Letter dated 


IS 14581 : 2019 


ANNEX B 
(Clause 9) 
FLOW CHART FOR SUGGESTION SCHEME 


| 


Employee submits 
his Suggestion 


Suggestion Box opened at decided 
date/ time & suggestions are numbered 


Suggestion forwarded to concerned 
HOD for comments, if required Thanks efter 


Comment Already Implemented 


received 


Can't be Implemented 


Committee evaluates & 


recommends for Reward 


Publicity of Suggestion & 
Suggestor at Notice Board etc. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MSD 04 (0571). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.1.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 26 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


