rs

72934:

mqo

(Reaffirmed 2006)

Indian Standard

SOLARENERGY-THERMAL APPLICATIONS-VOCABULARY
UDC 697'7'620'91 : 001'4

0

BIS 1991

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS]
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI llqOO2

Price Gromp 6

@Iar Energy Sectional Committee,

HMD 4

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 22 March 1990, after the draft finalized by the Solar Energy Sectional Committee had been approved by the Heavy Mechanical Engineering Division Council. The terminology of the terms used in any field are always useful for better commercial understanding. This standard gives a classified list of terms and letter symbols used in the field of solar thermal energy and their definitions. This standard is based on ISO/DP 9488 `Solar energy - thermal issued by the International Organization for Standardization ( IS0 ). application vocabulary'

1s 12934 : 1990

Indian Standard

SOLARENERGY-THERMAL APPLICATI;ONS VOCABULARY
1 SCOPE 1.1 This standard defines terms relating thermal applications of solar energy. 2 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
to

2.1.9 Solar Hour Angle An angle of 15" for each hour measured from solar noon, negative for morning hours and positive for afternoon hours, that is SHA = 15" at(Hr= 13). 2.1.10 Solar Noon For any given location solar noon is the local time of day when the sun is at its highest altitude for that day, that is the time when the sun crosseq the observer's meridian. 2.1.11 Solar Time The hour of the day as determined by the apparent angular motion of the sun across the sky with solar noon as the reference point for 12 o'clock. 2.1.12 Sunset Hour Angle The hour angle occurring at sunset.
exist For NOTE - Mzny different definitions `sunset'; the most generally used is the definition : the time when the centre of disk coincides with th: extension of the horizontal plane.

For easy reference and use, the term and definitions have been classified as given below. 2.1 Solar Geometry 2.1.1 Aphelion The point in the earth's orbit, when it is farthest from the sun, approximately 152 X lo6 km. 2.1.2 Perihelion The point in the earth's orbit when it is closest to the sun, approximately 147 x 166 km. 2.1.3 Solar Declination The angle subtended between the earth-sun line and the plane of the equator ( north positive ), zero on equinox dates, varying between + 23'45" ( June 22 ) and - 23'45" ( Dee 22 ). 2.1.4 Azimuth ( Angle ) The arc of the horizon ( in between a given point and direction : usually the true in a clockwise direction, 0 degrees ) intercepted an adopted reference north, and measured to 360".

geometric
the sun's observer's

2.1.13Orientation ( Angle ) The direction, a collector ( or a building ) faces, expressed as the azimuth angle of the horizontal projection of the surface normal. 2.1.14 Angle of Incidence The angle between the direct plane ~of the absorber. 2.1.15 Sun-Path Diagram A graphic representation of solar altitude versus solar azimuth, showing the position of the sun from sunrise to sunset for various dates of the year. NOTE - Many different projection methods are in
use.

2.1.5 Solar Aximuth ( Angle > The projected angle between a straight line from the apparent position of the sun to the point of observation and due north. The angle is measured clockwise using the projections on the local horizontal plane, 0 to 360". 2.1.6 Solar Altitude ( Angle > The angle between a straight line from the apparent position of sun to the point of~observation and the horizontal plane through that point of observation. 2.1.7 Zenith The highest point of the sky hemisphere, point vertically above the observer. 2.1.8 Zenith Angle The angular distance of the sun from the vertical, that is the angle subtended by a vertical line to the zenith and the line of sight to the sun, that is 90" minus the solar altitude angle. 1 the

radiation

and the

2.1.16 Heliodon A solar angle simulator, useful in conducting shading assessments on buildings or collector arrays, usually having a model table, tilting for the latitude, rotating for the hour of day, using a lamp to represent the sun, at some distance away, mounted on a vertical rail, allowing adjustment for the date ( for declination ). 2.1.17 Solarscope A device similar to the heliodon, but having a

IS 12934 : 1990

fixed horizontal model table and a light source movable to any solar altitude and azimuth. 2.1.18 Meteorological
Range-

2.2.10 Solar Radiation The radiation emitted by the sun. ( Practically all the solar radiation incident at the earth's surface is at wavelengths less than 3 m and is often termed `shortwave radiation'. Use of the latter term in this sense is discouraged >. 2.2.11 Solar Energy

The distance `v at which the threshold contract, between a black and white target is 0'02. l&L-In1 Q E of the atmospheric

Thus V is a function only extinction coefficient 0. 2.1.19 Angle of Inclination

The energy emitted by the sun in the form of electromagnetic energy ( Primarily in the wavelength region from 0'3 to 3'0 pm ) or any energy made available by the reception and conversion of solar radiation. 2.2.12 Solar Flux The radiant flux originating from the sun.

Angle between the absorbing collector and the horizontal. 2.2 Radiation Terms 2.21
Radiation

surface

of the

2.2.13 Solar Spectrum Wavelength distribution electromagnetic radiation 2.3 Radiation Quantities ( or frequency ) of emitted from the sun.

The phenomenon of energy transfer in the form of electromagnetic waves. 2.2."t Radihnt Energy The energy of electromagnetic 2.2.3 Radiant Flux Power emitted, transferred form of radiation. 2.2.4 Ultraviolet Radiation Electromagnetic radiation with wavelengths shorter than visible light ( shorter than approximateiy 380 nm ) and longer than X-rays. 2.25
Visible Radiation

2.3.1 Zrradiance waves. Flux of radiation per unit area ( at a point on a surface ); quotient of the flux of radiation incident on an infinitesimal element of the surface containing the point under consideration, by the area of the element. Irradiance is normally expressed in watts per square metre ( W/m2 ).
NOTE - Solar irradiance is often termed `incident solar radiation intensity', instantaneous inSOhtiOn' or `incident radiant flux density'.

or received

in the

2.3.2 Zrradia tion Integrated total irradiance normal to the plane of the collector aperture whose effect on the thermal output of the collector would be the same as that of the integrated total solar. radiation. Irradiation is normally expressed in megajoules per square metre ( MJmm2 ). 2.3.3 Insolation

Radiation with human optic approximately 380 nm and 780

wavelengths that stimulate the nerves. Visible radiation lies within a wavelength band of nm.

2.2.6 Infrared Radiation Electromagnetic radiation of between 780 nm and approximately 2.2.7 Shortwave Radiation Radiation with wavelengths less than 3 m. wavelengths 1 nm.

An imprecise term, may mean the radiation received from the sun, solar irradiation or irradiance, or in a general sense : sunlight penetration. Its use is deprecated. 2.3.4 Direct Solar Radiation Solar flux coming from the solid angle of the sun's disk on a surface perpendicular to the axis of that solid angle. In conventional instruments the acceptance cone includes a plane angle of about 6 degrees. ( It is measured in watts per square metre ). 2.3.5 Diffuse ( Solar) Radiation Diffuse solar radiation is the hemispherical solar radiation minus the radiation received from a small solid angle centered on the sun's disk.

2,2.8 Longwave Radiation Radiation originating from sources at terrestrial temperatures, ( for example ground and other terrestrial objects >, thus substantially all at waveiengths greater than 3 pm. ( Sometimes called `thermal radiation' >. 2.2.9
Total ( Irxident ) Radiation

The integrated lengths.

value of radiation

of all wave-

IS 12934: 1990
NOTE - This solid angle should be equal to that of the field-of-view angle mentioned in 3.4 and then the sum of the dir& solar radiation c_omponent normal to the receiver plane and the diffuse solar radiation is equal to the hemispherical solar radiation.

2.3.16 Altazimuth Mount A tracking mount capable of rotation about orthogonal altitude and azimuth axes; tracking may be manual or by a follow-the-sun servomechanism. 2.3.17 Solar It-radiance, Spectral ( E h )
, y c .

2.3.6

Global ( Solar ) Radiation

The hemispherical solar radiation horizontal plane surface. 2.3.7 Circumsolar Radiation

received by a The solar irradiance per unit wavelength interval at a given wavelength. Units W.m-", m-1. ' 2.3.18 Transmittance,
7

Radiation scattered by the atmosphere so that it appears to originate from an area of the sky immediately adjacent to the sun. It causes the solar aureole. 2.3.8 Hemispherical
( Solar ) Radiation

The ratio of the transmitted incident flux. 2.3.19 Radiant Exposure
H

radiant flux to the

Time integral of irradiance. The solar radiation received by a plane froma solid angle of 2a steradians. surface 2.4 Radiation Measurement 2.4.1 Rndiometer Instrument used for measuring radiation ( the output cf the instrument can be either irradiance or irradiation ). 2.4.2 Pyrradiometer An instrument for measuring the total radiation on a plane surface from a solid angle of 2~ steradians. 2.4.3 Pyranometer Instrument for measuring the radiation on a plane receiver surface which results from the radiant fluxes incident from the hemisphere above within the wavelength~range of 0'3 to 3 m.
NOTE - The given spectral range represents roughly the spectral range of solar radiation ( also called solar or short wave range ) at the giound and is only nominal. Depending on the material used for the domes which protect the receiver surface of a pyranometer the~spectral limits of its responsitivity meet more or less accurately the above-mentioned limits. NOTE - More than 99% of the hemispherial solar radiation at the earth's surface is contained withIn the wavelength range from 0 3 pm -to 3.0 m. Generally the hemispherical solar radiation is composed of the direct solar radiation and diffuse solar radiation ( solar radiation scattered in the atmosphere ) as well as of solar radiation reflected by the ground.

2.3.9 A tmospheric Longwave Radiation
( Syn. with the deprecated

term `sky radiation' ) The thermal radiation emitted by gases and particles in the atmosphere. 2.3.10 Sky Radiation A deprecated `atmospheric radiation'. term, as it can mean either radiation', or `diffuse ( solar )
Solar Radiation

2.3.11 Extra-Terrestrial

Solar radiation received at the outer limit of the earth's atmosphere. 2.3.12 Solar Constant The solar irradiance outside the earth's atmosphere on a plane normal to the direction of this radiation, when the earth is at its mean distance from the sun ( 149'5 x lo6 km 1. The solar co. rtant value so defined is 1367 W/m", but may be revised within & 7. 2.3.13 Direct ( Solar ) Irradiance
ante )
Irradiance produced by direct

2.4.4 Solarimeter A specific type of pyranometer. Its use as a synonym for pyranometer is deprecated. i.i.5
Spectral Pyranometer

( Beam Irradi-

radiation

on a

given plane. 2.3.14 It-radiance, Average
Integration of irradiance over a specified

An instrument for measuring solar over restricted wavelength ranges. 2.4.6 Pyrheliometer

radiation

time

interval, divided by that time interval. 2.3.15 World Radiometric Reference
( WRR )

Are radiometers designed for measuring the irradiancc which results from the solar radiant flux from a well defined solid angle whose axis is perpendicular to the plane receiver surface.
to this definition pyrhelioNOTE - According meters are applied to measure direct solar radiation at normal incidence. Typical field-of-view angles of pyrheliometers range from 5" to IO".

The WRR is a scale ( reference ) representing the SI units of irradiance with an uncertainty of less than f 0'3 percent. 3

IS12934:1990
2.4.7 Sunshine Recorder

2.4.15 Pyrgeometer An instrument for determining the irradiance on a plane receiving surface which results from the radiant fluxes incident from the hemisphere above within about the wavelength range 4 pm to 50 pm.
NOTE -The given spectral range is nearly identical with those of the so-called terrestrial radiation and is only radiation or longwave nominal. Depending on the material used for the domes which protect the receiving surface of h pyranometer the spectral limits ~of its responsivity meet more or less accurately the above-mentioned limits.

An instrument which records the time interval during which solar radiation reaches sufficient intensity to cast distinct shadows. NOTE - The threshold value of direct irradiance of 120 f 24 W/m2 has been suggested.
24.8 Eohel

Curve ( drawn on -a map ) of equal sunshine duration during a given interval of-time. 2.4.9 Isorad Curve ( drawn on a map ) of equal irradiation during a given interval of time. 2.4.10 Field Pyrheliometers Pyrheliometers which are designed and used for long term field measurements of direct solar radiation. Generally these pyrheliometers are weather-proof encased. The receiver is protected from wind, dirt, rain, snow and insects by a window ( of quartz ) or alternatively by strong ventilation. 2.4.11 Solar Irradiance Simulator A source of radiative energy simulating the solar radiation. Enables a solar domestic water heater to be tested under standard conditions of ambient temperatures, wind and radiation intensity. 2.4.12 Standard Pyrheliometers Standard pyrheliometers are pyrheliometers of any class serving as reference in calibration procedures. They are selected and well tested instruments, the long time drifts of sensitivity of which are relatively low, controlled on a routine basis by comparisons with other standard pyrheliometers.
NOTE - Generally standard pyrheliometers are ouerated without orotectinn windows. To achieve the above-mentioned stab'ility of the sensitivity, the use of a standard pyrheliometer should be restricted to comparisons and calibration activities. The instrument should be stored carefully in a laboratory of moderate climate.

solar

2.4.16

Pyrheliometer,

Absolute ( Self-Caltbrating

)

A radiation sensor for determining the direct solar irradiance having a field of view of 5 degrees and a slope angle of 0'75 to 0'8 degrees and having a blackened cavity receiver for absorption of the incident radiation; the measured electrical power in a heater affixed to the cavity receiver constitutes the method of self-calibration and traceability to absolute SI units; the sensing of the temperature rise of the receiving cavity is employed to either relate the radiation quantity to the SI electrical quantity ( passive ) or to control the heater to stabilize cavity temperature at a desired set-point ( active >. 2.4.17 Pyranometer,
Reference

A well maintained pyranometer selected according to its stability and quality and used principally to calibrate other instruments. 2.4.18 Integrating Sphere A sphere of from 1 to 4 m in diameter with a planar segment ( usually _a horizontal bottom segment ) provided on which to mount pyranometers to be compared with an artificial light source, the sphere wall being coated with a flat white paint ( as lambertian as possible to provide a nearly uniform irradiance >. 2.4.19 Pyrheliometer,
Secondary Reference

2.413

Primary Standard Pyrheliometers

A pyrheliometer essentially meeting WMO first class specifications but not having self-calibrating capability. 2.4.20 Tilt Angle The angle between the vertical and the pyranometer axis which is identical to the angle between the horizontal plane and the plane of the detector surface 2.4.21 Field-of -View Angle of a Pyrheliometer The field-of-view angle of a pyrheliometer is the full angle of the cone which is defined by the center of the receiver surface and the border of the aperture, if the latter is circular and concentrical to the receiver surface ; if not, effective angle may be calculated. 4

Primary standard pyrheliometers are recruited from the group of absolute pyrheliometers (also called absolute radiometers ). 2.4.14 Secondary Standard Pyrheliometers Secondary standard pyrheliometers, are pyrheliometers of high precision and stability whose calibration factors have been derived from primary standard pyrheliometers. The group comprises absolute pyrheliometers which do not fulfil the requirements of primary standard pyrheliometers, as well as compensation pyrheliometers and some other precise but historical instruments like the silver disk pyrheliometer.

IS 12934 : 1990

2.422 Solar Tracker ( or Sun Tracker )
Solar trackers are power driven or manually operated with movable supports which must be employed to align a pyrheliometer to the sun. "Eqtmtorial trackers" are sun-following devices which have an axis of rotation pointing towards the elevated pole; the axes of motion are the hour angle and the declination of the sun. "Altazimuth trackers" are sun-following devices with the solar elevation angle and the azimuth angle of the sun as coordinates of movement. 2.4.23 Sun Shading Disk Device )
Disk Device ( Short : Shade

barometric overhead.

pressure,

and the sun was directly

of NOTE - Air mass varies with the declination the sun and the -local barometric pressure which changes with altitude. 2.5.7

Attenuation

The reduction of radiation flux over a given path length, due to absorption and scattering. 25.8 Scattering Interaction of radiation with matter, where its direction is changed but the total energy and wavelength remain unaltered. 25.9
Sky ~Temperature

A device which allows to move a disk in such a way that the sun is always screened from the receiver of a radiometer ( for example a pyranometer ). For calibration purposes quick removal of the disk is mandatory. 2.4.24 Calibration of a Radiometer Calibration of a radiometer means the determination of the absolute responsivity or the calibration factor as its reciprocal of a radiometer under well defined measurement conditions. 2.5 Radiation
2.5.1

The atmospheric radiation received at a surface may be expressed in terms of an equivalent blackbody radiation temperature, which is the sky temperature. 2.510
Angstrom

Unit of length :10e10 m or 0'1 nm. ( Its use is discouraged,Jhe preferred unit is the nano-metre: 1 nm = 10 A. ) 2.5.11 Air Mass Zero ( AM0 ) Describing solar radiation quantities outside the earth's atmosphere at the mean earth-sun distance.
2.6 Collector Types

Properties

and Processes

Asorptance

( Solar )

The ratio of the amount of solar radiation absorbed by an element of a surface to the amount of such radiation incident on it. 2.5.2 Emittance The ratio of the radiant energy emitted by a body to the energy emitted by a blackbody at the same temperature. _ 2.5.3 Rrffectance . The~ratio of radiation reflected from a surface to the radiation incident on that surface which is dependent on wavelength of radiation and angle of incidence. 2.5.4 ReJlectance, Hemispherical The ratio of all of the flux leaving a surface or a medium by reflection, within a solid angle of 2 steradians, to the incident flux. 2.5.5 Albedo Ratio of the solar radiation reflected by a surface, to that incident on it. A generalised term for the average reflectance of a defined surface area ( usually of the earth or clouds ) in technical applications its use is discouraged, the preferred term is `reflectance'. 2.5.6 Air Mass The ratio of the mass of atmosphere in the actual observer-sun path to the mass that would exist if the observer was at sea level, at standard 5

2.6.1 Collector, Solar Thermal Device containing
2.6.2

an absorber.

Liquid Type Colfector

A solar collector transfer fluid.

that uses a liquid as the heat

2.6.3 Air Type Collector A solar collector that uses air as the heat transfer fluid. 2.6 4 Collector, Flat Plate A non-concentrating solar collector in which the absorbing surface is essentially planar. 2.6.5 CoIlector, Concentrating A solar collector that uses reflectors, lenses or other optical elements to redirect and concentrate the solar radiation passing through the aperture onto an absorber, the surface area of which is smaller than the aperture area. 2.6.6 Collector, Line Focus A concentrating collector that concentrates solar radiation in one plane only producing a linear focus.

IS 12934 : 1990 2.6.7 Collector, Point Focus

2.6.18 Collector Vertical Wall that focuses solar A solar collector which is placed on a vertical wall ( with a tilt angle of 90 degrees ). 2.6.19 Collector, Site Assembled A solar collector which site of its installation. is assembled only at the

A concentrating collector radiation to a point.
2.6.8

Collector, Parabolic Trough

A concentrating collector that focuses solar radiation by means of a cylindrical reflector having a parabolic cross section. 2.6.9 Collector Parabolic Dish A concentrating collector having a paraboloidal dish-shaped reflector, that focuses the solar radiation onto an attached focal-point receiver or engine-receiver unit. 2.6.10 Collector, Non-Zmaging A concentrating collector that concentrates solar radiation onto a relatively small receiver, but without bringing the solar radiation to a sharp point or line focus, that is without creating an image of the sun on the receiver. 2.6.11 Collector, Compound Parabolic Concentrating

MOTE - This may be because parts af the building ( rafters, insulation etc. ) are part of the collector or because the size of the collector makes transportation impractical.

2.7 Collector
2.7.1 Absorber

Components

Device within a solar collector for absorbing radiant energy and transferring this energy as heat into a fluid. 2.7.2 Absorber Plate An essentially planar form of absorber. 2.7.3 Receiver
In

A non-imaging concentrating collector that uses parabolic reflector segments to concentrate the solar radiation. 2.6.12 Collector, Faceted A concentrating collector that uses many flat reflecting elements to concentrate the solar radiation at a small area or along an elongated band. 2.6.13 Collector, Fresnel A concentrating collector that uses a Fresnel lens/mirrors to focus the solar radiation onto a receiver. 2.6.14 CoIZector, Tracking A solar collector that moves so as to follow the apparent motion of the sun during the day, rotating about one or two axis ( single or doubleaxis tracking ). 2.6.15 Collector, Evacuated Tube A solar collector made from transparent tubing ( usually glass ) with an evacuated space ( Partial vacuum > between the tube wall and the absorber. The absorber may consist of an inner tube or another shape with means for removal of the thermal energy and may be specially coated. 2.6.16 Collector, Trickle A flat plate solar collector in which unpressurized liquid flows or `trickles' over the absorber. 2.6.17 Collector, Venetian Blind An air-type solar collector in which movable vans are employed to absorb or reject the radiant energy. 6

concentrating collector, the part to which the solar radration is finally directed or redirected and includes the absorber and any associated glazing through which the radiation must pass.
Surface

2 7.4 Non-Selective

A surface of which the optical properties of absorptance, reflectance, transmittance and emittance are spectrally uniform, that is essentially independent of wavelength, over a particular wavelength range. 2.7.5 Selective Surface A surface of which the optical properties of reflectance, absorptance, transmittance and emittance are spectrally dependent that is significantly vary with wavelength, so that the collection ( or rejection ) of thermal energy is enhanced. 2.7.6 Cover Plate Collector The transparent ( or translucent ) material or materials that cover the absorber of a solar collector to provide thermal and environmental protection.
NOTE -These materials are most directly exposed to the solar radiation and are generally used to reduce the heat loss from the absorber to the surroundings and to protect the absorber.

2.7.7 Coh'ector Aperture (A) Net area available for transmission of solar radiation through the outer air cover interface. 2.7.8 Aperture Plane The plane at or above the solar collector through which the unconcentrated solar radiation is admitted.

IS 12934 : 1990 2.7.9 Area, Aperture 2.8.4 Mean Fluid Temperature

The maximum projected area of a solar collector through which the unconcentrated solar radiation is admitted and directed to the absorber. 2.7.10 Area, Collector Parcel The total area of the panel assembly with its containing box ( if present ), projected on the aperture plane. 2.7.11 Area, Gross Collector The maximum projected area of a completed solar collector module, exclusive of integral fluid of mounting and connecting means conduits. For an array or assembly of collectors including devices, such as evacuated tube or concentrating collectors, gross area includes the entire area of the array. 2.7.12 ConcenZrator An optical device ( consisting of lenses or mirrors ) which as part of a solar collector, receives the unconcentrated solar radiation and redirects ( concentrates ) it onto a smaller area ( the receiver or absorber ). 2.7.13 Equatorial Mount A sun-tracking mount, usually clockworkdriven, whose axis of rotation is parallel to the ~earth's axis. 2.7.14 Fresrlel Lens A sheet of plastic or glass, having grooves of prismatic section, which refract the incoming radiation as desired, usually to a line or point focus. 2.7.15 Fresnel Lens, Circular A fresnel lens, having concentric circular grooves, formed so that the radiation will be focused to a point, as by a circular lens. 2.7.16 Fresnel Lens, Linear parallel straight grooves formed so that the radiation will be focused to a line, as by a c-ylindrical lens. 2.8 Collector Attributes and Operation
A fresnel lens, having

The average

temperature of the heat transfer fluid in the collector. Its value is usually taken to be the arithmetic mean of the fluid inlet and outlet temperatures. 2.8.5 Nominal Working Pressure
The recommended working pressure for which the collector was designed and built.

2.8.6 Eficiency,

Collector

Of a solar thermal collector, the ratio of the energy removed by the heat transfer fluid over a specified time period, to the solar irradiance incident on the collector for the same period, under steady-state conditions.
NOTE-For flat plate collectors the amount of solar energy may be taken over either the net ( aperture ), or the gross collector area, which must be stated; for concentrating collectors the amount is usually taken over the aperture area,

28.7

Efficiency, Zero Loss Collecttir

The efficiency of the collector, when the mean fluid temperature is equal to the ambient air temperature. 2.8.8 Collector Heat Removal Eflciency
Factor

The ratio of the useful energy delivered by a flat plate solar collector, to what this energy would be if the entire absorber plate were at the temperature of the fluid at the inlet.
NOTE - In some test temperature is used. methods the mean fluid

2.8.9 Collector Tilt Angle The lower angle between the aperture pla.ne of a solar collector and the horizontal plane. 2.8.10 Flow Condition The state obtained when the heat transfer fluid is flowing through the collector, or collector array, as intended for normal operating conditions. 2.8.11 Stagnation Conditions In solar energy systems, the conditions ( that is temperature and pressure ) existing when the system has attained a quasi-steady state after the flow of the heat transfer fluid has stopped, but the absorber continues to receive significant solar radiation.
NOTE - In certain testing situations this term is used for the worst possible conditions, that is when the collector contains no fluid and is exposed to maximum radiation and outdoor temperature.

2.8.1 Heat Transfer Fluid A fluid that is used to transfer thermal between components in a system. 2.8.2 Fluid Inhzt Temperature The temperature of the heat transfer fluid at the point of entry into the collector. 2.8.3 Fluid Outlet Temperature The temperature of the heat transfer point of leaving the collector. fluid at the energy

2.8.12 Steady-State Occurring in solar collectors when the heat removal rate ( including losses ) is equal to the 7

IS 12934 : 1990

solar energy input rate, that is when the total system enthalpy is constant.
NOTE - Tolerance limits of variability specified for particular purposes.

2.8.23

Potable

may be

Means suitable for human consumption. 2.8.24 Solar Fraction The ratio k of energy supplied by the solar part of a system to the total load. 2.8.25 Standby Condition
That condition is deliberately the tank. of operation in which no energy being put in or withdrawn from Ambient Air

2.8.13 Concentration Ratio, Flux Ratio of the irradiance on the absorber of a concentrating collector, to the irradiance on the aperture of the collector.
NOTE - Normally the net aperture area is used. 2.8.14 Concentration Ratio, Geometric

Ratio of the aperture area of a concentrating collector, to the absorber area.
NOTE 2.8.15 Normally the net aperture area is used.

2.8.26 Temperature,

Track~ing Error

The temperature of the air surrounding the thermal energy storage device or solar collectors being tested.
NOTE - Significant differences can occur over short distances, therefore, in particular applications, the method fied. of measurement must be speci-

a) for a two-axis tracking collector : the angular deviation of the outward normal line from the aperture plane from the collector-to-sun line; b) for a single-axis tracking collector : the angular deviation between two planes intersecting along the axis of rotation, one containing the optical axis, the other containing the center of the sun. 2.8.16 Ambient Air Air in the space ( either indoors or outdoors ) surrounding the thermal energy storage device or solar collectors, whichever is applicable. 2.8.17 Fluid Transport
The transfer of air, water or other

2.8.27

Time Constant

The time required for a first order system to have its output change by 63'2 percent of its final change in output following a step change in its input. 2.8.28 Water Draw Rate The rate at which the hot water is withdrawn from the system at a specified time. 2.8.29 Equivalent Length

fluid between

components. 2.0.18 Auxiliary Fuel That fuel used in an auxiliary thermal source. 2.8.19 Auxiliary Thermal ( Heat ) Source A source of thermal energy, other than solar, used to supplement the output provided by the solar energy system; usually in the form o-f electrical resistance heat or thermal energy derived from combustion of fossil fuels. 2.8.20 Domestic
Refers to use in residential buildings. and small commercial

The length of a straight section of pipe or duct causing the same pressure drop as actually occurs within the system at the same flow rate. 2 8.30 Tank Capacity The measured when full. 2.8.31 Accuracy The ability of an instrument to indicate the true value of the measured physical quantity. 2.8 32 Precision The measure of the closeness measurements among repeated physical quantity. 2.8.33 Standard Air Air weighing 1'204 kg/m3 which approximates dry air at temperature of barometric pressure of 101'325 kPa.
2.8.34 Standard Barometric Pressure

volume of the fluid in the tank

of of

agreement the same

2.8.21 Fractional Energy Savings
That fraction

of energy used by a conventional domestic water heating system that is saved by using the solar system.

2.8.22 Outside Air to external air; the atmosphere to the building.
Refers

exterior The barometer 8 pressure of 101.325 kPa.

IS13934:1999
2.8.35 Class A Operation

fluid can be drained from the collector to waste.

and run

Mode of operation in which the delivery temperature at -the hot outlet connection never falls below 57�C under a specified load.
2.8.36 Class B Operation

2.9.7 Filled System
A system in which the collector with the heat transfer fluid. 2.9.8 Forced System
A system in which heat transfer fluid is forced through the collector either by mechanical means or by externally generated pressure.

remains

-filled

Mode of operation in which the delivery temperature at the hot outlet connection never calls below 45�C under a specified load. 2.8.37 Load Amount of thermal energy drawn from the system as hot water during a particular test ( for example the average day test, or the non-solar test ). -2.8.38 Solar Contributio?? The ratio of energy supplied by the solar part of a system to the total load. 2.8.39 Storage Tank Volumetric Capacity The measured when full. volume of the fluid in the tank

2.9.9 Indirect System ( Heat Exchange System j A system in which a heat transfer than the heated ~water ultimately passes through the collector. fluid other consumed

2.9.10 Integral Collector Storage System
A system in which the functions of collection and storage of solar energy are performed within the same device.

2.9.11 Open System
A system in which the heat transfer extensive contact with the atmosphere.

fluid is in

2.8.40 Continuous Electricity Tariff Tariff for continuously available electricity

2.9.12 Remote Storage System
A system in which the storage

SUPPlY* 2.8.41 O&Peak ( Electricity ) Tariffs
Tariff for electricity supply for restricted hours. There may be different tariffs for different restricted periods. 2.9 Systems 2.9.1 Circulating System A system in which heat transfer fluid circulates between the collector and a storage vessel or heat exchanger during operating periods. 2.9.2 Close-Coupled Solar Water Heater

vessel is separate from the collector and is located at some distance from it. 2.9.13 Series Connected System

A system in which the water to be heated passes directly from a supply point through the collector to a storage vessel or to a point of use. 2 9.14 Service Hot Water System A system to supply hot water for use in domestic or commercial applications other than space heating. 2.9.15 Solar Water Heater System normally consisting of a collector and a container which may be integral, close coupled or remote, and which heats water by means of radiant energy from the sun. It is normal for solar water heaters to be either fitted with or connected to a supplementary heating source. 2.9.16 Solar Only Systems A system designed to provide solar heated domestic water without use of supplementary energy other than that required for fluid transport and control purposes. 2.9.17 Solar Preheat System A system not incorporating any form of supplementary heating and installed to preheat cold water prior to its entry into any other type of household water heater. 9

Unit where the collector abuts the container a common chassis or cradle.

on

2.9.3 Closed System ( Sealed or Unvented System ) A system in which the heat transfer fluid is completely sealed from the atmosphere. 2.9.4 Direct System A system ultimately collector. in which the heated water that will be consumed passes through the

2.9.5 Drainback System A solar thermal system in which, as part of the normal working cycle, the heat transfer fluid is drained from~the solar collector into a storage vessel for subsequent reuse. 2.9.6 Draindown System A solar thermal system in which the heat transfer

IS 12934 : 1990
2.9.18 Solar Plus -Supplementary System 2.10.7 Thermop!le

A system which utilizes both solar and an auxiliary energy source in an integrated way and is able to provide a specified hot water service independently of solar energy availabihty. 2.9.l9
Thermosiphon System

A number of thermocouples wired consistently in seri-es or parallel to measure small or average temperature difference.
3 NOMENCLkTURE CONVERSION 3.1 Letter Symbols FOR SOLAR ENERGY

A system which utilizes only density changes of the -heat transfer fluid to achieve circulation between collector and storage. 2.9.20 Vented System A system in which contact between the heat transfer fluid and the atmosphere is restricted either to the free surface of a feed and expansion cistern or to an open vent pipe only.
2.9.21 Phase Hearer > Change Solar System ( Water

A a AM B b C
C

Area Correlation Air Mass

Coefficient

Supplementary Energy Source Rating Correlation Coefficient cost Specific Heat Capacity; Correlation Coefficient Mass Diffusion Coefficient; Mass Diffusivity; Daily Total Diffuse Radiation Energy; Equation of Time; Radiant Emissive Power; Illuminance; Irradiance; Radiant Flux Density Solar Irradiance Emissive Power; Fractional Energy Savings Solar fraction; Monthly Fraction by Solar Energy; Focal Length Solar Irradiance; Mass Flux Density; Irradiation; Daily Solar Radiation Daily Irradiation; Radiant Exposure; Irradiance Heat Transfer Coefficient; Planck's Constant; Specific Enthalphy Hourly Irradiation; Radiant Intensity Solar Irradiance Mechanichal Equivalent of Heat; Radiosity Incident Angle Modifier Thermal Conductivity Longitude; Length; Distance; LOSS;Load; Radiance Luminance Radiant Exitance; Radiosity; Radiant Flux Density Radiant Emissive Power; Radiant Selfexitance; Radiant Exitance Mass: Air Mass Mass Flow Rate Number Index of Refraction;

A solar energy system which uses a refrigerant ( typically freon ) as the heat transfer fluid. The refrigerant changes from liquid to gas ( changes phase ) when it is heated, and from gas, back to liquid when heat is released. ( Also known as "refrigerant-charged system". ) 2.10 System
Collectors 2.10.1 ) Components ( Other than

D E

Es e f G H h I IS J K k L M Mn m ti N n P

Collector Loop Heater

A heater installed within the collector loop when testing the solar domestic water heating system with a non-irradiated array. 2.10.2 Components Parts of the solar hot water system including but not limited to collectors, storage, pumps, heat exchanger, controls, etc. 2.10.3 Control Any device for regulation of the solar thermal system or component in normal operation, can be manual or automatic. 2.10.4 Heat Exchanger A device specifically designed to transfer heat between two physically separated fluids. Heat exchangers can have either s'::zle or double walls. 2.10.5 Pressure-Temperature
_ _&ef Device

An automatic pressc;c an d temperature sensitive device actuated by a predetermined internal pressure or temperature or both and intended or reIieve excessiv: pressure or to prevent temperature within an otherwise closed liquid system. 2.10.6 Container Vessel ( including fittings ) in' which the heated water is stored; sometimes referred to as a storage container, cylinder or tank.

Number Radiant Radiant

Q
IO

Power; Atmospheric Pressure; Flux Energy per Unit Time; Energy; Energy

IS 12934 : 1990
9

R r s sf T t U V
V

Energy per Unit Length Thermal Resistance Reflection ( from Incidence Shade Factor Solar Fraction Temperature, Temperature, "K "C

Time

per

Area

or

i m n
0

surface ); Angle

of

P r
S

SC

incident, inlet, initial maximum normal, noon overall, extraterrestrial, standard, outlet pressure reflected, radiation, receiver solar, specular, scattered, system, supplementary Solar constant sunrise sunset tilted, total tilted, thermal, thermal useful volume zenith wavelength total

Overall Heat Transfer Specific Volume

Coefficient

ST S

Average Wind Speed; Volume Radiant Energy Density; Air Speed Sun Declination Angle

T t th
U V z h

W Z

3.2 Greek Symbols Diffusivity: Thermal Absorptance; Absorptivity; Altitude Slope; Volumetric Thermal Expansion Coefficient, Angle Luminance Factor Specific Heat Ratio; Intercept Factor; Azimuth Dispersion; Thickness; Declination; Optical Intercept Factor Emittance; Emisivity Efficiency; Dynamic Viscosity Extinction Coefficient, Wavenumber Angle; Time; Angle of Incidence Wavelength; Thermal Conductivity Absolute ( Dynamic ) Viscosity Kinematic Viscosity; Frequency Reflectance; Reflecticity; Density Stefan-Boltzman Contant; Optical Beam Spread; Extinction Coefficient Transmittance; Transmissivity; Dimensionless Time Latitude; Radiant Flux Density Angle Solid Angle; Hour Angle 3.3 Subscripts a av b d dn e f g h air, ambient, absorbed, average blackbody, beam diffuce, day direct normal effective, equivalent final gross horizontal aperture, annual

3.4 Listing by Terms ( excluding subscripts ) Absolute ( Dynamic ) viscosity p, r] Absorptance a Absorptivity a Air Mass AM, m Air Speed W Altitude OL Angle 0, #, 4, P, w Angle of Incidence r, 0 Area A Atmospheric Pressure P Average Wind Speed V Azimuth Y Correlation Coefficient a, b, C, c
cost c

Daily Irradiation

H G D

Daily Solar Radiation Declination 6 Density p Dimensionless Time r dispersion 6 Distance L Efficiency r] Emissive Power E Emisivity E Emittance B Energy E 11

Daily Tolal Diffuse Radiation

ts: 12834 : 1990 Energy per Unit Time 6 Energy per ITnit Time per Unit Area or Length q Equation of Time E Extinction Coefficient k, u Flux J Focal Length f Fractional Energy Savings e Frequency y h Heat Transfer Coefficient Hour Angle w Hourly Irradiation I Illuminanc e E Index of Refraction Intercept Factor + Irradiance E, H Irradiation H, G Kinetic Viscosity Latitude `p Length L Load L Longitude L Loss L Luminance L Luminance Factor @ D Mass m Mass -Diffusion Coefficient v n Radiant Emissive Power Me, e Radiant Energy Q, Qe Radiant Energy Density w Radiant Exitance M, J Radiant Exitance, Emitted Radiant Exposure G, H E, M Radiant Flux P Radiant Flux Density Radiant Intensity Reflectance p Reflection r Shade Factors fl L, 1 Me, E

Slope B Solar Fraction f, Sr Solar Irradiance Ee, G, IY Solid Angle w Specific Enthalphy h Specific Heat Capacity c Specific Heat Ratio Y Specific Volume v Stefan-Boltzman Constant

u B

Sun Declination Angle Z Supplementary Energy Source Rating Temperature T, t Thermal Conductivity Thermal Diffusivity Thermal Resistance f Thickness 6, d Time 7, 0, t Transmittance r Volume V Volumetric Thermal Expansion Wavelength h Wavenumber rc Zenith Angle BZ
a

( Boltzmann's Constant ) K, h

Mass flow Rate lia Mass Flux Density G Mechanical Equivalent of Heat J Monthly Fraction by Solar Energy Number Optical Optical Overall Planck's N, n Beam Spread u Intercept Factor 8 Heat Transfer Coefficient Constant h

R

U

Coefficient

@

Power P Radiance L

12

Standard Mark
I

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have beenproduced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control~which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard-marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to -manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2986 to promote marking and quality certification of harmonious development of the activities of standardization, goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright No part of these publications may be reproduced in BIS has the copyright of all its publications. any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publication ), BIS. Revision of Indian Standards Indian Standards are issued from possession of the to BIS giving the are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent latest amendments or edition. following reference :

Dot : No. HMD 4 ( 5144 ) Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text AtTected

BUREAU -Headquarters
:

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036

Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all OIlices ) Telephone t 331 01 31 331 13 75

37 86 62 53 38 43 41 29 16

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 -Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) BOMBAY 400093 Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

6 32 92 95

Printed at Swatantra Bharat Press, Delhi, India

