( Reaffirmed 2002 )

IS : 6703 - 1972

Indian Standard
GLOSSARY OF WOODEN PACKAGING TERMS

Wood and Wood Products Containers MCPD 16
Chairman SHRI A. c.
SERHAR

Sectional

Committee,

Repres&ing Forest Research Institute and Colleges, DehraDun

MAWS Indian Tea Association, Calcutta SHRII.AHMED SHRI V. c. SOOD ( &fcntafe) Indian Institute of Packaging, Bombay Sear G. S. BHOME SARI K. N. KIJPALIKA~ (Al&male) Indian National Shipowners' Association, CAPT H. M. BOATWALA CAPT S. D. TANAVDE ( Alh~te) TRAFFIC Ministry of Railways DEPUTY DIRECTOR, ( RATES ) DEPUTY DIRECTOB, TRAFFIC
SERI dS~E~~~~?~TY)

Bombay

Saw

Limited Faridabad Federation of' Associations of Small Industries of India, Bombay Indian Plywood Industries Research Institute, Dn JOSEPE GEOROE Bangalore DR H. N. JAQADEESH ( Alternafe ) The Albion Plywood Limited, Calcutta SHRI D. K. JAIN SARI G. SUBRAMANIAM ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Technical Development SRRI J. S. M~THARU Indian Chemical Manufacturers Association,~Calcutta SFiRI s. N. bfEHRA Federation of Indian Plywood and Panel Industry, SHRI M. R. MOTAYED New Delhi SHRI K. S. NAIR ( Aknafe) Sundaram Industries Private Limited, h4adurai SHRI K. R. NATARAJ Directorate of Standardization, Ministry of Defence DB A. N. NAYEI~ Snnr H. N. BF~AR~AVA( Alfernate ) Kirloskar Oil Engines Limited, Poona SHRI S. V. PATTANI SHIU V. D. SARDESAI ( Alternate ) SHRI K. S. SUBRAMANIAM, Director General, IS1 ( Ex-&io Member) Officer on Special Duty ( MCPD ) PHAVIN GANDHI

. .

(i4'ternatee) Escorts

Secretary SHR~ T. P~ENA~ANDAM: Deputy Director ( MCPD ), IS1

INDIAN
MANAK

STANDARDS
BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR NEW

INSTITUTION
SHAH ZAFAR MARC DELHI

IS : 6703 - 1972

Indian Standard
GLOSSARY OF WOODEN PACKAGING
0.
0.1 This

TERMS

FOREWORD

Indian Standard ~was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 4 December 1972, after the draft finalized by the Wood and Wood Products Containers Sectional Committee had been approved by the Marine, Cargo Movement and Packaging Division Council. 0.2 The necessity for a comprehensive list of terms used in wooden packa$ging and their commonly agreed definitions has been very keenly felt, This glossary has, as this field has grown considerably in recent years. therefore, been drawn with a view to eliminating ambiguity and confusion arising from different interpretations of the terms frequently used in In formulating this glossary, every wooden packaging industry and trade. effort has been made to avoid highly scientific definitions and give the meaning of each term in simplest form consistent with accuracy. 0.3 In preparing this national co-ordination other countries. standard among due weightage has been given for interthe standards and practices prevailing in definitions the latter in this glossary shall apply. and

0.4 Should any difference arise between those in the individual package~standards,

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard covers definitions of terms and wooden containers industry and trade. 2. TERMINOLOG'?Y 2.1 Barrel -A

used in wooden

packaging

bulged cylindrical container of greater length than breadth, made of wooden staves bound together with hoops and having two flat ends of equal diameter. of lumber protection, to which an article is fastened (a) for or (b ) for positioning in or assembly

,

2.2 Base - A framework shipment without further to a shipping container.

2.3 Basket - A semirigid container of variable shape and size, usually made of thin strips of wood, woven or stapled, or otherwise bound together. Fibreboard or combinations of wood and fibre are also used in the construction. One or more handles are usually provided for lifting. 2

IS : 6703 - 1972
2.4 Batten -A

reinforcing member attached inside or outside, at right angles to grain, of wood box panel, wood barrel head, or face of wirebound box, or crate.
2.5 Bottom - That filling or handling.

face of a container

on which it usually rests while

2.6 Box -

A rigid container having closed faces. by

box constructed of wood assembled 2.7 Box, Nailed Wood -A fastening sides, top, and bottom to the ends with nails.

2.8 Bracing, Car - Material, either wood or metal, such as straps, wires and tie rods, used to hold a load or articles in position in a car and to prevent shifting into excess space in a car not completely occupied by the load. or fibreboard shipping box (see 2.6); 2.9 Case - A wooden metal, usually a reasonably large wooden or fibreboard box used for canned goods, bottled goods, etc. 2.18 Cask - A term used synonymously with barrel, but usually of large Casks may be of slack or tight cooperage. size or capacity. of packing cases on the basis of thickness 2.11 Class -Classification of boards and battens (see 2.4) and width of battens. 2.12 Cleat - A wood or metal strip attached along the edge of a panel of a wood wirebound, or fibreboard container, for the attaching of an adjacent panel, or fastened to the panel between the. edges for reinforcement and stiffening. having 2.13 Cleated Plywood Box - A rigid container cleated panel faces, the panels being made of plywood. five or six

2.14 Cleated Wood Box .- A nailed wood box having two or more inside or outside cleats on two opposite faces usually designated as ends, to reinforce the box and to increase the nailing area. 2.15 Cone Boards - Cone boards in pent-up boxes end boards which are triangular at the top. (see 2.71) are the

2.16 Container - A receptacle such as a bag, barrel, drum, box or crate used in commerce for packing, storing, and shipping commodities. 2.17 Container, Returnable - A shipping container designed to be used for more than one shipment. of any material

2.18 Container, Wood-Framed - A container made up of facing units formed of wooden frames with enclosed panels of plywood, fibreboard or other similar materials. Also known as a plywood or cleated fibreSometimes the units may have only partial frames, board box. 3

IS : 6703 - 1972 2.19 Corner of a container Buffer - Various materials, cut or formed to fit into corners and designed to support or cushion the contents. joined The

of framed construction 2.20 Crate - A rigid shipping container together with nails, bolts or any equivalent method of fastening. framework may or may not be enclosed with sheathmg. 2.21 Crate, by applying Sheathed sheathing - A rigid and fully enclosed to a framework structure. container

constructed

2.22 Cushioning Material - The material used for internal packaging to protect the contents of a container from any shocks during handling, transportation and storage. 2.23 Diagonal Bracing - A member, single or multiple, of a crate or box attached diagonally or at an angle to add reinforcement to the A member reaching at an angle from a gate or other container. structure to the wall or floor of a car to strengthen and reinforce the gate or structure. 2.24 Dimensions containers, usually ` Outside `. - The measurement of length, width, and depth expressed in that order, should be stated as `Inside' volume occupied by a container as determined of or

2.25 Displacement-The by its outside dimensions.

- A device, made of various materials, which separates the 2.26 Dividers space within a container into two or more spaces, cells, compartments or Dividers may be plain, interlocking, scored, horizontal, vertical or layers. The primary purpose of dividers is to separate the articles and/ diagonal. or to furnish cushioning. 2.27 Dolly - A low platform or structure mounted on wheels designed primarily for moving bulky loads for short distances. or castors,

2.28 Drainage Holes - Spacers or holes provided in or near the bottom of closed containers to allow the escape of condensation or other water from the inside of the container. 2.29 Drive Screw-A metal fastener or connector having helical grooves along its shank, either cut, stamped, or twisted, and with a relatively high pitch. The head may be plain or slotted and is secured in place by driving similar to nails. cylindrical container made of metal, 2.30 Drum - A single-walled, plywood or fibreboard having inserted or attached heads with a capacity 6f 500 litres or less. 4

IS : 6703- 1972 2.31 Edge Protector - A metal piece of right angle section placed over the edge of boxes, crates, bundles and gates, or bracing to distribute the pressure from metal bands or ties to prevent cutting. 2.32 Eod-Grain Nailing - Wood members so nailed together that point of the nail follows the grain of the wood in that member holding point of the nail. 2.33 Excelsior -Curled shreds of wood, loose, wadded, or made into pads. 2.34 Pace Any one of the plane surfaces usually soft woods; may the the be

of a container.

.

2.35 Filler Pads - Used to fill space; sometimes applied to a soft flexible pad made with various loose filling materials to provide cushioning effects. 2.36 Fillers-Any otherwise unused material spaces. or combination of materials used to fill main

2.37 Framing - The parts or structure to which the sheathing,

members of a crate forming the braces and blocks may be added.

2.38 Hamper - A container (commonly used for shipping fruits and vegetables) circular, elliptical, or polygonal in horizontal cross section, the It has slatted top dimensions being usually greater than the bottom. sides and a bottom which may be loose, stapled, or nailed in place. The top may or may not be open. 2.39 I. D. Inside dimensions or inside diameter. used to

2.40 Insent - Usually a thin filler or frame of wood or fibreboard take up space or separate articles within a package.

2.41 Interior Packing-Packing material, blocking or bracing used to protect the contents of a container from damage or to hold the contents in a fixed position. 2.42 Kit - Shipping container of metal or wood of truncated conical shape, with fixed bottom in larger end and fixed or removable top in or on smaller end, usually holding less than 20 litres. 2.43 Load Limit in weight units, a body can withstand

a) The maximum force, without damage.

b) The greatest allowable weight which may be placed in a container or .vehicle. For containers, load limit is often expressed in terms of the gross weight of the container and its contents. 2.44 Load, Pallet loose or in containers, A load, made up entirely of articles and placed on pallets or skids. or commodities,

5

IS : 6703 - 1972 2.45 Load, Palletized Unit -

A unit or unitized load secured to a pallet

or skid. 2.46 Load Type - A qualitative description of the contents of a container with respect to density, fragility, and degree of blocking, bracing and cushioning necessary. Load types are further divided into the following categories. 2.46.1 Tyke I Load (Ea&) - A qualitative term denoting contents of low or moderate density conforming to the shape of the container and lending support to all faces of the container. 2.46.2 Type II Load ( Average) - A qualitative term denoting contents of low or moderate density providing, when packed directly into a shipping container, non-shifting support at several points on face of the container. 2.46.3 Type III Load ( Dt@cult ) - A qualitative term denoting contents characterized by irregular shape not lending support EO the container, or by great density or extreme fragility. 2.47 Load, Unit or Unitized a) Containers or articles secured as a group by a binding or bonding medium; the containers or articles may be on pallets or skids. b) A shipment so prepared that it may move in the carrying vehicle. c) A system for utilizing heavy duty steel strapping, either flat or round, for binding together various articles or commodities into a floating load. 2.48 Lumber -Wood that has been prepared for market resawing, planing or otherwise cutting or finishing. by sawing,

2.49 Lumber, Matched - Lumber that is shaped to make a close tongued and grooved joint at its edges or ends. 2.50 Lumber, ResawnRough or surfaced divided into two or more thicknesses by sawing. 2.51 Lumber, Rough lumber that has been

Undressed lumber as it comes from the saw. Lumber that is shaped at its edges to make

2.52 Lumber, Shiplapped close rabbeted or lapped joint. 2.53 Lumber, Surfaced point 2.54 Nail, Blunt the shank. -Nail

Lumber that is planed on one or more faces. having a point that is cut off square with

2.55 Nail, BOX - A nail with a large flat head, usually made of lighter gauge wire than sinkers. 6

IS : 6703 - 1972 2.56 Nails, Cement Coated-Nails to which a cement applied to increase their holding power. 2.57 Nail Cooler is flat underneath same penny size. - Same as a sinker (see 2.64) except and of slightly greater diameter than Nail with a flat countersunk nail with a point head. having four facades; coating has been

that the head a sinker of the

2.58 Nail, Ccwker -

2.59 Nail, Diamond Point-A the most common point used.

2.60 Nail, Drive (Common Nail) construction purposes and usually made sinkers, coolers, corkers, etc. 2.61 Nail, clinching. Duckbill Point -

An all-around nail for general of wire of greater diameter than a thin flat point etched a long driving of various part, or to facilitate to increase extended with a sizes

A nail having whose surface

2.62 Nail, Etched ~holding power.

A nail

has been Nail with

2.63 Nail, Sharp Point (Needle Point) point like a needle, usually for hand driving.

2.64 Nail, Sinker -Nail used for either hand or machine small fillet under the head to strengthen the same. group of articles, 2.65 Nest -A which fit one within the other.
2.96

cans,

baskets

or boxes, or

dimension 0. D. - Outside diameter of a cylindrical container 2.67 Packaging
2.67.1

of a package or wire or rod.

outside

The technique

of preparing term denoting

an article

or articles

for packing. goods for

2.67.2 A qualitative distribution.

the technique

of preparing

2.68 Packing -The materials used for cushioning or holding an article `or articles in place within a container or for separating the articles from each other; and the operation of placing an article or articles within a shipping container. 2.69 Pallet - A low portable platform of wood, metal, fibreboard, or combinations of the same to facilitate handling, stowage, and transportation of materials as a unit. 2.70 PanelAny area or interior part. ( flat ) between
7

L

scores and/or

edges of a box, carton

IS : 6703 - 1972

2.71 Pent-Up Box - Pent-up boxes are usually angular or conicle at the top and meant for carrying filled bottles and similar products when it is necessary that the container be packed, transported and stored always in an upright position. 2.72 Planks - Yard lumber 50 mm and under 100 mm in thickness and 200 mm and over in width. 2.73 Platform, Skid - A wood or metal single platform elevated a short distance above the floor by runner or legs to facilitate mechanical handling. 2.74 Plywood - Multiple sheets of veneer glued together, the grain of adjacent plies at right angles. usually with .

term applied to any device which prevent egress of an 2.75 Retainer -A article from its intended position. 2.76 Rock Fastener -The which are so made that loop through the~other.
2.77 Rubbing Strips -

design of ends of the wire on wirebound boxes the container is closed by interlocking one

boards of crates containers.

Boards nailed to the underside of skids or floor or boxes to provide a surface upon which to slide the

2.78 Saddle - A bracing member cut out or built up to fit the shape of the supported article and to increase the area of contact between the blocking and the article. 2.79 Separator components.
-

Any material

interposed between

articles

or packing

2.80 Sheathing - Material fastened to the frame across the openings ofa crate to prevent pilferage, or the entry of dirt or water or of other articles. 2.81 Shooks (Box and Crate) fabricated parts of a box or crate.
-

The

unassembled

but

completely

2.82 Skid - A timber, bar, rail, or the like used in pairs or sets to form a slideway or roll-way, as for an incline to a sidewalk, or such a set fastened to the bottom of a machine or structure to facilitate sliding. 2.83 Skid Box - A metal or wooden box fastened to a platform raised on skid members or legs and may or may not be collapsible. 2.84 Slat - Any of the members of a crate, 25 mm or less in thickness. skid or pallet and usually

2.85 Spacer - A device made ofany material which serves to maintain a predetermined distance between any two points in a shipping container, or between any interior part and articles contained therein. 8

IS : 6703 - 1972 2.86 Spreader - A horizontal wooden member placed in a car to hoid the gates in position against the load. between two gates

2.81 Stave - One of the properly shaped units of a wooden vessel which, when placed edge to edge and bound with hoops around a circular bottom (sometimes top or bottom), forms a container of a designated type. 2.88 Strapping A flexible strip material used to:

a)

fasten merchandise hold together

within

a container; or

b)

a bundle

or bale;

C) reinforce

Flexible materials used as a shipping container. described above may consist of textiles, paper, and round or ftat metal, applied with special stretching and sealing tools or secured with nails or stables.

2.89 Stringer - A wooden member to which the two faces of a pallet or the deck of a skid are fastened and placed at right angles to the members making up the face or the deck. 2.90 Smut .4 short member of a crate or bracing used as reinforcement. of a tongue an adjacent contains with all or by

2.91 Tongue and Groove - Type of lumber joint consisting arid a groove on opposite edges to provide close fitting into grooved or tongued piece. 2.9` Unit Package - A properly identified a single item, a quantity of the same item, its cornpc~nent parts. 2.93 Veneer -- Thin slicing or sawing. sheets of wood, produced

package which a set or an item on a rotary

lathe

2.94 Weight, Gross -The weight of a complere package ready for container, the commodity, inner all packing comprising shipment, material, and the outer container. 2.95 2.96 Weight, Weight,

weight of all packing

Net-The weight of the commodity material or containers. The difference between

alone,

excluding

the

Tare -

the gross and net weight.

2.97 Wirebound Box - Boxes made of relatively thin board and bound by steel wires, stapled to the cleats and to the boards to become an integral part of the box. 2.98 Wood Wool - Finely shredded excelsior and coarse pieces; plain, wadded, or in pads. free tiom knots, splinters,

9

