**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 7073-2 (1983) : Glossary of terms relating to air cargo 
pallets and containers. Part 2: Air cargo containers [TED 
14: Aircraft and Space Vehicles] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



1) 
rS :7073( Pdrt II ) - 1983 

( Reaffirmed 2003 ) 

Indian Standard 

GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO AIR 
CARdO PALLLTS AND CON IAIN ERS 

PART II AIR CARGO CONTAINERS 



UDG 621^5^1 32 : 636 7 073 : 001 4 




VNDtAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

KIANAK HHrtVAN, *f HAHAlllJK fiHAH i'-AKAK VlAHG 

NFW DFLHI MfWOa 



IS : 7073 ( Part II ) - 1983 

Indian Standard 

GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO AIR 
CARGO PALLETS AND CONTAINERS 

PART il AIR CARGO CONTAINERS 

Air Cargo Handling Sectional Committee, MCPD 8 

Chairman Representing 

Shri p. R. Ghandbasekhar* Directorate General of Givil Aviation, New Delhi 

Members 

Shbi p. G. Deshmukh Indian Institute of Packaging, Bombay 

Shbi G. S. Pubttshothaman ( Alternate ) 
Shbi M. S. Ekbote Indian Airlines, New Delhi 

Shbi S. C. Bhatnagab ( Alternate ) 
Shbi S. Jaitley International Airports, Authority of India, 

New Delhi 
Shbi P. R. P. Rao ( Alternate ) 
Shbi S. V. Kfmbbe Air India, Bombay 

Shbi C. Mohandas ( Alternate ) 
Shbi K. N. S. Krishnan Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi 

Shbi G. M. Menon Indian Aluminium Company Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri P, Ghakravobty ( Alternate ) 
Shbi R. N. Padhy Directorate of Technical Development and 

Production ( Air ) ( Ministry of Defence ), 
New Delhi 
Shut B. Sampath ( Alternate ) 
Shri L. S. Verma. Ministry of Defence ( Aerial Delivery Research and 

Development Establishment ), Agra 
Shbi Amar Dayal ( Alternate ) 
Shbi R. K. Vithuani Associated Commercial & Manufacturing Enter- 

prises Pvt Ltd, Bombay 
Shbi P. S. Das, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director ( MCPD ) ( Secretary ) 



♦Shri P. R. Chandrasekhar was the chairman for the meeting in which this standard 
was finalized. 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1983 
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of jfcjie 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 7073 ( Part II ) - 1983 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Air Transport C'ontalner.s and Pallets Subcommitiee, MCPD 8 : 1 

Convener Repfesenihig 

Sjiui YASHViR KrMAU Indian Airlines, Now Dellu 

Members 
Shri M. S. Ekbotk Indian Airlines, New Dtdhi 

Snai K. S. Jayaram International Airports Authority of India, Nrw 

Delhi 
Skki p. R. p. Rao ( Alternate ) 
Sum O. O. Shah National Aeronautical Laboratory, Bangalore 

SiiKi t'' C^ Sir A KM A i'lic Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New 

Delhi 
Smhi L. S. Vkhm a Ministry of Defence ( Aerial Delivery Research and 

Development Estaljlishmeni ), Agra 
Sum Amah Dayat. ( Alternate ) 
Simi K. N. M. Yelaiianka Air India, Bombay 



IS : 7073 ( Part II ) - 1983 

Indian Standard 

GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO AIR 
CARGO PALLETS AND CONTAINERS 

PART II AIR CARGO CONTAINERS 
0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part II ) was adopted by the Indian 
Standards Institution on 30 March 1983, after the draft finalized by the 
Air Cargo Handling Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Marine, Cargo Movement and Packaging Division Council. 

0.2 This standard covers the terms relating to air cargo containers. The 
terms relating to air cargo pallets are covered in Part I of this 
standard. 

0,3 In order to facilitate international coordination on the subject, this 
standard is based on lATA Unit Load Devices Manual published by the 
International Air Transport Association ( lATA ). 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard ( Part II ) defines the basic terms relating to air cargo 
containers, 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.1 Air Cargo Container — A structural unit which interfaces directly 
with aircraft loading and restraint systems and meets all restraint 
requirements without the use of supplementary equipment. 

2.2 Capacity — Expression of either internal volume or mass carrying 

ability. 

2.3 Corner Fittings — An arrangement of apertures and faces, installed 
on the top and bottom corners of a container, to provide for compati- 
bility and interchange between transport modes. 



IS : 7073 ( Part II ) - 1983 

2.4 Corner Posts — Vertical post located at the corners of a container, 
integral with the corner fittings and connecting the roof and floor 
structures. 

2.5 Design Mass — The maximum mass that the unit is designed to 

carry, 

2.6 Diinensions — The length, width and height measured parallel to 
each of its axis and expressed in this order. As used herein intended to 
mean the extreme external measurement of the container. 

2.7 Fibreboard { Solid or Corrugated ) — A fabricated material 
used in container manufacture which is made from wood pulp, straw, 
waste papers, or any combination thereof, pressed and held together to 
form a semi-rigid board and which may be in solid form consisting of 
two or more plies glued together, or in corrugated form in which 
one or more fluted pieces are glued between alternate flat facings. Both 
types may or may not be lined on one or both faces with laminated 
paper, metal foil, plastic, kraft or similar paper. 

2.8 Hold — An area used to contain cargo or unit load devices. 

2.9 Knock-Down — The capability of a container to be disassembled 
and its components stacked, 

2.10 Lower Deck — The compartment below the main deck; normally 
used in reference to high capacity aircraft. 

2.11 Lower Deck Container — Unit load device shaped to fit the 
lower deck of the high capacity aircraft. 

2.12 Main Deck — The passenger carrying level, or in cargo carrying 
aircraft the cabin section throughout the fuselage. 

2.13 Side — The walls of a container which, when loaded in an aircraft, 
face the port or starboard wall of the fuselage. 

2.14 Stacking — Placing one unit on top of another, or in multiples, 
either in a warehouse or in an aircraft, for purposes of saving floor 
space. 

2«15 Thermal Container — Freight container built with insulating 
walls, doors, floor and roof which retards rate of heat transmission 
between inside and outside of container. 

2.16 Ultimate Load — The load under which the container exhibits 
permanent deformation but does not rupture to the extent -of discharging 
cargo. ** 

4 



IS ! 7073 ( Part II )- 1983 

2.17 Ultimate Load Factor — A factor which, when muhiplied by the 
maximum gross mass or the maximum payload, as indicated in the 
specification, establishes the ultimate load. 

2J8 IJiiloadiiig — Removing loaded aircraft unit load devices or bulk 
cargo from an aircraft. 

2.19 Volume — The actual cubic capacity of a unit load device based 
on the external or internal dir^ensions. 

2.20 Width — In relation to containers, measured across the aircraft. 



INDIAN STANDARDS 

ON 

AIR CARGO HANDLING 

IS : 

7073 ( Part I )-1973 Glossary of terms relating to air cargo pallets and containers. 

Part I Air cargo paliets 

7074 ( Part T )-I973 Air cargo pallets. Part I General requirements 

7917 ( Part I )-1975 Air cargo freight containers^ Part I General requirements 

7917 ( Part II )-1975 Air cargo freight containers, Part II Testing 

8169 ( Part I )-l976 Air cargo container — main deck container ( 2 438 x 2 438 mm ) 
for high capacity air craft, Part I General requirements 

8169 ( Part II )-1976 Air cargo container— main deck container ( 2 438 X 2 438 mm ) 
for high capacity air craft, Part II Testing 

8396-1978 Air cargo base sandwich panel 

8589 ( Part I )-1977 Net-assembly to secure cargo on air craft pailetSj Part I General 

requirements 

8762-1978 General requirements and testing of certified half size lower deck 

containers for high capacity aircraft 

7074 ( Part II )-1978 Air cargo pallets. Part II Testing 

9753-1981 Tie-down fittings for aircraft net assemblies 

10195-1982 General requirements for insulated air cargo containers 

10196-1982 Guidelines for transportation of dead body and cremated remains 

of human beings 



