( Reaffirmed 1998 )

IS : 11493 - 1986

Indian Standard
GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO FARM DRAINAGE
Farm Drainage
Chairman DR A. M. MICHAEL Members DR A. K. BHATTACHARYA ( Alternate to Dr A. M. Michael ) DR M. C. AQARWAL Haryana Agricultural University, Hissar Tocklai Experimental Station, Jorhat DR BHUPAL SIN~H DR H. S. CHAUHAN G. B. Pant University of Agricultural and Technology, Pantnagar DR SEWA RAN ( Alternate ) CHIEF ENQINEER PWD Irrigation ( North ), Belgaum SUPERINTEND~NO ENGINEER Director ) ( Alternate ) Irrigation Research and Development, Pune EXECUTIVE ENGINEER ( Alternate ) DIRECTOR ( FCM ) Central Water Commission, New Delhi Hulgul Group Cooperative Society, Sirsi SHRI V. S. HIZQDE Indian Hume Pipe Co Ltd, Bombay SHRI N. G. JOSHI &RI S. D. KHEPAR Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana DR SITA RAM SINGH ( Alternate ) SHRI V. PATTABHI Hyderabad Industries Ltd, Hyderabad SRRI A. K.~GUPTA ( Alternate ) University of Agricultural Sciences, Bangalore DR H. PURNAPRACNACHAR DR R. K. RAI Rajendra Agricultural University, Patna Damodar Valley Corporation, Calcutta DR T. K. SARRAR SHRI C. K. SRINIVASAN Wavin India Limited, Madras SRRI K. R. RAN~ARAJAN ( Alternate ) Khadi and Village Industries Commission, Bombay SHRI V. VASUDEVAN SHR~ B. P. SRIVASTAVA ( Alternate ) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-o&o Member ) SRRI T. PURNANANDAM, Director ( Agri gL Food ) Secretary SrlRl R. N. Sn.&nnrA Joint Director ( Agri & Food ), TSI

Sectional

Committee,

AFDC 47
Research Institute ( ICAR ),

Representing Indian Agricultural New Delhi

@ Cojyright 1986
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the Indian Co&right Acf ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS< 11493 - 1986

Indian Standard
GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO FARM DRAINAGE

0.

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 31 January 1986, after the draft finalized by the Farm Drainage Sectional Committee had been approved by the Agricultural and Food Products Division Council. 0.2 With the increasing emphasis on farm drainage, aneed comprehensive glossary which would provide authentic terms used in the field. It is hoped that this standard uniformity in the interpretation of various terms used. was felt for a definition of would bring

0.3 An Indian Standard glossary of terms relating to river valley projects ( IS : 4410 ) has been published in several parts which covers the definitions of drainage terms in general. However, this standard has been prepared to define the terms specific to farm drainage only.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard to farm drainage. 2. DEFINITIONS 2.1 Artificial Drainage Drainage laid by human efforts. covers the definitions of various terms used in relation

2.2 Capillary Fringe - Zone of soil above water rises due to surface tension.

the water table where the

2.3 Collector Drain - For surface drainage system, it is an open drain into which a number of field drains discharge their water. For surface drainage system, it is usually a closed conduit, larger in size than the lateral drains into which a number of lateral drains discharge their Depending on the site, collector drains may or may not be water. required. In surface drainage, collector drains are also called field laterals. 2

IS :11493 2.4 Crop Tolerance Period -- It is the duration up to which crop can withstand waterlogging condition without significant to the quality and quantity of yield. 2.5 Drainage - Process of removing artificial or natural means. ground water or surface

- 1986

a specific damage water by

2.6 Drainage Area - The area from which a lake, stream or waterway and reservoir receives surface flow which originates at precipitation. It is also known as drainage basin, catchment, catchment area, catchment basin or river basin. 2.7 Drainage Channels - An open channel either for carrying off surplus ground or surface water. artificial or natural

2.8 Drainage Coefficient - It is the amount of water to be~removed in 24 hours to provide favourable condition for crop growth. It is usually expressed in millimetres per day. It is also known as drainage modulus. 2.9 Drain Depth - For open surface drains, it is the depth from the For surface drains, it is the distance ground surface to the drain bottom. between the ground surface and the drain tube centre. 2.10 Drainage Design - It is process of arriving at an appropriate combination of depth and spacing of drains along with their crosssectional area and slope such that the drainage system becomes economically viable for any or a combination of water table control, disposal of excess surface water, salinity control and alkanity control. 2.11 Drainage Head - The difference between the level of water in a drain at any given point and the lowest level of the land. - Any material which can be laid below the 2.12 Drainage Material soil surface to provide a easy passage of flow to~the subsurface water. Example are clay tiles ( with or without perforations ), rigid or corrugated flexible perforated PVC pipes, etc. 2.13 Drainage System - A branches and subsidiary drains. system comprising a main drain, its

portion of pore space 2.14 Effective Porosj;ty - The porous media in which movement of water takes place.

in saturated medium point to or micro drainage

of a 2.15 Electrical Conductivity - It is the property expressing its capacity to carry electrical charge from one usually expressed in milli another point. This property, ohm/cm, is used to express the salinity of the soil extracts, water, irrigation water, etc. 3

.

IS : 11493 - 1986 2.16 Equivalent Depth - It is a fictitious reduced depth of effective flow zone due to increased length of streamlines of flow when the tile or open drains do not reach down to the impermeable layer. 2.17 Farm Drainage - The disposal of storm water from farm lands and removal of water excess from farm lands to prevent or to relieve waterlogging, to prevent accumulation of harmful amounts of salts and deterioration of soil structure, and to provide healthy environment for crop growth. 2.18 Field Drain - It is usually a shallow drain to facilitate the removal of excess accumulated different parts of the field. provided in the field surface water from

placed around the subsurface drain 2.19 Filter - This is a material tubes to prevent the soil entering into the drain tubes and to provide a zone of higher hydraulic conductivity ( than the soil ) around the draintubes. It is also known as envelop. 2.20 Free Water influence of gravity. 2.21 Ground Water Water which drains through It is also known as gravitational a soil water. under the

It is the water in the soil below the water table.

2.22 Hydraulic Conductivity - The rate of flow of water through a porous material of a unit cross-sectional area under a unit hydraulic It is also called unit of permeability, gradient, at a specified temperature. transmission constant or coefficient of transmission. - The decrease 2.23 Hydraulic Gradient distance in the soil in the direction of flow. 2.24 Hydraulic Head - It is the sum of tional head at the point under consideration. 2.25 Hydraulic perimeter. Radius It is ratio of in hydraulic pressure wetted head area head and to the per unit

gravitawetted

2.26 Impermeable Layer - A layer of subsoil which does not easiiy A layer is usually called impermeable if permit water flow through it. its hydraulic conductivity is one-tenth or less than that of the zone in which the sub-surface drains are proposed to be laid. 2.27 Infiltration - The process through the ground surface. of entry of water into the soil profile place

2.28 Infiltration Rate - The rate at which infiltration takes expressed in depth of water per unit of time usually in mm/h.

2.29 Inspection Chamber - It is a space provided in the form of a manhole at the junction of a lateral drain and the collector drain, to act as a silt trap and to inspect the functioning of the drainage system. 4

-IS : 11493 - 1986
Drain - It is a field drain to remove excess water from It can be unlined open channel, mole drain, tile drain, perroot zone. forated pipes, etc. 2.31 Leaching root zone depth Efficiency - State of mixing of salts within the crop when profile is leached with some irrigation water.

2.30 Lateral

2.32 Leaching Requirement - The fraction of water entering the soil that must pass through the root zone in order to prevent soil salinity from exceeding a specified value. 2.33 Main Drain which the collector It is usually an existing natural drains discharge their water. artificial drain into

2.34 Natural Drainage - As applied to a given area, it refers to the natural topographic and/or subsoil conditions of that area for disposing of excesssurface and/or sub-surface water from it. 2.35 Observation Well - It is a perforated tube installed vertically into the soil profile going below the water table, to monitor the water table fluctuation by taking measurement of the water level inside the tube. 2.36 Percolation zone of crop. The water which passes below the effective root

average time 2.37 Rainfall Frequency - The occurance of~rainfall of a given intensity/magnitude or greater intensity.

interval between the and that of an equal

2.38 Rainfall Intensity - The rate at which rainfall occurs expressed It is the ratio of the total amount of rain in depth units per unit time. to the length of the period in which the rain falls. 2.39 Run-off - That portion of precipitation which is not absorbed by the deep strata but finds its way into the streams after meeting the persistent demands of evapo-transpiration including interception and other losses. It includes surface run-off received into the channels after rainfall, delayed run-off that enters the streams after passing through the position of the earth and other delayed run-off has been temporarily detained as a snow cover and stored in natural lakes or swamps. 2.40 Run-off Co-efficient rainfall intensity. Ratio of the peak run-off rate to the

2.41 Sub-surface Drainage - The removal of surplus or excess ground water accomplished by means of natural drainage ( for gravilly subsoil ) 5

IS I 11493 - 1986 or by artificial

means, such as drains placed under a surface.
SCI 5.2.1 to

NOTE - For other terms and definition under sub-surface drainage, 5.2.24 and 5.2.26 to 5.2.28 of IS : 4410 ( Part XIV/Set 2 )-19775.

2.42 Surface

Drainage - The removal of surplus or excess surface water collected on land accomplished by natural o-r artificial means, such as open ditches and terracing.
NOTE - For other terms and definition under surface drainage as well as 5.3.28 and 5.3.29 of IS : 4410 ( Part XIV/&c 2 )-1977*. set 5.3.1 to 5.3.26,

2.43 Time of Concentration - Time required for a particle to flow from the most remote point of area to the outlet.

of water

2.44 Waterlogging - It refers to the condition of land in which it can not be put to its normal use as a result of either or both of high water table and surface ponding. In arable lands depending upon the extent and duration of waterlogging, the crop yield may reduce substantially or even become zero. 2.45 Water Table - The upper surface of a zone of saturation soil, where the pressure is atmospheric. of the

*Glossary of terms relating to river valley projects: Part XIV reclamation; Section 2 Reclamation.

Soil conservation

and

6

