**************** 



-k t^^ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 8444 (1977) : Fumigant Strips for Treatment of Honey-Bees 
[FAD 3: Apiary Industry] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



tS : 11444- 1977 

( Reaffirmed 2004 ) 



ImVfcm Standard -^ € o 

SPFCIFICATTON FOR p 

FUMIGANT STRIPS FOR 
TREATMENT OF HONEY-BEES 



U DC: G32' 934'2-4 1 82 : 638^ 1 5-UB4 




© CopyriMk 1977 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN. S BAlfADUR SHAli ZAFAR MARC 

NEW DELHI UOOOa 



IS : 8444 - 1977 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
FUMIGANT STRIPS FOR 
TREATMENT OF HONEY-BEES 

Apiary Industry Sectional Committee, AFDC 1 1 

Chairman Representing 

Db G, B. Deodikar Khadi & Village Industries Commission, Bombay 

Members 
Shki D S Ghadha Central Committee for Food Standards ( Ministry of 

Health & Family Welfare ), New Delhi 
Smt Debi Mukhebjbe ( Alternate ) 
Director of Laboratories Directorate of Marketing and Inspection, Faridabad 

Shri K. N, Rustagi ( Alternate ) 
Dr N. p. Goyal Punjab Agricul rural University, Ludhiana 

Shri B. P. Gupta Directorate of Fruit Utilization, Government of 

Uttar Pradesh, Ranikhet 
Shri K. M. Joyappa Department of Industries & Commerce, Government 

of Karnataka, Bangalore 
Apicultubal Development 
Officer ( Alternate ) 
Dr R. p. Kapil Haryana Agricultural University, Hissar 

Dr D. S. Gupta ( Alternate ) 
Shri J. L. Kaw J & K. Khadi and Village Industries Board, Srinagar 

Shri O. P. Krishna Department of Agriculture, Government of Himachal 

Pradesh, Simla 
Shri Jogindee Singh ( Alternate ) 
Dr N. G. Pant Indian Agricultural Research Institute ( ICAR ), 

New Delhi 
President Coorg Honey and Wax Producers* Co-operative 

Marketing Society Ltd, Virajpet 
Director ( Alternate ) 
Secretary Sambay Kutir Shilpanusthan Ltd, Sibsagar 

Shri P. L. Sharma Himachal Pradesh University, College of Agricul- 

ture, Solan 
Shri S. G. Shende Maharashtra State Khadi & Village Industries 

Board, Bombay 
Shri G. S. Bhambube ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. G. Shende All India Bee-Keepers' Association, Pune 

Dr r' p. Kapil ( Alternate ) 
Special Officer Martandam Bee-Keepers' Co-operative Society Ltd, 

Martandam 
Db M. Swaleh Forest Research Institute & Colleges, Dehra Dun 

Dr R. M. Bebry ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1977 
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 8444 - 1977 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Db I. N. Tandon Government Beekeeping Station, Jeolikotc 

Shki Yogeshwab Singh ( Alternate) 
Shri G. V. Thakab Khadi & Village Industries Commission, Bombay 

Shbi K. V. Tonape ( Alternate ) 
Shri T, Purnanandam, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Deputy Director ( Agri & Food ) 

Secretary 

Shri Manohar T. Santwani 
Deputy Director ( Agri & Food ), ISI 



Beekeeping Equipment Subcommittee, AFDG 11:2 

Convener 
Shri G. V. Thakar Khadi & Village Industries Commission, Bombay 

Members 

Shri K. M. Joyappa Department of Industries & Commerce, Government 

of Karnataka, Bangalore 
Shri J. L. Kaw J & K. Khadi & Village Industries Board, Srinagar 

Shri O. P. Krishna Department of Agriculture, Government of 

Himachal Pradesh, Simla 
Shbi Joginder Singh ( Alternate ) 
Shbi Bimalendu Mondal 24 Parganas Bee-Keepers' Go-operative Society Ltd, 

24 Parganas 
Shbi R, P. Phadke Khadi & Village Industries Commission, Bombay 

Shbi A.' M. Shah All India Bee-Keepers' Association, Pune 

Shbi Tibath Ram ( Alternate ) 
Shbi P. L. Sharma Himachal Pradesh University, College of Agriculture, 

Solan 
Shri S. G. Shende Maharashtra State Khadi & Village Industries 

Board, Bombay 



IS : 8444 - 1977 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

FUMIGANT STRIPS FOR 

TREATMENT OF HONEY-BEES 

0. FOREWORD 

0,1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 29 April 1977, after the draft finalized by the Apiary 
Industry Sectional Committee had been approved by the Agricultural 
and Food Products Division Council. 

0.2 Fumigant strips are recommended for smoke generation for treatment 
of honey-bees against tracheal mites {Acarapis ivoodi, Rennie). The strips 
are coated with a non-systemic acaricide, namely, chlorobenzilate which 
is safe to honey-bees. This standard is expected to help apiarists in 
procuring the strips of desired quality and lead to the import substitution 
of the product. 

0.3 The bee-colony is treated by burning the strip at one end and allowing 
to smoulder in the hive with the entrance closed after the flying has ceased. 

0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, express- 
ing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance 
with IS: 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this 
standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard prescribes requirements for fumigant strips for use 
against acarine disease of honey-bees {Apis cerana indica), 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall apply. 

2.1 Fumigant — Chemicals which when volatilized are toxic to target 
organisms. 



♦Rules for rounding off numerical values ( reuised ). 

3 



IS : 8444 - 1977 

2.2 Acarine Disease — Disease of honey-bees ( Apis carana indica) caused 
by a microscopic mite { Acarapis woodi Rennie ). It infects the thoracic 
trachea (breathing tubes) of aduh bees. 

3. MATERIAL AND CHEMICALS 

3.1 Blotting Paper— conforming to IS: 1396-1960*. 

3.2 Potassium Nitrate — 5 percent solution. 

3.3 Chlorobenzilate — ethyl 4,4'-dichloroben2ilate. Prepare 15 percent 
solution in benzene. 

4. PREPARATION 

4.1 Soak the blotting paper in 5 percent potassium nitrate solution and 
allow it to dry in shade. Soak the dried paper once in 15 percent solution 
of chlorobenzilate and allow it to dry. 

4.2 Gut out the strips of dimensions 1 1 X 4 cm which contains the 
appropriate dose. 

5. REQjUIREMENTS 

5.1 The strips shall be Icompetely dry before packing. 

5.2 The strips shall be evenly soaked with the fumigant. 

5.3 Each fumigant strip shall contain 8 to 10 mg of chlorobenzilate per 
cm^ as tested by the method given in Appendix A, 

6. PACKING AND MARKING 

6.1 The strips shall be suitably packed in cardboard cartons to guard 
against ingestion of moisture or other damage in handling. 

6.1.1 The supplier shall furnish the information sheet on the procedure 
for use of the strips and precautions in their handling. 

6.2 Each carton, shall be marked with the following information: 

a) Name of the manufacturer, and 

b) Batch or code number. 

6.2.1 The carton may also be marked with the ISI Certification Mark. 

Note — The use of the ISI Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of the 
Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act and the Rules and Regu- 
lations made thereunder. The ISI Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard 
conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements 
of that standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and quality 
control which is devised and supervised by ISI and operated by the producer. ISI 
marked products are also continuously checked by ISI for conformity to that standard 
as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of 
the ISI Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers or processors, may be 
obtained from the Indian Standards Institution. 



•Specification for blotting paper. 



IS : 8444 - 1977 

1. SAMPLING 

7.1 The method of drawing representative samples of the product and 
the criteria for conformity shall be as agreed to between the purchaser 
and the svipplier. 



APPENDIX A 

[Clause 5.3) 

METHOD OF DETERMINATION OF QUANTITY 
OF CHLOROBENZILATE ON STRIPS 

A-1. REAGENT 

A-1.1 Benzene — analytical reagent grade. 

A-2. PROCEDURE 

A-2.1 Select a clean fumigant strip and measure its area accurately. 
Take 10 ml of warm benzene in a dish and dip the strip in it. Allow the 
strip to remain in benzene for 10 to 15 minutes. Remove the strip, filter 
the solvent through filter paper and collect the filtrate in a weighed dish. 
Again keep the strip in 10 ml warm benzene, remove it after few minutes, 
filter the solvent through the same filter paper and collect the filtrate in 
the same weighed dish. Repeat this procedure once more. Rinse the 
filter paper twice with 5 ml benzene each time and collect the washings 
in the same weighed dish. Evaporate benzene in the weighed dish and 
weigh it to get constant mass. 

A-3. CALCULATION 

Q 2) 

A-3.1 Mass of chlorobenzilate, in mg/cm^ — X 1000 

A 

where 

C = mass in g of the dish and residue; 

D = mass in g of empty, clean and dry dish; and 

A = area in cm^ of fumigant strip. 



INDIAN STANDARDS 

ON 

APIARY INDUSTRY 

IS: 

1504-1974 Beeswax ( second revision ) 

1515-1969 Beehives {first rerision ) 

1735-1960 Hive stands 

1736-1960 Honey extractor, tangential type 

2072-1976 Comb foundation sheets {first revision ) 

3891-1974 Layout for honey processing plant {first revision ) 

3894-1966 Comb foundation nxill 

4941-1974 Extracted honey {first revision ) 

5426-1969 Travelling bees box 

5427-1969 Honey extractor, radial type 

6695-1972 Code for conservation and maintenance of honey bees 

7459-1974 Wasp trap 

7849 ( Part I )-1975 Layout for a honey house*. Part I Large scale honey handling units 



