INRI HAF IS 8391 (Part 3) : 2019 
Indian Standard 


Tet am ch fero tas firf2ra Raa s 
ar A vfre — AN 
am 3 Hefera 
( RRT GATE) 


Rubberized Coir Sheets for 
Cushioning — Specification 
Part 3 Sandwiched 
( Third Revision ) 


ICS 55.040; 59.060.10; 59.080.40 


© BIS 2019 


anda HIS Sm 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR UT, 9 serere TH HM, ay freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


October 2019 Price Group 7 


Coir and Coir Products Sectional Committee, TXD 25 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 3) (Third Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Coir and Coir Products Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textile Division Council. 


This standard was first published in 1977 and further revised in 1987 and 2018. Further it has now been revised to 
incorporate the additional requirements for Eco-mark. 


Sandwiched Rubberized Coir (SRC) sheets are cushioning product manufactured from suitable polyurethane/ 
orlatex foam rubber sheet between two rubberized coir/needle felt coir sheets with natural or synthetic or a 
combinationof both binders. In general, this indigenous technology used to manufacture sandwiched rubberized 
coir sheetsfor cushioning is an improved combination of that of the existing rubberized coir industry. 


Curled coir fibres are suitably coated and bonded with natural or synthetic rubber or a combination of both 
containing suitable ingredients and vulcanized for the final set to make uniform mat in different density according 
to requirement. Polyurethane or latex foam sheet sandwiched with rubberized coir/needle felt coir sheets by the 
application of latex to get uniform bonding between the sandwiched materials. Sandwiched rubberized sheets 
shall be of resilient nature and porus structure in the form of fabricated sheets. 


The Ministry of Environment and Forests, Government of India has instituted a scheme for labelling environment 
friendly products known as ‘Eco-mark scheme’ and notified vide Gazette Notification No. 893(E), dated 18 
September 2018 for labelling Coir and Coir products as environment friendly. 


The Eco-mark scheme is being operated by the Bureau of Indian Standards. However, to obtain the licence to use 
the Ecomark on a product, it is also essential to obtain BIS licence to use the Standard Mark as per the relevant 
Indian Standard for that product. 


The composition of the committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex M. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in 
the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 8391 (Part 3) : 2019 


Indian Standard 


RUBBERIZED COIR SHEETS FOR 
CUSHIONING —SPECIFICATION 


PART 3 SANDWICHED 
( Third Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard (Part 3) prescribes the requirements 
and methods of test for sandwiched rubberized coir 
sheets for cushioning. 


1.2 It does not cover articles made from 
shreddedrubberized coir or fabricated articles 
consisting of a cover of sandwiched rubberized coir 
sheets enclosing springs or other cushioning material, 
or industrial and packaging material. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A contain provisions, 
which through reference in this text constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subjected to revision, and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards indicated in Annex A. 


3 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 


3.1 Rubberized Coir — A resilient product of 
porousstructure containing curled coir fibre suitably 
coated and bonded with natural rubber, synthetic 
rubber or a combination of both containing suitable 
ingredients, and vulcanized for the final set to the 
desired size and shape. 


3.2 Needle Felt Coir Mats — Aresilient product 
ofporous structure containing needle felt coir (non- 
woven process) suitably coated and bonded with 
natural rubber or synthetic rubber or a combination of 
both containing suitable ingredients, and vulcanized for 
the final set to the desired size and shape. 


3.3 Polyurethane Foam — Flexible polyurethane 
foam of polymer or polyester type, which is described 
as expanded cellular product produced by interaction of 
poly-hydroxy compounds, water and isocyanate. The 
form shall consist of cells of uniform characteristics, 
which are essentially open and interconnecting. 


3.4 Latex Foam — A cellular rubber made directly 
from liquid latex and in which all the cells are 
intercommunicating having a vulcanized cellular 
structure with a porous surface. The cells shall be of a 
uniform character. 


3.5 Sandwiched Rubberized Coir Sheets (SRC) — 
Cushioning block obtained by enclosing suitable 
polyurethane and/or latex foam rubber sheet of suitable 
thickness and density between two rubberized Coir/ 
Needle felt coir sheets and described in 5.1, or a 
combination of such blocks. 


3.6 Indentation Hardness Index —The indentation 
hardness index is the load in kilograms required to 
produce an indentation in the sample equivalent in 
depth to 40 percent of the original thickness of the 
sample with a cross-section of 1 square decimeter. 


3.7 Original Thickness —The thickness determined 
by needle gauge method for the whole sample will be 
termed as original thickness. 
NOTE — For sample having thickness less than 38 mm, 
the original thickness shall be determined by superimposing 
minimum number of pieces to give a total thickness of about 
38mm and the average taken as the original thickness of the 
sample. 


4 GRADES 


The sandwiched rubberized coir sheets for cushioning 
shall be graded on the basis of the indentation hardness 
index and density as given below: 


Grade Indentation Density, Min 
Hardness Index g/dm’? 
Medium 4.00-4.99 50.0 
Firm 5.00-5.99 60.0 
Extra firm 6.00-6.99 70.0 


NOTE — The tolerance on indentation hardness index has 
been provided to take care of the agreement between the 
purchaser and the manufacturer in respect of this requirement 
when it is desired to have different value in any portion of the 
coir sheet. 


IS 8391 (Part 3) : 2019 


5 MANUFACTURE, WORKMANSHIPAND 
FINISH 


5.1 Sandwiched rubberized coir sheets shall be 
manufactured using un retted coir fibre mechanically 
extracted by regulated and even feeding of the fibres 
with the help of a mechanical arrangement in curling 
machines to form a thick strand of evenly distributed 
parallelized fibres which is processed further to form 
twisted curled coir rope as per IS 9308 (Part 4) for 
effectively utilize the resiliency of the fibre material, 
the fibres being bonded to each other by vulcanized 
rubber to keep them in position, utilizing rubber latex 
containing compounding ingredients of such nature 
and quality that the finished product complies with the 
requirements of this specification. 


Alternatively, coir fibres manufactured by mechanical 
process as per IS 9308 (Part 2) or IS 9308 (Part 3) 
are processed through needled felt plant (Non-woven 
system) to make uniform mat in different densities 
according to the requirement. The non-woven 
mats produced are bonded with natural rubber or 
synthetic rubber or a combination of both containing 
compounding ingredients of such nature and quality. 
Then the fleeces of mats are pressed into pad by passing 
into a press under controlled temperature, pressure 
and time that the finished product complies with the 
requirements of this specification. 


5.2 The rubberized coir/needle felt coir sheets shall 
be sandwiched with either polyurethane or latex 
foam or the combination of the both for a sandwiched 
sheet. Polyurethane or latex foam sheet sandwiched 
with rubberized coir/needle felt coir sheets by the 
application of latex to get a uniform bonding between 
the sandwiched materials. The side walls of the sheets 
after cutting to the desired dimensions shall be bonded 
by latex compound with Hessian cloth or tapestry or 
any other suitable material so as to provide additional 
support, if necessary. 


5.3 Sandwiched rubberized coir sheets shall be 
of a resilient nature and porous structure, in the 
form of sheetings or fabricated sheets. Any special 
characteristics other than those prescribed in this 
specification which may be desired for specific 
application shall be as agreed to between the purchaser 
and the supplier. 


5.4 The sandwiched rubberized coir sheets shall present 
an uniform appearance throughout the structure and 
shall not contain loose fibres or voids. 


5.5 Due to manufacturing conditions, the material may 
have to be altered or repaired. The repaired or altered 
material shall be acceptable provided the material used 
in such repairs or alterations is of the same composition 
and quality as the original product and provided such 
alterations do not affect the requirements given in this 


specification. The odour of sandwiched rubberized 
coir shall be as mild as possible and shall not be 
objectionable. 


5.6 Toppings of natural foam or synthetic foam or 
combination of both may be bonded to sandwiched 
rubberized coir sheets for a smoother surface as agreed 
to between the purchaser and the supplier. 


5.7 Thickness of the latex foam/polyurethane foam 
shall not exceed the total thickness of rubberized coir/ 
rubberized needle felt coir sheet for manufacture of 
sandwiched rubberized coir. 


6 SHAPE AND DIMENSIONS 


6.1 Sandwiched rubberized coir sheets may be supplied 
in fabricated shapes or in sheet form as specified by the 
purchaser. 


6.2 The dimensions of sandwiched rubberized coir 
sheets, when tested according to the method prescribed 
in Annex B shall be as specified by the purchaser 
subject to the tolerance as given below: 


Length or Width Permissible Tolerance 


mm 
Uptolm +6 
1 mtol.5m +9 
Over 1.5 m +12 
Thickness Permissible Tolerance 
mm 
Up to 12mm +3 
-0 
Over 12mm up to 38 mm +6 
-3 
Over 38 mm up to 100 mm +12 
-6 
Over 100 mm +15 
-6 
7 REQUIREMENTS 
7.1 Density 


Density requirement is optional and has been given for 
guidance only. The density corresponding to various 
grades is as given in 4. The method of test shall be as 
given in Annex C. 


7.2 Indentation Hardness 


When tested according to method given in Annex D, 
different grades of sandwiched rubberized coir 


products shall have the indentation hardness as 
prescribed under 4. 


7.3 Resistance to Ageing 


When tested according to method prescribed in 
Annex E, the indentation hardness of the sample after 
ageing shall not vary by more than +10 percent of the 
value obtained with unaged sample. 


7.4 Resistance to Flexing 


When tested according to the method given in 
Annex F, the indentation hardness of the test specimen 
shall not vary by more than +10 percent. This shall 
be calculated on the resultant thickness. 


7.5 Compression Set (Aged) 


The compression set of the sample, when determined 
by the method prescribed in Annex G, shall not exceed 
+ 15 percent. This shall be calculated on the resultant 
thickness. 


7.6 Compression Set (Un-aged) 


The compression set of the sample, when determined 
by the method prescribed in Annex G, tested 
under atmospheric conditions without the elevated 
temperature, shall not exceed +10 percent. 


7.7 pH Value 


The pH value of the aqueous extract of rubberized 
coir when determined by the method prescribed in 
Annex H shall be within 5 to 8.5. 


7.8 Chloride Content 


The chloride content of the rubberized coir calculated 
as ‘Cl’ when determined by the method prescribed in 
Annex J shall not exceed 0.3 percent by mass. 


7.9 Sulphate Content 


Sulphate content of the aqueous extract of the material 
prepared as in H-2 and tested by the method prescribed 
in Annex K shall not exceed 0.2 percent by mass. 


8 TESTS 


8.1 Preparations and Conditioning of Samples 


8.1.1 Wherever practicable, the tests shall be conducted 
on the whole sandwiched rubberized coir sheet. 


8.1.2 The specimen shall be cut from the centre of the 
sample piece as far as possible and the specimen shall 
be subjected to test, preferably within 24 h of cutting. 


8.1.3 When the finished product does not lend itself 
to testing or to the preparation of test pieces because 
of complicated shape, small size or other reasons, 
standard test slabs shall be prepared. 


IS 8391 (Part 3) : 2019 


8.1.4 When differences due to the difficulty in 
obtaining suitable test pieces from the finished product 
arise, the manufacturer and the purchaser may agree on 
acceptable deviations. This can be done by comparing 
results of standard test pieces and those obtained on 
actual product. 


8.1.5 Test shall be carried out not before 24 h after 
vulcanization of the sample. Sample and test pieces 
shall be protected from light as far as possible and from 
any stress or strain, whenever they are not actually in 
the process of being tested. 


8.1.6 Conditioning 


Each sample selected for test shall be conditioned for a 
minimum period of 24 h at 27 + 2?C and 65 + 5 percent 
relative humidity (see IS 6359) prior to testing and 
testing shall be in the same atmosphere, when the testing 
cannot be carried out in the same atmosphere then the 
testing shall be commenced within 2 min of withdrawal 
of specimen from the conditioning atmosphere. 


9 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR 
ECOMARK (OPTIONAL) 


9.1 The product shall meet the requirement specified in 
this Indian Standard. 


9.2 The manufacturer shall produce the consent 
clearance as per the provisions of Water (Prevention 
and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 and Air 
(Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 and 
the authorization(s), if required under the rules notified 
under the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 and the 
rules made there under while applying for the Eco- 
markas per Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016. 


9.3 The product(s) or product packaging(s) may display 
in brief the criteria based on which the product(s) has/ 
have been labeled environment friendly. 


9.4 The material used for product packaging(s) shall be 
recyclable, reusable or biodegradable. 


9.5 The product shall meet the specific requirements as 
given in Table 1.’ 


Table 1 Specific Requirements for Ecomark 


(Clause 9.5) 

SI Parameter Requirement Method of Test 

No. 

1) (2) (3) (4) 

1 Residual pesticides 1.0 IS 15651 
(Sum parameter) 
(ppm) (Max) 

ii) pH of aqueous 6-7 IS 8391 (Part 1) 


extract 


IS 8391 (Part 3) : 2019 


10 SAMPLING 


10.1 Lot 


All sandwiched rubberized coir sheets of the same 
grade, size and shape manufactured under similar 
conditions shall constitute a lot. 


10.2 Sample 

That part of the lot which is drawn randomly to 
represent the lot. 

10.3 Test Specimen 


An appropriately shaped piece taken from the sample 
for use in physical and chemical tests. 


11 MARKING OR LABELLING 


11.1 Each sandwiched rubberized coir sheets for 
cushioning shall be attached with a label bearing the 
following information: 


a) Name of the material; 


b) Manufacturer's name, initials, trade-mark or any 
other identification mark; 


c) Grade; 
d) Dimensions; and 


e) Criteria for which sandwiched rubberized coir 
sheets has been labeled as Eco-mark; and 


f) Any other information required by the buyer or by 
the law in the force. 


11.2 BIS Certification Marking 


The product(s) conforming to the requirements of 
this standard may be certified as per the conformity 
assessment schemes under the provisions of the Bureau 
of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and the Rules and 
Regulations framed there under, and the products may 
be marked with the Standard Mark. 


12 PACKING 


The sandwiched rubberized coir sheets shall be packed 
as agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier. 


13 INSTRUCTIONS FOR STORAGE 


Sandwiched rubberized coir sheets shall be kept in 
well ventilated store in an atmosphere free from the 
products of combustion from any heating appliance 
and free solvent vapours, out of contact with damp 
surfaces. Under no circumstances shall the products 
be stored in direct sunlight or exposed to ultraviolet 
light. When products are stacked in stores, care shall be 
taken to avoid undue compression or distortion. Special 
care shall be taken when staking fabricated products of 
irregular shape. 


IS 8391 (Part 3) : 2019 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 2 ) 


LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 


IS No. Title IS No. Title 
1070 : 1992 Reagent grade water | — (Part 2): 1987 Mattress coir fibre (first revision) 
Specification (third revision) (Part 3): 1987  Decorticated coir fibre (first 
711 : 1979 Specification for direct reading pH revision) 
meters (second revision) 15651 : 2006 Textiles — Requirements for 
6359: 1971 Method for conditioning of textiles emonmental. labeling = 
: : Specification 
15651 : 2006 Textiles — Requirements for : : 
environmental labelling HB 8391 (Part 1) | Rubberized coir sheets for 
Specification : 2019 cushioning — Specification: Part 1 
. . . Curled (second revision) 
9308 Specification for mechanically 
extracted coir fibre 
ANNEX B 


( Clause 6.2 ) 


METHOD OF TEST FOR MEASUREMENT OF DIMENSIONS 


B-1 DETERMINATION 
WIDTH 


OF LENGTH AND 


Measure the length and width of the sample using a 
steel rule nearest to 1 mm, ensuring the measurement 
along a line perpendicular to opposing faces of the 
sample. 


B-2 DETERMINATION OF THICKNESS 


B-2.1 A test specimen 100 x 100 mm cut out from the 
sample shall be placed between two larger horizontal 
plates with a load of 200 g on its upper surface. The 
distance between the plates is determined at about the 
middle on each side correct to the nearest mm and the 
average of the four readings taken as the thickness of 
the sample. 


B-2.2 Determination of Thickness of the Whole 
Sample 


The instrument for measuring the thickness consists of 
a 250 mm long, rigid, narrow measuring needle made 
out of the suitable material and finished to give a smooth 
polished surface, one end of which is fixed vertically 
to the centre of a polished plate of 3mm thickness and 
50 x 50 mm size, the other end being tapered to a point, 
to facilitate insertion of the rod through the rubberized 
coir sheet. The needle is calibrated in millimeter all 


along its length starting with the point fixing it with 
the plate as 0, every 5 and 10 mm from this point being 
prominently marked out. A disc of 35 mm diameter, 
weighing 200 g with a central hole to facilitate 
movement of the weight all along the length of the 
calibrated needle also forms part of the measuring 
instrument. 


B-2.2.1 Procedure 


For measuring the thickness of the sample, the calibrated 
needle measuring instrument is inserted through the 
bottom side of the sandwiched rubberized coir sheets, 
so that the needle is in a plane perpendicular to the free 
surface of the sandwiched rubberized coir sheets and 
the base plate of the instrument is in contact with the 
bottom side of the sandwiched rubberized coir sheets. 
Thereupon, the sliding weight is introduced on the 
projecting part of the needle and the combined thickness 
of the sandwiched rubberized coir sheets and that of 
the sliding weight read directly, correct to the nearest 
1 mm, on the calibrated needle. The thickness of the 
sliding weight is deducted from this reading to obtain 
the thickness of the test sample. The measurements 
are recorded at last at four points at random on the test 
piece and the average value taken as the thickness of 
the test material. 


IS 8391 (Part 3) : 2019 


ANNEX C 
( Clause 7.1 ) 


METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF DENSITY 


C-1 Determine the length, width and thickness of the 
sample as described in Annex B. 


C-1.1 Weigh the test specimen correct to 0.1 g. 


C-1.2 Determine the density of the sample by dividing 
the mass in grams by the volume in cubic decimetres. 


ANNEX D 
( Clause 7.2 ) 


METHOD FOR DETEMINATION OF INDENTATION HARDNESS INDEX 


D-1 TEST SPECIMEN 


Cut out a test specimen measuring 100 x 100 mm, 
leaving a space of 25 mm from the edges of the whole 
piece. 


D-2 APPARATUS 


D-2.1 The testing apparatus shall be capable of 
applying an indentation in such a way that the load is 
applied on the sample at a uniform rate through a load 
measuring device of suitable capacity for measuring the 
load required to produce the specified indentation. The 
sample shall be placed on the smooth flat horizontal 
surface of the platform of the load measuring device, 
the surface of the platform being larger than the size of 
the sample. 


D-2.2 The essential parts of the testing apparatus (see 
Fig. 1) are an adjustable indentor of the dimension 
specified in D-2.2.1, which can be moved vertically 
up or down by a threaded shaft, working through a 
sleeve of same pitch and dimension, operated by a 
hand wheel. The sleeve is fitted to a framework which 
rests on the horizontal surface of a table without having 
contact with the load measuring device of minimum 20 
kg capacity with accuracy of 10 g. The thickness of the 
sample can be measured by means of a pointer mounted 
on the indenter with suitable guides and sliding in 
front of a vertical scale graduated in millimetre. The 
pointer is so adjusted that when the indentor touches 
the platform of the balance, the reading of the pointer 
on the scale is zero. 


D-2.2.1 Indentor 


A 105 mm square mild steel plate of 3 mm thickness 
shall constitute the indentor, fitted to the threaded 
shaft by a ball and socket joint, so that the surface of 
the indentor can adjust itself to the contour of the test 
specimen. 


D-3 TEST PROCEDURE 


The test specimen shall be of size minimum 100 x 
100 mm. Raise the indentor to a height greater than 
the thickness of the sample and place the sample over 
the platform of the load measuring device below the 
indentor. Note the weight of the sample recorded by 
reading on the load measuring device (x g). Lower the 
indentor by rotating the handle so as to press the sample 
against the platform of the load measuring device. 
When the load measuring device reads (200 g + x g), 
note the reading of the pointer on the scale to record 
the thickness of the sample (¢,). Gradually lower the 
indentor to apply a load at the rate of 0.5 kg/min until 
the sample is pressed to a thickness of 60 percent of t,. 
The load recorded on the load measuring device for this 
indentation is taken as the indentation Hardness Index 
of the specimen. 


DIAL SCALE 
BALANCE 


HAND WHEEL 


SPINDLE 
(SQ. THREAD) 


Fic. 1 APPARATUS FOR IDENTATION TEST 


IS 8391 (Part 3) : 2019 


ANNEX E 
( Clause 7.3 ) 


METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF RESISTANCE TO AGEING 


E-1 PRINCIPLE 


The ageing test consists of subjecting samples to 
controlled deterioration by air at elevated temperature 
and atmospheric pressure after which the physical 
properties are measured and compared with those 
of un-aged samples. The deterioration is measured 
and compared with those of un-aged samples. The 
deterioration is measured by the observed change in 
indentation hardness index. 


E-2 TEST SPECIMEN 


From each sample cut out two test specimens of size 
100 x 100 mm and measure the indentation hardness 
index (/,) as specified in Annex D. 


E-3 PROCEDURE 


E-3.1 Select an air oven of such size that the totalvolume 
of test specimens does not exceed 10 percent of the 
free space in the oven. Make provision for suspending 
specimens so that they are not within 12 mm of each 
other or the oven sides. Control the temperature of the 
oven thermostatically so that the test specimens are 
kept at 70 + 2?C. Place thermometer near the centre of 
the oven to record the actual ageing temperature. 


E-3.2 Adjust the oven to 70 + 2°C. Place the 
testspecimens in the oven adjusted as indicated in E-3.1. 
Arrange the test specimens so that they are stationary, 
free from strain, freely exposed to air on all sides and 
not exposed to light. Continue the ageing for 48 h. At 
the completion of the ageing period, remove the test 
specimens from the oven and place on a flat surface to 
cool to room temperature. Allow them to cool for not 
less than 24 h. Measure the indentation hardness index 
(L) of the aged specimens as in Annex D. 


E-3.3 Compare the indentation hardness index of 

bothaged and un-aged test specimens. 

E-4 CALCULATION 

Calculate the resistance to ageing as follows: 
Resistance to ageing, percent= (1, — 7.) / I, x 100 

Where, 


I = Indentation hardness index of the original 
sample, and 


I,— Indentation hardness index of the aged sample. 


ANNEX F 
( Clause 7.4 ) 


METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF RESISTANCE TO FLEXING 


F-1 METHOD 


The method involves subjecting a sample to continued 
flexing with an indentor for 2 50 000 cycles at 4 cycle/s 
and measuring the loss/gain in indentation hardness. 


F-2 TEST SPECIMEN 


Cut out a test specimen measuring 100 x 100 mm, 
leaving 25 mm from the edges of the whole piece. 


F-3 APPARATUS 


F-3.1 The essential parts of the apparatus (see Fig. 2), 
which has been found suitable, consists of an indentor 
of dimensions specified in F-3.2, connected through a 
threaded adaptor and held by a locking nut to a push 
rod. This push rod is constrained to move vertically by 
fixed sleeves and is driven vertically by a motor which 


rotates a crank disc, the crank disc and push rod being 
joined by a connecting rod. This connecting rod is 
adjustably mounted in a radial slit in the crank disc, the 
length of the strokes, therefore, being adjustable. The 
motor is mounted upon a steel beam above the table 
upon which the specimen to be tested is placed. A square 
frame made of mild steel angles with a clear internal 
dimension of 107 x 107 mm is positioned on the table 
just below the indentor to prevent lateralmovement 
of the specimen in the course of its repeated flexing 
by the indentor. The fixtures are adjusted for effecting 
four flexes per second. A revolution counter is attached 
to the machine to record the number of flexes for the 
specimen. 


F-3.2 A 105 mm square mild steel plate of 3 mm 
thickness shall constitute the indentor. 


IS 8391 (Part 3) : 2019 


F-4 PROCEDURE 


Measure the thickness of the sample as described 
in AnnexB. Determine the indentation hardness 
index (/,) as given in Annex D. Adjust the stroke of 
the crankshaft for a depression of the indentor by a 
distance equal to 40 percent of the thickness of the 
sample. This is done by adjusting the position of the 
connecting rod in the crank disc. Raise the indentor 
to the top most position of the stroke and the test 
specimen in the mild steel angle box below the 
indentor. Place wooden blocks of suitable thickness 
below the specimen to ensure that the top surface of 
the specimen is in contact with the bottom side of the 
indentor when the indentor is at the topmost position 
of the stroke. Subject the specimen to flexing at a rate 


REVOLUTION COUNTER 


of 4 cycle/s. After flexing 2 50 000 cycles, allow the 
sample to remain for 30 min. Thereafter, determine 
the indentation hardness index (Z) by test method 
prescribed in Annex D. 


F-5 CALCULATION 
Calculate the resistance to flexing as follows: 
Resistance to flexing, percent = (1, — Z) / I, x 100 


Where, 


I = Indentation hardness index of the original 
sample, and 


I,= Indentation hardness index of the flexed 
sample. 


CRANK DISC 


CONNECTING ROD 


x PUSH ROD 


Fic. 2 APPARATUS FOR FLUXING TEST 


IS 8391 (Part 3) : 2019 


ANNEX G 
( Clauses 7.5 and 7.6 ) 


METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF COMPRESSION SET 


G-1 PRINCIPLE 


The compression set under constant deflection is the 
measure of the residual strain in a test piece after it has 
been strained under compression to a given extent for 
a given time and then allowed to recover for a given 
time, the temperature being substantially constant 
during the test. 


G-2 TEST SPECIMEN 


The test specimen shall be of size 100 x 100 mm. 


G-3 APPARATUS 


The compression device shall consist of two flat steel 
plates, between the parallel faces of which the test 
piece is compressed. Steel spacers in the form of bars 
and of thickness such as to give the required 40 percent 
compression shall be provided to control the thickness 
of the piece during the test. 


G-4 PROCEDURE 


Measure accurately the initial thickness of the test 
piece as in B-2. Compress the test piece by 40 percent 


of its original thickness between the parallel steel 
plates, which shall be larger than the test piece. Use 
steel spacers between the plates, sufficient clearance 
being allowed for tilting of the test piece and care being 
taken to avoid displacement of the test piece. After 
being compressed for 22 h at a temperature of 70 + 2?C, 
remove the test piece from the clamp while still at the 
test temperature and allow recovering for 3 h at room 
temperature. Then measure the thickness of the test 
piece again. Test at least two test pieces and take the 
average of test results. 


G-5 CALCULATION 


Calculate the compression set as follows: 


Compression set at constant = 
(T — T.) / T. x 100 strain, percent 
Where, 


T. — original thickness of the test piece, and 
T = thickness of the test piece after recovery. 


ANNEX H 
( Clause 7.7 ) 


METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF pH VALUE 


H-1 TEST SPECIMENS 


Draw a square piece of rubberized coir sheet weighing 
about 10 g. 


H-2 PREPARATION OFAQUEOUS EXTRACT 


Cut the piece taken into about 5 mm? pieces and weigh. 
Transfer to a clean, chemically resistant glass flask, 
fitted with ground glass joint for reflux condenser. Add 
distilled water (see IS 1070) weighing 20 times the 


weight of the rubberized coir under test, to the flask. Fit 
the flask to the reflux condenser and heat the contents 
of the flask to boil. Continue boiling for 1 h. Remove 
the flask and close while the liquid is still boiling 
gently using a clean ground glass stopper. Cool to room 
temperature. 


H-3 DETERMINATION OF pH VALUE 


Transfer a portion of the aqueous extract to the electrode 
of pH meter (see IS 2711) and determine the pH. 


IS 8391 (Part 3) : 2019 


ANNEX J 
( Clause 7.8 ) 


METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF CHLORIDE 


J-1 REAGENT 


J-1.1 Calcium Carbonate (Chloride Free) 

J-1.2 Standard Silver Nitrate Solution — 0.1 N. 
J-1.3 Potassium Chromate Solution — 5 percent. 
J-1.4 Burette 

J-1.5 Pipette 

J-1.6 Conical Flask 

J-1.7 Measuring Flask 


J-2 PREPARATION 
SOLUTIONS 


OF STANDARD 


J-2.1 Standard Silver Nitrate Solution — 0.1 N. 
Take 16.989 g of silver nitrate having molecular weight 
of 169.89 and dissolve in distilled water to make it one 
litre. 


J-2.2 Potassium Chromate Solution — 5 Percent. 
Dissolve 50 g of potassium chromate in one litre 
distilled water. 


water. Note down the volume of silver nitrate solution 
transferred. 


J-3.2 Take 100 ml of aqueous extract of the 
solutionwhich was prepared during pH analysis. 


J-3.3 Neutralize with calcium carbonate till a pale 
yellowcolor is obtained (usually 0.5 g is sufficient). 


J-3.4 Add 1 ml of potassium chromate solution. 


J-3.5 Titrate against standard silver nitrate solution tilla 
red colour is obtained. Note down the volume of silver 
nitrate solution transferred. 


J-3.6 Calculate the percentage of chloride by 


thefollowing formulae. 


J-4 CALCULATION 
3.546 (V, — V,) N 


Chloride (as Cl), percent by mass 
W 
Where, 
V = volume of standard silver nitrate solutionused 

in titration with material, in ml; 


J-3 PROCEDURE E volume of standard silver nitrate solution used 
in blank with material, in ml; 
J-3.1 For the potassium chromate solution prepared N= normality of silver nitrate solution; and 
addstandard silver nitrate solution of 0.1 N till a red W= mass of the material out of which the aqueous 
precipitate is formed. Allow it to stand for overnight extract was made for chloride content test 
and filter. Dilute the filter to one litre with distilled only, in g. 
ANNEX K 


( Clause 7.9 ) 


METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF SULPHATE CONTENT 


K-1 REAGENTS 


K-1.1Barium Chloride Solution, 2 percent (w/v). 
K-1.2 Hydrochloric Acid (Concentrated) 


K-2 PROCEDURE 


K-2.1 Take a measured portion of extract. Filter 
through a suitable filter paper and wash the filter paper 
with distilled water. Add concentrated hydrochloric 


10 


acid drop-by-drop to the combined filter and washing 
until the solution is just acidic to litmus, add 1 ml 
of acid per 100 ml of solution. Boil the solution for 
5 min and leave it to cool overnight. Filter off any 
precipitate on a filter paper pulp pad. Wash with 
water and heat the combined filtrate and washing to 
boiling. To the boiling solution add drop-by-drop 
10 ml of hot barium chloride solution. Boil for 30 min 
and leave to cool overnight. Transfer the precipitate 
quantitatively to an ignited tarred Gooch crucible 


with asbestos pad and wash with cold water until the 
washing are free from chloride. Ignite the crucible 
and its contents gently at first and finally at 800°C to 
900°C to constant weight. 


NOTE — Whatman No. 41 paper is suitable 


K-2.2 Carry out the blank determination. 
K-3 CALCULATION 


Calculate the percentage of water-soluble sulphateby 
the following formula: 


2058 *(a—b) 
P= 


V 


11 


IS 8391 (Part 3) : 2019 


Where, 


percentage by weight, of water soluble 


sulphates as sulphate ion; 


a= weight of the precipitate obtained as in test, in 
8; 

b= weight of the precipitate obtained as in blank, 
in g; and 

V= volume of extract taken for the test, in ml. 


NOTE — 100 ml of extract are equivalent to 2.0 g of 
conditioned test specimen. 


K-4 Repeat the test with extract of theremaining test 
specimens and calculate the percentage of water- 
soluble sulphate in each test specimen. 


Calculate the average of the values obtained as in K-3 
and K-4. 


IS 8391 (Part 3) : 2019 


ANNEX M 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Coir and Coir Products Sectional Committee, TXD 25 


Organization 


Central Coir Research Institute, Kalavoor 


Coir Pith and Allied Products Manufacturers and 
Exporters Association, Coimbatore 


All India Rubberized Coir Products Manufacturers 
Association, Tirunelveli 


Central Institute of Coir Technology, Bengaluru 
Coconut Development Board, Ernakulam 

Coir board, Kochi 

Coir Mats and Mattings Association, 

Coir on Foam Products, Coimbatore 

Coir Shippers’ Council, Cherthala 


Federation of Indian Coir Exporters’ Associations, 
Alleppey 


Hindustan Coir, Coir Board Complex, Alappuzha 


Karnataka State Coir Development Corporation Ltd. 
Bengaluru 


Kerala Organic Manure and Fertilizer, Kerala 


Kerala State Coir Corporation Ltd, Alappuzha 


Kerala State Small Scale Coir Manufacturer’s Federation, 
Alappuzha 


Kerala State Coir Marketing Federation, Kerala 


Kurlon Enterprises Limited, Bengaluru 


M M Rubber & Co, 


National Coir Research & Management Institute 
(NCRMI), Thiruvanthapuram 


National Coir Training & Design Centre, 


Natural Green Tech (P) Ltd., 


Orissa Co operative Coir Corporation Ltd, Bhubaneshwar 


12 


Representative(s) 
Dn Anita Das RAVINDRANATH (Chairman) 
SMT SuMI SEBASTIAN (Alternate) 


PRESIDENT 
SECRETARY (Alternate) 


SHRI SUNDARESAN 
SHRI MATHEW GEORGE (Alternate) 


Joivr DIRECTOR 
SENIOR SCIENTIFIC OFFICER (Alternate) 


SHRI SUGATA GHOSH 
Dr K MURALIDHARAN (Alternate) 


SECRETARY 
JomT DIRECTOR (Alternate) 


Suri V. A. JOEPH 
SHRI PAVITHRAN (Alternate) 


SHRI HARIRAJAN 
SHRI PHILIP VARGHESE (A/ternate) 


Suri K. S. SANJEEV 
SHRI SAJAN B Nar (Alternate) 


SHRI JOSPAUL MATHEW 
SHRI SAJAN B. Nair (Alternate) 


WEAVING MASTER 
SENIOR SCIENTIFIC OFFICER (Alternate) 


SHRI G. KUMARASWAMY 
Suri K. R. KumaraswaMY (Alternate) 


Suri G. RAJESH 


Suri G. SREEKUMAR 
Suri N. SUNURAJ (Alternate) 


PRESIDENT 
SECRETARY (Alternate) 


SHRI SURESH KUMAR 


SHRI NARENDRA KUDVA 
Suri P. ANIL (Alternate) 


SHRI JOSEPH CHERIYAN 


Dr K. R. ANIL 

Suri C. ABHISHEK (Alternate) 
ASSISTANT DIRECTOR 

ALAPPUZHA REGIONAL OFFICER (A/ternate) 
SHRI Tommy MATHEW 

SHRI ABHISHEK THOMAS (Alternate) 


MANAGING DIRECTOR 
GENERAL MANAGER (Alternate) 


IS 8391 (Part 3) : 2019 


Organization Representative(s) 
Rubber Board, Kottayam Dr J. THOMAS 
Dr James JAcos (Alternate) 
Shaa Pith Media Co., Coimbatore SHRI S PRABHU 


SHRI RAMESH (Alternate) 


Sivanthi Joe Coirs, Tuticorin SHRI DUNSTEN JOSEPH 
SHRI K. Sivakan (Alternate) 


Tamil Nadu Coir Cooperative Federation, Chennai MANAGING DIRECTOR 
GENERAL MANAGER (Alternate) 
Venugopal Fibre Industries, Pattukottai SHRI R. B. SHYAM SUNDER 
BIS Directorate General Suri A. K. BERA, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (TXD) 


[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


Suni P. N. MURALI 
ScIENTIST ‘D’ BIS 


13 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TXD 25 (13894). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


