( Reaffirmed 2001 )

IS : 10776 ( Part 3 ) - 1984

Indian Standard
METHODS OF MEASUREMENT OF ELECTRO-ACOUSTICAL CHARACTERISTICS OF HEARING AIDS
PART 3 ADDITIONAL MEASUREMENTS FOR HEARING AIDS WITH AUTOMATIC GAIN CONTROL CIRCUITS

Acoustics

Sectional

Committee,

LTDC

5

Chairman DR M. PANCHOLY Emeritus Scientist National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ) New Delhi Members Representing hhuja Radios, New Delhi SHRI SANDEEP AHU~A SHRI K. R. G~JRUMURTHY( Alternate ) Posts & Telegraphs Board, New Delhi SHRJ R. K. BHATIA SIIRI T. R. Waunwa ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi SHRI K. C~ANDRACHUDAN SHRI I. S. VEDI ( Alternate ) National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi DR A. F. CHHAPGAIZ Railway Board, Ministry of Railways SHRI P. K. GHOSH SHRI SHANXAR ( Alternate) Department of Electronics, New Delhi DR P. N. GUPTA Component Industries Association Electronic SHRI R. K. JAIN ( ELCINA ), New Delhi SIIHI L. K. VISHWANATH ( Alternate ) LT-COL KRISHBN LAL Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) SHRI B. S. RUPRAI ( Alternate ) Botton Industrial Corporation, New Delhi SHRI J. S. MONQA t?HR1 M. S. MONGA ( Alternate ) SHRI B. S. MUKHERJEE National Test House, Calcutta SHRI SUPRIYA ROY ( Alternate ) DR ( KUMARI ) SHAILAJA NIKAM All India Institute of Speech & Hearing, Mysore SHRT K. D. PAVATE Central Electronics Engineering Research Institute (CSIR ), Pilani SHRI M. R. KAPOOR ( Alternate ) PROF B. S. RAMAXRI~HNA Central University, Hyderabad ( Continued on page 2 )

INDIAN

@ Copyright 1984 STANDARDS INSTITUTION

This publication is protected under the In&n C@yrig& Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act

IS : 10776 ( Part 3 ) - 1984
( Continued from page 1 ) Members SHRI S. L. REDEY SRRI M. M. Josn~ ( &err&e REPRESENTATIVE S~sr M. SANKARALINGAM ) Representing Peico Electronics & Electricals Ltd, Bombay; and Radio Electronics & Television The Manufacturers' Association, Bombay Films Division, Bombay Supplies Directorate General of ( Inspection Wing ), New Delhi & Disposals

SHRI R. S. ARORA ( Alternate ) SHRI A. K. SEN Directorate General of All India Radio, New Delhi SHRI W. V. B. RAMALINGAM ( Alternate ) CDR P. K. SINHA Ministry of Defence ( R & D ) LT R. S. DATTA ( Alternate ) SUPERINTENDING SURVXYOR OF Central Public Works Department, New Delhi WORKS ( FOOD ) SURVEYOR OF WORKS I/FOOD ( Alternate ) SHRI N. SRINIVASAN,. Director General, IS1 ( i3-oficio Member ) Director ( Electromcs ) Secretary SHRI PAVAN KUMAR Assistant Director ( Electronics ), IS1

Panel

for Hearing

Aids and Audiometers,
Convener

LTDC

5 : P4

DR M. PANCHOLY Emeritus Scientist National Physza;L;:g;tory ( CSIR ) e Members SHRI SYED P. BASIIEEI~ DR SOH.~N SING~I ( Alternate ) DR A. F. CI~UAPGAJ~ DR P. GHOSH SRRI PXIR~ZE A. PCSTOS Janus SHRI R. N. NAR.~NG DR ( KUMARI ) SI~AII,AJ.~ NIKAW SHRI E. R. RAMA~HANDRAN DR P. C. SA~AR Radiocraft of India Pvt Ltd, Bangalore

National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi Arphi Incorporated, Bombay Alps International Pvr Ltd, New Delhi All India Institute of Speech & Hearing, Mysore Peico Electronics & Electricals Ltd, Bombay The Association of Otolaryngologists of India, Bombay

2

IS : 10776 ( Part 3 ) - 1984

Indian Standard
METHODS OF MEASUREMENT OF ELECTRO-ACOUSTICAL CHARACTERISTICS OF HEARING AIDS
PART 3 AIDS ADDITIONAL MEASUREMENTS GAIN FOR HEARING CIRCUITS WITH AUTOMATIC CONTRO~L

0.
0.1 This

FOREWORD

Indian Standard ( Part 3 ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 16 February 1984, after the draft finalized by the Acoustics Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. 0.2 This standard applies to hearing gain control ( AGC ) circuits. aids of any type with automatic

0.3 This standard includes devices which have compression and/or limiting properties with respect to the envelope of the input signal. Devices which control the long-term average output level are also included: a) AGC is employed to obtain compression, or the reduction of the dynamic range of the sound at the output, with the object of preserving the integrity of the input waveform. b) AGC circuits ing purposes. instead of clipping devices are often used for limit-

A limiting effect occurs when the input/output characteristic flattens out at higher input levels. Limiting action is mainly used as a means of preventing excessive output sound from the hearing aid from reaching the listener's ear. 0.4 This standard does not include:

a) Expanders. b) Clipping devices, which level; such devices differ in a steady state, tend signal.
NOTE distortion, attention.

cut off the signal peaks above a certain basically from AGC circuits, which, to preserve the waveform of the input
recovery range. time This may cause considerable should be given special

An AGC circuit with very short especially in the low-frequency

3

IS : 10776( Part 3 ) - 1984 0.5 The
methods of measurement of electro-acoustical hearing aids are being covered by a series of standards following individual parts: Part 1 General measurements for air-conduction for hearing for hearing of characteristics consisting of hearing aids with aids induction of the

Part 2 Part 3 Part 4

Additional measurements pick-up coil input Additional measurements gain control circuits Measurements of vibrator outputs.

aids with automatic aids with bone

characteristics

hearing

0.6 While preparing this standard, assistance has been derived from IEC Pub 118-2 `Methods of measurement of electro-acoustical characteristics of hearing aids: Part 2 Hearing aids with automatic gain control circuits' issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission ( IEC ). 0.7 In reporting the result of a test made in accordance with standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. this off,

-1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard ( Part 3 ) specifies uniform methods for dynamic and static performance characteristics of automatic gain control circuits.
2. TERMINOLOGY of measurement hearing aids with

2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the terms and definitions given in IS : 1885 ( Part 3/Set 5 )-19667 shall apply in addition to the following.
2.1 Automatic Gain Control ( AGC ) - A means in a hearing aid by which the gain is automatically controlled as a function of the magnitude of the envelope of the input signal or other signal parameter.
NOTE - Throughout this standard. reference is made to the use of acoustic inputs. However, where appropriate additional measurements may be made with an electromagnetically induced input.

2.2 Stucly State Input/Output Graph - The graph illustrating the output sound pressure level as a function of the input sound pressure level for a specified frequency, both expressed in decibels on identical linear scales ( Fig. 1 ).
tElectrotechnica1

*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ).
vocabulary: Part 3 Acoustics,

Section

5 Speech and hearing.

4

IS : 10776 ( Part

3 ) - 1984

2.3 Lower AGC Limit or AGC Threshold - The input sound pressure level which, when applied to the hearing aids, gives a reduction in the gain of 2 + 0'5 dB with respect to the gain in the linear mode ( Fig. 1 ). 2.4 Compression Ratio ( Between Specified Input Sound Pressure Level Values ) - Under study state conditions, the ratio of an input sound pressure level difference to the corresponding output sound pressure level difference, both expressed in decibels ( Fig. 1 ).

COtht'RESSION,A~NPUT LEVEL A OUTPUT LEVSL
,

LOWER

.iw I

LIMIT -w

iNPUT SOUND PRESSURE ~LEVEL~(dB ) FIG. 1 EXAMPLE OF STEADY STATE INPUT/OUTPUT GRAPH output sound pressure input sound signal of a by a square envelope 2 ).

2.5 Dynamic Output Characteristics - The envelope shown as a function of time when an predetermined frequency and level is modulated pulse with a predetermined pulse amplitude ( Fig.

2.6 Attack Time - The time interval between the moment when the input signal level is increased abruptly by a stated number of decibels and the moment when the output sound pressure from the hearing aid with the AGC circuit stabilizes at the elevated steady state level within &2 dB ( Fig. 2 ). 2.6.1 Attack Time for the Normal Dynamic Range of Speech - The attack time, when the initial input sound pressure level is 55 dBand the increase in input sound pressure level is 25 dB. 2.6.2 High Leoel Attack Time - The attack time, when the initial input sound pressure level is 60 dB and the increase in input sound pressure level is 40 dB. 5

IS : 10776 ( Part 3 ) - 1984 2.7 Recovery Time - The time interval between the moment when the stated input signal level is reduced abruptly to a level a stated number of decibels lower after the AGC amplifier has reached the steady state output under elevated input signal conditions, and the moment when the output sound pressure level from the hearing aid stabilizes again at lower steady state level within -&2 dB ( Fig. 2 ),
ENVELOPE OF THE INPUT SIGNAL

ENVELOPE

OF THE

OUTPUT

SIGNAL

FIG.

2

DYNAMIC

OUTPUT CHARACTERISTIC OF AN AGC CIRCUIT

2.7.1 Recovery Time for the .Normal Dynamic Range of [Speech - The recovery time, when the initial input sound pressure level is 80 dB and the decrease in input sound pressure level is 25 dB. time, when the initial 2.7.2 High Level Recovery Time - The recovery sound pressure level is 100 dB and the decrease in input sound pressure level is 40 dB. 3. CONDITIONS

FOR MEASUREMENTS
5 of IS : 10776 ( Part 1 )* shall apply in

3.0 Provisions
addition

of 3, 4 and to the following.

3.1 Although a pure-tone input signal of 1 600 Hz or 2 500 Hz when throughout this is specified for various measurements appropriate, standard, it is intended that pure-tone signals of other frequencies or signals of other spectral compositions may be used in addition where they would provide important information.
*Methods of measurement of electro-acoustical characteristics 1 General measurements for air-condition hearing aids. 6 of hearing aid::

Part

IS : 10776 ( Part 3 ) - 1984 4. MEASUREMENTS 4.1 Steady State Input/Output Graph
between input sound pressure level

4.1.1 Graph showing the relation and output sound pressure level.

4.1.1.1 The graph shall have the input sound pressure level as abscissa and the output sound pressure level as ordinate, both expressed in decibels on linear scales having divisions of identical size.
NOTE - In the input/output distinguished: Below the lower mode ). AGC graph limit of an AGC device, the slope different 45" portions ( linear may be amplifier

is essentially

Above this limit, the graph curves over in a portion having a decreasing slope, often followed by another portion having a nearly fiat slope ( AGC mode ). At very high input levels, a flat or sloping portion may be followed by a portion with a steeper slope, generally due to saturation of the AGC circuit.

4.1.2 Methods of Measurement - The gain control is adjusted to its maximum setting. Any adjustable gain contol after the AGC loop shall be adjusted in such a manner that overload of the hearing aid is avoided.
An input sound signal of frequency 1 600 Hz is applied at the lowest possible level consistent with an adequate signal-to-noise ratio of preThe input sound pressure level is increased ferably more than 10 dB. up to 100 dB in sufficiently small steps, and the corresponding output sound pressure level is measured after steady state conditions have been The graph is plotted with the input sound pressure level as reached. abscissa and the output level as ordinate, as described in 4.1.1. Where separate adjustable controls exist, such as AGC, gain or output controls, which will influence the shape and other characteristics of the steady state input/output graph, it is recommended that inputjoutput graphs be plotted, when useful for various additional stated setting of such controls. 4.2 Dynamic Output Characterisalcs

4.2.1 The purpose of this test is to determine the dynamic characteristics of the AGC circuit, particularly attack and recovery times. It should be emphasized that all these characteristics will depend on test frequency as well as on such factors as signal level, control settings and battery voltage.

IS : 10776 ( Bart

3 ) : 1984

4.2.2 Methods of A4 easuremen t 4.2.2.1 D_ynamic output characteristics mum setting of the gain control, an input when appropriate with a sound pressure adjustable gain control after the AGC m~anner that overload of the hearing aid of speech levels - At the ma-xisignal of 1 600 or 2 500 HZ level of 55 dl3 is applied. Any loop shall be adjusted in such a is avoided.

This signal is modulated by a square envelope pulse raising the The pulse length shall be at least five times input level by 25 dB. longer than the attack time being measured. If more than a single pulse is applied, the interval between the two pulses shall be at least five times the longest recovery time being measured. NOTE 1 This test may be carried out at various control settings as stated in 4.1.2. those

NOTE 2 - If lower gain control settings are applied, settings shall be clearly specified.

the method of obtaining

NOTE 3 -The loudspeaker emploved for the measurement of dynamic output characteristics as in 4.2 must be sufficiently free of transient distortion so that test results are not appreciably affected. NOTE 4 oscilloscope, measured. The the output signal time constants should be monitored on a device such as a ! of which are considerably shorter than those being the response time of

NOTE 5 - When very short response times are to be measured, the source shall be reported.

NOTE 6 - For half-wave rectifying AGC circuits, the attack time is dependent upon the polarity of the first halfwave of the test signal after the onset of the modulating square wave envelope. Depending upon the polarity, a shorter or longer attack time will occur. This is best demonstrated in case of an instantaneous rise in the amplitude occurring at a zero crossing of the test signal.

output characteristics for high level input - At the 4.2.2.2 Dynamic maximum setting of the gain control an input signal of 1 600 or 2 500 Hz when appropriate with a sound pressure level of 60 dB is applied. AnY adjustable gain control after the AGC loop shall be adjusted in such a manner that overload of the hearing aid is avoided. This signal is modulated by a square envelope pulse raising the input level by 40 dB. The pulse length shall be at least five times the attack time observed. If more than a single pulse is applied, the interval between two time being pulses should be at least five times the longest recovery measured ( see Notes 1 to 6 under 4.2.2.1 ). 4.3 Non-linear Distortion

4.3.1 Transients - The signal may be distorted during the attack time and recovery time by transients as well as by unwanted low frequency The effect of these phenomena on modulation caused by instabilities. 8

IS : 10776 ( Part 3 ) - 1984

the listener is not sufficiently understood to allow a recommendation measuring transient distortions to be made. 4.3.2 Harmonic
Distortion

for

4.3.2.1 The purpose~of this test is to ~determine the harmonic distortion as a function of the input sound pressure level after steady state conditions have been reached.

4.3.2.2 Methods of measurement ( Part 1 )* shall apply. 4.3.3
Intermodulation Distortion

Provision

of 6.12.1

of IS : 10776

4.3.3.1

Provision of 6.12.2 of IS : 10776 ( Part 1 )* shall apply. on Steady State and Dynamic Performance
Voltage

4.4 Effect
Respect

with

to Variation

in Bat~tery or Supply

4.4.1 The change in the performance parameters of the characteristics specified in 4.1,4.2 and 4.3 shall be tested with respect to variation in battery or supply voltage in accordance with 6.8 of IS : 10776 ( Part 1 )*.

n

*Methods of measurement of electro-acoustical characteristics Part 1 General measurements for air-condition hearing aids.

of

hearing

aid:

9

