( Reaffirmed 2000 )

IS : 9954- 1981

Indian

Standard

PICTORIAL SURFACE PREPARATION STANDARDS FOR PAINTING OF STEEL SURFACES
Painting, Varnishing and Allied Finishes Sectional Committee, BDC 34

Chairman
SHRI B. SHIRAZI

Representing
Cole Paints and Contracts Pvt Ltd, Bombay

Members
Natraj Paints Pvt Ltd, Bombay SHRI N. S. BHARATIA SHRI B. V. DALAL ( Alrernare ) Alkali & Chemical Corporation of India Ltd, DR S. BHATTACHARYYA Hooghly SHRI R. B~HL ( Alternate ) The Indian Paints Association, Calcutta SHRI C. J. BHUMKAR SHRI T. K. S. MANI ( Alternafe ) Rashtriya Chemicals Fertilizers Ltd, Bombay Sudr K. A. DESAI National Organic Chemical Industries Ltd, Bombay DR SHANKAR DU~A SHRI S. S. AHLUWALIA ( Alternate ) Indian Institute of Architects, Bombay SHRI H. S. HARIANI Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals, SHRI S. K. JAIN New Delhi SHRI D. S. CHOWDHURY ( Alternate ) Ministry of Railways JOINT DIRECTOR,( CHEM ), RDSO Metaliizing Equipment Co, Jodhpur SHRI M. D. MODI SHRI C P. TAPARIA ( Alternate ) , Institution of Engineers ( India ), Calcutta SHRI S. K. MUKHERJEE Goodiess Nerolac Paints Ltd, Bombay SHRI S. V. NATHAN Central Public Works Department, New Delhi SHRI P. PADMANABHAN SURVEYOR OF WORKS ( Alternate ) Garvare Paints Ltd, Thane SHRI R. R. SEQUEIRA SHRI R. M. KOTHARI ( Alternate ) Asian Paints Co ( India ) Ltd, Bombay SHRI P. B. SHAH SHRI G. B. SINGH ( Alternate ) Central Building Research Institute ( CSIR ), DR S. M. SINGH Roorkee Indian Plywood Industries Research Institute, SHRI V. SIVANANDA Bangalore SHRI S. S. ZOOLAGUD ( Alternate )

( Continued on page 2 )
0
INDIAN

Copyright 1982
INSTITUTION

STANDARDS

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 9954- 1981
( Continued from page 1 ) Members DR A. V. R. RAO SHRI 0. P. RATRA SHRI M. G. VIRMANI National Representing Buildings Organization, New Delhi

Ministry of Defence ( E-in-Chief's Branch ), New Delhi SHRI S. V. MATTIKALLI ( Alternate ) Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) SHRI G. RAMAN, Director ( Civ Engg ) Secretary SHRI S. SENGUPTA Assistant Director (Civ Engg ), ISI

( Alternate )

2

AMENDMENT NO. 1 AUGUST 2010 TO IS 9954 : 1981 PICTORIAL SURFACE PREPARATION STANDARDS FOR PAINTING OF STEEL SURFACES
(Page 3, Foreword, clause 0.3) -- Substitute the following for the existing: `The grade of preparation of a steel surface is dependent on the informations like initial condition (termed as rust grade), type of cleaning procedure and the degree of cleaning (termed as preparation grades). This standard specifies four initial conditions of steel surface prior to painting and six degrees of cleaning applicable for the four initial conditions depending on the type of cleaning procedures employed.' (Page 3, footnote marked *) -- Delete. (Page 4, clause 1.1.1) -- Substitute the following for the existing: `1.1.1 The initial conditions and the degree of cleanliness that is required to be achieved prior to painting have been covered in this standard through reference to the following International Standard: ISO 8501 - 1 : 2007 Preparation of steel substrates before application of paints and related products -- Visual assessment of surface cleanliness - Part 1: Rust grades and preparation grades of uncoated steel substrates and of steel substrates after overall removal of previous coatings
NOTE -- The above ISO Standard contains a series of prints each establishing a grade, with coating and various degrees of thoroughness of surface preparation. This standard however recommends the procedure to be adopted for making use of the prints in practice. The type of cleaning procedure to be adopted for achieving the different degrees of cleaning before painting shall be as recommended in IS 1477 (Part 1) : 2000.'

(Page 4, footnote marked ) -- Substitute `second revision' for `first revision'.

(CED 13)
Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India

IS : 9954 - 1981

Indian Standard
PICTORIAL SURFACE PREPARATION STANDARDS FOR PAINTING OF STEEL SURFACES

i

0.

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 30 October 1981, after the draft finalized by the Painting Varnishing and Allied Finishes Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 0.2 The effective life of a surface is to a very large has been prepared prior specify clearly the quality coating of anticorrosive paint applied to extent dependent on how thoroughly the to painting. It is also important to be of preparation required in each particular a steel surface. able to case.

,

0.3 The grade of preparation of a steel surface is dependent on the informations like initial condition (termed as rust grade), type of cleaning procedure and the degree of cleaning (termed as preparation grades). This standard specifies four initial conditions of steel surface prior to painting and, six degrees of cleaning applicable for the four initial conditions depending on the type of cleaning procedures employed. The initial conditions and the degree of cleaniness that is required to be achieved prior to painting has been presented in this standard as a series of prints each establishing a grade. The prints presents various initial conditions of steel surface before preparation for protective coating and various degrees of thoroughness of surface preparation. Attempts are being made by the relevant technical committee to develop and include these prints in this standard, but in the meantime the prints appearing in the Swedish Standard SIS 05 5900-1967 `Pictorial surface preparation standards for painting steel surfaces' may be referred to. The type of cleaning procedure to be adopted for achieving the different degrees of cleaning before painting shall be as recommended in IS: 1477 (Part I i-1971*, which has been taken up for revision with a view to including the modern cleaning procedures that are being used in practice. This standard, however, recommends the procedure to be adopted for making use of the prints in practice.
*Code of practice for painting
( firstrevision).

of ferrous metals in buildings : Part I Pretreatment

3

IS : 9954 - 1981 0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS: 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard specifies four different grades of rust ( A, B, developed on the surface of steel, and recommends preparation rust grades to either two grades of surface preparation ( St 2 when scraping and wire brushing is employed or f6ur grades preparation ( Sa 1, Sa 2, Sa 26 and Sa 3 ) when blast cleaning is and D ). of these and St 3 ) of surface' employed.
C

1.1.1 The recommended rust and preparation grades are' defined colour prints representing a full scale view of part of the surface.

by

NOTE - The cleaning techniques to be adopted for achieving the different grades of surface preparation has been covered in IS: 1477 (Part I)-1971t.

2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose of this standard the following definitions shall apply.

includes all blast abrasives, which have sharp irregular 2.1 Grit -This shapes, thus prompting high effectiveness in cutting away surface deposits or imperfections. In this category, the cut wire abrasives are also included. 2.2 Shot -`These are spherical or near spherical particles produced accidentally as a by-product in some of industrial intentionally produced for blast-cleaning. and are either operations; or

of a surface by the use of 2.3 Blast Cleaning - The cleaning or roughening natural grit or artificial grit a fine metal shot which is projected on to a surface by compressed air or mechanical means. 2.4 Mill Scale rolling of steel. 2.5 Pitting - The localized corrosion. The layer of black oxide of iron produced formation of holes or pits in a metal glancing during the hot by on a

surfaces, angles

2.6 Metallic Shean - The metallic surface which when viewed normlly

gloss seen at appears mett.

*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). Wade of practice for painting of ferrous metals in buildings : Part I Pretreatment
(first
revision).

4

Is : 9954- 1981 2.7 Flaking -

Lifting of the paint from the underlying surfaces in the form of flakes or scales. 3. RUST GRADES

3.1 For the purpose of this standard the steel surfaces have been grouped into the following rust grades: Grade A Grade B Grade C Steel surface covered completely `with adherent millscale and on which little rust is visible to the naked eye. Steel surface which has begun to rust and from which the millscale has begun to flake. Steel surface from which the millscale has rusted away or from which it can be easily scraped, but on which little pitting is visible to the naked eye. Steel surface from which the millscale has rusted away and on which considerable pitting is visible to the naked eye. to the

Grade D -

3.1.1 The appearance of the above rust grades shall correspond prints designated as A, B, C and D. 4. PREPARATION GRADES

4.0 It is assumed that prior to treatment the steel surface has been cleaned of dirt grease, algae and fungi and that the heavier layers of rust have been removed by chipping. 4.1 For the purpose of this standard, the preparation grades have been grouped as given in 4.1 and 4.2 depending on the cleaning procedure employed. 4.1.1 When Scraping and Wire-Brushing is Employed ( St)
4.1.1.1 Thorough scraping and wire brushing - The treatment shall remove loose millscale, rust, and foreign matter. Finally, the surface is cleaned with a vacuum cleaner, clean dry compressed air or a clean brush. It should then have a faint metallic shear. The appearance shall correspond to the prints designated St. 2.

4.1.1.2 Very thorough scraping and wire brushing, using power tools Surface preparation shall as for St 2, but much more thoroughly. After removal of dust, the surface shall have a pronounced metallic shean and correspond to the prints designated St. 3. 4.1.2 When Blast Cleaning is Employed ( Sa)
5 .

IS : 9954 - 1981 4.1.2.1 Light brush 08 blast cleaning -

foreign matter shall be removed. prints designated Sa 1.

Loose millscale, rust and The appearance shall correspond to the

4.1.2.2 Fairly thorough blast cleaning-Almost all millscale, rust and Finally, the surface is cleaned with a foreign matter shall be removed. vacuum cleaner, clean dry compressed air or a clean brush. It shall then be greyish in colour and correspond in appearance to the prints designated Sa 2. 4.1.2.3 Thorough blast cleaning nearly to pure metal - Millscale, rust and foreign matter shall be removed to the extent that the only traces remaining are slight stains in the form of spots or strip. Finally, the surface is cleaned with a vacuum cleaner, clean dry compressed air or a clean brush. It shall then correspond in appearance to the prints designated Sa 24. 4.1.2.4 Very thorough blast cleaning to pure metal - Millscale, rust and foreign matter shall be removed completely. Finally, the surface is cleaned with a vacuum cleaner, clean dry compressed air or a clean brush. It shall then have a uniform metallic colour and correspond in appearance to the prints designated Sa 3. 4.2 Designation of Prepared Surfaces - A steel surface, for example, originally corresponding to rust Grade B, which has been scrapped or brushed to preparation Grade 2, is designated BSt 2 and the one which has been prepared by blast cleaning to preparation Grade 24 is designated as B Sa 29. 5. PROCEDURE 5.1 To make use of the prints in practice, th.e procedure to 5.1.3 may be adopted. given in 5.1.1

5.1.1 Hold the book right way up with light coming towards the viewer. 5.1.2 Ascertain the initial condition of the steel by comparing untreated steel with prints of rust Grades A, B, C or D. the

5.1.3 After cleaning the steel, select those pages that show preparation Grades (St ) or ( Sa ) and compare the condition of the steel with the print equivalent to the preparation grades. If necessary, continue the cleaning procedure until the steel surface matches the print.

6

