**************** 



*■ fe^K 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 6846 (1972) : General requirements for control unit for 
airturbine, dental [MHD 8: Dentistry] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC 616-314-78:621-85:621-52 ";, IS: 6846- 1972 




Indian Standard ( Reaffirmed 2001 

GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR 
CONTROL UNIT FOR AIRTURBINE, DENTAL 



I. Scope — Covers general requirements for dental airturbine control unit. 
^'"*VP es "~" The Cental airturbine control unit shall be one of the following types: 

a) Mobile, 

b) Stationary, and 

c) Attached* 

3. Requirements 

3.1 In order to function at optimum efficiency, air compressor which is a part of airturbine shall be capable of 
delivering oil and moisture free air according to the type of the airturbine used. 

3.2 A suitable speed regulator to operate the airturbine shall be provided. 

3.3 The air pressure regulator in the control unit shail be so adjusted that when the speed regulator is 
put to maximum and the handpiece operating, maximum permissible air pressure is fed to the handpiece. 
This shall be indicated by the needle of the pressure indicator provided on the top of the control unit 
which shall rest on the intersection between green and red band of the dial. 

3.4 An oil reservoir when provided in the control unit shall be filied only with oil supplied by manufac- 
turer to the top level line. When the equipment is operated, the oil shall drip with a minimum of 20 
drops per minute for which an indicator shall be provided. 

3.5 Water to the bur head shall be obtained by operating a suitable switch. A water control valve shall 
be provided to control the amount of water flowing through the handpiece. Water container used in 
mobile and stationary types of control units shall be made of corrosion-resisting material and shall be 
fitted with a replaceable suitable filter to safeguard against the flow of dirt to the handpiece. In case of 
attached type of unit an arrangement may be provided to supply water at controlled temperature. 

3*6 In the case of attached type control unit an off-on switch for opening and shutting the current to water 
temperature control shall be provided. 

3.7 Water and air supply rubber tubings shall be braided, the softer of the two shall be for air supply. 
If nylon tubings are used, no braiding shall be required. 

3.8 A water softner capable of being regenerated by washing through periodically with a solution of 
common salt shall be provided on attached type control unit^to make use of mains water supply. 
Water softner prevents the formation of lime deposits at the heating element and in the handpiece. 

3.9 The control unit shall have a holder for placing the handpiece when not in use. 

3.10 The mobile control unit shall be provided with suitably sized castors having antistatic rubber tread 
(see IS : 4034-1968 Specification for castors for hospital equipment). 

4. Workmanship and Finish — The surfaces of the control unit shall be finished smooth and shall not 
have pin holes, blisters, blow holes and other surface defects. The edges shall be even and rounded. 
Corrosive surfaces shall be painted to shades agreed to between the manufacturer and the purchaser. 
Prior to painting, the surface shall be degreased, rust-proofed by phosphating and then suitably protected 
by anti-corrosive primer, either by brushing or by spraying and then finished by spraying in stove enamel 
or air-dryirrg enamel of the specified shade. The resulting finish shaii be hard and shall not readily chip 
or flake. These parts may also be finished with pigmented cellulose lacquer, conforming to IS : 5691- 1970 
' Specification for lacquer, cellulose, pigmented, finishing, glossy \ 

5. Instructions for Use and Maintenance — The control unit shail be accompanied by instructions 
manual giving information regarding unpacking, installation, operation and maintenance. 

6. Marking — Each airturbine control unit shall be marked with the manufacturer's name, initials or 
registered trade-mark. 

7. Packing — Each airturbine control unit shall be packed in a well-cushioned sturdy case to withstand 
rough handling during transit. The case shall be waterproof inside. Alternatively the airturbine control 
unit may be packed as agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier. 



Adopted 28 December 1972 



July 1973, ISI 




INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH 2AFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 1 1000 1 



fe 5 ~ G 



