IRT AAF IS 11891 : 2022 
Indian Standard 


mearan Hent h aw Ag N 
qa Aa amme — ARI 


( Teel FRAT ) 


Lubrication and Oil Seal System for 
Dynamic Compressors — 
Specification 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 23.140 


© BIS 2022 


anda AM Sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Te TH AMT, ay freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


June 2022 Price Group 7 


Compressor, Blowers and Exhausters Sectional Committee, MED 22 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Compressor, Blowers and Exhausters Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering 
Division Council. 


This Indian Standard was first published in 1986. The first revision has been taken up to keep pace with the latest 
technological developments and international practices. In this revision following major changes have been made: 


a) Clause 2 has been added mentioning the latest version of all the referred standards; 


b) Clauses 3.4, 4.4, 4.2.6, 4.2.7, 4.2.12, 4.4.2, 4.4.7, 4.4.9, 4.5.5, 4.5.7, 4.6.1 and 4.6.7 have been 
modified; 


c) New clauses 4.2.16 and 4.2.17 have been added; and 
d) Clause 7.1 has been added regarding the BIS certification marking. 
The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex B. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 11891 : 2022 


Indian Standard 


LUBRICATION AND OIL SEAL SYSTEM FOR 
DYNAMIC COMPRESSORS — SPECIFICATION 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard lays down the minimum requirements for 
the centralized recirculatory lubricating and sealing oil 
systems for high speed and high-pressure centrifugal 
compressor installations in petrochemical, fertiliser, 
refineries, etc, with various prime-movers like a steam 
turbine, gas turbine, electric motors with or without 
gearboxes. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards mentioned in Annex A contain provisions 
which through their reference in this text constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibilities of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 


3.1 Equipment — The main machinery in the 
compressor train for which oil systems are required. 


3.2 Special Application — A system that has been 
designed and constructed for at least three years of 
continuous supply of oil as specified to the equipment. 


3.3 Block-in-Time — The period required to 
depressurize or isolate the compressor or another item 
of equipment, its system after tripping the prime-mover. 


3.4 Coast-Down-Time — The time period required by 
the equipment from trip to barring speed/stop. 


3.5 Cool-off Time — The period for which the oil 
circulation is to be maintained to minimize damages 
due to the heat effects to the equipment. 


3.6 Control Oil — The oil required to actuate 
components like relays, pistons, etc, of the main 
equipment. 


3.7 Console — The complete oil system under reference 
with all its accessories or more packages arranged in 
such a way that site connections are minimum. 


3.8 Component — The items which constitute the 
oil system, for example, pumps, motors, couplings, 
coolers, etc. 


3.9 Main Pump — The pump with continuous 
operation. 


3.10 Shaft Driven — The oil pump which is driven by 
the shaft of one of the main equipment. 


3.11 Emergency Pump — The oil pump which shall 
facilitate cooling of the steam turbine prime-mover, the 
main equipment after coast-down time for safe rest of 
the equipment in the event of main and standby pumps 
failure. 


3.12 Standby Pump — The pump which meets the 
system requirements when the main pump fails. 


3.13 Booster Pump — Pumps located downstream of 
another pump for increasing the pressure of the latter. 


3.14 Trans flow Valve — A valve that maintains the 
system continuity during the changeover and at the 
same time provide tight shut-off of the idle component 
for maintenance. 


3.15 Normally Open and Normally Closed — 
Designate the position of the automatically controlled 
electric switches, valves, etc, in degenerised conditions. 


3.16 Centralized Lubrication System — A system in 
which two or more lubrication points on a machine or 
group of machines are served with the same lubricant 
from a common source. 


3.17 Total Equivalent Length of Pipe — The total 
lengths of straight pipe plus the total of the pipe length 
equivalent of associated fittings in the relevant part 
of the system. This term is used in the calculation of 
pressure drop. 


3.18 Pressure Drop — The difference in pressure of a 
medium before and after an event, that is, the medium 
having followed through a length of pipe. 


3.19 Laminar Flow — A type of flow in which, 
there is a continuous steady motion of the particles, 
the motion at a fixed point varying in no definite 
manner. 


IS 11891 : 2022 


3.20 Turbulent Flow — A type of fluid flow in which 
there is the unsteady motion of the particles, the motion 
at a fixed point varying in no definite manner. 


3.21 Rheological Properties — Properties relating to 
rheology, the science of the deformation and flow of 
matter. 


3.22 Strainer — A device for removing coarse and 
impure particles from a lubricant. 


3.23 Filter — A device for fine filtration of cleanliness 
in the system. 


3.24 Classification of Oil Lubrication System 


3.24.1 Circulating Oil System — The system in which 
lubricant medium after use is collected and returned to 
the reservoir. 


3.24.1.1 Circulating oil system is a continuous type of 
system and can be either volumetric or proportionate. 
The volumetric systems are applicable to only small 
capacity systems. 


3.24.2 Total Loss Oil System — System in which the 
lubricant once fed to lubrication point is not returned 
to the system. 


3.24.2.1 Total loss oil systems may be sub-classified into 
the intermittent and continuous types of systems. The 
intermittent type of system may be either volumetric or 
proportionate while the continuous type of system may 
be proportionate only. 


4 DESIGN CRITERIA 


4.1 General 


4.1.1 The system shall be designed to meet all the 
normal and transient operating conditions for the safe 
start/shutdown and normal/transient operation of the 
equipment in the train. 


4.1.2 The system shall be guaranteed a minimum of 
two years of uninterrupted operation. 


4.1.3 When the equipment is supplied by others then 
the oil system operating parameters shall be mutually 
agreed upon by the supplier and the purchaser. 


4.1.4 The system shall be designed for unsheltered and 
outdoor operation but it shall also be suitable for the 
specified site conditions. 


4.1.5 The supplier and purchaser shall mutually 
agree upon the arrangement and layout of the system 
components preferably in two or more packages. 


4.1.5.1 Each package shall be mounted on a flat or 
fabricated steel base of a drip-rim type design with a 
19 mm minimum drain connection. The fabricated 


structure shall be provided with suitably located vent 
and grout holes and these shall be provided with 
12.5 mm high steel curbing for preventing seepage of 
accumulated water or oil. 


4.1.6 The pipe-routing shall be such that operation and 
maintenance of the system components may be done 
with minimum difficulty. 


4.1.7 Necessary connections shall be provided for 
draining, cleaning and refilling the standby components 
of the system when the main components are in 
operation. 


4.1.8 The general requirements of the system with 
regard to manufacturing noise level and special system 
requirements like electrical hazard class, etc, which 
may necessitate the addition of some specialized 
equipment shall be mutually agreed to by the purchaser 
and the supplier. 


4.1.9 Pressure vessels like filters and accumulators, etc, 
shall be designed and manufactured as per IS 2825. 
The coolers shall be designed and manufactured as per 
IS 2825 and IS 4503. 


4.1.10 A single hydro-carbon oil shall be used in the 
system preferably of 40 to 60 centistokes at 40 °C. For 
steam turbine driven installations the oil shall conform 
to IS 1012. 


4.1.11 All the welding details and welding practices 
shall be as per IS 816. 


4.2 Oil Reservoirs 


4.2.1 The oil reservoirs shall not be integral with 
the equipment baseplate and shall be of rigid and 
vibration-free design. The sides shall be suitably 
reinforced with ribs. The sides shall be minimum of 
6 mm thick. 


4.2.2 A minimum of two pairs of lifting lugs of 
sturdy design shall be provided for safe lifting and 
transportation. 


4.2.3 The bottom base of the oil reservoir shall be of 
a single thick plate or fabricated base with suitably 
spaced anchor foundation bolts. 


4.2.4 The top plate of the tank shall not contain any 
through holes. The openings, if provided shall be 
raised to a minimum of 100 mm. The top plate shall 
be designed to avoid any accumulation of water and 
dirt. In the case of top-mounted components, suitable 
reinforcements shall be provided to prevent sagging. 


4.2.5 Manhole openings shall be provided for access 
to cleaning and inspection of all partitioned areas. 
These openings shall be covered easily with suitable 
removable type covers with handles. Handrails shall be 
provided for easy access to the bottom of the tank. 


ELECTRIC 
HEATER 


N; INLET: 
(A) RUN DOWN LEVEL 


RETURN FROM 
CONTROL VALVE 


(B) max. LEVEL 
(C) min. LEVEL 


(D) SUCTION 
LOSS LEVEL 


MAIN DRAIN 


STEAM COILS: 


STEAM CHAMBER 
DRAIN 


NOTE 1 — Charge capacity is the total volume below level ‘A’ 


NOTE 2 — Low-level alarm is set at level ‘C’ 


IS 11891 : 2022 


RETURN OIL FROM 
COMPRESSOR 


RETURN FROM 


PUMP 


NOTE 3 — Normal operating range is any level between level ‘B’ and ‘C? 


NOTE 4 — Retention capacity is the total volume below level ‘C? 


NOTE 5 — Run-down capacity is the volume between levels ‘A’ and ‘B’ 
NOTE 6 —Working capacity is the volume between levels ‘C’ and ‘D’ 


Fic. 1 LUBE OIL RESERVOIR 


4.2.6 A suitable filler connection to be provided on the 
top plate. 


4.2.7 A suitably sized and strategically positioned vent 
connection to the atmosphere shall be provided on the 
top plate. 


4.2.8 An over-pressure protective device shall be 
incorporated when specified in the enquiry. 


4.2.9 The top plate shall be suitably reinforced to 
take the weight of the top-mounted degasification 
system wherever applicable, which orientation is to be 
mutually agreed to by the purchaser and the supplier. 


4.2.10 A partition plate with suitable flow openings 
shall be provided in the oil reservoir to minimize the 
turbulence of the return oil reaching the pump suction 
branches. The height of this partition plate shall be to 
the maximum operating level. 


4.2.11 The bottom of the reservoir shall be sloped to 
a low-point drain connection. The slope shall be a 
minimum of 1° for effective drainage of the sediments. 


4.2.12 All pump suction connections shall be located 
on the high end of the reservoir bottom. Pump suction 
shall be located hydro-dynamically away from all the 
pressurized return lines. 


4.2.13 All return-oil lines shall enter the reservoir above 
the run-down level. These shall also be away from the 
pump suction. 


4.2.14 All pipe connections shall be flanged. 


4.2.15 Flanged type oil level indicator shall be 
positioned to indicate oil level 25 mm above maximum 
operating level to a point 50 mm below the operating 
level. 


SAFETY VALVE 


SUCTION 


IS 11891 : 2022 


4.2.16 Lube oil reservoir shall have enough time of 
hydraulic path of return oil towards pump suction 
considering the air release time of oil. 


4.2.17 All the return lines shall be located in the 
unstable zone of the reservoir and extended up to the 
bottom with stilling tubes. 


4.3 Criterion for Sizing of Reservoir 


4.3.1 The retention shall be 8 min, considering normal 
flow and volume of oil contained below the minimum 
operating level. 


4.3.2 The run-down capacity shall be determined by 
considering oil contained in system components such 
as bearing, seal housing, control elements, drain piping 
and overhead tank, etc, and which drains back to the 
reservoir during plant shut down. 


4.3.3 The capacity between the minimum and 
maximum operating levels shall be determined based 
on seal oil discharge rates and 3 days of operation 
without the addition of oil. In case there shall be a 
100 mm difference in heights between the minimum 
and maximum operating levels. 


4.3.4 The free surface of oil shall be designed to have a 
valve of 0.086 2 m7/I/min of normal flow. 


4.3.5 To enable starting up of the system in cold 
weather, either a steam heater or thermostatically 
controlled electric heater shall be provided. The device 
shall be designed to heat the charge capacity within 12 h 
from minimum site ambient temperature to equipment 
manufacturer recommended temperature. In the case of 
an electric heater watt density shall be 2.25 watts/cm?. 


4.3.6 Suitable provision shall be made for access to the 
components mounted on the top of the reservoir. 


4.4 Pumps and Driving Equipment 


4.4.1 The pumps shall be suitable for horizontal 
installation. 


4.4.2 The pump shall be positive displacement type 
or centrifugal type (as per purchaser’s requirement) 
[see 4.1 of IS 8593 (Part 1)]. 


4.4.3 The pumps shall be equipped with a suitable 
mechanical seal. 


4.4.4 Flexible coupling preferably spacer type, with 
suitable oil-resistant rubber pads or compact discs 
flexible coupling shall be used for the pumps assemblies. 
Removable, rigid and non-sparking coupling guards 
shall be provided to all exposed couplings. 


4.4.5 Each pump shall have its individual prime mover 
and unless otherwise specified the main pump shall be 
steam turbine driven and the standby electric motor. 


4.4.6 When the steam turbine is an auxiliary pump 
prime mover, the maximum continuous speed shall 
be 5 percent of normal operating speed and trip speed 
shall be set at a minimum of 15 percent of maximum 
continuous speed. 


4.4.7 The motor prime mover for the pumps shall be 
suitable for the area of classification, zone and gas 
group of site, totally enclosed fan cooled with class B 
insulation. The design manufacture and testing 
shall conform to IS/IEC 60079 (Part 7), IS 8789 and 
IS 12615. 


4.4.8 Drivers for the pump shall be capable of operating 
at the pump relief-valve setting for the seal oil pumps 
and for lubricating oil pumps the pump relief-valve 
setting or 120 bars whichever is less with oil viscosity 
corresponding to a temperature of 40 °C. 


4.4.9 The lubricating oil pump capacities shall be 
maximum of the following to cater to the system 
requirement: 


a) flow in normal running condition plus 15 percent 
of the usage as margin; 


b) Oil required during starting; and 
c) Transient condition (RPM change) of the prime 
mover. 


NOTE — The flow of the booster pump (if applicable) shall be 
added in maximum of the above value. 


4.4.10 Seal oil booster pumps shall be designed 
for maximum system requirements (inclusive of 
normal wear) plus 40 litres per minute or 20 percent 
of requirement whichever is higher. A low-pressure 
switch in the suction line shall be provided to alarm or 
to trip these pumps. 


4.4.11 The prime movers either motor- or turbine-driven 
shall be sized considering the following criterion. 


4.4.11.1 Motor driver 


These shall have a minimum nameplate rating 
corresponding to the percentage of the pump rated 
brake horsepower as follows (that is NXMF): 


SL No. Nominal Power Required Multiplication 


by the Pumps (N) Factor (MF) 
(1) (2) (3) 


i) 18 kW (25 HP) and less 1.25 

ii) 22 kW(30HP) to 55 kW 1.15 
(75 HP) 

iii) | Above 55 kW (75 HP) Ll 


4.4.11.2 Turbine driver 


The turbine shaft brake horsepower shall be 1.10 times 
the pump brake horsepower based on minimum inlet 
enthalpy conditions and maximum exhaust steam 
pressure specified. 


4.4.12 A by-pass pressure control valve shall be 
incorporated in the system sized for the full flow of 
both pumps. 


4.4.13 All pumps shall be installed with flooded suction. 


4.4.14 A cone-type strainer with a flow area of 
300 percent of the suction pipe cross-sectional area, 
located between the pump suction flange and upstream 
isolation valve, shall be provided. 


4.4.15 The stainless steel mesh of the pump suction 
strainer shall be of 250 microns or as specified by the 
pump manufacturer. 


4.4.16 A low-pressure switch shall be provided to start 
the standby pump when the main pump is unable to 
meet the system requirements. 


4.4.16.1 A suitable piping arrangement shall be made 
across the low-pressure switch for checking the 
healthiness of the standby pump starting when the main 
pump is in operation. 


4.4.17 One pilot-operated safety relief valve per pump 
shall be provided. 


4.4.18 The set pressure of the safety relief valve shall 
be 10 percent higher than the pump discharge pressure. 
The full opening pressure shall preferably be limited to 
10 percent of the set pressure. 


4.4.19 The capacity of the safety relief valve at full 
opening pressure shall be at least equal to the pump 
capacity. 


4.4.20 The safety relief valves shall not be mounted 
directly on the pumps. They shall be fine mounted with 
individual returns back to the oil reservoir. 


4.5 Filters 


4.5.1 100 percent capacity duplex oil filters (main and 
standby) shall be located downstream of the turn oil 
coolers. 


4.5.2 The duplex filters shall be suitably piped with the 
help of two trans flow three-way valves with a suitable 
lever mechanism for quick changeover. 


4.5.3 Both the filter bodies shall be connected by an 
equalizing connection with bypass valve and orifice. 
The equipment shall be provided with a linking 
mechanism for the smooth operation of the three-way 
valves. Suitable vents and valve drain shall be provided 
for easy draining of the filter bodies. Filter elements 
shall be easily replaced at the site. 


4.5.4 Oil supplied to servomotor is not filtered but the 
governing system oil is filtered away from the main 
stress, duplex filter with replaceable elements with 
trans flow three-way transfer valve shall be provided. 


IS 11891 : 2022 


4.5.5 The micron rating of duplex doubled filters in the 
mainstream and a governing line shall be 5 u, Nom and 
25 u, Nom respectively. 


Filter cartridge materials shall be water and 
corrosion-resistant. Metal mesh or stainless steel filter 
elements are not acceptable for normal operation. 


4.5.6 The pressure drop shall be a 0.35 bar in clean 
condition at 40 °C and 1.5 bar in dirty condition at 
normal flow when the changeover mechanism is put into 
operation. The collapsing pressure drop of the cartridge 
shall be a minimum of 3.5 bars. No bypass relief valves 
shall be permitted. 


4.5.7 The minimum design pressure for the filter shall 
not be less than the maximum operating pressure of 
the system, not less than the shut-off head pressure for 
centrifugal oil pumps, nor less than the relief valve setting 
for positive displacement pumps. 


4.5.8 The filters shall be manufactured as per IS 2825. 


4.5.9 A differential pressure indicator and switch shall 
be provided to monitor the pressure drop across the filter 
body in operation. 


4.6 Centrifuge 


Water and solid particles in the oil system shall be 
removed by an oil centrifuge suitable for continuous 
operation. 


4.6.1 The centrifuge capacity shall be sufficient for 
purifying the charge capacity of the lube oil tank in 12 h. 


4.6.2 A pressure switch shall be provided on the centrifuge 
downstream piping to stop the centrifuge in case of zero 
flow. 


4.6.3 The centrifuge shall remove moisture from the oil 
from an initial level of 1.5 percent to 0.05 percent ppm by 
volume and max particle size confirming to code 15/12 
as per ISO 4406 from input oil of quality of 21/18 as per 
ISO 4406 at 65 °C oil temperature. 


4.7 Degassing Tank 


4.7.1 Whenever a seal oil system is envisaged degassing 
facility shall be incorporated downstream of oil seals. 


4.7.2 The holding capacity of the tank shall be a minimum 
of 7 days of seals oil discharge from the compressor drain. 


4.7.3 The heater shall be either steam or electrical 
operated. In the case of electrical watt density shall be as 
indicated in 4.3.5. 


4.8 Overhead Run-Down Tank 


4.8.1 Provision of an overhead run-down tank shall be 
made for safe-coast down of the equipment when a trip 
occurs due to lube oil system failure. 


IS 11891 : 2022 


4.8.2 The tank shall be sized for maximum coast 
downtime of the equipment oil requirement. 


4.8.3 A level switch shall be provided to give consort 
to start the equipment only when the level reaches the 
overflow connection. 


4.8.4 The minimum elevation of this tank shall be 7 m 
above the machine centre line. 


4.9 Oil Coolers 


4.9.1 Twin coolers shall be provided in parallel 
arrangement with a trans flow valve interposed between 
them on the oil side. Each cooler shall be designed to 
dissipate the total cooling load. Water shall be on the 
tube side. The oil side operating pressure shall always 
be higher than the water-side operating pressure. 


4.9.2 Coolers shalt be of shell and tube type with 
removable tube bundle and removable channel and 
constructed in accordance with IS 4503. Tubes shall 
not be smaller than 15 mm outside diameter with a 
minimum tube wall thickness of 1.0 mm. Always 
straight tubes shall be employed. 


4.9.3 Generally construction materials for cooler shells 
channels, covers, tube sheet and tubes shall be carbon 
steel. For specific applications, other materials for tubes 


and tube sheets may be chosen depending on the type 
(quality) of cooling water flowing through the cooler. 


4.9.4 Tube side water velocity at rated conditions shall 
be limited to 1:0 m/s to 2:4 m/s depending on the type 
of tube material used. The waterside fouling factor shall 
be at least 0:000 4 h.m? °C/Kceal and the maximum 
water-side differential pressure shall be 0-7 kg/cm’. 


4.9.5 The minimum design pressure for coolers shall 
not be less than the maximum operating pressure of 
the system, not less than the shut-off head pressure 
for centrifugal oil pumps, nor less than the relief 
valve setting for positive displacement pumps. The 
water-side design pressure shall be suitable for the 
specified cooling water pressure, but not less than 
6 kg/cm’. When specified, coolers shall be suitable for 
150 °C steam heating. 


4.9.6 Suitable self-venting and draining connections shall 
be provided on coolers. 


4.10 Seal-oil Overhead Tank 


4.10.1 Seal-oil overhead tanks shall be provided when 
required by the designs of the seals and the seal oil 
control system or when specified by the purchaser as 
an emergency oil-rundown system. These tanks shall be 
machine mounted or separately mounted overhead tanks. 


VAPOUR VOLUME 
(0 TO 1 min SUPPLY) 
HIGH LEVEL ALARM 


NORMAL OPERATING RANGE 
(2 min SUPPLY) 


LOWER LEVEL ALARM 


EMERGENCY 
OPERATING RANGE 
(10 min SUPPLY) 


LOW LEVEL SHUTDOWN 


COUNT - DOWN AND BLOCK IN 
(min 5 MINUTES SUPPLY) 


SEAL-OIL OVERHEAD TANK 


6 


4.10.1.1 Seal-oil overhead tanks, shall be sized for 
the oil capacity above the low-level alarm setting to 
be equal to a 2 min flow at normal seal oil rates and 
shall include capacity for a low minute flow from 
low-level alarm to trip plus sufficient time-on less 
than two minutes after the trip for coast-down and 
block-in (5 min supply). Vapour volume above the 
high-level alarm setting shall be no less than 1min of 
normal oil flow. 


4.10.2 Seal oil overhead tanks shall have at least one 
50 mm inspection nozzle (if any other connection is 
provided, this may be eliminated). A bottom outlet 
nozzle, if used shall extend 25 mm inside the vessel in 
order to retain foreign matter. A minimum 19 mm drain 
and flow down connection shall be provided. 


4.10.3 A low oil level trip switch shall be a separate 
float or displacer operated switch. 


4.10.4 The reference gas shall be isolated from the oil 
by a bladder of material suitable for the service when 
specified by the purchaser. 


5 CONTROLS AND INSTRUMENTATION 


5.1 General 


5.1.1 The oil system shall be suitable for orderly start- 
up, stable operation, warning of abnormal conditions, 
and shutdown of the main equipment in the event of 
impending damage. 


5.1.2 All control, valves, relief valves, solenoid, 
and diaphragm operated valves, and all other valves 
handling flammable or toxic fluids shall have steel 
bodies with stainless steel internals and trims. Controls 
heads for flammable fluids shall be made of steel. 


5.1.3 All solenoids shall have continuous duty ratings. 


5.1.4 Controls and control panels shall be completely 
piped, requiring only the purchaser’s external piping 
connections. 


5.1.5 Controls and control panels shall be completely 
wired. When more than one wiring point is required 
for controls or instrumentation, wiring to all items shall 
be provided from a terminal box. All wiring shall be 
installed in protective metal conduits or enclosures. 


5.1.6 All controls and instruments shall be located and 
arranged for the case of visibility by the operators as 
well as for accessibility for tests, adjustments, and 
maintenance. 


5.1.7 Valved bleeders shall be required between 
instruments and their valves for services over 15 kg. 
f/cm?. 

5.1.8 When failure or malfunction of reducing valves 
may cause overpressure and resultant hazard or damage 


IS 11891 : 2022 


to downstream equipment or components, a relief 
valve discharging to the reservoir shall be furnished 
(see Fig. 2 for typical arrangement). 


5.2 Panels 


5.2.1 At least one instrument panel for the oil system 
shall be provided by the manufacturer when specified. 
The manufacturer shall furnish and mount on or in 
the panels the instruments specified on the datasheets. 
Spaces or cut-outs, or notches, shall be supplied 
as specified for the purchaser’s instruments. The 
configuration of the panels shall be as specified. 


5.2.2 The types of instruments and the locations of the 
panels shall be specified by the purchaser. 


5.2.3 After all the equipment locations have been fixed, 
the pressure instruments shall be piped to the terminal 
locations specified by the purchaser. A shutoff valve 
within each panel shall be provided for all lines except 
those for shutdown sensing devices. 


5.3 Alarms end Shutdowns 


5.3.1 The manufacturer shall furnish as a minimum, 
the following alarm and shutdown contacts (or bearing 
metal temperature detectors). The alarm setting shall 
precede the shutdown setting. 


Alarm | Shut Down 
Low lubricating oil pressure x — 
auxiliary start-up 
Low lubricating oil pressure x x 
for each level 
Low level in the reservoir for x -= 
each item 
Low seal-oil level or low seal x x 
oil differential pressure for 
each item 
High overhead-tank level for x = 
each item 
High thrust-bearing oil or x — 
metal temperature for each 
item (purchaser shall specify 
the arrangement required) 
Standby pump running for x — 
each item (not required if the 
purchaser’s alarms are from 
the motor starter) 
High oil filter differential x = 
pressure for each item 
High temperature after cooler x — 


5.3.2 A separate housing shall be furnished for each 
pressure or temperature-sensing switch. Single-pole, 
double-throw switches shall be used. 


IS 11891 : 2022 


MAIN EQUIPMENT 
LUBE SYSTEM 


pee 
| 
| 
| 
EESE A EE 1 ALARM 
g FILTERS E 2 STAND BY 
4 
La Oa 
T 
| TACCUMU| FILTERS 
| LATOR (2) ; a 
| 
L_ 
7 
4 (5) 
| ALTERNATE RESERVOIRS 


(9) 


THIS ARRANGEMENT IS VALID ONLY WHEN THE PRESSURE OF THE CONTROL OIL SUPPLY IS 
HIGHER THAN THE PRESSURE OF THE LUBE OIL AND THE COOLING WATER. 


NOTE 1 — Lubrication system at main equipment only. 

NOTE 2 — Direct contact-type accumulator or bladder-type accumulator when required. 

NOTE 3 — Typical arrangement for any system where a control valve failure can jeopardize or damage a low-pressure system. 
NOTE 4 — Twin oil filters. 

NOTE 5 — Omit check valve if the accumulator is not used. 

NOTE 6 — Twin oil coolers. 

NOTE 7 — Omit the bypass PVC circuit if centrifugal pumps are used. 

NOTE 8 — Primary pumps. 

NOTE 9 — Oil reservoir. 


Fic. 2 LUBE OIL AND CONTROL OIL SYSTEM 


5.3.3 ‘Open’ (de-energize) to alarm and ‘close’ 
(energize) to trip electric switches shall be furnished. 


5.3.4 The manufacturer shall furnish a first-out type of 
annunciator when an annunciator system is specified. 


5.3.5 All instruments and controls other than 
shut-down-sensing devices shall be installed with 
sufficient valving to permit removing instruments and 
controls while the system is in operation. 


5.3.6 Piping to a pressure switch for alarms shall 
include an orifice, a connection, a pressure gauge and a 
bleeder valve to test the alarm. The arrangement of the 
shut-down-sensing device shall permit it’s being 
checked during the operation where a redundant system 
(such as a ‘two-out of three’ system) is employed. 
Alarm and shut-down switch settings shall not be 
adjustable from outside the housing, pressure elements 
shall be made of 18 Cr-8 Ni stainless steel. 


5.4 Thermometers 


Either 150 mm minimum size industrial thermometers 
or 100 mm minimum size dial bimetallic or 
mercury-filled thermometers shall be mounted in the 
oil piping of the cooler inlets and outlets and in the oil 
piping at the outlet of each radial and thrust bearing. 
Individual 18 Cr-8 Ni stainless steel wells shall be 
furnished in pressurized or flooded locations. 


5.5 Pressure Gauges 


5.5.1 Pressure gauges shall be furnished at the discharge 
of each oil pump, at each bearing and seal inlet oil 
header, and the control inlet oil header. 


5.5.2 Each pressure gauge shall have a 100 mm 
minimum size, glycerin filled dial, 18 Cr-8 Ni stainless 
steel bourdon tube and movement. Each gauge shall be 
suitably valved to permit its removal while the system 
is in operation. The operating pressure of the system 
shall fall in the pressure gauge range of 35 to 65 percent. 


5.6 Flow Indicators 


5.6.1 Flow indicators shall be furnished in the 
atmospheric oil-drain return line from each bearing, 
gear, and seal and either the pressured inlet piping or the 
outlet piping of each continuously lubricated coupling. 


5.6.2 Steel non-restrictive flow indicators shall be 
used for atmospheric drain lines. Steel restrictive flow 
indicators shall be used for pressure lines. 


5.6.3 Each flow indicator shall be of the bull’s eye type 
and shall be installed with its bull’s eyeglass preferably 
in a vertical plane to facilitate viewing the flow of oil 
through the particular line. 


IS 11891 : 2022 


6 INSPECTION AND TESTS 


6.1 Inspection 


6.1.1 The inspector representing the purchaser shall 
have entry to the plants, including the sub-vendor 
plants, where work on or testing of components 
or sub-assemblies is being performed. It shall be 
the responsibility of the manufacturer to notify the 
sub-vendor of the purchaser’s inspection requirements. 


6.1.2 It is intended that the purchaser’s inspection 
work be facilitated by assigning to the manufacturer 
the responsibility of furnishing the inspector or 
his representatives with all requested material 
certifications, with test reports, purchase specifications 
or bills of materials, hydrostatic and running test data, 
ete to verify the manufacturer compliance with the 
requirements of the specifications. 


6.1.3 At least five days prior to scheduled shop tests, 
the manufacturer shall inform the purchaser of the 
planned test date. 


6.1.4 At least five days prior to the required system 
inspection, the manufacturer shall inform the purchaser 
of the planned inspection date. 


6.1.5 During assembly of the system and prior to 
testing, each component and all piping shall be cleaned 
by pickling, or by another appropriate method, to 
remove foreign materials, corrosion products, and mill 
scale. 


6.1.6 The purchaser shall specify whether the purchased 
oil system shall be used during the shop testing of the 
main equipment. 


6.1.7 Acceptance of shop tests shall not constitute a 
waiver of requirements to meet the field performance 
under specified operating conditions, nor does 
inspection in any way relieve the manufacturer of his 
responsibilities. 


6.2 Hydrostatic Tests 


6.2.1 Each cooler, filter, accumulator, and other 
pressure vessel shall be hydrostatically tested at 
1.5 times its design pressure. Tests shall be in 
accordance with code requirements where applicable. 


6.2.2 Each component, subassembly, and assembled oil 
system shall be hydrostatically tested at 1.5 times its 
design pressure. 


6.2.3 Cooling water jackets and other components of the 
system handling cooling water shall be hydrostatically 
tested at 1.5 times the design pressure of the cooling 
water system, in no case, however, shall this hydrostatic 
test pressure be less than 8 kg/cm’. 


IS 11891 : 2022 


6.2.4 Tests shall be maintained for a duration of at least 
30 min to permit complete examination of parts under 
pressure. 


6.3 Operational Tests 


6.3.1 The completed oil system shall be shop run to test 
operation, sound level, and cleanliness. The running 
tests shall be conducted under normal system operating 
conditions for at least 4 h. 


6.3.2 The low-oil-pressure alarm, the standby-pump 
start, and the shutdown switches purchased for the 
project, which falls in the confines of the console 
system, shall be used for the operational tests. 


6.3.3 The operational tests shall be conducted using 
an oil with the same viscosity and characteristics 
recommended for actual field operations. 


Oil temperatures (except as noted in 6.3.6) and oil 
pressures during the operational tests shall simulate 
field conditions. 


6.3.4 If steam is not available for the operational tests, 
turbine prime movers shall be tested at the site for 
performance. 


6.3.5 The operational testing of the oil system shall be 
conducted in the following sequence: 


a) The oil system shall be thoroughly checked for 
leaks and all leaks shall be corrected before testing 
is resumed; 


b 


wm 


The relieving pressures shall be determined in 
order to establish the subsequent proper operation 
of each relief valve; 


c 


wa 


A filter-cooler changeover shall be accomplished 
without the system’s delivery pressure dropping to 
the automatic-start setting of the standby pump; 


d) The control valve shall be demonstrated to have 
the suitable capacity, response, and stability by 
starting, running and stopping a second pump 
(main or standby) without the relief valves lifting 
and without the delivery pressure dropping below 
75 percent of the differential pressure between the 


normal operating and shut down pressures; and 


wm 


10 


e) The oil-pressure control valve shall be determined 
capable of controlling the oil pressure by 
successfully operating only the main pump or 
the standby pump at minimum oil requirements. 
Minimum oil requirements shall be the sum of the 
normal bearing and seal oil requirements plus the 
steady-state control oil requirements. 


6.3.6 Conformity to the following criteria for system 
cleanliness shall be demonstrated. 


6.3.6.1 After one hour of oil circulation at design flow 
rate at a temperature of 70 °C (or lower, as component 
design dictate) screens shall be placed at all discharge 
terminations from the console or the packages and other 
strategic points mutually agreed upon by the purchaser 
and the vendor. 


6.3.6.2 Screen mesh shall be no. 100 plain weave, 
127 microns diameter stainless steel or brass wire with 
a 0.15 mm by 0.15 mm opening. The particles shall 
display random distribution on the screen, piping, 
coolers, and valves shall be hammered frequently 
during the test. 


6.3.6.3 Visual inspection at approximately two to six 
points selected by the inspector shall be made to verify 
system cleanliness. The system shall be considered 
clean when such foreign matter as scale, rust, metal 
shavings, and sand is not visible to the naked eye and 
grittiness is not detectible to the touch. 


6.3.7 If the dismantling of the oil system is required to 
improve operation, the initial running test shall not be 
acceptable and final tests shall be run after corrections 
are made. In any event, the demonstration of cleanliness 
shall be conducted only after the final assembly. 


7 BIS CERTIFICATION MARKING 


The product(s) conforming to the requirements of 
this Standard may be certified as per the conformity 
assessment schemes under the provisions of the 
Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and the Rules 
and Regulations framed thereunder, and the product(s) 
may be marked with the Standard Mark. 


IS 11891 : 2022 


EXPLANATORY NOTE 


The schematics presented, herein illustrate the general philosophy and requirements of this standard and typify 
commonly used systems. The systems illustrated may be modified as necessary and as mutually agreed upon by 
the purchaser and the manufacturer to provide a system or systems adequate for a particular application. 


Instrument piping and valving details are not shown on most of the schematics. However, these details are 
illustrated in Fig. 3 and shall apply unless otherwise specified. 


The oil seal system is not mandatory but depends upon case to case mutually agreed between the purchaser and 
the manufacturer. 


Sq TO RESERVOIR 
OR DRAIN LINE 


SERVICE LINE SERVICE LINE 
TYPICAL DESIGN 


3A PRESSURE GAUGES SWITCHES TRANSFORMERS 


wie dn 
pr 


TO RESERVOIR 
OR DRAIN LINE 
SIGNAL TO RESERVOIR 
SERVICE LINE 
ALTERNATE DESIGN 
3B COMBINED INSTRUMENT SYSTEM FOR LOW PRESSURE 3C DIAPHRAGM ACTUATOR 


ALARM AND PUMP START SWITCHES 


TANK 
OR 
VESSEL (1) 
= SOURCE A SOURCE B 
3D EXTERNALLY CONNECTED LEVEL INSTRUMENT 3E DIFFERENTIAL DIAPHRAGM ACTUATOR INDICATOR 


SWITCHES TRANSMITTERS 


Fic. 3 INSTRUMENT PIPING DETAILS 


11 


IS 11891 : 2022 


IS No. 


816 : 1969 


1012 : 2002 


2825 : 1969 
4503 : 1967 


8593 (Part 1): 
2017 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 2) 
LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 


Title 


Code of practice for use of 
metal arc welding for general 


construction in mild steel 
(first revision) 
Turbine lubricating oils — 


Specification (third revision) 
Code for unfired pressure vessels 


Specification for shell and tube 
type heat exchangers 


Recommendations for centralized 
lubrication as applied to plant and 
machinery: Part 1 Oil lubrication 
(first revision) 


12 


IS No. 


8789 : 1996 


12615 : 2018 


IS/IEC 60079 
(Part 7) : 2015 


Title 


Values of performance 
characteristics for three-phase 
induction motors (first revision) 


Line operated three-phase AC 
motors (IE Code) “Efficiency 
classes and performance 
specification” (third revision) 


Explosive atmospheres: Part 7 
Equipment protection by increased 
safety “E” (first revision) 


IS 11891 : 2022 


ANNEX B 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Compressor, Blowers and Exhausters Sectional Committee, MED 22 


Organization 


Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited, Mumbai 
AB B India Limited, Bengaluru 

Atlas Copco India Limited, Pune 

Bharat Heavy Electrical Limited, New Delhi 


Boldrocchi Indian Private Limited, Gurugram 

Burckhardt Compression India Private Limited, 
Noida 

CSIR-National Physical Laboratory, New Delhi 

Directorate General of Quality Assurance, Ministry 
of Defense, New Delhi 

Dresser-Rand India Private Limited, Pune 

ELGI Equipments Limited, Coimbatore 


Engineers India Limited, Gurugram 


Gail (India) Limited, New Delhi 


Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


Indian Oil Corporation Limited, New Delhi 
Indian Register of Shipping, Mumbai 


Ingersoll Rand India Limited, Ahmedabad 
Kirloskar Pneumatic Company Limited, Pune 


MECON Limited, Ranchi 
NTPC Limited, New Delhi 
National Fertilizers Limited, Noida 


Neuman and Esser Compressor Application Centre 
Private Limited, Pune 


Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Limited, New Delhi 


Project and Development India Limited, Noida 


Represntative(s) 


SHRI K. Ravi (Chairman) 
Suri N. S. PRASAD 
SHRI VIJAY SHARMA 


SHRI V. P. SHYAMSUNDAR 
SHRI Y. V. RAMA LAKSHMI (Alternate) 


SHRI NOKESH AGGARWAL 
SHRI PryusH GOEL (Alternate) 


SHRI R. S. GUNAJI 
SHRI A. BHASKAR PRABHUNE (Alternate) 


DR RAJESH KUMAR 
ProF DR M. SINGH (Alternate) 


Lt COL DEEPAK SHARMA 
SHRI U. R. Rasa (Alternate) 


Suri M. H. Vyas 
SHRI J. B. RAVAL (Alternate) 


SHRI JAYARAJ B. 
SHRI JEYASELVAN M. (Alternate) 


SHRI J. S. DUGGAL 
SHRI MAHESH EASWARAN (Alternate) 


SHRI SATISH GEDA 


SHRI M. RAMBABU 
SHRI P. VENKATANARAYANA (Alternate) 


SHRI P. K. JAIN 


SHRI PRADEEP BANSAL 
SHRI ATUL MANI SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI RAMESH K. V. 
SHRI DILEEP PATIL (Alternate) 


SHRI NEERAJ BHARGAVA 
SHRI AVDHOOT BHIDE (Alternate) 


Suri A. K. Moni (Alternate) 
SHRI S. K. JHA 


SHRI S. K. SHARMA 
SHRI RAMAN GAMBHIR (Alternate) 


SHRI KUMAR PUDURU 
SHRI Manesh DIXIT (Alternate) 


SHRI BRAJ KISHOR RAI 
SHRI RITUJIT HAZARIKA (Alternate) 


SHRI S. MANDILWAR 
SHRI AJAY K. S. RUHEL (Alternate) 


IS 11891 : 2022 


Organization Represntative(s) 

Reliance India Limited, Mumbai SHRI S. K. GARYALI 

SHRI RANJIT S. MUNDRA (Alternate) 
Research Designs and Standards Organization SHRI S. P. GOVIL 

(RDSO), Lucknow 

TLT Engineering India Private Limited, Gujrat SHRI MUKESH K. JAIN 

SHRI SANJAY MAKWANA (Alternate) 
Tata Chemicals Limited, Mumbai SHRI M. S. PRASAD 

SHRI AJOY KUMAR SINGH (Alternate) 
Tata Consulting Engineers Limited, Navi Mumbai SHRI SHIREESH S. SWAMI 

SHRI ASLAM Basua B. (Alternate) 
BIS Directorate General SHRI RAJNEESH KHOSLA, SCIENTIST ‘E’ AND HEAD (MED) 


[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 
Member Secretary 


SHRI LOKRAJ MEENA 
SCIENTIST ‘B’ (MED), BIS 


14 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 22 (17809). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 


Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 


Regional Offices: Telephones 


Central : 601/A, Konnectus Tower-1, 6" Floor, DMRC Building, 
Bhavbhuti Marg, New Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8" Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, 2367 0012 


| 2323 7617 
Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 


Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg 
Chandigarh 160019 


265 9930 


Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri (East), | 2821 8093 
Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


