( Reaffirmed 1998 )

IS : 2768 - 1982

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR COPPER ALLOY STRIP FOR BULLET ENVELOPE

( First Revision
Copper and Copper Alloys Sectional Chairman DR L. R. VAIDYANATE Members Indian Copper

)

Committee, Representing Information

SMDC

11

Centre,

Calcutta

Bralco Metal Industries Pvt Ltd, Bombay SHRI DEV KUM~R AGGARWAL SHI:I R 4.7 KT~MARAGGARWAL ( Alternate ) Covtntary Metals Rajasthan Pvt Ltd, Jodhpur SHRI S. N. B.~FN.z SARI N. M. BAFNA ( Alternate ) National Test House, Calcutta SHRI K. L. BARUI SHR~ H. P. DUBEY ( ,4fternale ) Indian Telephone Industries Ltd, Bangalore SHRI J. NAGESH BHATT SHRI A. R. SUKU~,~ARAN ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Ordnance Factories, Calcutta SHRI V. N. BHIDE SHRI S. K. MOHANTY ( Alternate ) Bengal Ingot Co Ltd, Calcutta SHI.I S. N. CRANDA Indian Cable Co, Jamshedpur SHRI P. GHOSH SHRI TRILOK SINGE ( Alternate ) Ministry of Finance ( India Government Mint ), SHRI H. N. GUPTA Calcutta Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Secunderabad SHRI A. V. HARNE DR M. N. CH4NDRASEKH4RIAH ( Alternate 1 ) SHRI K. N. WADHWA ( Alternate II ) Saru Smelting Pvt Ltd, Meerut SHRI D. P. JOIN SHRI D. N. CHAKRAVORTY ( Alternate ) Alcobex Metals (P) Ltd, Meerut SHRI S. L. JAIN SHRI N. G. RAMAKRISHNAN ( Alternate ) Indian Standard Metal Co Ltd, Bombay SHRI F. A. A. JASDANWALLA SHRI C. CHATTERJEE ( Alternate ) Kamani Metals & Alloys Ltd, Bombay SHRI R. P. KESAN SHRI A. H. SABHACHANDANI( Alternare ) Vanaz Engineers (P) Ltd, Pune SHRI S. K. KHANDEKAR ( Continued on pap 2 @ Cokyrrght 1982 INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the Indian Csgyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 2768 - 1982
( C9ntinuedfrom page 1 )
Members

Representing MISHRB Directorate Gcnxal of Technical Development, New Delhi ( Alternate ) National Pipes & Tubes Co Ltd, Calcutta

SHRI L\XSWY

SHR1 T. R. MOHAN Rao SKXI A. K. MITRA SHKI P. R. DHAR I Alternate `i SHHI A. 7`. PAI. \ ' Ministry of Defence ( R & D ) SHRI I. N. BIIATI~ ( Alternate ) SHRl s. c. Panr, Ministry of Defence ( DGI )/DPI (N) Bhandary Metallurgical Corporation Pvt Ltd, SHXI P. S. R.\nf .\s\ITA?dy Bomba! SIIRI M. I;. Rao Indian Non-Ftxrrous Metals Manufacturers Association, Calcutta Institution of Engineers ( India), Calcutta; and REPRESE~TTATIVE Khetri Couoer Complrx. Todhour SHRI S. K. ROY Ministry of DGf'encc ( DGI )`I SI-IRI P. K. L. I'. N~nras~~lt ( Alternate j of Supplies & Disposals, SHIII R. N. SAHA Directorate General New Delhi SKRI DIPANK.4R KIRTI ( Alternate ) SHRI D. K. SEH~AL Leader Engineering Works, Jullundur SURI V. K. CHOUDEURY ( Alternate ) SENIOR CHEMIST & METAL- Ministry of Railways LURQIST, CENTRAL RAILW.%Y, BOMBAY DEPUTY DIRECTOR ( hl~~ )-II, RDSO, LUCKNOW ( Alternate ) National Metallurgical Laboratory SHRI S. C. SIVAR.~M~KRISIIN.~N ( CSIR )> Jamshedpur Multimetals Ltd, Calcutta ,SIIRI N. S. SURANA SRRI N. G. RAMAKR~SHNAN ( Alternate ) J. B. Metal Industries Pvt Ltd, Bombay SHJU S. S. VAIDY.&NATHAN Ministry of Steel & Mines, New Delhi; and SHRI 0. P. VASUDEVA Hindustan Copper Ltd, Ghatsila Dn S. K. BISWAS ( Alternate ) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-o&o Member ) SHRI C. R. RAMA RAO, Director ( Strut & Met )
Secretary
SHRI

0.

N.

DAS~UPTA ( Met ), IS1

Deputy Director

2

IS:2768

-1982

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR COPPER ALLOY STRIP FOR BULLET ENVELOPE

u.

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 30 June 1982, after the draft finalized by the Copper and Copper Alloys Sectional Committee had been approved by the Structural and Metals Division Council. 0.2 Copper alloy strip is used for bullet envelope. This In this revision, requirements earlier published in 1964. reverse bend test and grain size requirement have been material is generally being used by Defence. standard was for hardness, revised. The

preparing the revised standarcl, necessary assistance has been cerived from DEF STAN 95-l l/l, Bullet Envelope Materinls, dated 22 Feb 1980 issued by Ministry of Defence, Directorate of Standardization, London. 0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expresoff in accordance sing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

0.3 While

1. SCOPE 1.1 `fllis standard covers the requirements ( 9OjlO ) strips for bullet enve!ope. ~___. ____*Iit~Ies for rounding 017 numerical values ( reoised ).

for cold rolled

copper

alloy

3

IS : 2768 - 1982 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose of this standard, IS : 3288 ( Part I )-1981* shall apply.
the following definition as given in

2.1 Strip - Flat product, over 0.15 mm thick and up to and including 10 mm thick, of any width, and generally not cut to length; usually in coil, but may be flat or folded. 3. SUPPLY

OF MATERIAL
to the supply of material shall be

3.1 The general

requirements relating as laid down in IS : 1387-1967t.

4. MANUFACTURE and be available

AND

QUALITY
annealing

4.1 The strip shall be finished

by cold rolling with subsequent in the hardness range given m 6.1.

- Clean process scrap and electrical scrap may be 4.2 Use of Scrap used in the charge. Clean process scrap consists of ingot discards, webbing, large clippings, and partly, or completely formed components from It may include small, clippings, swarf guilding metal to this standard. turnings and millings of guilding metal to this standard, if these are free from contamination to the satisfaction to the purchaser. It may also include guilding metal rejected for being slightly outside the limits of composition, with the agreement of the purchaser. When continuous or semi-continuous casting with an underpouring technique is employed, ingot discards and clean process scrap other than guilding metal to this standard ( as detailed in the following note ) may be used so long as the chemical composition of the cast complies with Table 1.
NOTE - Clean process scrap is scrap arising from the production of strip or or its subsequent fabrication into components and is free from contamination. sheet

5. CHEMICAL
given in T able 5.2 The specified chemical edition of Method. 1.

COMPOSITION
shall have the chemical composition as

5.1 When tested, the material

chemical composition shall be determined either by the method in IS : 440-1964: or any other established instrumental/ method. In case of dispute, the procedure specified in the latest IS : 440-1964: for chemical analysis, shall be the Referee

*Glossary of termS for copper and copper alloys: Part I Cast form and wrought form ( main types ) ( second recision ). *General requirements for the supply of metallurgical materials (Jirsl revision ). $Methods of chemical analysis of copper ( reuisrd ).

4

IS : 2768 - 1982

TABLE

1 CHEMICAL

COMPOSITION

( Clatws 4.2 orrd 5.1 ) CONSTITUENT copper Nickel, Max Arsenic, Max Antimony, Max PERCENT 89 to 91 0.1 O-02 0.01 0.002 0.03 0.02 0.05 0.01 O-005 Remainder

Bismuth, Max Tin, Max Lead, Max Iron, Max Phosphorus, Max `Other Zinc elements ( each ), Max

l Sulphur is not determined normally but may be in excess of 0.005 percent provided the properties and suitability of material are not adversely affected.
6. PHYSICAL 6.1 Hardness,
55 to 75 HV. 6.2 Bend Test - Bend tests shall be made on test pieces cut with their major axes either parallel to the direction of rolling ( longitudinal bend test ) or at right angles to the direction of rollmg ( transverse bend test ) ( see 6.2.3 and 6.2.4 ). 6.2.1 The longer edges shall be carefully rounded and smoothened longitudinally so that for material up to 3.15 mm thick the cross-section has approximately semi-circular edges; for material over 3.15 mm thick the edges shall be rounded to a radius of 1.6 mm. 6.2.2 Where possible, the material shall be subjected bend tejt; where this is not possible it shall be subjected bend test.
*Method for vickers hardness test for copper and copper alloys. 5

PROPERTIES
when tested in accordance with IS : 2866-1965*, shall be

to a transverse to a Iongitudinal

IS :2768 - 1982
6.2.3 Reverse Bend Test - A test piece 01' 13 mm in width and of ccnvenient length be cut from the material so that its major axis is at 30" to rolling direction. If the width of the material is less than 50 mm, a longitudinal test piece having its major axis parallel to the rolling direction may be used. The longer side of the test piece be rounded and smoothened longitudinally so that the cross section has approximately semi circular ends. Part of the test piece shall be gripped between two formers each having an inner edge radius equal to three times the thickness ofthe material. The free end of the test piece shall be bent through 90 over one former and bent back to its original position ( 1 bend ), it shall then be bent through LO" over the other former and back to its original position ( 2 bends ), the necessary constraint being applied to maintain contact between the test piece and the former. Repeating this procedure until cracking occurs and a kink appears in the test piece at the crack; failure is defined as the fern-ation of a k'nk that prevents the test piece from following the curve of the former. The number of completed bends before failure shall not be less than 8 ( see `I able 2 ). 6.2.4 Single Bend Test - A test piece of approximate width as laid down in Table 2 and of convenient length shall be cut from the strip in any direction at the discretion of the inspecting authority and sharp edges be removed and side smoothened. The test piece shall not crack when bent through 180" over a former of radius equal to half the thickness of the material.
TABLE 2 BEND AND REVERSE BEND TEST REQUIREMENTS RADIUS OF FOXMER NUMBER OF BENDS

THICKNESS OF STRIPS ( t ) (mm) Up to and including 2.54 Over 2.54

WIDTH OF TEST PIECE (mm) 13 25

TYPE OF TEST

Reverse Single

3t l/Zt

8 Minimum 1 of 180"

6.3 Grain Size - The greater than 0.065 mm. 6.3.1 The pui.chaser by tune anti tlcn size stanc ards
*Methods

average

grain

size of the material

shall

not be

average grain size may be determined if specified by the etching the smface of' the mateCal to reveal it: grain strucof 75, with the grain comparing this, at a magnlficat:on given in IS : 4748-19C8*.

for estimating average grain size of metals.

6

IS : 2768 - 1982 ,7. DIMENSIONS 7.1 The AND TOLERANCES

dimensions and tolerances shall be as laid down in IS : 30521974" unless otherwise specified by the purchaser.

8. FREEDOM
other visible

FROM

DEFECTS
clean, sound and free from surface and

8.1 The strips shall be reasonably
defects. 9. CALCULATION basis that its density 10. PACKING

OF WEIGHT
where necessary on the is 8.8 g/ems.

9.1 The weight of the strips shall be calculated

10.1 Strips shall be supplied in coils of continuous length flats and the mass of each coil shall be as per agreement. may weigh 125 kg. 11. MARKING

or folded or as Each package

11.1 Each coil shall have attached to it a metallic tag which is stamped with suitable marks to indicate the material, name of the manufacturer, mas's and such other information required by the purchaser. 11.1.1 Each coil and in the case of strips in may also be marked with the IS1 Certification
flat form, Mark. each package

NOTE - The use of the IS1 Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of the Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The IS1 Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well-defined system of inspection. testing and quality IS1 control which is devised and supervised by ISI and operated by the producer. marked products are also continuously checked by IS1 for conformity to that Details of conditions under which a licence for the standard as a further safeguard. use of the IS1 Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers or processors, may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution.

12. SAMPLING

AND

CRITERIA

FOR CONFORMITY

all the strips of the same width and 12.1 Lot - In any consignment, thickness be!onging to a particular cast of melt and manufactured by a single firm shall be grouped together to constitute a lot. b
*Dimensions for wrought copper and copper alloys sheet, strip and foil ( for general engineering purposes ) ( first revision ).

7

IS : 2768 - 1982 12.1.1 Tests for determining the conformity of ments of this specification shall be carried out Unless otherwise required ( set Xote ), the number for this purpose at random over the whole lot shall co1 1 and 2 of Table 3. the lot to the requireon each lot separately. of strips to be selectsd be in accordance vyjth

NOTE -In view of the critical nature of the dimensions and the requirements specified under 7 and 8 for some of the ordnance stores, purchaser may ask for cent percent inspection in place of sampling inspection for checking the conformity of the lot to these requirements. In such cases, strips fcund not conforming to any of these requirements shall be rejected and the remaining shall be used for further testing as specified in 12.2.2. LTABLE 3 SCALE OF SAMPLING AND PERMISSIBLE OF DBFECTIVES ( Cluusc12.1.1 )
LOT

NUMBER

SIZE

SAMPLE Srza

PERMISSIBLE No. ov DEFECTIVE@ (3) t 1 2 3 4 6 8

(1)
QLess than 15 16 to 48 41 to 65 66 to 110 111 to 180 181 to 300 301 and above

(2)
All 15 25 35 50 75 110

*This ensures that lots containing only four percent or less defectives shall be accepted most of the times. TDefective strips shall be rejected and the remaining shall be used for further testing specified in 12.2.2.

12.2 Number

of Tests

and Criteria

for Conformity

12.2.1 The strips selected in accordance with Table 3 shall be inspected for manufacture and quality ( see 4.1 ), dimensions ( see 7 ) and freedom of one from defects ( see 8 ). Any strip failing to meet the requirements If the or more of these characteristics shall be considered as a defective. number of defectives found is les> than or equal to the permissible number of defectives given in co1 3 of T able 3, the lot shall be declared as conforming to the requirements of the above characteristics ( see Note under 12.1.1 ). 12.2.2 From each lot, the number of strips to be subjected to the determination of copper and zinc coment ( set Table 1 ), hardness test ( se: 6.1 ) and bend test ( see 6.2 ) shall be one for lots weighing 200 kg or less 8

IS : 2768 - 1982 and shall be in proportion of one per 200 kg and part thereof for weighing more than 200 kg subject to a maximum of five samples. determination of all other requirements of chemical compoGtion Table 1 ) shall be done for each lot irrespective of the lot weight. strips for these tests shall be selected out of those obtained in 12.1.1.
NOTE 1 -In the case of strips in coil form weighing more than example shall be taken for each coil to provide the necessary test pieces. 200

lots One ( see The

kg, one the strips

NOTE 2 - The material required for chemical analysis from each of intended for testing shall be collected in accordance with IS : 1817-1961*.

NOTE 3 -- The test pieces required for various tests shall be cut off from each of the selected strips when cold anl ih%lI receive n3 further treatment except that they may be machined to the required shnpe of the test pieces bafore being tested.

12.2.2.1 W,ion only one chemical analysis or physical test is done on a lot, the lot shall be considered ai: conform:ng to the requirem?nt$ of the specification if the resuIt so obtained from each of the characteristics satisfies the co:respanding requirement of the specification. If the result of the analysis or test fails to satisfy the requirements for any chsracteristics, two more tests for that characteristic shall be done in order to If bDth these confirm that the analysis or test has been lone properly. .analyses or test results satisfy the relevant requirem-nts, the lot shall be deeme-l as confotminz t3 the requirements of the spacification, otherwise not. 12.2.2.2 In the case of the determination of copper content and hardness test, when more than one ana!ysiq or test result is available for a lot, the lot shall be considete1 as conforming to the requirements of this specification if the mean ani the range calculated from the analysis .or test results of each of the characteristics satisfy the conditions given below: a) ( Mean + O-6 Range ) shall be less than or equal to the maximum specification limit, and b) ( Mean - 0.6 Range ) shall be greater than or equal to the minimum specification limit.
NOTE 1 - Mean is obtained by dividing the sum of the test by the number of test ( or analysis ) results. NOTE 2 -Range is ,.defined as the difference minimum value of test ( or analysis ) results. between ( or analysis ) results and only the 0.5

the maximum

NOTE 3 - The multiplier 0.6 of :he range ensures that lots containing percent or less defective strips shall be accepted most of the times.

12.2.2.3 In the case of bend test, when more than one test result is available, the lot shall be declared as conforming to the requirement of this characteristic if each one of the test results is found to be satisfactory.
*Methods of sampling non-ferrous metals for chemical analysis.

9

INTERNATIONAL
Base bits QUANTITY Length Mass Time Electric current Thermodynamic temperature Luminous intensity Units Amount of substance Supplementary QUANTITY Plane angle Solid angle Derived Units
QUANTITY

SYSTEM

OF UNITS

( SI UNITS )

UNIT

SYMBOL m kg E A K cd mol

metre kilogram second ampere kelvin candela mole

UNIT radian steradian

SYMBOL rad sr

UNIT newton joule watt weber tesla hertz siemens volt Pascal force

SYMBOL N

DEFINITION N = 1 kg.m/s+ 1 J = 1 N.m 1V.s 1 W =a1 J/s lWb= 1 1 1 T = 1 Wb/m* s = 1 A/V V = 1 W/A

Force Energy Power Flux Flux density Frequency Electric conductance Electromotive Pressure, stress

J
W Wb T Hz S V Pa

1 Hz = 1 c/s (s-s)

1 Pa = 1 N/m2

