UDC

829'11'012'55'004'3/`4

IS: Indian Standard

11178-

1985

( Reaffirmed 2001 )

,

m

1

I

STORAGE

RECOMMENDATIONS FOR AND HANDLING OF PNEUMATIC FOR AUTOMOTIVE VEHICLES
storage and handling machinery, off-the-road

TYRES

1. Scope-Covers recommendations for automotive vehicles including earthmoving tractors, agricultural tractors and trailers.
1.1 This standard is not applicable

of pneumatic tyres vehicles, industrial

for use on trucks and

to tyres for bicycles inside

and rickshaws. The precautions and procedures given

2. Storage - All tyres shall be stored in 2.1 to 2.7 and 3 shall be followed.

a warehouse.

2.1 The tyres shall be stored in a covered place (warehouse ) to prevent exposure, to light from skylights, windows, doors or other openings. Skylight glass shall be painted all over with dark paint. Any openings shall be kept closed so that light entering the warehouse is reduced to the minimum possible. Electric lights shall not be left `ON' beyond the time necessary (see Fig. 1 ).
Stacking Light and Air Heat, Ozone and Dirt

Stack Tyres on Clean Horizontal Base FIG. 1 TYPJCAL ILLUSTRATION

Protect Air SHOWING

Against Light, and Dust CORRECT ( \/)

Cover and Protect Agajnst Ozone and Dirt AND WRONG (X)

Heat,

STORAGE

2.2 In case the warehouse, where tyres are stored cannot be darkened for some reason, the storage Diles of tyres shall be carefully covered with tarpaulin or some reasonably heavy woven fabric for :omplete protection against light, air current, dirt, water, etc (see Fig. 1 ),

Adopted

24 January

1985

I
INDIAN
MANAK BHAVAN,

Q July 1985, ISI
I STANDARDS
9 BAHADUR NEW DELHI

Gr 2

INSTITUTION
SHAH 110002 ZAFAR MARG

IS:11178

-1985

2.3 The tyres shall not be stoied in a room where electrical discharges occur, or are likely to occur, as a result of the operation of electric motors, arc welding, generators, switches or other electrical devices (see Fig. 1 ). 2.4 Storage arrangements shall be so planned that stocks ere rotated to move the oldest tyres first and any accumulation of very old stocks shall be avoided by issuing the stock on the principle of <first-in-first-out' ( FIFO ). The temperature in 2.5 Tyres shall not be piled near radiators, or other sources of heat or air coolers. Storage at sub-zero temperatures shall be avoided. the warehouse shall be kept as low as possible. However, where it is necessary to do so, tyre manufacturer may be consulted for storage, handling and use. 2.6 Air draughts shall be avoided in the warehouse supply of oxygen in the air currents. to stem deterioration of tyres due to continued

2.7 Excessive humid atmosphere shall be avoided in the storage space. High humidity causes moisture This affects to condense inside the tyre carcass resulting in more tyre growth in service than desirable. the service, life and performance of tyres. 3. Stacking and Handling 3.1 Tyres shall be stacked in as stress free conditions as possible. any of the methods outlined in 3.1.1 or 3.1.2 shall be adopted. Depending on the space available

3.1.1 When there is sufficient space available it is recommended that the tyres be stored vertically Depending on the convenience of handling side by side in racks made from rust proof tubular piping. tyres and, ceiling height, the number of such racks may be increased vertically, ensuring that there is no direct heat dissipation from the ceiling roof to the tyres stored on the top rack. The tyres shall be so The supports shall be stored that their weight is supported by the tread at two points over the piping. so arranged that approximately three quarter of the tyre circumference is above the supports and one quarter below them. 3.1.1.1 All types of radial ply tyres and tyres for earthmoving equipment shall be stacked vertically on hammock type racks so that the weight of the tyre or tyres is supported by the tread, approximately one-third the tyre circumference fully in contact with the hammock. 3.1.2 Where there is limitation of space, tyres may be piled horizontally one above the other, over a It is accepted that such storing will result in some deformation of tyres. clean, level, cemented floor. In order that the deformation is kept within the acceptable limits the height of the piles shall not exceed the values recommended below. 3.1.2.1 Mopedand motorcycle fyresStack may be made of a maximum of 25 tyres. up to a maximum of 5 tyres above the top tyre may be stacked as shown in Fig. 2. Binder tyres

BINUER f-

FIG. 2
(TO PROVIDE STABILITY TYRES

PLAN

FOR PILLING

TYRES IN FOUR PILES AS SHOWN)

ARE TO BE STACKED !2

IS:11178

-1985

3.1.2.2 Car, scooter and scooter derivative tyres ( diagonal ply ) - Stack may be made of a Binder tyres up to a maximum of 5 tyres above the top tyre may be stacked as maximum of `20 tyres. shown in Fig, 2.
l

3.1.2.3 Truck and bus tyres ( diagonal ply ) - Stack may be made of tyres so that the total height For some dees not exceed 1.8 m. On top of thestack a maximum of 2 binder tyres may be stacked. of the sizes of tyres the number of tyres that can be stacked worksout'as follows: Tyre Size Designation No. of Tyres in a Stack

9 plus 2 binder tyres on top of ninth tyre 8 plus 2 binder tyres on top of eighth tyre

3.1.2.4 Light truck 3.1.2.5 Tractor fyres

tyres -

Stack shall be made of maximum

of 15 tyres.

a) Rear stack shall be made of tyres as follows: Tyre Size Designation 8.3 and 11'2 section 12'4 to 13.6 section 16'9 section Note -The
adjacent to those

No. of Tyres

in a Sfack, 15 12 7

Max

and over

circumferential alignment of the tyre below it.

of the tyres in a stack shall be such that the tread bars

of one

tyre are

b) Front stack shall be made of a maximum 3.1.2.6 Animal 3.1.2.7 Earth 3.1.2.8 Radial drawn moving vehicle tyres -

of 10 tyres. of 10 tyres.

Stack shall be made of a maximum

equipment

fyres -

Tyres of this type shall not be stacked horizontally.

ply tyres stability

Shall not be stacked horizontally. to the stacks the tyres shall be stacked in four piles as shown in Fig. 2. or large

3.1.2.9 To provide

3.1.2.10 As far as possible mixing of sizes in a stack shall be avoided. Large section diameter tyres shall not be stacked above the smaller sizes in a stack ( see Fig. 1 ).

3.1.2.11 Where it is required to utilize more vertical space than permitted by 3.1.2, ballet type The pallats shall be of sufficient strength to crates may be used in combination with fork-lift trucks. withstand handling and shall be able to support the load of tyres on it without damage to tyres. If possible, this 3.1.2.12 All the tyres in a stack shall be turned and repiled at least every 90 days. In this operation the bottom most tyres operation may be performed earlier than the 90 days period. shall be placed at the top and the top most tyre at the bottom. If the tyres are to be stacked on floor a 3.2 Stacking of tyres on dirty floors shall be avoided. foundation of clean wooden strips of about 13 mm thickness shall be laid on the floor to avoid contact with dirt, oils, grease, solvents, floor polish, etc ( see Fig. 1). 3.3 Lacing of tyres in piles shall be avoided. of tyres. 4. Outside Storage of Tyres Lacing may cause kinks in beads and may distort the form

4.1 Outside storage of tyres is not recommended. It is recognised that this may be necessary in extreme emergency conditions but such storage shall not exceed 30 days. In case tyres are stored outside, at the earliest oppertunity the tyres shall be shifted to a warehouse and procedures and precautions given in 2 and 3 shall be followed. 4.2 In case of outside storage, a suitable foundation shall be constructed so that tyres do not come in contact with the ground. The tyres shall be piled according to the procedure outlined in 3.1. The piles shall be covered by tarpaulin or similar material ensuring protection aginst sunlight, water and other contaminants ( see Fig, 1 ). 3

IS : 11178 - 1985
4.3 It shall be ensured that no free water is present in the carcass before the tyres are stacked. Tube and flap shall be removed to check the presence of free water. Any free water shall be completely removed and the tyres shall be dried at room temperature before stacking.

EXPLANATORY

NOTE

This standard is one of the standards formulated on the recommendations for storage and handling of tyres, inner tubes, flaps, rims, etc, the other standard in this series being IS : 11031-1984 ' Recommendations for storage and handling of inner tubes, flaps and tube valves for use with pneumatic tyres for automotive vehicles `. This standard has been prepared dealers for storage of tyres. to help the manufacturers, organized consumers and tyre

It is well known that rubber products deteriorate when exposed to sunlight, air currents, dirt, outline the methods to prevent tyres with their moisture, heat, etc. Therefore, these recommendations Electrical discharges in the vicinity of tyres have to be avoided as they generate ozone contact. High ambient temperatures which greatly accelerates oxidation and deterioration of rubber products. also accelerate deterioration of rubber products. Sub-zero temperatures cause rubber products to become stiffer causing embrittlemelt and, therefore, for operation and storage at such low temperatures, Air currents increase oxygen supply in the warehouses tyre manufacturers should be consulted. Excessive moisture in the thereby causing oxidation of tyres, therefore, draughts should be avoided. tyre carcass increases growth of tyres in-service and reduces its service life and should, therefore be avoided. The deleterious effects of the above factors can be minimized by a careful chaise of storage conditions. A tyre may prematurely fail in service because of poor storage conditions. This can be avoided by following the recommendations outlined in this standard. These recommendations also outline for making the stacks. the methods of stacking of tyres and precautions to be

followed

4
Printed at Arcee Press. New Delhi, India

