IS : 3842 ( Part VII ) - 1972 ( Reafl'iied 1997 ) ( Reaffirmed 2001 )

Indian Standard
APPLICATION GUIDE FOR ELECTRICAL RELAYS FOR AC SYSTEMS
PART Vii FREQUENCY RELAYS

( Fourth Reprint APRIL 1999 )

UDC

621'316'925 : 621'316'726

0 Copyright 1972 BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN, 9

INDIAN
BAHADUR NEW DELHI 110002

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR MARC3

Gr 5

September

1972

IS : 3842 ( Part VII ) - 1972

Indian Standard
APPLICATION GUIDE FOR ELECTRICAL RELAYS FOR AC SYSTEMS
PART VII FREQUENCY
Committey,

RELASYS
ETDC 35

Relays Sectional
Chairman
SHRI K. M. CHINNAPPA

Representing

Tata Hydro-Electric Power Supply Co Ltd, Bombay

Members SIXRIG. K. THAKUR ( Alfernote to Shri K. M. Chinnappa ) &RI N. S. S. AROKIASWAMY Tamil Nadu Electricity Board, Madras SHRI T. B. CHIKKOBA ( Alterrrnk) hlaharashtra State Electricity Board, Bombay SHRI M. M. BENDRE Universal Electric Co, 24 Parganas SHRI Y. N. BHARGAVA SHRI S. R. K. MURTHY ( Altcmate ) Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals SHRI G. R. BHAT~A ( Inspection Wing ) Jyoti Limited, Baroda SHRI A. DATTA Sn~r B. L. SINIIVAL( AItenmte ) DEPUTY DIRECTOR STANDARDS Railway Board, New Delhi ( SS/TI ), RDSO, LUC6NOW &ISTANT DIRECTORSTANDARDS ( RELAYS) (Alternate ) DIRECTOR, CENTRAL P 0 w E R Central Water & Power Commission ( Power Wing), New Delhi RESEARCH INSTITUTE, BANGALORE DEPUTY DIRECTOR,CENTRAL POWERRESEARCIX INSTITUTE ( .4!!ternate ) Directorate General of Posts & Telegraphs, New SHRI P. S. ENDLAW Delhi Mysore State Electricity Board, Bangalore SHY S. GoYTN~.~PPA Directorate General of Technical Development, SHRI D. P. GUPTA New Delhi SHRI S. PAL~IAN( Altern& ) U. P. State Electricity Board, Lucknow $&XXI p. A. KRISHNASWAMY Bornhay Elrctric Supply 6: Transport Undertaking, &RI A. "D. LIMAYE Bombay SI~RIA. M. KELICAR ( Alkmate ) Haryann State Electricity Board, Chandigarh SHRI MOHINDERPAL SHRI K. L. MIGLANI ( Alfernate ) National Test House, Calcutta SHRI S. K. MUKHERJEE ASEA Electric India Pvt Ltd, Bombay SHRI S. T. PATEI. Snar M. P. MOBEDJINA ( rllternate )

( Contirwd on page 2 ) BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR NEW DELHI 110002

IS : 3842 ( Part VII ) - 1972 ( Continuedfrom page 1 )
Members
SHRI M. S. RAJAGOPALAN

Representing English Electric Co of India Ltd, Madras

SHRI N. NATH ( Alternntc ) Heavy Electric& ( India ) Ltd, Bhopal A. RAJA RAO Koorkee University, Roorkee DR T. S. M. RAO Hindustan Brown Boveri Ltd, Bombay SHRI U. V. RAO SHRI V. BALASUBRAMANIAN ( Alternate ) Hindustan Steel Ltd, Ranchi SHRI P. RENGASWAMY SHRI T. C. RAJAGOPALAN ( Alternate ) International General Electric Co of India Pvt Ltd. SHRI 1~. K. SHARMA Bombay Siemens India Ltd, Bombay SHRI M. M. SHETHNA SHRI S. V. AJREKAR( Alternate ) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-o&o Member ) SHRI Y. S. VENKATESWARAN, Director ( Elec tech ) Secretary
SHRI

SHRI VIJAI Assistant Director ( Elec tech ), IS1 Panel for Application

Guide for Electrical Relays, ETDC

35 : P2

Convener SIIRI G. K. THAK~K Members
C E N T R A L Central Water & Power Commission ( Power Wing ), New Delhi RESEARCH INSTITUTE, BANGALORE ASEA Electric India Pvt Ltd, Bombay SHRI M. P. MOBEDJINA English Electric Co of India Ltd, Madras SHRI N. KATH Heavy Electricals ( India ) Ltd, Bhopal SFIRIV. RADHAKRISIINAN Punjab State Electricity Board, Patiala SHRI P. K. SEN Siemens India Ltd, Bombay SHRI M. M. SHETHNA DEPUTY DIRECTOR,
POWER

Tata Hydra-Electric

Power Supply Co Ltd, Bombay

2

IS t 3842 ( Part VII ) - 1972

Indian Standard
APPLICATION GUIDE FOR ELECTRICAL RELAYS FOR AC SYSTEMS
PART VII FREQUENCY RELAYS

0.

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard (Part VII ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 17 April 1972, after the draft finalized by the `telays Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical i-`ivision Council. 0.2 Modern power systems are designed to provide uninterrupted elect ical supply, yet the possibility of failure cannot be ruled out. The 1 .otectivtL relays stand watch and in the event of failures, short-circuits or L )normal operating conditions help de-energize the unhealthy section of t!lc polvcr system and restrain interference with the remainder of it and thus limit damage IO equipment and ensure safety of personnel. They are also used to indicate the type and location of failure so as to assess the effectiveness of the protective schemes. 0.3 The features which the protective relays should possess are: even after long operations under part of the operatof that is, to ensure correct action a) Reliability, periods of inactivity and also to offer repeated severe conditions;

that is, to ensure that only the unhealthy b) Selectivity, system is disconnected; c) Sensitivity, that is, detection ing conditions; of short-circuit damage

or abnormal

d) Speed to prevent or minimize rotating plant; and

and risk of instability

e> Stability, that is, the ability to operate only under those conditions that call for its operation and to remain either passive or biased against operation under all other conditions. 0.4 The fri-cquency of ac voltage of a power supply network is normally maintained constant at the declared frequency and within statutory limits of variation. In conditions of emergency plant outage, excessive overloading of the network, short-circuits in the system, ctc, large variat:ons ill frcqucllc), occur aucl it is desirable to provide means of frequency protection. Excessive or rapid variation of frequency causes variety of 3

IS : 3842 ( Part

VII)- 1972

damage to generating plant, damage to industrial machinery, burnouts of domestic appliances, dislocations in traffic signalling systems, etc. In certain circumstances they also result in total power failure. With the increase in interconnected power systems, large variations in frequency are likely to result in heavy damage to electrical systems and equipment, and necessity has, therefore, been felt of preparing an application guide for frequency relays for power systems. 0.5 This guide has been prepared to evaluate a variety of considerations associated with frequency based protection. The technique of application of frequency relays is still being developed and therefore no attempt has been made to standardize the schemes of application of frequency relays. 0.6 It is emphasized that this guide has been prepared to assist in application rather than to specify the relay to be used. It deals only with the principles of application of frequency relays and does not deal with the selection of any particular scheme. The actual circuit conditions in all probability may be different from those given in this guide. 0.7 In the preparation of this guide, considerable assistance has been derived from several published books and technical papers and from manufacturers' trade literature. 0.8 This guide is one of the series of Indian Standard application guides A list of s tandards so far prepared in for electrical relays for ac systems. this series is given on P 20. 1. SCOPE 1.1 This guide ( Part VII ) deals with the application covered by IS : 3231-1965*. 1.2 It does not cover frequency relays used for: generating sets, portable machines. diesel a) regulating frequency of emergency or petrol generating sets, etc; and b) field switching 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose of this guide the following definitions, in addition to those given in IS : 1885 ( Part IX)-19667 and IS : 1885 ( Part X )-1968$, shall apply. 2.1 Overfrequency Relay-A relay which operates when the characteristic quantity ( the frequency ) rises to or changes through the setting value above the rated frequency of the relay.
*Specification for electrical relays for power system protection. tElectrotechnica1 vocabulary : Part IX Electrical relays. $EIectrotechnieal vocabulary : Part X Electrical power system protection.

of frequency

relays

and synchronizing

of synchronous

4

IS : 3842 ( Part VII ) - 1972 Relay - A relay which operates when the characteristic quantity ( the frequency) falls to or changes through the setting value below the rated frequency of the relay. 3. GENERAL FEATURES 2.2 Underfrequency

3.1 Input - The energizing quantity of a frequency relay is a single alternating voltage which should be equal in magnitude to the rated voltage of the relay. The relay response depends upon the frequency of the alternating input voltage by virtue of its electrical circuit being tuned to resonance.

3.2 Operating PrincipleThe internal circuit of a typical electromechanical frequency relay consists of two series resonant branches, both The resonant frequency of connected in parallel across a voltage source. one branch circuit is fixed and the tuning is flat in the vicinity of the rated frequency. The complimentary branch contains a tapped or continuously variable inductance and the frequency can be sharply tuned to resonance. If the frequency is within the non-operating zone, the currents in the two branches are adjusted to swing in phase and the relay does not operate. As the frequency approaches the operating zone, a phase difference sets up in the branch currents and the relay operates. 3.3 Movement -Various movements, such as electromagnetic, ferraris, electrodynamic, induction and permanent magnet mcving coil, are employed in the frequency relays. There are many variants. However, among the electromechanical relays induction movement is the most widely used in the frequency relays. 3.4 Classification - Frequency relays discussed following two broad classes based on the operating in this guide fall in the time characteristic: such as the induction

a) Relays employing the time deIay movements, disc movement; and

b) Relays employing fast acting movements, such as the induction cup movement, permanent magnet moving coil, ferraris and electrodynamic movements. 4. CHARACTERISTICS characteristic curve of frequency relay indicates the time of operation of the relay when a voltage of constant frequency and A typical illustration for an sinusoidal waveform is applied to the relay. induction disc relay is shown in Fig. 1. It is presumed here that the constant frequency applied is sufftcientlynear the setting. In practice, however,
4.1 Time-frequency

IS : 3842 ( Part VU ) - 1972 the relay operation occurs by the frequency changing through the setting point, that is to say it is not constant. The effect of changing frequency on the operating time can be observed if the characteristk is plotted showing the operating time against a constant rate of change of frequency. Such a characteristic is illustrated in Fig. 2. The operating time measured is from the instant the frequency equals the setting of the relay while it changes at a constant rate. 4.2 The actual frequency obtaining at the time the relay has completed operation, in response to any given rate of change of fre uency can be found from a characteristic showing the integral change o I frequency in hertz against the rates of change of frequency in hertz per second. A typical illustration for underfrequency relay is shown in Fig. 3. The broken curve in Fig. 3 illustrates the eventual frequency that will result if the opening time of circuit-breaker is added to the relay operating time. 5. SETTING RANGE

5.1 The setting range available on most frequency relays is about 8 to 12 percent of the rated frequency. They are mostly continuously adjustable. However, some models are found with fixed setting up to a maximum of 7 The accuracy that may be achieved in the setting is of the order values. of f 0.1 Hz. The manufacturer may be consulted regarding the actual accuracy of setting. 5.2 Three types of setting arrangements are available, a) Fixed setting, b) Specified number of tapped settings, and c) Continuously adjustable setting. 6. EFFECT OF VOLTAGE VARIATION namely:

6.1 Variation in the magnitude of the voltage fed to a frequency relay may, in certain types, have notable effect on the setting value calibrated at the A curve showing change in the setting with respect to the rated voltage. change of voltage should be obtained from the manufacturer of the relay to examine an application of a particular relay. This is illustrated in Fig. 4. 6.2 Transient voltage variations caused by blowing of a fuse in the voltage circuit wired to a frequency relay and manual or automatic switching of an ac supply are likely to cause mal-operation of an induction cup This difficulty may be overcome by connecting an frequency relay. auxiliary relay having approximately 0.1 second delay on pick-up to delay Frequency relays with incorporated the signal of the frequency relay. which can be employed for direct auxiliary delay relay are available If, however, an auxiliary time delay scheme is not tripping conlrol. employed internally for tripping commands! it is usually adequate to supplement externally an auxiliary relay with rntentional delay. 6

IS : 3842 ( Part VII ) - 1972

56 55 54 53 52 51 50 L9 40 17 L6 L5 14 43 12 20 60 100 VOLTS IA Frequency Voltage Characteristic IB l&O 160 10, 36 0 1 OPERATING 2 TIME 3 IN s 4 60 56

Frequency Operating Time Characteristic

FIG. 1

CHARACTERISTICS OF INDUCTION DISC FREQUENCY RELAYS

0 0-I

0.2 RATE Ci

U.6

1.0

2 OF

L

6

10

20

LO IN tiz/s

CHANGE

FREQUENCY

FIG. 2

EFFECT OF CHANGING FREQUENCY ON OPERATING TIME OF FREQUENCY RELAY 7

IS : 3842 ( Part *I

) - 1972

RATE m-m_ FIG. FREQUENCY OPERATES FREQUENCY OPERATES

OF

CHANGE CHANGE CHANGE

OF

FREQUENCY UNTIL UNTIL

IN Hz/s RELAY BREAKER

OCCURRING OCCURRING

3

INTEGRAL. CHANGE OF FREQUENCY WITH RATED FREQUENCY FOR UNDERFREQUENCY RELAY

CHANGE

OF

PERCENTAGE FIG.

RATED

VOLTAGE

4

CALIBRATION

CHANGE

WITH VARIATION ,8

OF VOLTAGE

IS : 3842 ( Part VII ) - 1972 6.2.1. The induction
variations disc frequency by virtue of its movement. relay is immune to-transient voltage

7. EFFECT

OF TEMPERATURE

VARIATIONS

7.1 The calibration of a frequency relay alters with variation in temperThe deviation in calibration is of the order of 0.3 percent to cite ature. In arty particular application the deviaan indicative value of the effect. tion should be based on spedlfications offered by the manufacturer. 7.2 It is recommended that in practice, a frequency relay should be calibrated after warming it up for 30 to 60 minutes by switching on its rated voltage. 8. EFFECT

OF HARMONIC

VOLTAGE

8.1 The harmonic

frequency voltage component in the energizing voltage affects the calibration of a frequency relay. A typical deviation is 0.1 Hz In any particular application, the for a harmonic content of 10 percent. deviation should be obtained from the manufacturer's specification.

8.2 The third and the major harmonic in the energizing voltage of frequency relay is eliminated when the relay is connected line-toline across a 3-phase star-connected secondary of a voltage transformer. The higher harmonics, the f?th and the seventh, may be present but Energizing voltage derived from only in relatively small proportions. line-to-neutral or single-phase connected secondary of a potential transformer is not recommended for connecung to a frequency relay.

9. EFFECTS 9.1. Frequency

OF FREQUENCY

CHANGES

variations are of two categories. In the first, the frequency merely drifts at a very low rate of change and may remain The effect of such drift may or steady at any drift value for a long time. There are limits for such drift, beyond may not be harmful to equipment. which harm begins to set in. In the second variety, the rate of change of frequency is so quick that the frequency builds up or dwindles to extreme values unless correcThere is littlc control on tive measures counteract and arrest the change. tllis t) pc of change; harmful effects build up on cquipmcnt and even the power supply may be endangered.

1s : 3842 ( Part VII ) ; 1972 9.2 Drifting Frequency

9.2.1 Steam turbines, particularly those of higher output rating operating at pressure and temperature conditions of high order, are critically designed to operate at the rated speed and frequency. A small zone up and down the rated frequency is available for operation in which no mechanical damage will result except that the output will change. But as the frequency exceeds the safe zone, and moves beyond the limits, resonant vibrations will set up in the blades and metallic erosion will occur. The effect will vary from turbine to turbine; hence no guiding limits can be given. The manufacturer of turbine specifies the safe operating speeds or frequency zone and the time periods permissible for operating the turbines at unfavourable frequencies in emergencies with a view to limiting the damage to a minimum. The manufacturer should be consulted on the behavioural specifications of each steam turbine in this respect. 9.2.2 Operation of a steam turbine at damaging safe working zone will result in integrated damage intervals and ultimate reduction in life. 9.3 Accelerating Frequency frequencies beyond the to blades over recurrent

9.3.1 When load on a generator is suddenly thrown off due to tripping of a heavily loaded line circuit-breaker or a generator circuit-breaker, the turbine *will accelerate before governor mechanism becomes effective. Hydraulic turbines have been known to reach I.8 to 2.2 times the normal speed. Steam turbines may reach 1.2 times rated speed which is a critical overspeed where machine may break up. 9.3.2 Directly coupled exciters of hydraulic turbine driven generators will develop excessive voltage across commutator segments and a dc short circuit may result. The heat may melt solder in commutator segments which under centrifugal force would flare open. An open circuit may develop in the armature. Insulation between armature winding and shaft may break down and exciter bearings may get damaged. The generator field windings may develop inter-turn short circuit. 9.3.3 The rotor of steam turbine driven generator may shear, and the field windings on the rotor may get dislodged under huge centrifugal forces that develop. 9.3.4 The generator stator windings may ( for both types of turbines) straining the stator coil insulation. build overvoltage, If stator earth fault occurs, a major outage follows. 9.3.5 It is customary to provide overspeed protection a) overspeed trip device on the speed governor switch, b) a permanent magnet generator and a frequency c) an overvoltage relay. 10 by means of: or a centrifugal relay, or

IS : 3842 ( Part VII ) - 1972 9.4 Decelerating Frequency

9.4.1 Frequency decelerates in a system, if there is sudden increase of Speed governor action follows load in excess of the available generation. and initiates build-up of speed to restore normalcy equated to new load. But delay in the speed governor action will result in decelerated change of frequency. If spinning reserve of generation capacity is available, condiA spinning reserve on hydraulic tions can be easily returned to normalcy. turbine driven generator would help to equate load quick!y but a spinning reserve on steam turbine generator can equate load onl;y at a rate of load pick-up that can be sustained at uniform expansion of the turbine compoIf this limits the load pick-up, nents, and the firing rate of the boilers. the frequency deceleration will build up with cascade effects. It should be noted that any spinning reserve which is available will start to have a significant effect within about 5 seconds of the start of the generation deficit, depending upon the type of generation in the affected area. The initial deceleration for a 50-Hz rated system can bc estimated fror, t that the load is a constant the following formula on the assumptions torque load and the speed governor action is not effective: d = where

_::(+")

Hz/set

d = deceleration

of a 50-Hz system; in the

H = average inertia constant of generators in operation disconnected section expressed in per unit value;

L 7 system

load disconnection;

in megawatts, and

that

is, in

total t!rc

load before disconnected on this 1-O per shall be shall be

G = system generation in section in megawatts.

operation

A typical response of a steam turbine driven generator based method of estimate is illustrated in Fig. 5. The initial load is unit. It would be seen frorn the illustration that corrective action taken very fast before critical frequency is reached or else 111c unit tripped.

9.4.2 At lower than rated frequency, the output voltage of a shunt exciter without a voltage regulator collapses as the SlOl>c of the terminal voltage build-up curve of the exciter coincides with the field r&stance line. This would happen when the voltage regulator is remoi& from service for The generator excitation would then be in .jeopardy; the maintenance. generator would be removed from service by loss of field protection. 11

IS : 3842 ( h-t

Vi1 ) - 1972

SECONOS

AFTER DISTURBANCE BfGtNS

FIG. 5

TOTAL CLEARING TIME PROM DISTURBANCE

9.4.3 At very low frequency, the terminal voltage of direct coupled exciter drops which in turn reduces excitation and the in.ternal generated The machine is, in that case, in a danger cf voltage of an alternator. falling out of synchronism. 9.4.4 If the voltage regulator is in service, it will boost the exciter voltIt shall return to normal position age by moving to full boost position. within about a minute or else the thermal capability af the alternator stator will be exceeded; the voltage regulator itself and the alternator field winding will be seriously overloaded. 9.4.5 A system operating at low frequency is critically in danger. A steam turbine generator unit will be in difficulty with 5 percent reduction in frequency as the boiler feed-water pump motors, coal rnill motors, draft fan motors will operate with reduced output and depending on the design' of the boiler the conditions will redouble until complete failure results. In hydraulic turbine generator units the effect is not so serious on the auxiliaries even up to a frequency drop of 10 percent below normal. also follows which further Along with underfrequency, undervoltage aggravates the situation. 12

IS : 3842 ( Part VII ) - 1972 The VAR 9.4.6 With underfrequency system undervoltage also follows. output of generator is reduced. The system deficient in VAR tends to be unstable. Motor loads in the system may trip out creating relief in the system but other plant load will be overloaded. If underfrequency is caused by a system short circuit, the various cascade effects may tear the system apart into areas each of which will have new problems. In all probability complete power failure will result in a part or the whole of the system. 9.5 Frequency relays have been applied frequency changes, The available methods 10. APPLICATION OF OVERFREQUENCY to forestall are described RELAYS ill-effects of the in 10 and 11.

10.1 The mechanical overspeed devices mentioned earlier in 9.3.5 are not sometimes provided. Instead a permanent magnet generator is provided in the speed governor. The output voltage of the generator is connected to a fast acting overfrequency relay or overvoltage relay. 10.1.1 It is also possible that the mechanical overspeed device, if not carefully maintained and regularly tested, may fail to operate when requirAn overfrequency relay may be used as a back-up ed in an emergency. protection to the mechanical overspeed device. The relay contact for The unit is shut tripping is connected to trip the throttle of the turbines. down from the electrical side by the action of a power relay tripping in the generator direction. 10.1.2 The setting of the overfrequency relay is usually adjusted to 110 percent of the rated frequency when applied to steam turbine generator unit. Higher setting to 115 percent may be permissible for hvdraulic turbine generator. 10.2 An overfrequency relay is sometime applied to protect a steam turbine generator unit against picking up overspeed in the starting operation. In the process of starting, the turbine is rolled at approximately one-third rated speed and after heating and expansion of shaft is uniform, the turbine is quickly accelerated to rated speed by raising safely through its lower critical speeds. In case it overspeeds, the throttle valve will automatically be tripped by the overfrequency relay. The setting is acljusted to 104 to 105 percent of rated frequncy. A similar situation generators. does not arise in the case of hydrau!ic turbine driven

10.3 The damage caused to steam turbine blades mentioned in 9.2 by drifting ovcrfrcquency operation may be checked under supervision of a induction disc or time delayed overfrequency relay connected to operate an audible alarm in the boiler and turbine control room as wc~llas the elccRemedial action may be initiated manually. trical room. 13

IS : 384:, ( Part

VIP ) - 1972

103.1 T!:c rctting to be adopted would be about 102 percent of the rated frequency. The actual setting should be based on the behavioural characteristic of' each turbine, in consultation with the manufacturer. II. APPLICATION OF UNDERFREQUENCY RELAYS

11.1 Damage iv t-a.used to steam turbine blades as mentioned in 9.2 by drifting ur~clerlic~1urx~cy operation. A supervisory protection as mentioned in 10.3 is not suflicient in this'icspect. A generator operating in a system with slight ovcrfrequency and slight overvoltage is indicative of a stable system. But lvith a slight underfrequency and undervoltage the system tends to 1~ urr!<tablc. Faster protection is in this case desirable, not only to forewarn but to take corrective action quickly before conditions worsen. 11.1.1 An induction cup type or fast operating underfrequency relay can be employed not only to project instantaneous audible alarm but also The objectives to be to relieve suitablt: loads with measured time delay. secured depend upon the systenr configuration. 11.2 If the supply to a synchronous rnotor is interrupted, it is essential that the motor circuit-breaker is tripped as quickly as possible, if there is any possibility of the supply bein, 17 either automatically restored or restored without the knowlrdgc of the machine operator. This is necessary in order to avoid the possibility of the supply being restored out of phase with the motor generated x901 tag.c. The underfrequency relay will cater for the condition of the supply failing when motor is on load, causing the motor to decelerate fairly quickly. 11.2.1 A fast operating underfrequency relay is employed to disconnect the motor on loss of supply. The voltage fed to the underfrequency relay should be derived from the motor side so that on failure of the mains supply the motor continues to feed a voltage of underfrequency to the relay. 11.2.2 If the supply is received on a long `feeder, which also caters to non-synchronous loads along with the synchronous motor load at the receiving end, an instantaneous auto-reclosing control may be provided at the sending end, only when the protection mentioned earlier is employed. XL.3 If supply fails in a station, undervoltage relays are employed to switch over communication equipment to alternative source of supply. However, when undervoltage and underfrequency conditions occur due to excess of load over generanon, communication equipment would continue The communications are most to be supplied from the affected supply. likely to be impaired in this situation particularly if electronic valves constitute its components. 14

IS : 3842 ( Part VII ) - 1972

111.3.1 An induction disc or time used to switch over communications an undervoltage relay mentioned in as the underfrequency r&y will not

delay underfrequency relay may be to an alternate supply. The need of 11.3 cannot, however, be eliminated operate for total supply failure.

XI.4 Underfrequency relay of the fast operating type is a reliable device for switching in system fault recorders in a few select locations in a system as records of a disturbance affecting the whole system are required on a comparable basis. The other types of protective relays may be used for this purpose but at a disadvantage that all of them will not simultaneously switch all the recorders into action. As underfrequency would be a common reference at all places, recorders switched by underfrequency relays would The records so obtained would be comparalmost start at the same time. able and very useful in analyzing the sequence of a disturbance. 1.1.5 An industrial consumer having his own generating plant to meet part of his load and receiving his balance needs of power from a supply organization ( see Fig. 6 ) can employ underfrequency relay to protect his generating plant if supply from the supply organization system fails. The industrial generators will begin to feed power to the other system and A similar case arises if the supply organiunderfrequency will result. zations circuit-breaker at sending end trips, the line is tapped for supplying other loads and the receiving end circuit-breaker at the industrial bus-bar does not trip. The industrial generation can be saved in these cases by tripping the receiving end circuit-breaker on the supply organizations line at the industry's bus-bar by an underfrequency relay. If the generation is not sufficient to meet all the loads, the same underfrequency relay may be used to trip feeders supplying non-essential load along with the tie circuit-breaker on the supply organizations line.
SUPPLY TAPPED LOADS

FOR jj?Io.

POWER

RELAY

6 APPLICATIONOF A FRE~JENCY RELAY IN AN INDUSTRIAL SYSTEM HAVING ITSOWN GENERATIONAND ALSO DRAWING POWER FROM A SUPPLY ORGANIZATION

15

IS : 3842 ( Part VII ) - 1972 11.5.1 The setting of the underfrequency relay will be fairly near the rated frequency. It sometimes happens that the supply organizations operating frequency may be slightly below the rated frequency and within allowable limits. The industry's generators will follow the frequency as they cannot correct it. There is then a chance of mal-operation of the underfrequency relay if the setting is skirting near the operating frequency. To prevent such mal-operation, the setting and the sul;ply to the relay should be carefully selected.
11.6 In a large power system comprising a number of generating stations producing energy from water head or fuels and having a number of switching and transforming stations interlinked in any manner by high voltage transmission lines, a state of underfrequency and consequently unstable operation may set in if excess load over generation occurs due to loss of generation or tripping of a transmission line initiated by a short circuit somewhere in the system which may be cleared by mal-functioning or slow operation of the conventional protective devices. There may be a failure of circuit-breaker, or a Iightning arrester. Instances are sufficient of system totally shutting down Gth a fast frequency decay. 11.6.1 Fast frequency in the system. 11.7 Load limitation a) Tripping decay may be arrested by automatic load limiting

may be done in the following ways: is the major primary solution;

the feeders -this

b) Splitting the system into areas, which in themselves are selfsufficient in generation as far as the load in the area is considered. This has a secondary value; and c) Combination 11.7.1 In intimately: devicing of both (a) and (b). these measures, it is necessary to bear in mind

a) the knowledge of the power system itself as regards its physical outlay, the relationship of excess generating areas with the excess load areas, the line loadings, etc; b) the operating limitations of the equipment particularly the generating plant and the transformer equipment; and c) the characteristic of the loads. 11.7.2 These requirements arrangement can, therefore, devise suitable arrangement system. 11.8 Feeder Tripping will differ in each system. No standard be offered. Mostly it will be necessary to which meets the needs of any particular

11.8.1 Knowing the nature of loads and taking account of any commercial agreement with individual consumer, it will be possible to divide feeders into following or similar classes. 16

IS : 3842( Part VII ) - 1972 11.8.1.1 Feeders carrying loads which are essential to be maintained at all times. This usually covers supplies to hospitals, water works and industrial loads where the process carried on cannot be interrupted, as such interruption would involve prolonged shut-down for days before the plant can be returned to service.
11.8.1.2 Feeders carrying important loads which if interrupted would result in loss of material or temporary inconvenience, but may be returned to normalcy without necessity of prolonged outage. 11.8.1.3 interruption Feeders carrying general beyond an inconvenience. loads which are not affected by

11.8.2 The analysis will help to assess the load relief obtainable accordThe classified feeder loads may then be connected ing to the type of load. in the load limitation scheme according to desired sequence. Three load limiting scheme for feeder tripping are generally used. 11.8.2.1 In the first scheme, the number of under-frequency relays is the same as the number of groups of feeders. Each feeder group will be tripped by the associated frequency relay through a multicontact tripping relay. Each relay will have its own frequency setting and the settings can be graded with respect to the total relief required. In this scheme loads can be tripped all over the system one after other and if system frequency recovers, the relays will reset and no further tripping will occur. An illustration of this scheme is shown in Fig. 7. If frequency relays are of the draw-out type, it is a very simple matter to change any particular feeder group to control of other relay having different frequency setting as the relays can be interchanged. If the rate of frequency change is relatively slow, the load relief will be time-spaced automatically by the time rate of frequency change permitting the system to recover at any time without triPping any unnecessary load. If on the contrary the decelerat>m js fast, invariably all relays will trip out feeders under their control, and thr system will recover after full relief of load. iThe scheme is flexible and selfcontained. 11.8.2.2 The second scheme consists of one underfrequency relay and a timer with as many time contacts as the number of feeder groups to be tripped. Each time, the contact of the timer will energize a multicontact tripping relay for tripping all feeders in a group. One underfrequency relay per scheme will be required at each station and each relay may have a different frequency setting. ,$n illustration of this scheme is shown in Fig. 8. Load relief at any to the given station will be obtained at fixed time intervals according settings given to the timer after the frequency has touched the setting If the deceleration of frequency in the system of the particular relay. is relatively slow, only tllc initial load relief obtained instantaneousIy by operation of the underfrequency relay will bc time-spaced automatically 17

IS : 3842 ( Part VII ) - 1972
This reliefwould not be ample according to the relief change frequency. as only one relay would be operating in the system at any time. The relief stages to be timed out by the timer would be independent of the rate of change of frequency that demands the relief. More load than necessary If the deceleration will be relieved before system would begin to recover. is fast, the scheme will take long time to respond. In this scheme feeder groups can be rotated to trip in the sequence of the time settings by inserting a rotary switch to connect the timer contact This means that interruptions to orders cyclically to the tripping relays. the consumers will be cyclically given in successive emergencies. 11.8.2.3 The third scheme consists of a combination of parts drawn A variety of intricate combinations is from 11.8.2.1 .and 11.8.2.2. possible. Attention to the needs of particular system, the reliability of the scheme adopted and its flexibility to operation and testing would ultimately matler. 12. TESTING relays, a dc or ac motor generator set may bc used if available. Alternatively an electronic frequency The latter is usually portable and facilitates testing generator may be used. of frequency relays at Site.

12.1 For the purpose of testing frequency

UFT h

+ + + P 9 P I Ia Tc
HR HR HR

a

I a

Tc

UF A HR Tc a

= = = = =

Underfrequency relay Auxiliary relay Hand reset auxiliary tripping relay Tripping coil of breaker Make contact of breaker

FIG. 7 APPLICATION OF UNDERFREQUENCY RELAY FOR FEEDER TRIPPING-NUMBER OF RELAYS IS THE SAME AS NUMBER OF FEEDERS
18

IS : 3842( Part VII ) - 19'12

+ P

I(1
HR = Hand reset tripping relay Tc = Trip coil of circuit-breaker

HR

UF = Underfrequency A = Auxiliary relay

relay Instantaneous )

7' = Timer solenoid ( T,

(I = Make contact of breaker

FIG.

8 APPLICATION OF UNDERFREQUENCY RELAY FOK FEEDER
TRIPPING - ONE RELAY AND A TIMER HAVING SAME NUMBER OF CONTACTSAS THE NUMBER OF FEEDERS

INDIAN ON RELAYS IS: 1885 ( Part 1885 (Part 3231-1965 3637-1966 3638-1966

STANDARDS

IX!)-1966 X)-l968 protection Electrical

Electrotechnical Electrotechnical

vocabulary vocabulary:

: Part IX Electrical
Part X

relays power system

Electrical

*
relays for power relays guide for gas-operated relays relays for ac systems for system protection

Gas-operated Application

/

3842 ( Part 3842 (Part 3842 ( Part

Application guide for electrical I )-I967 current relays for feeders and transformers

: Part I OverPart II III IV

II )-19i`G Application guide for electrical Overcurrent relays for generators and motors

relays

ac systems:

III )-I966 Application.guide for electrical relays for ac systems Phase unbalance relays mcluding negative phase sequence relays IV)-1966 Thermal Application relays guide for electrical for for electrical electrical relays relays relays relays for for for for for ac systems:

: Part
Part

_3842 (Part

3842 ( Part V )-I968 Distance 3842 (Part 3842 (Part

Application guide protection relays guide

ac systems ac systems: ac systems

: Pact V
Part VI

VI )-I972 Application Power 7 clays VII )-1972 Application Frequency relays

guide for electrical

: Part VII
Part I

4483 ( Part I )-1968 Preferred panel cut-out Fiush ntounting IDMTL relays

dimensions

electrical

relays:

BUREAU $F

WlAN

STAYDAR~

Headquutem: Manak Btmvan, 9 Bahadur Shah Za& Marg, NEW DELHI Telephones: 323 0131,323 3375,329 9402 Fax : 91 11 3234662, 91 11 3239399,91 11 3239382

110002
Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all Offrces) Telephone 8-77 00 32

Central Laboratory:

Plot No. 20/9, Site IV, Sahibabad Industrial Area, Sahibabad 201010 Regiomt Central Offices:

: M@`nakBhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 `Eastern : U14 CIT Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola, CALCUTTA 700054 : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113

32376 17 337 86 62 60 38 43 235 23 15 832 92 95

Northern : SC0 335-336, Sector 34-A CHANDIGARH 160022 Southern TWestero : Marmkalaya, E9, Behind Marol Telephone Exchange, Andheri (East), MUMBAI 4ooO93 Branch Offices: `Pushpak', Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, AHMEDABAD 380001 $ Peenya Industrial Area, 1st Stage, Bangalore-Tumkur Road BANGALORE 560058 Gangotri Complex, 5th Floor, Bhadbhada Road, T.T. Nagar, BHOPAL 462003 Plot No. q-63, Unit VI, Ganga mar, BHUBANESHWAR 751001

550 1348 839 49 55 554021 40 36 27 21 01 41 8-28 88 01 8-71 19 96 54 11 37 201083 37 29 25 21 68 76 23 89 23 52 51 71 26 23 05 32 36 35 621 17 271085 309 65 20 222 39 71

Kataikathir $uildings, 670 Avinashi Road, COtMBATORE 641037 Plot No. 43, Sector 16 A, Mathura Road. FARIDABAD 121001 Savitri Complex, 116 G.T. Road, GHAZi&BAD 201001 5315 Ward No. 29, R.G. Barua Road, 5th By-lane, GUWAHATI 781003 5-8-56C, L.N. Gupta Marg, Namfmlly Station Road, HYDERABAD 500001 E-52, Chikranjan Marg, C-Scheme, JAIPUR 302001

117/418 B, Sarvcdaya Nagar, KANPUR 2@3005 Seth Bhawan, 2nd Floor, Behind teeia Cinema, Naval Kishore Road, LUCKNOW 226001 NIT Building, Second Floor, Gokulpat Market, NAGPUR 440010 Patliputra Industrial Estate, PATNA &JO013 Institution of Engineers (India) B&ding 1332 Shivaji Nagar, PUNE 411005 T.C. No. 14/142t, University P.O. Pa&yam, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM `Sales Office is at 5 Chwringhee CALCUTTA 760072 &roach, P.O. Princep Street, 695034

TSales Office is at Novelty Chambei,

Grant Road, MUMBAI 400007

*Sales Of$ce is at `F' Bock, Unity Building, Narashimaraia Square, .. BANG&ORE 560002 .
Printed at Simco Printing Press,

Delhi,

India

