anda HAF IS 5116 : 2020 
Indian Standard 


Uerdtsft cb TANT ἔτ τῆττ Ue eraa 
SALUT — ATA BTU ATTA 
( RA Te ) 


Domestic and Commercial 
Equipment for Use with LPG — 
General Requirements 


( Fourth Revision ) 


ICS 27.060.20; 97.040.20 


© BIS 2020 


anda AM η] 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 serere TH AMT, πε fref - 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


July 2020 Price Group 9 


Domestic and Commercial Gas Burning Appliances (Pressure Type) Sectional Committee, MED 23 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Fourth revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on after the draft finalized 
by the Domestic and Commercial Gas Burning Appliances (Pressure Type) Sectional Committee had been 
approved by the Mechanical Engineering Divisional Council. 


This standard is a necessary adjunct to all the standards on gas burning appliances using liquefied petroleum gases. 
Some common features and general requirements of the appliances have been compiled in this standard to avoid 
repetition of these clauses. 


Liquefied petroleum gases are usually classified as butane, propane and butane propane mixtures. The appliances 
covered by this standard can be operated on butane, propane and butane-propane mixtures. 


This standard was first published in 1969 and subsequently revised in 1977, 1985 and 1996. The fourth revision 
of this standard has been revised to incorporate amendments issued and suggestions received from time to time. 


For ease of reference this standard has been divided into three sections as follows: 
Section 1 Construction, 
Section 2 Performance, and 
Section3 General. 
The composition of the Committee responsible for the preparation of this standard is given in Annex N. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final 
value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2: 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )'. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that the specified value in this standard. 


IS 5116 : 2020 


Indian Standard 


DOMESTIC AND COMMERCIAL 
EQUIPMENT FOR USE WITH LPG — 
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 


( Fourth Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard specifies general requirements and 
methods of test relevant to these requirements, for 
domestic and commercial equipment, for households 
and other commercial catering organizations, using 
liquefied petroleum gases at 2.942 kN/m? (30 gf/cm?) 
gas inlet pressure. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards at Annex A contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provision of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All the standards are subject 
to revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given 
in IS 6480 shall apply. 


SECTION 1 CONSTRUCTION 
4 GENERAL 


4.1 The construction of all the parts of the equipment 
shall be sound and of high standard of workmanship 
and appropriate finish. The construction shall 
ensure durability and shall comply with the safety 
requirements. 


4.2 Rivets, fastening screws, plugs, etc, shall not lead 
into gas passages, except where adequate provision has 
been made to ensure permanent gas-tight joints. 


5 MATERIALS 


5.1 Fittings and materials shall comply, where 
specified, with the relevant Indian Standards and shall 
be appropriate to the conditions arising in the part of 
the appliance in which they are used. The appliance 
shall be free from swarf, grit, and other foreign matters. 
Wherever practicable, rigid metal tubing shall be used 


for internal gas supplies integral with the appliance. 
If flexible tubing is used, it shall not be fitted on the 
outlet side of any control which is capable of cutting 
off the gas completely, except where screwed metal 
connections are fitted. The use of low pressure rubber 
or plastic tubing fitted or pushed on nozzle is not 
recommended. 


5.1.1 Plastic components which are liable to heating 
(for example, tap handles, push buttons, etc) shall be 
free of fissures, distortion, blemishes and discolouration 
and shall not show signs of ageing when tested as given 
in Annex B. 


5.2 The material used in the construction of the 
appliance or parts of the appliance shall be resistant to 
wear and deterioration occurring in the normal use. The 
burner parts shall not melt or distort when the stove 
burner is operated with flames flashed back for half an 
hour in the mixing tube. This shall be checked by the 
test detailed in Annex C. 


5.3 All copper and copper alloy parts shall pass the 
mercurous nitrate test (season cracking test) when 
tested according to the method specified in IS 2305. 


5.4 Non-metallic materials normally in contact with the 
gas shall not change in weight or volume by more than 
15 percent after being immersed in pentane or LPG for 
72 h at room temperature, when tested according to 
Annex D. 


5.5 The main body of the burner (including mixer head, 
mixing tube and burner head) shall be of substantial 
and durable construction. Metals having a melting 
point below 510°C shall not be considered acceptable 
for top burners while metals having a melting point 
below 800°C shall not be considered for oven, griller 
or auxiliary burners or any other combination thereof. 


5.6 The components of the gas taps may be made of 
the following materials. Examples of suitable materials 
specified below are for guidance: 


Alloy LM 6, 
LM 20 


Alloy LM 24 


Bodies-Alloy 4600 and Alloy 
4600A of IS 617 


Bodies (Pressure die Casting) 


IS 5116 : 2020 


Alloy DCB 1 Bodies (die castings) — DCB 1 
of IS 1264 
Alloy DCB 3 Bodies (pressure die castings) — 


DCB 2 of IS 1264 


Bodies, plugs (hot pressed) — 
Leaded brass of IS 6912 


Nuts, etc — Type I of IS 319 
Springs (phosphour bronze) — 


Alloy CZ 122 


Alloy CZ 121 
Alloy PB 102, 


PB 103 Grade I and Π of IS 7608 

Alloy En 56 Springs (stainless steel) — 

Series Grade I or IS 4454 (Part 4) 

Alloy C 106, Tubes — Grade DHP and DPA of 

C 107 IS 2501 

Alloy CZ 108 Washers — Alloy CuZn37 of 
IS 410 


5.7 Drip trays, if provided, shall be made of non- 
corrosive material or appropriately finished and treated 
to resist corrosion. 


6 DESIGN FOR MAINTENANCE 


6.1 Every part of the appliance shall be of such 
construction as to be secured against displacement, 
distortion, warping or other damage and shall be 
supported to maintain a fixed relationship and 
reasonable conditions of handling and use so as to 
ensure continued compliance with these requirements. 
Such parts not permanently secured shall be designed 
so that they cannot be incorrectly assembled and cannot 
be improperly located or misaligned in removing or 
replacing during cleaning or other servicing. 


6.2 Thermostats, orifices, burner ignition devices, 
oven and griller door springs, air shutters and other 
accessories and controls which may require cleaning, 
repair or adjustment in the field shall be readily 
accessible. 


6.3 Condensate from the products of combustion shall 
not drip from the appliance to the floor. 

6.4 Level 

An appliance when fitted according to manufacturer's 
instruction shall be in level. 

6.5 Noise 


It is desirable that the intensity of noise should be as 
low as possible whether from burners, pilot, resonance 
effects in flue, water circulation, local overheating, 
mechanical vibration or any other case. 


6.6 Handles Add Knobs 


These shall be so constructed and fitted that they do not 
work loose or break easily in normal use. 


6.7 Electrical Requirements 


Where the appliance is intended for connection to 
the mains electrical supply, the requirements given 
in 6.7.1, 6.7.2 and 6.7.3 shall be met. 


6.7.1 Components 


Electrical components shall 
appropriate Indian Standards. 


comply with the 


6.7.2 Earthing 


Appliances shall conform to the earthing requirements 
of IS 3043. 


6.7.3 Connection 


Any flexible cable connecting the appliances to the 
main electrical supply shall have a minimum useful 
length of 1.80 m. It shall be of 3 cords, and, if supplied 
for a portable appliance, shall embody strengthening 
cords as specified in IS 694. 


With a fixed appliance it shall be possible to connect 
and disconnect the electric supply with the appliance 
fixed in its working position. 


6.8 There shall be easy access to components and 
controls for maintenance and adjustment. 


6.9 The gas and water connections should preferably 
be so placed that the installation pipes can easily be 
connected without appearing at the front. 


6.9.1 It shall be possible to descale all waterways 
susceptible to the formation of scale. Wherever 
practicable, appliance shall be provided with a point 
for the measurement of gas pressure. This should 
preferably be located after all controls. 


7 WORKMANSHIP AND FINISH 


7.1 The finish of exposed parts shall be durable, easy 
to clean and not subject to excessive deterioration 
in normal use. Parts which come in contact with 
foodstuffs shall be capable of being hygienically 
cleaned. The finish shall, on visual examination, show 
no defects, such as pinholes, blisters, roughness and 
exposed areas of metal, which might give rise to unduly 
rapid deterioration in the use. The surface shall also be 
free from burrs and sharp edges, which might cause 
injury to the user with normal operation. The finished 
components shall meet relevant requirements covered 
in 7.2 to 7.4. 


7.2 Vitrous-enamelled components shall meet the 
requirements as given in Annex E. The test shall be 
carried out on a specimen measuring 40 mm Χ 75 mm 
prepared from the same base metal and enamels, as the 
components, and processed and fired along with the 
components to ensure identical conditions. 


7.2.1 A separate specimen shall be used for each test. 


7.3 The top flat surface of the body of the appliance, if 
plated, shall have a coating of minimum of 10 microns 
of nickel followed by 0.2 microns minimum of 
chromium. The coating shall be tested as per the 
requirements given in clauses 7.3.1, 7.3.2 and 7.3.3. 


7.3.1 The thickness of nickel plating shall be determined 
by BNF jet method or any other method, such as 
coulometric method as specified in IS 3203. 


7.3.2 Adhesion Test 


Cut a piece of a plated article, hold it in a vice and 
apply a coarse file to the cut edge in such a manner as to 
raise the deposit. There shall be no separation between 
the coating and the base metal and the coating shall 
continue to adhere to the base metal. 


7.3.3 Corrosion Resistance 


The plated article shall be subjected to the test for 12 h 
as covered in IS 6910. The rating shall be assigned 
using the methods described in IS 6009. 


7.4 Paints or Similar Finishes 


Surfaces finished in stoving paint or similar material 
shall conform to the requirements given in 7.4.1 
and 7.4.2. 


7.4.1 Resistance to Abrasion 


The apparatus required for this test shall be as shown in 
Fig. 1 with a 1 mm diameter steel ball fixed at the end 
of a counterpoised arm which is kept horizontal. 


Apply the apparatus to the surface under test and move 
the ball, after loading with not less than 1 500 g, at 
3-4 cm/s relative to the surface. If the indicator bulb 
lights, the surface is deemed to have been penetrated. 
For metallic paints a visual examination of the scratch 
is necessary in order to determine whether the film 
has been penetrated. The finish is deemed to have 
failed if the scratch has Jagged edges, is greater than 
] mm wide or penetrates the film. Clean the ball 
after each test and inspect frequently to verify that it is 
a 1 mm sphere. 


7.4.2 Resistance to Heating 


When the appliance is operated with LPG at its normal 
working pressure for a continuous period of 8 h, there 
shall be no appreciable change of colour of any of the 
appliance and the finish shall not become tacky or show 
other signs of deterioration. This does not apply to parts 
which come into direct contact with the flame. After the 
initial burning-off period, there shall be no detectable 
odour from the flame when the appliance is operated 
normally. 


7.5 Concealed Gas Supplies 


Concealed tubular fittings liable to corrode shall 
be protected by bituminous paint or other equally 
protective material. 


IS 5116 : 2020 


7.6 Water Supplies 


All water-carrying tubing and components shall 
be resistance to corrosion, or shall be treated with 
a corrosion resistant finish both internally and 
externally. 


7.7 Screws, Nuts, Bolts and Springs 


All springs and those screws, nuts and bolts, which are 
visible or which are to be removed for maintenance 
shall be of corrosion resistant material or treated to 
resist corrosion. 


8 GAS TAPS 


8.1 The appliance shall have at least one tap for each 
burner. 


8.2 The ‘ON’, ‘OFF’ and any fixed/ intermediate 
position of tap knob/handle shall be clearly and 
durably indicated or shall be obvious by design or 
position. This may be done by combining the rotating 
tap knob (handle) and fixed dial plate/body. The 
‘ON’, ‘OFF’ and any intermediate position may be 
permanently marked anti-clockwise on the fixed dial 
plate/body in words or proper images. The rotating 
tap knob (handle) by virtue of its design or position 
(see Fig. 2 for reference), should point the respective 
position. In case of symmetrical tap knob (handle), 
peripheral marking in a different colour or projection 
may be provided. Where it is not obvious which 
tap operates which burner, some indication shall 
be given. All taps shall close in the same direction. 
The direction of rotation of a tap knob (handle) from 
off-on-simmer shall be anticlockwise. Taps shall be 
designed so that when placed in any position and 
viewed from a distance of 3 m, will definitely indicate 
whether the valve is open or closed or in intermediate 
position. 


8.3 Where taps are fitted with adjustable stops, there 
shall be means for locking the stops in position. If 
screws are used for this purpose, they shall not lead into 
gas passages. 


8.4 Preferably all taps (excluding pilot taps) should 
lock in the ‘OFF’ position but in all cases it shall be 
impossible for any handle or tap to move accidentally, 
for example, by the weight of plugs or handles or when 
caught by clothing. If this requirement is satisfied by 
means of an automatic locking device, the tap shall be 
easy to operate with one hand. 


8.5 Taps shall be so made that in normal use and with 
reasonable application of lubricant, the gas passages do 
not become blocked (see Fig. 3). 


8.5.1 Taps shall be lubricated with a suitable grease, 
resistant to the action of the gas and capable of operating 
at the maximum temperature of 110°C. 


IS 5116 : 2020 


COUNTER 
BALANCE 


TO BE FIXED TO 
BARE METAL OF 
COMPONENT ON TEST 


SADDLE TO SLIDE 


GUIDE 
CHANNEL 


@15 INSULATING [I FREELY IN GUIDE 
WASHER LOCKNUT CHANNEL 

915 INSULATING 

BUSH 

8 3 60 3 
16 
CHUCK 11 
10 | A 
Ø1 STEEL BALL CIRCUIT DIAGRAM 
SECTION AT A-A 


SOLDERED TO SMALL 
LENGTH OF TUBE 


MINIMUM STROKE OF 
1mm BALL 65mm 


R12.5 


55 70 20 


All dimensions in millimeters. 


Fic. 1 PAINT SCRATCH TEST APPARATUS 


IS 5116 : 2020 


TURNING AXIS 


og 


©- O- 


a) Examples of Not Acceptable Designs 


(b) Examples of Acceptable Knob/Handle Designs 


BUILT-IN 
LIGHTER 


GAS LEVER 
(c) MOVING KNOB 


Fic. 2 TypicAL Types or TAP ΚΝΟΒ / HANDLES 


8.6 Each taper plug tap shall be spring-loaded to 
maintain a gas-tight fit. Helical springs fitted in taps 
and valves shall have flattened ends, which shall be 
rounded before fitting. 


8.7 Taper plug taps shall have dimensional allowances 
when in ‘OFF’ position given in Fig. 4. 


8.8 All controls or taps shall be easy to operate at all 
temperatures normally attained in use. 


8.9 Screws, nuts, etc, which regulate the tension of taps 
valve or springs, shall not loosen in operation of the 
appliance. It shall not be possible to cause a leak during 
normal manual operation of tap. 


8.10 Screw-down valves shall be so designed that it is 
impossible to withdraw completely the valve stem in 
the normal operation of the tap. 


8.11 Taps having an ‘OFF’ position shall have positive 
stops at the ‘OFF’ and simmer position except that 
special purpose taps (for appliance incorporating 
auto or self ignition device), for example, taps with 
simmering position in between ‘OFF’ and ‘ON’ may 
have a movement beyond the simmer position with a 
positive stop. 


8.11.1 Simmer flame shall be obtained by fixed simmer 
orifice. 


IS 5116 : 2020 


MAIN GAS PASSAGE 
SIMMER HOLE 


TAPER PLUG 


--- GAS INLET 


EXTRA GREASE 
COLLECTING GROOVE 


ACCEPTABLE 


NOT ACCEPTABLE NOT ACCEPTABLE 
Fic. 3 SIMMER GAs-way IN Tars (AXIAL FLow) 


B = 
7 i PLUG | 
Lota 


SA AV AV AV AV AV AV. 


E 


j 
4 
Γ 
DLL 


σα 
rem f H 
SPINDLE f 7 D 
J HOUSING Í 
_ σι SECTION 


A= TOP TAKE UP 1.1 MIN 
B = TOP RIDGE FORMATION ALLOWANCE 0.4 MIN 
C = BEARING SURFACE ABOVE GAS-WAY 3.0 MIN 


D = CIRCUMFERENTIAL SEAL 2.80 MIN 


x 


A, = BOTTOM TAKE UP 1.2 MIN 
B, = BOTTOM RIDGE FORMATION ALLOWANCE 0.4 MIN 
C, = BEARING SURFACE BELOW GAS-WAY 3.0 MIN 


Fic. 4 DETAILS OF GAS Cock ALLOWANCES 


6 


8.12 The niting means adopted shall be sufficiently 
robust to withstand normal use without distortion or 
damage. 


9 INJECTOR JETS 


9.1 The injector jets shall be fixed calibrated type and it 
shall not be possible to loosen them without the use of 
tools. The dimensions of the injector jet shall conform 
to the following requirements: 


Across flats 6 mm, Minimum 


Projection from the face of 
mounting 


Threads 


6 mm, Minimum 


MS5orIBA 


9.1.1 Injector jet shall be made of metal, with or 
without ceramic tip. The melting point of the metal 
shall not be less than 650?C. 


9.2 The size of the jet in litres per hour of flow of LPG 
at STP conditions shall be impressed upon it. 


10 BURNERS 


10.1 The construction of the burners and the assembly 
shall allow their dismantling from the supports easily 
with or without the use of tools (see Fig. 5 for guidance). 


10.2 The burner supports shall be rigid and shall be 
fixed in their place. Their construction shall ensure the 
stability of the burners and shall prevent their undue 
movement in a horizontal plane. 


10.3 The tightness of the joints in the burner assembly 
shall not depend upon adhesives or any kind of packing. 


10.4 If primary air regulators are used, they shall be 
so designed that they are not easily maladjusted by the 
user and the construction shall be such that primary 
air adjustment can be made with the burner in place 
(see Fig.6). 


BURNER HEAD 


MIXING TUBE 


IS 5116 : 2020 


10.5 If the burner is made and assembled in two or 
more parts they shall be so designed to provide proper 
self-locating arrangement so that they are always 
re-assembled to its original design preventing any 
maladjustment in their assembly. This shall also be 
applicable for primary air regulators. 


11 DRAUGHT DIVERTER 


Where an appliance is to be, ventilated to outside air. 
A draught diverter shall be fitted and its resistance 
to draught shall be tested by the method given in 
Annex F. The appliance shall meet the following 
requirements: 


a) Combustion shall comply with 22, and 


b) Pilots shall remain stable and shall not be 
extinguished and flame failure devices shall 
continue to function normally. 


12 FLUE OUTLET 


12.1 Enclosed Burner 


An appliance in which the burner is enclosed in a 
chamber, for example, a hot-food cabinet, shall be 
provided with a designed flue outlet. 


12.2 Obstruction 

The flue shall be protected either by design or position 
against inadvertent obstruction. 

12.3 Wall Staining 


The design and the position of the flue outlet shall be 
such that staining of the wall and ceiling of the room is 
minimized. 


13 PILOTS 


13.1 All pilot flames and weep terminals shall be 
protected as far as possible by design and position 
against diminution or extinction, for example, by 
draught, by products of combustion, by over-heating, 


INJECTOR 
JET 


PRIMARY AIR OPENING 


Fic. 5 TYPICAL BURNER ASSEMBLY 


IS 5116 : 2020 


1 7 v 
$ LEA 3 
B D 
E 
A 
D 
Ip 
(2, 
c B E 
A = INJECTOR JET 
B = THROAT 
C = AERATION CONTROL 
D = LOCKING DEVICE 
E = MIXING TUBE 
Fic. 6 PRIMARY AIR CONTROLS 
by condensation, by corrosion, or by matters falling 14 FLAME FAILURE DEVICE 


from above. 


13.2 Ignition of the main burner from the pilot flame 
shall be smooth and no pilot flame shall lift, roar, or 
lengthen sufficiently to cause discolouration on any 
external surface, soot deposition or smell at working 
pressure between 2.452 and 3.432 kN/m? (25 and 
35 gf/cm?). 


14.1 Requirements for flame failure device shall be as 
under: 


a) Shall prevent gas from being supplied to the 
main burner until the pilot flame, if provided, is 
established; 


b) Shall, after flame failure, stop all gas flow to the 
main burner; 


c) Shall be actuated only by a pilot flame, if provided, 
to ignite the main burner without failure or delay; 


d) Shall open and close in times not exceeding the 
following limits: 


Operation Time 
—_ oF 

Manually Non-manually 
Operated, Operated, 
seconds seconds 

Operating from 40 90 

cold 

Closing from 75 90 

the fully heated 

condition 


e) Shall be free from any weakness in design which 
will give rise to failure to danger; and 


f) Shall be protected against adjustment by 


unauthorized persons. 


14.2 The requirements of flame failure device shall be 
checked by the method given in Annex G. 


15 GAS THERMOSTATS 


15.1 Valve Cleaning 


The thermostat should preferably be so designed that 
the valve can be withdrawn from the body and, after 
cleaning replaced without alteration of the temperature 
calibration. If it is so designed, this operation shall be 
possible without removing the complete thermostat 
from the appliance. 


15.2 Bypass 


Any bypass orifice should either be readily accessible 
for cleaning or suitably protected against blockage. 
Thermostats for use with relay controls shall have the 
bypass, if any, blocked. 


15.3 Calibration Marking 

The settings shall be indicated by easily distinguishable 
durable markings. 

15.4 Sealing 

Means shall be provided to avoid interference with the 
calibration. 

15.5 Calibration 


While operating the oven burner, the temperature shall 
be maintained to the manufacturers calibration within 
+10°C. This requirement shall be tested by the method 
given in Annex H. 


15.6 Backlash 


Except when the appliance is fitted with a fixed-setting 
thermostat, the change in temperature due to backlash 
shall not exceed 10°C when tested by the method given 


IS 5116 : 2020 


in Annex H. 


16 GAS SOUNDNESS 


All gas carrying parts of the appliance shall be sound and 
these parts when connected, to form a complete assembly 
shall also be sound against any gas leakage. The complete 
assembly shall be checked at 14.71 kN/m? (approx 
150 gf/cm’). The details of test are given in Annex J. 


17 WATER SOUNDNESS 


17.1 Components 


Tubing, fittings, water taps, ball valves and cylinders 
shall comply for soundness with relevant Indian 
Standards. 


17.2 Appliances 


Manufacturers shall state whether the appliance is 
intended for connection to a cistern or main water 
supply, in the former case they shall also state the 
maximum static head to which the appliance should 
be subjected, together with the recommended range of 
working heads. Appliances shall not leak or show any 
signs of distortion at a water pressure 50 percent greater 
than recommended maximum head and appliance 
intended to withstand the full water pressure, that is, 
with outlet water control, shall not leak or show any 
sign of damage or distortion at a static pressure of water 
of 205 MN/n (21 kgf/cm’) when tested by the method 
given in Annex K, unless there is a water surface open 
to atmosphere. 


17.2.1 All appliances using pressure containers 
whatever pressure their component parts can withstand 
shall be able to withstand a vacuum of 49 kN/m? 
(0.5 kgf/cm’) without permanent deformation taking 
place, unless a safety device is fitted which prevent any 
vacuum being formed. 


17.2.2 All appliance without a water surface open to 
atmospheric pressure shall be fitted with: 


a) a pressure relief valve, and 


b) a non-return valve on the water inlet. 


17.2.2.1 The pressure relief valve when provided shall 
be so constructed that the relieving pressure cannot 
exceed 60 percent of the hydrostatic test pressure of 
the storage vessel. The relieving pressure shall be 
plainly and permanently marked on the relief valve 
itself. 


17.3 Connections 


Screwed water inlet and outlet connection shall have 
either an IS 554 taper external thread or an internal 
thread which is suitable for direct connections to an 
IS 554 taper external thread. 


Further following type of connections are also 
acceptable. 


IS 5116 : 2020 


Suitable for direct connection to copper tubes to 
IS 2501 and mild steel tubes to IS 1239 (Part 1) and 
suitable for screwing to IS 554 pipe threads medium 
and heavy. 


18 GAS INLET CONNECTIONS 


18.1 Nozzles shall be made from brass, zinc, mild steel 
or aluminum alloys. 


18.2 Where nozzles for flexible tubing are fitted, they 
shall be so positioned as to facilitate fitting of the tubing 
and also to prevent heating of the tubing to more than 
60°C. Shape of nozzles is given in Fig 7. 


18.3 Screwed gas inlet and outlet connections shall 
have threads specified in 17.3. 


18.4 The pipe/tube used for main gas rail (other than 
the threaded portion) shall be of mild steel. The wall 
thickness of main gas rail other than the threaded 
portion shall not be less than 1.6 mm. The external 
surface of the gas rail shall be treated to resist corrosion. 
Any other connection made from the main gas rail shall 
be only metallic. 


SECTION 2 PERFORMANCE 
19 GENERAL CONDITIONS OF TEST 


19.1 During the tests the initial adjustment of appliance 
shall not be altered unless specifically required in the 
test procedure. The appliance shall be adjusted and 
operated in accordance with the instructions given 
on or issued with the appliance. Before any tests are 
made the appliance shall be operated at its full working 
temperature for a sufficient period to remove any 
temporary protective coating, which might interfere 
with observations. The gas connections and system up 


to and including the burners shall be examined for leaks 
before and after test. The performance test results shall 
not be valid unless the system is sound. The appliance 
shall be at room temperature at the start of each test 
unless otherwise stated. 


19.2 The room in which tests are conducted shall 
be adequately ventilated but free from perceptible 
draughts. The gas/air shall be supplied to the appliance 
through a control valve, an adjustable pressure 
regulator and an accurate meter with a pressure gauge 
on its inlet. A pressure gauge shall be fitted to the inlet 
of the appliance and additional water manometer to 
any pressure test points on the appliance. The gas/air 
pressure shall be measured correct to 2.5 mm water 
gauge at the inlet to the appliance and controlled so that 
any variation does not exceed 2.5 mm water gauge. 


19.3 Except where otherwise stated, the appliance 
shall satisfy the performance requirements using LPG. 
Wherever the combustion characteristics of burners 
are concerned, each burner shall be tested separately 
and in all possible combinations with other burners. 
This procedure shall be used for appliance with up 
to four burners. For appliance with larger number of 
burners, the test procedure becomes impossibly long 
and discretion shall be exercised to eliminate tests 
on combinations of widely separated and which are 
fitted in appliance of open construction are unlikely to 
interfere with the combustion of each other. 


20 GAS CONSUMPTION 


20.1 Each burner assembly under separate ‘ON/OFF 
control shall be within + 8 percent of the manufacturer’s 
declared gas consumption in g/h or 1/h or heat input 
in kcal/h at 2.942 kN/m? (30 gf/cm? gas inlet pressure 
when measured according to clause 20.4. 


TWO EQUALLY SPACED (APPROX.) 
EXPANDED AREAS OF APPROX. 
WIDTH 1.5 AND WITH ROUNDED 
CORNERS 


ne min. 


Tolerance on all dimensions in + 0.25 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


Fic. 7 ΝΟΖΖΙΕ FOR 6.4 mm ΒΟΕΕ TUBING 


10 


20.2 Appliances having more than one burner, shall 
give within ^5, percent of the declared heat input at the 
standard pressure with all the taps turned on. 


20.3 The gas consumption of the pilot alone shall 
not exceed 5 1/1 at a gas inlet pressure of 2.942 kN/m? 
(30 gf/cm?). 


20.4 The flow through the injector jet at 30 gf/cm? shall 
be measured with a wet gas meter using compressed 
air (free from oil/impurities) and converted the same 
at STP (27?C and 760 mm Hg). Thereafter using 0.75 
as multiplying factor, the value of air flow at STP so 
obtained to be converted to flow of LPG at STP. 


NOTE — For the above test, one litre of LPG = 2.46 g. 


20.5 The temperature of the room during the test shall 
be between 25?C and 30?C. 


21 IGNITION AND FLAME STABILITY 


21.1 There shall be some means of ignition from an 
easily accessible position. In addition it shall be 
possible to light the pilot (or burner in the absence of a 
pilot) directly with a match. It shall be possible to see 
the main burner flames either directly or by reflection 
when the burner has been lit. The ignition pilot flame 
shall be clearly visible at the time of lighting, unless 
it is protected by a safety device, but not necessarily 
thereafter, although it is desirable that the pilot flame 
should be visible at all times whether protected by a 
safety device or not. The pilot shall be capable of 
igniting the main burner smoothly over the range of 
pressures from standard underload to overload. The 
smoothness of ignition of the burner shall be judged 
when all the ports or jets have ignited. 


21.1.1 Where an appliance is fitted with a pilot not 
protected by a flame failure device, the pilot and main 
taps shall be designed so that it shall not be possible to 
turn the main gas taps ‘ON’ with the pilot tap ‘OFF’ 
nor shall it be possible to turn the pilot tap ‘OFF’ with 
the main gas tap turned *ON'. Open boiling burner and 
grill pilot taps are exempted from this requirement. It is 
desirable that any burner with a rated output in excess 
of 5 040 kcal/h should be protected by a flame failure 
device. 


21.2 Burner flames shall carry across to all ports or Jets 
on the same burner under normal working condition 
from full gas rate down to 75 percent of full gas rate 
at gas inlet pressure from 2.452 to 3.432 kN/m? (25 to 
35 gf/cm?). 


21.3 It shall be possible to operate appliance with 
taps fully open at gas inlet pressure from 2.452 to 
3.432 kN/m’? (25 to 35 gf/cm? without the flame either 
extinguishing blowing off or striking back and without 
the formation of soot. 


1 


IS 5116 : 2020 


21.4 Pilot flames shall be stable without lifting or 
soot deposition at gas inlet pressure from 2.452 to 
3.432 kN/m’ (25 to 35 gf/cm?). 


21.5 The flxed minimum pilot rate shall be sufficient to 
relight the main burner at 2.452 kN/m? (25 gf/cm?) gas 
inlet pressure. 


21.6 Thermostats 


Flame stability at bypass or maintenance rate shall 
meet the requirements given in 21.6.1, 21.6.2 
and 21.6.3. 


21.6.1 Variable Setting Thermostat 


When tested by the method given in Annex L, the 
flames shall be stable at all rates from normal maximum 
gas rate down to and including bypass rate when the 
appliance door is quickly opened and closed. The 
flames shall also remain stable when the thermostat 
head is rotated rapidly in both clockwise and anti- 
clockwise directions. 


21.6.2 Fixed Setting Thermostat 


When tested by the method given in Annex L, the flame 
shall not be permanently extinguished or flash back at 
maintenance rate after the doors of the appliance are 
opened or closed sharply 


21.6.3 Protection of Rods and Phials 


Thermostat rods and phials shall be so positioned 
as to be protected from damage in normal use of the 
appliance. 


22 COMBUSTION 


On no account the carbon monoxide/ carbon dioxide 
ratio of exhaust gases, of any appliance operating 
at any consumption at which the flame is stable at 
gas inlet pressure from 2.452 to 3.432 kN/m? (25 to 
35 gf/cm?) shall exceed 0.02. The carbon monoxide and 
carbon dioxide contents of the products of combustion 
shall be determined by the methods capable of accuracy 
of 0.001 percent and 0.5 percent, respectively of the 
volume of the sample. This test need not be performed 
on burners with a gas rate of less than 20 l/h at 
2.942 kN/m? (30 gf/cm?) gas inlet pressure. 


23 FIRE HAZARD AND 
TEMPERATURES 


LIMITING 


23.1 Floor Wall and Ceiling Temperatures 


Appliances installed on or near walls and floor as 
intended for normal use shall not give rise in operation 
to wall, floor or ceiling temperature in excess of 65°C 
above the room temperature after 2 h operation. This 
requirement shall be tested by the method given in 
Annex M. 


IS 5116 : 2020 


23.2 Surface Temperatures 


When operated as described in 23.1 no portion of the 
surface of the appliance, other than a working surface, 
likely to be accidently touched shall exceed 120°C 
(working surfaces include pan supports, oven flue 
outlets, grill covers and plate racks). 


23.2.1 Surfaces which is normal use have to be touched 
for short periods (for example, tap handles), shall not 
have a temperature exceeding 60°C. 


23.2.2 The temperature of synthetic rubber diaphragm 
in gas carrying components shall not exceed 60°C. 


SECTION 3 GENERAL 


24 INSTRUCTIONS 


Each appliance shall be accompanied by an instructions 
sheet, card or leaflet dealing with the following: 


a) Brief instructions for installation, regulation 
and maintenance of the appliance. This includes 
setting of flue and terminal, if required; 


12 


b) For use with LPG at 2.942 kN/m? (30 gf/cm?); 
c) Total gas consumption in g/h (1/h) (with LPG): 
d) Any special instruction for use of the appliance; 


e) Where cooking ranges with high level grills or 
independent wall fixing grills are supplied, the 
minimum clearance allowable between the top of 
the grill and ceiling or overhead shelf from the fire 
hazard point of view; 


f) If threaded connections are provided on gas and 
water inlets and outlet, size of thread; and 


g) Rating of the burners in kcal/h (with LPG). 
25 PACKING 


25.1 The method for packing shall be such as to 
minimize the damage to the appliance in transit. If 
governors or relay controls are unavoidably supplied 
loose, moving parts shall be clamped with the valve 
in the open position and the inlet and outlet shall be 


plugged. 


25.1.1 All open pipe ends and connection openings 
shall be suitably plugged, and sealed to prevent the 
entry of extraneous matter. 


319: 


410: 


554: 


617: 


694 


1239 (Part 1): 


1977 


1999 


1994 


: 2010 


2004 


1264 : 1997 


2305 : 1988 


B-1 METHOD 


B-1.1 The test shall be made in a dry products free 
heating cabinet. Where the plastics is integral with, 
pushed on or secured to another component, the 
stressed condition shall either be simulated or, where 
practicable, the plastics part shall be assembled to the 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 2 ) 


IS 5116 : 2020 


LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 


Title 
Free cutting brass bars, rods and 
section — Specification (fifth 
revision) 


Specification for cold rolled brass 
sheet, strip and foil (third revision) 


Pipe threads where pressure — 
Tight joints are made on the 
threads — Dimensions, tolerances 
and designation (fourth revision) 


Cast aluminum and its alloys — 
Ingots and castings for general 
engineering purposes 
Specification (third revision) 
Polyvinyl | chloride insulated 
unsheathed and sheathed cables/ 
cords with rigid and flexible 
conductor for rated voltages up to 
and including 450/750 V (fourth 
revision) 

Steel tubes, tubulars and 
other wrought steel fittings — 
Specification: Part 1 steel tubes 
(sixth revision) 


Brass gravity die castings 
Specification (fourth revision) 


Method for mercurous nitrate test 
for copper and copper alloys (first 
revision) 


No. 


2501 : 1995 


3043 : 2018 


3203 : 1982 


4454 (Part 4) : 
2001 


6009 : 1970 


6480 : 1988 


6910 : 1985 


6912 : 2005 


7608 : 1987 


ANNEX B 
( Clause 5.1.1 ) 


Title 


Solid drawn copper tubes for 
general engineering purposes — 
Specification (third revision) 
Code of practice for 
(second revision) 


Methods of testing local thickness 
of electroplated coatings (first 
revision) 


earthing 


Steel wires for mechanical springs: 
Part 4 stainless steel wire (second 
revision) 


Method for evaluation of results of 
accelerated corrosion test 


Glossary of terms relating to 
domestic and commercial gas 
burning appliances (first revision) 


Method of testing corrosion 
resistance of electroplated and 
anodized aluminum coatings by 
acetic acid salt spray test (first 
revision) 


Copper and copper alloys forging 
stock and forging — Specification 
(second revision) 


Specification for phosphor bronze 
wire for general engineering 
purposes (first revision) 


METHOD OF TEST FOR PLASTICS COMPONENTS 


mating component. 


13 


B-1.2 Visually inspect the component to establish its 
initial condition. Place the stressed component in the 
cabinet for a continuous period of 48 h at a temperature 
of 60°C, after which inspect it again. 


B-1.3 If during the final examination it is observed that 
the plastics part has sustained any fissures. Distortion, 
blemishes or discolouration it shall be deemed to have 


failed. 


IS 5116 : 2020 


ANNEX C 
( Clause 5.2 ) 


METHOD OF FLASH-BACK TEST FOR MATERIALS OF BURNERS 


C-1 PROCEDURE 


Set up the appliance under examination to operate as 
far as possible in the manner expected in normal use, 
attention being paid to the manufacturer’s instructions. 
Connect to the gas supply at a pressure between 2.452 
to 3.432 kN/m’ (25 to 35 gf/cm’). Ignite each burner in 
turn and maintain with the flames in the mixing tube. 


The gas rate chosen for this may not necessarily be 
the maximum gas rate that can be accommodated in 
the mixing tube but the rate most likely to cause flash- 
back and which may cause melting or distortion of the 
burner. Maintain the burner with burner top in normal 
position for half an hour in the flashback condition, and 
subsequently examine for any distortion or melting. 


ANNEX D 
( Clause 5.4 ) 


METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF SWELLING OF MATERIALS 


D-1 PROCEDURE 


Weigh a piece of material under examination in air and 
then in water; and calculate the volume. Thereafter, 
immerse in pentane for 72 h at room temperature. In 
case liquid pentane is not available, immerse the piece 
in LPG in a sealed container capable of withstanding 
the vapour pressure of LPG to be expected. After 72 
h. withdraw the sample and allow to weather in air for 
5 min and reweigh in air and water for estimation of 
volume. In case of loss of weight, care shall be taken 


not to confuse it with the removal of small bits of 
grease, which may have been present in the sample 
under test. If this is suspected, perform the test on two 
samples, wash one of them for a few minutes in liquid 
pentane before commencing the test. If deterioration 
in the properties of the compound are suspected as a 
result of loss of weight, then obtain the whole of the 
component, such as diaphragm or O-ring and subject to 
the test as described above reassembled in the appliance 
and tested for operation in the usual way. 


ANNEX E 
( Clause 7.2 ) 


TESTS APPROPIRATE TO VITROUS ENAMELLED COMPONENTS 


E-1 All enamelled components shall pass the tests 
given in E-1.1 and E-1.2. 
E-1.1 Citric Acid Spot Test 


The enamelled surface shall pass the following 
requirements when tested as per the following 
procedure: 


E-1.1.1 Apparatus — Dropper bottle or medicine 
dropper. 


E-1.1.1.1 Watch glass — 25 mm in diameter with flre- 
polished edge. 


E-1.1.1.2 Towel — Made of soft cotton. 


14 


E-1.1.2 Reagents 


E-1.1.2.1 Citric acid solution — Dissolve 10 g of 
anhydrous citric acid crystals (H,C,H Ο,) in 100 ml 
of water. Solution shall be prepared not more than 48 h 
prior to use. 


E-1.1.2.2 Cleaner solution — Dissolve 10 g of 
trisodium phosphate (Na,PO,) in one litre of tap water. 


E-1.1.3 Procedure 


Clean the test specimen of all adhering dirt and grease 
by means of acetone. Thoroughly wash the area to be 
tested using a soft cotton towel moistured with a warm 
one percent solution of trisodium phosphate. Rinse 


in warm running tap water and dry with a soft towel 
by blotting. Store the specimen at a temperature of 
26 + 1°C for a time sufficient to bring it within this 
range of temperature prior to and during the test. 


NOTE — If, when rinsing, water gathers in drops on the 
surface, repeat washing treatment until water spreads 
evenly. 


Select areas on the specimen that remain horizontal 
or nearly horizontal in service. Place the specimen 
in a position such that flat area at least 38.1 mm in 
diameter is horizontal with the specimen and the 
citric acid solution at 26 + 1°C, place several drops 
of the solution on the test area to form a pool, and 
immediately cover with a clean watch glass in 
inverted position. Use a quantity of solution that is 
Just sufficient to fill the inverted watch glass except 
for a small air bubble (3 to 6 drops are usually 
required depending upon the curvature of the watch 
glass). After 15 min of treatment, remove the watch 
glass and immediately rinse the spot of solution from 


EXTENSION 


STANDARD GUIDE 
TUBE CLAMPS 


ELEVATION 
SCREW 


SLIOING CLAMP, 


SUPPORT ROO 


TUBE 


GUIDE TUBE CLAMP 
EXTENSION ARMS 


SLIDING CLAMP 
SUPPORT STOP 


LOWERING AND RAISING FINE 
ADJUSTMENT SETTER 


IS 5116 : 2020 


the surface. Dry the specimen with a dry, clean, soft 
cotton towel by blotting (not by rubbing). 


Check the test specimen within 2 h after exposure to the 
test solution. Draw 2 or more approximately parallel 
lines extending across the treated area by using the flat 
point of conventional graphite drafting pencil of degree 
3B held in a normal writing position and applied with 
firm pressure. Now rub the marks with a clean, soft, 
cotton towel which have been dipped in water and 
wrung to expel and excess water. Do not use soap, 
abrasive or similar cleaning material. The pencil mark 
shall be completely removed from treated area. 


E-1.2 Impact Resistance Test 


The enamelled surface shall be examined for any 
signs of chipping when tested as per the following 
procedure: 


E-1.2.1 Apparatus — The apparatus shall conform to 
Fig. 8. 


GUIDE TUBE DETAIL 


SLIOING CLAMP 


Fic. 8 Impact Test MACHINE 


15 


IS 5116 : 2020 


E-1.2.2 Procedure 


Place the test specimen on the base of the apparatus and 
centre approximately. Then clamp the specimen firmly 
into position with the clamps. Now place the falling 
weight, consisting of aluminium ball of 20 + 1 mm in 
diameter weighing 10 g minimum on the release pin 
through the set of perforation in the guide tube, so that 
height of the impact is 91 cm above the test specimen. 
Begin the test by pulling the release pin which allow 
the falling weight to strike at the centre of specimen. 
After the test there should not be any chipping. 


E-2 THERMAL SHOCK RESISTANCE TEST 


E-2.1 Components on which water may spill in normal 
use shall be tested for thermal shock resistance. 


E-2.2 The enamelled surface shall be examined for any 
signs of flaking-off or creasing after undergoing cycles 
of test when tested as per the following procedure. 


E-2.3 Procedure 


Subject the tests specimen to radiant heat, so as to 
reach sturdy temperature of 185 to 195°C in about 
10 min in an oven. Remove the specimen within 5 s and 


quench the surface with 1 000 ml of water at 15 to 20°C 
directed from an aspirator or other container through 
a 5 mm diameter tube, the end of tube being 150 mm 
above the centre of the heated portion of the tests 
specimen and the flow rate being adjusted to 10 ml/s 
(see Note). Dry the specimen, replace the same in 
position under the radiant heat source and repeat the 
procedure until 6 cycles have been completed. The 
specimen shall not show any sign of flaking off or 
creasing. 


NOTE — It is convenient to mark the test area to ensure that 
water for quenching is correctly applied. 


E-3 Pan supports, burner caps and burner baffles shall 
be tested by the following procedure. 


E-3.1 Procedure 


Heat the components place in position by lighting 
the burner in full on position with flat bottom pan 
containing water placed on the pan supports, for half an 
hour. Extinguish the burner and allow the component 
to cool to atmospheric temperature. Repeat the heating 
and cooling treatment twice. At the end of the test, 
the component shall not show any signs of cracking, 
flacking and blistering. 


ANNEX F 
( Clause 11 ) 


METHOD FOR TESTING REISISTANCE TO DRAUGHT 


F-1 PROCEDURE 


Install the appliance as it would in practice be installed 
and connect the draught diverter, by trunking of the 
same nominal size at the outlet, to a blower or to 
some other as the outlet, to a blower or to some other 


means of producing up-draught and down-draught. 
The trunking connected to the draught diverter shall be 
straight for a length not less than 10 diameters. Subject 
the appliance to up-draught and down-draught of upto 
9 m/s and examine the performance of the appliance 
over this range of velocities. 


ANNEX G 
( Clause 14.2 ) 


METHOD FOR TEST FOR FLAME FAILURE DEVICE 


G-1 PROCEDURE 


G-1.1 Opening 


With the appliance cold and the main gas turned off, 
turn on and ignite the pilot jet. If provided. Turn on the 
main burner tap or taps and water taps, if necessary. 


Note the time required from ignition of the pilot for the 
gas in the main burner to ignite. 


G-1.2 Closing and General Soundness 


Allow the device to attain equilibrium temperature 
with the appliance regulated to the manufacturer’s 


instructions. Then turn off all the gas tap. Turn on the 
gas momentarily at intervals of 10 s. When the gas 
pressure at the burner is zero with the gas tap turned 
on, the device shall be deemed to have closed. After 
any unburnt gas has cleared, repeat the test, but this 
time keeping the gas tap turned off 100 s. Apply a light 


IS 5116 : 2020 


closely to a port or jet of the burner and turn the gas on. 
There shall not emerge from the burner jets or ports or 
any part of the device enough gas to be ignited and the 
total gas leakage shall not exceed 1.5 1/1 at the standard 
pressure using LPG. 


ANNEX H 
( Clauses 15.5 and 15.6 ) 


METHOD FOR TESTING PERFORMANCE OF THERMOSTAT 


H-1 PROCEDURE 


H-1.1 Calibration 


Take the temperature at the fixed setting or, in the case 
of a variable thermostat, at a convenient number of dial 
settings, commencing at the lowest and proceeding 
successively to higher settings. At each setting turn 
the dial beyond the required setting and then back 
so that the setting is approached from a higher one. 
The temperature is deemed steady when the average 
temperature does not vary by more than 10°C during 
two successive periods of 15 min each. 


H-1.2 Backlash 


To determine the effect of backlash when reversing 
the rotation of the dial of the thermostat knob, select 
settings at the bottom, middle and top of the normal 
working range and at each of these settings, after 
equilibrium conditions have been established and 
recorded, turn the thermostat dial several settings 
down and then up to the original setting. Allow 
equilibrium conditions to become established and 
record as before. 


ANNEX J 
( Clause 16 ) 


METHOD FOR TEST FOR GAS SOUNDNESS 


J-1 PROCEDURE 


J-1.1 The appliance shall be tested for gas soundness 
by the following method: 


Subject the appliance to be tested to an air supply at a 
pressure of 150 gf/cm? with the bubble leak indicator 
(see Fig. 9) in the air supply line. Apply this pressure 
with all the taps of the appliance closed and examine 
the bubble indicator for the appearance of bubbles. The 
interval between successive bubbles passing through 
it shall not be less than 10 s. Repeat the test with all 
the jets of the appliance sealed and all the taps open. 
Repeat the two tests after the taps have been turned 
‘ON’ and ‘OFF’ ten times. 


17 


J-1.2 The method given below shall be used to locate 
the point of leakage: 


Immerse the appliance to be tested or the part through 
which the gas flows assembled in working condition, in 
a water bath at room temperature. Then connect it to an 
air supply at a pressure of 150 gf/cm? for a minimum 
period of 10 s with all the taps of the appliance closed 
and the appliance or the tested parts shall be examined 
for leakage of air. 


The test shall be repeated with all the jets sealed and 
all the taps closed. The interval between successive 
bubbles passing through it sealed shall not be less 
than 10 s. 


IS 5116 : 2020 


INLE 


To 
APPLIANCE 


SECTION XX 


Fic. 9 BuBBLE LEAK INDICATOR 


ANNEX K 
( Clause 17.2 ) 


METHOD FOR TEST FOR WATER SOUNDNESS 


K-1 APPARATUS 


A suitable apparatus comprises a hand operated 
hydraulic pump, having fitted to its outlet a stop valve 
followed by a pressure gauge (see Fig. 10). 


K-2 PROCEDURE 


Connect the appliance to be tested to the hydraulic 
pump as indicated in Fig. 10. For appliances with 
outlet control expel air from the circuit by operating 
the pump with the appliance outlet open. When all the 
air is expelled close the appliance outlet and raise the 


pressure in the system to the test figure. For appliances 
with broken feed (for example, ball valve) expel air from 
the system by operating the pump and fill the cistern. 
When the ball test figure. In both cases then close the 
stop valve at the outlet of the pump. The appliance shall 
be considered sound if the test pressure is maintained 
for a period of 5 min. Appliances or parts intended to 
withstand only the head of water thy contain (that 1s, 
boiling pans, appliances with broken feed, etc) shall be 
sound when completely filled with water at maximum 
working temperature. 


STOP VALVE 


HYORAULIC PUMP 


IS 5116 : 2020 


STOP VALVE 
APPLIANCE 


APPLIANCE WITH OUILET CONTROL 


HYDRAULIC PUMP 


APPLIANCE WIIH 


APPLIANCE 


BROKEN FEED 


Fic. 10 APPARATUS FOR WATER PRESSURE TEST 


ANNEX L 
( Clause 21.6.1 and 21.6.2 ) 


METHOD FOR TEST FOR FLAME STABILITY AT BYPAS OR MAINTENANCE RATE 


L-1 METHOD 


L-1.1 Light the oven burner and adjust the thermostat 
to the highest setting, with the gas pressure at the inlet 
to the appliance set to 2.942 kN/m? (30 gf/cm?). When 
the appliance has heated up and the thermostat has 
cut down the gas rate, turn the thermostat down to its 
lowest setting and note the gas rate. Check that this gas 
rate is the bypass rate of the thermostat (or relay valve, 


19 


if fitted). Inspect the flames to confirm that they have 
remained alight and have not lit back. 


L-1.2 Examine the stability of the flames at bypass rate 
when any door on the appliance is quickly opened and 
closed. This test may be conveniently carried out when 
the appliance is already heated at one of the higher 
thermostat settings. 


IS 5116 : 2020 


ANNEX M 
( Clause 23.1 ) 


METHOD FOR MEASUREMENT OF FLOOR, WALL AND CEILING TEMPERATURES 


M-1 APPARATUS 


M-1.1 The apparatus shall consist of a wooden floor 
with side and back walls (see Fig. 11). The floor shall 
be approximately 5 cm thick and consist of a 2.5 cm 
layer of pine below a 2.5 cm layer of any timber with 
natural colour nearing white or off-white finished 
in clear varnish with a thickness of building paper 
between them. Both the side and back walls shall be 
of 2.5 cm pine and painted dull black. The apparatus 
shall be large enough to accommodate almost any 
appliance, and the side wall shall be detachable so that 
measurement can be made if necessary against both 
sides of the appliance. 


M-1.2 Thermocouples shall be embedded in each panel 
at 15 cm intervals and in such a way that the Junctions 
are fixed in position 2 mm from the wood surface. 
They shall be conveniently inserted in holes of 8 mm 
diameter with a thermojunction bent at a right angle 
and sealed in position with insulating cement. It shall 
be necessary to arrange for successive readings to be 
made from each thermojunction, a convenient method 
of doing this is to connect all terminals of one sign to a 
single terminal and each terminal of the opposite sign 
to a separate terminal of a switchboard. Temperature 
shall be measured using these thermojunctions. 


M-2 PROCEDURE 


M-2.1 Before commencing tests with a new apparatus, 
dry it out thoroughly either by previous test or by 
heating it for 24 h with an appliance in position and 
operating at maximum gas rate in order to dry out the 


wood and secure reproducible results. This procedure is 
not necessary in subsequent tests. 


M-2.1.1 Floor and Wall Temperatures 


Arrange the appliance under examination so that 
it is as close as possible to the side and back walls 
of the apparatus described in L-1, taking note of the 
manufacturer's installation instructions. Light all the 
burners and place a 15 cm diameter vessel (with lid) 
containing about 2 kg water on each top burner. As 
soon as the water in the vessel boils, reduce the gas 
rate so that it is Just kept boiling. Measure the floor 
and wall temperatures at the Junctions most affected 
by the heat of the appliance after 2 h of operation and 
at any intermediate time from the initial lighting if it 
is considered that certain local temperatures have been 
reached a maximum. 


In case of mini water heater, arrange the water heater 
under examination so that it is as close as possible to 
the side and back wall of the apparatus in L-1, take note 
of the manufacturer's installation instructions. Light 
the water heater and adjust to give maximum water 
temperature at the maximum heat input. Measurement 
shall be taken after 20 minutes of operation. 


M-2.1.2 Ceiling Temperature 


Raise the back panel and use the side panel as ‘ceiling’ 
resting on the top edge of the raised back panel and 
support at front edge by convenient stand. Operate 
the appliance as described in M-2.1.1 and record the 
temperature on the ceiling panel supported 1 m above 
the top of the appliances. 


FACE OF WALL 


+ 


SECTION AT THEROCOUPLE 


Fic. 11 APPARATUS FOR MEASURING FLOOR, WALL AND CEILING TEMPERATURES 


20 


IS 5116 : 2020 


ANNEX N 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE 


COMPOSITION 


Composition of Domestic and Commercial Gas Burning Appliances (Pressure Type) 
Sectional Committee, MED 23 


Organization 


LPG Equipment Research Centre, Bangalore 


Agnisumukh, Bangalore 


All India LP Gas Stove Association, New Delhi 
Bharat Petroleum Corporation, Ltd, Mumbai 


Bureau of Energy Efficiency, New Delhi 

BSH Household Appliances Mfg Pvt Ltd 
(Bosch-Siemens), Chennai 

Delton Industries, New Delhi 

Dir Gen Quality Assurance, New Delhi 

Gorani Industries Ltd., Indore 

Padmini Appliances (P) Ltd, New Delhi 

Hindustan Petroleum Corpn Ltd, Mumbai 


Ideal Engineers Hyderabad Ltd, Hyderabad 


In Personal Capacity 


Indian Institute of Petroleum, Dehradun 


Indian Institute of Technology, Guwahati 
Indian Oil Corpn (R&D Centre), Faridabad 
Indian Oil Corpn (R&D Centre), Mumbai 


Indraprastha Gas Limited, New Delhi 
Office of the Development Commissioner, New Delhi 
Petroleum Conservation Research Association, 

New Delhi 


Racold Thermo Ltd, Pune 


Rama Domestic Appliances, New Delhi 


Representative(s) 


Suri K. K. THAKUR (Chairman) 
Suri A. K. Bera (Alternate I) 
Ms MEENAM VERMA (Alternate IT) 


SHRI HARI RAO 
SHRI SANDEEP Kumar JAIN (Alternate) 


SHRI YUGAL MALHOTRA 


SHRI S. SRIRAM 
SHRI A. PRABHAKAR (Alternate) 


Suri KAMRAN SHAIKH 
Ms DEEPSHIKHA WADHWA (Alternate) 


SHRI VIJAY LOGANATHAN 


SHRI R. C. NANGIA 
SHRI VIVEK NANGIA (Alternate) 


SHRI S. J. KOLARKAR 
Lt Cor N. MUKHERJEEE (Alternate) 


SHRI ANIL GORANI 
SHRI SANJAY GORANI (Alternate) 


Suri AJAY GOYAL 
SHRI NEERAJ Goya (Alternate) 


Suri P. N. KANTH 
SHRI PRAVEEN ΗΑΡΚΕ (Alternate) 


SHRI SATISH KABRA 
SHRI DEEPAK Kasra (Alternate) 


Suri M. K. GUPTA 


SHRI PANKAJ KUMAR ARYA 
Suri V. K. VERMA (Alternate) 


Pror. P. MUTHUKUMAR 
SHRI ASHUTHOSH TIWARI 


SHRI SANJAY GUPTA 
SHRI SUNIL RAMBHAL (Alternate) 


SHRI BHUDEV SINGH 
Suri K. C. DEwANGAN (Alternate) 


SHRI C. K. VISWANATHAN 
Suri K. K. Funpa (Alternate) 


SHRI SURENDRA PRATAP 


SHRI ABHIJIT BANSHELKIKAR 
SHRI MAHESH BHANGALE (Alternate) 


SHRI AMARJEET SINGH KOHLI 
SHRI MANMOHAN KRISHNAN (Alternate) 


21 


IS 5116 : 2020 


Organization Representative(s) 
Shri Krishna Test House, New Delhi SHRI SUNIL TALWAR 
Sunflame Industries, Faridabad SHRI K. L. VERMA 


Suri A. K. Duinara (Alternate) 


Superflame Apppliances Private Limited, Faridabad SHRI VIKRAM VERMA 


Vanaz Engineering Ltd, Pune Suri A. A. TAMBOLI 
Suri A. S. ΓΑΤΚΕ (Alternate) 
BIS Directorate General SHRI RAJNEESH KHOSLA, SCIENTIST ‘E’ AND HEAD (MED) 


[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) ] 


Member Secretary 


SHRI SANDEEP KESHAV 
ScIENTIST ‘B’ (MED), BIS 


22 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 23 (13542). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8490, 2337 856] 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


