IS 16115 : 2013 
(Reaffirmed 2019) 


IAA HAF 


yi a gh fas Ram (Wye wa HA) aI 
yei — Aries fagia 


Indian Standard 


EVALUATION OF COMPLETED IRRIGATION PROJECTS 
(MAJOR AND MEDIUM) — GUIDELINES 


ICS 93.160 


© BIS 2013 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 


August 2013 Price Group 3 


Water Resources Planning, Management and Evaluation Sectional Committee, WRD 06 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Water 
Resources Planning, Management and Evaluation Sectional Committee had been approved by the Water Resources 
Division Council. 


The concept of inspection into the performance and adoption of corrective steps of any system help in increasing 
its efficiency and river valley projects are no exception to this. The need to carryout performance evaluation 
study of the river valley projects is being increasingly felt over the word for the past few decades. Periodical 
evaluation of irrigation projects during their implementation is as important as their planning, owing especially 
to the massive investments made. The main objective of evaluation study is to find out how far the project has 
achieved the planned goals, and if not, what are the reasons/bottlenecks in not achieving the targetted benefits. 
This is a vital tool to focus apart from the benefits, the deficiencies in project planning and implementation. Thus 
it will help in improving the techniques of project formulation and also optimize the performance of the projects. 
Assessing the status of the system efficiency and deliveries and the problems enables planners to formulate a 
suitable strategy for extension, renovation or modernization of the systems 


IS 16115 : 2013 


Indian Standard 


EVALUATION OF COMPLETED IRRIGATION PROJECTS 
(MAJOR AND MEDIUM) — GUIDELINES 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard provides guidance for carrying out 
the performance evaluation of completed irrigation 
projects (major and medium) with special emphasis 
on the irrigation component. 


1.2 Evaluation of socio, agro, economic, environmental, 
ecological, hydropower generation, navigational, flood 
protection aspects and the assessment of various impacts 
of the projects on the climate, environment and ecology 
do not fall within the scope of this standard. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
listed below: 


IS No. Title 

4410 Glossary of terms relating to river 
valley projects: 
Irrigation practice (first revision) 
River and river training (first 
revision) 
(Part 5): 1982 Canals (first revision) 
(Part 6): 1983 Reservoirs (first revision) 
(Part 12 ): 1993 Diversion works (first revision) 
(Part 15) Canal structures, 

(Sec 1) : 1973 General terms 

(Sec 2) : 1973 Transitions 

(Sec 3) : 1977 Flumes 

(Sec 4) : 1977 Regulating works 

(Sec 5): 1992 Cross drainage works (first revision) 
(Part 17): 1977 Water requirements of crops 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


(Part 1) : 1991 
(Part 3) : 1988 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given 
in applicable parts of IS 4410 shall apply. 


4 AGENCIES RECOMMENDED 
CARRYING OUT THE STUDY 


FOR 


The concerned state governments should undertake the 
study through institutions having an unbiased approach 
with scientific aptitude. To the extent possible the 


agency should be competent in various disciplines like 
hydrology, irrigation hydraulics including irrigation 
structures and instrumentation, economics, agronomy, 
social sciences and operation and maintenance (O&M), 
consistent with the scope of study. 


5 SELECTION OF PROJECTS 
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION 


FOR 


Projects which have been completed and in operation 
for a period of five years or more and those projects 
for which no evaluation has been carried out for the 
past five years or more, consequent upon their 
extension, renovation, modernization (ERM) should 
be selected. Among such projects, those having a gap 
of 20 percent or more between the planned irrigation 
potential and its utilization should be identified for the 
purpose of evaluation study, at the first instance. 
However, all the projects under operation should be 
taken up in due course of time. 


6 FREQUENCY OF CARRYING OUT 
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION STUDY 


All the old irrigation systems constructed/executed 
during pre-independence period or those constructed 
25 years ago should invariably be re-evaluated with 
regard to their performance. In any case, performance 
evaluation of the completed river valley projects should 
be done at least once in a period of 5 years. Any 
proposal for extension, renovation, modernization 
(ERM) of existing systems should be preceded by the 
performance evaluation study. 


7 BASE FOR COMPARISON 


7.1 The base for comparison of an existing irrigation 
project should generally be the objectives or targets 
envisaged at the time of design and implementation, 
or the objectives on which the project was approved. 
However, in the case of extension/renovation/moderni- 
zation schemes, those objectives on which the project 
was revised during execution and finalized at the 
completion stage should be taken as the base. The scope 
of the project in the original report or as revised from 
time to time is always known and should be taken as 
the basis for comparison of performance evaluation. 


7.2 It should be noted that sometimes, comparison with 
the targets taken from the project report may not reflect 
the true performance because annual inflows or 


IS 16115 : 2013 


availability of water may differ widely from those 
projected at the time of planning, or some other changes 
may have been introduced at subsequent stages. 
Therefore, the performance of an irrigation system 
gives a more realistic picture, if it is evaluated with 
reference to the targets projected for particular season. 
For example, availability of water before the Rabi 
season is generally known while the pattern of 
irrigation and the crop is decided before the season 
starts. Another reason could be that the infrastructure 
is not complete and that full irrigation potential of the 
project has not been reached. 


Accordingly seasonal targets can be fixed and actual 
performance measured against them. At the same time, 
assessment only with reference to seasonal projections 
may also not reflect true performance. The assessment 
should therefore be made on both counts that is with 
reference to the project report and with seasonal 
projections. If the achievements fall short of the 
objectives provided in the project report consistently 
for many years, there could be a need to look at the 
original project to review and revise its scope or to 
carry out additions and alterations. 


8 KEY INDICATORS FOR EVALUATION AND 
ANALYSIS 


8.1 The main objectives of evaluation is to determine 
if the purpose for which the system has been set up is 
achieved or not and to discover whether different 
components of the system are functioning properly 
or not. These indicators should include irrigation 
performance objectives such as reliable water delivery 
and its optimal utilisation for crop production. 
Essential points such as equity, reliability, adequacy, 
regularity and durability, which are vital for 
successful management, should be kept in mind. 
Owing to wide variation in the size and scope of the 
irrigation projects in the country, indicators that are 
appropriate in one environment for one project may 
not be applicable for another. Operating experience 
can assist in listing of indicators useful for evaluation 
in a majority of cases. Some of the typical indicators 
are given in 8.2 to 8.7. 


8.2 Reservoir Operations 


a) Inflows, spillages and releases; 

b) Reservoir operation plan vis-à-vis actual 
operation; 

c) Reservoir storage efficiency; 

d) Reservoir sedimentation and likely effects on 
live storage capacity; and 

e) Comparison with earlier years and comparison 
between different sub commands/reservoirs. 


8.3 Conveyance System Performance 


a) Canal conveyance efficiency; 
b) Canal operations loss; and 
c) Adequacy of water delivery. 


8.4 Maintenance of Civil Works of System 


a) Head works; 

b) Canals; 

c) Drains; and 

d) Water control structures. 


8.5 Drainage Performance 
a) Water table fluctuation, seasonal and long 
term; 
b) Drain effluents quality change (by area); 
c) Drainage requirement change (by area); and 
d) Water-logging and soil salinity change (by 
area). 


8.6 Below the Outlet 


a) Irrigation potential created and utilized; 

b) Farm water use efficiency; 

c) Conjunctive use of water; 

d) Adequacy of irrigation method; 

e) Adequacy of crop selection; 

f) Production technique for irrigated agriculture; 
g) Soil management and erosion control; and 
h) Equity in water distribution and dependability. 


8.7 The following are also important and should be 
covered in the evaluation process: 


a) Organization of water distribution; 
b) Communication system; 

c) Cost of distribution of water; 

d) Incentives and malpractices; 


e) Participatory irrigation management (PIM) 
and training programmes for farmers; 


f) Data collection and monitoring; 
g) Total number of water users supplied; 


h) ‘Timely information about irrigation schedule 
to various farmers; and 


j) Co-ordination between farmers and irrigation 
authorities. 


9 DATA COLLECTION 


9.1 Primary Data 


The primary data given in 8.2 to 8.7 and information 
for the overall command area should be collected for a 
detailed study. 


9.2 Maps 
a) Index map (a scale of 1: 250 000 is 
recommended); 


b) Maps showing irrigation canal network, major 
drainages and other features of the command 
on a scale, as available; 


c) Soil survey maps, as available; 


d) Maps showing tube wells as also ground water 
observation wells on a scale of 1 : 250 000 or 
as available; 


e) Village maps to a scale of 1 : 4 000 for 
commands of selected minors, showing 
irrigation network and other physical features; 
and 


f) Irrigation revenue maps 


9.3 Reports 


a) Project reports as also completion report, if 
available; 

b) Reports on cropping patterns and soil survey 
reports, if any; 

c) Reports on appraisal studies, if available; 

d) Irrigation manual of orders; 

e) Reservoir operation manual; and 


f) Model study reports of the hydraulic structures 
and sedimentation survey reports, conducted 
to assess sedimentation rates. 


9.4 Physical Data 
a) Meteorological Data: 


1) Rainfall — Normal monthly rainfall data in 
the command area; 


2) Normal monthly evaporation and evapo- 
transpiration data and agro-climatic data; and 


3) Temperature data. 
b) Hydrological Data: 


1) Water availability at head-works monthly data 
for last 5 years; 

2) Monthly regulation data for overall system in 
various distributary networks and for selected 
minors for last 5 years; 

3) Data of seasonal water table fluctuations and 
of depths of water table in the observation 
wells (if available); 

4) Data on pumping tests on wells (if available); 

5) Discharge data of regenerated water in drains 
df available); and 


6) Water quality data (if available). 


IS 16115 : 2013 


9.5 Functional Data 
9.5.1 Agronomic Data: 


a) Agronomic practices, crop water require- 
ments; and 


b) Irrigation practices. 
9.5.2 Resource Use 


It should include land use and cropping patterns for 
overall command for the last 5 years. 


9.5.3 Details of Data of Irrigation Canals 


a) Gross and cultivable commands on the 
distributary networks; 

b) Water scheduling and rostering of canals for 
last 5 years; 

c) Public and private tube-wells functioning in 
the command for last 5 years; 

d) Irrigated area — crop-wise for various 
distributary networks and for selected minors 
and on public tube-wells for the last 5 years; 
and 

e) Irrigated area from tube-wells and drains in 
the project command for last 5 years. 


9.5.4 Details of Water Logged Areas and Salinization/ 
Alkalization in Overall Command and Data on 
Reclamatory Measures taken by Project Authorities, 


if Any 


9.5.5 Rules and Procedures for Scheduling Supplies 
Among Canals 


a) Periodicity of irrigation schedules over the 
command, continuous or varying; 


b) Scheduled operation of canals (full discharge 
or at lower or greater discharges); and 


c) Opening and closing dates for the canals and 
closure periods. 


9.5.6 Rules and Procedures and Methods for 
Distribution of Supplies Among Farmers in the Outlet 
Commands 


9.5.7 Rules and Procedures for Regulation and Control 
of Irrigation Supplies 
a) Operation manuals; 
b) Operation monitoring system — Management 
Information System (MIS) and Decision 
Support System (DSS); 
c) Regulation and control system and its 
structure; 
d) Interference by the farmers with canal flows 
and irrigation schedules; and 
e) Interference from outside agencies. 


IS 16115 : 2013 


9.5.8 Operation and Maintenance Norms 
9.5.9 Operation and Maintenance Funds 


9.5.10 Organization for Regulation and Water 
Management: 


a) O&M staff, trained and untrained; 

b) Tenure of O&M staff and changes in posting; 

c) Powers of O&M staff to deal with infringements 
and interference by farmers and legislation in 
force, if any; 

d) Staff incentive structure for O&M; and 

e) Discipline in operation by staff. 


9.6 Secondary Data 


In addition to the primary data as outlined in 9.1 to 9.5 
which will be useful for detailed study, additionally 
critical data is also necessary for performance 
evaluation of the system. This is to be obtained by 
carrying out field observations and investigations on 
main canal, on three representative distributaries — 
one in head reach, one in central reach and one in tail 
reach, and in the commands of one or two minors on 
each of three representative distributary systems, 
selected on the basis of parameters of hydrologic soil 
classification, groundwater, drainage, etc. 


9.7 The following field investigations and observations 
are also necessary: 


a) Survey for inventory of wells/tube-wells and 
for ascertaining capacity/discharges and 
annual drafts for outlet commands of selected 
minors. Assessment of annual drafts will be 
based on reconnaissance surveys and queries 
in the field. Water quality of groundwater 
should also be ascertained. 


b) Operation and conveyance losses on stretches 
of main canal, representative distributaries 
and selected minors and water courses 
(Conveyance losses may be measured by 
inflow — outflow method). 

c) Sample surveys in both crop seasons for 
irrigation methods, depth and frequency of 
irrigation, effective rainfall and crop yield for 
principal crops vis-a-vis soil conditions, 
nature of water and other agricultural inputs, 
size holdings, etc, in typical canal irrigated 
fields on sample outlets. 

d) Similar observations are necessary for 
relevant crops for each type of irrigation 
facility (well irrigation, canal irrigation and 
canal irrigation supplemented by well 
irrigation). 

e) Sample survey for cropping patterns in 
irrigated areas and in outlet commands in 


three outlets on each selected minor and their 
comparison with department records and 
design expectations. The survey is to be based 
on reconnaissance and queries in the field. 


10 Review and Analytical Study of Data 


10.1 Macro-level Study 


Review of policy and objectives should be made in 
regard with distribution of available supplies among 
farmers and cropping patterns adopted and crops 
grown, and of the effect and adequacy of irrigation 
and related acts and supplemental rules framed on the 
objectives. Enforcement of codal provisions with the 
real situation should be reviewed. History of the project 
should be referred so as to ascertain some of the issues 
involved in the completion of the project. 


10.2 Studies for Evaluation of Performance for 
Existing Irrigation System 


10.2.1 Review of Water Availability and Utilization: 


a) Pattern and extent of surface water 
availability: The data of surface water supply 
availability of the head of barrage main canal 
systems and that passed on should be collected 
and compared. If there are deviations, the 
reasons should be ascertained and measures 
necessary for affecting availability be 
indicated. 


b) Groundwater development in the command: 


1) Review should be made of ground water 
development in overall command of the 
system. 


2) Status of groundwater development 
through private and public wells should 
be ascertained. The conjunctive use 
system as prevalent and its efficacy 
should be studied. It should be examined, 
if any change in policy is required. 

c) Return flow availability for re-use in the 
command: Reconnaissance surveys should be 
carried out to locate the drains with flowing 
water in the command in different periods of 
the year. 


10.2.2 Review of Irrigation System 


a) Main canal and distributary canal systems 
(canals and off-takes) with respect to 
adequacy of capacity of canals and regulators 
and other structures: 

1) Longitudinal sections and cross-sections 
of main canal and irrigation distribution 
network. 


2) Layout and geometry of irrigation canal 


b) 


c) 


network, lined and unlined and their 
capacities at heads and strategic points. 

3) Canal roughness and conveyance and 
operation as well as run-off losses in 
channel system. 

4) Location and details of head and cross 
regulators and their control system. 

5) Location and capacities of escapes and 
outlets for various water levels in canals 
and distributaries. 

6) Dummy regulators and drainage arrange- 
ments in lined channels. 


Distribution systems in outlet commands: 


1) Outlets (size and type) and discharge 
capacities in the command areas. 


2) Pattern of distribution of supplies among 
outlets. 


3) Adequacy of watercourses and field 
canals in command outlets and their state 
of maintenance. 


4) Adequacy of on-farm development 
(OFD) works (field canals — lined and 
unlined, chak roads and field drainage) 
and state of maintenance of OFD works. 


5) Status of land levelling and land shaping 
of fields. 


6) Estimation of seepage and runoff losses 
in watercourses and field canals. 


Drainage system: 

1) Adequacy of the network of connecting 
and primary drains; 

2) Adequacy of the capacity of drains; and 

3) State of maintenance. 


10.2.3 Review of Water-Logging Problems 


a) 


b) 


c) 


From study of depth of ground water table 
maps, the effect of irrigation on ground water 
level over time, and the areas prone to water- 
logging should be ascertained. 


Soil salinity/alkalinity problem should be 
ascertained. The areas with salinity/alkalinity 
problem should be identified on the basis of 
reconnaissance surveys and contact with public 
and officials. Provision of funds to mitigate the 
problem and remedial measures proposed by 
the project authorities and the action research 
programme should be critically analyzed. 

Water quality of drainage water should be 
ascertained, and seen as to what extent it can 
be re-used for irrigation and other purposes. 


IS 16115 : 2013 


10.2.4 Review of Water Allocations and Scheduling 


Plan 
a) 


b) 


c) 


Available supplies, canal regulation and water 
scheduling procedures vis-a-vis weather 
conditions, frequency of irrigation and 
irrigation methods for predominant crops 
should be reviewed. 

Scheduling of supplies by farmers vis-a-vis 
optimum timings of irrigation should be 
reviewed. 

Decision making process in water allocation 
about adequacy and scope of decentralisation 
of certain functions should be studied. 


10.2.5 Review of Monitoring System and Communication 


Network 


a) 


b) 


Review of system of data collection, processing 
and analysis in respect of water availability, 
scheduling and supplies, and their utilisation 
in regulation and comparison with actual 
situation. 


Review of communication system in respect 
of adequacy and reliability. 


10.2.6 Agricultural Performance 


a) 
b) 


c) 
d) 


Cropping patterns, irrigated crop areas and 
intensities; 

Supplies reaching fields and those consumpti- 
vely used by crops; 

Crop yields and agricultural income; and 


Extent of ground water and drainage reuse in 
meeting agricultural demand. 


10.2.7 Evaluation of Reaction of Farmers to the 
Performance/Impact of Irrigation Project with Respect 


to: 


a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 


e) 


f) 


g) 


Water availability; 

Adequacy of OFD programme; 

Adequacy of inputs and support services; 
Adequacy of water distribution system among 
farmers; 

Information to farmers about operating proce- 
dures, scheduling of supplies, opening and 
closing dates for the channels and closure 
periods; 

Arrangement of co-ordination and consultation 
among farmers and officials; and 

Attitude of the farmers to the project. 


The key constraints in the system are to be analysed 
and the works to be remodelled or new works to be 
provided should be identified. 


IS 16115 : 2013 


11 PERFORMANCE EVALUATION OF 
IRRIGATION SYSTEM 


11.1 Macro-level study will be carried out and 
evaluation of performance of existing irrigation system 
as described in 10 should be made. The available data 
of irrigation system shall be studied and following 
points should be considered: 


a) Fulfilment of design expectations about water 
availability. 

b) Comparability of water allocations to those 
complied by operation rules. 


c) Comparison of design canal and off-take 
capacities compared with design capacity. 


d) Maintenance and its affect on system 
performance. State of maintenance should be 
ascertained by study of longitudinal sections 
and of logbooks of works based on inspections 
and surveys carried out during operation as well 
as closure periods. 


e) Integration of other resources of water 
(ground water, tanks and drainage reuse) with 
the canal system and their contribution to the 
water availability. 


f) Frequency of monitoring/reporting of system 
operations and presence of arrangements for 
regulating and controlling the system. 


g) Frequency of surprise inspections and presence 
of a regular system of surprise inspections or 
are these made only after receipt of either a 
complaint from a group of farmers or the 
directions from higher authorities. 


h) Comparison of actual irrigated areas with 
design expectations. 


j) Extent of adherence to present operating rules 
and procedures, specified irrigation schedules 
among canals, opening/closing dates, distri- 
bution of supplies among outlets and farmers, 
and cropping calendars. 


k) Comparison of cropping patterns and intensities 
with design objectives and reasons of the 
differences between them, if any. 


m) Existence of water-logging and salinity 
conditions in some of the areas and the reasons 
for the same (inadequacy or lack of farm 
agricultural drainage system and connecting 
and primary drains). The water logged areas 
and other areas where water table is rising 
should be identified by review of ground 
water table in the command area, available 
with ground water investigation organization. 
The information of soil salinity/alkalinity 
should be collected from block level 


supplemented by study of the soil survey data 
as available and by reconnaissance survey. 
n) Availability/passage of information to farmers 
about operation procedures, opening and 
closing dates, and irrigation schedules. 


p) Adequacy of land development programme 
and the relevant organisational setup for its 
implementation. 


q) Interference by farmers with control structures, 
canal flows and irrigation schedule. 


11.2 Review of Status of Water and Crop 
Management 


11.2.1 This includes assessment of the present status of 
water management system for assessment of irrigation 
needs, use of weather forecasts in such assessment, 
organisational set up and communication system, of 
management information and reporting system and the 
regulation and operation system of canal supplies. This 
also includes ensuring the adequacy of facilities for 
education of beneficiaries and management staff for 
affecting better use of the available supplies. 


11.2.2 Status of crop management, that is organization 
and programmes of agricultural extension services 
including plant protection measures, and research 
programmes and their infrastructure and the extent of 
association of universities and research institutions in 
the research programmes. 


11.2.3 Status and adequacy of marketing facilities such 
as location of markets, network of roads and transport. 


11.2.4 Presence of proper arrangement of co-ordination 
and consultation among farmers and officials. Extent 
of involvement of farmers in the water management 
and maintenance of watercourses, field channels and 
drains should be studied. 


11.2.5 For projects covered under the centrally 
sponsored command area development programme 
(CADP) the status of on-farm development (OFD) 
works in regard to the following should be ascertained: 


a) Selection and introduction of suitable cropping 
patterns; 
b) Development of ground water to supplement 
surface irrigation; 
c) Development and maintenance of main and 
intermediate drainage system; and 
d) Provision of rotational water supply (Warabandi). 
The status of adaptive research for evolving suitable 
soil-water-crop relations and management techniques 
suitable to the condition of farmers’ fields should also 
be ascertained. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: WRD 06 (0476). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 
VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


