:
4

Uh

622'242

: 622.243.k

628'112'24

IS

:

7266( Part 1) - 1966
(Reaffirmed 2001)

Indian
`,

Standard

GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR DIRECT CIRCULATION ROTARY DRILLING RIGS `k
PART ( 1 WITH ROTARY TABLE

First

Revision

/

I. Scope ior water

- Lays down the general well construction.

requirements

for direct

rotary

drilling as

rig with F given

rotary table used in IS: 9439-1980

- For the purpose !. Terminology `Glossary of terms used in water well 3. Functions and Constructional

of this standard drilling technology'

terminology shall apply.

Details for water supply and exploration purposes in

3.1 The drilling rig is usedto construct deep wells formations. varying from soft and medium to hard.

3.2 Under direct rotary drilling method the hole is drilled by rotating the drilling string. Drilling fluid is pumped into the hole from a suction pit through delivery lines and drilling string. The drilling fluid circulated, removes the drill cuttings from the bottom of the hole and gets collected at the suction pit. Thus the circulation of the drilling fluid is a continuous process while drilling is in progress (see Fig. 1 ). The drilling fluid pumped into the hole forms a coating on the side rnralls preventing the hole from collapsing and preventing the loss of circulation of water and neeps the cuttings in suspension. In addition it cools and lubricates the drilling string and ihe bit. 3.3 The functions and constructional details of the various units of the water well drilling rig are given in Fig. 2. This figure is intended to be typical only and does not constitute a specific recommendation but is only a guideline for the manufacturers and the users of the direct rotary drilling rigs. 3.3.1 Hoisting system

3.3.1.1 The function of the hoisting system is to provide necessary equipment used with the rig for lowering and ho~istingthe drill string, casing pipes and miscellaneous operations such as lowering of assembly, pump installation, etc. Total mass of drilling string is an important consideration taken into account in the design of the hoisting equipment although due consideration is given for the casing loads which may be heavier than the drill pipes at times. -.i%? 3.3.1.2 The main components of the hoisting system include the draw-works, the mast or derrick, rotary table, travetling block, etc. 3.3.2 Mast or derrick 3.3.2.1 The derrick/mast shall be designed and fabricated to carry safely all loads which may occur in actual operations. The largest dead load imposed on the derrick is normally the heaviest drill string or the casing assembly run in the well. The maximum vertical load imposed on the derrick is on account of pulling up the entire drill string or casing assembly, which gets stuck up in the hole during drilling operations. The designer shall design the mast with a safety factor of three times the load of the drill string. 3.3.2.2 The derrick/mast shall also be designed to withstand heavy wind loads as specified in IS: 800-1984 `Code of practice for general construction in steel (second revision )' or in IS: 802 (Part 1 )-1977 `Code of practice for use of structural steel in overhead transmission line towers: Part 1 Loads and -permissible stresses'. The horizontal force of the wind on the derrick and the vertical'load of the drill pipe shall be given due consideration.

Adopted

2 July 1986

0 April I BUREAU
MANAK

1987, BIS I

Gr 5

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR NEW DELHI

STANDARDS
SHAH 110002 ZAFAR MARG

IS:7206(Part

I)-1986

RECIPROCATING

FIG. 1 ROTARY DRILLING SYSTEM 3.3.2.3 The derriek shall have a clear working height to facilitate the handling of drill string and casing and shall be of sufficient width to handle, with ease, the changing of drilling bits. The mast shall be able to accommodate rotary table, desired number of double sheave pulleys, travelling block swivel hook, haulage wire ropes and other drilling accessories. The hook providing connection between travelling block and swivel shall be designed to handle with safety the complete drill string, casing assembly, -etc, with a factor of safety of two, 3.3.2.4 The material used in the construction of mast shall conform to IS: 226-1975 `Specifications of structural steel ( standard quality) (fifth revision )' or steel tube conforming to IS: 1161-1979 `Steel tubes for structural purposes (third revision)`. The material shall be capable of handling the maximum load without distortion, with the factor of safety being not less than three in any case. 2

+E L i.Y

DERRICK

/MAST

\
W

\

ROTARY

TABLE 4

1

FIG. 2

ROTARY

DRILLING

RIG

f

IS:7206(

Part 1).1968
distribute the to the crown working room two parts in load uniformally. pulley block shall shall be ~provided case of the heavy

3.3.2.5 The mast shall be fabricated with cross members to The line of centre They shall be properly welded without cracks. be perpendicular to the centre of the rotary table. Sufficient on the derrick floor after its erection. The mast may be made in duty rigs for easy transportation on the highways.

3.3.2.6 The mast shall be actuated by one or more double acting hydraulic cylinders Mechanical locks shall be provided to hold the mast with safety checks to either raise orlower it. Adjustable leg supports shall be p~rovidecl for levelling of the rig and also to in vertical position. take up the loads without disturbing its position. 3.3.2.7 H-ydraulic pumps of adequate capacity shall be installed with control valves for Provision may be made using the hydraulic cylinders in case of hoisting and lowering the mast. to accommodate necessary water connection joints and electric wiring system on the mast. The hydraulic system shall also have a~dequate capacity for rotary table *retraction and hydraulic pull down units, if needed. 3.3.2.6 The derrick of joints of drill strings. 3.3.3 Draw-works 3.3.3.1 The draw-works is an equipment used to transmit the power required to remove It consists of two or more the drill string from the hole and to lower the equipment in the hole. drums to accommodate sufficient length of wire ropes of required size depending upon the capacity of the rig to handle the necessary equipment during drilling operations. Generally three lines known as drilling line, hoisting line and sand Ii-ne ale accommodated, 3.3.3.2 The drilling line is used with the drilling string exclusively, and shall have sufficient capacity to handle the total load of drill string, The casing line/hoisting line is used for assembly lowering and drill rod handling during operations. In case of failure of the drilling line, hoisting line may be used as drilling line. The sand line is used for material handling, bailing, etc. 3.3.3.3 The power mechanical clutches. for the draw-works may be conveyed either through pneumatic clutches or shall have provision to install the B. J. tongs unit for making and breaking

3.3.3.4 The drums shall be operated with brake hands of adequate capacity, The shaft of the hoisting assembly shall be mounted on antifriction bearing on either side with adequate The drum shall be mounted in line for handling of drill pipes, casing, etc. lubrication facilities. It shall be capable of exerting sufficient pull on drill string or other lines using single or multiple sheave pulleys through steel wire ropes conforming to IS : 1856-1977 `Steel wire ropes for haulage purposes ( second revision )' or IS : 2266-1977 `Steel wire ropes for general engineering purposes ( second revision)' laid on both the drums. The hoisting system shall be able to operate at different hoisting speeds as per requirement of loads. pulley 3.3.3.5 Drilling line is used block with swivel hook. table with the travelling block and the casing line shall have double

3.3.4 Rotary

3.3.4.1 The rotary table is used to transmit the torque and impart rotary motion to the kelly and the drill string. The upper part of the rotary table accommodates kelly bushings used to rotate the kelly. It is made of cast alloy steel fitted underneath with ring gear shrunk on to the table. The table is supported either by ball bearing of taper roller bearings capable of supporting the total load of the drill string or casing assembly which have to be lowered into the well. Hence provision has to be made in the form of suitable bearings for holding the table as well as holding the kelly bush, casing slips, etc, in position. Suitable guards with oil seals may be provided so that the mud or water does not leak to the gear or into the bearings. Ring gear and its driving pinion gear are generally of spiral bevel construction which provides smooth operation. The speed reduction from the pinion shaft to the table is to the order of 3:l or4:l. The pinion shaft shall be fixed with antifriction bearings of taper roller design. This shall also be equipped with necessary oil seals and guards to prevent entry of mud or water into the interior parts of the assembly. 3.3.4.2 Power for driving the rotary table may be taken by shaft drive or any ot'her suitable drive to select various rotational speeds required to drill through different formations. The rig shalU have at least four forward speeds and one reverse speed to suit the formations. 4

IS : 7206 ( Part 1) - 1986
3.3.4.3 The power to the drive shall be from the main power unit or from a separate An independent clutch may be provided for imparting power unit with specified gear reductions. It shall be able to carry the total load of the drill the rotary movement as and when required. string~and maximum housing assembly. Powerful hydraulic pull down system may be provided to give positive downward pressure to the drill string, if needed. different rotational speeds at the rated power from 3.3.5 Transmission gear box - For obtaining the prime mover to operate the rotary table as well as the hoisting drums according to the load conditions, a sturdy gear box with four forward and one reverse speed with required gear reduction shall be provided, This unit is coupled to the power unit through a main clutch. Individual clutches may be-provided for all the sub units. The gear box shall be of simple design land the gear shall be of sturdy nature to withstand sudden loads. 3.3.6 Compound case - These shafts are provided in oil bath for compounding the power case so provided shall combine the dissipated by the two prime movers. Oil bath compound power of both the engines and run singly when required. 3.3.7 Pull down - The on the drill string when feed. 3.3.8 Mud pump 3.3.8.1 In direct circulation rotary drilling operations, drilling mud, pumped the drill pipe is discharged through the bit and returns to the surface through the between the drill pipe and the walls of the hole. down through annular space pull down pressure Pull down needed. shall be sufficient to give the required pressure may have either hydraulic or mechanical chain

3.3.8.2 Reciprocating, positive displacement, double acting ( duplex ) or centrifugal pumps of adequate capacity with suitable prime mover shall be provided with the direct circulation rotary drilling rigs. The pump shall be able to clearly flush out the cuttings from the bottom of the borehole to obtain the maximum drilling rate. The pump shall be designed to deliver required quantity of mud fluid at the adequate pressures corresponding to the depth and size of the The cylinder liners of _boreholes and shall conform to IS : 9201-1979 `Pumps for handling slurry'. the mud pump shall be of replaceable type. The pump shall have an independent control deriving power either from main power unit or from auxiliary power unit. It shall be provided with independent clutch to operate it when required. Necessary pipelines and high pressure hoses for delivery and suction -with suitable pressure gauges may be provided. To prevent the damage of the hoses and pipe lines a pressure release valve/safety valve shall be provided to relieve the excessive pressure if the pump develops high pressure. The section hose used in drilling rigs shall withstand the abrasive action of the circulating fluid. The pistons shall have replaceable rubber cups facing opposite direction at each end of piston. The valves, actuated by the pressure in the fluid being pumped shall also be replaceable. The delievery hose is used to deliver the mud fluid from the upper end of the stand pipe to the swivel connected at the top of the drill string. 3.3.9 Power units 3.3.9.1 The various components of the drilling rig shall be run by either one or more prime movers depending upon the capacity of the rig, High speed industrial diesel e-ngines or electric motors of adequate capacity may be provided along with the drilling rigs. 3.3.9.2 Diesel engines used with drilling rigs shall be continuously rated engine conforming to IS : 10002-1981 `Performance requirements for constant speed compression ignition ( diesel ) engines for general purposes ( above 20 kW )' and shall be easily accessible for simple repairs. The engine shall be capable of delivering an output of ten percent in excess of its rated output for at least a period of two hours in a cycle of 24 hours. 3.3.9.3 The elctrical motors, where used, shall be continuously rated and shall conform to fS : 325-1978 `Three-phase induction motors ( fourth revision )' or IS : 4722-1968 `Rotating electrical machines'. The switch gear shall conform to IS :-8544 `Motor starters for voltages not exceeding 1 000 V' ( in 5 parts ) as applicable. The cables shall conform to either IS : 694-1977 `PVC insulated cables for working voltages up to and including 1 100 volts ( second revision )' or IS : 1554 ( Part 1 )-I976 `PVC insulated ( heavy duty ) electric cables: Part 1 For working voltages up to and including 1 100 V ( second revision )' or IS : 434-1964 `Rubber-insulated cables' ( in two parts ), The cable shall be rated in accordance with IS : 3961 ( Part 2 )-I967 `Recommended current ratings for cables: Part 2 PVC insulated and PVC-sheathed heavy duty cables' or IS : 3961 ( Part 3)-1968 `Recommended current ratings for cables: Part 3 Rubber insulated cables' as the case may be. The working voltages of motors shall be in accordance with IS : 585-1962 `Voltages and frequency for ac transmission and distribution systems (revised)`.

IS : 7206 ( Part 1 ) - 1986 3.3.10Hydraulic pumps - Hydraulic pumps of adequate capacity may be provided for actuating mast raising cylinders, pull down system, rotary table, retraction, etc. These pumps may be driven with power drawn from the main prime mover or from the auxiliary prime mover.
3.3.11 Controls 3.3.11.1 All the controls the rotary table. The control a) To start/shut b) For raising c) For operating d) To operate shall shall be grouped be provided unit; together at the left side of the for the following operations:. drillers station near

off the power and lowering the hoisting,

the mast; drilling and sand lines; string;

rotary table of the drilling

e) To drive the mud pump; f) To control g) To operate h) For lighting the throttle of the prime movers; levers; and

the gear shift system.

3.3.11.2 In addition, gauges for mud pump pressure, hydraulic pressure, voltmeter and ammeter, etc, may be provided. Separate meters may be installed indicating the rotation speed, penetration rate and pull down pressure. Weight indicator may also be provided. 3.3.12 Lighting system - Generally drilling operations are carried out during day and night. To enable round-the-clock operation, the entire rig shall be adequately illuminated. In the case of the rig mounted with a diesel engine, the power for lighting shall either be from the main engine or from any auxiliary ~equipment. In the other case where the electric power is available and the rig equipped with electrical motors, the power for the lights shall be tapped from the electrical main and in the case of rigs supplied to mines the voltage shall be either 110 V or 24 V. Panel lights for the guages may also be provided. Suitable control switches shall be provided. one drilling unit. The whole 3.3.13 Mounting - All the above units put together comprises system shall be moumted on a steel welded structure forming a solid foundation for the entire machinery. This structural construction, in turn, may be mounted on either a self-propelled roadworthy truck of adequate capacity having sufficient wheel base or trailer chassis with pneumatic wheels with tow bar arrangements for shifting by tractors or trucks. 4. Tools and ;Accessories the direct rotary drilling rig, a complete set of following operating equipment shall

4.1 To operate be provided.

to IS : 11180 ( Parts 1 and 2 )-I935 `Specification for kellys for 1) Kelly - A kelly conforming direct rotary drilhing: Part 1 Square and hexagonal kellys or Part 2 Round fluted kellys' ( under preparation ); 2) External 3) Drill upset seamless of different drill sizes; with necessary sizes subs; and types to suit the core barrel; pipes; pipes of different sizes as desired by the purchaser;

collars

4) Double

tube core barrels,

5) One set of coring 6) Water swivel 7) High pressure 8) Suction 9) Travelling

bits of different

suiting drill

to the size of drill hoses; depending

hoses with strainer blocks

upon capacity

of the mud pump; of the rig;

with sheaves

according

to the capacity pipes; pipes

IO) One set of rotary B. J. tongs to handle 11) Central required 12) Hoisting latch elevators for by the purchaser; plugs for hoisting required hoisting the drill

the drill ths drill

and all

sizes

of casing

assembly

as

pipes to suit the drill the kelly,

pipe supplied; pipes, drill collars, rock roller,

13) All types of subs bits, drag hits, etc;

for connecting

drill

6

IS : 7206 ( Part I)14) Spider bush with slips conforming for handling pipes of different sizes;

1966

15) `C-clamps

to IS : 9181-1979 `C-clamps'; fishing tap and die ( male and female) set for the drill pipes

l-6) Fishing tools - right handed sizes supplied; and 17) Two sets of pipe wrenches ( Part 2 )-1978 `Pipe wrenches: 4.2 Small Tools rig for use during 1) Spirit Following small maintenance:

of nominal size 900 and 1 200 mm conforming Part 2 Heavy duty'. shall be supplied with the direct circulation

to IS : 4003 rotary drilling

tools

level conforming wrenches sets

to IS : 5706-1970 `Spirit conforming conforming jaw spanner revision )`; to to

levels for use in precision `Single `Ring ended wren&es

engineering'; adjustable ) ( second

2) Adjustable wrenches';

IS : 6149-1971 IS : 2029-1981

open-jaw ( spanners

3) Ring spanners revision )`;

4) Double ended open ( spanners ) ( second 5) Box spanner machinery;

sets conforming

to IS : 2028-1981 `Open jaw wrenches ( first revision guns'; ( second revision )`; purpose )`; )' suiting to the

sets conforming

to IS : 2030-1971 `Box spanners portable

6) Grease gun conforming 7) Pliers conforming

to IS : 7794-1975 `Manual

grease

to IS : 3650-1981 `Combination to IS : 4003 ( Part 1 )-I978

side cutting

pliers

8) Pipe wrench conforming (first revision )`; 9) Chain pipe wrenches

`Pipe wrenches:

Part 1 General ( first

conforming

to IS : 4123-1982 `Chain

pipe wrenches

revision

10) Oil cans conforming

to IS : 4561-1968 `Oil cans'

( in five parts );

11) Outside calipers conforming to either IS : 3651 ( Part 1 )-I982 `Vernier calipers: Part I Vernier calipers with teast count 0'1 mm and 0'05 mm ( second revision )' or IS : 4183-1~967 `Firm-joint inside.and outside calipers': 12) Inside calipers conforming to either IS : 3651 ( Part 1 )-1982 or IS : 4189-1967; for general purposes ( first revision )`; steel tape measures ( first revision )' 13) Scales conforming to IS : 1480-1970 `Metric scales or IS : 1481-1970 `Metric steel scales for engineers 14) Steel tape ( revised ); 15) Tachometer; 16) Chisels 17) Centre conforming punch; ( flat, )`; round screw and half round ) conforming to IS : 1931-1972 `Engineers socket-screw (see files keys to IS : 402-1974 Cold chisels ( second revision )`; conforming to IS : 1270-1965 `Metric

( winding

) type

18) Set of files ( first revision 19)

Hexagonal socket ( first revision 1';

keys conforming

to IS : 3082-1973 `Hexagonal frames with blade

20) Hacksaw Hacksaw 21) Flexible 22) Screw

frame ( see IS : 5169-1969 blades ( first revision )`; grinder;

`Hacksaw

IS : 2594-1977

drivers

conforming

to IS : 844 `Screw

drivers'

( in three parts );

23) Heavy duty puller

for pump ( liners/valve jacks 20/25 tonne

seat ); capacity ( for rig levelling operations ) -two -two numbers; numbers;

24) Heavy duty travelling 25) 100 tonne 26) Clamps 27) Clutch capacity

mechanical/hydraulic and spanner for mud pump.

jacks for fishing

for pipes; adjustable

7

IS : 7206 ( Part 1 ) - 1986
5. Information to be Supplied by the Purchaser by the purchaser at the time of enquiry or order: The following during information drilling shall be furnished for ground

1) 2)

The type of formation water exploration:

the rig is likely area;

to encounter

operations

Mean sea level of the operating depth and final of the mast; unit, either

3) Anticipated 4) Total height

size of the horehole

and the anticipated

assembly

size;

5) Mobility

of the entire

truck or trailor

mounted;

6) Power available 7) Compounding 3) Any special 9) Any special
6. Information

to drive the rig and mud ~pump; gear box of prime movers; 1 and

features

required

to be installed;

tools to be supplied. be Supplied by the Manufacturer/Supplier rigs shall be furnished by the manufacturer/supplier The following details of the at the time of delivery:

direct

rotary

to drilling

1)

Total capacity of drilling in terms of the size of the rod, maximum load that can be handled, ap~proximate rate of drilling under normal hydrogeological conditions; speed versus engine speed ( rev/min ), transmission gear ratio;

2) Hoisting

3) Rotary table speeds; 4) Mud pump stroke; 5) Maximum 6) Maximum 7) Wire capacity, namely, maximum discharge and pressure with respect to bore and

hook load capacity; working height, with width respect and constructional details of the drilling mast;

line capacities

to various lines:

sizes provided

in the draw-works;

3) Capacity 9) Number

of the main line and auxiliary and capacity of the mast raising

cylinders; ratio; and quantity delivered;

10) Horse power of the prime 11) Capacity `2) Compound of the hydraulic case; of the ~mast; provided;

mover and its transmission pump in terms of pressure

13) Capacity

14) Types of clutches 15) Capacity 15) Functional

of the generator details

and its details; instruments installed;

of the various

17) A sketch diagram 18) Any other special drilling rig; 19) Recommended 20) Trouble 21) Overall height

of the power transmission; features that are incorporated in the design and construction of the

servicing

system;

shooting

and remedy chart for all the major components;

of the mast in down position;

22) Overall length of the mast in down position, axle load, wheel base, total length and width of the chassis and other general dimensions may be provided. However, these aspects shall be such as to meet the statutory motor vehicle rules and regulations; 23) The physical 24) Detailed and chemical properties manual of the drill pipes, drill collar and kelly; and

operating

instructions

and parts catalogue 8

of the equipments.

IS : 7206 ( Part 1 ) - 1986
`7. Testing - The object of testing of the drilling rig is to determine the efficiency of the drilling rig in terms of its capacity to the specified diameter/depth of drilling and rate of penetration in semi-consolidated and unconsolidated formations round the clock, till it reaches its rated capacity. `7.1 Durafion of Test and consistent results `7.2 Observation During regard to the following: The duration of test shall be sufficient to obtain of all the major components of the rig, the Test During the period of test, observation the specified shall performance made in

be carefully

I) The rig mounted on the chassis shall be inspected for axle loading on the front axle and the rear axle so that it shall be within its specified limits of the vehicle/trailer. The ability of the vehicIe/traiIor for driving on the road may be examined and -shall meet the statutory motor vehicles rules and regulations. Thus the mobility of the drilling rig from one place to another place shall be checked; 2) The prime movers shall be checked for their performance loading of 10 percent for a period of two hours; 3) The handling capacity system shall be verified 4) The hydraulic of the control of the masf and draw-works according to the rated capacity; on cont/nuous in respect loading and over-

of hoisting

and lowering

system shall be operated and checked valves, hoses, etc, shall be checked;

to its rated capacity of drilling shall

and performance be noted;

5) The rate of speed in erection

of mast and commencement

6) The rig shall be operated to the maximum capacity and a log book shall be maintained to record the progress and performance of the rig, the depths achieved at various intervals, penetration rate and the nature of the soil and aquifers encountered during testing If the rig fails to function, the defect shall be located in respect of operating operations. The reasons equipment or if of any other nature and whether the same is found repeated. for the same shall be investigated and recorded. Records shall be maintained in respect of details of the surface pipes lowered, pilot hole drilling, reaming and lowering of assembly; 7) The performance of the mud pump in respect of the consistent delivery be recorded at various depths and time taken in clearing of cuttings; 8) The average fuel consumption per hour may also be recorded during and pressure the test; specified shall

9) The drill pipes and the working tools shall conform to the specifications where and shall not develop any cracks or deformations during the testing of the rig; IO) The lubrication 11) Dampening system of all units hammering shall be checked; and undue shock loads shall

of vibrations,

effects

be checked;

and

12) All important components and controls of mast, rotary table draw-works and transmission system and lighting system shall be checked thoroughly for suitability and stability.

EXPLANATORY

NOTE

This Indian Standard ( Part 1 ) lays down the general requirements for use as guidelines by It is the manufacturers and the users, for direct circulation rotary drilling rig with rotary table, proposed to cover general requirements for direct circulation rotary drilling rig with top drive for The rigs conforming to the requirements water well construction in Part 2 of the standard. specified in this standard may lead to its satisfactory performance.
water

The circulation rotary for drinking, irrigation

drilling rigs are being employed and industrial purposes.

to construct

water wells

for

supply

of

req'uirements have been This standard was first published in 1~974. In this revision additional specified in case of mast draw-works, power units: tools and accessories and information to be In addition references to Indian Standards have been provided by the manufacturer/supplier. given in respect of various tools and equipments referred to in the standard. 9
Printed at New Indfa Printin Press, Khurja, India

NO. 1 MAY 1993 TO IS 7206 ( Part 1) : 1986 -GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR DIRECT CIRCULATION ROTARY DRILLING RIGS
PART 1 WITH ROTARY TABLE
(First ( Page 2, clause existing sentence: Revision ) Substitute the following for the

AMENDMENT

3.3.2.4, jirst sentence ) -

"The material used in the construction of mast shall conform to IS 226 : 1975 `Structural steel ( standard quality ) (fifih revision )' or steel tubes conforming to IS 1161 : 1979 `Steel tubes for structural purposes ( third revision )' or steel tubes conforming to Iji 3601 : 1984 `Steel tubes for mechanical and general engineering purpo@&@rst revision )`." (Page 4, clause 3.335 )Insert the following new clause after 3.3.3.5:

.

`333.6 All draw work shall betested to demonstrate that the clutch system af draw work is capable of lifting the hook load specified and have sufficient capacity Ur hold the hook load specified.'
(Page 4, clause 3.3.4.1, lines 10 and 11) Substitute:

`The manufacturer table.'

shall specify the speed reduction from the pinion shaft to the

for TIC spedreduction
4 : 1.' (Page (Page 5, clause 3.3.6, second sentence ) 5, clause 3.3.8.2, line 6 ) Substitute `if for `so'. matter from the pinion shaft to the table is to the order of 3 : 1 or

Delete the following

`and shall conform to IS 9201 : 1979 `Pumps for handling ( Page 6, clause 4.1 ) Sl No. 10 : Substitute the following

slurry.' for the existing matter at

`10) One set of rotary tongs to handle drill pipes;' 1

(Page 8, clause 6, SI No. 16 to 24 ) existing matter:

Substitute the following

for

the

`16) Overall height of the mast in down position; 17) OvemJl length of the mast-in down position, axle load, wheel base, total le&h and width of the chassis and other general dimensions may be provided. However, these aspects shall be such as to meet the statutory motor vehicle rules and regulations; 18) The physical and chemical properties of the drill pipes, drill collar and kelly; and 1% Detailed operating instructions manual and parts catalogue of the equipments, such as: i) fuuctional details of the various instruments installed;

ii ) a sketch diagram of the power transmission; iii ) any other special features that am incorporated in the design and construction of the drilling rig; iv ) recommended servicing system; and v ) trouble shooting and remedy chart for all the major components.'

HhJD21)
Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India

