WAT AA IS 16355 : 2015 
Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2019) 


ph —arad fer at ag aft 

(umag ) Ren arena A fadi 

F yia A sate ARTS cat 
wart & fer feeder 


Geosynthetics — Guidelines for 
Installation of Geogrids Used as 
Soil Reinforcement in Mechanically 
Stabilised Earth (MSE) Retaining 
Structures 


ICS 59.080.70 


© BIS 2015 


ada AM Rt 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
© HAF YS, 9 eee WAL Í, ae feeeit-110002 
l rch a MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


July 2015 Price Group 2 


Geosynthetics Sectional Committee, TXD 30 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Geosynthetics 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textile Division Council. 


Geogrids are single or multi-layer materials usually made from extruding and stretching high density polyethylene 
or polypropylene or by weaving or knitting and coating high tenacity polyester yarns. The resulting grid structure 
possesses large openings called apertures that enhance interaction with the soil or aggregate. The high tensile 
strength and stiffness of geogrids make them especially effective as soil and aggregate reinforcement. These can 
be uniaxial or biaxial. Biaxial geogrid is normally used for roadbed stabilization and reinforcement while uniaxial 
geogrid is used for reinforcement in mechanically stabilized earth systems (MSE). 


The primary type of MSE systems which have emerged include: reinforced steepened soil slopes (RSS); reinforced 
embankments over soft foundations (RESF) and mechanically stabilized earth walls (MSEW). MSEW and RSS 
have become especially important in highway construction as their use reduces the required width of new right- 
of-way and facilitates construction within existing limited right-of-way. RESF are recognized as a cost-effective 
alternative to traditional techniques for constructing earthen embankments over low strength foundations. 


RSS (up to an angle of 80°) provide a cost effective means to achieve more efficient grade changes than are 
possible with conventional unreinforced slopes limited to 30°. MSE walls are constructed by compacting fill soil 
in layers between intermittent horizontal geogrid layers which assure the stability of the entire soil/facing system. 


Soil reinforcement with geosynthetics (geotextiles and geogrids) (RESF) has emerged as an efficient, economical 
and effective solution to the problem of constructing embankments over soft soils. Geogrids reduce lateral 
displacement and improve the overall stability of the soil embankment. However, geogrids are limited in ultimate 
strength by structure and polymer properties. Therefore, in a combined system, a geogrid or geotextile can be 
employed to facilitate the development of a working platform which is subsequently covered with very strong 
geotextile. The embankment is then constructed on the geotextile. 


Survivability is defined as resistance to mechanical damage during road construction and initial operation. The 
ability of an uniaxial geogrid to survive installation and reasonable service loads shall be assured, if it is to 
perform as designed. Installation damage to a geogrid is a function of the following: 


a) Geogrid thickness, 

b) Compactive effort and lift thickness, 

c) Type and weight of construction equipment used for fill spreading, 
d) Grain size distribution of backfill, 

e) Angularity of backfill, 

f) Polymer used in the manufacture of geogrid, and 

g) Geogrid manufacturing process. 


The major parameters of importance of uniaxial geogrids are strength, durability and mechanical interaction 
with soils. The strength is affected both by temperature and rate or duration of loading. For durability of geogrids, 
long term creep strain behaviour, UV stability, biological resistance, chemical resistance, resistance to 
environmental stress cracking and temperature variations in use are important. Mechanical interaction with soil 
can be measured in terms of interaction factors for sliding and pullout. 


IS 16355 : 2015 


Indian Standard 


GEOSYNTHETICS —GUIDELINES FOR 
INSTALLATION OF GEOGRIDS USED AS SOIL 
REINFORCEMENT IN MECHANICALLY STABILISED 
EARTH (MSE) RETAINING STRUCTURES 


1 SCOPE 


This standard prescribes set of guidelines for 
installation of geogrids used as soil reinforcement in 
mechanically stabilised earth (MSE) retaining 
structures. 


2 SURFACE PREPARATION 


Foundation soil shall be excavated to the lines and 
grades as indicated on the construction drawings or as 
directed by the engineer. Over excavated areas shall 
be filled with compacted backfill material as per project 
specifications or as directed by the engineer. As a 
minimum, foundation soil shall be proof rolled prior 
to backfill and geosynthetic placement. 


3 INSTALLATION 


3.1 The geosynthetic may be temporarily secured in 
place with staples, pins, sand bags or backfill as 
required by fill properties, fill placement procedure or 
weather condition, or as directed by the engineer. It 
shall be laid smooth without wrinkles or folds on the 
backfill. 


3.2 Primary geosynthetic may not be overlapped or 
connected mechanically to form splices in the primary 
strength direction. Single panel lengths are required 
in the primary strength direction. No overlapping is 
required between adjacent rolls unless specified by the 
engineer. 


3.3 Backfill material shall be placed in lifts and 
compacted as directed under project specifications. 
Backfill shall be placed, spread and compacted in such 
a manner as to minimize the development of wrinkles 
in and/or movement of the geosynthetic. A minimum 
fill thickness of 100 mm is required prior to the 
operation of tracked vehicles over the geosynthetic. 


3.4 On curves, the geosynthetic may be folded or cut 
to conform to the curves. The fold or overlap shall be 
in the direction of construction and held in place by 
pins, staples, or piles of fill or rock. 


3.5 Prior to covering, the geosynthetic shall be 
inspected by a certified engineer to ensure that the 


geosynthetic has not been damaged during installation. 
Damaged geosynthetic shall be repaired immediately. 
Cover the damaged area with a geosynthetic patch 
which extends an amount equal to the required overlap 
beyond the damaged area. 


3.6 On soils with CBR > 3, most rubber-tired vehicles 
can be driven at slow speeds, less than 16 km/h and in 
straight paths over the exposed geosynthetic without 
causing damage to the geosynthetic. Sudden braking 
and sharp turning should be avoided. Tracked 
construction equipment should not be operated directly 
upon the geosynthetic. A minimum fill soil thickness 
of 150 mm is required prior to operation of tracked 
vehicles over the geosynthetic. Turning of tracked 
vehicles should be kept to a minimum to prevent tracks 
from displacing the fill and damaging the geosynthetic. 


3.7 For soils with CBR < 1, construction vehicles shall 
not be allowed directly on the geosynthetic. The 
subbase or base shall be placed such that at least the 
minimum specified lift thickness shall be between the 
geosynthetic and equipment tires or tracks at all times. 
Turning of vehicles shall not be permitted on the first 
lift above the geosynthetic. 


3.8 Any ruts occurring during construction shall be 
filled with additional backfill material, and compacted 
to the specified density. 


3.9 If placement of the backfill material causes damage 
to the geosynthetic, the damaged area shall be repaired 
as previously described above. The placement 
procedure shall then be modified to eliminate further 
damage from taking place. 


3.10 The geogrid shall be laid at the proper elevation 
and alignment as shown on the construction drawings 
or as directed by the engineer. The geogrid shall be 
installed in accordance with the installation guidelines 
provided by the manufacturer or as directed by the 
engineer. The geogrid may be temporarily secured 
in place with ties, staples, pins, sand bags or backfill 
as required by fill properties, fill placement 
procedures or weather conditions or as directed by 
the engineer. 


IS 16355 : 2015 


4 INSPECTION 


4.1 The owner or owner’s representative may randomly 
inspect geogrid before, during and after (using test pits) 
installation. 


4.2 Any damaged or defective geogrid (that is frayed 
coating, separated junctions, separated layers, tears, 
etc.) shall be repaired/replaced in accordance with 5. 


5 REPAIR/REPLACEMENT OF DAMAGED OR 
DEFECTIVE GEOGRID 


Any roll of geogrid damaged before, during and after 
installation shall be replaced by the contractor at no 
additional cost to the owner. Proper replacement shall 
consist of replacing the affected area adding 1m of 
geogrid to either side of the affected area. 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 


IS 16355 : 2015 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Geosynthetics Sectional Committee, TX 30 


Organization 


The Bombay Textile Research Association, Mumbai 


Business Coordination House, New Delhi 


Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 


Central Soil and Materials Research Station, New Delhi 


CIDCO, Mumbai 
Coir Board, Kochi 


Department of Jute and Fibre Technology, Kolkatta 


Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals, New Delhi 


E. I. Dupont India Pvt Ltd, Gurgaon 


Ganga Flood Control Commission, Patna 


Garware Wall Ropes Ltd, Pune 


Gujarat Engineering Research Institute, Vadodara 


Indian Jute Industries’ Research Association, Kolkata 


Indian Jute Manufacture Association, Kolkatta 
Jaya Shree Textiles, Hooghly 


Kusumgar Corporates, Mumbai 


Macaferri Environmental Solutions Pvt Ltd, Navi Mumbai 
Maharashtra Maritime Board, Mumbai 


National Highways Authority of India, New Delhi 


National Jute Board, Kolkatta 


Office of the Textile Commissioner, Mumbai 


Premier Polyfilms Ltd, Ghaziabad 


Reliance Industries Ltd, New Delhi 


Strata Geosystems (I) Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


Supreme Nonwovens Pvt Ltd, Hyderabad 


Techfab India, Mumbai 


Representative(s) 


Dr A. N. Desai (Chairman) 
Suri V. K. Patt (Alternate) 


SHRI SAMIR GUPTA 
SHRIMATI RitikA Gupta (Alternate) 


SHRI SUDHIR MATHUR 
Suri Jar BAHAGWAN (Alternate) 


SHRI NRIPENDRA KUMAR 
Suri MAnisH Gupta (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Dr U. S. SARMA 
Suri M. Kumaraswamy PILLay (Alternate) 


Dr Swapan GHOSH 
Suri K. R. Gupta (Alternate) 


ADDITIONAL DIRECTOR GENERAL (QA) 


Suri R. GANESH 
SHRIMATI VEDIKA Kapoor (Alternate) 


Suri S. Masoop Husain 
Suri Ravi BHUSHAN Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI TIRUMAL KULKARNI 
Suri S. J. Curtnis (Alternate) 


Suri L. V. ASHARA 
RESEARCH OFFICER (Alternate) 


Suri P. K. CHOUDHURY 
Suri Kousuik Das (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
SHRI PAWAN SHARMA 


Suri Y. K. KusuMGAR 
Dr M. K. TALUKDAR (Alternate) 


Dr RATNAKAR MAHAJAN 
REPRESENTATIVE 


Suri R. K. GANDHI 
Suri R. P. SincH (Alternate) 


Suri T. SANYAL 
Suri A. K. Kuastaair (Alternate) 


Suri AJAY PANDIT 
Suri M. BaLucuamy (Alternate) 


Dr SANJEEV K. VERMA 
Suri HARINDER Kumar (Alternate) 


Suri M. S. VERMA 
Suri V. RAVIKANTH (Alternate) 


SHRI NARENDRA DALMIA 
SHRI SHAHROKH Bacu (Alternate) 


Suri C. K. CHAUDHURI 
Suri C. K. Jain (Alternate) 


SHRI ANANT KANOI 
Dr SauraBu Vyas (Alternate) 


IS 16355 : 2015 


Organization 


The Synthetics & Art Silk Mills Research Association, Mumbai 


Urja Products Pvt Ltd, Ahmedabad 
Veermata Jijabai Technological Institute, Mumbai 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


Dr ManisHA MATHUR 
SHRIMATI ASHWINI Sudam (Alternate) 


SHRI JANAK NANAVATY 
Suri S. P. BORKAR 


SHRI PRABHAKAR Rar, Scientist ‘E’ and Head (TXD) 
[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 


Suri J. K. GUPTA 


Scientist ‘C’ (TXD), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TXD 30 (1078). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


