( Reaffirmed 2003 )

IS:4906-1968

Indian Standard
CODE OF SAFETY FOR RADIOCilEMICAL LABORATORY
Chemical Hazards Sectional Committee, CDC 18 chairman
SHRI N. S. MANXIKER R@e.sentin~ Directorate General of Factory Advice Service & Labour Institutes ( Ministry of Labour, Employment % Rehabilitation ), Bombay

Hindustan Organic Chemicals Ltd, Bombay SHRIJ. D. ADHIA Ssnu S. M. MA~XI~AJU ( Affcmafs ) Directorate General of Health Services ( Ministry of SHRI S. K. BORWR Health & Family Planning- ) SHRI Pi S. RAYACELWDRAN ( Alternate ) Central Public Health Engineering Research Snm J. M. DAVE Institute ( CSIR ), Nagpur DEPIJT~ DIRECTOR, T R A P P I c Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) ( GENERAL ) Ministry of Petroleum & Chemicals &RI -1. M. GIJHA DR G. JAYARAHA Rao ( AIkrnatc ) Rhabha Atomic Researcb Centre, Bombay DR JAODISH SHANKAR Directorate General of Technical Development, SHRIJOQINDER SINCH New Delhi Department of Explosives ( Ministry of Industrial SHRI S. N. LAHIRI Development & Company Affairs ) SHRI S. C. ROY ( Alternate j Manufacturers' Chemical Association, _ S&u C. Cl. MANIAR Indian Bombay Hindustan Steel Limited, Ranchi DR V. C. MANKOM DR B. N. CHAKRAVARTY ( Alternate ) SHRI M. N. KHANNA ( Alfhak ) Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) DR C. N. K. MURTHY SHRI R. S. AQARWAL (Alternate) Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) SHRI NARE~RA SIN~H DR K. J. BALAKRISHNA ( Alternate ) Indian Institute of Petroleum ( CSIR ), Dehra Dun REPRESENTATIVE The Western India Match Company Ltd, Bombay SHRI M. VENUCOPAL SKRI D. DAS GUPTA, Director General, IS1 ( Ex-o$icio Member ) Director ( Chem ) Secretary DR A. K. BHATTACHARYA Deputy Director ( Chem ), IS1 ( Continued on page 2 )

INDIAN
MANAK

STANDARDS
BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR NEW DELHI

INSTITUTION
SHAH 110002 ZAFAR MARG

IS:4906-1968 ( Conrinuedfrompase 1 ) Laboratory
Convener DR NITYA NAND Members SWRI V. J. BAKRE Central Revenues Control Laboratory ( Ministry of Finance ) SHRI D. K. SANKARAN ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Health Services ( Ministry of SHRI S. K. BORKAR Health & Family Planning ) SHRI P. S. RAMACHANDRAN ( rllternatc ) Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi DR K. C. GULATI Ciba of India Limited, Bombay DR B. S. J~XHI Italab Private Limited, Bombay DR S. M. KAJI SHRI J. C. DEY ( Affcrnalc ) SHRI S. S. HONAVAR ( nllernalc ) Directorate General of Factory Advice Service & SHRI S. C. KALE Labour Institutes ( Ministry of Labour, Employment & Rehabilitation ), Bombay Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay SHRS P. R. KAMATH National Chemical Laboratory ( CSIR ), Poona DR H. B. MATHUR Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) SHRI V. L. MEHENDALE Hindustan Steel Ltd, Ranchi DR H. N. RAY DR 13. N. CHAKRAVARTY ( Memale)

Chemical Hazards Subcommittee,
* RepIcssnfing

CDC

18 : 3

Central Drug Research Institute ( CSIR ), Lucknow

IS : 4906 - 1968 CONTENTS
PAGE 0. 1. 2. 3. 4. r 3. 6. 7. 0 0. 0 .I . 10. 11. 13 &. 13. FOREWORD SCOPE .. .
... ...

... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...

... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
... ...
COMMON

4 5 5 6 6 8 8 11 20 20 21 23 23

... ...

... ...

HAZARDS . . .

BIOLOGICAL EFFECTS OF RADIATION MAXIMUM PERMISSIBLE EXPOSURE LINTS CIASSIFICATIONOF RADIOISOTOPES RADIATION SOURCES ... ...

CLASSIFICATION OF LARORATORIES WASTE DISPOSAL ... ...

... ... ...

RADIATION MONITORING INSTRUMENTS GENERAL SAFETY R~I,ES ...

TRAINING, INDOCTRINATIONAND SAFETY SUPERWSION PROTECTIVE A~EASURET CHARACTERISTICS HAZARD RADIONUCLIDES .. . ...... ............... . .. OF ... ......... . .. SOME ...

. ..

25 25 26

APPENDIX A APPENDIX B

3

ls:4!w6-1968

Indian Standard
CODE OF SAFETY FOR RADIOCHEMICAL LABORATORY
0. FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 2 August 1968, after the draft finalized by the Chemical Hazards Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division Council. 0.2 Radioisotopes are increasingly employed in medicines, agriculture and industry and in research laboratories. The maximum permissible concentrations of radionuclides in air and water are in almost all cases, excepting natural uranium, of orders of magnitude lower than the maximum allowable concentrations of non-active chemical isotopes. This, coupled with the characteristic radiotoxicity and difficulties of detection by conventional methods, makes it necessary that elaborate precautions are taken in the design and layout of radiochemical laboratories and in the handling, storage and disposal of radioactive materials. 0.3 The potential injuries due to radiation may be reduced to a minimum if all the safety instructions prescribed for the purpose are followed to the This is only possible if the characteristic of the radioactive fullest extent. material, nature of the hazards involved, purpose underlying the safety instruction and the function and uses of protective equipment are fully understood. 0.4 Radiation science is a very highly specialized field and a considerable ' amount of sustained research is being carried out throughout the world. As such concept and definitions change rather rapidly. Subject to this limitation, this code is based on best current opinion available on the subject. In the preparation of this code of safety, the following publications, in particular, have been freely consulted: Report of International Commission on Radiological mittee II on permissible dose for internal radiation Press, New York. International directory of radio isotopes, Vol national Atomic Energy Agency, Vienna. International Commission on Radiological Publication No. 6 ( Amended and Revised Press, Ne\v York. Protection Com1959, Pergamon by Inter( ICRP ) Pergamon

I, published Protection 1962, 1964),

Recommendations of the International Commission on Radiological Protection. ( Adopted September 17, 1965 ). ICRP Publication

No. 9, Pergamon

Press, New York. 4

A basic toxicity classification of radionuclides; Technical Report No. 15, International Atomic Energy Agency, Vienna, 1963. Basic safety standard for radiation Energy Agency, Vienna, 1967. Radioactive products, Bombay ( AS ). Bhabha protection, Research International Centre, Research Atomic Trombay, Centre,

Atomic

Manual of radiation protection in Bhabha- Atomic Trombay, Bombay ( BARC/223 ); 1965.

Report of Committee V on the handling and disposal of radioactive materials in hospitals and medical research establishments, 1964; Pergamon Press, New York. 0.5 Safety code for industrial radiographic practice ( IS : 2598-1966 ) has already been published which gives in detail safety aspects concerning the use of ionizing radiation for industrial radiography. 0.5.1 For prevention of chemical accidents, which may also occur in a radiochemical laboratory or which may lead to exposure due to radiation, IS : 4209-1966* may be consulted. 1. SCOPE 1.1 This code recommends measures that should be adopted to prevent harmful over-exposure to radiation in a radiochemical laboratory handling small amounts of radioactive materials during normal operations. It describes important characteristics of radioactive materials, nature of hazards, design requirements of laboratories and other essential information for protection against radiation. 2. HAZARDS 2.1 The hazards from: a) external b) internal that are usually exposure, exposure. and encountered in using radioisotopes arise

2.1.1 External exposure may be attributed to sources outside the body. from alphas and betas is mostly limited to the first External exposure few millimetres from the surface of the skin and results from spills and contamination. 2.1.2 Internal exposure results when radioactivity finds access inside the body. The hazard arises when the activity deposits in the organs and irradiates seats of deposition. Alpha emitters are considered most toxic under this class of exposure.
*&de of safety for chemical laboratories.

5

IS:4!m-1968 3. BIOLOGICAL 3.1 The EFFECTS OF RADIATION

bioIogica1 effects of ionizing radiation are described at length in several treatises and are fairly well known. All ionizing radiations interact with tissue in such a way as to produce deleterious effects which are qualitatively similar. But quantitative differences arise from the fact that the total energy per gram imparted to the tissue which is irradiated is not the only factor to be considered. A heavy particle produces many more ions per cm length of its track than a beta particle. As a result, different radiations have relative biological effectiveness, which is indicated by ` Quality Factors ' ( QF ) to denote Linear Energy Transfer ( LET ) factors. Absorbed doses will have to be multiplied by QF to express on a common scale radiation exposure incurred by persons due to all ionizing radiations. For internal exposure QF should be taken as 1 for p-, p+, gamma and X radiation and conversion electrons ( except in case of p-, p+ and e- radiations with maximum energy E,,, 0*03 Mev for which QF is taken to be I.7 ), 10 for alpha particles and 20 for fission fragments and for nuclei recoiling during alpha emission. For a detailed discussion on QF reference may be made to ICRP Pub-6.

3.2 The biological effects from radiation exposure produced either through single active exposures or through chronic exposures are classified as follows: a) Somatic - affecting the living cells responsible for the maintenance of body functions, and b) Genetic - affecting the germ cells which are responsible for the propagation of genetic characteristics. 33.1 Massive acute exposures, which are likely to induce radiation sickness or even death, are to be guarded against in dealing with fissile materials and in operating reactors. 3.3 It is chronic exposure that is to be guarded against in tracer laboratories and in working with low level activities in radiochemical installations. It is internal exposure primarily resulting from inhalation, ingestion and contamination of wounds that one has to specifically guard against. Chronic exposures have been shown to have appreciable influence in reducing the life span of the individual and increasing the incidence of leukaemia. Cataract of eyes, induction of bone tumours, aplastic anaemia are some of the other observations attributed to chronic exposures. 4. MAXIMUM

PERMISSIBLE

EXPOSURE

LIMITS

dose for an individual is stated to be that dose accumulated over a long period of time or resulting from single exposure, which in the light of present knowledge carries a negligible probability of severe somatic or genetic injuries; it is such a dose that any effects that ensue more frequently are limited to those of a minor nature that would not be considered unacceptable to the individual by competent medical authorities. 6

4.1 The permissible

IS:_-1968 4.1.1 In any organ or tissue the dose equivalent due to occupational exposure shall comprise that contributed by external and internal sources, It shall not be resulting from the circumstances'imposed by .the occupation. held to include the dose from any medical exposure as patients, from exposure to natural background radiation or from other exposures received by the individual as a member of the public. 4.2 The maximum permissible dose to the whole body, gonads or red bonemarrow of an individual shall be 5 rems in any one year. Provided the total dose in any one year does not exceed the maximum permissible dose ( subject to restrictions in 4.2.1 ), a worker may receive in a quarter of a year a dose to the whole body, gonads and the red bone-marrow not exceeding 3 rems. A dose of 3 rems may be received as a single dose within a quarter of a year, but this shall be avoided as far as practicable. For providing flexibility, the maximum permissible total accumulated dose for exposure involving whole body, gonads and red bone-marrow at any age over 18 years shall be governed by the relation: D=5(N-18) where D = tissue dose in rerns, and .N= age in years, The maximum permissible doses recommended are:

QY?$b
4 b)
Gonads and red bone-marrow, and in the case. of uniform irradiation, the whole body Any single organ ( including lenses of the eye ) excluding gonads, bonemarrow, thyroids, skin and hands, forearms, feet and ankles Bone, thyroid,. skin of the whole body ( excluding skin of hands, forearms, feet and ankles ) Hands, forearms, feet and ankles rems 3

K?ady Limit rems 5

8

15

cl 4

15

30

40

75

4.2.1 There are also special cases listed below where exceptions to the application of the above procedure may be desirable for practical reasons. 4.2.1.1 Previous exposure unknown - If the dose previously accumulated in radiation work by the worker over any given period is not known, it shall be assumed that the worker has received the currently recommended maximum permissible dose in each year of that period. 7

43.1.2 Persons starting work at an age less than 18 years - When a person begins to be occupationally exposed at any age of' less than 18 years, the dose equivalent to the gonads and the red bone-marrow should not exceed 5 rems in any one year under age 18, and the dose accumulated to age 30 should not exceed 60 rems. 4.2.1.3 Exposure of women of reproductive capacity and ptegnant women - In circumstances where women of reproductive capacity are involved then the permitting dose to the abdomen is limited to 1.3 rems in a quarter corresponding to 5 rems per year delivered at an even rate. Under these conditions, the dose to an embryo during the critical first two months of organogenesis would normally be less than 1 rem. It is recommended that when a pregnancy has been diagnosed, arrangements should be made to ensure that the exposure of the woman be such that the average dose to her foetus, accumulated during the remaining period of pregnancy, does not exceed 1 rem. 4.3 Exposures of the Members of the Public - It is not advisable that members of the public should receive exposures from operations. Such exposures take place through accidental or indiscriminate releases to the public environment. Dose limits are described for exposures of public rather than maximum permissible limits. The annual dose limits for members of the public shall be one-tenth of the corresponding occupational maximum permissible doses. 5. CLASSIFICATION OF RADIOISOTOPES

5.1 Several considerations go into the classification of the radioisotopes according to relative radiotoxicity. Appendix A gives a recent classification of the different radionuclides according to relative radiotoxicity per unit activity. The classifications into Groups 1 to 4 correspond to the terms high toxicity, medium toxicity ( upper sub-group A ), medium toxicity ( lower sub-group B ), and low toxicity respectively. 6. RADIATION SOURCES

6.1 The radiation sources in use may be classified as: a) Sealed Sources - which do not contribute to contamination internal hazard, and remain a primary source. are used for secondary preparations b) Open Sources -which dilutions, labelling, etc. or

through

6.1.1 Sealed Sources - Sealed sources are employed in a number of fields, such as teletherapy, interstitial therapy, industrial gamma radiography, thickness gauging, static eliminators and for calibration purposes. Co-60, Ir-192, Cs-137, Sr-90, Tl-204, etc, are some of the more common sources 8

which are industrially used. Such sources are normally sealed in capsules to prevent the escape of the radioactive material and should be ensured against In case of properly sealed sources, the hazard breakage or defective sealing. arises only through external exposure, and against this the greatest precaution should be used. 6.1.1.1 Choice of sealed sources - The activity of the source should be as low as possible and not in very much excess of the requirements, with due The radioactive material inside regard to its half life and duration of use. the sealed container should be of low toxicity, and in such chemical and physical form as to minimize dispersion or ingestion, in case of rupture of the container. Sealed sources should have clear markings indicating the nature and quantity of the source activity. These sources should be periodically checked up for any contamination or leakage, p_articularly in case of radium whose daughter product radon is a gas which could be A recommended test is to scrub the dry quite hazardous when inhaled. container with a dry filter paper sponge and to count the activity. Mechanically damaged or corroded sources should be immediately placed in suitable containers and sealed. 6.1.1.2 Precautions in of all radiation protection receiving radiation doses exposure recommended. following factors: a) Time the use of sealed sources - The basic objective measures is to prevent handling personnel from in excess of the maximum permissible levels of This is achieved by a suitable combination of the the time of exposure; shielding in between the actizle

By limiting

b) Shielding - By the use of adequate source and the worker; and c)

Distance-By maintaining a maximum possible distance between the source and the worker, by using long forceps and remote handling equipment.

By making use of these factors in appropriate combination, radiation exposure to personnel not only engaged on actual work, but in the surroundings also, could be reduced to the minimum. 6.1.1.3 It is very important that while working with any sealed radiation source, adequate shielding should be provided and the adequacy should always be tested by direct measurements. Precautions should be taken to guard against any scattered radiation around the primary protective shielding. The eyes, face and body may be protected from beta rays by transparent plates of perspex of moderate thickness. Protection against gamma rays should be achieved by screening the source with adequate shielding of lead which should be as near the source as possible. The lead bricks used for shielding sources should overlap to prevent penetration of radiation through gaps. In addition to lead, concrete and marble also offer adequate protection against gamma radiation, but lead is the most convenient. 9

.

1$:4906-1968 6.1.1.4 Forceps used for handling these sources should be as long as practicable and should grip the source with minimum force exerted by the fingers. These forceps should be light in weight and should have grips notched or grooved in a way to hold the sources securely. Transparent plastic hand shields of sufficient thickness attached to the forceps would be an added protection against the most energetic betas, if unshielded beta emitters are being used. The time of handling these sources should be minimum possible, if unshielded radiation sources are being used. For pipetting solutions of very high activity and presenting over exposure hazards in handling, remote handling pipette should be utilized over the shielding wall.
6.1.1.5 Vices, chucks or similar arrangement should be provided at the handling of sources. protective barriers, to facilitate They should be designed against excessive clamping pressure which will lead to damaging A spring loaded ratchet or slipping clutch mechanism would the sources. prove useful. 6.1.1.6 Some of the regulations to be observed in the application of the sealed sources are given briefly below ( for detailed code of safety for industrial radiographic practice, refer to IS : 2598-1966* ): a) I?ldustrial gamma radiography-The controlled area should be clearly marked with instructions restricting entry to unauthorised personnel. Light or audible signals or both should, be provided during irradiation. The radiographic set-up should be completed before starting the irradiation. Any radiographic work requiring removal of the sealed source from shielding container should be preceded by adjustments with a dummy capsule. The removal of the source from the shielding container should be done by automatic means or remote handlmg. After return to the container, the shielding should be verified by monitoring. ,saips, static eliminators arzd similar devices usiq sealed \%%erever possible sealed sources should be installed or shit-ldrtl in such a way that personnel instal!ing or maintaining the seaI::d source should not receive exposure in excess of the rccommrncled maximum !eveis of exposure. Radioactive symbols should be put up permanently on such devices. In case of loss or hreakage of the source, the radiological health and safety officer should be notified immediately.
SfJWCYS --

1)j

7hitkmss

6.1.1.7 departments

Telethcrapy and interstitial therapy installations in medical need elahorate planning and form a separate subject altogether.

6.1 .1.8 Method of USPof sealed sources - Source should be properly stored and inventories maintained. If any person has reason to believe that a source has been lost he should rcport,,immediateiy to the radiological health and
*Safety code for industria! radiographic practice.

10

IS:4906-1968
safety officer. All sources should be manipulated in such a way as to minimize exposure of personnel and people in adjacent area. Area of particular hazard should be cordoned after marking off. Any semi-shielded beam or scattered beam should be clearly indicated, and area monitored to assess the radiation fields. Sealed sources, when practicable, should be used in enclosed installations and should never be touched with hand. In addition to adequate shielding, limiting the working time also helps to make the exposure as short as possible and for this dummy runs should be performed beforehand. These protection measures require careful planning and proper application of protection principles. 6.12 Unsealed or Open Sources - The open sources offer a comparatively larger scope of work and are employed in tracer studies and preparation of labelled compounds. They present problems of safety in handlmg and are a potential source of contamination in the laboratories. In manipulating an unsealed or open radioactive source great care should be exercised towards minimizing the chances of entry into the body as a result of ingestion and inhalation of air-borne particles and absorption through contact with contaminated surfaces. The hazards will arise in general through contaminated hands, smoking and mouth pipetting, glass blowing, etc, or from inhalation of air-borne radioactivity. When the hazards due to ingestion and inhalation are negligible ( as in the case of well sealed sources ) the risks in handling radioisotopes will depend essentially upon the effects of external beta and gamma radiation. 7. CLASSIFICATION

OF LABORATORIES

7.1 The

types of laboratories needed for handling different quantities c open sources of radioisotopes depending upon the relative radiotoxicity ar given in Table 1.
TABLE 1 CLASSIFICATION OF RADIOCHEMICAL LABORATORIES

LEVEL OF RADIOTOXICITY OF ISOTOPES*

TYPE OP LABORATORY REQUIRED FOR LEVELS OF ACTIVITY
r--------Type 1 -_--*-__---____

Type 2

TYPO 3

Group 1 Group 2 Group 3 Group 4 *See Appendix A.

<IO <l

rCi mCi mCi Ci

10 PCi-I mCi 1 mCi-100 mCi 100 mCi-IO Ci 10 Ci-1000 Ci

>I

mCi

>lOO mCi >lO Ci

(100 (IO

>1 000 Ci

11

Is:4906:-1968 7.1.1Modifying factors may be applied to the quantities mentioned in the last three columns of the above table, according to the complexity of the The following factors have been suggested which procedures to be followed. should be used with discretion:
Procedure Storage ( stock solutions ) Very simple wet operations Normal chemical operations Complex wet operation with risks of spills, simple dry operations Dry and dusty operations Modfying Factor x 100 x 10 xl x 0.1 x 0.01

7.1.2 At the present stage of development and utilization of radioisotopes in the country, Type 3 laboratories ( Table 1 ) are not likely to come up outside the Department of Atomic Energy and Allied Units. However, there art a cot pl3 of laboratories in the country which can be designated as belonging to the Yype 2; Type 1 laboratories are expected to be quite common in the medic4 and agricultural institutions, industrial establishments and universities. Types 1 and 2 laboratories a.re described in 7.2 and 7.3. 7.2

Type 1Laboratory

,7.2.1 For manipulation of small amounts of radioactivity ( as quoted in Table 2 ) a modern conventional chemical laboratory with a few modifications may be used. However, while converting any such laboratory to a radioactive Type 1 laboratory, judicious consideration be given to (a) radiation safety, (b) efficiency of operation, (c) economy, and (d) convenience. Some of the salient features requiring attention for this type of laboratory are outlined below:
a) Layout - As far as possible, active laboratories should be designed in such a way as to segregate from other inactive laboratories. Working space in this type of laboratory should be allotted on generous scale as compared to a normal chemical laboratory. Sufficient storage space should be provided for stocking radioactive Washing facilities in general are adequately complied solutions. with by use of the ordinary laboratory sinks with a smooth white glass finish without cracks. The taps should be workable by elbow, foot or knee so as not to contaminate them by hands or gloves. The discharge of liquid radioactive waste should be limitThe drains if possible should be of plastic ed to one or two drains. The drains or polyethylene pipe which could be easily repaired. should be properly planned to pass through areas away from work places and should lead to sewers or collecting carboys or tanks. Floors, walls and workinp surfaces - The floors and working surfaces should be covered with linoleum and work benches should be

b)

12

Is:4!m-1968 suitably equipped with non-absorbent tops and with disposable covers. All working surfaces ( including the fume hood ) should be strong enough to support the weight of the necessary shielding material ( lead, iron ) against gamma radiations. Floors should be cleaned by wet mopping and should not be swept dry. Walls and ceilings should be finished with a non-porous washable surface, such as a good hard gloss paint.

Cl Fume

hoods - In operations where gaseous release or reactions at elevated temperatures are involved, use of a fume hood is necessary. As far as possible, handling of active solutions shall be carried out The fume hood exhaust system should be sufficient in fume hoods. to produce a velocity of about 30 linear metres per minute across the opening of the fume hood. This should give efficient clearance of the laboratory air at the rate of about 10 air changes per hour. Even at the maximum permissible activity levels in a Type 1 laboratory, it is sufficient to discharge the exhaust air through ducting to the outside of the building at a point above roof level or at least not immediately adjacent to windows or air intakes. It is not necessary to filter the air at these low levels. Due care should be given, when considering the design and erection of exhaust ducts, towards ease of replacement as well as minimizing the spread of contamination within buildings during the dismantling operations. For example, the duct length could be as short as possible and single piece and the exhaust fan should be mounted on the outside of the ducting to reduce contamination of the motor and to make it more accessible for maintenance purposes. A piece of ducting needing repairs after long run is best discarded as radioactive waste; this prevents spread of contamination in workshop and other areas. Fume hoods should produce a rgular flow without any eddies. The speed of the air flow should be such that there can be no escapes of air into the work place from the fume hood under typical operating conditions.

7.3 Type 2 Laboratory 7.3.1 This laboratory is intended to be used for handling activities in the range of the order shown in co1 3 of Table 2. Some of the salient features common to this type of laboratory are as follows:

4

Layout -As far as possible active laboratories should be designed and used so as to segregate widely different levels and types of activity. Entry into a laboratory or exit out of it should always be through change rooms equipped with personnel monitoring and decontamination facilities. Counting rooms should be separate, conditioned to 25�C and 55 percent humidity and away from rooms for storage and working with radioactive material to avoid contamination and high background. Working space in this type of 13

JS:4!306-196s
laboratory should be allotted on generous scale as compared to a normal chemical laboratory. Ample storage space should be provided for radioactive samples. b)

Plumbing facilities - In high active sections, drains which are to handle radioactive effluents shall be an entirely separate system. However, in practice the liquid wastes are collected and stored in suitable containers before effecting controlled discharge into the environment and hence there is no need for a separate drainage The discharge of low level liquid wastes should system generally. These drains, if possible, should be limited to one or two drains. be of plastic or polyethylene pipe which could be easily repaired. The drain should be properly planned as to pass through areas away from work places and should lead `to sewers or collecting carboys or tanks.
Washing facilities - For cleaning purposes, the usual laboratory sink, without any sharp corner, or cracks, will suffice; stainless steel sinks offer certain advantages over soapstone or porcelain sinks, If the discharge of active wastes is through the sink, it is preferable to have a cup sink since this would present a relatively The taps should be small area for contamination accumulation. workable by elbow, foot or knee, so as not to contaminate. them by hands or gloves. A plastic or glass sheet should be fixed to the side of the sink which is closer to the worker to avoid spillage of the active liquids on the worker.

c)

4

MateriaZs -

The design of laboratories for radioactive work should be such that they can be easily kept clean. Places where Floors should have dust can accumulate are kept to a minimum. smooth continuous, non-absorbent surfaces and should be made of materials that may easily be cleaned, and may also be replaced, Floors are best covered with good-quality linoleum if necessary. cemented at the joints and edges and well polished with wax. Any minor contamination may be removed with wax, and in case of gross contamination the linoleum may be readily replaced. Wood and concrete surfaces are highly disadvantageous as floor surfaces because they are almost impossible to be decontaminated They should be linoleum and are quite expensive to be replaced. covered. Corners between walls and floor, or walls and ceiling should be rounded off. Walls and ceilings should be finished with a washable surface of coating, such as obtained with non-porous, However, where heavy contamination is good hard gloss paint. expected, it is advisable to use a strippable paint. These may be of hard wood thoroughly polished or Formica or rubber sheet with a smooth surface although stainless steel lining is sometimes recommended. The working surface should always be covered with disposable absorbent paper or 14

e) Bench to@ -

IS:4906-1968
It has been suggested that the plastic coated linoleum paper. bench tops be covered with special paper which are absorbent on In some cases, where one side and waterproof on the other. protection to external radiation is achieved with a concrete bench top, it is necessary to paint the surface with gloss paint or strippable paint. Drip
trays -

These

are used to minimize

risks from spills.

Fume hoods - Fume hoods are usually constructed of wood and glass, the former being covered with a good hard gloss paint. In fume hoods required for high activity work, a strippable paint, particularly inside the hood is advocated. Depending upon the type of work, a layer of replaceable absorbent waterproof backing or linoleum may be used to cover the working surface of the hood. The fume hood exhaust system should be capable of producing an air flow of about 30 to 60 linear metres per minute across the opening of the fume hood when the shutter is opeli to the \vorking position. The air passing in the cupboard will, of course, form part of the ventilation of the room and is usually LLlarge fraction of it. Smoke tests should be carried out to ensure that the draught is adequate under all circumstances to prevent radioactive dust and vapours being flown from the fume hood back into the air of the laboratory. The base structure should be 20 strong as to support The location of the fume hood inside the a load of 2 240 kg/m". radiochemical laboratory should be away from window, doors, ventilation outlets -and laboratory personnel. Due care should be @ven when considering the design and erection of exhaust ducts towards ease of replacement as well as minimizing the spread of contamination within buildings during the dismantling operations. For example, the duct length could be as short as possible and single piece and the exhaust fan should be mounted on the outside of the ducting to reduce contamination of the motor and to make it more accessible for maintenance purposes. Centrifugal fans arc more suited for this purpose. Provision should be made for the introduction of air filters at a later stage. A piece of ducting needing repairs after long run is best discarded as radioactive in workshop and waste; this prevents spread of contamination open areas, The speed of the air flow should be such that there should be no escape of air into the working place from the This may be checked by fume hood under operating conditions. smoke tests. Good top lighting should be provided in fume cnpboards and all bulbs and fittings should be outside the cugl~~~rd facilitating easy maintenance with the light passing through a ` sealed window `. Glove boxes - At higher levels of activity, the protection a fume hood ceases to be adequate and hence it becomes 15 given by necessary

I!3:4!#6-1968
to enclose the active material all the time in a sealed type of box, known as glove box, which is having one or more faces and made of transparent material, such as perspex. These boxes are particularly useful for dry material, of the activity of the order of 1 mCi/g and upwards. The box is fitted with an exhaust fan and operated under a slightly reduced pressure, so as to minimize any probability. of leakage of active material into the laboratory. The fan is preceded by a high efficiency filter so as to keep the fan and exhaust ducting as clear as possible. The exhaust air is directly carried into the exhaust ducting and then to the outside. Manipulations inside the glove box are done by means of long rubber gloves sealed into portholes in the sides. Any release of contamination from the glove box into the room is due normally to the moving material, for example, equipment, tools, etc, in and out of the box. However, this may be restricted by the use of a transit box which is a small box mounted on the side of the glove box and having two doors, one opening to the laboratory and the other into the glove box. The transit box helps in keeping the laboratory clean.

j)

Illumination, ventilation and air-conditioning - To ensure efficient manipulations, adequate illumination of the working place is an important factor. Though fluorescent lighting is usually recommended, disturbances might arise in counting set-ups, due to defective fluorescent lamps. The ventilation should provide 10 to 20 air changes per hour. The ventilating system should aim at preventing the spread of air-borne activity outside the building or from one part of the building to another. It is necessary to supply pure air, which should be filtered to prevent excessive dust from being brought in. The flow of air within the building should always tend to be from the less to the more active areas. Such an air flow will help to prevent the spread of activity into non-active areas. The location of the exhaust outlet shall be at least l-5 metres above the tallest point of building. There should be no taller buildings in the adjacent areas. Air-conditioning is recommended for counting because of the better performance of the instruments but it is not essential for the entire radiochemical laboratory.

7.4

Type 3 Laboratory

7.4.1 For the higher levels of activity of the order mentioned in Table 2 a specially designed laboratory will be required. Requirements for this type of laboratory are not described in this document.
7J

Laboratory Techniques and Equipment
for by

7.5.1 Choice of Process - The quantity of radicactive material chosen any specific purpose should not be greater than the minimum dictated

16

lS:4906-1968
experimental needs. It is preferable to work with solutions rather than dry powdery materials. The manipulation processes selected should .be those which avoid excessive transfers from one vessel to another. 7.5.2 Equipment - Special equipment consisting of tongs, forceps, trays and for the higher levels of gamma-activity apparatus, with adequate shielding should be provided. All equipment used or handling radioactive materials should be confined to the activity area and should be treated as contaminated. 7.5.3 Containers for active materials should as far as possible incorporate necessary shielding close to the source. Pipetting of solutions and operation of wash bottles should never be performed by mouth, but by means of compression bulbs and by remote handling equipment wherever necessary. Glass-blowing on contaminated apparatus shall be done with special -techniques which do not involve mouth operations. Squeeze type wash bottles and propipettes are useful for those operations. 7.5.4 Storage Cell - In addition to active areas, the laboratory should have provision for a well designed cubicle for storing radioactive sources. The area should be designed with some understanding of utilization of sources. 7.5.5 Decontamination Procedures - In any establishment using radioisotopes, contamination either direct or indirect is unavoidable in spite of the stringent measures adopted to prevent it. The types of contaminations which are common to any radioisotope laboratory are of three types: a) Personnel b) Equipment contamination, contamination, and

c) Work area contamination. Decontamination of each type mentioned above may be achieved careful manipulation of a set of procedures outlined below: by

7.5.5.1 Personnel &contamination - Personal cleanliness should be watched in all operations where there is a likelihood of even the slightest contamination; persons working with radioisotopes ( including those of low toxicity ) should wash their hands thoroughly with detergents before leaving the work area, either temporarily or at the end of the working period. Particular attention should be paid to the finger nails. After washing, the contaminated parts should be checked rigorously for any fixed residual contaTable 2 specifies the permissible levels of surface contamination. mination. For instance if washing with detergents and water fails to bring down the level of contamination below permissible level, say in the case of hand, other methods should be tried. One may resort to treatment with suitable chemicals, such as potassium permanganate and sodium bisulphite or EDTA However, chemical treatment should be conducted carefully solution. 17

ls:4!HM-1968
because this will enhance chances of uptake through porous skin. Even mild abrasions or scrubbing shall be done with soft nylon brush in such a way as not to injure the skin. However, treatment with chemicals shall always be done with utmost discretion depending upon the site of contamination and only under medical supervision. For example, any contamination in the eye or near the eye should be removed only with water and not chemicals. Similarly treatment of face and other sensitive organs should be conducted with greatest caution and on proper supervision of the authorized physician. Care shall be taken to avoid contamination of abrasions, cuts and puncture wounds and any person with any of these handicaps shall not be allowed to work with radioisotope, without proper sealing of the open wound. If skin break or cut occurs while working in an active area, the authorities concerned shall be informed immediately for contamination check-up and further decontamination. Needless to say, a medical officer should be consulted in all cases of contamination of cuts and sores.
TABLE 2 MAXIMUM DETAILI I% (2) (1) 1. Gmeral working areas ( floor, walls tabletops, equipment, surfaces, etc ): a) Transferable contamination: i) Slightly and moderately hazardous ii) Highly hazardous b) Fixed contamination: i) Slightly and c,oderatcly hazardous ii) Highly hazardous 2. Hands* ( Total contamination ) 3. Skin* 4. Clothing*: a) Personal b) Company issued 5. Shoes: a) Transferable contamination: i) Personal ii) Company issued b) Fixed contamination: i) Persona: ii) Company issued total contamination should NOTE 1 -The NO= 2 - The total contamination should Nm 3 - The total contamination should *No loose contamination is permitted; the PERMISSIBLE CONTAMINATION LEVELS OF SURFACE

MAXIMUMPERYKWBLELEVEL ---h-----' Alpha Beta-Gamma (3) (4)

'

2.5 dpm/cmt 2.5 dpm/cma 2.5 dpm/cma 2.5 dpm/cme 200 dpm 800 dpm 800 dpm 2 800 dpm

100 dpm/cm* 50 dpm/cm* 140 140 4 000 40 dpm/cmz &pm/cm2 dpm dpm/cm* ( Note 1 )

40 dpm/cm* ( Note I ) 140dpm/cme ( Note 2 ) 20 dpm/cmZ 50 dpm/cm2 280 dpm/cmr I Note 3 1 700 dpm/cm2' ( Note 2 )

1 dpm/cm* 2.5 dpm/cmr 1 IOOdpm 2 800 dpm not exceed not exceed not exceed levels given

10s dpm. 3.5 x 10` dpm. 1.4~ 1V dpm. are for fixed contamination.

18

IS:4906-1968 7.5.5.2 Decontamination of laboratory equipment and work areas - Any equipment which has been used ir connection with any radioactive work should be treated as contaminated unless proved otherwise by a carefui The types of decontamination treatment will depend upon the survey. nature of contaminant and upon the type of surface contaminated:

4

Glassware may be cleaned on a routine basis with chromic acid solution. If unsuccessful, other cleaning agents, such as concentrated nitric acid, ammonium citrate, penta sodium triphosphate and ammonium bifluoride should be tried. The solutions used for cleaning should be disposed off adequately as active waste (see 8). All metal objects may be cleaned by washing with a detergent solution followed, if necessary, with dilute nitric acid or a 10 percent solution of sodium citrate or ammonium bifluoride. In the case of stainless steel hydrochloric acid should be avoided as this will result in corrosion leading to greater difficulty in future deBrass polish for brass, oxalic acid for contamination work. rusty surfaces, ammonium citrate, dilute acids and organic solvents are also recommended for decontamination purposes. Though plastic paint surfaces may be decontaminated often successfully by using acetone, trichloroethylene or a 10 percent hydrochloric acid solution, it is advisable to strip off the paint and replace with new coatings. The above mentioned procedures are mostly for wet spillage on various surfaces. However, if a dry contamination occurs on any surface, as a first step in the process of decontamination a vacuum cleaner with a high efficiency filter should be used followed by suitable methods mentioned above. Protective apparel and personal clothing of staff or clothing, bedding of hospital patients who are being treated with radioisotopes shall be monitored regularly. If there is any significant contamination, they should be segregated and stored until the activity has fallen below the safe level as recommended in Table 2, failing which they should be laundered in a special laundering facility or discarded.

b)

4

4

4

handling radioactivity and._. Change Rooms - Every facility * 7.5.6 Wash Room . _ . should be equipped with change rooms at entry and wash room near the working place. The change room is a place where on entry into the building the worker changes into company clothing or overalls as required and goes At the time of Ieaving working area, he passes through into the hot areas. the change rooms, is monitored and then wears his personal clothing. Change room is also equipped with showers as well as decontamination A change room acts as a barrier against movement of radioactive solution. Wash rooms equipped with showers contamination outside working areas. 19

Is:4986-

1968
immediate clean-

should be installed in a facility. These would facilitate up in case of sudden spills, or suspected contamination. 8. WASTE

DISPOSAL

8.1 Waste problems

in a laboratory of Type 1 or 2 are not very significant However, the basic principles do not as in the case of Type 3 laboratory. change in the method of disposal in order to avoid a contamination problem In general, in the neighbourhood, resulting from indiscriminate release. three types of wastes are produced: a) Solids - The solids may comprise filter papers containing precipitates, contaminated glass apparatus, etc. These are collected in polyethylene bags and packaged in suitable containers. If the activity is high enough contact the Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Trombay, Bombay ( AS ) for further instructions regarding its handling and safe disposal. b) Solutions - If the solutions contain low activity they may be disposed of in the drain followed by a large flushing of water. The active sources, active spills, etc, may be collected in polyethylene carboys for disposal. In case of high activity refer to Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Trombay, Bombay ( AS ). ICRP provides sufficient guidance by fixing limits on the maximum permissible level ( MPL ) of activity that may be discharged into the environment without endangering the public. c) Gases-Those evolved particulate radioactive suitable ventilation. in the fume hood and other air-borne dusts are adequately exhausted with

8.2 For any major problems connected with safety of handling and _disposal of radioactive materials, advice may be sought from Bb.abha Atomic Research Centre, Trombay, Bombay ( AS ).

9. RADIATION

MONITORING

INSTRUMENTS

ways of recording the extent of exposure of This consists of a radio-sensitive personnel is provided by the film badge. film covered with suitable filters. These film badges should be provided for every radiation worker. Details of the film badge service may be obtained from the Officer-in-Charge, Directorate of Radiation Protection, Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Trombay, Bombay. 9.2 In addition to film badges which are worn on person certain other radiation monitoring instruments are necessary for Type 1 and Type 2 laboratories. For example, a portable battery-operated radiation survey meter, with a thin walled Geiger-Mllller counter, suitable for measuring

9.1 One of the most convenient

20

1!3:4!306-1968
beta and gamma rediations in the low range, and a battery-operated radiation survey meter with ionisation chamber ( gun type ) for measuring higher levels of beta and gamma radiations are very helpful in assessing the possible extent of radiation exposure. However, in assessing hand contamination a thin walled Geiger-Miiller counter connected to the main instrument assembly consisting of a power pack, count rate circuit and 50 microampere meter Surface contamination may be checked up by taking would prove useful. swipe samples of the loose contamination with filter papers and counting the activity in an endwindow Geiger-Miiller counter. 9.3 A modified vacuum cleaner assembly of known air intake capacity, for example, 20 litres/min may be used to estimate the air-borne activity. Air is drawn at this flow rate through a millipore filter paper held in a suitable suction head for a known period and the collected activity counted in an endwindow Geiger-Miiller counter. 10. GENERAL

SAFETY

RULES

10.1 A general code of behaviour typical for a radioisotope laboratory has been drawn below in accordance with the provisions of radiation safety. A summary of hazard control procedures has also been presented in the form of a table ( see Table 3 ):
a) Laboratory coats shall be worn in the laboratory. b) Unnecessary materials are not to be brought or allowed to lie in the laboratory. c) The movement and storage of radioactive material shall be under the control of a responsible person acquainted with safety procedures and regulations. d) The maintenance of an inventory of radioactive sources is very necessary. e) Eating, drinking and smoking are not allowed in the laboratory. f) No mouth operations are allowed, for example, pipettes, wash bottles and labels shall not be put to the mouth. g) Solid and liquid waste materials shall be put into suitably labelled receptacles. h) When wearing rubber gloves, disposable tissues should be used for handling taps, switches, etc. j) Gloves, clothing, apparatus and benches shall be monitored after work with radioactive materials. k) Radioactive work should not be undertaken by a person having a wound below the wrist. m) Film badges shall be worn on person and a record of the external dose received by the person shall be maintained. n) Radiation symbols should be exhibited wherever active sources are being manipulated or stored. 21

IS:4906-1968 10.2 These rules may of conditions. For instance, and perhaps a change of cordoned off with suitable a sense of awareness while with the code of practice. Table 3.
TABLE 3

course be modified or augmented to suit special spillage might warrant the use of overshoes Areas of particular hazard should be clothing. notices restricting entry. It is important to have working with radioactive material in accordance A summary of hazard control is drawn up in

HAZARD

CONTROL

PROCEDURES

( chuses lo.1 and 10.2 )
HAZARD EXPOSURE DUE TO PREVENTIVE MEASURE

%. (1) i) (2) Radiation (3) Handling of beta and gamma sources ( no direct exposure hazard from alpha ) apparatus 2. Spills ( these are very serious with alpha emitters ) (4) Distance :. Time of exposure 3: Shielding I. Careful technique: a) Providing table tops b) Working in trays c) Use of propipettes d) Use of gloves 2. Good house keeping 3. Containment Frequent monitoring 4: [mmediate decontamination 1. Containment 2. Avoid dry sources 3. Working in well ventilated place 4. Fume hoods 5. Masks and filters

ii)

Contamination

1. Contaminated

iii)

Ingestion and inhalation

1. Dust 2. Aerosols 3. Spills

10.3 Health Surveillance 10.3.1 Pre-employment Examination - All new personnel in radiation work shall have a pre-employment medical examination. Notes should be made of the family history, of the previous occupational history, and of previous diagnostic examination or radiation therapy. The examination shall include a complete blood count with determination of erythrocyte and leukocyte levels and a differential white cell count. 10.3.2 Routine Medical Examination - Medical examinations should be performed at a frequency depending upon the conditions of the occupational ICRP recommends that the workers who have been identified as exposure. being in conditions of work where doses might exceed 3/10 of the annual maximum permissible doses should be subject to special health supervision and personnel monitoring. 22

IS:49os-1968 10.4 Personnel Monitoring of occupational instruments to and to make it

10.4.1 External Radiation - Doses received as a result exposures shall be systematically checked with'appropriate ensure that maximum permissible doses are not exceeded possible to keep individual cumulative dose records.

10.4.2 Internal Radiation -Tests should be performed to estimate the total body burden for workers who deal with unsealed radioactive isotopes that may give tise to levels of ingestion or inhalation in excess of the maximum permissible concentrations. Such tests should also be performed where radioisotopes may enter the body through the skin or through skin punctures and open wounds. These tests may require the monitoring of breath and excreta, and the direct determination of the body burden by means of a total body monitor according to circumstances. 11. TRAINING, INDOCTRINATION AND SAFETY SUPERVISION

11.1 An important contributory factor in safety is the training and indoctrination given to the worker in radiation hazards and safety code of practice. For any new installation it is important that the staff should be given lectures and demonstration in the use of personnel monitoring equipment and good housekeeping methods by a trained health physicist. Ihere are regular training facilities with the Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Trombay, Bombay for imparting the necessary knowledge and practical experience. The trained health physicist or the health supervisor should conduct in turn periodical refresher courses and maintain a record of personal exposures. 11.2 Safety Supervision - The authority in charge of radiochemical laboratory shall identify a technically competent person or persons to provide advice on all relevant aspects of radiation protection and to provide such technical services as required in the application of appropriate recommendation for radiation protection and maintain exposure records as required by the safety code and national radiation safety practices. 12. PROTECTIVE MEASURES

12.1 Equipment - External radiation hazards may be minimized by making use of special equipment, such as long handled forceps, tongs, etc, In its while manipulating active sources from a distance of 15 to 100 cm. simplest form the long handled tongs will have a pistol grip together with a trigger mechanism cperating a ` grip ' which may be used to hold `the active source. An additional improvement over the latter one is the provision of a threaded screw which may be screwed up so that the grip remains securely Drip trays of stainless steel or plastic, fastened to the radioactive source. lined with absorbent paper, help to minimize the spread of contamination The tray should be without rough surfaces, or sharp in case of spills. 23

Is:4966-1963 For higher levels of gamma corners, to facilitate easy decontamination. activity, adequate shielding should be provided for containers of active materials and as far as possible incorporate necessary shielding close to the source. All manipulation should be done in a drip tray or in some form of double containers. 12.2 Pipetting of solutions and operations of wash bottles should never be performed by mouth, but by means of compression bulbs, remote handling pipettes, squeeze type wash bottles, etc. Never look down into a beaker or test-tube containing several millicuries of a strong beta emitter. Glassblowing on contaminated apparatus shall be done with techniques which do not involve mouth operation. 12.6 Placards bearing radiation symbols are required in the laboratory. The placards should also bear health safety instructions and should be put up, wherever radioactive sources are being manipulated or stored. 12.4 Equipment used for handling radioactive materials should be confined to the active area of laboratory. 12.5 Protective Clothing - In any radioisotope laboratory, the type of protective clothing required will depend upon the nature of work. For usual laboratory work ( Type 1 ) the ordinary laboratory coats are quite adequate. Ifwork involves decontamination of equipment, a change of shoes in addition is advisable. Overshoes made of plastic or rubber material may be used. 12.6 Work shall not be carried out with radioactive materials or materials suspected to be carrying contamination,. without wearing rubber gloves. Rubber gloves used for handling active materials should not be used for handling other items, even in the active laboratory. Contaminated gloves should be thoroughly washed before taking off. The wearing and removal of the gloves should be in the same way as that of the surgical technique to minimize the contamination of hands. It is necessary to point out here, that while these gloves might provide adequate protection against soft beta rays, they are not adequate against hard beta rays. Heavier rubber gloves are more robust and give some measure of protection against beta radiation; they may be made more comfortable to wear by lining with cotton fabric. 12.7 Respirators -When the concentration of air-borne activity in working atmosphere goes above the maximum permissible levels during any major or minor operation, special precautions have to be taken. These include the wearing of a fully impervious clothing made up of a full rubber suit with boots, gloves and helmet and fresh air is supplied through an airline. Before donning such a wear, a full change of clothing is recommended. However, where the contamination level is not so high and is only occasional, lighter type of suit made of thin plastic material may be used with a simple airline hood. During short periods of emergency a high efficiency respirator is used along with a hood to cover the head. The body as a whole is covered 24

IS:4!388-1968
In a radioisotope laboratory an accident, such with plastic overalls. even a spillage might warrant use of respirators and protective apparel. as

12.8 It is necessary to ensure the periodic check-up of handling equipment and examination at frequent intervals of respirators and protective clothing. This would help in keeping them ready for any emergency work. 13. HAZARD CHARACTERISTICS

RADIONUCLIDES

OF SOME

COMMON

radiation and hazard characteristics of some commonly used radionuclides are given in Appendix R. All values of MPC quoted are for occupational exposure only. For general public the permissible level is 1 /lO of the occupational value.

13.1 The

APPENDIX ( Clause 5.1
)

A
TO

CLASSIFICATION OF RADIOISOTOPES ACCORDING RELATIVF, RADIOTOXICITY PER UNIT ACTIVITY

croup 1
(1) Pb-210 Pa-231 Pu-241 cc249 croup 2 Na-22 Y-91 Te-129m Eu-152 Bi-207 Bk-249 Group 3 Be-7 K-42 Fc-52 c-14 K-43 Fe-55 F-18 Ca-47 Fe-59 Na-24 SC-47 co-57 Cl-38 SC-48 Co-58 Si-31 V-48 Ni-63 P-32 G-5 I Ni-65 s-35 Mn-52 cu-64 A-41 Mn-56 Zn-65 Cl-36 zr-95 I-124 (13 Y) Bi-2 10 Ca-45 Ru-106 1-126 Eu-154 At-2 11 G-46 Ag-1lOm I-131 Tb-160 Pb-212 Mn-54 Cd-115m I-133 Tm-170 Ra-224 Co-56 In-114m G-134 Hf-181 AC-228 co-60 Sb-124 cs- 137 Ta-182 Pa-2PO Sr-89 Sb-125 Ba-140 Ir-192 Th-234 Sr-90 Te-127m Ce-144 Tl-204 U-236 (2) PO-210 U-230 Pu-242 cl-250 (3) Ra-223 U-232 Am-241 Cf-252 (4) Ra-226 U-233 Am-243 (5) Ra-228 U-234 Cm-242 (6) AC-227 Np-237 Cm-243 (7) Th-227 Pu-238 Cm-244 (8) Th-228 Pu-239 Cm-245 (9) Th-230 Pu-240 Cm-246

25

IS:4906-1968
Group 3 (1) Zn-69m Kr-87 Nb-95 Rh-105 Sri-125 I-i34 Br- I F2 Eu-155 Tm-171 OS-185 Au-198 Bi-206 croup 4 H-3 Rb-87 Xe-13lm Th-232 O-15 Y-91m Xe-133 Th-Nat A-37 Zr-93 Cs-134m U-235 Co-58m Nb-97 Cs-135 U-238 Ni-59 Tc-96m Sm-147 U-Nat Zn-69 Tc-99m Re-187 Gc-7 1 Rh-1UYm Os-19lm Kr-85 In-l 13m Pt-193m Sr-85111 I-129 Pt-197m Conrd (2) Ga-72 Rb-86 MO-99 Pd-103 Sb-122 I-135 Pr- 143 Cd-153 Yb-175 OS-191 Au-199 Bi-2 12 (3) As-73 sr-85 l'c-96 Pd-109 Tc-125m Xe-135 Nd-147 Gd-159 Lu-177 OS-193 Hg-197 Rn-220 (4) As- 74 Sr-91 Tc-97m Ag- 105 Te-127 cs-131 Nd-149 Dy-165 W-181 Ir-190 Efg-197m Rn-222 (5) As-76 Y-90 Tc-97 Ag-111 Tc-129 Cs-136 Pm-147 Dy-166 IV-185 k-194 Hg-203 Th-231 (6) As-77 Y-92 Tc-99 Cd-109 Te-13lm Ba-131 Pm-149 Ho-166 W-187 Pt-191 Tl-200 Pa-233 (7) Se-75 Y-93 Ru-97 Cd-115 Tc-132 La-140 Sm-151 Er-I69 Re- 183 Pt-I93 Tl-"0 1 Np-239 @) k-82 Zr-97 Ru-103 In-151m I-130 Cc-141 Sm-153 Et=171 Re-186 Pt-197 Tl-2O'L (9) Kr-85m Nb-93m Ru-105 Sn-113 I-132 Cc-143 Eu-152 (9.2 hr) Re-188 Au-196 Pb-203

NOTE sub-group

IAEA refers to groups A, medium toxtcity -

1 to 4 as high lower sub-group

toxicity, medium toxicity - upper B, and low toxicity respectively.

APPENDIX ( cluuse
HAZARD B-l. BARIUM CHARACTERISTICS 140 ( 56Balg0 )
A fission product Activation Cross-Section Beta: Gamma:

B 13.1 )
OF SOME RADIONUCLIDES

Occurrence

or production:

( parent of La-140

).

Production Process U( n, f) Ba-140

Other Activities La-l 40 ( daughter 40.2 h )

Radioactive emission

0.48 Mev ( 40 percent ) l-02 Mev ( 60 percent ) 0.03 Mev*, 0.30 Mev, 0.16 Mev, 0.54 Mev*

( Lalgo activity Critical organ: Bone
*Most abundant gammas.

always present ) Maximum permissible body burden: 4 &Ii alignment

26

IS :4906-1968
Soluble or
ItiSOlUble

Organ of Reference

M. P.C. for 168 h/week r____h__ ----7 ( ;;;;t; )a ( ":;;;;,a ) 3 x 2 x ) lo-" 10-s G x 4.0 10-s

Soluble
Insoluble Physical Half-Life 12.8 d Daily urinary

CI ( LLI
r Bone -! Lung 1GI ( LLI

2 x70-4

x 10-s 10-s 4 x 10 s

Biological Half-L@ 65 d excretion rate: K 1 percent Factor ( calculated

Effective Half- L$e 10.7 d ). 140 ) 15 r/h at ( Ba - 140 + La-

Hazard characteristics: 1 cm/mCi. B-2.

BERYLIUM

7 ( ,Be' )
Cyclotron production; cosmic ray production.

Occurrence

or production:

Production Process Cl* ( p3, p3n ) Be7 Li7 ( p, n ) Be7 Radioactive emission Critical organ: Total body Soluble or Insoluble

Activation Cross-Section

Other Activities Not known

Gamma: 0.48 Mev ( approximately 12 percent ) EC*: 100 percent Maximum Organ of Reference permissible 600 l&i body burden:

M.P.G. for 168 h/week ----h-----7 ( =$;Jw ( yg;y; )a 0.02 2.0 ti2 4 x 2 x 10-s 10-s

Soluble Insoluble Physical Hatf- Life 53.6 d Hazard
*Emits

GI ( LLI ) Total body Lung GI (LLI) Biological Half- Life 180 d characteristics:
characteristic

4 x 10-r 3 X 10-6 Effective Half- Lzfe 41 d

K Factor

0.3 r/h at 1 cm/mCi.

Li X-rays

O-052 Kev.

27

ls:4906-1968 B-3. BROMJNE 82 ( saBrz2) Occurrence or production: Irradiation of ammonium potassium bromide. Activation Cross-Section 3.1 barns Beta: 0.44 Mev ( 100 percent ) bromide and

Production Process Brsi ( n, y ) Brsz Radioactive emission

Other Activities BrmmBred Cl4

Gamma: 0.55 Mev ( 70 percent ) 062 Mev ( 43 percent ) 0.70 Mev ( 29 percent ) 0.78 Mev ( 87 percent ) 0.83 Mev ( 26 percent ) I.04 Mev ( 30 percent ) 1.32 Mev ( 28 percent ) I.48 Mev ( 18 percent )

Critical organ: Total body Soluble or Insoluble

' Organ of Reference

Maximum permissible body burden: 10 &i M.P.C. for I68 h/week _hp___

Total body Soluble GI ( SI ) GI ( LLI ) Insoluble Lung Biological Half- Life 8d

3 x 10-s 3 x 10-s 4 x ,10--d Effective Hal$- Life 1.3 d

4 x 10-7 6 x IO-' 6 x IO-* 2 x IO-'

Physical Half- Life 1.5 d

Hazard characteristics: K Factor 147 r/h at 1 cm/mCi. 28

IS:4906-l%s B-4. CAESIUM Occurrence 137 ( &i'~' )

or production:

A fission product. Activation Cross-Section Beta: Gamma: IC: Other Activities
CS'N

Production Process
IJ ( n, f ) Csis' Radioactive emission

0.61 Mev ( 92 percent ) 1.17 Mev ( 8 percent ) 0662 Mev ( 82 percent via 2.6 min Ba13'm ) 10 percent ( characteristic Ba X-rays 32 Kev ) Maximum

Critical organ: Total body Soluble or Insoluble Organ of Reference

permissible body burden: 30 pC!i

M.P.C. for 168 h/week A-_ GJ$`W ( IQ;. .2 x 10-B 5 x 10-s 8 x 10-s 12

Soluble Insoluble Physical Half- Lzfe 1.1 x lo4 d Hazard characteristics:

Total

body

2 x 10-a 4 x 10-d

Lung GI ( LLI ) Biological Half- Life 70 d K Factor ) Reactor

Eflective Half- Life 70 d

3.1 r/h at 1 cm/mCi.

B-5. CALCIUM Occurrence

45 ( &a4S

or production:

irradiation

of CaCO, Other Activities Ca47 Ca4e SC'? SC49

Production Process Ca4' ( n, y ) Ca45

Activation Cross-Section 0.67 barns

Radioactive emission Critical Organ: Bone

Beta:

0.25 Mev Maximum permissible 30 FCi body burden:

29

IS:4906-1968
Soluble or Insoluble Organ of Reference M.P.C. for 168 h/week ~~~~_~~~ ---------Y ( M.P.C. )w ( M.P.C. )a &i/cc Soluble Insoluble Bone Lung GI (LLI) Biological Half- Life 1.80 x 104 d 9 x 10-s PCi /cc 10-S

4 x 10-s
3 x Effective Half- Life 10-T

2 x 10-s

Physical Half-Ltfe 164 d B-6.

162 d

CARBON

14 ( &Y )
Reactor irradiation of aluminium nitride.

Occurrence

or production:

Production Process X1* ( n, p ) C" Radioactive emission Critical Fat organ:

Activation Cross-Section 1.75 barns Beta: O-155 Mev Maximum

Other A&z&es Negligible

permissible burden: 300 /tCi

body

Soluble or Insoluble

Organ oj RPferencc

M.P.C. for 168 h/week -A>r.P.c. )W ( M.P.C ); &i/cc pCi/cc 10-C 10-s Effective Half- Life 12d

Soluble

( CGe ) Total

Fat body

8 x -

1O-3

Submersion Physiral Hal$ Lij> 2 x 106d

Biological Half- Life 12 d

30

IS:4906-1968 B-7. CHROMIUM
Occurrence

51 ( 24Crs1 )
Reactor irradiation chromate. Activation Cross-Section 13.5 barns EC ( 100 percent ) emits characteristic V X-ray of 5 Kev, Gamma: 0.323 Mev ( approximately 8 percent ) Maximum Organ of Reference of chromium or potassium

or production:

Production Process

Other Activities K42

E;;ibP;t?$ emission

Cr51

Critical organ: Total body Soluble or Insoluble

permissible 800 PCi

body burden:

A4.P.C. for I68 h/week h_____~ r-----( M.P.C. )m ( M.P.C. )a pCi/cc &I /cc 4 x IO-6 8 x lo-7 3 x lQ-6 Eflective Half-Life 26.6 d 0.18 r/h at 1 cm/mCi. 0.02 O-02

Soluble Insoluble Physical Half- Life 27.8 d Hazard characteristics:

GI (ELI) L&g ' GT (LLI) Biological Half- Life 616 d K Factor

B-8. COBALT
Occurrence

60 ( 27Coso )
Reactor irradiation of chloride in a reactor. Activation Cross-Section 36.30 Beta: cobalt or cobalt

or production:

Production Process

Other Activities

emission Gamma: Critical organ: Total body

barns C 060m 0.306 Mev ( 100 percent ) 1.48 Mev ( approximately 0.15 percent ) l-17 Mev ( 100 percent ) 1.33 Mev ( 100 percent ) Maximum permissible body burden 10 &i `I 31

IS:4!MSSoluble or Insoluble

1968 Organ of Reference M.P.C. for 168 h/week r~~~c------7 ( M.P.C. )a ( M.P.C )a &i/cc &i/cc 10-7 IO-' 3 x 10-s 6 x10-s Effective Half- Lije 9.5 d 5 x lo-' 10-s 3 x 10-a

Soluble Insoluble Physical HaFLife 1.9 x lo3 d Hazard characteristics: B-9. GOLD

GI (LLI) Total body Lung G { GI (LLI) Biological Half- Life 9.5 d

K Factor 13.0 r/h at 1 cm/mCi.

198 ( 7aAu'Ps) Reactor irradiation of gold. Activation Cross-Section Beta: Other Activities

Occurrence or production: Production Process AurD7 ( n, y ) Aurs8 Radioactive emission

Critical organ: Kidney Soluble or Insoluble

Soluble Insoluble Physical Half- Life 2.7 d Hazard characteristics:

AulDD 96 barns 0.29 Mev ( 1 percent ) 0.96 Mev ( 99 percent ) 1.37 Mev ( O-025 percent ) Gamma: 0.41 Mev ( 96.1 percent ) O-68 Mev ( 1.1 percent ) 1.09 Mev ( 0.26 percent ) IC: 3.6 percent Maximum permissible body burden: 20 &i M.P.C. for 168 h/week Organ of r_---AReference --( M.P.G. )w ( r&y;: )B j&i/cc 5 x IO-4 10-7 GI ( LLI ) 5 x 10-4 GI ( LLI ) 8 x lo-* Biological Half- Life 280 d K Factor 2.3 r/h at 1 cm/mCi, 32 Effective Half- Life 2.7 d

IS : 4906 - 1968 B-10. IODINE
Occurrence

131 ( 5J'3' }
Iodine-131 is obtained by the irradiation of Te-130 in a reactor as also in the products of nuclear fission of uranium.
ACtiUUtiOTZ Other

or production:

Production Process 138 Teis'J ( n, y ) Te---+I'31 B Beta:

Activities

Cross-Section 0.22 barns Te-121m Te-123 Te-125 ( Te-127m ) ( Te-129 ) Xe-131m Te-I31m ( 30 h ) ) ) ) ) ) ) )

Radioactive emission

0.25

Mev ( 3 percent

O-33 Mev ( 9 percent 0.61 Mev ( 87 percent 0.81 Mev ( 1 percent Gamma: 0.08 Mev ( 2 percent 028 Mev ( 5 percent ( 80 percent O-36 Mev

0.64 Mev ( 9 percent 0.72 Mev ( 3 percent IC: Critical organ: Thyroid Soluble or Insoluble Organ of Reference 4 percent Maximum

)
)

permissible 0.7 t.Ki

body burden:

M.P.C. r--_-__---_~ ( M.P.G. &i/cc

for 168 h/week )w ( M.P.C. @i/cc 3 x 10-s )a

Soluble Insoluble
PhJXiCUl

Thyroid GI ( LLI Lung )

2 x

10-s

6 x 1O-4 -

lo-' 10-7 Effective Half- Life 7.6 d

Half- Lif 8.0 d Hazard characteristics:

Biological Half- Lif 138 d K Factor

2.18 r/h at 1 cm/mCi. 33

-

ls:4!m-1968
B-11. IRON 59 ( ssF@
Occurrence

)
Reactor irradiation of iron the formation of iron-59. Activation Cross-Section 0.98 barns Beta: 0.27 O-46 l-56 O-19 l-10 l-29 Mev ( 46 percent Mev ( 54 percent hlev ( O-3 percent Mev ( 2.5 percent ML.' ( 56 percent Mev ( 44 percent ) ) ) ) ) ) body buTden: or Fe,O, _ - leads to

or production:

Production Process Fe-58 ( n, y ) Fe-59

Other Activities Fe58

Radioactive emission

Gamma:

Critical orgzm Spleen Soluble or Insoluble Organ of Reference

Maximum

permissible 20 PCi

M.P.C. for 162 h/week (_-__--h~___~ ( M;gi;J w ( ;$;E )B

Soluble Insoluhle Physical Half- Life 45.1 d Hazard B-12. characteristics

GI ( LLI ) { Spleen Lung GI ( LLI ) Biological Half- Life 600 d

6 x 1O-1 10-s 5 x 10-d

IO-' 5 x 10-8 2 x 10-s 9 x IO-8 Effective Half- Life 41.9 d

:

K Factor

6.2 r/h at 1 cm/mCi.

PHOSPHORUS
or production:

32 ( ,sP3L )
Produced in reactors 11)' irradiation phosphorus or KH,PO,. Activatiox Cross-Section 0.19 barns Beta: 1.71 Rlev h,Iaximum permissible 6 $i body burden: of red

Occurrence

Production Process P31 ( n, y ) Pp2 S3' ( n, p ) Psz Radioactive emission Critical organ: Bone

Other Activities KU
p33 s35 s37

34

IS Soluble or Insoluble Organ of Reference

:4906-1968

M.P.C. for 168 h/week ~----h--_-7 ( M.P.G. /tCi /cc )W ( M.P.C. PCiicc 2 x 10-S 3 X 10-S 4 x IO-8 Effect&e Half- L;fe l-l.1 d )a

Soluble Insoluble Physical Half- Life 14.3 d B-13. PLUTONIUM 239

Bone

2 x 10-d 2 x10-4

{

E?LLI )
Biological Half- Life 1.155 d ( aqPu2= )

Occurrence

or production:

The target is not a specified one. Various chemical forms of uranium may be employed. Activation Cross-Section Other Activities

Production Process ?

~228

( n,

y

) U229_k+

Np22L_+Pu229

2.74 barns

Not known

23*5m Radioactive emission Critical organ: Bone Soluble or Insoluble

2.3d Aloha:
1

5.09 Mev ( 10.7 oercent `I 5.13 Mev ( 16.8 percent i 5.14 Mev ( 72.5 percent ) Maximum permissible body burden: 0.04 flCi M.P.C. for 168 h/week ~~~~~h~~~~_~ ( M.P.C. &i,`cc )W (M.P.C.), yCi/cc 6 x IO-`" 10-l' 5 x IO-8 Effecfice Half- Life 7.2 x lo1 d

Organ of Reference

Soluble Insoluble Physical Half- L$e 8.9 x lo6 d

Bone Lung GI (LLI) Biological Halj2;fe 7.3 x 10% d 35

5 x 10-s 3 x 10-a

IS : 4906 ~-1968 B-14. POLONIUM
Occurrence

210 ( s4Po*io RaF )
Reactor irradiation of bismuth the formation of polonium-210. Activation Cross-Section oxide leads to

or production:

Production Process 210
Bi203 (n, y) Bi--_-_tPo2~0

Other Activities

O,O19 barns 5.305 Mev ( 100 percent 2 percent ) )

None

(5d)P Radioactive emission Critical organ: Spleen _ Soluble or Insoluble Organ of Reference Alpha: Gamma:

0.8 Mev

( 0.001

Maximum

permissible body burden: 0.03 yCi

M.P.C. r___-h

for I68 h/week ---( M.P.C. )w ( M.P.C.), &i/cc &i/cc 2 x lo-`0 2 X IO-10 7 x IO-11 5 x 10-s Effective Half- Life 42 d

Soluble Insoluble Physical Half- Life 138.4 d

Spleen Kidney

Lung

7 X 10-s 8 x 1O-6 ) 3 x 10-a

GI ( LLI

Biological Half-Life 60 d

B-15. POTASSIUM
Occurrence

42 ( isK4" )
Reactor irradiation of potassium potassium chloride in a reactor. Activation Cross-Section 1.1 barns Beta: Gamma: carbonate or

or production:

Production Process K41 ( n, y ) K'2 Radioactive emission Critical organ: Total body

Other Activities
p32 S36 (-Jss Cl33

2.0 Mev ( 18 percent ) 3,6 Rlev ( 82 percent) 1.53 Mev ( 18 percent) Maximum 36 permissible 10 &i body burden:

IS : 4906 - 1968 Soluble or InsoLuble Organ of Reference ,Vl.P.C. for 168 h/week ~~~~~~h~~~~_ ( M.P.C. p.Ci /cc Soluble Physical Half- Life 0.52 d Hazard B-16. characteristics: RADIUM 226 K Factor ( ssRa2?6 ) It is a naturally occurring radioisotope available in significant quantities in pitchblende. Activation Cross-Section Alpha: Gamma: IC: Activity Critical Bone organ: Otgan of Reference 4.589 4.777 0.188 ( 5.7 percent ) ( 94.3 percent) ( approximately Other Activities Daughter products the U-Ra series of )* ( M.P.C. FCi /cc 7 x 10-T 4 x 10-s I$fective Half- Life 0.52 d )a

GI (3
{
GI

( LLI

)

3 x 10-s 2 x IO-4

Biological Half- Life 5% cl 1.37 r/h at 1 cm/mCi.

Occurrence

or production:

Production Process Natural radioisotope

Radioactive emission

4 percent

)

2 percent due to Radon

and daughters

present

Maximum

permissible body burden: 0.1 PCi

Soluble or Insoluble

M. P.C. for 168 h/week r---_-A ---( M.P.C. )w ( M.P.C.; $X/cc &X/cc 1O-11 6 x 1O-8 Effective Half-@ 1.64 x at 1 cm/mCi. IO* d

Soluble Insoluble Physical Half-Li$e 5.9 x IO5 d Hazard characteristics:

Bone GI ( LLI )

IO-' 3 x 10-4

Biological Half- Life 1.64 x lo* d K Factor 8.25 37
r,`h

IS:4!lO6-1968
B-17. SILVER
Occurrence

110 m ( 4,Ag110m )
Irradiation of silver in a reactor the formation of Ag-I 10. Activation Cross-Section 3.2 barns Beta: 0.087 0.53 2.87 0*6G 0.68 0.71 0.74 O-76 0.81 0.88 0.94 1.38 1.48 1.51 leads to

or production:

Production Process Agrog ( n, y ) Ag*lOm Radioactive emission

Other Activities None

Mev ( 55 percent ) Mev ( 43 percent ) Mev ( 2 percent via 24 set Ag-110 ) Mev Mev Mev Mev Mev Mev Mev Mev Mev Mev Mev ( 94 percent ) ( 12 percent ) ( 17 percent ) ( 5 percent ) (21 percent) ( 8 percent ) ( 69 percent ) ( 29 percent ) ( 26 percent ) ( 5 percent ) ( 14 percent ) ) ]

Gamma:

IT: Critical organ: Kidney Soluble or Insoluble

[ 0.116 Mev ( approximately 0 percent ( IC : 2 percent to 24 set Ag-110 ) Maximum

permissible body burden: 10 PCi

Organ of Reference

M. P.C. for 168 h/week r-----~ ----7 ( M.P.C.),V (M.P.C.), t*Ci/cc &S/cc 7 x 10-a 3 x 10-S 5 x 10-s Effective Half- Life 10 d

Soluble Insoluble Physical Half- Lzfe 270 d Hazard characteristics:

GI ( LLI Lung GI (LLI)

)

3 x 10-d

3 x 10-a

Biological Half- Life 10 d Nil. 38

IS : 4906 - 1968

B-18. SODIUM
Occurrence or

24 ( iiNar" ) production: Reactor irradiation sodium chloride yields sodium-24. Activation Cross-Section 0.53G barns Beta: Gamma: 1.39 Mev ( 100 percent ) ) of sodium carbonate. or sodium bicarbonate Other Actizlities
Cl36 c-3"

Production Process Na'3 ( n, y ) Na" Radioactive emission

p3: S3"

1.37 Mev ( 100 percent 2.76 Mev ( 100 percent
Maximum

)
body burden:

Critical organ: Total body Soluble or Insoluble
orpn of

permissible 7 PCi

lt+retice

:\I. P.C. for 168 h/week C._-.--I_._h_.-___~

( M.P.C.

)W ( M.P.C. $Zi/cc

)3

FCi /cc

solub:c
Insoluble Physical Half- Lif O-63 d ' IIazard B-19. characteristics STRONTIUM

GI (SI) GI ( LLI ) Biological Half- L$e 11 d

2 x IO-3 3 X IO-4

4 x IO-' 5 x 10-s Effectiue Half-Life 06 d

: I< Factor
90 ( ssSrgo )

18.4 r/h at 1 cm/nlCi.

Occurrence

or production:

Strontium-90

is a fission product. Other Actizities C&S" YQO

Production Process U ( n, f ) SrQo Radioactive emission Critical Bone organ:

Activation Cross-Se&m Beta: 0.54 Mev Ygo -p 2.26 Mev Maximum

permissible 2 PCi

body burden:

39

l[S : 4906 - 1968
.Wuble or Insoluble Organ of Reference M.P.C. for 168 h/week ~-__--h_.---~ ( M.P.C. &i/cc Soluble Insoluble Plpical Half- Life 101 d Hazard characteristics: Bone Lung GI ( LLI ) 4 x 10-G 10-J ),y ( M.P.C. pCi/cc 4 x 2 x 6 x lo-lo 10-g IO-* )B

4 x

lliolo~,oicnl
Hay- I.$ 1.8 x IO-' d 6.4

Effective
Ha lJ Life x lo3 d

Mostly in equilibrium Ygo ( T- l/2 64.4 h -

with Mev p 2.2 ).

B-20.

SULPHUR

35 ( 16S35)
Obtained chloride by irradiation in a reactor. of sulphur or potassium &her Activities P32
Cl38

Occurrence

or production:

Production Process S3* ( n, y ) S3" Cl35 ( n, p ) sss

Activation Cross-Section 0.26 barns O-19 barns

S3'
p33

Nat" Radioactive emission Critical Testis Soluble or Insoluble Organ of Reference organ: Beta: 0.167 Mev permissible 90 f&i body burden:

Maximum

~-------h--.__._7 ( M.P.C. PCi [cc

M.P.C.

for

168 h/week jia

)w ( M.P"C. &i/cd:

Soluble Insoluble

Testis GI (LLI) Lung 40

6 x

lo-"

9 X X0--~

IS:4906-1968 Physical Half- Life 87.1 d B-21. THORIUM
Occurrence or 232, NATURAL production: This is a naturally occurring radioisotope abundantly available in monazite.

Biological Half- Life 623 d

Effective Half-L;Se 76.4 d

Production Process
Natural radioisotope Alpha: IC: Critical Bone Soluble or organ:

Activation Cross-Section -

Other Activities
MsThI ( Ra2'$ ) and daughter

Radioactive emission

4.007 Mev ( 100 percent ) MsThII ( Ac**s ) 6.13 h 24 percent Maximum permissible 0.04 &i body burden:

Insoluble

Organ of Reference

M.P.C. for 168 h/week r--~--_._~ ( M.P.C. ),, ( M.P.G. )a y Ci /cc
+i /cc 2 x ) 4 x 10-d 10-s 7 X 10-13 4 x 10-1s 7 x 10-s

Soluble Insoluble

Bone Lung GI ( LLI

Physical Half-L+
5.1 x

( Thz32 )
lo'* d

Biological Half-Life 7.3 x lo4 d ( rH3 )
Activation tritium. of lithium

Effective Half- Life
7.3 x 101 d

E-22. TRITIUM
Occurrence

or production:

leads to the formation

of

Production Process
Li6 ( n, tc ) H3 Radioactive emission Critical organ: ( HTO or H3,0 Beta:

Activation Cross-Section O-028 barns
O-018 Mev Maximum ) body tissue

Other Activities
None

permissible body burden: lo3 l&i 2 X 10' l&i

Sol ( total body ) 41

IS:4906-1968 Soluble or
Insoluble Organ of Reference ~_ M.P.C. for I68 h/week ~~~~-h~~~~~ )w ( M.P.C. l&i /cc 2 x 2 x 4 x 10-s 10-G 10-Q )a,

( M.P.C. /Lci/cc

Soluble HTO

or H3,0 )

Body tissue Total body Skin ( submersion ) Biological Half- Life 12 d

H5s ( submersion

0.03 0.05 -

Physical Half- L;fe 4.5 B-23. x

Effectiire Half- Life 12 d

lo3 d URANIUM, NATURAL

Occk-ence

or production:

Occurs

naturally. Other Artir:ities

Production Process Natural radioisotope percent percent ) ) ) Alpha: IC: Critical organ: Kidney Soluble OY Insoluble

Activation Cross-Section -

Ikay

prodUcts
-

Ur3* ( 39.24 Uz3* ( 0.040 Radioactive emission

U235 ( 0.071 4 percent

4.2 Mev ( 100 percent )

-

Organ of Rej&etrce

.\I.]`.(,`. r-_---h /LCi/cc

for

( R,I.P.C. )W GI (LLI) { Kidney Lung GI (LLI) ( U2ss-U23* ) Biolqgical Half- Life 2 x' 10-J 6 x IO-' 2 x 10-J

168 h/week ------7 ( h4.P.C. )a pCi/cc ; ; w,

Snluble
Insoluble Plqical Half-L+

2 i< IO-11 3 x 10-s

l-6 x 10'2 d

15d
42

IS:4906-1968 B-24. ZINC 65 ( ,,Zn"9 )
Occurrence or production: Reactor irradiation of zinc-65. Activation Cross-Section 0.44 barns EC Beta: EC ( 98.5 p+O*325 Gamma: Emits characteristics of zinc leads to formation Other Activities Znss ) ZrYsti

Production Process Zna4 ( n, y ) Zn6b Radioactive emission

percent ) Mev ( I.5 percent ) Cu X-rays rays emitted is emitted.

I.1 1 Mev ( 45`percent

8.0 Kev when a body burden:

2.5 Mev gamma positron Critical crgan: Total bc dy Soluble or Insoluble Organ of Reference

Maximum

permissible 60 &I

M.P.C. for 168 h[week ~-__-__~_ ---7 ( M.P.C. )W ( M.P.C. )a PCi /cc f&i /cc 4 x 4 x 2 x 10-s 10-a 10-s 10-s 10-s -

Soluble Insoluble Physical Half- Lif 245 d Hazard B-25. characteristics:

Total body { Prostate Lung Biological Half- Life 933 d K Factor 95 ( 40Zrgs )

Effictive Half- Life 194 d 2.7 r/h at 1 cm/mCi.

ZIRCONIUM

Occurrence

or production:

Reactor irradiation of zirconium dioxide in a reactor yields Zr-35 besides occurring in the fission products. Activation Cross-Section Other Activities
ZrS7 NbS7 r\rT\,S5

Production Process Zrn4 ( n, y ) Zrns

,
d

0.03

barns

daughter Hf 115 HflSl
( from

impurities

)

43

Production Process Radioactive emission Beta:

Activation Cross-Se&on

Other Activities

0.360 Mev ( approximately 43 percent ) 0.40 Mev ( approximately 35 percent )

0.88 Mev ( 2 percent ) Gamma: 0.72 Mev ( approximately 55 percent ) 0.75 Mev ( approximately 48 percent ) 0.23 Mev ( 0 percent via 90 h Nb-95m ) IC: Critical organ: Total body Soluble or Insoluble Organ of Referetue 2 percent Maximum permissible body burden: 20 &i M.P.C. for I68 h/week r.-___h -------7 ( M.P.C. )w ( M.P.C.), $Zi/cc Soluble Insoluble Physical Half- Lift 63.3 d GI (LLI) { Total body Lung GI (LLI) Biological Half- Life 450 d 6 x 1O-4 1.0 6 x%-4 &i/cc IO-' 4 x 10-B 1o-s lo-' Efictive Half- Ltfe 55.5 d

44

