**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 975 (1988) : Methods for determination of colour fastness 
of textile materials to sublimation [TXD 5: Chemical 
Methods of Test] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS : 171 - 1988 

(Reaffirmed 2004) 



Indian Standard 

METHOD FOR 

DETERMINATION OF COLOUR FASTNESS OF 

TEXTILE MATERIALS TO SUBLIMATION 

( First Revision ) 



UDC 677-0164734 : 535682 



® Gofgrrigto 1989 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

f. 2 January 1989 



IS : 975 - 1988 

Indian Standard 

METHOD FOR 

DETERMINATION OF COLOUR FASTNESS OF 

TEXTILE MATERIALS TO SUBLIMATION 

( First Revision ) 

0. FOREWORD 



0.1 This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was 
adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards 
on 31st August 1988, after the draft finalized 
by the Chemical Methods of Test Sectional 
Committee had been approved by the Textile 
Division Council. 

0.2 This standard was first published in 1956 
and has been revised on the basis of experience 
gained during its use. Changes have been 
made in the preparation of composite specimen, 
procedure and assessment of colour fastness 
ratings so as to bring it in line with other similar 
standards on colour fastness tests. 



0.3 Colour fastness of textile materials is of 
considerable importance to the consumer. The 
fastness depends not only upon the nature and 
depth of shade of the dyestuff used but also 
upon the nature of the fibre and the method of 
dyeing or printing employed; the same colour- 
ing matter, when used in dyeing or printing 
different fibres or when applied by different 
methods upon the same fibre, may give vastly 
different results. Formulation of standard 
methods of test for determining colour fastness 
of textile materials to different agencies, likely 
to effect change in colour is, therefore, 
necessary. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard prescribes a method for the 
determination of colour fastness of textile 
materials of all kinds and in all forms to 
sublimation in storage. 



2. PRINCIPLE 



2.1 A specimen of the textile in contact with 
specified adjacent fabrics is rolled in the form 
of a cylinder and placed in a glass tube, and is 
heated to the required temperature. The speci- 
men is then removed and cooled, and the 
degree of staining of the adjacent fabrics is 
assessed with grey scale. 

3. SAMPLING 

3.1 Sample to determine conformity of a lot of 
coloured textile material to a specification shall 
be selected so as to be representative of the lot. 

3.2 Sample drawn in compliance with the 
relevant material specification or as agreed to 
between the buyer and the seller to evaluate 
colour fastness of the material in the lot shall be 
representative of the lot. 

4. COMPOSITE SPECIMEN 

4.1 Two Adjacent Fabrics — Each measuring 
10 X 4 cm, one piece made of same kind of 
fibre as that of the textile to be tested or that 
predominating in the case of blends, the second 



piece made of polyester fibre, unless otherwise 
specified. 

4.2 Preparation of Composite Specimen 

4.2.1 If the textile to be tested is fabric, place 
a specimen 10 v 4 cm between two adjacent 
fabrics ( see 4.1 ) and sew along one of the 
shorter sides to form a composite specimen. 

4.2.2 If the textile to be tested is yarn, knit or 
weave it into fabric and draw from it a 10 X 
4 cm specimen. Treat it as in 4.2.1, alternatively, 
form a layer of parallel lengths of yarn between 
the two adjacent fabrics ( see 4.1 ), the amount 
of yarn taken being equal to half the combined 
mass of the adjacent fabrics. Sew along two 
opposite sides to hold the yarn in place and to 
form a composite specimen. 

4.2.3 If the textile to be tested is loose fibre, 
comb and compress an amount approximately 
equal to half the combined mass of the adjacent 
fabrics (see 4.1 ), into a sheet 10 X 4 cm size, 
and sew along all four sides to hold the fibre in 
place and to form a composite specimen. 

5. APPARATUS 

5.1 Glass Tube — about 15 mm in diameter. 

5.2 Drying Oven — capable of being maintain- 
ed at required temperature ±2°C. 

5.3 Grey Scale — For evaluating staining. 



1 



IS s 975 - 1988 



6. PROCEDURE 

6.1 Roll the composite specimen in the form of 
a cylinder and place it in the glass tube. Heat 
the tube ( with the specimen ) in the oven under 
either of the following conditions: 



Temperature 
(°G) 

120 ±2 
150 ±2 
180 ±2 
210 ±2 



Time 
( seconds ) 

120 
30 
30 
30 



6.2 Remove the specimen from the tube and 
unroll it. Evaluate the degree of staining of 
the pieces of adjacent fabrics with grey scale 



(see IS: 769-1982*). 

Notk 1 — The treated test specimens and the pieces of 
adjacent fabric should have cooled after drying and 
should have regained their normal moisture content 
before evaluation. 

Notk 2 — In cases of doubt in the colour fastness 
rating as assessed by an observer, the assessment should 
be done by at least three observers and the overall 
average rating should be reported. 

7. REPORT 

7.1 Report the numerical rating for staining of 
each piece of adjacent fabric used in the penetra- 
tion of composite specimen, and the conditions 
of treatment, that is, the temperature and time. 



•Method for evaluating staining (first revision ). 



Printed at Arcee Press, New Delhi, India 



