Indian Standard

IS : 6494 . 1988 ( Reaffirmed 2000 )

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR WATERPROOFING OF UNDERGROUND WATERRESERVOIRSANDSWIMMINGPOOLS
f First Revision)
Second Rcyrint OCTOBER 1997

UDC

621.642.37 + 725.74 : 699.82

@ Co/pi&

1989

BUREAU
MANAK Or 4

OF

.INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARC

BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

Juns 1989

IS : 6494- 1986

Indian Standard

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR WATERPROOFING OF UNDERGROUND WATERRESERVOIRSANDSWIMMINGPOOLS
(First Revision)
0,

FORE

WORD
etc, which are important of overall waterproofing taken into consideration civil construction work. from the point of view and which need to be by those entrusted with

0.1 This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 1 September 1988, after the draft finalized by the and Damp-proofiing Sectional Waterproofiing Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 0.2 During the construction of under round Water reservoirs and concrete swimming p %l Is, it is essential to ensure the wateretightness of the resulting structures so that the flow of water from inside the structure to outside, and the infiltration of water from the surrounding soil into the structure are effectively prevented. This standard is intended to provide guidance to the engineers, contractors and others engaged in building activity in the methods to be adopted for the construction of water-tight underground reservoirs and swimming pools. 0.2.1 This standard lays down provisions relating to membrane type of waterproofing including certain other provisions relating to construction technique, the quality of material,

0.3 The standard was published in 1972 and the revision of this standard has been taken up to incorporate further changes necessary in view of the revision of various standards referred to in this standard. In this revision the detail procedure to be followed in carrying out chemical injection treatment has been added. 0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.
*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ).

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard lays down the procedure to be followed and the precautions to be taken during the construction of underground water reservoirs and swimming pools SO as to ensure the watertightness of the resulting structure. Method of maintenance and rectification of defects noticed during the construction are also covered in this standard. 2. REQUIREMENTS OF STRUCTURE, DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION DETAILS 2.1 Requirements for Swimming Pools and Underground Reservoirs - These structures should be built so as to comply with the requirements of the best practice pertaining to reinforced concrete, plain concrete or such other form of concrete construction as may be employed [ see IS : 3370 ( Part 1 )-1965* 1. The requirements *Code of practice for concrete structures for the storage of liquids: Part 1 General requirements. 1

laid down under into consideration.

2.1.1 to 2.1.9 shall also be taken shall be taken to resulting from the and creep, of tempera-

2.1.1 Suitable precautions avoid cracks and leakages following: Movements a>

due to shrinkage

b) cl

Movements due to variation ture and humidity,

Movements due to dissipation of heat generated by the concrete in the process of hydration, Damage to the concrete by the percolation of chemically aggressive liquids from outside, Damage due to uneven settlement of foundations, Cracking of concrete caused by rusting of bars, and uplift force.

g) Hydrostatic

ISr6494-1988 2.1.2 Construction joints should be set at right angles to the general direction of the member ( see Fig. I ). The position and arrangement of construction joints should be determined at the design stage and indicated on the drawings. Consideration should be given to the limiting number of such joints and to keeping them free from possibility of percolation ( see .5.5 ). The surface-film of the first-placed concrete should preferably be removed while the concrete is still green to expose the aggregate and leave a sound irregular surface. This may be effected by spraying wrth water or air and water, assisted If the conby light brushing, where necessary. crete has been allowed to harden, it will be necessary IO achieve the desired surface by hacking the whole of the surface, care being taken to avoid damaging the aggregate. 2.1.2.1 While the remainder of the concrete should be kept continuously wet, curing of the joint surface may be suspended a few hours before concreting is to be resumed so as to permu no more than superficial drying of the joint surface J ust b efore concreting is resumed the roughened joint surface should be thoroughly cleaned and made free of all loose matter, preferably without re-wetting, and then treated with a thin layer of cement grout or cement-sand The ratios mortar worked well into the surface. of sand to cement, and water to cement in this grout or mortar should not exceed those in new Special care should be taken to avoid concrete. segregation of the concrete along the joint plane and to obtain thorough compaction. 2.1.2.2 Alternatively, for the layerof grout or mortar provided that the workability concrete placed in contact slightly increased. horizontal joints, may be omitted, of first batches of with the joint is b) which is sufficiently impervious and non-porous. to water

2.1.3.1 The directions given in 3 of IS : 3370 (Part l)-1965* may be followed while designing the concrete mix. 2.1.4 The permeability of any uniform thoroughly compacted concrete of given mix proportions is very largely dependent on its watercement ratio. While an increase in this ratio would lead to an increase in the inherent permeability, the consequences of reducing the water-cement ratio of a mix with a given cement content, that is, failure to achieve complete compaction of the drier mix, are likely to be much more serious. For a given mix made with particular materials, there is a lower limit to the water-cement ratio which can be used economically on any one job. It is essential to select a richness of mix compatible with the available aggregates, whose particle shape and grading have an important bearing on the workability which must be suited to the means of compacSuitable additives may be added tion s cted. to map e concrete dense and workable. Efficient vibrating equipment should be employed for compating the concrete. 2.1.4.1 In practice, it is usually convenient particularly when dealing thin with congested reinforced sections, to specify a cement content sufficiently high to ensure that thorough compaction is in fact obtainable with the means available whilst maintaining a sufficiently low watercement ratio. In thicker sections, where a reduction in cement content may be desirable to restrict the temperature rise due to cement hydration, a lower cement content is usually permissible, partly because the overall permeability of the section is reduced by the greater thickness and partly because the less congested conditions may permit thorough compaction of a somewhat drier mix. 2.1.5 Curing Concrete should be properly has an important influence cured. on the

21.3 The concrete mix proportions should be so designed as to produce a concrete from the materials available: a) which has a workability to ensure that, with the means available, it can be satisfactorily placed in the formwork and compacted without risk of segregation, honeycombing or bleeding; and

*Code of practice for concrete structuresfor the storage of liquids: Part 1 General requirements.

/-PREPARED JOINT SURFACE

FIG. 1

A TYPICAL CONSTRUCTION JOINT 2

IS:64!94-lmpermeability of concrete and it is necessary keep the concrete moist, particularly during first few days. to the 3.2 Aggregates a) The aggregates should not have an absorption greater than 2 percent, as measured ygga3c*cordance with 2 of IS : 2386 (Part 3)-

2.1.6 The permissible stresses in concrete and steel shall be according to the recommendations given in 3.3 and 3.4 of IS : 3370 (Part 2)-1965*. 2.1.7 Slabs in contact with water shall designed in accordance with the provisions 3.3.1 of IS : 3370 (Part 2)-1965*. be of

.
b) Grading

1) The

2.1.8 To reduce shrinkage stresses as far as possible, there should not be less than 0.3 percent of steel in any direction. 2.1.9 In long walls, it is recommended that the walls be divided into sections not more than 15 m long with a gap of about 30 cmleft between sections so that the shrinkage in the long sections may occur as far as possible before the gaps are concreted, and the longer this can be deferred, the better. The use of carefully rebated joints is imperative at these construction joints. 2.2 Requirements Reservior Only for Underground Water

grading should be such as to produce a concrete with the specified proportions and consistency and one that will work readily into position without segregation and without the use of an excessive Water content, and can be readily compacted into a dense impervious mass. aggregate should be in accordance with Table 4 of IS : 383-1970t (all zones).

2) Fine

size of coarse aggregate 3) The maximum should be as large as possible, but limited to the least of the following dimensions: i) one quarter of the smallest distance between the opposite faces of the section, ii) five miliimetres less than the minimum cover to the reinforcement, and iii) five millimetres less than the clear distance between the main reinforceing bars. shall be free 3.3 Water - Water terious materials, reasonably clean source approved by the engineer. from deleand from a

2.2.1 To avoid temperature changes as far as possible, the reservoirs may, with advantage, be built partly into the ground SO that the soil is available to cover the roof, if necessary, and to form embankments on the outside SO as to enclose the reservoir completely in a covering of earth. Special precautions should be taken to guard against evaporation and the movements arising from extremes of temperature before the covering is made. 2.2.2 The permissible stress in steel reinforcement shall be governed by the provision of 3.4.2 of IS : 3370 (Part 2)-1965*. 2.2.3 Lapping tanks should be 25 percent of the vertical section. reinforcement in circular SO arranged that not more than bars are jointed at any one of

3.4 Steel - Steel reinforcement shall comply with the requirements of IS : 432 (Part l)-1982f, IS : 432 (Part 2)-19825 or IS : 1786-1985)(. 3.5 Bitumen Felt - It shall conform Grade 2 of IS : 1322-19827 and Type 2 of IS : 7193-1974**. 3.6 Bitumen Mastic IS : 5871-1970tt. It shall to Type 3, 2, Grade conform to

2.2.4 If the reservoir was partly underground and partly above ground in the portion exposed to atmospheric conditions, there should not be less than 0.3 percent of steel in either direction. 3. MATERIALS 3.1 Cement - Portland cement conforming to IS : 269-19767 or Portland blastfurnace cement conforming to IS : 455-1976t or Portlzi$ pozzolana cement conforming to IS : 1489-19765 shall be used.
*Code of practice for concrete structures for the storage of liquids: Part 2 Reinforced concrete structures. $Specification for ordinary and low-heat Protland cement ( third reoision). :Specification for Portland slag cement ( tlrirdrecision). $SpPcification for Portland pozzolana cement ( second revision).

*Methods of test for aggregates for concrete: Part 3 Specific gravity, density voids, absorption and bulking. tspecificatlon for coarse and fine aggregates from natural sources for concrete ( second r&ion ).

SSpecification for mild steel and medium tensile steel bars and hard-drawn steel wire for concrete reinforcement: Part 1 Mild steel and medium tensile steel bars ( third revision ) . QSpecification for mild steel and medium tensile steel bars and hard-drawn steel wire for concrete reinforcement: Part 2 Hard-drawn steel wire ( third mnsion ). /Specification for high strength deformed steel bars and wire for concrete reinforcement ( third revision ). :rSpecilication for bitumen felts for waterproofingand damp-proofing ( third revision ). **Glass fibre base coal tar pitch and bitumen felts. ttSpecification for bitumen mastic for tanking and damp-proofing (jirsl revision ).

3

1s~: 6494 - 1988 4. WATERPROOFING
TREATMENT 4.4.3 If bitumen mastic is used for the dampproofing treatment, it shall conform to IS : 58711970*. 4.4.4 The damp-proofing treatment be carried out in accordance with igait. may also IS : 991%

4.1 General Features - The swimming pools and underground water reservoirs have to be made proof against leakage or seepage of water as follows: a) From inside the structure ing ground, and b) From the surrounding inside of the structure. to the surround-

ground towards the

4.1.1 It shall be borne in mind that the practice ~of using concrete, not in itself watertight, and placing too much reliance on the waterproofing measures is not desirable. Concrete should be watertight in itself and the waterproofiing methods should be looked upon as additional safety devices. 4.2 Preventive Measure for Reduction of Surface Water Entering into Adjacent Ground - Where possible, the grounds should slope away from the structure for a distance of about 3 m to divert the surface run off and to prevent water from standing near or against the side walls. The surfaces near the side walls should preferably be paved. On sloping sites, it would Abedesirable to construct a~cut-off land drain on the high side to lead water around the structure to a lower level. 4.3 The ground water shall be prevented from remaining in contact with the side walls or the flooring ~for lorig periods by installing a system of drainage around the foundation of the structure or beneath the floor or both together. The provision of drains around the structure near the foundation level is recommended for any site where the ground water table is likely to rise very much above the foundation level. These drains should be graded to an open outlet or storm water sewer or to a sump located in the capacity premises where pumps of suitable should be provided to pump out the water as fast as it gets collected. 4.4 Waterproofing Treatment - For preventing the ground water from percolating through the flooring the waterproofing/damp-proofing treatment indicated in 4.4.1 to 4.4.7 may be given. 4.4.1 After laying the levelling course of lean concrete and allowing it to harden for at least 48 hours, waterproofing membrane should be spread over it, care being taken to provide suitable overlaps and care should be taken to prevent zany damage to the membrane. 4.4.2 If bitumen felt is used for the dampproofing treatment, it shall conform to IS : 1322The damp-proofing treatment should 1982*. be given in accordance with the recommendations given in IS : 1609- 1976t. *Specification for bitumen felts for waterproofing and damp-proofing ( third revision ).
*Code of practice for laying damp-proof using bitumen felts ( second revision ). treatment

4.4.5 The treatment mentioned in 4.4.1, 4.4.2 or 4.4.3 should be covered over with at least 50 mm thick sand cement screed using 1 : 3 mix and integral waterproofing compound in prescribed proportions. The surface or the screed should be levelled only with a wooden float and should not be trowelled smooth. Before laying the structural concrete, the surface of the screed should be wetted with cement slurry. 4.4.6 After the side walls are constructed and allowed to undergo the specified curing, the inside surface of the walls and the flooring should be made rough with a hacking tool, washed clean with water and wire brushed so as to remove all the loose material, and a waterproof cement plaster 1 : 3 mix with suitable proportion of an integral waterproofing compound should be applied in two coats, the first coat being 12 mm thick and the next 10 mm thick. The second coat should be applied after allowing a time interval of at least 24 h for the first coat to harden. 4.4.7 The outside surface of the side walls should be treated with a waterproof rendering in a similar manner but in this case, only one coat of plaster 12 mm thick may be applied instead of two successive coats. 4.4.8 The rendering should be cured as carefully as the main concrete structure. After the outside coat of plaster has been fully cured and allowed to dry for some time, it may be given a coat of hot bitumen of the incustrial grade 85/25 conforming to IS : 702- 1961: as a further precaution against the seepage of ground water into the tank. 5. WORKMANSHIP 5.1 General and Necessary Features of Workmanship - For obtaining impervious concrete, it is not only necessary to use properly graded aggregate and to employ a suitably designed mix but it is also of utmost importance to see that the concrete is compacted by means of suitable tools. In case of walls or inaccessible portion of the forms, where use of internal vibrator is impracticable, the form should be hammered slowly facilitating proper placement of concrete. The concrete shall be thoroughly worked around the reinforcement, along the embedded fixtures and into corners of forms. _damp-prooiing (first revision ). proofing treatment
Sspecification tCode of practice *Specification for bitumen mastic for tanking and for in-&u waterproofing and dampwith glass fibre reinforced bitumen. for industrial bitumen ( wised ).

4

IS t 6494 - 1988
5.2 Internal Vibrators - These should invariably be used, wherever possible. Vibrators should not be used for displacing concrete. Overloading the vibrators by placing too much concrete per vibrator is not good. Over vibrating by using too many vibrators relative to quantity of concrete also is not good. Segregation by excessive vibration or excessive water content should be strictly avoided. Vibrator shall be withdrawn gradually and smoothly, and in a manner which shall not cause suction, voids or air entrapment. 5.3 Construction and Expansion Joints Joints in concrete structures constitute the possi-, Careful attention should ble sources of leakage. therefore, be paid to the design, location and Construction of joints in water retaining structures made of concrete [ for details, see 8 of IS : 3370 (Part 1)-1965*J. 5.4 Construction Joints - As far as possible, vertical joints should be avoided. This can be done by completing a layer of concrete not more than 60 cm high in a continuous operation working around the circumference in both directions from the starting point and repeating the process for the day's operation. Before closing day's operation, a rebate should be formed in the concrete on the top surface of the wall forming `key' to get construction joints as explained in 2.1.2 for n,ext day's operation, 5.5 Before next operation is started, all timber spoils, laitance, scum or loose concrete shall be removed by hacking the surface and then scrubbing off with a wire brush to remove all loose Thereafter, before resummortar or aggregates. ing concreting operation, the surface should be thoroughly washed and wetted with water, and then a thin coat of cement sand grout of cement mix as that in cOncrete should be applied. As an additional precautions, water bars as mentioned in 8 of IS : 3370 ( Part 1 )-1965" may be But sufficient care shall be used at such joints. taken when such water barriers are used, as otherwise, while pouring concrete from height, these strips may get bent and thereby restrict the passage of concrete, causing large size pores If it is not possible and honeycomb concrete. to take adequate care, it is better not to use the water bar. Concreting with proper measures at joints will itself be sufficient guarantee for water-tightness and the use of water bar will then be not necessary. 5.6 Expansion Joints - In concrete swimming pools and reservoirs of small and medium capacities, it is not economical to provide expansion joints and it is not a practice also. In large reservoirs, expansion joints shall be provided at predetermined positions limiting their spacing to not more than 35 111 in the case of underground structures or those with fully covered
`Code of liquids: of practice

sides, and not more than 28 m in the case of The expansion joints partly exposed structures. may be constructed according to IS : 3370 ( Part 1 j-1965*. Sufficient care and precautions should be taken in providing them, if not properly done, this is a source of continuous trouble. In large reservoirs, concrete cover slab shall be designed to slide over the top of walls. The wall tops in these cases should be suitably finished smooth and a layer of bitumen felt or paper should be applied. 5.7 Treatment at Fixtures Like Pipes and Conduits - The pipes and special fixtures should be fixed in position before concreting operation so that these are built in at the time of construction. These specials should be provided with puddle collars for proper grip with concrete and also to act as a water bar around the periphery of such fixtures. 5.8 In the case of underground water reservoirs and swimming pools, being founded on piles, the damp-proofing/waterproofiing treatment shall be provided to bottom raft using bitumen felt conforming to IS : 1322-1982t or IS : 7193-1974: should be provided as shown in Fig. 2. The bitumen felt shall be laid in accordance with the details given in IS : 1609-1976s or IS : 9918-198111 as the case may be.

PROTECTIVE

BRICK

WALL

WATER-PROOFING

TREAl `MENT

FIG. 2 A TYPICAL SKETCH OF DAMP-PROOFING/ WATER-PROOFINGTREATMENTFOR UNDERGROUND WATER RESERVOIRS AND SWIMMING POOLSBEING FOUNDEDON PILES
*Code of practice for concrete structures for the storage of liouids: Part 1 General reauirements. SSpecification for bitumen felts- for waterproofing and damp-proofing ( third revision ). $Specilication for glass fibre base coal tar pitch and bitumen felt. &ode of practice for laying damp-proof treatment using bitumen felts ( second rrvision ). Kode of practice for in-situ waterproofing and dampproofing treatment with glass fibre tissue reinforced bitumen.

Part 1 General

for concrete structures requirements.

for the storage

5

IS : 6494 - 1988 6. TESTING AFTER CONSTRUCTION
7. REMEDIAL

TREATMENT

6.1 It is detrimental to keep the water retaining structures dry for a longer period than 4 weeks, as it may lead to formalion of cracks. So it is imperative that before the last casting is completed, water arrangement for testing the tank is ready at site. Immediately after the removal of form work, the tank should be tested. All preliminaries should be completed in advance.
6.2 Water should be supplied to the reservoir slowly at ~the rate -of 300 to 450 mm depth of reservoir per day and the result closely observed, both from the angle of structural stability whether any crack is being noticed anywhere in the structure at any tirrle and fl.om the point of view of water tightness At the end of the operation, that is, when full supply level is reached, all valves shall be closed tightly. The water level in the reservoir should be properly marked on the wall. Leakage through the valves should have been checked and there should not be any drop due to the same. After 24,48 and 72 h, the levels should be checked and the drops in level will be a measure of water-tightness. 6.3 The permissible standard usually adopted is b mm drop in 24 h in case of' covered reservoir and 1~ mm in case of open reservoirs. Necessary adjustment should be made depending on the relative humidity and other local conditions. 6.4 If there is no drop, but dampness is observed in the outer sutface, such dampness may vanish in course of time as the free lime ejected out of cement will be plugging the minor pores causing If the intensity of leakage is such dampness. sltghtly more, then lime may be added to the testing water. 6.5 In case of leakages, the marked and separately treated points should be after dewatering.

7.1 The nature of the

remedial treatment will depend on the extent and magnitude of the leakage noticed. In the case of minor seepage taking place through unnoticeable -hair cracks, etc, the treatment mentioned under7.1.1 to 7.1.3 and 7.1.5 is recommended whereas in the case of severe leakage or seepage through cracks, etc, the treatment mentioned in 7.1.4 is recommended. 7.1.1 In case of leakage through the opening of the horizontal construction joint, after emptying the reservoirs, the leaky joint should be properly cut-off preferably by using a power-driven Carborundum saw or any other tool so as to get a square or slightly undercut groove. The joint is then filled up with cement mortar or synthetic resin after coated with mastic or bitumen. 7.1.2 Coating with Sodium Silicate - The solution made of one part of sodium silicate commercial ( sp. gravity 1.8 kg, litre; paste variety of purity containing sodium oxide and silica in the ratio of 1 : 2.6 to 1 : 2.8) and three parts of water by volume is applied copiously with a soft broom over the entire surface. The treatment consists of three coats applied at an interval of 24 h between each coat. 7.1.3 For tank subjected to considerable pressure, bitumen coatings are commonly given. Bitumen conforming to IS : 1580-1969; should be applied to a perfectly dry and clean surface in two coats each 10 mm thick. This is particularly suitable where there is any probability of the concrete cracking due to adoption of high working stresses in the design, lack of provision for settlement, contraction, etc. 7.1.4 Chemical Injection - In the case of severe leakage through cracks or seepage of water from surrounding ground in water logged areas, this method as indicated in 7.1.4.1 to 7.1.4.5 The main advantage of may be carried out. this method 1s that this treatment may be applied at any stage, that is, even if leakage or the seepage problem develops long after the construction. In this case, the removal of the back-fill of earth around the task may be avoided as the treatment may be given from the inside surface. 7.1.4.1 Holes about 50 mm dia and 25 to 40 mm deep shall be chiselled in grid pattern at a spacing not exceeding 1.5 metre centre-tocentre all over the base, walls and top slab. In addition, all the construction joints shall be opened by making a groove as to reach the reinforcement. 7.1.4.2 MS grouting nozzles of 25 mm dia shall then be fixed in these holes and grooves ( set Fig. 3 ).
*`+cci:i<ation for bituminous cc,mpounds ). for water-

6.6 It is sometimes difficult to locate the source of leakages in case of underground reservoirs. Ifit is from the floor, it is hardly possible to locate unless clear cracks are noticed and hence complete floor will have to be treated. So in such case of underground reservoir, the drop in level should be recorded for every 300 mm after keeping the water for 24 h. If at some stage, there is no drop, then it is presumed that floor is in order and the wall above that height is only responsible for leakage. If drops are noticed all through, it may be ~only the floor which is responsible for the leakage or both floor and the wall. With the presumption that the floor is not in order and the wall is in order, the floor may be set right leaving the treatment of the wall for the future, if necessary. 6.7 For all these uncertainties, it is recommended that some additional aids or precautions be taken for underground reservoirs, especially to water to find its way prevent outside sub-soil inside when the reservoir is empty. 6

proofing ant1 caulking porpores ( sccoad r&ion

IS : 6494 - 1988 7.1.4.3 After the nozzles are fully set, neat cement slurry admixed with water soluble monomer based chemical shall be injected through the network of nozzles with low pressure grout pumps at a pressure not exceeding the designed The grouting shall be strength of the concrete. started at very low pressure and increased gradually to a required pressure. The grouting shall continue till the hole refuses to take any further grout, even at an increased pressure.
.AB

425

MS NOZZLE PLASTER (1:3)

CEMENT

7.1.4.4 The water soluble monomer based used shall conform generally to chemical In addition, it should conform IS : 2645-1975*. to the following requirements:

4 b)

It should be soluble in water; The resultant grout solution should not have viscosity greater than 1.2 centipoises; With addition of catalysts, gelation should occur by polymerisation cross linking chain reaction, that is, the water shall be bound into the gel structure and there shall not be any shrinkage of gel afterwards; and The gelatin be such that it can be controlled to required time.

4
3A Floor and Wall

IL-

WALL

(~25

MS NOZZLE

4

7.1.4.5 The nozzles shall be removed 24 hours after the grouting is over and the holes shall be finished off neatly. 7.1.5 Guniting - In the case of leakages from very many points, guniting has to~be resorted to for covering the entire surface with sufflcient. thickness of mortar strengthened with mesh reinforcement. *Specification for integral cement waterproofing compound ( first reoision ).

38 Junction Fm.

3

A TYPICAL SKETCH FOR FIYUNGOF NOZZLE

Bureau of Indian Standards

i

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of-the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form BIS ~has the copyright of all its publications. without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publication), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that than-ges are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of"BIS Handbook' and `Standards Monthly Additions'.

Amendments Amend No. Date of Issue

Issued Since Puhlicaticm Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters:

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS Telegrams: Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone 32376 17,3233X41 x5 6 1 91 20

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones: 323 0131,323 33 75,323 94 02 Regional Offices: Central Eastern Northern Southern Western Branches
: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg

NEW DELHI 110002
: l/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola

CALCUTTA

700054 160022

337 84 99,337 337 86 26,337

: SC0 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH

{ 60 38 20 43 25
: C.I.T. Campus,.IV

Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113

{ 235 02 16,235 04 42 2351519,2352315 832 92 95,832 832 78 91,832 78 5X 7X 92

Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093
: AHMADABAD.

BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.
Printed by Reprography Onit. BE. New Iklhi

