**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



IS 101-1-2 (1987) : Methods of sampling and test for paints, 
varnishes and related products, Part 1: Test on liquid 
paints (general and physical), Section 2: Preliminary 
examination and preparation of samples for testing [CHD 20: 
Paints, Varnishes and Related Products] 



a^yj i imzzmn^a rafrg amsBs 



2*S< W I l?S^>!>^^>fcN 



^£<yv\^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



udc 667-612 :620115'8 ( First Reprint AUGUST 1991 ) IS : 101 ( Part 1/Sec 2 ) -1987 



, ,. -, , , ( Reaffirmed 2004 ) 

Indian Standard 

METHODS OF SAMPLING AND TEST FOR 
PAINTS, VARNISHES AND RELATED PRODUCTS 

PART I TESTS ON LIQUID PAINTS (GENERAL AND PHYSICAL) 
Section 2 Preliminary Examination and Preparation of Samples for Testing 

( Third Revision ) 



1. Scope — Prescribes the procedure for preliminary examination of a single sample as received for 
testing and procedure for preparing a test sample. 

2. Examination of Sample Container 

2.1 Record any defects in the sample container or any visible leakage. If the contents have been 
affected, the sample shall be rejected. 

2.2 Remove all packing material ( for example, sawdust ) and other debris from the outer surface of the 
container, particularly around the closure, open the container carefully, taking care not to disturb the 
contents. 

2.2.1 Some paints and related products are prone to develop gas or vapour pressure during storage. 
Care, appropriate to the situation, should be taken in opening containers, particularly if bulging of the 
lid or the bottom of the container is observed. If such phenomenon occurs, it shall be noted in this 
report. 

3. Preliminary Examination of Fluid Products 

3.1 Visual Examination of Fluid Products 

3.1.1 Ullage — Record the approximate ullage, expressed as percentaae of the total capacity of the 
container. 

3.1.2 Surface skin— Record the presence of any surface skin, and its type (whether continuous, 
hard or soft, thin or moderate or excessively thick ). If any skin is present, detach it as completely as 
possible from the sides of the container and remove it, if necessary, by sieving. Record the ease of 
removal. For analytical control purposes, where skin is present, it may be necessary to disperse the 
skin and include it in the sample for testing. 

3.1.3 Consistency — Record whether the sample is thixotropic or whether gelling has taken place, 
taking care not to confuse gelling and thixotropy. 

Note — Both thixotropic and gelled paints have a jelly like consistency, but whereas the consistency of the former is 
markedly reduced by stirring or shaking, the consistency of a gelled paint or varnish can not be reduced in this way. 

3.1.4 Separation of phases — Record any separation of the sample into layers. 

3.1.5 Visible impurities — Record any visible impurities present and remove them, if possible. 

3.1.6 Sediment — If there is any appreciable sediment, record its presence and appearance. 

3.1.6.1 If there is any settling, record the type of settling like soft, hard or hard dry. If the settling 
is hard and appears dry and crumbly inside a lump when cut with a clean palette knife, describe it as 
hard dry. 

3.1.7 Clarity— \n the case of varnishes, thinners, catalyst, solutions, etc, record the clarity and 
colour of the sample. 

3.1.8 Mixing 

3.1.8.1 Thoroughly stir the sample and incorporate any slight sediment. Samples which have 
gelled or show hard-dry settling can not be effectively reincorporated and shall, therefore, not be used 
for testing purposes. Care shall be taken to ensure minimum loss of solvent. To achieve this, erll 
operations shall be carried out as quick as practicable. 

3.1.8.2 If the original sample contained skin, remove any remanants by straining the sample 
through a 150-micron IS Sieve [ see IS: 460 ( Part 1 )-1978 Wire cloth test sieves ( second revision ) ]. 

3.1.8.3 if no hard settling has occured, mix the sample thoroughly by a palette knife if the sample 
is small or by a stouter stirrer, if it is a larger sample. Firmly replace the lid and thoroughly shake the 
contents; inverting the container as this is being done. Repeat alternate stirring and shaking until the 
contents are completely homogeneous. Avoid, as far as possible, entrainment of air. 



Adopted 30 April 1987 



November 1987, BIS 



Qr 1 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BMAVAN. 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHU 10002 



IS: 101 ( Part 1/Sec2) -1987 

3.1.8.4 If hard settling has occured, pour all the fluid medium into a clean container. Remove the 
settled pigment from the bottom of the container with a palette knife and mix thoroughly. When a 
uniform consistency has been achieved, return the medium to the original container, a small portion at 
a time, carefully incorporating each addition before the next is made. Complete the reincorporation by 
pouring from one container to the other several times. The sample shall be free from air bubbles 
before use. 

4. Preliminary Examination for Viscous Products, such as Putties Mastics, etc 

4.1 Examine these products in general as in 3. Where mixing is necessary to ensure homogeniety, a 
small heavy duty mixer may be used. 

5. Preliminary Examination for Products in Powder Form 

5.1 No special procedure is usually required for these products, but unusual features shall be recorded, 
such as abnormal colour, presence of lumps, foreign matter, etc. 

6. Blending and Reduction of a Series of Samples 

6.1 in case where a series of samples have been taken from a homogeneous product,, they may either 
be tested separately or combined to produce a composite (reduced) sample as given in 6.1.1 to 6,1.3. 

6.1.1 Fluid products — After thoroughly mixing each sample as given in 3, pour or otherwise transfer 
the samples into a clean, dry container of suitable size and thoroughly mix them by stirring, shaking, 
etc. When mixed sample appears to be homogeneous, take a reduced sample in accordance with 
IS: 101 ( Part 1/Sec 1 )-1985 'Methods of sampling and test for paints and related products; Part 1 Tests 
on liquid paint ( general and physical), Section 1 Sampling {third revision )'. Place the reduced sample 
in one or more clean, dry containers allowing 5 percent ullage, than close, label and, if necessary, seal 
the containers. 

6.1.2 Viscous products — It is not possible to specify any single, generally applicable proc< dure. 
Treat each case on its merits, taking into account the mechanical aids available, the difficulty of mixing 
viscous. materials, the possible loss of volatile matter, etc. 

6.1.3 Products in powder form — Empty the contents of the various sample containers into a clean, 
dry container of suitable size and mix thoroughly. Reduce the sample down to a suitable size by 
quartering either manually or by means of a rotary samples divider, then place the reduced sample in 
one or more clean, dry containers. Close, label and, if necessary, seal the containers. 

7. Labelling 

7.1 The following information shall be given on the label of the sample container: 

a) Name of the material; 

b) Name of manufacturer; 

c) Date of manufacture; 

d) Size and particulars of the consignment; 

e) Name of the consigner; and 

f) Details of sampling like sample size, place, date and name of sampler. 

8. Report 

8.1 The report shall contain the following: 

a) description of the sample- 

b) appearance, clarity, etc; 

c) description of skinning observed and the sieving procedure adopted; 

d) description of settling observed, and the mixing and incorporation procedure followed; and 

e) other observations as indicated in this standard. 

EXPLANATORY NOTE 

This Indian Standard is one of a series of standards dealing with sampling and testing of paints, 
varnishes and related products. This standard supersedes 4 of IS: 101-1964 'Methods of test for ready 
mixed paints and enamels (second revision )'. Considerable assistance has been derived from 
ISO 1513-1980 Taints and varnishes — Examination and preparation of samples for testing 1 , issued by 
the International Organization for Standardization ( ISO ). 



'Printed at Print-O-Bind, New Deity, India- 



