IS : 4591- 1968

Indian Standard

( Reaffirmed 2002 )

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF ESCALATORS
(Third Reprint APRIL 1989)

UDC

621'876 : 696'6

0 Copyright BUREAU
MANAK

1968

OF
BHAVAN, 9

INDIAN
BAHADUR DELHI NEW 110002

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR MARG

Gr 4

July 1968

IS : 459101968

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF ESCALATORS
Lifts and Escalators Sectional Committee,
Chairman SHRI S. K. BHATTACHAR%.\ Members
SHRI B. GUPTA SAWA (Alternate

ETDC 46

Refiresen ting

CentralPublic Works Department ( Electrical Wing ),
New Delhi

Shri S. K. Bhattacharya )

to Indian Institute of Architects, New Delhi Buildings & Communications Department, `ment of Maharashtra, Bombay Govern-

SHRI R. G. ANAND SHRI V. G. BAPAT SHRI P. BOSE

Eastern Regional Electrical Contractors India Ltd, Calcutta SHRI B. W. KHANORKAR ( Alternate) Railway Board, Ministry of Railways

Association

CHIEF ELECTRICAL ENGINEER Crsti

ELECTRICALINSPECTOR TO Chief Electrical Inspectorate, Government of Madras THF, Go VERNMENT OF MADRAS ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR ( TECH~ICAL ) ( Altcmat ) Chief Electrical West Bengal Consol Elevators ( Inspectorate, Government of

SURI NIRMALENDU DAS GUPTA SHRI B. KHAMBATTA SHRI V. &MAR ( Alternate ) SHRI S. R. MENON SHRI G. J. WILSON ( Aftmrate) SHRI A.
MITR.4

Pvt ) Ltd, New Delhi

Best & Ccmpany Pvt Ltd, Madras Directorate General New Delhi of Supplies & Disposals,

SHRI J. N. VAZ ( Altmatr) SHRI S. ;K. NAYAR

Dynacraft Machine Company Pvt Ltd, Bombay J. J. Engineering Co, Bombay The General Electric Co of India Pvt Ltd, Calcutta Electrical Construction 24 Parganas & Equipm,ent Co Ltd,

SHRI J. C. PATEL
SHRI B. B. PAUL

SHRI S. V. RAMNATHKAR SWRI P. K.
BANKA (

Alternate ) ( Continued on puge 2 )

BUREAUMANAK

dF

IN-DIA-N

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

BHAVAN,

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

( Continuedfrom page 1 ) Members SHRr M. L. SACHDEVA SENIOR ASSISTANT TO -CW~EF Jbmmuc.4L INSPECTOR To GOVERNMENT, PUNJAB ( Ahnate SHRI J. L.
hElDAL

chief

RW-tk Electrical Inspectorate Punjab, Pa&la

to the Government

of

)
CenH

Public Works Department New Delhi Inspectorate, Go (India}

( Architect Wing ),

. SHRI S. P. TYAGI
SHR1 P. L. VAHI Snru S. S. SIJJAN( Altcrnata ) S&Y. S. VENKATESWARAN, Diictor ( Elec tech )

Electrical

Delhi Administration L:d, Bombay

Otis Elevator

Director Genaal, St%YCtllrg SHRI N.
DA-MA

IS1 ( Ex-o@io Member )

Assistant Dire&or

( Elec tech ), ISI

2

IS:4!591-1968

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF ESCALATORS
0.
0.1 This Indian Standard

FOREWORD

was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 29 April 1968, after the draft finalized by the Lifts and Escalators Sectional Committee had been approved' by the Electrotechnical Division Council. 0.2 Escalator industry is gradually growing in the country and already Need was, therefore, escalators have been installed in many buildings. felt to prepare this code to regulate the installation and maintenance and for safe working of escalators and the associated machinery and apparatus. 0.3 In the preparation following : The West Bengal of this code, Escalators assistance Rules, 1962. for elevators, dumbAmerican Society of on lifts and escalators. and has been derived from the

Al7.1-1965 American Standard safety code waiters, escalators and moving walks. Mechanical Engineers. 0.4 This standard is one of a series of Indian Standards Other standards published in this series are: IS : 1860-1968 maintenance IS : 3534-1966 IS : 46661968

Code of practice *for installation, operation of electric passenger and goods lifts ( revised ) Outline dimensions for electric lifts passenger and goods Specification for electric

lifts

0~5 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing with the result of a test or analysis,- shall be rounded off in accordance The number of significant places retained in the rounded off IS : 2-1960*. value should bc the same as that of the specilied value in this standard. I. SCOPE

1.1 Th,is code applies escalators in buildings.

to

the

design,
values

installation

and

maintenance

of

*Rules for rounding otfnumerical

( revised).
3

xS:4!m-1968 2. TERMINOLOGY' 2.0 For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply. inclined, continuous stauway used for

2.1 Escalator - A power-driven, raising or lowering passengers.

2.1.1 Escalator Instullution - It includes the escalator, the track, the trusses or girders, the balustrading, the step-treads and landings and all chains, wires and plant directly connected with the operation of the escalator. 2.~ .2 Escahatot Muchine -The mechanism and connection therewith used for moving the escalator. 2.2 B8luster -A short pillar slender above row of balusters meant other equipment below. moving in

and bulging

CrS.1 Balustrade -A handrails.

for supporting

2.3 Conmbpktt - A pronged plate that forms part of an escalator landing and engages with the cleats of the steps at the limits of travel. 2.1 Ernergtncy Srop Push or Switch - A push button or switch de+gned to open a circuit and cut off power supply to the escalator machine si, as to cause the escalator to stop. 2.5 Landing - The portion of the building or structure which is used to receive or discharge passengers into 3r from an escalator. 2.6 Travel ( Rise] - The vertical distance between the bottom terminal landing and the top terminal landing of an escalator. 2.7. overspeed Covernor - An automatic device which causes the power supply to the esqlator to be interrupted in the event of the speed exceeding the predetermined value of the normal running speed. 2.8 Rated Load - The load which the escalator is designed and installed to lii at the rated speed. 29 Rated 8peed - The speed at which the escalator is designed to operate. It is the rate of travel of the steps, measured along the angle of inclitio~, with rated load on the steps or carriage. 3. CONSTRUGTIOff, INSTALLATION, PROTEC'IION, OF ESCAIATORS OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE 3.1 Every escalator and every part thereof shall be of sound material and good construction and ~ofsufficient mechanical strength for the purpose for .which it is intended and ~sofar as is piacticable, shall be installed, protected, worked and maintained in such a manner so as to prevent danger.

3.2 All materials shall be in accordance specifications wherever available.
4. CONSTRUCTIONAL

with the latest Indian

Standard

REQmMENTg

4.1 Angle of Inclinatiom

- It shall not be in excess of 30 degrees from the horizontal excepting that with an escalator having a vertical rise not exceeding 6 metres an angle up to 35 degrees may be permitted.

4.2 Width - The width between balustrades shall be measured on the incline at a point 68.5 cm vertically above the nose line of the steps, and shall not be less than the width of the step. It shall not exceed the width of the step by -more than ~33 cm with a maximum of 16.5 cm on either side of the escalator. 4.3 Bolustrading - Escalators shall be provided on each side with solid balustrading. On the step side the balustrading shall be smooth and substantially flush except for protective mouldings `parallel to the run of the steps and properly bevelled vertical mouldings projecting not more -than 6.5 mm, that cover joints of panels. 4.3.1 Use of Glass in Balustrades they conform to IS : 2553-l 964*. Glass panels shall not be used unless

4.32 Change in Width Between Balustrmfes - There shall be no abrupt changes in the width between the balustrading on the two sides of the -Where a change in width is unavoidable, such change shall escalator.. not exceed 8 percent of the greatest width. In changing the direction of the balustradmg resulting from a reduction in width the maximum allowable angle of change in the balustrading shall not exceed 15 degrees from the line of the escalator travel. 4.3.3 Clearance Between Balustrades and Sk@ - The clearance on either side of the steps between the steps and the adjacent skirt guard shall be not more than 5 mm and the sum of the clearances pn both sides shall be not more than 6 mm. 4.3.4 GuariLc at Ceiling Intersection --A solid guard shall be provided in the intersecting angle of the outside balustrade ( deck board ) and the ceiling or soffitt except where the intersection of the outside balustrade ( deck board) and the ceiling or soffitt is more than 60 cm from the centre line of the handrail. The vertical face of the guard shall project at least 36 cmhorizontally from the apex of the angfe. The exposed edge of the guard shall be rounded to eliminate shear hazard. Guards may be shatterproof glass.

l Spa&atieo

&Xsafety glan ( r&d

).

( Since revised ).
3

r

4.4.1 Each balustrade shall be provided with a handrail moving same direction and at substantially the same speed as the steps.

in the

4.4.2 Extension Beyond Combplates - Each moving handrail shall extend at normal handrail height not less than 30 cm. beyond the line of points of the combplate teeth at the upper and lower landings. 4.4.3 Guards - Hand or finger guards where the handrail enters the balustrade. shall be provided at the point

4.4.4 Distance Bctwean Handrails-The horizontal distance between the centre lines of the two handrails, measured on the incline, shall not exceed the width between the balustrades ( see 4.2 ) by more than 15 cm, with a maximum of i-5 cm on either side of the escalator ( see Fig. 1 ).
ESCALATOR WIDTH. 150 MAX

-I--

b75

MAX

/.---STEP

TREAD

WIDTHt330MAX in millimetres.

--+

All dimensions

Fro.

1

RELATIONSHIP OF ESCALATOR PARTY *

( see 4.2,
$5 Steps Treads

4.4.4

and 4.5.2)

4.5.1 Material and Type-Step frames shall be made of incombustibIe material. Step treads shall be horizontal and made of incombustible material and shall afford a secure foothold. 6

15:45!31-1968 4.5.2 Dimensions of Stefis - The depth of any step tread in the direction of travel shall be not less than 40 cm and the rise between treads shall be not more than 22 cm. The width of a step tread shall be not less than 40 cm nor more than 102 cm.
4.5.3 Clearance Between Steps - The maximum treads on the horizontal run shall be 4 mm. clearance `between step

4.5.4 Slotting of Step Treadr - The tread surface of each step shall be slotted in a direction parallel to the travel of the steps. Each slot shall be not more than 6.5 mm wide and not less than 9.5 mm deep; and the distance from centre to centre of adjoining slots shall benot more than 9.5 mm. 4.6 Landings 4.6.1 Landings shall be of material and design affording secure foothold. 4.6.2 If the landing is of concrete, wood or other antislip material. 4.7 Combplates 4.7.1 There shall be a combplate escalator. at the entrance and at the exit of every it shall have edge insertions of metal,

4.7.2 Design of Combjdates - The combplate teeth shall be meshed with and set into the slots in the tread surface so that the points of the teeth are always below the upper surface of the treads. Combplates 4.8 Trusses shall be adjustable vertically.

or Girders

4.8.1 The truss or girder shall be designed to safely sustain the steps and running gear in operation. In the event of failure of the track system it shall retain the running gear in its guides. 4.8.2 Where tightening devices are operated by means of tension weights, provision shall be made to retain these weights in the truss if they should be released. 4.9 Step Wheel Tracks 4.9.1 Step wheel tracks shall be so designed as to prevent displacement the steps and running gear if a step chain breaks. 4.10 Rated Load shall be computed of

4.10.1 The rated load in ~kilograms on an escalator by the following formula: Rated load = 2.7 WA 7

IS : 4591-

1968

where

W = the width in cm between the balustrades ( see 4.2 ), and A = the horizontal distance between the upper and lower
combplate teeth in metres. 4.11 The rated per mintite. 4.12 speed of the escalator shall not be more than 38 metres

Design Factors of Safety

4.12.1 The factors of safety, based on the static loads, shall be at least the following: a) For trusses and all structural members including tracks-five (5); b) For driving machine parts: 1) where made of steel or bronze - eight (8); 2) where made of cast iron or other materials c) For power-transmission members ten (10). annealed,

ten (10);

Step chains composed of cast-steel links which, if thoroughly shall be permitted with a factor of safety of at least twenty (20). 5. DRIVING MACHINE, MOTOR AND BRAKE

5.1. Connection Between Driving Machine and Mkin Drive Shaft The driving machine shall be connected to the main driveshaft by toothed gearing, a coupling, or a chain. 5.2 Driving escalator. Motor-An electric motor shall not drive more than one

5.3 Brake - Each escalator shall be provided with an electrically released, mechanically applied brake capable of stopping the up or down travelling escalator with any load up to rated load. This brake shall be located either on the driving machine or on the main drive shaft. Where a chain is used to connect the driving machine to the main It is not required that drive shaft, a brake shall be provided on this shaft. this brake be of the electrically released type if an electrically released brake is provided on the driving machine. 6. OPERATING AND SAFETY devices DEVICES shall be provided conforming to the type

6.0 Operating and safety following requirements.

6.1 Starting Switch - Starting switches shall be of the key-operated and shall be located within sight of the escalator steps. 8

IS : 4591- l96$ 6.1.1 Where starting pushes or switches are within reach of the public they shall be either of the key-operated type or be enclosed in a box provided with a lock and key. 6.2 Emergency Stop Buttons - Emergency stop buttons or other type of manually operated switches having red buttons or handles and conspicuously marked STOP PUSH or STOP SWITCH shall be accessibly located at or near the top and bottom landings of each escalator, and shall be protected against accidental operation. An escalator stop button with an unlocked cover over which it can readily be lifted or pushed aside shall be considered accessible. The operation of either of these buttons or switches shall inIt shall not be possible to start terrupt the power to the driving machine. the driving machine by these buttons or switches. 6.3 Speed Governor - A speed governor shall be provided, the operation of which shall cause the interruption of power to the driving machine should the speed of the steps exceed a predetermined value which-shall benot more than 40 percent above the rated speed. EXCEPTION: The overspeed governor is not required where a low slip alternating current squirrel cage induction motor is used and the motor is directly connected to the driving machine. 6.4 Broken Step-Chain Device-A broken step-chain device shall be provided which shall cause the interruption of power to the driving machine if a step-chain breaks, and, where no automatic chain tension device is provided, if excessive sag occurs in either step-chain. 6.5 Broken Drive-Chain Device - Where the driving machine is connected to the main drive shaft by a chain, a device shall be provided to cause the application of the brake on the main drive shaft if the drive-chain parts. 6.6 Stop Switch in Machinery Spaces - A stop switch shall be provided in each machinery space where means of access to the space is provided. This switch, when opened, shall cause electric power to be removed from the The stop switches shall be: escalator driving machine motor and brake.

a) of the manually opened and closed type; b) conspicuously and permanently marked, ` STOP `; and c) positively opened mechanically and their opening shall solely dependent on springs.

not be

6.7 Application of am Electrically Released Brake - An electrically released brake shall automatically stop the escalator when any of the safety devices required by 6.2 to 6.5 function. 7. MACHINE
7.1 A machine ROOM

room of suitable size and construction shall be provided for the housing of the escalator machine or machines, and associated apparatus and equipment. 9

Is:4591 -1968
7.2 Construction - The machine room shall be of sound constructwn, weather-proof and dry and shall be properly ventilated to prevent any undue rise in temperature inside the room. Where necessary means shall also : be provided to maintain a reasonable temperature in the machine room. The floors of the machine rooms shall be capable of carrying the load of the escalator machinery and other equipment housed therein. 7.3 Access 7.3.1 The machine room shall be arranged to allow reasonable access to The and the removal of the equipments therein or of any part thereof. height of the machine room shall be sufficient to allow any part of the tquip`ment'to be accessible and removable for repairs and replacement. 7.3.2 Safe and convenient access to machine provided with access doors opening outwards. room entrances shall be

7.4 The machine room shall not be used as store room or for any other purpose other than housing the escalator machine and associated apparatus and equipment. No inflammable or explosive material shall be kept in machine room. 8. LIGHTING, ACCESS AND ELECTRICAL WORK

8.1 Lighting of Machine Rooma - The machine room shall be provided with permanent and adequate artificial lighting of an approved type and whenever available electric lighting shall be provided by at least one fixed The light light point and one plug socket for every two or less machines. switch shall be fixed near the machine room entrance. The lighting switch shall be so located that it can be operated without pass&g over or reaching over any part of the machinery. 8.2 Lighting of Step Treads - Step treads shall be illuminated throughout their run. The light intensity on the tread surfaces shall be'not less than `20 lux.
NOTE - It is desirable that the illumination be of uniform intensity and that it should not contrast materially with that of the surrounding area.

8.3 Electrical

Wiring

and Apparatus

8.3;1 All electrical ~wiring and apparatus in connection with the escalator installation, shall conform to the Indian Electricity Rules and to the relevant Indian Standard and also to other regulations, ifany, relating to fire insurance of the building in which the escalator is installed. 8.3.2 All cables and other wiring in connection with the escalator installation shall conform to the relevant Indian Standard for the voltage at which these are intended to be worked and if metallic covering is used it shall be efficiently earthed. 10

IS:4!591-1968 8.3.3 No bare conductor shall be used in any escalator as may cause danger to persons. 8.3.4 Electrical conductors shall be encased in rigid conduits, electrical tubings or wireways which shall be securely fastened to the supporting structure. 8.3.5 All electric supply lines and apparatus in the escalator shall be of suitable construction and shall be so installed, protected, worked and maintained that there is no danger to persons from them. 8.3.5.1 All metal casings or metallic coverings containing or protecting any electric supply line or apparatus shall be efficiently connected with earth. 8.3.6 Disconnect Switch -An enclosed, fused disconnect switch or a circuit breaker shall be installed and shall be connected into the power supply line to the driving machine motor. Disconnect switches or circuit breakers shall be of the manually closed multi-pole type. The switch shall be so placed that it is close to and visible from the escalator machine to which the supply is controlled. 8.3.6.1 With dc power supplies the main disconnecting switch and any circuit breaker shall be so arranged and connected that the circuit of brake magnet coil is opened at the same time that the main circuit is opened. 8.3.7 Enclosure of Electrical Parts - All electric safety switches and controllers shall be enclosed to protect against accidental contact. 8.3.8 Caution J%?tice - Suitable ` CAUTION ' notice shall be affixed near every motor or other apparatus in w'hich energy is used at a pressure exceeding 250 volts. 8.3.9 Insulation - The electrical parts of starting and stopping devices, other operating and similar devices, controllers and similar other parts shall be efficiently insulated and the insulation shall be capable of withstanding for a period of one minute, the continuous application of a test voltage of alternating current equal to ten times the voltage at which these electrical parts are energised, subject to a maximum voltage of 2 000 volts when the test voltage is applied between contacts or similar parts in the open position, and between such contacts and earthed parts. 8.3.10 Voltage Limitations under consideration. 8.4 Access to Interior - Reasonable access to the interior of the escalator shall be provided for inspection and maintenance. 9. ADDITIONAL 9.1 The escalator extinguisher. PRECAUTIONS machine AND REQmMENTS

room shall be provided with a suitable fire11

Is:4!591-1968 9.2 Explosive or other inflammable materials shall not be carried in the escalator as may endanger the safety of persons. 9.3 Where an escalator is under examination or repairs suitable steps shall be taken to ensure that the escalator is not operated inadvertently by any person in such a manner which may endanger the safety of peisons working in the escalator. 9.4 EsCal8tor Pit Pans -Escalator pit pans should be periodically cleaned of oil and refuse. The frequency of cleaning will depend on the service, but should be such as to reduce to a minimum the hazard resulting from accidental or spontaneous ignition. 9.5 Lnbricatioa - AI1 parts of the machinery and equipment requiring lubrication should be lubricated at regular periodic intervals with lubricants of a grade as recommended by the manufacturer. The use of excessive amounts of lubricant should be -avoided. 80. I'~OTF&TI;QN&F
TRUSSES AND MACHINE SPACES

10.1 Protection Required - The sides and undersides of escalator trusses and machinery spaces shall be enclosed in fire-resistive materials. Means may be provided for adequate ventilation of the driving and driven machine and control spaces, 11. PROTECTION OF FLOOR OPENINGS

Floor openings for escalators shall be 11.1 Protection Requ+!d-protected against the passage of frame, smoke or gases in the event of fire. 11.2 Escalators A ccredited as a Repid Means of Egress - Escalators ~accredited as a required means of egress shall be fully enclosed in accordance with the requirements of local laws and ordinances pertaining to interior stairways. 11.3 Escalator Not Ahwedited as a Required Means of Egress Escalators not accredited as a required means of egress shall have the floor openings protected by any one of the following generally recognized methods or by other methods which may be estabhshed as adequate by competent' agencies:

4 W

Full enclosures as specified in 11.2; Sprinkler method ( only where the building area is fully protected by a supervised automatic sprinkler system) consisting of individually operating sprinklers so spaced as to protect the exposed sides of the opening. A heat apron shall be provided to bank heat around the sprinkler heads adjacent to the opening. The lower 12

IS:45!31-19611 edgt of the apron shall be not less than 15 cm below the bottom of the sprinkler heads ( set u&o IS : 1648 - 196 l* ) ; c) Kiosks; d) Automatic rolling shutters [see IS : 3614 ( Part I ) - 1966t 1; or e) Spray nozzles ( only where building area is fully protected by a supervised automatic s[. rinkler system ). 12. TESTS 12.1 site Teats of Escalators 12.1.1 Each type and size of escalator shall be tested for the rated load that it is designed to carry. Such tests may be made, at the option of the manufacturer, in hi plant or in the field on the first escalator of that type and size installed in a building. Where a type and size of escalator has previously been tested and approved in one jurisdiction, certified copies of such test may be accepted in lieu of an actual test at the option of the enforcing authority. 12.~2 If the rise for a give11 type and width to be installed is more than l-5 metres higher than the rise for which that type and width has been tated, a new type test shall be made for the higher rise. 12.1.3 Escalator operating and safety devices required shall be tested with no-load on the escalator in accordance with the following: a) Sped Govzmol Test - Where a speed governor is required by 6.3, the governor shall be tested -by operating it by hand. b) Broken Step-Chak Device -Operation of the broken stepchain device, required by 6&, shall be tested by operating the actuating device by hand. c) Brokm Drive-Chain Device - Operation of the broken drive-chain .device required by 6.5, where a drive chain is used, shall be tested by operating the actuating device by hand. d) Stop Buttons-The emergency sto,p buttons, required by 6.2, shall be tested by operating them when the escalator is operated in each direction of travel.

*Codeof practice for fire safetycf buildings ( general ) : We fighting equipment and ita maintenance including construction and installation of fireproof doors.
t!Spccification for fire-check doors : Part I

Plate, metal covered and r&izq type.

13

