IRT HAF IS 7337 : 2020 
Indian Standard 


ukana weer — urA srecractt 
( dtaa gadarn ) 


Project Management — 
Glossary of Terms 


( Third Revision ) 


ICS 65.015.13 (084):001.4 


© BIS 2020 


anda AM A 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Teg TH HM, ay Reef — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


September 2020 Price Group 4 


Management and Productivity Sectional Committee, MSD 04 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Third Revision) was be adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Management and Productivity Sectional Committee had been approved by the Management and Systems 
Division Council. 


Project management is the discipline of organizing and managing resources in such a way that these resources 
deliver all the work required to complete a project within defined scope, time, and cost constraints. It is the 
application of knowledge, skills, tools and techniques to a broad range of activities in order to meet the requirements 
of the particular project. 

Project management is a carefully planned and organized effort to accomplish a specific (and usually) one-time 
effort. It includes developing a project plan, which includes defining project goals and objectives, specifying tasks 
or how goals will be achieved, what resources are need, and associating budgets and timelines for completion. 
It also includes implementing the project plan, along with careful controls to stay on the ‘critical path’, that is, 
to ensure the project is being managed according to plan. Project management usually follows major phases, 
including feasibility study, project planning, implementation, evaluation and support/maintenance. 

Its concepts and applications have expanded considerably during the recent years, thereby making it important to 
define the various terms used in order to avoid ambiguities in their interpretation during usage. 

This standard was originally published in 1974 and subsequently revised in 1985 and 2010. This revision has been 
formulated to include many additional terms relating to project management and delete terms which are not being 
used in normal practice. Some of the terms in this version have been redefined in the light of latest developments 
and experience gained. 


This standard defines the terms commonly used in project management so as to facilitate communication and the 
spread of knowledge in its practice. These definitions have been primarily divided into three sections namely: 


a) Section I — Organization and management; 

b) Section II — Planning; and 

c) Section III — Review procedures for project coordination and control. 
Within the respective sections, the definitions have been arranged in alphabetical order to facilitate its reference. 
The composition of the Committee responsible for formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


IS 7337 : 2020 


Indian Standard 


PROJECT MANAGEMENT — GLOSSARY OF TERMS 
( Third Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard gives definitions of terms relating to 
project management. 


2 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 


SECTION I ORGANIZATION AND 
MANAGEMENT 


2.1 Build Own Operate (BOO) — An agent is granted 
the right to develop, finance, design, build, own, 
operate and maintain a project for the client. The agent 
owns the project and retains the revenue and risk for a 
specified period. 


2.2 Build Own Operate Transfer (BOOT) — An 
agent is granted the right to develop, finance, design, 
build, own, operate and maintain a project for the client. 
The agent owns the project and retains the revenue and 
risk for a specified period after which the ownership is 
transferred to the client. 


NOTE — It is also referred as ‘Build Own Transfer (BOT)’. 


2.3 Contract Management — A mutually binding 
agreement between the owner and the contractor for 
providing services against payment for execution of 
project. 


2.3.1 The contracts are basically of the following types 
based on method of payment: 


a) Item Rate Contract — It is an agreement requiring 
the completion of different items of project work 
according to bills quantities, specifications of 
quality and rates for unit quantity of work of each 
item. 


b) Percentage Rate Contract — It provides for 
reimbursement of actual costs of different items of 
project work plus payment ofan agreed percentage 
ofthe cost as profit. 


c) Lump Sum Contract — Under this, the payment 
is made for the project as a whole either at a fixed 
price or at a fixed price plus a pre-determined 
incentive fee for superior work. 


d 


— 


Cost Plus Contract — It provides reimbursement 
of actual cost plus either a fixed fee proportionate 
to the project work, or a predetermined fee as a 
bonus for superior work. 


2.3.2 The contracts can also be classified based on the 
following integrated delivery methods: 


a) Turn Key Contract — Under this, the contractor 
is responsible for setting up a plant or facility and 
putting it into operations to achieve prescribed 
performance standards. 


b) Build Own Operate (BOO) — An agent is granted 
the right to develop, finance, design, build, own, 
operate and maintain a project for the client. The 
agent owns the project and retains the revenue and 
risk for a specified period. 


c) Build Own Operate Transfer (BOOT) — An agent 
is granted the right to develop, finance, design, 
build, own, operate and maintain a project for the 
client. The agent owns the project and retains the 
revenue and risk for a specified period after which 
the ownership is transferred to the client. 


2.4 Project — A project consists of a unique set of 
processes consisting of coordinated and controlled 
activities with start and end dates, performed to achieve 
project objectives. 


2.5 Project Communication Management — A subset 
of project management that includes communications 
planning, information planning, information 
distribution, performance reporting and administrative 
closure in an effort to correctly disseminate project 
information for effective implementation and 
monitoring of the project. 


2.6 Project Life Cycle — A project life cycle is defined 
as a set of phases from the start to the end ofthe project. 


2.7 Project Management — roject Management 
is the application of methods, tools, techniques and 
competencies to a project. 


2.8 Project Organization — The organization 
structure created or evolved to serve the project and its 
stakeholders. 


2.8.1 Project Organization Structure 


a) Functional Organization Structure — An 
organizational structure for undertaking various 
specialized tasks of the project. “Organizations 
are structured by grouping people performing 
similar activities into departments. 


IS 7337 : 2020 


b) Projectized Organization Structure — An 
organization structure especially created for the 
project and headed by a project manager having 
total administrative and functional control. 
“Organizations are structured by grouping people 
to project teams on temporary basis.” 

NOTE — The project management may be supported by 
outside personnel like consultants, etc. 

c) Matrix Organization Structure — A structure 
created from staff drawn from various functional 
departments working under the direction of 
project manager till the completion of the assigned 
responsibility (ies). “Organizations are structured 
by creating a dual hierarchy in which functions 
and projects have equal prominence.” 


2.9 Project board/steering committee — A group 
of senior stakeholders including the project manager 
with authority, accountability and responsibility for 
governance and providing direction to project team 
through high level decisions. 


2.10 Project Manager — An individual with authority, 
accountability and responsibility for managing a project 
to achieve specific objectives. 


SECTION II — PLANNING 


2.11 Activity — Identified elementary component of 
work that is required to be undertaken to complete a 
project. 


2.12 Activity Float — It is the time available to an 
activity in addition to its planned duration without 
affecting the completion time of the project. There are 
four types of activity floats namely, total float, free 
float, independent float and interference float. 


2.13 Backward Pass — Is a procedure during the time 
analysis involving backward traversal of the network 
from the ending event to the starting event to determine 
the latest start and finish time of each activity. 


2.14 Cost Analysis — Is the analysis of project network 
by estimating the cost of each activity for a given time 
and resource requirement to arrive at the total cost of 
the project and analyzing different alternatives with 
respect to different time and resource requirements of 
the activities and their impact on the total cost of the 
project with a view to optimizing the total project cost. 


2.15 Cost Variance Chart — A chart depicting the 
actual cost of an activity and its variance from the 
planned/budgeted cost. 


2.15.1 Crashing — The process of reducing the time 
duration of an activity(ies) in a project by deployment 
of additional resources in order to expedite the project 
completion. 


2.16 Crash Activity Duration — The time duration 
of an activity when executed at an expedited rate 
with additional resources to achieve/advance project 
schedule. 


2.17 Crash Cost — The cost of an activity when 
executed in crash duration by deployment of additional 
resources. 


2.18 Crashing Cost — The additional direct cost 
incurred on the activity as a result of crashing that is, 
the difference between the crash cost and the normal 
cost of the activity. 


2.19 Critical Activity — Is an activity with zero/ 
minimum float wherein any magnitude of delay in 
completion of the activity beyond the available float 
will delay the completion of project by the same 
magnitude of time. 


2.20 Critical Path — Critical path in the network is 
the longest duration path from the start to the end of the 
project determining the project duration. There may be 
more than one such path. 


2.21 Critical Path Method (CPM) — Is a technique 
used for depicting the project activities with 
deterministic time estimates in the form of a project 
network and determines the path of critical activities 
to facilitate time, resource and cost planning of the 
project. 


2.22 Dangling Activity — Is an activity in the network 
which is stand alone and has no successor activity(ies). 


2.23 Dependency Relationship — Is a relationship 
in which the next activity or a group of activities can 
not begin or end until preceding activity or group of 
activities has been started or completed. 


2.24 Detailed Plan — Is a document to facilitate day- 
to-day execution and monitoring of activities where 
activities are further broken down into tasks specifying 
the methodology, working practices, work norms etc. 
for optimum utilization of resources. 


2.25 Equipment/Machine Loading Plan — Is 
a document specifying allocation schedule of an 
individual equipment/machine to various activities 
over a period of time. For example, cranes, excavators 
etc. 


2.26 Forward Pass — Is a procedure during the time 
analysis involving forward traversal of the network 
from the starting event to the ending event to determine 
the earliest start and finish time of each activity. 


2.27 Free Float — Is the time available to an the activity 
in addition to its planned time when all the preceding 
activities are assumed to have been completed at the 
earliest finish time and all succeeding activities can be 
started at the earliest possible time. 


2.28 Independent Float — Is the time available to 
an activity in addition to its planned time when all 
the preceding activities are assumed to have been 
completed at the latest finish time and all succeeding 
activities can be started at the earliest possible time. 


2.29 Individual Work Plan — Is a document 
specifying allocation of precise responsibilities along 
with its time schedule to each individual member or 
group of members where the responsibility of work is 
assigned to a group. 


2.30 Interference Float — Is the difference between 
total float and free float, which can be carried forward 
to succeeding activities and shared. 


2.31 Ladder Activity — Two or more activities in a 
network, which though interdependent, are capable of 
being scheduled concurrently for major part of their 
duration connected by either lead time or lag time. 


2.32 Milestone — Is the completion of a phase or a 
significant stage in a project. 


2.33 Milestone Chart — It contains schedules of 
selected key/critical events derived from the network, 
their status of start or finish and the projected delay in 
the occurrences of milestones. 


2.34 Normal Activity Duration — The duration of an 
activity when executed under normal circumstances. 


2.35 Normal Cost — The cost of an activity when 
executed under normal circumstances. 


2.36 Precedence Network (Activity-on-node 
Network) — A type of project network in which the 
activities are represented by nodes and precedence 
relationship between the activity interconnecting 
arrows. The precedence network may depict four types 
of dependency relationships between a pair of activities 
namely, start to start, start to finish, finish to start or 
finish to finish. 


2.37 Probabilistic Time Estimate — When the time 
duration of an activity is not known with certainty and 
is found to have random variation, in such cases the 
activity duration is calculated in terms of optimistic 
time estimate (a), most likely time estimate (m) and 
pessimistic time estimate (b) as under: 


a+4m+b 


Expected time = 6 


2.38 Product Break Down — Describes the structural 
breakdown of the project in a hierarchical manner 
into product packages and individual products to be 
delivered at the end of the project. 


2.39 Programme Evaluation and Review Technique 
(PERT) — Is a technique used for depicting the project 


IS 7337 : 2020 


activities with probabilistic/ stochastic time estimates 
in the form of a project network and determine the 
probability of the project completion in different time 
periods to facilitate time, resource and cost planning of 
the project. 


2.40 Project Bar Chart/Gantt Chart — Display of 
project schedule and/or progress of activities in the 
form of time-scaled bars for each activity against time 
access. 


2.41 Project Calendar — Project calendar is the 
calendar which specifies the working and non-working 
days for the project. 


2.42 Project Closeout — A process that provides for 
either acceptance or termination of the project by the 
project sponsor, completion of various project records, 
final revision and issue of documentation to reflect the 
‘as-built’ condition. 


2.43 Project Network — Is a graphical model depicting 
the inter-relationship amongst the various activities of 
the project. Project networks show the execution of 
activities depicting the flow of time from start of the 
project till its completion (usually from left to right). 


2.44 Project Objective — Is a set of deliverables at 
the end of a project, meeting the functional and the 
quality requirements within the prescribed time and 
cost estimates so as to meet its time schedule. 


2.45 Project Plan — Is the basic reference document 
for execution and monitoring of the project. It contains 
the various activities of the project, their inter- 
relationships, resources required to execute these 
activities and the planned schedule of execution. 


2.46 Project Planning — Is a process involving 
the estimation of work content, activities required 
to perform that work, resources required for these 
activities, determine relationship amongst activities, 
scheduling of activities and their integration for 
optimum utilization of resources and completion of the 
project within the time and cost estimates with a view 
to achieve the desired project objectives. 


2.47 Project Scope — A concise and accurate 
description of the end products or deliverables to be 
expected from the project and that meet specified 
requirements as agreed amongst the project’s 
stakeholders. 


2.48 Project Team — Is a multi-disciplinary 
organizational group, headed by a Project Manager, 
responsible for execution of a project. Project team may 
consist of personnel drawn from various disciplines 
like, design, engineering, procurement, construction, 
quality assurance and inspection, safety, project 
management, etc. 


IS 7337 : 2020 


2.49 Quality Plans — A quality plan is a document, 
or several documents, that together specify quality 
standards, practices, resources, specifications, and the 
sequence of activities relevant to a particular product, 
service, project, or contract. 


2.50 Resource Analysis — Analysis of project network 
by considering both the time and resource requirements 
of the activities to determine the planned start and 
finish time of each activity within the time and resource 
constraints with a view to optimize the utilization of 
resources. 


2.51 Resource Constrained Project Scheduling — 
Is a method of resource analysis where the resources 
are limited and inflexible and the project schedule 
is arrived at with a view to optimal utilization of the 
available limited resources. 


2.52 Resource Levelling — The process of rescheduling 
activities such that the requirement for resources for the 
project does not exceed resource limits and resources 
are optimally utilized. 


2.53 Resource Productivity Chart — Depicts 
the comparison between the actual productivity of 
resources and the standard norms. 

NOTE — The productivity of resources is expressed in term of 


work done per unit of resource used i.e. per machine hour or 
per man-day. 


2.54 Resource Work Plan — Is a document 
specifying the requirement of resources like manpower, 
construction equipment/machinery during execution of 
the project at different time period and how they are 
planned to be made available. 


2.55 Risk Assessment — The process of identifying 
potential risk, quantifying their likely occurrence and 
evaluating their impact on the project. 


2.56 Risk Identification — The process of determining 
which event will affect the project. 


2.57 Risk Control — An iterative process for 
monitoring and controlling the risks by identification, 
assessment and treatment. 


2.58 Risk Treatment — The process of selection and 
implementation of appropriate options (like eliminate, 
mitigate, transfer, share or accept risks) for dealing 
with risk. 


2.59 Stage Plan — Is a part of the project plan giving 
details of one of the stages of a large project and its 
interface with the other stages as well as the overall 
project. 


2.60 Technical/Work Plan — It focuses on the 
technical dependencies and the work content of the 


project, the relationship between the work components 
and their plan of execution. 


2.61 Time Analysis — Is the analysis of the project 
network related to the time characteristics of a project 
for determining the earliest and latest start and finish 
time of the activities, with associated float, with a view 
to arriving at a time plan of the project. 


2.62 Time Variance Chart — A chart depicting the 
actual beginning and completion of various activities 
and its variance from the planned beginning and 
completion of the activity. 


2.63 Total Float — Is the total time available to an 
activity in addition to its planned time when all the 
preceding activities are assumed to have been completed 
at the earliest possible time and all succeeding activities 
can be started at the latest allowable time. 


2.64 Work Breakdown Structure — Work breakdown 
structure is a hierarchical decomposition framework 
for presenting the work that needs to be completed, in 
order to achieve the project objectives and create the 
required deliverables. 


2.65 Work Package — The work defined at the lowest 
level of the work breakdown structure which requires 
same set of functional expertise and can be performed 
by the same group of resources, for which various 
attributes like cost, time, etc. can be estimated and 
managed. 


SECTION Ill REVIEW PROCEDURES 
FOR PROJECT COORDINATION AND 
CONTROL 


2.66 Actual Cost of Work Performed (ACWP) — 
It is the amount of actual cost incurred for work (at 
actual price) performed during and cumulatively upto 
the end of a given period. 


2.67 Budgeted Cost of Work Performed (BCWP)/ 
Earned Value — It is the budgeted cost of work 
actually performed during and cumulatively upto 
the end of a given period of time. It is also known as 
‘earned value’ of actual work. 


2.68 Budgeted Cost of Work Scheduled (also 
referred as Planned Cost of Work Performed) 
(BCWS) — It is the budgeted cost of work (at a 
predetermined price) scheduled to be completed 
during and cumulatively upto the end of a given 
period. 


2.69 Cost Performance Index (CPI) — The ratio of 
budgeted cost of work performed (BCWP) and actual 
cost of work performed (ACWP) wherein the value less 
than one indicates that the project cost has exceeded 


the budget and the value greater than one indicates that 
the project cost is within budget. 


2.70 Cost Variance — It is the difference between the 
budgeted cost of work performed (planned value) and 
the actual cost of work performed (actual cost): 


Cost Variance (CV) = BCWP-ACWP 


2.71 Estimated Cost at Completion (EAC) — It is the 
total cost estimated for the completion of the project. It 
is arrived at by adding cumulative actual cost of work 
performed upto a given time to the projected cost for 
remaining work. 


2.72 Project Analysis — The process of checking 
and comparing the project data (collected during 
monitoring) with the baseline to determine any 
deviations and its causes. 


2.73 Project Control — The process of ensuring 
conformance of actual performance with planned 
performance. 


2.74 Project Monitoring — Collecting, recording and 
reporting information in relation to the plan concerning 
any or all aspects of project execution namely, time, 


IS 7337 : 2020 


cost and performance, highlighting both areas of 
achievements and potential failures needing desired 
attention and action. 


2.75 Project Review Cycle — An iterative method 
of monitoring and analyzing the activities viz-a-viz 
the baseline of the project, to determine corrective 
measures and updating the plan accordingly. 


2.76 Schedule Performance Index (SPI) — The ratio 
of budgeted cost of work performed (BCWP) and 
Budgeted Cost of Work Schedule (BCWS) wherein the 
value greater than one indicates that the project is ahead 
of schedule and the value less than one indicates that it 
is behind schedule. 


2.77 Schedule Variance — It is difference between 
the budgeted cost of work performed and the budgeted 
cost of work scheduled. It is the component of the cost 
variance which is attributed to schedule slippage: 


SV =BCWP- BCWS 
2.78 Time Variance — It is the difference between the 


scheduled time of work performed and the actual time 
of work performed. 


IS 7337 : 2020 


ANNEX A 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Management and Productivity Sectional Committee, MSD 04 


Organization(s) 
Indian Institute of Materials Management, New Delhi 


Associated Chambers of Commerce and Industry of 
India (ASSOCHAM), New Delhi 


Bharat Electronics Ltd., New Delhi 

Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd. , New Delhi 
Directorate General of Quality Assurance, Kanpur 
Engineers India Ltd., New Delhi 

FICCI, New Delhi 


Grant Thornton, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Management, Indore 


Indian Institute of Materials Management, New Delhi 
Indian Statistical Institute, New Delhi 

International Management Institute, New Delhi 
Maruti Suzuki India Ltd., Gurgaon 


Microsoft Corporation India Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi 


National Informatics Centre, New Delhi 
Orange Renewable Power Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi 


Ordnance Factory Board, Kolkata 
Project Management Institute, New Delhi 


Punj Lloyds Pvt. Ltd., Gurgaon 

Steel Authority of India. Ltd., New Delhi 

STQC, New Delhi 

Deloitte India, Gurgaon 

Ernst & Young, New Delhi 

TCS New Delhi 

In personal capacity, ($04, Chelsea Tower, Omaxe 


Heights Vibhuti Khand, Gomti Nagar, Lucknow - 
226010) 


Representative(s) 
Suri V. K. JAIN (Chairman) 


PROF AMAN AGARWAL 


SHRI SUDHIR ERANDI 
Ms EKTA BHARDWAJ (Alternate) 


SHRI K. K. SETH 
Suri JAGDISH PRASAD (Alternate) 


SHRI DEVKI NANDAN 
Suri M. V. KUMBHALKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHWANI SONI 
Suri R. Monan (Alternate) 


SHRI HIMANSHU DHUNDIA 
Suri MRITUNJAY Kumar (Alternate >) 


SHRI GAURAV JAIN 
Ms TusHA Goyat (Alternate I) 
Pror V. K. Gupta (Alternate I) 


Suri M. K. BHARDWAJ 
Ms RINA CHAKRAVORTY 
Dr B. METRI 


SHRI PRITIMAN DEY 
SHRI SUSHANT Bose (Alternate I) 
Suri Ravi KANT Yapay (Alternate II) 
SHRI KARMINDER SINGH (Alternate II) 


SHRI ALOK LAL 
Suri DHIRAJ GYANI (Alternate) 


Dr V. SIVARAMAKRISHNAIAH 


SHRI MUKESH ARORA 


SHRI S. K. YADAV 
Suri P. R. LOHAKPURE (Alternate) 


SHRI TEJAS SURA 
Ms Leena Gupte (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 

SHRI R.K. ANAND 
NOMINATION AWAITED 
NOMINATION AWAITED 
NOMINATION AWAITED 


NOMINATION AWAITED 


PROF S. CHAKRABORTY 


IS 7337 : 2020 


Organization(s) Representative(s) 
In personal capacity, (D-27 Panchsheel Enclave, Pror. R. K. SACHDEVA 
New Delhi) 
In personal capacity, (H 67 C, DDA Flats, Saket, SHRI MAHESH CHAUDHARY 
New Delhi) 


In personal capacity, (H No. C 30, New Multan Nagar, — SHRIBALRAJ SETH 
Paschim Vihar, New Delhi 110056) 


Directorate General, BIS Ms. SNEH Lata, HEAD (MSD) AND MEMBER SECRETARY, 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex- officio ) | 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
“BIS Catalogue” and “Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MSD 04 (10813). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


