IS 11034 : 1993 IS0 8828 : 1988 ( Reaffirmed 2002 ) srT7ih rir*

( qijya

getm )

Indian Standard
IMPLANTS FOR SURGERY - GUIDANCE ON CARE AND HANDLING OF ORTHOPAEDIC IMPLANTS ( First Revision )

UDC

615'46.004'24

: 616'089'843

@IBIS 1993
BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN
9 NEW BAHADUR DELHI

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR MARG 110002 Price Group 2

August 1993

'

Orthopaedic

Instruments

and Accessories

Sectional

Committee,

MHD

2

NATIONAL

FOREWORD

This Indian Standard which is identical with IS0 8828 : 1988 `Implants for surgery - Guidance on care and handling of orthopaedic implants', issued by the International Organization for Standardization ( IS0 ) has been adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation of the Orthopaedic Instruments and Accessories Sectional Committee ( MHD 2 ) and approval of the Medical Equipment and Hospital Planning Division Council. This standard was first published in 1984. is being published as dual number standard Its first revision to align it with has been taken up and the standard IS0 8828 : 1988.

The text of above mentioned IS0 standard has been approved as suitable for publication as Indian Standard without deviations. Certain conventions are, however, not identical to those used in Indian Standards. Attention is particularly drawn to the following: a) Wherever the words `International should be read as `Indian Standard'; b) Comma practice Standard' and appear, referring in Indian to this Standards standard, they

(,)

has been used as a decimal is to use point ( . ) as the decimal

marker while marker.

the current

IS 11034 : 1993 IS0 8828 : 1988

Indian Standard
IMPLANTS FOR SURGERY - GUIDANCE ON CARE AND HANDLING OF ORTHOPAEDIC IMPLANTS

( First Revision )

0

Introduction

b) 3.1.2

non-sterilized (see 3.1.3). Sterile implants

The guidance given in this International Standard on the care and handling of orthopaedic implants after delivery to the purchaser is intended to help ensure that implants remain free from contamination or damage prior to insertion into the patient. Guidance is given on the procedures for receiving, storing, transporting, handling, cleansing and sterilizing implants; guidance on cautions necessary for preparing implants for use are also outlined. The guidance is aimed at all personnel involved *in receiving and handling implants. It is important that all personnel should be familiar with recommended procedures in order to .minimize the risk and occurrence of damage to implants.

The packaging of pre-sterilized implants shall be left intact until the time of use. The packaging shall be inspected for damage. If damage is found, the implant should be considered unsterile. The implant should then either be returned to the supplier for reprocessing or, if appropriate, be repackaged and resterilized in the operating area. 3.1.3 Non-sterile implants

1

Scope and field of application

This International Standard gives guidance on the recommended procedures for handling orthopaedic implants (such as currently used metal, ceramic 0; polymeric implants, and also including acrylic resin and other bone cements) from receipt at the hospital until they are implanted or discarded.
NOTE The guidance does not apply to the implant manbfacturer.

Some non-sterile implants may be received in special sterilizable packaging and this should not be removed. Nonsterile implants not packaged in this way should only be unwrapped immediately prior to sterilization so as to preserve the surface finish and configuration intact, and they should be handled as infrequently as possible. 3.1.4 Usability of implants

2

Definition

Any implant that has been dropped or mishandled and which is suspected of having suffered damage shall not be used and shall be returned to the-supplier. However, the final judgement as to the suitability of the implant shall always lie with the surgeon who uses the implant.

oithopaedic implant : A device implanted surgically, wholly or partially, in the body, either temporarily or permanently, and used either as an aid in the repair of bone and/or related tissues or as a temporary or permanent replacement for these tissues.
NOTES 1 Throughout this International Standard, the term "implant" has been used to mean "orthopaedic implant". 2 Acrylic resin cement, used for fixing certain devices, is deemed to be an "implant".

3.2

Transport

The implants shall be transported so as to preclude any damage or alteration to the condition of the implant and its packaging as received.

3.3
3.3.1

Stock records'
General

3
3.1

General guidance
On receipt

Stock records are required to facilitate inventories, stock rotation, traceability to the manufacturer and, in some instances, for transfer to patienl.s records. 3.3.2 Unique numbers

3.1.1

General Some implants are marked on their surface with a unique number, lot or batch number, or serial number which also appears on the package. This number will usually be transferred to the patient's records.

Packaged implants may arrive either a) pre-sterilized (see 3.1.21, or

1

IS 11034 : 1993 IS0 8828 : 1988

3.3.3

Records to be compiled

The following information shall be recorded : a) b) cl d) e) f) 3.4 3.4.1 type of implaMs); size of implant(s); unique number of implant or batch or lot; material of implant; the number of implants in a package unit; date of manufacture or receipt.

rinsing, the implants shall be thoroughly dried. Special attention shall be paid to recesses since both chemicals and rinse water may be entrapped in them. 3.6.5 Sterilization shall be carried out by steam autoclaving or other methods which will ensure that the integrity of the implant is protected. 3.6.6 All implants shall be sterilized in accordance with the manufacturer's recommended methods. 3.6.7 Implants shall not be sterilized in contact with instruments or with implants of other materials; metallic oxide and other contaminants could transfer to the `implant, thus causing an unacceptable condition when implanted. 3.7

Storage
General

Appearance

In all storage areas, implants shall be stored prior to use so as to maintain the configuration and surface finish of the implant and not damage its packaging. Implants should be stored separately from instruments. 3.4.2 Storage conditions

Implants that show signs of surface or configuration damage shall be discarded. 3.8

Contouring

and modifying

implants

3.8.1 Performance characteristics of the implant may be altered by contouring or modifying the implant. 3.6.2 Contouring or clamping of implants - a procedure which is frequently necessary - shall be carried out by the surgeon in a manner that will least alter the performance of the implant. However, it is recommended that metallic implants should not be bent sharply, re-bent, angulated at a screw hole, notched or scratched. 3.8.3 Implants should not be contoured or modified by the use of instruments that have been damaged or the effectiveness of which has been impaired. 3.9

Where provided, the manufacturer's instructions for storage should be followed. If there are no such instructions, implants shall be stored in dry conditions and should not be exposed to direct sunlight, ionizing radiation, extremes of temperature or particulate contamination.

3.5

Stock rotation

The principle of "first in, first out" is recommended. The practice of stock rotation should be adopted for all implants, sterile and non-sterile, in all storage areas.

3.6 Cleaning implants

and sterilization

of non-sterile

Re-use

Implants previously implanted shall not reused.

3.6.1 Non-sterile implants may be sterilized without prior cleaning if the manufacturer's packaging has been removed immediately prior to sterilization. 3.6.2 After each surgical procedure, all implants that may be subjected to a resterilization procedure shall be thoroughly and carefully cleaned. Ultrasonic cleaning, mechanized washing or scrubbing by hand are suitable methods provided that they are carried out carefully. The method used should be that which prevents impact, scratching, bending or surface contact with any materials that might affect the implant surface or configuration. 3.6.3 The manufacturer's recommendations on cleaning shall be closely complied with. If scrubbing by hand is used, soft brushes shall be used and harsh chemicals or harsh cleaning solutions shall be avoided. 3.6.4 After cleaning, the implants shall be rinsed completely free of all residues, soap, detergent or cleaning solutions. After

4 Additional guidance and materials
4.1 Sterilization

on polymeric

implants

Special attention should be given when using the manufacturer's recommended methods to sterilize most polymeric implants and materials; otherwise the process may cause degradation or other adverse effects. In those instances where resterilization is possible, the manufacturer's recommended methods shall be corr$lied with. Polymers that require special attention are ultra-high molecular weight polyethylene, acrylic bone cements and degradable materials. Silicone elastomers, however, may be resterilized by steam autoclaving. 4.2

Acrylic

bone cement

Acrylic bone cement (where the liquid and solid components are packed in bottles, bags or other immediate containers)

2

IS 11034 : 1993 IS0 8828 : 1988

should be discarded at the end of the theatre session if the outer of the two enveloping wrappings has been opened.

6 Additional guidance on implants or components of implants with rough surfaces or surfaces with intrinsic porosity
6.1 Sterile implants

4.3

Silicone

implants

The contamination of silicone implants by dust, lint, talc, skin oils and other surface contaminants can cause subsequent fluid and fibrous tissue build-up in the tissues after implantation. Silicone implants should always be handled using strict aseptic technique and preferably handled only with blunt metal instruments.

Implants supplied sterile by the manufacturer should be maintained in the sterile packaging. If this packaging is damaged and no longer intact, the implant shall be returned to the/ manufacturer for disposal.

6.2

Subsequent

cleaning

of implants

5 Additional components
5.1 Sterilization

guidance

on ceramic
For implants which have been removed from the package and inserted into the surgical site, but which have not been implanted or contaminated by other sources, subsequent cleaning may be impossible and the implant should be discarded.

and handling

Ceramic components, such as the heads and acetabular cups of hip joint prostheses, may be supplied in either a steriJe or non-sterile condition. It is important that when sterilization is carried out, the components are separated and not assembled, especially ceramic-to-metal assemblies. Ceramic components should not be quenched in water after steam sterilization, but should be allowed to cool slowly to ambient temperature. Only instruments having a protective plastics coating should be used to handle the ceramic components and the surfaces of the spigot of .femoral stems. 5.2 Dropping of ceramic components

6.3

Non-sterile

implants

For implants supplied non-sterile, special precautions should be followed to prevent contamination and to clean and sterilize the implant prior to surgery. If the implant has been inserted into the surgical site, but has not been implanted or contaminated by other sources, subsequent cleaning may be impossible and the implant should be discarded.

7

Bibliography

If a ceramic component is dropped, it should be discarded even if there are no signs of damage.

The following documents will be of use in the application of this International Standard : IS0 601%. Implants for surgery marking, packaging and labeling. General requirements for

5.3

Manufacturer's

instructions

The manufacturer's instructions shall be closely complied with when ceramic components are being assembled and when ceramic heads are being placed on and taken off femoral stems.

ASTM F 565-78, Standard practice for care and handling of orthopedic implants and instruments.

3

Reprography

Unit, BE,

New

Delhi, India

Standard Mark

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

Bareaa of Indira Standards

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standarda Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyrigbt No part of these publications may be reproduced BIS has the copyright of all its publications. in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director or grade designations. ( Publications ), BIS Revision of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodica!ly; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indin Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards Monthly Additions'. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following reference: Dot : No. MHD 2 ( 2356 ) Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN Headquarters:

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 11002 Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern Southern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036

Telegrams Common

:. Manaksanstha to all Offices ) Telephone { 33101 31 331 13 75

37 84 99, 37 86 26, 53 38 43, I153 23 84

37 85 61 37 86 62 53 16 40

: C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113

235 02 16, 235 04 42 C 235 15 19, 235 23 15 632 92 95, 632 78,91, 632 78 58 632 78 92

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) BOMBAY 400093

Branch : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD, GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.
Prioted at Printwell Printers. Aligarh. India

