IS 12535 ( Part 1 ) : 1988

Indian Standard

( Reaffirmed 1999 )

s .AUTOMOTIVE VEHICLES-TRANSMISSION SYSTEMS-GLOSSARY
PART 1 GENERAL DEFINITIONS

.

UDC

629-l 13 : 621'83'06: 001'4

,

.

,

.

.

DESCRIPTORS

: AUTOMOTIVE AUTOMOTIVE

VEHICLES. TRANSMISSION SYSTEMS. GLOSSARY TRANSMISSION SYSTEMS. GLOSSARY

@ BIS 1989

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDI,AN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

May 1989

Price Group 1

Automotive Transmission Systems Sectional Committee, EDC 103

FOREWORD This Indian Standard ( Part 1 ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 29 September 1988, after the draft finalized by the Automotive Transmission Systems Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering Division Council. The Automotive Transmission Systems Sectional Committee is bringing out a series of standards on the basics of automotive transmission systems. These standards are being issued in the following three parts: Part 1 General definitions Part 2 Universal joints and drive shafts Part 3 Drive axles These standards have been issued to help in understanding various types of transmissions, universal joints, and drive shafts and drive axles. These will also help in understanding the functions related to automatic These standards also aim at eliminating ambiguity in transmission systems of automotive vehicles. definitions of transmission types and the types of shafts in the automatic transmission systems of automotive vehicles. This standard ( Part 1 ) covers the terminology and the symbols for manual and automatic systems and defines various types of transmissions, joints, drive shafts, drive axles, etc. In the preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from the following standards: Transmission Terminology. Functions Society of Automotive Engineers Inc., transmission

SAuEsJA645 May 86 Automative

SAE J 649 Mar 83 Automatic Engineers Inc., USA.

Transmission

Terminology.

Society of Automotive

IS 12535 ( Part 1 ) : 1988

Indian Standard

AUTOMOTIVE VEHICLES-TRANSMISSION SYSTEMS-GLOSSARY
PART 1 SCOPE 1.1 This standard ( Part 1 ) defines the various terms relating to automotive transmission systems including functions. A specific arrangement can be described by a combination of several definitions listed in this standard. 1.2 It also covers terminology mission functions. 2 GENERAL DEFINITIONS 2.1 Transmission A device for transmitting power at a multiplicity of speeds and torque ratios. ( In all definitions using the word `transmission', the word `transaxle' can also be substituted ). 2.2 Transaxle A transmission which provides differential output. 3 TRANSMISSION TYPES for automatic transA countershaft transmission in which ratios are obtained by axial relocation of gears to mesh with other gears. 3.7.2 Constant Mesh Countershaft Transmission A countershaft transmission in which gears are constantly in mesh. Ratios are obtained by engagement of positive or friction means. 3.7.3 Synchronized Countershaft Transmission A constant mesh countershaft transmission in which means are provided for synchronizing the speeds of engaging elements. 3.8 Manually Sbifted Transmission A transmission in which ratio manually. 3.9 Planetary Transmission A mechanical transmission using epicyclic gears. A transmission in which ratio changes are effected through friction drive members. 3.3 Hydrodynamic Transmission A transmission converter. using a fluid coupling or torque 3.10 Power Assisted Shift Transmission A transmission in which the effort of manual ratio change or. selection is accomplished or assisted through the application of hydraulic, pneumatic or electric power. 3.11 Overdrive Transmission A transmission which provides a speed ratio wherein the output speed is greater than the input speed. In the mse of overdrive transaxle, output speed is modified by the fina drive. 3.12 Split Torque Drive Transmission A transmission which comprises two or more parallel torque paths. The individual paths may be any of several types such as mechanical, hydrodynamic, hydrostatic or electrical. 1 changes are effected 1 GENERAL DEFINITIONS 3.7 Countershaft Transmission A mechanical transmission in which gears are mounted on parallel shafts. Common types of are given in 3.7.1 countershaft transmissions to 3.7.3. 3.7.1 Sliding Gear Transmission

3.1 Automatic Transmission A transmission in which ratio changes are effected automatically without manual assistance, 3.2 Friction Drive Transmission

3.4 Hydrostatic Transmission A transmission using a positive displacement pump to drive a positive displacement motor. 3.5 Semi-Automatic Transmission A transmission in which some of the functions of normal ratio changes are effected automatically. 3.6 Mechanical Transmission A transmission in which speed and torque ratios are obtained by gears or other mechanical elements.

IS 12535 ( Part 1 ) : 1988 3.13 Continuously Variable Drive A transmission with infinitely variable a finite range. 3.14 Hydromechanical Transmission A transmission having both hydrostatic pump and motor and mechanical elements in the power path. 3.15 Auxiliary Transmission A transmission used for supplementing the gearing in a main transmission. Commonly it has 2, 3 or 4 speeds. It may be manually shifted or power assisted. 3.16 Transfer Case ratios within 4.7 Power Shift A shift which occurs drive. 4.8 Non-power Shift A shift which occurs while the drive is interrupted. 4.9 Overlap Shift A shift during which the torque transmitting elements Of more than one driving ratio are engaged simultaneously for a short interval. 4.10 Freewheel Shift A torque shift in which a one way clutch is involved as an element of one of the drive ratios from which or to which a shift is made. 4.11 Hydrodynamic Shift A shift in which a hydrodynamic unit is either filled or emptied to affect its torque transmitting capacity. 4.12 Blade Angle Shift A shift in which the angle of the blades of hydrodynamic element is changed to affect its torque capacity. 4.13 Manual Shift A shift which results from the action of the manually operated part of the control system. 4.14 Automatic Shift A shift which results from the action of the automatically operating part of the control system. 4.15 Inhibited Shift A manual shift which is automatically prevented under certain predetermined conditions of operations. 4.16 Overrun Shift A shift which occurs at less than road load throttle opening with vehicle in motion. 4.17 Part Throttle Shift A shift which is obtained at a throttle position short of full throttle. 4.18 Forced Shift A shift which is obtained position. at maximum throttle without the interruption of

A device for transmitting power from one drive line to another drive line. 4 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS RELATING TO AUTOMATlC TRANSMISSION FUNCTIONS 4.1 Friction Start The use of a friction driving member in starting a vehicle from a standing position. 4.2 Fluid Start The use of a hydrodynamic or hydrostatic drive unit in starting a vehicle from a standing position. 4.3 Converter Lockup ( Lockout ) The transition from hydrodynamic to mechanical drive normally accomplished through the application of a friction element. 4.4 Shift A control system actuated change in the functioning of the torque transmitting drive ( this could be a gear train, a hydrodynamic or a hydrostatic drive unit, electrical or friction drive mechanism, etc ) which results in a change in torque ratio and speed ratio. 4.5 Upshift A shift which results in a decrease in torque ratio and an increase in the speed ratio. 4.6 Downshift A shift which results in an increase in torque ratio and a decrease in speed ratio.

_

Standard Mark The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Burew of Indian Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

.

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the B'ure&u of Indian Stanciards Act, I986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright No part of these publications may be reproduced in BIS has the copyright of all its publications. any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BlS. Revision of Indian Standards Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in nossession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BlS giving the following reference: DOG : No. *DC 103 ( 5025 ) Amendments Issued Since Publication
-.

Amend No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU
_ Headquarters :

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan. 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036

`Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone I 3310131 331 13 75

.

,

36 24 99 13 2 16 1843 41

Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113

f41 24 42 I 41 25 29 19 16

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) BOMBAY 400093 Branches : AHMADABAD- BANGALORE. -BHOPAL.- BH-UBA~HWAR. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. PATNA. TRIVANDRUM.

6 32 92 95

Printed at Printwell

Printers,

Delhi, India

