INATA Ah IS 4264 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


Alten ntet — EA 


(TETI FRAT ) 


Caustic Soda — Code of Safety 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 13.300; 71.060.40 


© BIS 2023 


UR AH OAT 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


eee HAH MA, 9 FR IE AHL AMT, Ay fare - 110002 


MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


October 2023 Price Group 7 


Chemical Hazards Sectional Committee, CHD 07 


FOREWORD 


This standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the 
Chemical Hazards Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division Council. 


Caustic soda is an important basic chemical having large-volume use in industries such as rayon, paper and soap 
in addition to its use in a very large number of industries as an auxiliary process chemical. Caustic soda is a 
corrosive chemical and handling of it presents various hazards which are better prevented than cured. A sound 
code of practice will reduce the frequency of hazards and also, in many cases, the amount of damage caused by 
an accident. 


The elimination of accidents is vital to public interest. Accidents produce social and economic loss and impair 
individual or group productivity. Realization of this loss has led the authorities to devote a good deal of attention 
to safety education. Apart from general precautions, some typical precautions are required to be taken during 
manufacture, storage and handling of caustic soda. The standard also prescribes safety measures for controlling 
hazards and essential information on symptoms of poisoning, first-aid, medical treatment, storage, handling, 
labelling and employee safety. This standard is intended to guide the users in the recognition of these hazards and 
in establishing safe handling procedures. 


This standard was originally published in 1967. With a view to update the standard based on the experience of 
last five decades and on the currently available data the Committee felt a need to revise the standard. In this 
revision general properties have been incorporated and modifications have been made to update safety measures 
for controlling hazards and essential information on symptoms of poisoning, first-aid, medical treatment, storage, 
handling, labelling and employee safety based on the currently available data and last five decades experience. 


The properties of caustic soda listed in 4 have been taken from literature and have been included for information 
only. Moreover, these properties pertain to pure caustic soda. BIS has published a separate standard IS 252 : 2013 
on the requirements, methods of sampling, and test for caustic soda suitable for use in rayon, cosmetic, textile, 
soap, paper and other similar industries. It covers the material in the solid and lye form. 


The various clauses of the standard have been aligned with the format being applied for all Indian Standards on 
code of safety of chemicals. 


In the preparation of this code of safety assistance have been derived from the following publications: 


a) Chemical safety data sheets — SD-16, manufacturing chemists association, 1825 Connecticut Avenue, 
Washington D.C. 2009. 


b) Sax’s dangerous properties of industrial materials, volume three, 12" edition, Richard J. Lewis Sr., 
Wiley-interscience publication, 2012. 


c) NIOSH, pocket guide to chemical hazards, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Centres for 
Disease Control, 1990 (National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health). 


d) IPCS-International program on chemical safety, 2004 edition 


e) Nicky Bates, national poisons information service (London Centre), medical toxicology unit, guy's & st 
thomas' hospital trust, Avonley Road, London, SE14 5ER, UK. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


IS 4264 : 2023 


Indian Standard 
CAUSTIC SODA — CODE OF SAFETY 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard prescribes a code of safety 
concerning hazards relating to caustic soda. It 
describes the properties and essential information 
for the safe handling and use of caustic soda. 


1.2 This code does not, however, deal with 
specifications for design of buildings, chemical 
engineering plants, method and ingredients used in 
the manufacture, equipment for waste disposal and 
operation control. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards given below contain provisions 
which, through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the editions indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revision, and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most 
recent editions of these standards: 


IS No. Title 


IS 1260 (Part 1): Pictorial marking for 
1973 handling and labelling of 
goods: Part 1 Dangerous 

goods (first revision) 


IS 4155 : 2023 Glossary of terms relating to 
chemical and radiation 
hazards and hazardous 


chemicals (first revision) 


IS 4167 : 2020 Glossary of terms relating 
to air pollution (second 


revision) 


IS 8519 : 1977 Guide for selection of 
industrial safety equipment 
for body protection 


IS 8520 : 2023/ Eye and face protection — 
ISO 19734 : Guidance on selection, use, 
2021 and maintenance (first 

revision) 


IS 8807 : 1978 Guide for selection of 
industrial safety equipment 
for protection of arms and 


hands 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard the definitions given 
in IS 4155 shall apply. 


4 PROPERTIES 
4.1 General Information 
4.1.1Chemical Name — sodium hydroxide 


4.1.2 Common Name and Synonyms — caustic soda, 
lye, soda lye, sodium hydrate 


4.1.3 Uses 


Sodium hydroxide is used in bar soaps and 
detergents. Sodium hydroxide is also used as a drain 
cleaner to unclog pipes. Around 56 percent of 
sodium hydroxide produced is used by industry, 
with 25 percent of NaOH used in the paper industry. 
Some other uses include fuel cell production, to cure 
food, bleach, drain cleaner, oven cleaner, soaps, 
detergent, paper making, paper recycling, aluminum 
ore processing, oxide coating, processing cotton 
fabric, pickling, pain relievers, anticoagulants to 
prevent blood clots, cholesterol reducing 
medications, and water treatment. 


4.2 Identification 
4.2.1 Formula — NaOH 


4.2.2 CAS Number — 1310-73-2 
4.2.3 UN Number — 1823 (solid), 1824 (solution) 


4.2.4 UN Class — UN hazard Class 8, UN 
subsidiary risks: NA, UN pack group: II 


4.2.5 Hazchem Code — 2W 

4.3 Physical Properties 

4.3.1 General— hygroscopic and deliquescent salt 
4.3.2 Molecular Mass — 39.997 gm/mol 

4.3.3 Physical State — solid/liquid 


4.3.4 Colour — colourless liquid/colourless solid/for 
lye colourless to semi turbid 
4.3.5 Odour — odourless 


IS 4264 : 2023 


4.3.6 Boiling Point — 1390 *C 

4.3.7 Melting Point — 318 °C 

4.3.8 Vapour Density (Air = 1) — 2.3 

4.3.9 Specific Gravity — 2.13 at 20 °C 

4.3.10 Viscosity — not applicable 

4.3.11 Vapour Pressure at 76.6 °C — < 2 KPaat 20 °C 
4.3.12 Heat of Combustion — not applicable 


4.3.13 Refractive Index at 589.4 nm — 1.433 at 320 °C; 
1.421 at 420 °C 


4.3.14 Solubility in Water — miscible, 111 g/100 ml 
at 20 °C 


4.3.15 Solubility in Other Solvents — soluble in 
chloroform, miscible with ethanol ether 


4.4 Chemical Properties 
4.4.1 Reactivity 


Caustic soda destroys living tissues. Considerable 
heat is generated on adding water to solid caustic 
soda or its strong solutions and this may cause 
boiling and spattering of hot solution. It reacts with 
mineral acids to form corresponding salts. All 
organic acids also react with sodium hydroxide to 
form soluble salts. Another common reaction of 
caustic soda is dehydrochlorination. 


4.4.2 Polymerization — not applicable 
4.4.3 Allotrope Formation — not applicable 
4.4.4 Corrosion Properties 


Caustic soda corrodes clothing and a few metals, 
such as aluminium, tin, lead, zinc and alloys 
containing these metals; slowly corrodes iron, 
copper and Monet metal. 


4.5 Fire and Explosion Hazard Properties 

4.5.1 Ignition Temperature — no ignition temperature 
4.5.2 Auto Ignition Temperature — not flammable 
4.5.3 Flash Point — not applicable 

4.5.6 Fire Risk — not applicable 


5 HEALTH HAZARD AND TOXICITY 
INFORMATION 


5.1 General Information 


Caustic soda is dangerous when carelessly handled. 
Solid caustic soda or its solutions have marked 
corrosive action on all tissues of body. Signs and 
symptoms of irritation do not immediately become 
evident after contact with caustic soda, as a result, 


the worker may suffer injury before he realizes that 
the chemical is in contact with his body. 


5.2 Routes of Entry 
5.2.1 Skin 


Direct contact to skin produces severe pain, 
chemical burns and cause wounds, lesions or 
abrasions. It shall not be in contact with open cuts or 
irritated skin. Repeated exposure to skin causes 
dermatitis. 


5.2.2 Eyes 


Direct contact to eye causes pain and burns. This 
results in severe damage of eye such as clouding of 
cornea, inflammation of iris, epithelium destruction, 
cataracts, eyes glued to eyelids and blindness. 


5.2.3 Ingestion 


Ingestion of lye produce burns around the mouth, 
throat, and stomach. It increases in saliva production 
and inability to speak or swallow. It causes 
ulcerations and swellings of mucous membrane. 
May experience nausea, vomiting and diarrhea. 


5.2.4 Inhalation 


Lye on inhalation irritates the respiratory tract and 
can cause lung damage. Mild symptoms include 
cough, choking and damage of mucous membrane. 
While when sudden inhalation of dust can also result 
fatal symptoms with severe lung and throat 
inflammation. 


5.2.5 Long Term Effects 


Prolonged exposure results in erosion of teeth, 
inflammatory and ulcerative changes in mouth, 
necrosis of jaw, bronchial irritation followed by 
bronchial pneumonia. High exposure of dust could 
lead to pneumoconiosis. 


5.3 Toxicity Information 
a) Threshold limit value — time-weighted 
average (TLV-TWA) — 2 mg/m? 


b) Short term exposure limit (STEL) — not 
available 


c) Immediately dangerous to life or health 
(IDLH) — 10 mg/m? 


d) Lethal dose (LDso) (rat, oral), (median 
dose) — 325 mg/Kg 


e) Lethal concentration (LCi) (human, 
oral) —not available 


f) Inhalation (rat) LCs 9 — not available 
5.4 Antidote 


There is no antidote for sodium hydroxide toxicity. 


5.5 Health Effects 
5.5.1 Signs and Symptoms 


Causes severe irritation or burns to the eyes, skin, 
gastrointestinal tract, and respiratory system. 


Incompatibility: Acids and halogenated compounds. 
5.5.2 Acute Toxicity 
5.5.2.1 Systemic effects 


No general or systemic effects are noted except 
those resulting from shock or those secondary to 
tissue damage. 


5.5.2.2 Local effects 


Caustic soda is dangerous to live tissue. Contact 
with it causes burns, frequently deep ulceration and 
ultimate scarring. Severe burns result not only from 
the solid alkali but also from solutions of this 
compound. Even dilute solutions on prolonged 
contact exert a destructive effect on tissues. Caustic 
soda is a strong primary irritant. Multiple small 
burns may result from exposure to dust or mist of the 
material. Contact with eyes either of solid caustic 
soda or its solutions may rapidly cause severe 
damage to the delicate eye tissues. Molten caustic 
causes severe injury both by reason of high 
temperature (above 320 *C) and corrosive nature of 
the compound. Ingestion either of the solid caustic 
soda or its solution results in damage to mucous 
membranes or deeper tissues. As a result, 
perforation may follow or subsequent extensive scar 
formation may occur. Death may occur if vital areas 
are penetrated into. Scarring may so constrict the 
damaged tissues that extensive corrective surgery 
may be required. Inhalation of the dust or 
concentrated mist may cause damage to upper 
respiratory tract and even to the lung tissue proper. 
The effects of irritation may vary from mild 
irritation of nasal membranes to severe pneumonitis 
depending on the severity of the exposure. 


5.5.3 Chronic Toxicity 


It could lead to bronchial pneumonia or 
pneumoconiosis. 


5.5.3.1 Systemic effects 


There are none except those secondary to tissue 
damage. 


5.5.3.2 Local effects 


Repeated contact with dilute solutions may cause 
superficial destruction of skin in multiple areas and 
primary irritant dermatitis may result. Repeated 
inhalation may similarly cause varying degrees of 
irritation to the tissues of the respiratory passage 
including lungs. 


IS 4264 : 2023 


6 PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT 
6.1 Availability and Use 


While personal protective equipment is not an 
adequate substitute for good, safe working 
conditions, adequate ventilation, and intelligent 
conduct on the part of employees working with 
caustic soda, it is, in many instances, the only 
practical means of protecting the worker, 
particularly in emergency situations. One should 
keep firmly in mind that personal protective 
equipment protects only the worker wearing it, and 
other unprotected workers in the area maybe 
exposed to danger. 


The correct usage of personal protective equipment 
requires the education of the workers in proper 
employment of the equipment available to him. 
Under conditions which are sufficiently hazardous 
to require personal protective equipment, its use 
should be supervised and the type of protective 
equipment selected should be capable of control 
over any potential hazards. 


6.2 Non-Respiratory Equipment 
6.2.1 Eye and Face Protection 


Safety glasses or chemical googles should be used 
to protect eye and skin, wherever required. Face 
shield shall be used while handling bulk quantities. 
Immediate work area must be well equipped with 
facilities such as eye wash fountain and quick 
drench shower (see IS 8520). 


6.2.2 Head Protection 


Class C hard hats should be worn where there is 
danger of falling objects. If hard hats are not 
considered necessary, soft-brimmed hats or caps 
may be worn to give protection against splashes. 


6.2.4 Body, Skin and Hand Protection 


Wear protective clothing to minimize skin contact. 
Wear chemical resistant clothing and rubber boots 
when potential for contact with the material exists. 
Always place pants legs over boots. Contaminated 
clothing should be removed, then discarded or 
laundered. Discard contaminated leather goods. 
Handling bulk quantities, a PVC suit and PVC 
gloves be used (see IS 8519 and IS 8807). 


6.3 Respiratory Equipment 


6.3.1 Respirator selection based on assigned 
protection factor (APF) for concentration up to 
10 mg/m?: 
a) (APF = 25) Any supplied-air respirator 
operated in a continuous-flow mode; 
b) (APF = 25) Any powered, air-purifying 
respirator with a high-efficiency particulate 
filter; 


IS 4264 : 2023 


c) (APF = 50) Any self-contained breathing 
apparatus with a full facepiece; and 

d) (APF = 50) Any supplied-air respirator 
with a full facepiece. 


6.3.2 Emergency or planned entry into unknown 
concentrations or IDLH conditions: 


a) (APF = 10 000) Any self-contained 
breathing apparatus that has a full 
facepiece and is operated in a pressure- 
demand or other positive-pressure mode; 
and 


b) (APF = 10000) Any supplied-air respirator 
that has a full facepiece and is operated in 
a pressure-demand or other positive- 
pressure mode in combination with an 
auxiliary self-contained positive-pressure 
breathing apparatus. 


7 STORAGE, HANDLING, LABELLING AND 
TRANSPORT 


7.1 General 


This material is inorganic and not subject to 
biodegradation. Because of the high pH of this 
product, it is harmful to aquatic life. The washings 
should be collected in an impervious container and 
recovered or neutralized with acid and disposed 
without harming the nearby eco-system. 


7.2 Storage 


7.2.1 Drum containers should be stored in dry 
locations to prevent rusting. They should be 
periodically inspected and spills, etc, attended to. 
Rusted containers become weak, and they should be 
handled with extra care. 


7.2.2 For stationary storage, mild steel tank or any 
other properly designed tank with alkali resistant 
lining should be used. They should be provided with 
manholes of at least 60 cm diameter protected with 
grills and cover. Top of the tank should be vented to 
atmosphere. 


7.2.3 All tanks should be capable of being 
completely isolated from other tanks and processes 
by suitable valves. Where possible small portions of 
pipe lines should be removed or blanks should be 
inserted for additional safety. The tanks should be 
capable of being drained off completely. 


7.2.4 Before repairs or cleaning, tanks should be 
completely drained and thoroughly washed. 


7.2.5 Persons required to enter a tank should first 
make sure that the tank is empty, has been washed 
free of alkali and certified so by a competent 
authorized inspector or inspecting authority. They 
should wear adequate personal protective equipment 
including a safety belt securely attached to arope the 


free end of which is held by a person standing 
outside the confined space. Supply of fresh 
breathable air to persons inside the tank should be 
ensured by proper means. 


7.2.6 High density polyethylene (HDPE) bags used 
for storage of caustic flakes/solids should be of 
proper strength (denier). The bags should be lined 
internally. Caustic should be filled in suitable size 
liners kept in HDPE outer bags. Care to be taken that 
the outer bag is not soiled with caustic. The 
temperature of caustic, while filling should be 45 °C 
to 50 °C. After filling, the liner should be tied at 
mouth immediately to avoid ingress of moisture. 
The outer HDPE bag should be double stitched. The 
bags should be stored in well ventilated and covered 
storage. Hooks should not be used for transfer of 
filled bags. There should not be ingress of water 
during rain. Preferably the bags may be stored on 
platform raised to a height to prevent contact with 
water in case of some water enters storage yard due 
to any circumstances. The storage of bags should not 
go beyond a height of Sft. 


7.2.7 Storage and Precautions with Tankers 


7.2.7.1 Before allowing persons to carry out jobs 
inside a tank, proper safety work permit for confined 
space entry to be taken. It should be ensured that the 
tank is isolated from the supply line and lockout 
tagout (LOTO) to be followed. 


7.2.7.2 The following points are to be carefully 
remembered: 


a) Water should be freely available and used 
in case of spillage; 

b) When empty, all openings and valves 
should be properly closed, and the tanker 
returned promptly; 


c) Tankers, unless they are specifically meant 
for storage and transport of caustic soda 
solution, should be thoroughly cleaned of 
all extraneous matter before use; 


d) During loading and unloading, the tanker 
should be braked and isolated against any 
movement; 


e) While loading and unloading spurting 
should be avoided and as an additional 
precaution anti-splash screens should be 
used; 


f) Work on tankers should be supervised by 
foremen and only workers using approved 
type of personal protective equipment 
should be allowed to work; 

g) Compressed air should not be used for 
loading or unloading the tank wagons, but 
pumps or gravity method should be used; 

h) All valves should be closed before 
disconnection; and 


j) Safety instructions should be stenciled on 
both sides of the tanker. 


7.3 Handling 


7.3.1 In handling caustic soda solution care should 
be taken to avoid solidification in the pipelines and 
equipment. The strength of the solution may be 
easily determined from its density. All equipment 
should be kept clean by washing of the accumulation 
of solidified caustic and sodium carbonate that 
forms around small leakages. When disconnecting 
equipment or pipelines, make sure that they are 
empty of caustic soda, and they are washed. At such 
times, a hose with running water should always be 
available. Glandless pumps should preferably be 
used, otherwise packing glands of pumps should be 
shielded to prevent spraying of caustic solution. 
When spillage has occurred of solid or flakes it 
should be swept carefully with a broom and the area 
hosed down. In case of spillage of solution, the floor 
should be washed with water from a hose rather than 
swept. 


7.3.2 Molten caustic has a temperature range of 
320 *C to 400 *C. Extreme care should be taken to 
avoid spurting of molten caustic in the caustic filling 
yard. The yard should be always kept clean. Any 
overflow or spillage of molten caustic should be 
allowed to solidify and then immediately washed 
away, otherwise a dangerous slippery surface will be 
left on the floor. Handling filled drums of molten 
caustic is a dangerous practice which should not be 
followed unless the operator is well guarded. If hot 
caustic is to be run into a container the latter should 
be absolutely dry and free of acid to guard against 
explosion. When liquid enters a container, extreme 
caution should be exercised to prevent splashing. 


7.3.3 Accidents frequently occur while taking 
samples of molten caustic soda. A long-handled 
nickel or steel ladle of small capacity should be used 
to scoop out the sample. It is not advisable to take 
samples of flowing molten caustic as there is always 
danger of spurting. Goggles, gloves, gum boots, 
aprons and safety helmets should be invariably worn 
whenever handling molten caustic soda. The 
supervisory staff should constantly bear in mind that 
all safety equipment should be properly and 
constantly used. The most common hazard is to the 
eye and should always be protected by suitable 
goggles. Use of transparent face shield is 
recommended in addition to safety goggles. 


7.3.4 Solid caustic should be ground and flaked in a 
separate well-ventilated room remote from other 
work rooms. Each man in the grinding room should 
be provided with adequate type of personal 
protective equipment. 


The persons carrying/lifting the caustic drums/bags 
should have undergone training on ergonomic lifting 
methods. 


IS 4264 : 2023 


The joint flanges must be covered to avoid spray, in 
case of leakage or gasket failure. 


Pipelines exposed to cold temperatures should be 
insulated and when exposed extreme cold, 
concentric pipes with steam jacket may be provided 
to keep the caustic flowing without getting solidified 
and causing increase in pressure in the pipelines. 


The tank should have proper venting arrangement 
for venting out the steam and vapours. The people 
engaged in this activity should wear all protective 
equipment and should be at a suitable distance from 
the tank. 


They have to avoid contact with strong acids, acid 
chlorides, acid anhydrides, chloroformates, copper, 
aluminum and their alloys. 


7.3.5 Equipment for Handling 


7.3.5.1 Pots containing boiling caustic soda should 
be provided with exhaust hood to carry off the mists 
and sprays. 


7.3.5.2 Evaporators and similar vessels used in 
handling liquid caustic soda under pressure should 
be tested periodically with cold water according to 
the standards laid down in the relevant pressure 
vessels code. 


7.3.5.3 Tanks should be provided with overflow 
arrangements in such a way that the liquid is 
conveyed to a safe place without causing harm to 
workers nearby. 


7.3.5.4 Stuffing boxes are sources of leaks. With 
modern materials of construction and gland packing 
or seals, this leakage may be well controlled. 


7.3.5.5 To prevent leaks, pipelines should be of 
seamless type and have welded flange joints. 
Depending on temperature and pressure, the gaskets 
may be of soft rubber or compressed asbestos. 


7.3.5.6 Pipelines exposed to low temperatures 
should be so arranged that they can be heated to 
prevent crystallization of the solution. 


7.3.5.7 All equipment used for manufacture, 
handling, storage, or use of caustic soda should be 
regularly inspected and maintained in good 
condition. 


7.3.5.8 During maintenance work when pipes are to 
be disconnected, workers should operate from 
above. Before breaking the point, they should ensure 
that there is no pressure inside and that the line has 
been thoroughly drained, and if necessary, 
thoroughly rinsed with water. Flanges should always 
be opened from the far end. The valve which 
controls the line should be closed and locked and a 
MAN AT WORK ' sign should be hung on it until 
the repairs are complete. 


IS 4264 : 2023 


7.3.6 Dissolve solid caustic soda in one of the 
following ways: 


7.3.6.1 Strip the drum and immerse the cake of solid 
caustic in the dissolving tank of water. 


7.3.6.2 Perforate the drum suitably and suspend it 
above the dissolving tank and pump a stream of 
water into the drum allowing the solution to flow 
into the dissolving tank. 


7.3.6.3 To avoid iron contamination, peel off the 
steel drum from solid cake of caustic before 
dissolving. In bulk addition rapid generation of heat 
is obtained and there is likelihood of local boiling 
and spurting of the solution. Dissolve flakes by 
addition to a well-agitated tank of water. Accidents 
frequently occur during the handling of caustic soda 
for making solutions and it is imperative that all 
safety equipment is properly used in this dissolving 
department. 


7.4 Labelling 


7.4.1 Each container (including tankers) should 
carry an identifying label or stencil as depicted in 
Fig. 7 in IS 1260 (Part 1). The storage containers 
shall be labelled or marked to identify as follows: 


a) Contents of the container; 


b) Name and address of the manufacturer or 
importer of the hazardous chemical; and 


c) Physical, chemical and toxicological data 
as per the criteria given in the relevant 
schedule of the Manufacture, Storage and 
Import of Hazardous Chemicals Rules, 
1989. While referring to the statutes, the 
stipulations given in the subsequent 
amendments of those statutes shall be taken 
into account. 


Manufacturers name with label warnings required 
by regulations or ordinances form part of the label 
or placard. 


7.4.2 Each drum shall be labelled as follows: 
‘SODIUM HYDROXIDE (CAUSTIC SODA)’ 


DANGER — Do not get in eyes, on skin or clothing. 
Do not take internally. In case of contact, flush with 
water copiously; in case of eyes flush with water for 
15 min and see the doctor. Use goggles, face-shield, 
rubber aprons, gloves, gum boots and helmets while 
handling. 


7.4.3 Solid 


Solid caustic soda should be packed in mild steel 
drums. The container should be securely closed, the 
lid being tack-welded or expanded to a tight fit. If 
the closure is not air-tight, moisture and carbon 
dioxide will be absorbed by caustic soda. Over the 


lid, a printed sealing foil of tin should be affixed. On 
this label, it should be clearly stated that the 
container is carrying a corrosive and caustic 
chemical. Precautions regarding the handling and 
the corrosive nature of chemical should be clearly 
written on the container. It should also be marked 
with paint with the name of the manufacturer, grade 
and weight of caustic soda material, and the year and 
month of manufacture. The container used for solid 
caustic soda is generally not corrugated. 


7.4.4 Flakes 


The mild steel drums used for flakes should be 
usually of black sheets and should be corrugated for 
greater strength. The lid should be expanded into 
position or should be tack-welded. All the other 
markings should be as for the solid drums. Both 
solid and flake drums should be black painted. The 
flakes can also be packed in lined HDPE bags with 
a suitable strength inner liner. Handling care 
including use of PPEs and emergency precautions 
should have been printed on the outer HDPE bag. 


7.4.5 Lye 


Lye of different strength should be transported in 
tankers. The tankers should be generally painted in 
light grey or white with an alkali-resistant paint. The 
words ‘caustic soda 32 and its strength’ should be 
painted in large block letters horizontally across the 
tankers, on both sides. Precautions regarding the 
handling of the corrosive chemical shall be written 
on the label or on the printed tin-plate attached to the 
tanker and should be prominently displayed. The 
words ‘CORROSIVE CHEMICAL’ should in 
addition be stenciled on both sides of the tanker. 


7.5 Transport 
7.5.1 Unloading Tankers/Drums 


Waste containing alkali is harmful to bacterial 
growth necessary for degradation of organic waste. 
Such wastes should be properly treated and 
neutralized before it is led into sewers, rivers, ponds 
or open fields. 


7.5.2 Driver 


The persons carrying/lifting the caustic drums/bags 
should have undergone training on ergonomic lifting 
methods. 


K. The valves should be covered by a strong 
protection system to prevent accidental 
breakage and spray. 


L. The tankers driver should be trained with 
hazardous chemical transport guidelines and 
provided with the transport emergency 
(TREM) card and material safety data sheet 
(MSDS) for each consignment. 


M. In case of solid transport, no incompatible 
chemicals should be transported with caustic 
soda. 

NOTE — If transport of the hazardous chemical is 
involved it shall be carried out in accordance with the 
Central Motor Vehicles Rules, 1989. While referring to 
the statutes, the stipulations given in the subsequent 


amendments of those statutes shall be taken into 
account. 


S SPILLAGE, LEAKAGE AND WASTE 
DISPOSAL 


8.1 General 


All personal attending to spill/leak should use proper 
personal protective equipment and fire-fighting 
equipment while handling caustic soda. 


8.2 Spillage 


In case of spillage, do not repack the spilled 
material. Do not bring the spilled material in contact 
with acid, acid chlorides or other combustible 
materials 


$.2.1 General Information 
8.2.2 Land Spill (Spill on Land) 


The area shall be removed with all ignition sources 
and clean up all spill immediately using protective 
equipment. 


8.2.2.1 Containment 


The spill drain area should have retention basins for 
pH adjustments and dilution of spill before disposal. 
As an immediate precautionary measure, isolate 
spill or leak area in all directions for at least 50 m 
for liquids and at least 25 m for solids. 


8.2.3 Water Spill (Spill in Water) 


The area shall be cleared with personal and alert fire 
brigade about the nature of hazard. 


8.2.3.1 Containment 

Prevent it from entering into drains. 
8.3 Leakages 

8.3.1 General Information 


In case of a spill or leak, stop the leak as soon as 
possible. 


8.3.2 Leak from the Tanker/Tank 


The leaking tanker should be emptied out to another 
empty tanker or to a storage tank. 


8.3.3 Caution 


Persons handling leaking caustic soda tankers 
should wear proper personal protective equipment. 


IS 4264 : 2023 


8.4 Accidental Release Measures 


Wear appropriate personal protective equipment 
recommended in 6. Completely contain spilled 
material with dikes, sandbags, etc. Shovel dry 
material into suitable container. Liquid material may 
be removed with a vacuum truck. Remaining 
material may be diluted with water and neutralized 
with dilute acid, then absorbed and collected. Flush 
spill area with water, if appropriate. Keep product 
and flush water out of water supplies and sewers. 
This material is alkaline and may raise the pH of 
surface waters with low buffering capacity. Releases 
should be reported, if required, to appropriate 
agencies. 


8.5 Disposal of Empty Containers 


8.5.1 The empty containers (including drums, HDPE 
bags, liners, etc) and the wastes are hazardous 
wastes and should be disposed with all precautions 
or to be sold to authorized recyclers only. 


8.5.2 Empty flake drums should be thoroughly 
washed with water by filling to the brim, agitating 
and pouring out the water at least six times. Before 
washing, the drum should be visually examined to 
see that no appreciable quantities of caustic flakes 
are sticking inside. 


8.5.3 Solid drums are usually cut open, so the drum 
sheets should be washed profusely with water before 
disposal. In case the solid caustic is dissolved out of 
the uncut drum, the empty drum should be treated 
like the empty flake drum before disposal. 


8.5.4 In the case of returnable flake drums, care 
should be taken to tightly close and reseal the lid 
before returning the empty drums. 


9 FIRE PREVENTION AND FIRE FIGHTING 
9.1 Extinguishing Media 


This material is not combustible. Use extinguishing 
media appropriate for surrounding fire. 


9.2 Special Fire Fighting Procedures 


Keep run-off water out of sewers and water sources. 
Dike for water control. Cool containers exposed to 
flames with water until well after the fire is out. 
Move container from fire area if it can be done 
without risk. If risk of water pollution occurs, notify 
appropriate authorities. 


9.3 Unusual Fire and Explosion Hazards 


May develop highly toxic or corrosive fumes if 
heated. In contact with some metals and 
water/humid air, hydrogen gas is formed, which may 
form explosive mixture with air. Contact with some 
organic chemicals can produce a violent or 
explosive reaction. 


IS 4264 : 2023 


9.4 Protective Measures in Fire 


Self-contained breathing apparatus and suitable 
protective clothing must be worn in fire conditions. 


10 TRAINING 


10.1 Workers required to handle caustic soda in any 
form should be instructed about the hazards 
involved and safe methods of work. They should be 
provided with adequate and appropriate personal 
protective equipment and its correct use should be 
ensured. They should be instructed about basic first- 
aid measures against alkali and the steps to be taken 
in the event of spillage of caustic soda. They should 
be instructed about the location and use of showers, 
eye fountains, hose lines, etc. Food should not be 
stored or eaten in a work-area where caustic soda is 
handled. 


10.2 They should have provided with MSDS of the 
above chemical, site safety regulations and trained 
with emergency response procedures, use of 
protective clothing, fire-fighting and first aid. 


11 HEALTH MANAGEMENT, FIRST-AID 
AND MEDICAL TREATMENT 


11.1 Health Management 
11.1.1 Physical Examination 
11.1.1.1 Pre-placement physical examinations 


All new entrants should be given a pre-placement 
medical examination before they are engaged in the 
manufacture of caustic soda. All workers should be 
regularly checked up by a physician with particular 
reference to dermatitis. 


11.1.1.2 Periodic examination 


The respiratory stress and skin irritation can be 
periodically examined. 


11.2 First Aid 
11.2.1 General Principles 


11.2.1.1 Speed in removing caustic soda from the 
affected parts is of primary importance. Whether a 
full-time physician is employed or not, industrial 
first-aid kits should be kept at all places where 
caustic soda is handled. 


11.2.1.2 Copious and prolonged application of water 
to affected part is of foremost importance. The 
irrigation should be continued for as long as I h to 
2 h. The contaminated clothing should be removed 
promptly. In case of severe burns and those 
involving extensive areas of body shock may ensue, 
and in this case, patient should be laid in a supine 
position and kept reasonably warm until the 
physician, who should be called in attendance at 


once, arrives. No oil or ointment of any kind should 
be applied within first 24 h after exposure or 
subsequently without orders from the physician. 


11.2.1.3 Neutralization with acid or other chemicals 
should be postponed until thorough washing has 
been done. One-percent ammonium chloride or 
4 percent boric acid solution is suitable for eye 
washing. 10 percent ammonium chloride or 
2 percent acetic acid solution is suitable for 
application to skin. 


11.2.2 Contact with Skin 


Remove contaminated clothes. Rinse skin with 
plenty of water or shower for at least 15 min. Refer 
immediately for medical attention. 


11.2.3 Contact with Eyes 


Even if minute quantities of caustic soda either in 
solid or liquid form enter the eyes, they should be 
irrigated immediately with copious amounts of 
water for at least 15 min. Eyelids should be held 
apart during washing. A physician preferably an eye 
specialist should be called at once and if necessary, 
eye washing may be continued for another 15 min 
until he arrives. After the first washing, few drops of 
3.5 percent pontocaine solution or an equally 
effective aqueous topical anaesthetic may be 
instilled into the eyes. No oil or oily ointment should 
be used. 


11.2.4 Ingestion 


Do not attempt to induce vomiting. Patient should he 
encouraged to drink a large quantity of water. Dilute 
vinegar or a 5 percent solution of ammonium 
chloride may be administered freely if available. 
After dilution or neutralization of the alkali, whites 
of egg or paraffin oil may be taken for soothing 
effect. Stomach tubes or emetics should not be used 
unless ordered by the physician. 


11.2.5 Inhalation 


Patient shall be laid down and keep warm and rested. 
Inhalation of vapors as aerosol could cause ling 
oedema and shall be transported to hospital 
immediately. 


11.2.6 First-Aid Kit 


The first-aid kit should have paraffin oil, pontocaine 
solution and ammonium chloride solution. No 
additional requirement in first aid kit. Flushing of 
skin or rinsing of mouth is only first aid in case of 
acetone poisoning. 


11.3 Medical Treatment 


Washing of skin or eyes using large amount of 
water. 


12 ADDITIONAL INFORMATION 


All the accidents occurring in a caustic soda plant 
should be thoroughly investigated to find out the 
causes of the accidents and to suggest remedial 
measures and the detailed report should be recorded 


IS 4264 : 2023 


properly for future reference. All the accidents 
occurring in a caustic soda plant should be 
thoroughly investigated to find out the causes of the 
accidents and to suggest remedial measures and the 
detailed report should be recorded properly for 
future reference. 


IS 4264 : 2023 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Chemical Hazards Sectional Committee, CHD 07 


Organization(s) 


In Personal Capacity (1204, Bhumika Residency, 
Sector 20 Block No 21 roadpali Klambolinode, 
Navi Mumbai, 410218) 


Alkali Manufacturers Association of India, 


Mumbai 


Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 


Central Food Technological Research Institute, 
Mysore 


Central Leather Research Institute, Chennai 


Centre for Fire, Explosives and Environmental 
Science, Government of India, Ministry of 
Defence, New Delhi 


Crop Care Federation of India, New Delhi 


Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals, 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, 
Governement of India, New Delhi 


Department of Space (ISRO), Bengaluru 


Defence Research and Establishment, (DRDO), 
Gwalior 


Directorate General Factory Advice Service and 
Labour Institutes, Mumbai 


Gas Industries Association, Mumbai 
Hindustan Unilever Limited, Mumbai 
Indian Chemical Council, Mumbai 


Indian Institute of Chemical 


Hyderabad 


Technology, 


Indian Institute of Petroleum, Dehradun 


Indian Institute of Technology, Chennai 


Indian Institute of Technology, Mumbai 


Representative(s) 


SHRIK. S. RAMPRASAD (Chairperson) 


SHRIK. SRINIVASAN 
SHRIH. S. DAS (Alternate) 


MS GARIMA SINGH 
SHRI NISHITH GOSH (Alternate) 


DR DANDAMUDI USHARANI 
DR PRASANNA VASU (Alternate) 


DR M. SURIYANARAYANAN 


SHRI S. P. DOBHAL 
DR AARTI BHATT (Alternate) 


SHRI P. N. KARLEKAR 
DR J. C. MAJUMDAR (Alternate) 


DR VISHAL CHOUDHARY 


SHRI MURALEEKRISHNAN R 
Ms LAKSHMI V. W. (Alternate) 


DR PRABHAT GARG 
DR VIRENDRA VIKRAM SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI H. M. BHANDARI 
SHRI P. G. SATPUTE (Alternate) 


SHRI SUNIL KHER 
SHRI ANOOP TANDON (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJAY HARLAKA 
SHRI RAKESH WADALKAR (Alternate) 


DR C. NANDI 
DR RAKESH KUMAR (Alternate) 


DR BANKUPALLI SATYAVATHI 
DR SRIPADI PRABHAKARC (Alternate) 


DR NEERAJ ATRAY 
DR PANKAJ KUMAR KANUJIA (Alternate) 


DR SACHIN GUNTE 


PROF SANDIP ROY 


10 


Organization(s) 


Indian Institute of Toxicology Research, Lucknow 


Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic Research, 
Kalpakkam 


Institute of Chemical Technology, Mumbai 


Ministry of Environment and Forest, New Delhi 


National Chemical Laboratory, Pune 


National Institute of Occupational Health, 
Ahmedabad 


National Institute of Technology, Thrichi 


National Safety Council, Navi Mumbai 


Oil Industry Safety Directorate (Ministry of Pet 
and Natural Gas), Delhi 


Pesticides Manufacturer and Formulators 


Association of India, Mumbai 


Petroleum and Explosives Safety Organisation, 
Nagpur 


Safety Appliances Manufacturers Association, 
Mumbai 


Shriram Institute for Industrial Research, Delhi 


Tata Chemicals Ltd, Mithapur, Distt, Jamnagar 


In personal capacity  (1-4/2/6, Parijat C.H.S., 
Spaghetti, Sector-15, Kharghar, Navi Mumbai, 
410210) 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 4264 : 2023 


Representative(s) 


Dr D. K. PATEL 
DR SHEELENDRA PRATAP SINGH (Alternate) 


Dr K. K. SATPATHY 
PROF (DR) G. D. YADAV 
Dr B. M. BHANAGE (Alternate) 


SHRI VED PRAKASH MISHRA 
DR DINESH RUNIWAL (Alternate) 


DR VIJAY V. BOKADE 
DR M. MUTHUKRISHNAN (Alternate) 


DR B. RAVICHANDRAN 


PROF S. P. SIVAPIRAKASAM 
D. SREEJITH MOHAN (Alternate) 


SHRI A. Y. SUNDKAR 
SHRI K. D. PATIL (Alternate) 


SHRI DEVENDAR M. MAHAJAN 


DR ARCHANA KUMARI 
DR SANDIP SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI M. K. JHALA 
DR YOGESH KHARE (Alternate) 


SHRI MOHAMMAD 
SHRI DEVANG MEHTA (Alternate) 


DR JAGDISH KUMAR 
DR DEEP SHANKAR CHATTERJEE (Alternate) 


SHRI SNEHASHISH A. CHAKRABORTY 
SHRID. K. THAKUR (Alternate) 


SHRIS. SOUNDARARAJAN 


SHRI AJAY K. LAL, SCIENTIST ‘F’/SENIOR DIRECTOR 
AND HEAD (CHEMICAL) [REPRESENTING DIRECTOR 
GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
MISS SHUBHANJALI UMRAO 
SCIENTIST ‘B’/ASSISTANT DIRECTOR, 
(CHEMICAL), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CHD 07 (21703). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern :8® Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


