( Reaffirmed 2000 )

IS:11068-1984

Indian Standard
CRITERIA FOR EDIEiILITY OF OILS AND FATS
Oils Chairman
PROF M. M. CHAILHABARTY Members PROF A. C. GUPTA f Alternate Prof M. M. Chakradarty ) SRRI S. N. AQARWAL

and

Oilseeds

Sectional

Committee,

CAFDC

5

Reppresenting Oil Technologists Association of India, Kanpur

to Central Organization Bombay Directorate for Oil Industry and Trade, Nagpur

SERI H. P. GUPTA ( Altrrrtafc ) MARUETlNo AQRICULTURAL ADVISER TO THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA SERI R. J. VERMA ( Alternate ) S,ZRl J. A. A-~H'I.APUTH~Z SHRI P. N. AGARWAL ( Altcrnatd DR B. P. BALI~A DR N. L. MURTY ( Alfcrnats ) SHRI M. A. BHATT Sam C. R. KIUSHNAMURTHY ( Alternate ) DR N. V. BRINQX Dn V. V. S. MANI ( Altmntr
SHRI D. S. CHADHA SHHIMATI DEBI MKXHERJEH

of Marketing

and Inspection,

Ministry

of Defence ( DC1 )

1

Tata Oil Mills Co Ltd, Bombay Swastik Ho&ehold Bombay Hindustan and Industrial Products Ltd,

Lever Ltd, Bombay

)

SHRI P. K. CHAEKABOSTY DH K. C. GUI~A SHRI A. K. DHAR ( Altrrnats) SRRI P. V. GUJARATHI
SFIRI V. LAKSHUIKANTEAN

Central Committee for Food Standards ( Ministry of Health and Family Welfare ), New Delhi .. ( Attrrnatc ) National Test House, Calcutta Central Food Laboratory, Calcutta Khadi and Bombay Village Industries Commission, Development,

( Altcrnnfc )

SHRI R. C. GWPTA

Directorate General New Delhi

of Technical

SRRI S. N. PANDEY (All#~~~lt ) Kusum Products SHRI S. P. GUPTA SEXI A. R. N. KULU ( Altrrnntr )

Ltd, Rishra ( CoNtinurd ORpage 2 )

INDIAN

STANDARDS

INSTITUTION

This publication is protected under the Indian Cupyright Act ( XIV of 1957) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS:11068 - 1984
( Conlinucdfrom

pugc1)

Representing Members Godrej Soaps Ltd, Bombay SERI B. V. KANTAK SHRI M. S. THAKUB ( Alternate ) Directorate of Vanaspati, Vegetable Oils and Fats DR M. K. KUNDU ( Ministry of Civil Supplies ), New Delhi Laboratory Regional Research (CSIR ), DK G. LAKSHIYXINARAYANA Hyderabad DR A. J. PANTULU ( Allrrnntc ) Indi; ~g~~uhlitural Research Institute ( ICAR ), DR B. M. LAL SHRI T. V. MATHEW SHRI M. R. GROVER SHRI R. K. MATHUR Centril ( Altcmatr ) Agmark Laboratory, Nagpur Association of India, New

Vanaspati Manufacturers' Bombay Shriram Foods Delhi &

SERI G. K. SOOD ( Alternate ) SERI S. C. SINOHAL

Fertilizer

Industries,

SHRI T. N. AQQARWAL ( Altcrnnte ) Solvent Extractors' Association of India, Bombay SHRI G. V. SIRUH SHRI L. KRISHAN KUMAR ( Alternat* ) Consumer Guidance Society of India, Bombay DR ( SEIRIMATI) KAMLA SOHNIE Laboratory ( CSIR ), Research Regional DR C. SRINIVASULU Bhubaneshwar DR (SHRIMATI) K. VIJAYALAKMIMI (Alfemale ) Oil Technological Research Institute, Anantapur SRRI S. D. THIRUMALA RAO SHBI G. AZEEMODDIN(Alternate) Central Warehousing Corporation, New Delhi SERI P. R. VISEWAMBHARAN SHRI K. GOPINATHA MENON ( Altcmafc) Directorate of Oilreeds Development, Hyderabad SHRI M. D. WASNIK SHRI S. P. JUYAL ( Af~srnarc) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-ojicio Member) SRRI S. K. MATHUR, Director ( Chem ) Sccrdary SBRI P. S. ARORA Senior Deputy Director ( Chem ), ISI

Oils and Fats Subcommittee,

CAFDC

5 : 1

DR G. LAKSEMINAUATANA

Research Regional Hyderabad

Laboratory

( CSIR ),

Mtm bcrs Directorate AQRICWLTORAL MARKETING ADVISER TO THE GOV~RNZPNT 0~ INDIA SHRI T. V. MATIIEW ( Altcmafr )

of Marketing

and Inspection,

Nagpur

( Continued on pag6 10)

2

IS:11068 - 1984

Indian Standard
CRITERIA FOR EDIBILITY OF OILS AND FATS
0.
0.1 This Indian

FOREWORD
Standards Instituby the Oils and by the Chemical Products Division

Standard was adopted by the Indian tion on 15 September 1984, after the draft finalized Oilseeds Sectional Committee had been approved Division Council and the Agricultural and Food Council.

0.2 Most of the fats and oils in use today for edible purposes are traditional items that have become accepted for the purpose through centuries of usage. Sesame, rape, mustard and coconut oils are perhaps the oldest of these, followed by the Portugese introduction of the groundnut and its oil in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. Other local traditional edible oils are those of sunflower and niger, and in a smaller way of sal, Dhupa, Kokum, linseed, etc. 0.3 In recent times, new oils have been introduced whose edibilities were primarily established by usage elsewhere. Examples of such materials are refined cottonseed oil, sunflower seed oil, soybean oil, palm oil and tobaccoseed oil, which were therefore accepted without question in India as being edible. 0.4 Recently, however, new developments have occurred. Certain minor oils used in local diets have been commercialized, such as sal seed fat, mango kernel fat and K'okum butter. Other fats about which less is known are becoming available, such as the seed oils of the citrus family, water-melon, pompkin, tea, coffee and the like, whose edibility has not Moreover, even fats that are known been traditionally established. to have been consumed by human beings cannot, on that score, be automatically assumed to be beneficial to health on unrestricted consumption. 0.5 A certain protocol of testing is today in vogue to determine the edibility and toxicity or otherwise to human beings of any ingested Ideally this involves, stepwise examination of analytical product. characteristics, biological testing on rats, biological testing on two other animal species including a non-human primate, and final testing on human volunteers. Certain steps may be omitted, for example, if the fat is already in edible use, and rat tests are normal. 3

IS:11068

- 1984

0.6 This standard outlines procedures for the stepwise examination of a fat or oil that is under consideration for edible use. The various steps and their significance is first outlined in general terms. This is followed by the broad experimental directions relating to each step. 0.7 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2- 1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard outlines the stepwise criteria the edibility or otherwise of an oil or fat. 2. STEPS INVOLVED to be followed to determine

2.1 History of Use -Collect information from local practices or from historical records regarding usage of the oil or fat, either for internal consumption as a medicinal or edible material, .for external application or for non-human usage. These data will offer some clues to the possible properties of the fat in its unrefined form. However, once the fat has An inedible fat may been refined, these properties may not still apply. become edible on refining. 2.2 Analytical Examination - Determine thoroughly the physical, chemical and spectral analytical characteristics of the fat, the nature of its component fatty acids and any unusual components of its unsaponifiable matter. Any unusual features will call for specific attention in animal testing. 2.3 Testing,on Rats - The first biological testing is usually done on albino rats on diets containing 10 percent fats to determine chronic toxicity by way of fat digestibility, feed utilization, growth performance If the testing is continued for three and indications of chronic toxicity. generations, reproductive performance on the fat.containing diet can also be estimated. For acute toxicity, the fat as injected, and the organs examined histopathologically. i.4 Testing on Other Animals - It is desirabIe to also test the fat for edibility on two other animal species, one of which is a primate that The type of testing is similar to that in rats. resembIes man.
*Rules

for rounding off numerical values ( revised).
4

IS:11068

- 1984

found edible shall finally be tested by 2.5 Human Testing -Fats feeding to human volunteers, and the mass gain, fat digestibility and effect on serum lipids examined. 2.6 Determining Edibility -Putting together all the evidence from the experimental data, a statement should be possible regarding the edibility of the fat, and any restrictions indicated in respect of its unrestrained usage for human consumption. 3. ANALYTICAL
3.1 Analytical EXAMINATION Characteristics

3.1.1 Using standard method, determine the following usual analytical characteristics:

a) Melting point (if solid), b) Refractive index, value, matter.
meant for

c) Iodine value, d) Saponification e) Acid value, and f ) Content of unsaponifiable

NOTE -Any oil or fat with a meltiog point of 45�C and above is not direct edible consumption.

3.1.2 Examine the ultraviol& absorption spectrum ( this will indicate any conjugated material ) and the infrared absorption spectrum ( for any unusual features ).

3.1.3 Carry out the specific Presence of the following: a) Hydroxy acid, b) Epoxy acid, c) Cyclopropene

quantitative

or qualitative

tests for the

fatty acids, and such as alkaloids, etc. of glycerol present.

d) Any other toxic material, 3.1.4 Determine the percentage

-Examine the fatty acid components 3.2 Fatty Acid Composition present in the form of their methyl esters, qualitatively by thin-layer 5

IS : 11068 - 1984 chromatography (TLC ) and quantitatively by gas-liquid chromatography ( GLC ) or high pressure liquid chromatography. Where GLC is used, it is advisable to determine the composition both on short silicon columns and on long polyester columns. Where unusual fatty acids are present, the chromatographic methods should be suitably adopted. Separation of the total fat by silver ion-TLC against a known fat of similar unsaturation will also serve to indicate any unusual components. 3.3 Examination of Unsaponifiabie Matter - Many classes of compounds like sterols, hydrocarbons, pigments, alcohols, alkaloids, etc, are present, each class being itself a complex mixture. Resolution by TLC of the unsaponifiable matter of the test fat, alongside that from a familiar material like groundnut oil, will point to any unusual constituents. Use of three solvent systems for separate resolutions will also be helpful. Such solvent systems using TLC on silica gel G are as follows: a) Benzene b) Benzene alone,

: ethyl acetate

( 95 : 5 ), and ( 30 : TO ).

c) Chloroform

: trichloroethylene

3.4 Interpretation-The tests SO far will show whether the fat is unlikely to be edible, for example, if the contents of hydroxy, epoxy or cyclopropene acids, or of unsaponifiable matter, are high, or whether further testing is justified. It will also indicate any special emphasis in the conduct of the animal work. Thus a saturated fat will call for specific attention in animal studies to digestibility, skin condition, tail necroses and the nature of serum and liver lipids. A fat containing cyclopropene fatty acids may be expected to lead to accumulation of stearic acid in adipose tissues. A high conteqt of unsaponifiable matter, or unusual constituents, may call for specral feeding studies with isolated Previous literature on the specific effects of unsaponifiable matter. certain constituents must be examined to further guide the course of animal studies. 4. TE!jTING ON

RATS

4.1 Acute Toxicity

-Typically, 6 male and 6 female rats are injected intraperitoneally with 0.5 ml of the test oil daily for 7 days, with All the animals are sacrificed and all groundnut oil as a control. the organs ( liver, kidneys, testes and heart ) are examined histopathologitally for any abnormalities in comparison with the controls. 4.2 Long-Term Rat Studies 24 female weanling of either sex. Each

4.2.1 Muthodolo,~y - AS an example, 24 male and rats are divided into two groups with equal numbers 6

IS : 11068 - 1984 is fed for 22 weeks on a diet adequate in all respects containing of the test oil in one group and 10 percent of groundnut other. The animals within groups are mated, and the feeding for three generations on the weaned animals.
10 percent oil in the continued

4.2.2 Growth Performance and Feed E&&my Ratio - For each generations, the gain in body mass for weeks is observed and the feed efficiency ratio is calculated separately for males and females. 4.2.3 Fat Digestibility - Faeces are carefully collected ( adhering food must be removed) separately from each animal on say, the 10th day on the diet. The faeces are dried, ground and saponified with alcoholic potash, after which the soaps are acidified with dilute sulphuric acid, and A control group of rats the fatty matter isolated with light petroleum. on the same diets without added oil, but with the same mass of added sucrose (to make the diets isonitrogenous ), serve as controls for fat excretion. The difference shows the extra fat excreted coming from the fat fed, from which the percentage digestibility is calculated for both the test oil and groundnut oil. 4.2.4 the skin lipids is are also Nature of Rat Lipids -At condition is noted and measured. Additionally, undertaken: the end of the first generation feeding, the content of serum lipids and of liver if possible, the following determinations and triglyceride levels;

a) Serum

and liver cholesterol

b) Determination of low-density lipoprotein ( LDL) and highdensity lipoprotein ( HDL ) spectra by serum ultracentrifugation, and of very low density lipoprotein ( VLDL) by agarose gel electrophoresis; c) Content of vitamin A in the liver; and

d) Fatty acid composition of serum lipids [ with estimation of the ratio between 20 : 3 (n-9) and 20 : 4 ( n-6 ) fatty acids 3, adipose tissue lipids and heart muscle lipids. 4.2.4.1 The animals fed groundnut oil serve as controls. genera-

4.2.5 Reproductiuc Performance - Records are kept for the three tions of animals and the following are calculated: a) The percentage b) The
C) The

of females

who have conceived; from IFM birth to delivery;

mean number average

of days taken

litter size and average weanling

mass; and preweanling mortality.

d) The average

mass and percent 7

IS:110684.2.5.1

1984 The animals fed groudnut oil serve as controls. ( liver, kidneys, testes for any abnormalities

4.2.6 Chronic Toxicity - Key organs of the body and heart muscle ) are examined histopathologically in comparison with the groundnut oil fed animals. 5. TESTING ON OTHER ANIMALS _u

evaluation calls for 5.1 Choice of Animals - Complete toxicological testing on rats and two other animal species, one of which is a non-human primate. Rabbits, hamsters, mice or dogs are possibilities for the first category and any species of monkeys would fall into the second. 5.2 Methodology for Other AnimalsPrinciples are the same as for Thus for digestibility testing on rats, but shorter periods may be used. trials, 5 to 7 growing male animals may be kept for 7 days on the diet, and the faeces collected on the 8th day; or three groups of animals may be kept respectively on the test diet, a groundnut oil control diet, and a fat-free diet ( with added sucrose) for say, 15 days and the faeces collected for the last 5 days; or the same group of animals may be kept in turn on the test oil diet, a fat-free diet, and a groundnut oil diet for say, a week each, and the faeces collected on the last day of the particular feeding. Acute toxicity trials may be carried out by fat injection, as described for rats. an example, 2 groups of 8 rnonkeys 5.3 Methodology for Monkeys -As ( Macacca radiata ), matched for body mass, are put on diets containing 18 percent protein and 10 percent of total fat (test oil or groundnut oil ). After 2 months, the peripheral blood samples are dr;twn and analysed for lipid phosphorus, total cholesterol and triglycerides, and if possible for fatty acid composition. To determine any possible effect on lipid the levels of enzymes such as glutamic osalacetic metabolism, transaminase ( SGOT ) and glutamic pyruvic transaminase ( SGPT ) may be determined. Also, after feeding for a period of 6 to 12 months, the animals can be sacrificed and key organs like the heart, liver, adrenals and sartorius muscles examined histopathologically after suitable staining. 6. TESTING ON MAN

;_

usually young men, must be 6.1 Choice of Subjects - Volunteers, found who agree in writing to participation in the feeding trials, which are limited to digestibility studies and examination of serum lipids for If possible tryglycerides, cholesterol and total fatty acid composition. various classes of plasma lipoproteins may also be determined.

8

IS : 11068 - 1984 6.2 Method%ogy - As many subjects are possible, say 6 to 12, are kept for a period of 7 days on a diet very low in fat, at the end of which the faeces are collecbed for a day and analysed for the mass of fatty matter (metabolic fat excreted ). Next 10 percent of the test fat ( ingested fat ) is added to the diet and after another 5 days; the faecal fat excreted is again weighed. The percent digestibility is given by the following formula: Digestibility, percent by mass Blood samples 7. FINAL Fat ingested - ( Fat excreted Metabolic Fat Excreted) 100 X ___--Fat ingested period -

=

at the end of the fat feeding

are drawn for analysis,

EVALUATION

7.1 Assembly of Data - The results of all the animal and human experiments, along with those of the controls employing groundnut oil, are compared, and a judicious `conclusion regarding the edibility of the This may be in terms of unrestricted human usage, fat arrived at. or undesirability for use as an edible fat. usage with certain restrictions, Where the fats are used only occasionally, or in small amounts, the permissible criteria could also be more tolerant than for cooking fats used regularly and in volume. A further mitigating circumstances in India is that the invisible fat present in almost every dietary constituent, notably cereals and pulses, constitutes 10 to 20 grams every day, as is of a highly unsaturated nature with about 50 percent of linoleic acid.

IS I 11068- 1984
( Continued from pap Mcmbrrs 2) Repcsenting

Ministry of Drfence ( DC1 ) SHRI J. A. A~HTAPUTRE S~rtr P. K. MAJUMDAR ( Altcrnalc ) ASSISTANT DIL~EC~POH ( AOHI ENOC~) Indian Council of Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi Central Organization for Oil Industry and Trade, SHRI V. K. BANSAL

SHIU H. P. GUPTA ( Alternnle )
DR N. V. BRINGI

Bombay

Du V. V. S. MANI ( Alternate) SERI D. S. CHADRA SERI R. D. KAWATRA
SHRIMATI DEBI MU~HERJEE

Hindustan

Levrr

Ltd, Bombay

of Health ( Altsmats 1

Central Committee

for Food Standards ( hlinistry and Family Welfare ), New D,*lbi
of Technical Development,

SHRI V. LAKSIIMIPANTHAN

]iireF$;eyhyral e Khodi and

Bombay

Village "

Industrirs

Commission,

SHRZ R. K. MA~PRATIA

SHRI V. K. B. NAIR ( Altarnate )

&RI RABIN SARKAR ( Altrrnatr SHBI R. K. kfATAUH SHRI G. K. SOOD I Alternate 1 DR N. L. MURTY ' ' DR A. D. SHITOLE ( Allernofr ) DR S. M. PATEL

, Indian Paint Association, Calcutta )
Vanaspati Manufacturers' Bombay

Association

of India,

Tata Oil Mills Co Ltd, Bombay
Oil Technologists' Association of India, Kanpur

PROF V. V. R. SUBRAHMANYAM

( Alternate )
DR J. V. PHABIIAKAR SHRI R. D. SHENOI DR I. S. SHENOLIPAR

Central

Food Technological ( CSIR ), Mysore

Research

Institute

Indian Confectionery Manufacturers' Association, New Delhi Indian Council of Medical Research, Nsw Delhi

DR RAMESEI BEATT ( Ahnate) DR I. A. SIDDIQUI
DR R. A. KHAN ( Altcrnatc) SHRX M. S. TFIAKUR

Directorate of Vanaspati, Vegetable Oils and Fats ( Ministry of Civil Supplies ), New Delhi

Indian Soap and Toiletries Makers' Association, Bombay; and Godrej Soaps Lrd, Bombay Oil Technological Research Institute, Anantapur SHRI S. D. THIRUM~LA RAO SBRI D. ATOHYUTA RAMAYPA ( Alfcrnatc ) Directorate of Oilseeds Development, Hyderabad SHRI M. D. WASNIK SHEI S. P. JVYAL ( Altwnatr )

10

