INATA Ah IS 9478 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


STAT (ATA) vette cat STA, 
Frat, aearas sit waters — Afè 
Ra 


(RAT FRAT ) 


Design, Construction, Installation 
and Operation of Biogas 
(Biomethane) Plant — Code of 
Practice 
( Third Revision ) 


ICS 75.160.40 


© BIS 2023 


SUGE Ae Sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR Her, 9 TRA Me TH AMT, Ag Ree - 110002 


MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


Ve TE: TUNES 


February 2023 Price Group 11 


Renewable Energy Sources Sectional Committee, MED 04 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Third Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Renewable Energy Sources Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering Division 
Council. 


This standard was first formulated in 1980 with the title ‘Family sized bio-gas plant - Code of practice’ and was 
subsequently revised in 1986 and 1989. The standard covered the family sized biogas plants, upto 10 m? per day 
capacity. This standard has revised with a view to including larger capacity biogas plants, namely small sized 
(up m° to 25 m° per day), medium sized (25 m? per day to 2 500 m° per day) and large sized (more than 2 500 m° 
per day) biogas plants. 


Biogas plants have been gaining lot of importance due to scarcity of conventional form of energy and from 
sustainability considerations. This standard provides the guidance to stakeholders to select and design the 
capacities of biogas plant for their requirements of biogas. 


Biogas plant mainly consists of a digester, gas storage unit, inlet and outlet assembly, mixing chamber and gas 
distribution pipelines. 


This revision has been taken up to keep pace with the latest technological developments and practices followed 
in biogas plant industries. This revision incorporates the following major changes: 


a) Biogas plants with capacity more than 10 m° per day are also included; 
b) More designs of biogas plant; 

c) Feedstocks other than gobar are also included; 

d) Plant performance parameters; 

e) More material of construction; 

f) Recommended applications of final product and by-product; and 

g) Recommended OLR for different type of feedstocks. 


The digestate manure from the biogas plant, also known as the fermented/digested solid and liquid manure 
(organic fertilizer), are substances made up of one or more unprocessed materials of a biological nature 
(plant/animal) and may include unprocessed mineral materials that have been altered through microbiological 
decomposition process. Digested solid and liquid manure (organic fertilizer) can be upgraded/fortified for its use 
in different crops. Some of the upgraded/fortified digested slurry/manure includes, phosphate rich organic manure, 
and potassium rich organic manure. The digestate manure from the biogas plant may be used as an organic 
fertilizer for agriculture purposes as per Annex H. In the formulation of Table 10 of this standard, assistance has 
been drawn from Fertilizer Control Order, 1985. 


While revising this standard considerable assistance has been derived from Ministry of New and Renewable 
Energy draft ‘Standards for design, development, operations and maintenance of biogas plants (small, medium, 
and large scale) in India’. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is listed in Annex J. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 9478 : 2023 


Indian Standard 


DESIGN, CONSTRUCTION, INSTALLATION AND 
OPERATION OF BIOGAS (BIOMETHANE) PLANT — CODE OF 
PRACTICE 


( Third Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard specifies the requirements for design, 
construction, installation and operation of small, 
medium and large sized biogas (biomethane) plants. 
It includes the classification of biogas plants on the 
basis of daily biogas production, included and 
excluded feedstocks for plant, plant performance 
parameters, different designs and materials for 
digesters and gas holders, and their construction. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A contain provisions 
which through their reference in this text constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the editions indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revision and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most 
recent editions of the standards indicated in 
Annex A. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions 
given below shall apply. 


3.1 Anaerobic Digestion — A biological 
conversion of biodegradable materials by 
microorganisms in the absence of oxygen creating 
two main products: biogas and digestate. An 
example of anaerobic digestion is the biological 
conversion of the biodegradable parts from 
predominantly biomass sources. For the purpose 
there are three types of mixing: biogas mixing, 
impeller mixing and slurry mixing: 


a) Biogas Mixing — This is novel and simple 
digester turbulence mechanism to break 
foam, froth and some materials inside the 
digester without any mechanical moving 
part inside the digester; 


b 


ma 


Impeller Mixing — This is expensive 
digester mixing, mechanical device need not 
be used for digester mixing until the high 
organic loading rate digester is designed for 
production; and 


c) Slurry Mixing — This is the method of 
recirculation of digesting material from top 
to the bottom and from bottom to the top. 


3.2 Bio-CNG/Compressed Bio Gas (CBG) — A 
compressed biomethane having similar capabilities 
as that of compressed natural gas (CNG). 


3.3 Biogas — The gas produced by anaerobic 
digestion of organic matter, comprising methane 
(CH4) as the main component (50 percent to 
70 percent) and carbon dioxide (CO2) (30 percent to 
40 percent) with varying quantities of H2S, moisture 
and some other gases in trace quantities. 


3.4 Biogas Meter — The instrument used for 
measuring quantity of biogas generated by biogas 
plants of different capacities. 


3.5 Biogas Installation — The installation 
including its pipelines, pipes and accessories for 
anaerobic digestion of biomass and waste, 
upgrading of biogas, liquefaction of biogas, storage 
of biogas (in raw, gas or liquid form), storage of 
CO, storage of auxiliaries, storage of biomass and 
digestate. 


3.6 Biogas Pipeline — A system of pipework for 
transportation of biogas or biomethane with all 
associated equipment and stations up to the point of 
delivery and outside the biogas installation. This 
pipework is mainly below ground, but also includes 
above ground parts. 


3.7 Biogas Storage — Buffer, gas holder, tank, 
vessel, bag or similar component used to store 
biogas. The biogas storage can be an integral part of 
the digester. 


3.8 Biomass — Material of biological origin 
excluding material embedded in geological 
formations and/or transformed to fossilized 
material. Biomass is organic material that is plant 
based or animal based, including, but not limited to 
dedicated energy crops; agricultural crops and trees; 
food, feed and fibre crop residues; aquatic plants, 
algae, forestry and wood residues; organic 
agricultural, animal and processing by-products; 
agricultural, municipal and industrial organic waste 
and residues, whether or not in landfills; and sludge, 
waste water, and other non-fossil organic matter. 


IS 9478 : 2023 


3.9 Biomass Pipeline/Digestate Pipeline — 
System of pipework for transportation of 
liquid biomass or digestate with all associated 
equipment, up to the point of delivery. 


3.10 Biomass Pre-treatment — Treatment 
of biomass with chemical, physical, thermal and 
biological methods in order to increase methane 
production when the biomass is digested or gasified. 


3.11 Biomethane — Methane rich gas with the 
properties similar to natural gas derived from biogas 
produced by anaerobic digestion or gasification by 
upgrading. Sometimes, the term ‘upgraded biogas’ 
is also used instead of the term ‘biomethane’. 


3.12 Capacity — Capacity of the biogas plant is the 
total amount of feedstock or biogas that can be 
contained or produced respectively. 


NOTE — This standard defines the capacity based on daily 
biogas production. 


3.13 Compressed Biomethane (CBM) — 
Biomethane used as a fuel for vehicles or for other 
purposes, typically compressed up to 20 MPa in the 
gaseous state. 


3.14 Cooking Biogas — The kitchen sized micro- 
level biogas plant produced raw biogas which is 
directly used for cooking purposes in domestic 
stoves with and/or without purification. 


3.15 Digestate/Effluent/Compost — Remaining 
effluent from the anaerobic digestion process 
including solid fraction and liquid fraction. It is the 
digested slurry coming from outlet. This is a rich 
source of plant nutrients and used as a manure 
(organic fertilizer), It is also used as 
inoculum/starter for hastening the process of 
composting of other organic material. 


3.16 Digester — A tank, also known as 
fermentation tank embedded partly or fully in the 
ground or completely above ground, it may be of 
cylindrical or other suitable shape and size, and 
made of suitable construction materials it is used to 
hold the slurry within it for digestion for a 
recommended retention period. 


3.17 Dry Matter — Remaining part 
of biomass or digestate after drying the moisture 
content. 


3.18 Gasholder — It is a storage tank for biogas. 
The gas holder may be an integral part of the digester 
design or placed separately. 


3.19 Hydraulic Retention Time (HRT) — A 
measure of the average duration of time for which 
feedstock remains in the digester. It is estimated by 


dividing the volume of the reactor by daily or hourly 
volumetric feed rate). It is expressed in time (days 
or hours). 


3.20 Inlet — The component of the biogas plant 
used for feeding the mixture of biomass and water to 
the digesters. 


3.21 Inlet Feed Slurry — A mixture of biomass 
feedstock and water/digested slurry in the right 
proportion which is fed to the digesters. 


3.22 Mixing Tank/Feed Preparation Tank — 
This is a tank in which the input feed is mixed with 
water or liquid digestate recirculated, prior to 
feeding into the digester through the inlet. 


3.23 Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) — The 
organic and inorganic solid wastes together arise out 
of municipalities with/without segregation. 


3.24 Organic Dry Matter (Volatile Matter Upon 
Loss on Ignition) — Part of biomass or feed 
slurry or digester content or digestate derived from 
total dry matter containing carbon and originating 
from living materials [sample = moisture + dry 
matter, dry matter = volatile matter (organic) + fixed 
matter (inorganic/ash)]. Instead of organic dry 
matter (organic portion of dry matter), the term ‘total 
volatile solids’ is also used. 


3.25 Organic Loading Rate of Digester (OLR) — 
Amount of volatile organic dry matter entering the 
anaerobic digester over time, measured in kilograms 
per cubic metre of digester volume per day (kg/m? 
per day). The organic load gives an indication of the 
capacity of the digester whether it’s a low rate, 
standard rate or high rate digester. It provides 
information on nutrient supply levels of the 
microorganisms involved, overload or undersupply 
of the system as well as resulting technical and 
process control measures to be taken. The organic 
load describes the efficiency of the anaerobic 
digester. 


3.26 OrganicFraction of Municipal Solid Waste 
(OFMSW) — The organic portion out of the total 
municipal solid waste, which consists of 
biodegradable (VS) and non-biodegradable organic 
solid waste. 


3.27 Digester Outlet or Drain — The outlet or 
drain for taking out the digested portion of the 


slurry. 


3.28 Raw Biogas — Biogas directly derived from 
the digester which is not conditioned, cleaned, dried 
or purified. 


3.29 Substrate — Part of the biomass which is 
biodegradable and converted by microorganisms 
and/or enzymes as catalyst into biogas and 
fermented manure (organic fertilizer). 


3.30 Total Solids (TS) — Solids that include both 
the suspended solids and the dissolved solids which 
are obtained by separating the solid and liquid phase 
by drying. It is generally denoted in percentage of 
feedstock. 


3.31 Transportation of Biogas — Activity 
intended to transport biogas from one place to 
another through pipelines and/or cylinders/cascades 
in order to supply biogas to distribution systems or 
for utilization by industrial and domestic consumers. 


3.32 Two Stage Biodigester — Two digesters are 
used in series, where the first digester is used for 
acidification and second for methanogenesis. 


3.33 Volatile Solid (VS) — Volatile solid is the 
amount of volatile matter lost after the ignition of 
pre-dried biomass sample at 550 °C for 4 h. It is 
expressed in percent of TS. 


4 CLASSIFICATION OF BIOGAS PLANTS 


Biogas plants are classified in Table 1 on the basis 
of the total biogas production per day from the plant. 


Table 1 Classification of Biogas Plants 


(Clause 4) 
(in m?/ day) 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Small scale 1-25 
ii) Medium scale 25 - 2 500 
iii) Large scale >2 500 


NOTE — Small scale biogas plants for largely urban and 
semi-urban areas for digesting domestic organic kitchen and 
garden waste can be less than 1 m°/day biogas production 
also. 


IS 9478 : 2023 


5 FEEDSTOCKS 
5.1 Feedstock is broadly identified as: 


a) Organic waste from animals; 


b) Biodegradable solid and liquid organic 
waste from industries including sugar mills 
and food processing industries crop residues 
and suitable stubbles; 


c) Organic/biodegradable fraction of 
municipal solid waste; and 


d) Domestic sewage. 


5.2 Specifications of feedstock to be used in the 
biogas plant are categorized as: 


a) Included feedstock; and 
b) Excluded feedstock. 


5.3 Included Feedstocks 


Annex B shows the type of feedstocks considered 
for biogas plants along with organic loading rate, 
hydraulic retention time, volatile solid removal and 
biogas yield according to plant size. 


5.4 Excluded Feedstocks 


The following feedstocks shall not be included in the 
biogas plants: 


a) Fossil fuels and products and by-products 
made from them; 


b) Woody biomass; 
c) Paper; 

d) Cardboard; 

e) Pasteboard; 


f) Harbour sludge and other water body 
sludges and sediments; 


g) Plastics; 
h) Metals; and 


j) Biomedical/pathogenic waste. 


IS 9478 : 2023 


5.5 Characteristics of Input Feed-Stocks 


Characteristics of input feedstock shall comply with 


parameters as prescribed in the Table 2. For 
sampling and analysis of biomass refer Annex C. 


Table 2 Input Feedstock Parameters/Specifications 


(Clause 5.5) 
SI No. Parameters Requirement 
a) (2) (3) 
i) C: N ratio 15 to 30:1 
ii) Total solids (percent) for wet digestion 5to15 
iii) Total solids (percent) for dry digestion >15 
iv) Volatile solids (percent) >60 
v) Particle size As applicable according to technology 
used for pre-digestion/digestion. 
NOTES 


1 C is organic carbon. 


2 For < 15 C : N ratio, two-stage bio-digester is recommended. 


6 PLANT PERFORMANCE PARAMETERS 


Biogas plant performance shall be defined with the 
parameters such as feedstock characteristics, 
temperature, organic loading rate, pH, biogas yield, 
and hydraulic retention time (HRT). Annex B shows 


the minimum acceptable limit for organic loading 
rate, hydraulic retention time, volatile solid removal 
and biogas yield according to plant size. Anaerobic 
digestion process in the biogas plant shall comply 
with the requirements as given in the Table 3. 


Table 3 Digester Performance Parameters 


(Clause 6) 
SI No. Parameter Range 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Temperature in °C Mesophilic process: 20 to 40 
Thermophilic process: 45 to 60 
ii) pH 6.8 to 7.5 
iii) FOS/TAC ratio 0.3 to 0.4 


[VFA (volatile fatty acids)/Alkalinity] 


Recommended for biogas plants of capacity 
500 m° per day or above (see Annex D) 


7 DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION 
7.1 Different Designs of Biogas Plants 


The different plant designs for anaerobic digestion 


IS 9478 : 2023 


for different plant sizes shall be considered as shown 
in Table 4. An illustration about the different designs 
of biogas plants is given at Annex E. 


Table 4 Different Designs of Biogas Plant 
(Clause 7.1) 


Plant design for different plant sizes 


SR 


SI No. Small-scale Medium-scale Large-scale 

(1) (2) (3) (4) 

i) Continuous stirred tank reactor Up-flow anaerobic sludge Up-flow anaerobic sludge 
(CSTR) type digesters blanket (UASB) blanket (UASB) 
(horizontal/vertical design) 

ii) Floating-drum plant with a Continuous Stirred Tank Continuous Stirred Tank 
cylindrical digester Reactor (CSTR) Reactor (CSTR) 

(KVIC model) 

iii) Floating-drum plant with a External circulation sludge External circulation sludge 
hemisphere digester bed (ECSB) bed (ECSB) 
(Pragati model) 

iv) Floating-drum plant made of angular Plug flow reactor Plug flow reactor 
steel and plastic foil 
(Ganesh model) 

v) Floating-drum plant made of pre- Biogas induced mixing Biogas induced mixing 
fabricated reinforced concrete arrangement (BIMA) digester arrangement (BIMA) 
compound units digester 

vi)  Floating-drum plant made of fibre- High rate solid digesters High rate solid digesters 
glass reinforced polyester 

vii) + Fixed film reactor Fixed film reactor 

vill) Fixed-dome plant with a brick Fixed-dome plant with a brick — 
reinforced, moulded dome reinforced, moulded dome 
(Janta model) (modified PAU Janta model) 
(6 m° to 25 m? per day) (upto 500 m?/day) 

ix) Fixed-dome plant with a hemisphere Floating films reactors Floating films reactors 


digester (Deenbandhu model) 
(up to 6 m° per day) 


x) Bag type digesters 


In general biogas plant mainly consists of a digester, 
gas storage unit, inlet and outlet assembly, mixing 
chamber and gas distribution pipelines. 


7.2 Materials for Construction 


This section covers the requirements of construction 
materials used for construction of biogas digester, 
biogas holder, pipes and fittings. For construction of 
any structure refer Annex F also. 


7.2.1 Digester 


The digester for small-scale plants may be made 
from bricks, membranes (neoprene rubber, flexible 


PVC, flexible HDPE)/high density polyethylene 
(HDPE)/ferro-cement/mild steel/stainless steel/fibre 
reinforced plastic (FRP), flexi bag type biogas plants 
made up of linear low density polyethylene 
(LLDPE)/high quality poly-propylene sheet/PVC 
lined polyester double UV coated fabric, etc, having 
water and gas leak proof design and fabrication, with 
ultraviolet protection and desired strength for 
minimum life of 10 years. The digester for medium 
and large scale plants may be made from bricks 
masonry/reinforced cement concrete/mild 
steel/stainless steel. For reference, the relevant 
Indian Standards for construction of digester using 
different materials are given in Table 5. 


IS 9478 : 2023 


Table 5 Material for Construction of Digester 


(Clause 7.2.1) 


SI No. Material Relevant 
Indian Standard 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Masonry IS 1905 
ii) Reinforced cement concrete (RCC) IS 456 
iii) Steel IS 800 
iv) High density polyethylene (HDPE) IS 2508 
v) Linear low density polyethylene (LLDPE) IS 2508/IS 12701 
vi) Ferro-cement — 
vii) Glass fibre reinforced plastic (FRP) IS 12866 
viii) Poly-propylene sheet — 
ix) PVC lined polyster double UV coated fabric — 
x) Polyethylene with polypropylene/EPDM (Ethylene — 
propylene dine monomer) as outer layer (bag type 
digester) 
7.2.2 Gas Holder holders shall also be provided with suitable 


Gas holder/dome for small, medium and large scale 
plants may be made from brick masonry and gas 
leak proof with suitable material. Appropriate 
corrosion allowance (thickness/coating) to be 
provided for gas holders made up of steel. Gas 


protective enclosure. Methane permeability should 
be upto 200 cm?/m?/day at 10 N/mm” absolute 
pressure as per ISO 15105 (Part 1). For reference the 
relevant standards for construction of gas holder 
using different materials are given in Table 6. 


Table 6 Material for Construction of Gas Holder 


(Clause 7.2.2) 
SI No. Material Relevant 
Indian Standard 
Q) (3) 
i) Glass fibre reinforced polyester resin with steel frame IS 12986 (Part 1) 
ii) Brick masonry (upto 80 m° per day) IS 1905 
iii) PVC lined polyester double UV coated fabric should — 
be Min 750 g/m? or higher according to storage 
capacity 
iv) Steel IS 800 
v) Linear low density polyethylene (LLDPE) IS 12701 
Calculation of gas holder volume: Required volume of gas = (X/24)xY m° 


Total expected gas = Xm/*/day 
production from each 

Digester 

Per hour biogas production = X/24 m*/hr. 
from each digester 

Recommended duration of = 3 hours (Y) 


storage for Biogas 


holder for each digester 


1.10 x required 
volume 


Supplied volume of gas = 
holder 


NOTE — Recommended duration of storage for raw biogas 
could be as per design and local utilization requirements for 
medium and large scale biogas plants. 


7.2.2.1 Membrane based gas holder 


The membrane based biogas holder shall not 
chemically react to media such as slurry and biogas, 
temperature and aging. Membrane material shall be 
defined in terms of tensile strength, gas diffusivity, 


IS 9478 : 2023 


temperature resistance (membrane to remain intact 
in the stipulated range mentioned) surface 
resistance, fire resistance, and UV resistance. The 
membrane shall comply with the requirements as 
given in Table 7. 


Table 7 Requirements for Membrane Based Biogas Holder 
(Clauses 7.2.2.1 and 7.2.2.2) 


SI No. Particulars Specifications 
d) (2) (3) 
i) Tensile strength 3 000 N/5 cm, Min as per ISO 1421 


ii) Gas diffusivity 

iii) Temperature resistance 
iv) Surface resistance 

v) Bleeder resistance 


vi) UV resistance 


vii) Flame resistance 


viii) Maximum operating pressure 
(Set point for pressure release 
valve) 


7.2.2.2 In case of double membrane based biogas 
holder, the requirements given in Table 7 and the 
following shall be complied with: 


a) The biogas produced by anaerobic digestion 
inside the digester is collected from digester 
mounted single/double membrane biogas 
holder installed on each digester; 


b) The membrane is microbiologically 
resistant as per the geo-synthetic method for 
determining microbiological resistance by 
soil burial test as per the appropriate 
standard; 


c 


<~ 


Digester mounted double membrane biogas 
holder shall be made of PVC coated 
polyester fabric; and 


d) The external and internal membrane shall be 
protected against ultra violet light, treated 
with fungicide and flame retardant materials 


according to appropriate standard. 


wm 


NOTE — The minimum material strength shall be 
further dependent on the project specific requirements 
dictating the required material strength as appropriate 
for the results of the static design calculations for the 
inflated structure. 


7.2.3 Pipes and Fittings 


7.2.3.1 For low pressure (up to 1bar) conveyance of 
biogas, HDPE, CPVC, MDPE, uPVC, Stainless 


200 cm?/m?/ day at, Max 10 N/mm?(1 bar) absolute pressure 


- 30 °C to + 70 °C 
Less than 3 x 10? Ohm, 
Less than 3 x 108 Ohm, Max 


UV content of total solar radiation 5.4 kWh/m?/day, Min for 


designed/projected life 


100 mm per min (at biogas flash point temperature) 


50 mm water column (WC) 


Steel pipes and fittings may used of required 
thickness. The mild steel pipes and fittings being 
used to carry raw biogas shall be as per IS 15663 
(Part 1). After the purification of the biogas as per 
IS 16087, it may be transported using pipes and 
fittings being used for natural gas as per IS 15663 
(Part 1). All piping material shall have appropriate 
corrosion allowance and UV tolerance for designed 
life of minimum 15 years. 


NOTE — A purification unit may be installed, depending 
upon the requirement. 


7.2.4 Automatic/Manual Biogas Flare Unit 


The flaring unit can be installed for safety 
requirements and/or for emergency/maintenance 
shutdown situation. 


7.3 Feedstock Storage 
7.3.1 Solid Feedstocks 


For short term storage of feedstocks (up to 7 days) 
appropriate facilties for leachate collection and 
covered storage without causing odour problem will 
be designed and setup at the site of biogas plant, for 
the long term storage of feedstocks the facility shall 
follow Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) 
and State Pollution Control Board (SPCB) waste 
storage guidelines. 


IS 9478 : 2023 


7.3.2 Liquid Feedstocks 

The feedstock/slurry may be stored in appropriate 
leak proof tanks before adding it to the digester, as 
applicable. 

8 ELECTROMECHANICAL WORK 


All electro mechanical works like valves, gates, 
pipes and fittings, instrumentations, lightings, 


wiring, etc. shall be as per the relevant Indian 
Standard. 


9 SPECIFICATION OF OUTPUT 


9.1 Biogas (Biomethane) 


The biogas (biomethane) for use in automotive 
application, piped network and cylinder applications 
shall comply with and tested in accordance with 
IS 16087. 


IS/ISO No. 
IS 456 : 2000 
IS 800 : 2007 


IS 875 (Part 1) : 1987 


IS 1079: 
IS 1161: 


2017 
2014 


ISO 1421: 2016 


IS 1905 : 
: 2011 


IS 2062 


IS 2379 : 
: 2016 


IS 2508 
IS 3370 


(Part 1): 
(Part 2) : 
: 2017 
: 2016 


IS 4923 
IS 4984 
IS 5312 


(Part 1): 
(Part 2) : 
: 2009 


IS 5572 


IS 6092 


(Part 1): 


(Part 2) 
(Sec 1): 
(Sec 2) 


(Sec 3): 
4176 


(Sec 4) : 
5314 


(Sec 5): 
5315 


(Part 3) 
(Sec 1): 


1987 


1990 


2021 
2021 


2004 
2013 


1985 


2004 


: 2004 


2004/ISO 


2004/ISO 


2004/ISO 


2004 


IS 9478 : 2023 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 2) 


LIST OF STANDARDS REFERRED 


Title 
Plain and reinforced concrete — Code of practice (fourth revision) 
General construction in steel — Code of practice (third revision) 


Code of practice for design loads (other than earthquake) for buildings and 
structures: Part 1 Dead loads — Unit weights of building materials and stored 
materials (second revision) 


Hot rolled carbon steel sheet, plate and strip — Specification (seventh revision) 
Steel tubes for structural purposes — Specification (fifth revision) 


Rubber- or plastics-coated fabrics — Determination of tensile strength and 
elongation at break 


Code of practice for structural use of unreinforced masonry (third revision) 


Hot rolled medium and high tensile structural steel — Specification (seventh 
revision) 


Pipelines — Identification — Colour code (first revision) 

Polyethylene films and sheets — Specification (third revision) 
Concrete structures for retaining aqueous liquids — Code of practice: 
General requirements (second revision) 

Plain and reinforced concrete structures (second revision) 

Hollow steel sections for structural use — Specification (third revision) 
Polyethylene pipes for water supply — Specification (fifth revision) 


Swing check type reflux (non-return) valves for water works purposes — 
Specification: 


Single door pattern (second revision) 
Multi — door pattern (first revision) 


Classification of hazardous areas (other than mines) having flammable gases and 
vapours for electrical installation (third revision) 


Methods of sampling and test for fertilizers: 

Sampling (first revision) 

Determination of nitrogen, 

Introduction (second revision) 

Test methods not covered under dual number standards (second revision) 


Nitrate nitrogen content — Nitron gravimetric method 


Ammoniacal nitrogen content — Titrimetric method after distillation 


Total nitrogen content — Titrimetric method after distillation 


Determination of phosphorus, 


Introduction (second revision) 


IS 9478 : 2023 


(Sec 2) : 2004 Test methods not covered under dual number standards (second revision) 

(Sec 3) : 2004/ISO Extraction of water — soluble phosphates 

5316 

(Sec 4) : 2004/ISO Quinoline phosphomolybdate gravimetric method 

6598 

(Sec 5) : 2004/ISO Extraction of phosphates soluble in mineral acids 

7497 

(Part 4) : 1985 Determination of potassium (first revision) 

(Part 5) : 1985 Determination of secondary elements and micronutrients (first revision) 

(Part 6) : 1985 Determination of moisture and impurities (first revision) 

IS 6940 : 1982 Methods of test for pesticides and their formulations (first revision) 

IS 7016 Methods of test for rubber or plastics coated fabrics: 

(Part 1) Determination of roll characteristics, 

(Sec 1) : 2022/ISO Methods for determination of length, width and net mass (third revision) 

2286-1 : 2016 

(Sec 2) : 2019/ISO Methods for determination of total mass per unit area, mass per unit area of 
2286-2 : 2016 coating and mass per unit area of substrate (second revision) 

(Sec 3) : 2019/ISO Method for determination of thickness (second revision) 

2286-3 : 2016 

(Part 2) : 2022/ISO Determination of tensile strength and elongation at break (third revision) 

1421 : 2016 

(Part 3) Determination of tear resistance, 

(Sec 1) : 2022/ISO Constant rate of tear methods (third revision) 

4674-1 : 2016 

(Sec 2) : 2017/ISO Ballistic pendulum method (second revision) 

4674-2 : 1998 

(Part 4) : 2003/ISO Rubber - or plastics - coated fabrics — Determination of resistance to damage by 
7854 flexing (second revision) 

(Part 5) : 2019/ISO Rubber - or plastics - coated fabrics — Determination of coating adhesion (third 
2411: 2017 revision) 

(Part 6) Determination of bursting strength, 

(Sec 1) : 2016/ISO Steel — Ball method (second revision) 

3303-1 : 2012 

(Sec 2) : 2018/ISO Hydraulic method (second revision) 

3303-2 : 2012 

(Part 7) : 2009/ISO Rubber - or plastics - coated fabrics — Determination of resistance to penetration 
1420 by water (second revision) 

(Part 8) : 1975 Accelerated ageing 

(Part 9) : 2003/ISO Rubber - or plastics - coated fabrics — Determination of blocking resistance 
5978 (second revision) 


(Part 10) : 1997/ISO Rubber - or plastics - coated fabrics — Low Temperature bend test (first revision) 
4675 


(Part 11) : 1987 Determination of flexibility — Flat loop method 


(Part 12) : 1987 Determination of tack — Tear resistance 


(Part 13) : 2003/ISO 
5473 


(Part 14) : 2003/ISO 
4646 


(Part 15) : 2019/1SO 
5470-1 : 2016 


IS 8329 : 2000 


IS 8749 : 2002 
IS 8935 : 1985 
IS 9334 : 1986 
IS 9523 : 2000 


IS 9890 : 1981 
IS/ISO 10434 : 2020 


IS 12701: 1996 


IS 12866 : 2021 


IS 12986 (Part 1) : 
1990 


IS 13095 : 2020 
1S13349 : 1992 
IS 14333 : 2022 


IS 15045 


(Part 1) : 2021/ISO 
5599-1 : 2001 


(Part 2) : 2021/ISO 
5599-2 : 2001 


(Part 3) : 2001 
ISO 5599-3 : 1990 


ISO 15105 (Part 1): 
2007 


IS 15663 (Part 1): 
2006 


IS 15778 : 2007 


IS 16087 : 2016 
IS/ISO 17292 : 2015 
IS 17875 : 2022 
IS 17876 : 2022 
IS/ISO 22109 : 2020 


IS 9478 : 2023 


Rubber - or plastics - coated fabrics — Determination of crush resistance (first 
revision) 


Rubber - or plastics - coated fabrics — Low temperature impact test (first revision) 


Determination of abrasion resistance using taber abrader 


Centrifugally cast (spun) ductile iron pressure pipes for water, gas and sewage — 
Specification (third revision) 


Biogas stove — Specification (second revision) 
Specification for electric solenoid operated actuators (first revision) 
Specification for electric motor operated actuators (first revision) 


Ductile iron fittings for pressure pipes for water, gas and sewage — Specification 
(first revision) 


Specification for general purpose ball valves 


Steel gate valves flanged and butt — welded ends for petroleum petrochemicals 
and allied industries 


Rotational moulded polyethylene water storage tanks - specification (first 
revision) 


Plastic translucent sheets made from thermo-setting polyester resin glass fibre 
reinforced — Specification 


Biogas plants — Glass fibre reinforced polyester resin gas holders — 
Specification: Part 1 With steel frame 


Butterfly valves for general purposes (first revision) 
Cast iron single faced thimble mounted sluice gates 


Polyethylene pipes for sewerage and industrial chemicals and effluent — 
Specification (first revision) 


Pneumatic fluid power — Five — port directional control valves 


Mounting interface surfaces without electrical connector (first revision) 


Mounting interface surfaces with optional electrical connector (first revision) 


Code system for communication of valve functions 


Plastics — Film and sheeting — Determination of gas-transmission rate — Part 
1: Differential-pressure methods 


Design and installation of natural gas pipelines — Code of Practice: Part 1 Laying 
of pipelines 


Chlorinated polyvinyl chloride (CPVC) pipes for potable hot and cold water 
distribution supplies — Specification 


Biogas (biomethane) — Specification (first revision) 

Metal ball valves for petroleum petrochemical and allied industries (first revision) 
Stainless steel seamless pipes and tubes for general service 

Stainless steel welded pipes and tubes for general service 


Industrial valves — Gearbox for valves 


IS 9478 : 2023 


ANNEX B 


(Clauses 5.3 and 6) 


Table 8 Type of Feedstocks Considered for Biogas Plants Along with Organic Loading Rate (OLR), Hydraulic Retention Time (HRT), Volatile Solid (VS) Removal 


and Biogas Yield According to Plant Size 


Sl Small Scale Biogas Plant Medium Scale Biogas Plant Large Scale Biogas Plant 
No. 
Types of | OLR HRT VS Specific | Biogas | OLR HRT VS Specific Min. OLR HRT VS Specific Biogas 
Waste (kg (day) | removed biogas produ- (kg (day) | removed | biogas biogas (kg (day) | removed biogas produced 
VS/m? | min Í produced ced VS/m? | min ( D produc | produced | VS/m? | min ( D produced | (m°/t VS) 
digester Pee (m?/ kg (m7/t | digester poreon ed (m?/ | (m?/t VS) | digester Pe (m?/ kg min 
liquid ia vs solid | liquid me kg VS min liquid core VS 
volume/ removed) | waste) | volume/ remove volume removed) 
day) min min day) d) min /day) min 
min min min 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) (15) (16) (17) 
i) Poultry 1.75 40 44 0.6 50 2 35 44 0.7 60 2 35 44 0.7 70 
waste + 
seed 
ii) | Municipa 22 30 75 0.5 70 2.7 30 75 0.5 75 3 30 75 0.5 80 
1 solid 
waste + 
seed 
iii) Food 2 30 70 0.55 90 25 30 70 0.55 90 3 30 70 0.55 95 
waste + 
seed 
iv) | Vegetabl 2.2 30 75 0.6 80 2.7 30 75 0.65 85 3.3 30 75 0.65 95 
e waste + 
seed 
v) Slaughter 2 20 55 0.7 70 3 30 60 0.7 70 3 25 60 0.8 65 
house 


12 


IS 9478 : 2023 
Table 8 (Concluded) 


waste + 
Seed 


vi) | Agricultu 1.4 35 53 0.33 60 1.7 35 53 0.33 70 2 30 53 0.33 70 
ral waste 
+rice 


straw + 


seed 
vii) Kitchen 2.2 30 75 0.5 70 2.7 30 75 0.5 80 3.3 30 75 0.5 70 


waste + 


seed 
viii) Cattle 2 40 28 0.23 30 2 40 28 0.23 35 2.29 35 28 0.23 35 
dung 
[DAP, 
milch, 
grazed(o 
n grass 
/straw 
dominant 
diet)] 


ix) Sewage - - 60 0.23 35 0.8 25 60 0.23 35 
sludge 
(no 
pretreatm 
ent) 


NOTES 


1 Seed/inoculum shall be active biodigester slurry, STP sludge, fresh cow dung or recirculated slurry or water (microbial inoculum). 
2 OLR varies from high rate to low rate to standard rate anaerobic digester; high rate 4 to 8, standard rate 2 to 4, low rate 1 to 2, HRT also varies as less than 15 days high rate, 15 day to 25 day standard rate more than 25 days low 


rate digester. 
3 The units and parameter above are recommended for optimum performance, however improved performance is desirable. 


4 For reference, it may be assumed that for a family of 4 persons, 1 m° per day of biogas is required for cooking purpose. 


13 


IS 9478 : 2023 


ANNEX C 
(Clause 5.5) 


SAMPLING AND ANALYSIS 


C-1 FEEDSTOCK parameters may be analysed: 
a) DH value; 


b) FOS-TAC ratio; 


For feedstock following parameters may be 
analysed as per the relevant Indian Standard: 

a) Total solids; 

b) Volatile solids; 

c) Compositional analysis; 

d) C:N ratio; and 

e) Bio-chemical methane potential (BMP). 


c) Biogas yield; and 
d) Biogas analysis. 


C-3 ANALYSIS OF DIGESTED SLURRY 


Digested slurry may be analyzed for all parameters 
C-2 PRODUCT/PROCESS is oe test methods as prescribed in 


During the operation of biogas plant following 


Table 9 Testing Parameters for Analysis of Digested Slurry 
(Clause C-3) 


SI No. Parameters Method of Test 
(a) (2) G) 
i) Sampling IS 6092 (Part 1) 
ii) Moisture, percent IS 6092 (Part 6) 
iii) Colour — 
iv) Odour — 
v) Particle size — 
vi) Bulk density, g/cm? IS 6940 
vii) Total organic carbon, percent — 
viii) Total nitrogen (as N), percent IS 6092 (Part 2/Sec 1 to 5) 
ix) Total phosphate (as P205), percent IS 6092 (Part 3/Sec 1 to 5) 
x) Total potassium (as K20), percent IS 6092 (Part 4) 
xi) Micronutrients IS 6092 (Part 5) 


IS 9478 : 2023 


ANNEX D 
(Clause 6) 


ASSESSMENT OF FOS/TAC RATIOS 


SI No. FOS/TAC Ratios Assessment 
a) (2) (3) 
i) > 0.6 Highly excessive biomass input, stop adding biomass. 
ii) 0.5-0.6 Excessive biomass input, add less biomass. 
iii) 0.4-0.5 Plant is heavily loaded, monitor the plant more closely. 
iv) 0.3 — 0.4 Biogas production at a maximum, keep biomass input constant. 
v) 0.2-0.3 Biomass input is too low, slowly increase the biomass input. 
vi) < 0.2 Biomass input is far too low, rapidly increase the biomass input. 


IS 9478 : 2023 


ANNEX E 
(Clause 7.1) 


DIFFERENT TYPES OF DIGESTERS USED IN BIOGAS PLANTS 


E-1 CONTINUOUS STIRRED TANK 
REACTOR (CSTR) TYPE DIGESTERS 
(HORIZONTAL/VERTICAL DESIGN) 


CSTR digester consists of continuous stirred tank 
reactor where continuous mixing of effluent and 
biomass takes place with the help of central and 
lateral agitators. The essential feature is that the 
wash out of the active anaerobic bacterial biomass 
from the reactor is controlled by a sludge separator 
recycle system. The basic idea underlying the 
anaerobic contact process is to: 


a) provide contact between the active biomass 
and feed; 


b) utilize the digester volume effectively; 
c) prevent stratification and temperature 
gradient; and 


d) minimize the formation of scum layer and 
the deposition of sludge solids. 


E-1.1 CSTR Digester Process 


a) Raw effluent is collected in a buffer tank 
which maintains the temperature around 
38 °C to 42 °C. Some quantity of treated 
spent wash (digester outlet) is also mixed in 
buffer tank to raise the pH; 


b 


wm 


From buffer tank raw spent wash feed is at 
the top in a centre shaft of the digester; 


c 


<~ 


There will be one central agitator and two to 
five numbers of lateral agitators available to 
make uniform distribution of biomass and 
substrate for uniform degradation; 


d) The effluent travels to the bottom and 
contacts with active anaerobic culture in the 
reactor by the rotation of central agitator and 
lateral agitators; 


e) The re-circulated sludge also mixed with 
raw effluent in a central shaft of the digester; 


f) The treated spent wash collected through 
overflow pipe and passed through degassing 
tower for removal of dissolved gases to 
achieve better settling of sludge in further 
process; 


WN 


Biogas is collected at the top of the digester 
and will be stored in gasholder. Biogas from 
the biogas holder will be compressed and 
sent to boiler for burning; and 


8 


h 


wm 


Biogas is also used for gas engine to 
generate the power; here H:S shall be 
removed from the biogas before using in the 
gas engine. 


E-2 UP-FLOW ANAEROBIC SLUDGE BED 
(UASB) 


UASB reactor is based on the so-called three-phase 
separator, which enables the reactor to separate gas, 
water and sludge mixtures under high turbulence 
conditions. This allows for compact and cheaper 
designs. The reactor has multiple gas hoods for the 
separation of biogas. As a result, the extremely large 
gas/water interfaces greatly reduce turbulence, 
making relatively high loading rates of 10 kg/m to 
15 kg/m? per day possible. Separation in the UASB 
reactor requires only 1.0 m of height, which 
prevents flotation effects and, consequently, 
floating layers. Generally, during the treatment of 
UASB reactor, the substrate passes through an 
expanded sludge bed containing a high 
concentration of biomass first. After that, the 
remaining part of substrate passes through a less 
dense biomass named the sludge blanket. The 
influent is pumped to the UASB reactor from bottom 
of it by peristaltic pump. The influent moves 
upwards and gets in contact with the biomass 
in sludge bed, then continues to move upwards and 
the rest substrates act with the biomass again in 
the sludge blanket which has a less concentration of 
biomass compared with the sludge bed below. The 
volume of sludge blanket must be sufficient to 
conduct the further treatment to wastewater by- 
passed from the lower layer of sludge bed by 
channeling. At the same time, it will help to ensure 
a stable effluent quality. A three phases [gas-liquid- 
solid (GLS)] separator located above 
the sludge blanket to separate the solid particles 
from the mixture (gas, liquid, and solid) after 
treatment and hence allowing liquid and gas to leave 
the UASB reactor. After the treated wastewater is 
collected by the effluent collection system via 
number of launders distributed over entire area 
discharging, it passes to main launder provided at 
periphery of the reactor and the biogases generated 
will be collected as the valuable fuel or for deposal. 


E-3 FLOATING DRUM PLANT WITH A 
CYLINDRICAL DIGESTER (KVIC MODEL) 


This type of plant has an underground well-shaped 
digester having inlet and outlet connections through 
pipes located at its bottom on either side of a 
partition wall. An inverted drum (gas holder) made 
of mild steel is placed in the digester which rests on 
the wedge shaped support and the guide frame at the 
level of the partition wall and moves up and down 


along a guide pipe with the accumulation and use of 
gas. The weight of the drum applies pressure on the 
gas to make it flow through the pipelines to the 
points of use. The gasholder alone is the costliest 
component which accounts for about 40 percent of 
the total installation cost of biogas plant. It also 
needs to be painted regularly for protecting it against 
corrosion. These plants can be of any size to cater 
the needs of the users. 


E-4 FLOATING DRUM PLANT 
HEMISPHERE DIGESTER 
MODEL) 


WITH A 
(PRAGATI 


In Pragati Design Biogas Plant is floating drum 
plant with the depth of pit is less than KVIC biogas 
plant and is cheaper. It can be constructed in hilly 
area and high water table areas. 


The digester of Pragati design plant start from the 
foundation in dome shape thereby reducing the 
constructional area, for same digester volume, thus 
reducing the cost of construction of the plant. The 
wall thickness of digester is kept 75 mm only. Dome 
shape construction takes place up to a collar base, 
where a central guide frame is provided. The 
digester wall above guide frame is constructed in 
cylindrical shape. 


E-5 FLOATING DRUM PLANT MADE UP OF 
ANGULAR STEEL AND PLASTIC FOIL 
(GANESH MODEL) 


It is basically a KVIC plant constructed with 
bamboo and polythene sheet. The digester is made 
of an angle iron frame, bamboo and polythene sheet. 
The KVIC gas holder and guide frame are used in 
this design also. The cost of this plant is 70 percent 
of KVIC plant. 


E-6 FLOATING DRUM PLANT MADE OF 
FIBRE GLASS REINFORCED POLYESTER 


This type of digester, which is widely used on a 
household scale, uses fiberglass so it is more 
efficient in handling and changing the biogas plant 
site. This digester consists of one part that functions 
as a digester and gas storage, each mixed in one 
chamber without insulation. Digester from 
fiberglass material is very efficient because it is very 
impermeable, lightweight and strong. If there is a 
leak, it is easily repaired or reshaped as before, and 
the more efficient is that the digester can be moved 
at any time if the farmer does not use it anymore. 
The main advantage of fiberglass digester is its ease 
of implementation and handling, low investment 
cost and being more environmentally friendly. 


IS 9478 : 2023 


E-7 PLUG FLOW REACTOR 


Plug flow reactors, also known as tubular reactors, 
consist of a hollow pipe or tube through which 
reactants flow. The plug flow reactor can be in the 
form of a tube wrapped around an acrylic mould that 
is encased in a tank. Water at a controlled 
temperature is circulated through the tank to 
maintain a constant reactant temperature. Plug flow 
reactors, consist of a cylindrical pipe with openings 
on each end for reactants and products to flow 
through. Plug flow reactors are usually operated at 
steady-state. Reactants are continually consumed as 
they flow down the length of the reactor. Plug flow 
reactors may be configured as one long tube or a 
number of shorter tubes. They range in diameter 
from a few centimeters to several meters. The choice 
of diameter is based on construction cost, pumping 
cost, the desired residency time, and heat transfer 
needs. Typically, long small diameter tubes are used 
with high reaction rates, and larger diameter tubes 
are used with slow reaction rates. 


E-8 EXTERNAL CIRCULATION SLUDGE 
BED (ECSB) 


li is high-rate anaerobic digestion system uses 
granular biomass to treat wastewater. This 
technology is ideal for urban areas and facilities with 
limited space availability. Wastewater with high 
concentrations of soluble organics can be easily 
treated in the compact ECSB system, making this 
technology an ideal choice for breweries, beverage 
plants, biofuel processors, or the pulp and paper 
industry. It can be constructed from various 
materials such as steel, concrete, or fibre/glass- 
reinforced plastic (FRP/GRP). This technology 
continuously meets discharge requirements and 
eliminates wastewater surcharges, converts organic 
waste to recoverable green energy (heat and power). 
Its pressurized system design eliminates odour 
emissions and sealed headspace, eliminating the 
potential for tank corrosion. 


E-9 BIOGAS INDUCED MIXING 
ARRANGEMENT (BIMA) DIGESTER 


The Biogas induced mixing arrangement (BIMA) 
system is the original among the self-mixing 
hydraulic digester systems. It doesn’t require any 
mechanical equipment such as agitator, circulation 
pumps or gas injection for mixing the digester. The 
2-chamber system uses the produced biogas to 
create a level difference in the chambers and in this 
way builds up a mixing pressure of up to 5 N/mm”. 
The turbulent mixing occurs against the biogas 
production in intervals of 4 time to 10 time a day. 


IS 9478 : 2023 


The system is extremely low-maintenance and has 
lower operational costs than conventional systems. 
Ideal applications of this system are high solid 
sludge and waste, such as in the sewage sludge 
treatment, treatment of organic solid wastewater, 
manure, organic household and industrial waste, etc. 


E-10 FIXED-DOME PLANT WITH A BRICK 
MASONRY, MOULDED DOME (JANTA 
MODEL, 6 m?/day TO 25 m?/day) 


The main feature of the fixed-dome biogas plant or 
Janta model biogas plant is that the digester and the 
gas holder are integrated parts of brick masonry 
structure. The digester is made of a shallow well 
having a dome-shaped roof on it. The inlet and outlet 
tanks are connected with the digester through large 
chutes which are called displacement chambers. The 
gas pipe is fitted on the crown of the masonry dome 
and there is an opening on the outlet wall of the 
outlet displacement chamber for the discharge of 
spent digested slurry. The size of this plant is limited 
to 25 m° per day. 


E-11 FIXED-DOME PLANT WITH A 
HEMISPHERE DIGESTER (DEENBANDHU 
MODEL, UPTO 6 m?/day) 


This plant is designed on the principle that the 
surface area of biogas plants is reduced (minimized) 
to reduce their installation cost without sacrificing 
the efficiency of the plant. The design consists of 
segments of two spheres of different diameters, 
joined at their bases. The structure thus formed, acts 
as the digester, as fermentation chamber, as well as 
the gas storage chamber. The higher compressive 
strength of the brick masonry and concrete makes it 
preferable to go in for a structure which could 
always be kept under compression. A spherical 
structure loaded from the convex side will be under 
compression and therefore, the internal load will not 
have any residual effect on the structure. The 
digester is connected with the inlet pipe and the 
outlet tank. The upper part above the normal slurry 
level of the outlet tank is designed to accommodate 
the slurry to be displaced out of the digester with the 
generation and accumulation of biogas and is called 
outlet displacement chamber. The size of these 
plants is recommended up to 6 m*/day. 


E-12 FIXED-DOME PLANT WITH A BRICK 
MASONRY, MOULDED DOME (MODIFIED 
PAU JANTA MODEL, UPTO 500 m?/day) 


Fixed-dome plant with a brick reinforced, moulded 
dome or modified PAU Janta model biogas plant is 
a large capacity biogas plant developed to cater to 
the needs of dairy farmers. This essentially, is a 
‘Janta’ design but of a higher capacity. The gas- 
holder is hemispherical in shape and is structurally 


safe and crack-resistant. The construction of this 
type of plant is easy and is not very different from 
the method for the Deenbandhu Biogas Plant. This 
plant can be constructed with around 50 percent to 
60 percent cost as compared to the cost of other 
conventional floating drum type (KVIC) biogas 
plant. The biogas plant is an all brick masonry 
structure. Reinforced cement concrete is not used 
for construction of either the digester or the dome of 
the plant. The design is suitable for all regions of the 
country. The plant may be designed for any rated 
capacity from 20 m*/day to 500 m*/day for the 
hydraulic retention period of 40 days or more 
depending upon total solid concentration (TSC) of 
the influent slurry. Normally cattle dung mixed with 
equal quantity of water is used as feed for the plant 
having TSC of 9 percent to 10 percent. The plant 
may also work satisfactorily for higher TSC of upto 
12 percent. This means water consumption may be 
cut by upto 50 percent depending upon the season 
and physical status of the cattle dung used at the 
time of feeding. Maintenance requirements of this 
plant are far lesser than the floating drum biogas 
plants. 


E-13 FLOATING-DRUM PLANT MADE OF 
PRE-FABRICATED FERROCEMENT 
COMPOUND UNITS 


The ferro-cement type of construction can be 
applied either as a self supporting shell or an earth- 
pit lining. The vessel is usually cylindrical. Very 
small plants (volume under 6 mê) can be 
prefabricated. As in the case of a fixed-dome plant, 
the ferro-cement gas holder requires special sealing 
measures (proven reliability with cemented on 
aluminium foil). 


E-14 FIXED FILM REACTOR 


Fixed-film activated sludge (FFAS) 
technology/package provides for additional biomass 
within a wastewater treatment facility in order to 
meet more stringent effluent parameters or increased 
loadings without the direct need for additional tank 
capacity. Industry practice for upgrading wastewater 
treatment plants usually focuses on increasing the 
bioreactor volume to provide the additional bacterial 
population required to meet the system kinetic 
needs. FFAS systems such as moving bed biofilm 
reactor (MBBR) allow for the additional bacterial 
population to exist on a fixed surface, thereby 
eliminating the need to increase the suspended 
growth population. FFAS systems add the benefits 
of fixed film systems into the suspended growth 
activated sludge process. Activated sludge has 
process flexibility and provides a high degree of 
treatment. Fixed film processes are inherently stable 
and resistant to organic and hydraulic shock 
loadings. Placing Fixed Film media into activated 
sludge basins combines the advantages of both of 
these approaches. 


E-15 FLOATING FILMS REACTORS 


The moving bed biofilm reactor (MBBR) process is 
based on the aerobic biofilm principle and utilizes 
the advantages of activated sludge and other biofilm 
systems without being restrained by their 
disadvantages. The basis of the process is the 
biofilm carrier elements that are made from 
polyethylene. The elements provide a large 
protected surface area for the biofilm and optimal 
conditions for the bacteria culture to grow and 
thrive. The biofilm that is created around each 
carrier element protects the bacterial cultures from 
operating excursions to yield a very robust system 
for those industrial facilities loaded with process 
fluctuations. The biofilm also provides a more stable 
home for the bacteria to grow, so there is less space 
required compared to other biological systems and 
far less controls. Essentially nutrient levels and DO 
levels are the only control points for the system. 
MBBRs can be designed for new facilities to remove 
BOD/COD from wastewater streams or for nitrogen 
removal. Existing activated sludge plants can be 
upgraded to achieve nitrogen and removal or higher 
BOD/COD capacity (up to 500 percent increases 
have been obtained). 


E-16 BAG TYPE DIGESTERS 


A balloon plant consists of a plastic or rubber 
digester bag, in the upper part of which the gas is 
stored. The inlet and outlet are attached direct to the 
skin of the balloon. When the gas space is full, the 
plant works like a fixed-dome plant, that is the 
balloon is not inflated; it is not very elastic. The 
fermentation slurry is agitated slightly by the 
movement of the balloon skin. This is favourable to 
the digestion process. Even difficult feed materials, 
such as water hyacinths, can be used in a balloon 
plant. The balloon material shall be UV-resistant. 
The advantages of this biogas plants are its low cost, 


IS 9478 : 2023 


ease of transportation, low construction (as it is 
important if the water table is high), high digester 
temperatures, and non-complicated cleaning, 
emptying and maintenance. The disadvantages of 
this biogas plant are its short life (about five years), 
and it is easily damaged. Balloon plants can be 
recommended wherever the balloon skin is not 
likely to be damaged and where the temperature is 
even and high. One variant of the balloon plant is the 
channel-type digester with folia and sunshade. 


E-17 HIGH RATE SOLID DIGESTERS 


Anaerobic Digestion systems can be operated at a 
wide range of total solids (TS) contents depending 
on the feedstock TS content and process design. 
Anaerobic digestion for high strength wastewater 
can be carried out at a very low TS content 
(< 1.0 percent) using high-rate anaerobic reactors, 
such as an anaerobic biofilter, UASB or 
expanded/fluidized bed reactor. For slurry 
feedstocks, such as sewage sludge, animal manure, 
and liquid food waste, Anaerobic digestion systems 
are usually designed to operate at low TS contents 
(< 15 percent) and are referred to as liquid anaerobic 
digestion systems. Another type of anaerobic 
digestion that operates at TS contents higher than 
15 percent and digests solid organic wastes, such as 
the organic fraction of municipal solid waste 
(OFMSW) and crop residues, is defined as solid- 
state anaerobic digestion. High TS contents will 
reduce the mass transfer rate in anaerobic digestion 
and result in a retarded reaction rate and slow 
diffusion of intermediate products and inhibitors. 
The changes of volumetric reaction rate of 
lignocellulosic biomass in anaerobic digestion 
increase with TS content due to the increase of 
organic loading but then decrease at TS of around 
20 percent due to the slow mass transfer and 
accumulation of inhibitors. 


IS 9478 : 2023 


ANNEX F 
(Clause 7.2) 


REQUIREMENTS FOR DESIGN OF CIVIL CONSTRUCTION 


F-1 GENERAL 


This may include design and construction of feed 
storage area, feed handling system (pre-processing), 
digester feed chamber, anaerobic digester, digested 
slurry storage and processing for organic digestate 
manure, biogas storage system, purification and 
bottling unit/COz extraction and processing 
unit/electricity generation unit, water storage tank, 
firefighting system, etc. (as applicable).All these 
works are required to deliver the civil structures 
complete in all respects including water retaining 
structures, gas leak proof construction of digester 
and gas holder (leakage tested), structural steel 
works, finishing works like handrailings, floorings, 
plastering, painting of civil and steel structures, roof 
water proofing, rain water pipes, plumbing and 
sanitary pipes and fittings (wherever applicable). 


F-2 STRUCTURAL DESIGN 


F-2.1 Reinforced Cement Concrete (RCC) 
Structure 


All reinforced cement concrete (RCC) structures 
shall be constructed as per IS 456 and the following: 


a) Foundations of structures are assumed to be 
offering fixed support; and 


b) The column above RCC wall shall be 
assumed as pinned over RCC wall so that no 
moment is transferred to the RCC wall 
below. 


F-2.2 Liquid Retaining Structure 


All liquid retaining structures made up of concrete 
shall be as per IS 3370 (Part 1), IS 3370 (Part 2) and 
the following: 


a) F.O.S. against uplift shall be 1.25 and against 
sliding it shall be 1.5. 


F-2.3 Steel Structure 


Fabrication and erection of all the steel structures 
shall be as per IS 800. Plates and different sections 
used in structures shall be as per following: 


IS No. Title 

IS 1079 Cold formed light gauge sections 

IS 1161 Tubular sections 

IS 2062 Hot rolled sections and plates 

IS 4923 Hollow sections (rectangular or 
square) 


20 


F-2.4 Loads 
F-2.4.1 Dead Loads 


Dead loads include the weight of all permanent 
construction including walls, floors roofs, partitions, 
staircase and fixed service equipment and other 
equipment including their contents. Dead Loads for 
design shall be in accordance with IS 875 (Part 1). 


F-2.4.2 Liquid and Soil Loads 


Tanks below ground shall be subjected to surcharge 
and lateral pressure due to soil. Following load cases 
shall be considered for the design of liquid retaining 
structures (LRS): 


a) For wall-water inside tank full upto top of 
wall and no soil acting outside; 


b 


wm 


For raft-inside tank full; 


c 


wa 


Inside tank empty with soil and surcharge 
pressure of 1.0 MT/m? shall be considered 
on wall where ever required; 


d 


wm 


For two compartments -One shall be treated 
full up to top of wall and the other empty; 


e 


wm 


The following soil pressure co-efficient 
shall be considered for calculating lateral 
loads: 


1) For free cantilever wall, the earth 
pressure coefficient shall be 0.33 for 
rest, it shall be 0.5, that is earth pressure 
co-efficient at rest; 


2) For circular structure and propped wall 
earth pressure coefficient shall be 0.5; 
and 


f) Ground water table, if any shall be 
considered in the design of structures. 


F-2.4.3 Imposed Loads 


The following minimum loads shall be considered in 
the design of structures: 


a) Live loads on roofs = 150 kg/m’; 

b) Pump house = 1050 kg/m’; 
operating floor 

c) Maintenance/storage = 750 kg/m’; 


/air blower floor 


d) Suspended switch = 1000 kg/m’; 
gear, battery room 


e) Stairs, walkway and = 500 kg/m’; and 
landing 


f) Surcharge = 1000 kg/m?. 


F-2.4.4 Temperature Loads and Construction Joints 


Temperature load shall be considered half of 2/3 of 


21 


IS 9478 : 2023 


difference between maximum and minimum 
temperature. The construction joints in buildings 
and tank structures shall be provided as per relevant 
standard/engineering practices. 


F-2.4.5 Impact and Vibratory Loads 


Structures subjected to impact or vibratory loads 
shall be considered as 2.5 times the weight of 
vibratory equipment, like pumps, motor, blower, 
compressor, etc. 


IS 9478 : 2023 


ANNEX G 
(Clause 8) 


GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ELECTRO-MECHANICAL WORKS SPECIFICALLY FOR 
MEDIUM AND LARGE SCALE PLANTS 


G-1 GENERAL 


This specifies the general requirements related to 
electro-mechanical works to be carried out. Material 
and design of all the equipments, valves, gates, 
electrical instruments, etc as per relevant Indian 
Standards shall be suitable for the duty requirement 
to ensure minimum design life of 15 years. However, 
the following minimum requirements given under 
G-2 and G-3 need to be adhered to. 


G-2 MECHANICAL WORKS 


Various parts and components required for 
mechanical works of biogas plants are given below, 
however, level of automation to be decided based on 
the biogas plant capacity: 


G-2.1 Valves 


a) All automatic valves may be electrically or 
electro-pneumatically actuated. Pneumatic 
valves shall have 5 - way acting solenoids 
and the requisite air pressure depending on 
the valve specifications as per IS 15045 
(all parts); 

Medium (2 000 m3/day biogas and above) 
and large size plants: Entire plant/operations 
may be automated at desired level; 


b 


wm 


All valves of 500 mm diameter and above, 
and valves in discharge of pumps/blowers 
irrespective of size shall be electrically 
actuated as per IS 9334 and IS 8935; 


Valves up to and including 200 mm diameter 
can be wafer/lugged wafer type. All valves 
above 200 mm diameter shall be double 
flanged; 

e) All valves shall be provided with a 
dismantling joint for ease of maintenance. 
Dismantling joint can be common between 
two adjacent valves; 


c 


S 


d 


wm 


f) All valves 250 mm diameter and above shall 
be gear based as per IS/ISO 22109; 


All valves shall be as per the requirements 
and of the same size as line size; 


wa 


8 


h 


wm 


Valves in water line shall be butterfly type, 
valves in sludge lines shall be knife gate 
valves and valves in chemical lines shall be 
ball valves; 

jJ) NRVs shall be either swing check or dual 
plate check valves as per IS 5312 (Part 1 and 
Part 2); 


22 


k) All valves shall be of PN10 pressure rating 
or at least 2 times the working pressure, 
whichever is higher; 


m) All NRVs shall be double flanged. Ball 
valves shall be socketed or flanged type (in 
case of non-metallic) and flanged (in case of 
metallic); and 


n) All butterfly valves shall be as per IS 13095, 
gate valves shall be as per IS/ISO 10434 and 
ball valves shall be as per IS 9890 and 
IS/ISO 17292. 


G-2.2 Gates 


a) Automatic gates shall be electrically 
actuated and not pneumatic actuated as per 
IS 9334 and IS 8935; 


b) All gates of 1 000 mm x 1 000 mm size and 
above shall be automatic and electrically 
actuated; 

c) All gates shall be thimble mounted as per IS 
13349; 

d) Gates shall be in cast iron construction with 
SS shaft; and 

e) As required entire plant/operations shall be 
automated, operable through central 


operating system. All gates shall be required 
to be automatic to achieve this purpose. 


G-2.3 Actuators 


Electric actuators shall be as per IS 9334 and 
IS 8935. 


G-2.4 Pipes and Fittings for Different Plant 
Utility 


a) All process lines including sludge lines 
shall be HDPE pipelines as per IS 4984 of 
PN10 rating or Class K9 ductile iron 
pipelines as per IS 8329. All ductile iron 
pipe fittings shall conform to IS 9523 of 
pressure rating PN1O or 2 times the 
working pressure, whichever is higher; 


b) Chemical process water and drinking water 
pipelines shall be CPVC pipelines as per IS 
15778, 10 kg/cm? pressure rating or 2 times 
the working pressure, whichever is higher 
or SS304, Schedule 20 as per IS 17875 and 
IS 17876; 

c) Air pipe shall be SS304, Schedule 20 as per 
IS 17875 and IS 17876 or thickness as 
required for pressure 2 times the working 
pressure, whichever is higher; 


d) All buried pipes shall be laid on beddings 
as required to suit site conditions after 
leveling and compaction to minimum 
90 percent proctor density. All over ground 
pipe work shall be suitably supported over 
pipe racks/structural steel supports and 
anchored to  tanks/buildings/structures 
suitably facilitating easy replacements 
during maintenance as per relevant Indian 
Standard; and 


e) All pipe work shall be suitably colour 
banded for the conveying fluid and 
direction of flow marked with appropriate 
colour as per IS 2379. 


G-2.5 Hoists and Cranes 
For medium and large size biogas plants according 


to requirements and local conditions, lifting 
equipment (hoists or cranes) shall be provided in all 


23 


IS 9478 : 2023 


locations requiring lifting and shifting of material 
for operation and maintenance of plant. 


G-2.6 Hardware 


All hardware like nuts, bolts, washers, flanges, etc 
shall be suitable to meet the duty requirement, 
however components in contact with raw biogas 
shall be minimum SS304 or non corrosive materials 
for components use for raw biogas. 


G-3 ELECTRICAL AND INSTRUMENTATION 
SYSTEMS 


Electrical and Instrumentation systems for medium 
and large sized biogas plants shall be designed as per 
the relevant Indian Standards as applicable. Level of 
automation may be decided based on the biogas 
plant capacity. For large scale biogas plants used for 
power generation/CBG production, the installation 
of electrical equipments shall be as per IS 5572. 


IS 9478 : 2023 


ANNEX H 
(Foreword) 


RECOMMENDED APPLICATIONS OF FINAL PRODUCT AND BY-PRODUCTS 


H-1 COOKING 


Biogas may be supplied to households for use in 
biogas cookstove for cooking purpose. The biogas 
cookstove shall be as per IS 8749. 


H-2 ELECTRICITY GENERATION FROM 
BIOGAS (BIOMETHANE) 


Biogas (biomethane) may be used for the generation 
of electricity using CNG engines. Hundred percent 
biogas engines may also be used for conversion of 


biogas into electricity as per the relevant Indian 
Standard. 


H-3 DIGESTATE AS ORGANIC FERTILIZER 


Organic fertilizer is a by-product of the digestion 
process and produced in solid and/or liquid form, 
from the digester. This prescribed composition of 
the solid organic fertilizer for digestate of biogas 
(biomethane) plants shall comply for the solid and 
liquid organic fertilizers produced from the biogas 
digester as prescribed in Table 10 for further 
packaging and sales. 


Table 10 Specification of Organic Fertilizer 
(Clause H-3) 


SI No. Parameters Solid organic fertilizer | Liquidorganic fertilizer 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Moisture, percent by weight 30 percent to 40 percent 90 percent to 97 percent 
ii) Particle size Minimum 90 percent Minimum 90 percent 


material should pass 
through 4.0 mm IS sieve 


material should pass 
through 4.0 mm IS sieve 


iii) Total organic carbon, percent by weight, 14 14 
Min 
iv) NPK nutrients (Total N, P205 and K20 1.2 1.2 
nutrient, percent), Min (For upgraded 
digestate based organic fertilizer the nos. 
for P205 and K20 to be given) 
v) C : Nratio < 20 < 20 
vi) pH 6.5 to 8.0 6.5 to 8.0 
vii) | Conductivity (as ds/m), Max 4.0 4.0 
viii) Pathogens Nil Nil 
ix) Heavy metal content, mg/l, Max 
a) Arsenic (As) 10 10 
b) Cadmium (Cd) 5 5 
c) Chromium (Cr) 50 50 
d) Copper (Cu) 300 300 
e) Mercury (Hg) 0.15 0.15 
f) Nickel (Ni) 50 50 
g) Lead (Pb) 100 100 
h) Zinc (Zn) 1 000 1 000 
NOTES 


1 Bio-CO, utilization: Bio-CO, separated from purification 
of biogas can be used in green house chambers for plant 
growth, for manufacturing of dry ice (food grade), 
fumigation in grain storage, liquefaction, CO. sequestration 
for algae growth, fire extinguishers, and chemical synthesis. 


2 Liquid organic fertilizer can also be upgraded or amended 
with additional stable organic matter to improve quality. 


3 Solid and liquid digestate may be upgraded to make: 


a) Potassium and phosphate rich organic manure 
(PROM); and 


b) Microbial inoculent enriched solid/liquid biofertilizer. 


24 


Digestate slurry from biogas plant may be separated 
through de-watering machines into two, solid and 
liquid fraction. In case of solid fraction (also known 
as fermented organic manure), moisture is to be 
maintained below 30 percent to 35 percent, as high 
moisture contents lead to higher microbial activity 
in storage and may end up losing organic carbon 
during storage. Liquid manure may be used as it is. 
Liquid manure is high volume and extremely low in 


nutrients, generally used in bulk quantities in nearby 
agricultural fields. 


Value addition of fermented organic manure (solid 
fraction): 


a) Phosphate rich organic manure (PROM) — 
This can be prepared by mixing solid 
manure fraction with fine powder of rock 
phosphate to obtain final product with 
minimum of 8 percent P2Os and 10 percent 
of organic carbon. Ratio of each ingredient 
can be worked out after 
analysis of all ingredients and standardizing 
to achieve the desired value; and 


25 


IS 9478 : 2023 


b) Organic manure containing 3 percent 


nutrients- This can be done by adding small 
quantity of caster or neem cake and/or rock 
phosphate to comply to the total NPK 
requirement of 3 percent. 


NOTE — The liquid and solid outputs from the 
digester is rich in plant nutrients and organic matter 
for improving soil health. The subsequent use of the 
solid and liquid outputs of the biogas digesters needs 
to comply with one of the following, FCO standards 
on fermented organic manure (FOM), liquid 
fermented organic manure (LFOM) or State’s 
Pollution Control Boards norms for discharge of 
effluents having similar properties. 


IS 9478 : 2023 


ANNEX J 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Renewable Energy Sources Sectional Committee, MED 04 


Organisation 


Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, New Delhi 
Bharat Heavy Electrical Limited, New Delhi 

Biogas Forum India, New Delhi 

CSIR - Central Leather Research Institute, Chennai 


CSIR - Central Mechanical Engineering Research Institute, 
Durgapur 


Cement Manufacturers Association, New Delhi 

Central Arid Zone Research Institute, Jodhpur 

Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 

Consumer Coordination Council, Noida 

EMMVEE Photovoltaic Power Private Limited, Bengaluru 

India Meteorological Department, New Delhi 

Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi 

Indian Institute of Technology (BHU), Mechanical Engineering 
Department, Varanasi 

Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai 

Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 

Indian Renewable Energy Development Agency Limited, 
New Delhi 


International Copper Association India, Mumbai 


Maharashtra Energy Development Agency, Pune 


Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, New Delhi 


Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways, New Delhi 


National Institute of Solar Energy, Gurugram 


26 


Representative(s) 


DR A. K. TRIPATHI ( Chairperson) 
SHRI AMRISH GUPTA 

SHRI A. R. SHUKLA 

DR P. SHANMUGAM 


DR CHANCHAL LOHA 
SHRI SUBHO SAMANTA 


SHRI Raju Goyal 
SHRIV AIBHAV GUPTA (Alternate I) 
SHRI MANMOHAN RATHI (Alternate ID) 


DRANIL KUMAR SINGH 
DR PRIYABRATA SANTARA(Alternate) 


SHRI VIMAL KUMAR 
SHRI RAJIV GUPTA (Alternate) 


SHRIARUN KUMAR MISHRA 
SHRI R. K. KAPLASH (Alternate) 


SHRIVIJAY KUMARC. R. 
SHRIMANJUNATH ULLUR H. (Alternate) 


SHRIH.S. SAWHNEY 
DR ANIKENDER KUMAR (Alternate) 


DR KANCHAN K. SINGH 
DR PANNA LAL SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRIS. KUMAR SHUKLA 


SHRI J. K. NAYAK 
DR SHIREESH KEDARE (Alternate) 


PROF DIBAKAR RAKSHIT 
PROF K. RAVI KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI SOM PAL 
SHRI S. K. DEY (Alternate) 


SHRI DEBDAS GOSWAMI 
SHRI V. K. GUPTA (Alternate) 


SHRIMANOJ A. PISE 


SHRI HEMANT MANIKKULKARNI (Alternate I) 


SHRI ANAND V. KULKARNI (Alternate II) 
SHRI SAMEER GHODAKE (Alternatel]) 


DR S. R. MEENA 
DR A. K. SINGHAL (Alternate) 


SHRIANIL PRUTHI 


DR CHANDAN BANERJEE 
SHRI KISHORE K. MENON (Alternate) 


Organisation 


Nuetech Solar Systems Private Limited, Bengaluru 


Rites Limited, Gurugram 


Rajagiri School of Engineering and Technology, Kerala 


Regional Test Centre, Pune 


Sardar Patel Renewable Energy Research Institute, Mechanical 
Engineering Department, Vallabh Vidyanagar 


Solar Thermal Federation of India, Pune 
The Energy and Resources Institute, New Delhi 


In Personal Capacity (C-103 A, JVTS Garden Chaterpur 
Extension, New Delhi -110074) 
BIS Directorate General, New Delhi 


IS 9478 : 2023 


Representative(s) 


SHRISHRY ANANTH TYAMAGUNDLU 


SHRI RUPESH KUMAR 
SHRI MANISH TIWARI (Alternate) 


DR VARGHESEPANTHALOOKARAN 
SHRIJOEL GEORGE (Alternate) 


PROF SANDESH R. JADKAR 
DR ANAGHA M. PATHAK (Alternate I) 
PROF KIRAN DESHPANDE (Alternate II) 


SHRIE. R. ASIM KUMAR JOSHI 
DR SHAISHAV SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI JAIDEEP N. MALAVIYA 

SHRIN. K. RAM 

SHRI ATAM KUMAR 

SHRI RAJNEESH KHOSLA, SCIENTIST ‘F’/SENIOR 


DIRECTOR AND HEAD (MECHANICAL ENGINEERING) 
[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI AMAN DHANAWAT 
SCIENTIST ‘B’/ASSISTANT DIRECTOR 
(MECHANICAL ENGINEERING), BIS 


Panel for Standardization in Biogas Plant, MED 04 : P2 


Organisation 


Biogas Forum India, New Delhi 

Arka BRENStech Pvt Ltd, Gurugram, Haryana 

BDTC, Bangalore 

Blue Planet Environmental Solutions India Pvt. Ltd.,New Delhi 
Biogas Forum India, New Delhi 

CSIR - Central Leather Research Institute, Chennai 


CSIR-National Environmental Engineering Research Institute 
(NEERI), Nagpur, Maharashtra 


Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (DA & FW), 
New Delhi 


Enprotech Solutions,Pune, Maharashtra 
Indian Biogas Association, Gurugram 
Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 


In Personal Capacity (415/415, 18" Main, 14 cross, F Block, 
Sahakar Nagar, Bangalore, 560092) 


In Personal Capacity (175 — Bhupalpura Utsav — Sadan, Nr 
UCO Bank Opp. St Paul’s School, Udaipur, 313001) 


27 


Representative(s) 


DR A. R. SHUKLA (Convener) 
SHRI SRINIVAS KASULLA 

DR V. KUMAR GOUDA 

SHRI SUMEDH BAPAT 

DR A. R. SHUKLA 

DR P SHANMUGAM 


DR GANESH KALE 


DR A. K. YADAV 


SHRI SANJAY NANDRE 
SHRI GAURAV KEDIA 
PROF V.K. VIJAY 


DR H. N. CHANAKYA 


DR DEEPAK SHARMA 


IS 9478 : 2023 


Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, New Delhi DR S. R. MEENA 

DR PABITRA MOHAN BARIK (Alternate) 
Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana, Punjab SHRI S. S. SOOCH 
Sardar Swaran Singh National Institute of Bio-Energy (SSS- DR SACHIN KUMAR 


NIBE), Kapurthala, Punjab 


BIS, New Delhi SHRI AMAN DHANAWAT 


28 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 04 (21167). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8™ Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.L.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


