Ira urs IS 1893 (Part 4) : 2015 
Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2020) 


Criteria for Earthguake Resistant 
Design of Structures 
Part 4 Industrial Structures Including Stack- Like Structures 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 91.120.25 


© BIS 2015 


TAA AM equ 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
@ TM YAA, 9 SEK STAD art, ae feeeit-110002 
LL MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2015 Price Group 10 


Earthguake Engineering Sectional Committee, CED 39 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 4) (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Earthguake Engineering Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division 
Council. 


Himalayan-Naga Lushai region, Indo-Gangetic Plain, Western India, Kutch and Kathiawar regions are geologically 
unstable parts of the country where some devastating earthguakes of the world have occurred. A major part of the 
peninsular India has also been visited by strong earthguakes, but these were relatively few in number occurring 
at much larger time intervals at any site, and had considerably lesser intensity. The earthquake resistant design of 
structures, taking into account seismic data from studies of these Indian earthquakes, has become very essential, 
particularly in view of heavy construction program at present all over the country. It is to serve this purpose that 
IS 1893 : 1962 ‘Recommendations for earthquake resistant design of structures’ was published and subsequently 
revised in 1966, 1970, 1975 and 1984. 


In the fifth revision brought out is 2002, the Committee decided to cover the provisions for different types of 
structures in separate parts, to keep abreast of rapid developments and extensive researh carried out in 
earthquake-resistant design of various structures. Other parts in the series are: 


Part 1 General provisions and buildings 

Part 2 Liquid retaining tanks-elevated and ground supported 
Part 3 Bridges and retaining walls 

Part 5 Dams and embankments 


This standard (Part 4) contains provisions on earthquake resistant design of Industrial Structures including Stack 
like Structures. Industrial structures are covered in Section | and Stack like structures are covered in Section 2. 


In the formulation of this standard considerable assistance has been provided by BHEL, IIT Roorkee, IIT Bombay, 
IIT Kanpur, NTPC, EIL, NPC, TCE, DCAD and various other organizations. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex E. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 
1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded 
off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 1893 (Part 4) : 2015 


Indian Standard 


CRITERIA FOR EARTHQUAKE RESISTANT DESIGN OF 
STRUCTURES 


PART 4 INDUSTRIAL STRUCTURES INCLUDING STACK- LIKE STRUCTURES 
(First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 The industrial structures, including stack-like 
structures, shall be designed and constructed to resist 
the earthquake effects in accordance with the 
requirements and provisions of this standard. This 
standard describes the procedures for earthquake 
resistant design and provides the estimates of 
earthquake forces for design of such structures. 


1.2 Temporary elements such as scaffolding, temporary 
excavations need not be designed for earthquake forces. 


1.3 This standard does not deal with construction 
features relating to earthquake resistant industrial 
structures and stack like structures. For guidance on 
earthquake resistant construction of buildings, 
reference may be made to the following Indian 
Standards: IS 4326, IS 13827, IS 13828, IS 13920 
and IS 13935. 


1.4 This standard deals with earthquake resistant design 
of the industrial structures (plant and auxiliary 
structures) including stack like structures. This standard 
shall be considered applicable to all industries, 
including those listed below, unless exclusively noted 
otherwise: 

a) Process industries; 

b) Power plants; 


c) Petroleum, fertilizers, chemical and petro- 
chemical industries; 


d) Steel, copper, zinc and aluminum plants; 
e) Pharmaceutical plants; 

f) Cement industries; 

g) Automobile industries; 

h) Sugar and alcohol industries; 

j) Glass and ceramic industries; 

k) Textile industries; 

m) Foundries; 

n) Electrical and electronic industries; 

p) Consumer product industries; 


q) Structures for water and waste water treatment 
plants and pump houses; 


r) Leather industries; 


s) Off-shore structures and marine/port/harbour 
structures; 
t) Mill structures; 
u) Telephone exchanges; and 
v) Paper plants. 
NOTE — For nuclear and other hazardous chemical 
installations, reference may also be made to recommendations 
of applicable International Safety Standards. 
In addition to the above, the following structures, 
classified as stack like structures, are also covered by 
this standard: 


1) Cooling towers and prilling towers; 

2) Transmission and communication towers/ 
masts; 

3) Chimneys and stack like structures; 

4) Silos (including parabolic silos used for urea 
storage) ; 

5) Support structures for refinery columns; and 

6) Pressure vessels and chemical reactor 
columns. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 


IS No. Title 


456 : 2000 Code of practice for plain and 
reinforced concrete (fourth revision) 

800 : 2007 Code of practice for general 
construction in steel (third revision) 

875 Code of practice for design loads 
(other than earthquake) for building 
structures: 

Part 1 : 1987 Dead loads — Unit weights of 


building material and stored 
materials (second revision) 


IS 1893 (Part 4) : 2015 


IS No. Title 
Part 2 : 1987 Imposed loads (second revision) 
Part 3: 2015 Wind loads (third revision) 
Part 4: 1987 Snow loads (second revision) 
Part5:1987 Special loads and load combinations 
(second revision) 
1343 : 2012 Code of practice for pre-stressed 
concrete (second revision) 
1498 : 1970 Classification and identification of 
soils for general engineering purposes 
1888 : 1982 Method of load test on soils (second 


revision) 


1893 (Part 1): Criteria for earthquake resistant 


2002 design of structures: Part 1 General 

Provisions and Buildings 

2131 : 1981 Method for standard penetration test 
for soils 

2809 : 1972 Glossary of terms and symbols 
relating to soil engineering 

2810 : 1979 Glossary of terms relating to soil 
dynamics 

4326 : 2013 Earthquake resistant design and 
construction of buildings — Code of 
practice (second revision) 

4998 : 2015 Criteria for design of reinforced 
concrete chimneys (third revision) 

6403 : 1981 Code of practice for determination of 


bearing capacity of shallow 
foundations (first revision) 


6533 (Part 2): Code of practice for design and 


1989 construction of steel chimney: Part 2 

Structural aspects (first revision) 

13827 : 1993 Improving earthquake resistance of 
earthen buildings — Guidelines 

13828 : 1993 Improving earthquake resistance of 
low strength buildings — Guidelines 

13920 : 1993 Ductile detailing of reinforced 
concrete structures subjected to 
seismic forces 

13935 : 1993 Repair and seismic strengthening of 
buildings — Guidelines 

3 GENERAL TERMINOLOGY FOR 


EARTHQUAKE ENGINEERING 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply which are applicable generally 
to all structures: 

NOTE — For the definitions of terms pertaining to soil 


mechanics and soil dynamics references may be made to 
IS 2809 and IS 2810. 


3.1 Closely-Spaced Modes — Closely-spaced modes 
of structure are those of its natural modes of vibration 
whose natural frequencies differ from each other by 
10 percent or less of the lower frequency. 


3.2 Critical Damping — The damping beyond which 
the free vibration motion shall not be oscillatory. 


3.3 Damping — The effect of internal friction, 
imperfect elasticity of material, slipping, sliding, etc. 
in reducing the amplitude of vibration and is expressed 
as a percentage of critical damping. 


3.4 Design Acceleration Spectrum — It refers to an 
average smoothened plot of maximum acceleration as 
a function of frequency or time period of vibration for 
a specified damping ratio for earthquake excitations at 
the base of a single degree of freedom system. 


3.5 Design Basis Earthquake (DBE) — It is the 
earthquake which can reasonably be expected to occur 
at least once during the design life of the structure, 
that is the earthquake with probability of exceedence 
of 10 percent in 50 years corresponding to return period 
of 475 years. 


3.6 Design Horizontal Acceleration Coefficient 
(A4) — It is a horizontal acceleration coefficient that 
shall be used for design of structures. 


3.7 Design Lateral Force — It is the horizontal 
seismic force prescribed by this standard that shall be 
used to design a structure. 


3.8 Ductility — Ductility ofa structure, or its members, 
is the capacity to undergo large inelastic deformations 
without significant loss of strength or stiffness. 


3.9 Epicenter — The geographical point on the 
surface of earth vertically above the focus of the 
earthquake. 


3.10 Effective Peak Ground Acceleration 
(EPGA) — It is 0.4 times the 5 percent damped average 
spectral acceleration between period 0.1 to 0.3 s. 


3.11 Floor Response Spectra — Floor response 
spectra is the response spectra for a time history motion 
of a floor/support location. This floor motion time 
history is obtained by dynamic analysis of multi-storey 
structures with appropriate material damping values 
subjected to a specified earthquake motion at the base 
of structure. 


3.12 Focus — The originating earthquake source of 
the elastic waves inside the earth which cause shaking 
of ground due to earthquake. 


3.13 Importance Factor (J) — It is a factor used to 
obtain the design seismic force depending on the 
functional use of the structure, characterized by 
hazardous consequences of its failure, its post- 
earthquake functional need, historic value, or economic 
importance. 


3.14 Intensity of Earthquake — The intensity of an 
earthquake at a place is a measure of the strength of 
shaking during the earthquake, and is indicated by a 
number according to the Modified Mercalli Scale or 
M.S.K. scale of Seismic Intensities. 


3.15 Liguefaction — It is a state in saturated 
cohesionless soil wherein the effective shear strength 
is reduced to a negligible value for all engineering 
purpose due to pore pressure caused by vibrations 
during an earthguake when they approach the total 
confining pressure. In this condition the soil tends to 
behave like a fluid mass. 


3.16 Lithological Features — The nature of the 
geological formation of the earth’s crust above bed rock 
on the basis of such characteristics as colour, structure, 
mineralogical composition and grain size. 


3.17 Magnitude of Earthquake (Richter’s 
Magnitude) — The magnitude of earthquake is a 
number, which is a measure of energy released in an 
earthquake. It is defined as logarithm to the base 10 of 
the maximum trace amplitude, expressed in microns, 
which the standard short-period torsion seismometer 
(with a period of 0.8 s, magnification 2 800 and 
damping nearly critical) would register due to the 
earthquake at an epicentral distance of 100 km. 


3.18 Maximum Considered Earthquake (MCE ) — 
The most severe earthquake effects considered by this 
standard that is the Earthquake with probability of 
exceedence of 2 percent in 50 years corresponding to 
return period of 2 500 years. 


3.19 Modal Mass (M,) — Modal mass of a structure 
subjected to horizontal or vertical ground motion, as 
the case may be, is a part of the total seismic mass of 
the structure that is effective in mode k of vibration. 
The modal mass for a given mode has a unique value 
irrespective of scaling of the mode shape. 


3.20 Modal Participation Factor (I) — Modal 
participation factor of mode k of vibration is the amount 
by which mode k contributes to the overall vibration 
of the structure under horizontal and vertical 
earthquake ground motions. 

3.21 Modes of Vibration — See Normal Mode. 

3.22 Mode Shape Coefficient ( Q; ) — When a system 
is vibrating in normal mode k, at any particular instant 
of time, the amplitude of mass i expressed as a ratio of 


the amplitude of one of the masses of the system, is 
known as mode shape coefficient (Q;.). 


3.23 Natural Period (T) — Natural period ofa structure 
is its time period of un-damped free vibration. 


3.23.1 Fundamental Natural Period ( T, ) — It is the 
first (longest) modal time period of vibration. 


3.23.2 Modal Natural Period (T, ) — The modal 
natural period of mode kis the time period of vibration 
in mode k. 


3.24 Normal Mode — A system is said to be vibrating 
in a normal mode when all its masses attain maximum 
values of displacements and rotations simultaneously, 


IS 1893 (Part 4) : 2015 


and pass through eguilibrium positions simultaneously. 


3.25 Response Reduction Factor ( R ) — It is the 
factor by which the actual base shear force, that would 
be generated if the structure were to remain elastic 
during its response to the design basis earthquake 
(DBE) shaking, shall be reduced to obtain the design 
lateral force. 


3.26 Response Spectrum — The representation of the 
maximum response of idealized single degree freedom 
systems having certain period and damping, during 
earthquake ground motion. The maximum response is 
plotted against the undamped natural period and for 
various damping values, and can be expressed in terms 
of maximum absolute acceleration, maximum relative 
velocity, or maximum relative displacement. 


3.27 Seismic Mass — It is the seismic weight W 
divided by acceleration due to gravity, g. 


3.28 Seismic Weight ( W ) — It is the total dead load 
plus appropriate specified imposed load including 
weight of the contents for vessels, tanks and containers. 


3.29 Structural Response Factor (S,/g ) — It is a 
factor denoting the acceleration response spectrum of 
the structure subjected to earthquake ground vibrations, 
and depends on natural period of vibration and 
damping of the structure. 


3.30 Tectonic Features — The nature of geological 
formation of the bed rock in the earth‘s crust revealing 
regions characterized by structural features, such as 
dislocation, distortion, faults, folding, thrusts, 
volcanoes with their age of formation, which are 
directly involved in the earth movement or quake 
resulting in the above consequences. 


3.31 Time History Analysis — It is an analysis of 
the dynamic response of the structure with respect to 
time, when its base is subjected to a specific ground 
motion time history. 


3.32 Zone Factor ( Z ) — It is a factor to obtain the 
design spectrum depending on the perceived maximum 
seismic risk characterized by maximum considered 
earthquake (MCE) in the zone in which the structure 
is located. The basic zone factors included in this 
standard are reasonable estimate of effective peak 
ground acceleration. 


3.33 Zero Period Acceleration ( ZPA ) — It is the 
value of acceleration response spectrum for period 
below 0.03 second (frequencies above 33 Hz). 


4 TERMINOLOGY FOR 
STRUCTURES 


INDUSTRIAL 


For the purpose of earthquake resistant design of 
industrial structures in this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 


IS 1893 (Part 4) : 2015 


41 Base — It is the level at which inertia forces 
generated in the structure are transferred to the 
foundation, which then transfers these forces to the 
ground. 


4.2 Base Dimensions — Base dimension of the 
structure along a direction is the dimension at its base, 
in meters, along that direction. 


4.3 Centre of Mass — The point through which the 
resultant of the masses of a system acts. This point 
corresponds to the centre of gravity of masses of 
system. 


4.4 Centre of Stiffness — The point through which 
the resultant of the restoring forces of a system acts. 


4.5 Design Eccentricity ( e; ) — It is the value of 
eccentricity to be used at floor i in torsion calculations 
for design. 


4.6 Design Seismic Base Shear ( V4 ) — It is the total 
design lateral force at the base of a structure. 


4.7 Diaphragm — It is a horizontal or nearly 
horizontal system, which transmits lateral forces to the 
vertical resisting elements, for example, reinforced 
concrete floors and horizontal bracing systems. 


4.8 Dual System — Structures with dual system 
consist of shear walls (or braced frames) and moment 
resisting frames such that, 


a) the two systems are designed to resist the total 
design lateral force in proportion to their 
lateral stiffness considering the interaction of 
the dual system at all floor levels: and 

b) the moment resisting frames are designed to 
independently resist at least 25% of the design 
base shear. 


4.9 Height of Floor ( h; ) — It is the difference in 
levels between the base of the structure and that of 
floor i. 


4.10 Height of Structure ( h ) — It is the difference 
in levels between its base and its highest level. 


4.11 Horizontal Bracing System — It is a horizontal 
truss system that serves the same function as a 
diaphragm. 


4.12 Joint — It is the portion of the column that is 
common to other members, for example, beams framing 
into it. 

4.13 Lateral Force Resisting Element — It is part 


of the structural system assigned to resist lateral forces. 


4.14 Moment-Resisting Frame — It is a frame in 
which members and joints are capable of resisting 
forces primarily by flexure. 


4.14.1 Ordinary Moment-Resisting Frame (OMRF) — 
It is a moment-resisting frame not meeting special 
detailing requirements for ductile behaviour. 


4.14.2. Special Moment-Resisting Frame (SMRF) — 
It is a moment-resisting frame specially detailed to 
provide ductile behaviour and comply with the 
requirements given in IS 4326 as well as IS 13920 or 
IS 800 (limit state design). 


4.15 Number of Storey (n) — Number of storey of a 
structure is the number of levels above the base. This 
excludes the basement storey, where basement walls 
are connected with the ground floor deck or fitted 
between the structure columns. But, it includes the 
basement storeys, when they are not so connected. 


4.16 Principal Axes — Principal axes of a structure 
are generally two mutually perpendicular horizontal 
directions in plan of a structure along which the 
geometry of the structure is oriented. 


4.17 P-A Effect — It is the secondary effect on shears 
and moments of frame members due to action of the 
vertical loads, interacting with the lateral displacement 
of structure resulting from seismic forces. 


4.18 Shear Wall — It is a wall designed to resist lateral 
forces acting in its own plane. 


4.19 Soft Storey — It is one in which the lateral 
stiffness is less than 60 percent of that in the storey 
above or less than 70 percent of the average lateral 
stiffness of the three storey above. 


4.20 Static Eccentricity ( e; ) — It is the distance 
between centre of mass and centre of rigidity of floor i. 


4.21 Storey — It is the space between two adjacent 
floors. 


4.22 Storey Drift — It is the displacement of one level 
relative to the other level above or below. 


4.23 Storey Shear ( V; ) — It is the sum of design 
lateral forces at all levels above the storey under 
consideration. 


4.24 Weak Storey — It is one in which the storey 
lateral strength is less than 70 percent of that in the 
storey above. The storey lateral strength is the total 
strength of all seismic force resisting elements sharing 
the storey shear in the considered direction 


4.25 Combined Structures — A structure with lateral 
load resisting elements constructed from a combination 
of reinforced/pre-stressed concrete and structural steel. 


5 SYMBOLS 


Symbols and notations applicable to both Section 1 
and Section 2 are given as under: 


Tl= Q a 


Area of cross-section at the base of 
the structural shell 


Design horizontal seismic coefficient 


Floor plan dimension of floor i, 
perpendicular to direction of force 


Index for closely spaced modes 


Complete quadratic combination 
method 


Coefficient depending upon the 
slenderness ratio of the structure 


Coefficient of shear force depending 
on slenderness ratio, k 


Thickness of pile cap, raft or open 
foundation 


Maximum lateral deflection 
Distribution factors for shear 
Distribution factors for moment 
Response quantity due to dead load 
Design eccentricity at floor, i 

Static eccentricity at floor, i 
Modulus of elasticity of pile material 


Modulus of elasticity of material of 
the structural shell 


Response quantity due to earthquake 
load 


Response quantity due to earthquake 
loads in X-direction 


Response quantity due to earthquake 
loads in Y-direction 


Response quantity due to earthquake 
loads in Z-direction 


Acceleration due to gravity 
Shear modulus of soil = pV? 
Height of structure above the base 


Height of centre of gravity of structure 
above base 


Importance factor 


Response quantity due to imposed 
loads 


Moment of inertia of pile section 
Slenderness ratio 

Horizontal stiffness 

Rocking stiffness 

Mass matrix of the structural system 
Mass matrix of the primary system 
Maximum considered earthquake 


Total mass of all the equipment that 
are flexible mounted at different 
locations in the structure 


IS 1893 (Part 4) : 2015 


Modal mass of mode, r 


Total mass of all the equipment that 
are rigidly mounted at different 
locations in the structure 


Total mass of structural system, which 
supports secondary system 


Number of piles 
Number of locations of lumped weight 


Standard penetration test value (SPT 
Value) of the soil 


Response reduction factor 
Number of modes being considered 
Radius of circular raft foundation 


Radius of gyration of the structural 
shell at the base section 


Spectral acceleration 

Spectral acceleration coefficient 
Super imposed dead loads 
Square root of sum of squares 


Undamped natural period of vibration 
of the structure 


Characteristic length of pile 


Influence vector-displacement vector 
of the structural system 


Shear wave velocity of the medium 
Seismic weight of floor i 


Total weight of the structure including 
weight of lining and contents above 
the base 


Zone factor 
jth Normalized mode shape 


Mode shape coefficient at floor, i, in 
Mode, k 


Mode vector value from the primary 
system’s modal displacement at the 
location where the secondary system 
is connected 


Poisson’s ratio of soil 


Modulus of sub-grade reaction of soil 
in horizontal direction 


Peak response quantity due to closely 
spaced modes 


Cross-modal correlation co-efficient 
Modal damping ratio 

Frequency ratio = @/@; 

Absolute value of response quantity 
in mode k 


Peak response due to all modes 
considered 


IS 1893 (Part 4) : 2015 


DI — Mode participation factor 


ker 
| 


Maximum value of deflection 


6, — Lateral static deflection under its own 
lumped weight ati" location (chimney 
weight lumped at 10 or more 


locations) 
W, — Circular frequency, in rad/s, in i'^ 
mode 
Ai, Àj M — Response quantity in mode i, j, k 
respectively 
Oi, dp 6, — Maximum value of deflection in X, Y, 


Z direction, respectively 


6 GENERAL PRINCIPLES 


6.1 Ground Motion 


6.1.1 The characteristics (intensity, duration, etc) of 
seismic ground vibrations expected at any location 
depends upon the magnitude of earthquake, its depth 
of focus, distance from the epicentre, characteristics 
of the path through which the seismic waves travel, 
and the soil strata on which the structure stands. The 
random earthquake ground motion, which causes the 
structures to vibrate, can be resolved in any three 
mutually perpendicular directions. The predominant 
direction of ground vibration is horizontal. 


Earthquake generated vertical inertia forces are to be 
considered in design unless checked and proven to be 
not significant. Vertical acceleration should be 
considered in structures with large spans, those in 
which stability is a criterion for design, or for overall 
stability analysis of structures. Reduction in gravity 
force due to vertical component of ground motions can 
be particularly detrimental in cases of pre-stressed 
horizontal members and of cantilevered members. 
Hence, special attention should be paid to the effect of 
vertical component of the ground motion on pre- 
stressed or cantilevered beams, girders and slabs. 
Wherever necessary, the span to effective depth ratios 
shall be modified as per IS 456. 


6.1.2 The response of a structure to ground vibrations 
is a function of the nature of foundations, soil, 
materials, form, size and mode of construction of 
structures; and the duration and characteristics of 
ground motion. This standard specifies design forces 
for structures standing on rocks or soils, which do not 
settle, liquefy or slide due to loss of strength during 
vibrations. 


6.1.3 The design approach adopted in this standard is 
to ensure that structures possess minimum strength to 
withstand minor earthquakes (<DBE) that occur 
frequently, without damage; resist moderate 


earthquakes (DBE) without significant structural 
damage though some non-structural damage may 
occur; and withstand a major earthquake (MCE) 
without collapse. Actual forces that appear on structures 
during earthquakes are much greater than the design 
forces specified in this standard. However, ductility, 
arising from inelastic material behaviour and detailing, 
and over-strength, arising from the additional reserve 
strength in structures over and above the design 
strength, are relied upon to account for this difference 
in actual and design lateral forces. 


Reinforced and pre-stressed concrete members shall 
be suitably designed to ensure that premature failure 
due to shear or bond does not occur, subject to the 
provisions of IS 456 and IS 1343. Provisions for 
appropriate ductile detailing of reinforced concrete 
members are given in IS 13920. 


In steel structures, members and their connections 
should be so proportioned that high ductility is 
obtained, as specified in IS 800, avoiding premature 
failure due to elastic or inelastic buckling of any type. 


6.1.4 The design force specified in this standard shall 
be considered in each of the two principal horizontal 
directions of the structure and in vertical direction. 


6.1.5 Equipment and other systems, which are 
supported at various floor levels of the structure, shall 
be subjected to motions corresponding to vibration at 
their support points. In important cases, it may be 
necessary to obtain floor response spectra for analysis 
and design of equipment for example containers / 
vessels of hazardous or toxic materials/solids, liquids 
or gasses, shall be analysed using applicable floor 
response spectra. 


6.2 Assumptions 


The following assumptions are to be made in the 
earthquake resistant design of structures: 


a) Earthquake causes impulsive ground motions, 
which are complex and irregular in character, 
changing in period and amplitude each lasting 
for a small duration. Therefore, resonance of 
the type as visualized under steady-state 
sinusoidal excitations shall not occur, as it 
would need time to build up such amplitudes. 
NOTE — Exceptional, resonance-like conditions have 
been seen to occur between long distance waves and 


tall structures founded on deep soft soils. 


b) Earthquake is not likely to occur 
simultaneously with maximum wind or 
maximum flood or maximum sea waves. 

c) The value of elastic modulus of materials, 
wherever required, may be taken as for static 


analysis unless a more definite value is 
available for use in such condition (see IS 456, 
IS 800 and IS 1343). 


6.3 Increase in Permissible Stresses 
6.3.1 Increase in Permissible Stresses in Materials 


When earthguake forces are considered along with 
other normal design forces, the permissible stresses in 
material, in the working stress method of design, may 
be increased by one-third. However, for steels having 
a definite yield stress, the stress shall be limited to the 
yield stress, for steels without a definite yield point, 
the stress shall be limited to 80 percent of the ultimate 
strength or 0.2 percent proof stress, whichever is 
smaller; and that in pre-stressed concrete members, the 
tensile stress in the extreme fibers of the concrete may 
be permitted so as not to exceed two-thirds of the 
modulus of rupture of concrete. 


6.3.2 Increase in Allowable Pressures in Soils 


When earthguake forces are included, the allowable 
bearing pressure in soils shall be increased as per 
Table 1, depending upon type of foundation of the 
structure and the type of soil. 


In soil deposits consisting of submerged loose sands 
and soils falling under classification SP with standard 
penetration N values less than 15 in seismic zones III, 
IV, V and less than 10 in seismic zone II, the vibration 
caused by earthguake may cause liguefaction or 
excessive total and differential settlements. For specific 
sites, study should be conducted to determine its 
liguefaction potential on need basis. Specialist 
literature may be referred for liguefaction potential. 
Such sites should preferably be avoided while locating 
new settlements or important projects. Otherwise, this 
aspect of the problem needs to be investigated and 
appropriate methods of compaction or stabilization 
adopted to achieve suitable N values as indicated in 
Note 3 of Table 1. Alternatively, deep pile foundation 
may beprovided and taken to depths well into the layer, 
which is not likely to liguefy. Marine clays and other 
sensitive clays are also known to liguefy due to collapse 
of soil structure and will need special treatment 
according to site condition. 


Specialist literature may be referred for liguefaction 
potential, pile lateral and tensile resistance. 


7 DESIGN SPECTRUM 


7.1 For all-important projects, and all industries 
dealing with highly hazardous/toxic chemicals, 
evaluation of site-specific spectra for DBE and MCE 
is recommended. Such DBE site-specific spectra shall 
be considered as design spectra. 


NOTE — Standard specific design spectra as per 7.3.2, is 


IS 1893 (Part 4) : 2015 


to be taken as minimum for strength design of structures 
only. However, for structures with interconnected eguipment 
at one or more levels, where displacement is a governing 
parameter, use of site specific spectra shall be the governing 
criteria. 


7.2 For all other projects, where site-specific studies 
are not carried out, the standard (this code) specific 
spectra multiplied with zone factor as per 7.3.2 shall 
be considered as design spectra. 


NOTES 
1 Zone factors are given in Annex A. 


2 Standard specific spectra is given in Annex B. 
7.3 Design Horizontal Seismic Coefficient 


The horizontal seismic coefficient A, shall be obtained 
using the period T, described as under. 


7.3.1 When using site specific spectra for DBE, the 
seismic coefficient shall be calculated from the 
expression: 


S : ss 
where — = spectral acceleration coefficient 


corresponding to time period T of the structure. 


[For evaluation of Time Period ‘T’ of the structure 
(see 9.3, 14.1 and 14.2) as applicable]. 


7.3.2 When using standard specific spectra for DBE, 
the seismic co-efficient shall be calculated as under: 


NYANG I 
^ 2gR 
where 
Z = Zone factor corresponding to each zone is 
as given in Table 13 (Zone factors for some 
important towns are also listed in Annex D). 
S/g = Spectral acceleration coefficient value for 


rock and soil sites corresponding to period 
of structure T as shown in Fig. 1. These 
values are for 5 percent damping normalized 
to zero period acceleration equal to unity 
(ZPA =1).Values for other damping are 
obtained by multiplying factors as given in 
Table 14 (see Annex A). 


I = Importance factors (see Table 3 and Table 9). 
R = Response reduction factors (see Table 4 
and 10). 
NOTE — Ratio (//R) shall in no case be more than 1.0. 


T = Time period of the structure (see 9.3 and 
14). 


IS 1893 (Part 4) : 2015 


Table 1 Percentage of Permissible Increase in Allowable Bearing Pressure, Resistance of Soils 
(Clause 6.3.2 ) 


SI Foundation Type of Soil Mainly Constituting the foundation 
No. [Nen 
Type I Rock or Hard Soils — Well graded gravel and Type II Medium Soils — All Type III Soft 
sand gravel mixtures with or without clay binder, and soils with N between 10 and Soils — All soils 
clayey sands poorly graded or sand clay mixtures 30, and poorly graded sands other than SP 
(GB, CW, SB, SW and SC) having N above 30, where or gravelly sands with little or with N < 10 (see 
N is the standard penetration value (see Notes 1 and 2) no fines (SP) with N > 15 Note 6) 
d) 2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) Piles passing through 50 50 50 
any soil but resting on 
soil Type I 
ii) Piles not covered under — 25 25 
SI No. (i) 
iii) Raft foundations 50 50 50 
iv) Combined/Isolated RCC 50 25 25 
footings with tie beams 
v) Isolated RCC footing 50 25 — 
without tie beams, or 
unreinforced 
strip foundations 
vi) Well foundations 50 25 25 
NOTES 


1 The allowable bearing pressure shall be determined in accordance with IS 6403 or IS 1888. 


2 If any increase in bearing pressure has already been permitted for forces other than seismic forces, the total increase in allowable 
bearing pressure when seismic force is also included shall not exceed the limits specified above. 


3 Desirable minimum field values of N (after ground improvement) are as follows: 


SI Seismic Zone Depth below 
No. Ground Level 
m 
d) 2) (3) 
i) III, IV and V <5 
210 
ii) II s5 
210 


N Values 
(corrected) 


Remarks 


(4) (5) 


15 For values of depths between 5 m and 
25 10 m, linear interpolation is 
15 recommended. 

20 


If soils of smaller N values are met, compaction may be adopted to achieve these values or deep pile foundations going to stronger 


strata should be used. 


4 The piles should be designed for lateral loads neglecting lateral resistance of soil layers liable to liguefy 
5 See IS 1498, IS 2131, IS 6403 and IS 1888 for soil classification, tests on them. 


6 Isolated RCC footing without tie beams or unreinforced strip foundation shall not be permitted in soft soils with N « 10. 


7.4 Design Vertical Seismic Coefficient 


Vertical acceleration values are to be taken as 2/3 of 
the horizontal acceleration values. 


SECTION 1 INDUSTRIAL STRUCTURES 
8 DESIGN CRITERIA 


8.1 Categorization of Structures 


To perform well in an earthguake, the industrial 
structure should possess adeguate strength, stiffness, 
and ductility. Generally, structures have large capacities 
of energy absorption in its inelastic region. 


Structures are classified into the following 4 categories: 


a) Category 1 — Structures whose failure can 
cause conditions that can lead directly or 


indirectly to extensive loss of life/property to 
population at large in the areas adjacent to 
the plant complex. 


b) Category 2 — Structures whose failure can 
cause conditions that can lead directly or 
indirectly to serious fire hazards/extensive 
damage within the plant complex. Structures, 
which are reguired to handle emergencies 
immediately after an earthguake, are also 
included. 

c) Category 3 — Structures whose failure, 
although expensive, does not lead to serious 
hazard within the plant complex. 


d) Category 4 — All other structures. 


Typical categorization of industrial structures is given 
in Table 6. 


NOTES 


1 The term failure used in the definition of categories implies 
loss of function and not complete collapse. 


2 Pressurized eguipment where cracking can lead to rupture 
may be categorized by the conseguences of rupture. 


3 Structures which are ductile detailed as per IS 13920 orIS 800 
and eguipment which are made of ductile materials can 
withstand earthguakes many fold higher than the design spectra 
without collapse, and damage in such cases is restricted to 
cracking only. 


8.2 Design Loads 

8.2.1 Dead Load (DL) 

These shall be taken as per IS 875 (Part 1). 
8.2.2 Super Imposed Dead Loads (SIDL) 


Industrial structures contain several equipment and 
associated auxiliaries and accessories that are 
permanently mounted on the structures. These loads 
shall be taken in accordance with equipment 
specifications. 
NOTE — These loads may be provisional, that is, during service 
some of SIDL (or in few bays) may be smaller or negligible. 


Such variations should be accounted in the design of individual 
members. 


8.2.3 Imposed Loads (IL) 
These shall be taken as per IS 875 (Part 2). 


IS 1893 (Part 4) : 2015 


8.2.4 Earthquake Loads ( EL ) 


Earthquake force estimation, analysis and design for 
various categories of structures shall be done as per 
details given in Table 2. 


8.3 Load Combinations 


When earthquake loads are considered on a structure, 
the response quantities (namely member forces, 
displacements, storey forces, shears, base reactions, 
etc) due to Dead Load (DL), Imposed Load (IL), super 
imposed dead loads (SZDL) and design earthquake load 
(EL) shall be combined as per 8.3.1 and 8.3.2. 


8.3.1 Load Factors for Plastic Design of Steel 
Structures 


In the plastic design of steel structures, the following 
load combinations shall be accounted for: 


a) 1.7(DL+SIDL + IL) 
b) 1.7 (DL + SIDL) + 1.7 EL 


c) 1.3 (DL + SIDL + IL + EL) 


NOTE — Imposed load (IL) in load combination shall not 
include erection loads and crane payload. 


8.3.2 Partial Safety Factors for Limit State Design of 
Reinforced Concrete and Pre-Stressed Concrete 
Structures 


Table 2 Earthquake Force Estimation, Method of Analysis and Design for Various 
Categories of Structures 


(Clause 8.2.4) 


Structure Earthquake Force Estimation Method of Minimum Lateral Force 
Category (Percent of Seismic 
(see 8.1) Weight W) for Different 
Zones 
YA Aa 
Seismic Damping Method of Calculating Structural Structural II HI IV V 
Hazard Natural Period Analysis Design 
Assessment 
Method 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8 (9) (10) 
1 t T T 1 T 2.00 2.75 4.00 6.00 
Site specific/ 5 percent (See 9.3; 14.1 and (1) Linear for Limit state 
standard for RC 14.2) design, design as 
specific seismic = structures Modal analysis with all and per IS 456 
hazard and 2% for _ stiffnesses of the lateral (2) Non- for RC, 
assessment as steel as well as verticalload ^ linear time and 
per 7. structures resisting members and history plastic 
(see 9.4 Masses of the building ^ analysis for ^ design as 
and 15) modelled verification of per IS 800 
(For preliminary time mechanism for steel 
period estimation see 
3.2) 
2 1.50 2.00 3.00 4.50 
3 1.25 1.75 2.50 3.75 
4 1.00 1.50 2.00 3.00 


IS 1893 (Part 4) : 2015 


In the limit state design of reinforced and pre-stressed 
concrete structures, the following load combinations 
shall be accounted for: 


a) 1.5 (DL + SIDL + IL) 

b) 1.2 (DL SIDL 4 IL & EL) 
c) 1.5 (DL + SIDL + EL) 

d) 1.5 (0.6 DL + EL) 


NOTE — Imposed load (IL) in load combination shall not 
include erection load and crane payload. 


8.3.2.1 In case of industrial structures, the plan wise 
distribution of mass and stiffness of the structural system 
may or may not be symmetrical about two lateral 
directions that is, X and Y directions (Z axis being 
vertical). When responses from the three earthquake 
components are to be considered, the response due to 
each component may be combined as under. 


8.3.2.1.1 Where the plan wise distribution of mass and 
stiffness of the structural system is not symmetrical about 
two lateral (X and Y) directions, the response due to 
each component may be combined using the assumption 
that when the maximum response from one component 
occurs, the responses from the other two components 
are 30 percent of the corresponding maximum. 


All possible combinations of the three components 
(EL,, EL,, EL,) including variations in sign (plus or 
minus) shall be considered. Thus, the response due to 
earthquake force (EL) is the maximum of the following 
cases: 


EL 


X 


+0.3EL, & 0.3EL, 
EL, &0.3EL, + 0.3EL, 
EL, £0.3EL, £0.3EL, 


EL= 


As an alternative to the procedure in 8.3.2.1, the 
response (EL) due to the combined effect of the three 
components can be obtained on the basis of square 
root of the sum of the squares (SRSS), that is 


eu [erm (en) 


8.3.2.1.2 Where the plan wise distribution of mass and 
stiffness of the structural system is symmetrical about 
two lateral directions that is X and Y directions, the 
structure shall be designed for the effects due to full 
design earthquake load in one horizontal direction at a 
time. 


Thus, the response due to earthquake force (EL) is the 
maximum of the following cases: 


+EL, +0.3 EL, 
+EL, +0.3EL, 
+EL, +(0.3EL, or +0.3EL, ) 


EL 


10 


NOTE — The combination procedures of 8.3.2.1.1 and 8.3.2.1.2 
apply to the same response quantity (say, moment in a column 
about its major axis, or storey shear in a frame) due to different 
components of the ground motion. These combinations are to 
be made at the member force/stress levels. 


8.4 Seismic Weight 
8.4.1 Seismic Weight of Floor 


Seismic weight of each floor is its full Dead Load (DL) 
+ Superimposed Dead Load (SIDL) + appropriate 
amount of Imposed Load (IL). Weight of piping, cable 
trays, any other such utility that runs across the floors 
shall be included in the seismic weight of upper and 
lower floors using law of statics. 


8.4.2 Seismic Weight of Structure 


Seismic weight of structure is sum of seismic weight 
of each floor. 


8.5 Importance Factor (I) 


It is relative importance assigned to a structure to take 
into account consequences of its damage. Importance 
factors for structures in different categories are given 
in Table 3. Higher importance factor may however be 
assigned to different structures at the discretion of the 
project authorities. 


Table 3 Importance Factor J for Various 
Categories of Industrial structures 


(Clause 8.5) 


SI Categories of Structures Importance Factor” 
No. (see 8.1) I 

(1) Q) (3) 

i) Category 1 2.00 

ii) Category 2 1.50 

iii) Category 3 1.25 

iv) Category 4 1.00 


D Whenever structures are analyzed for site specific spectra 
corresponding to MCE, importance factor shall be considered 
as unity for all structures. 


8.5.1 Categorization of individual structure and 
components applicable to all typical industries are 
given in Table 6. 


8.6 Response Reduction factor (R) 


Response reduction factor, R takes into account the 
margins of safety, over strength redundancy and 
ductility of the structure. For industrial structures, 
response reduction factor is given in Table 4. These 
factors shall be used only for steel and RCC structures/ 
support structures and not for design of equipment. 
For equipment (//R) = 1 is recommended. 


9 MATHEMATICAL MODELLING 


9.1 Modelling Requirements 


The mathematical model of the physical structure/ 


Table 4 Response Reduction Factor”, R for 
Industrial Structures 


(Clause 8.6) 


SI Lateral Load Resisting System R 
No. (2) (3) 
(1) 
i) Building frame systems: 
a) Ordinary RC moment - Resisting frame 3.0 
(OMRF)? 
b) Special RC moment - Resisting frame 5.0 
(SMRF)" 
C) Steel frame : 
1) with concentric braces 4.0 
2) with eccentric braces 5.0 
3) Special moment resisting frame designed 3.0 
as per IS 800 without ductile detailing 
4) Steel special concentric braced frame 4.5 
designed as per IS 800 (limit state 
design) 
ii) Building with shear walls”: 
a) Load bearing masonry wall buildings”: 
1)  Un-reinforced L5 
2) Reinforced with horizontal RC bands 2:5 
3) Reinforced with horizontal RC bands 3.0 
and vertical bars at corners of rooms 
and jambs of openings 
b) Ordinary reinforced concrete shear walls? 3.0 
c) Ductile shear walls” 4.0 
iii) Buildings with dual systems ?*: 
a) Ordinary shear wall with OMRF 3.0 
b) Ordinary shear wall with SMRF 4.0 
c) Ductile shear wall with OMRF 4.5 
d) Ductile shear wall with SMRF 5.0 


D The values of response reduction factors are to be used for 
structures with lateral load resisting elements, and not just for 
the lateral load resisting elements built in isolation. 


2 OMRF are those designed and detailed as per IS 456 or IS 800 
(see 4.15.1). 
3 SMRF has been defined in 4.15.2. 
? Buildings with shear walls also include buildings having shear 
walls and frames, but where: 

a) frames are not designed to carry lateral loads, or 


b) frames are designed to carry lateral loads but do not 
fulfill the requirements of ‘Dual-System’. 


3 Reinforcement should be as per IS 4326. 
9 Prohibited in Zones IV and V. 


” Ductile shear walls are those designed and detailed as per IS 
13920. 

5 Buildings with dual systems consist of shear walls (or braced 
frames) and moment resisting frames such that, 

a) the two systems are designed to resist the total design 
force in proportion to their lateral stiffness considering 
the interaction of the dual system at all floor levels; 
and 

b) the moment resisting frames are designed to 

independently resist at least 25 percent of the design 
seismic base shear. 


equipment shall include all elements of the lateral 
force-resisting system. The model shall also include 
the stiffness and strength of elements, which are 
significant to the distribution of forces. The model shall 
properly represent the spatial distribution of the mass 


11 


IS 1893 (Part 4) : 2015 


and stiffness of the structures as well as mass of 
eguipment, cable trays and piping system along with 
associated accessories. Fifty percent (50 percent) of 
the imposed load shall also be included as suitably 
distributed mass on the structure. 


9.1.1 Soil-Structure Interaction 


The soil-structure interaction refers to the effects of 
the supporting foundation medium on the motion of 
Structure. The soil-structure interaction may not be 
considered in the seismic analysis for structures 
supported on rock or hard soil or rock-like material 
(N > 50, V, = 760 m/s). 


9.2 Interaction Effects between Structure and 
Equipment 


Interaction effects between structure (primary system) 
and equipment (secondary system), for Categories 2, 
3 and 4 structures, shall be considered as per 9.2.1 and 
for Category 1 structures as per 9.2.2. 


9.2.1 For Category 2, 3 and 4 structures, interaction 
effects between structure and equipment shall be 
considered as under: 


For the purpose of this clause, the following notations 
shall be used: 


Ms total mass of the primary system (structural 
system) on which the secondary system is 
supported, 

M, = total mass of all the equipment that are 
rigidly mounted at different locations in the 


structure, and 
total mass of all the equipment that are 


flexible mounted (on isolators) at different 
locations in the structure. 


Mx 


9.2.1.1 Wherever equipment are rigidly fastened to the 
floor, the equipment mass (Mp) shall be taken as lumped 
mass at appropriate locations. No interaction between 
the structures and eguipment shall be considered. 


9.2.1.2. For flexible mounted equipment, if 


— = «0.25 no interaction between the structures 
M +M} 


and equipment shall be considered. In such a case Mp 
should be considered as lumped mass at appropriate 
locations (decoupled analysis). 


M 5 : 
— E 25 0.25 interaction between the 


M.M, 
isolators (Flexible mount for support of eguipment) 
and the structure shall be considered by suitably 
modeling the isolators support system while 
considering the equipment as lumped mass (coupled 


analysis). 


921.3 If 


IS 1893 (Part 4) : 2015 


9.2.2 For Category 1 structures, decoupling criteria as 
given in Annex C shall be used for the interaction 
effects between primary system (structure) and 
secondary system (eguipment). 


9.3 Time Period Estimation 


The time period of different industrial structures would 
vary considerably depending upon structural 
configuration, height of the structure, soil conditions and 
appropriate percent of imposed load. Any generalized 
formulae, for time period evaluation, may not cover all 
such structures and may lead to erroneous results in 
certain cases. Hence, no simple guidelines can be given 
for estimation of time period of industrial structures. 


NOTES 


1 Formulae given in IS 1893 (Part 1), for estimation of time 
period for buildings (see 7.6) are not applicable for Industrial 
structures 


2 There is no need to increase base shear, V,,/V,, for industrial 
structures. 


9.3.1 The time period shall be estimated based on 
Eigen-value analysis of the structural mathematical 
model developed in accordance with 9.1 and 9.2. 


9.3.2 For preliminary design, the time period can be 
established based on its static deflection under mass 
proportional loading in each of the three principal 
directions. The structure is analysed by applying a force 
egual to the weight of the structure/eguipment at each 
corresponding node in X, Y or Z direction (one at a 
time) and corresponding deflection 8 is evaluated in 
X, Y and Z direction. Where the founding soil is soft 
soil, the effect of the same shall also be considered in 
the model for estimates for static deflection. 


The time period 7, would then be: 


T= an 
g 


Where 6 is the maximum value of deflection of the 
structure out of 6, , 6,, 6, and ‘g’ is acceleration due to 
gravity in the corresponding unit. 


9.4 Damping 


The damping factor to be used in determining spectral 
acceleration coefficient (S,/g) depends upon the 
material and type of construction of the structure and 
the strain level. The recommended damping factors are 
given in Table 5. 


10 DYNAMIC ANALYSIS 


Dynamic analysis shall be performed for the three 
orthogonal (two horizontal and one vertical) components 
of earthquake motion resulting in evaluation of 
earthquake loads EL,, EL,, EL, on the structure. The 
influence of P — A effect (see 10.3) as well as Torsion 
(see 10.4) shall also be included in the analysis. 


12 


Detailed analysis (see 10.1) shall be carried out for, 


a) structures of Category 1, in all Seismic Zones. 

b) structures of Category 2 in Seismic Zones III, 
IV and V. 

c) structures of Category 3 in Seismic Zones IV 
and V. 

Simplified analysis (see 10.2) shall be carried out for, 

1) structures of Category 2 in Seismic Zones II. 

2) structures of Category 3 in Seismic Zones II 
and III. 

3) structures of Category 4 in all Seismic Zones. 


NOTE — Those Category 4 structures, which could be 
identified as buildings, may as well be analyzed in accordance 
with the provisions of IS 1893 (Part 1). 


Table 5 Damping Ratio coefficients for Different 
Construction Materials 


(Clause 9.4) 


SI Material DBE MCE 
No. 
W Q) G @) 
i) Aluminium 0.02 0.04 
ii) Steel 0.02 0.04 
iii) Reinforced concrete 0.05 0.07 
iv) Pre-stressed concrete 0.03 0.05 
v) Water and other liquids (contained in tanks) 0.005 0.005 
vi) Granular materials contained in tanks 0.10 0.10 
NOTES 


1 For combined structures, damping ratio coefficient shall be 
determined based on well established procedures, if a composite 
damping ratio coefficient is not evaluated, it shall be taken as 
that corresponding to material having lower damping. 


2 For other liquids in sloshing mode, specific literature may 
be referred. 


3 Structure/equipment resting directly on soil, above damping 
may be enhanced appropriately. 


4 For equipment, storage tanks and piping system reference 
may be made to specialist literature for damping. 


10.1 Detailed Analysis 


Detailed analysis (Dynamic analysis) may be 
performed either by the time history analysis method 
or by response spectrum analysis method. 


10.1.1 7ime-History Analysis Method 


Non-linear time-history analysis of structures subjected 
to seismic loads shall be performed for study of safety 
against collapse. For generation of floor response 
spectra for use in design of secondary systems like 
piping, equipment supports, etc, time history analysis 
shall be performed for DBE using linear analysis 
technique. The analysis shall be based on well- 
established procedures. Both, “direct solutions’ of the 
eguations of motion or modal superposition method, 
can be used for this purpose. 


10.1.2 Response Spectrum Analysis Method 


Response spectrum analysis shall be performed using 
the design spectrum. 


10.1.3 Sufficiently large number of modes shall be used 
for both time history as well as response spectrum 
analysis to include the influence of at least 90 percent 
of the total seismic mass. The modal seismic mass shall 
be calculated as per the provisions of 10.1.4. 


10.1.4 Modal Mass 


The modal mass M, in mode ‘k’ is given as: 


where 
g = acceleration due to gravity, 
dik = mode shape coefficient at floor i, in mode k, 
W, = seismic weight of floor i of the structure, 
and 
n = number of floors of the structure. 


10.1.5 Modal Combination 


The peak response quantities should be combined as 
per ‘complete quadratic combination’ (CQC) method 
as follows: 


i= 2:2 «p, 
i=l j= 
where 
à = peak response quantity; 
A, = response quantity, in mode i (including 
sign); 
A; = response quantity, in mode j (including 
sign); 
Pj = cross-modal correlation co-efficient; 
SC (e p^ 
' (-Py +4078 (1+) 
r = number of modes being considered; 
G = modal damping coefficient as specified in 
9.4; 
TEE 
B = frequency ratio= — 
€ in jih : 
6; = circular frequency, in j" mode; and 


13 


IS 1893 (Part 4) : 2015 


Q; circular frequency, in i mode. 
Alternatively, the peak response quantities may be 


combined as follows: 


a) Ifthe structure does not have closely-spaced 
modes, then the peak response quantity (A) 
due to all modes considered shall be obtained 
as: 


where 
A4 = absolute value of response quantity, in mode 
k; and 
r = number of modes being considered 


b) If the structure has a few closely-spaced 
modes (see 3.1), then the peak response 
quantity A" due to these modes shall be 
obtained as : 


where 


A 


c 


absolute value of quantity, in closely spaced 
mode c (The summation is for the closely 
spaced modes only). This peak response 
quantity due to the closely spaced modes 
(A*) is then combined with those of the 
remaining well-separated modes by the 


method described in 10.1.5 (a). 


10.2 Simplified Analysis 


Simplified analysis shall be carried out by applying 
equivalent static seismic forces along each of the three 
principal directions one at a time. The horizontal 
seismic coefficient A, shall be determined in 
accordance with 7.3.1 for site specific DBE spectra or 
7.3.2 for standard specific spectra as the case may be 
using time period 7 as per 9.3.2. 


S, I 
a) For site specific spectra for DBE, A, = WR 


ZS,I 

2 g R 
Vertical acceleration values shall be taken as 2/3 of 
horizontal acceleration values. 


b) For standard specific spectra, A, = 


The seismic force at each node in each of the three 
directions shall be equal the product of its mass and 
corresponding seismic coefficient. 


10.3 P — A Effect 


Structures in all categories and in all zones shall be 
analysed to take into account the influence of P — A 
effect. 


IS 1893 (Part 4) : 2015 


10.4 Torsion 


The effect of accidental eccentricity shall be 
considered only for structures of category 4 in all 
seismic zones. 


This effect shall be considered for with rigid floors/ 
diaphragms. This shall be applied as an additional 
torsional moment egual to product of the seismic force 
at floor level and 5 percent of the structure dimension 
perpendicular to the earthquake direction at the centre 
of mass of the floor. 


10.4.1 The design eccentricity e,;, to be used at floor i, 
shall be taken as: 


= Ita) 


; 1.5 e, 40.05 b, 
di — (b) 


e-005 b ^| 


Analysis is to be done for both the cases and at the 
member force level, whichever gives more severe effect 
is to be considered. 


e; = Static eccentricity at floor i, defined as the 
distance between center of mass and center 
of rigidity 

b; = floor plan dimension of floor i perpendicular 


to direction of force 


The factor 1.5 represents dynamic amplification factor, 
while the factor 0.05 represents the extent of accidental 
eccentricity. 


NOTES 


1 For the purpose of this clause, all steel or aluminium flooring 
system may be considered as flexible unless properly designed 
floor bracings have been provided. 


2 RCC flooring systems in steel structures shall be 
considered flexible unless properly designed floor bracings 
are provided. 


3 Reinforced concrete flooring system at a level shall be 
considered rigid only, if the total area of all the cut-outs at that 
level is less than 25 percent of its plan floor area. 


11 DEFORMATIONS 


11.1 Drift Limitations 


The storey drift in any storey due to the minimum 
specified design lateral force, with partial load factor 
of 1.0, shall not exceed 0.004 times the storey height. 
There shall be no drift limit for single storey 
structure which has been designed to accommodate 
storey drift. 


14 


11.2 Separation Between Adjacent Units 


Two adjacent buildings, or adjacent units of the same 
structure with separation joint in between shall be 
separated by a distance equal to the amount R 
(Reduction factor) times the absolute sum of the 
maximum calculated storey displacements as per 11.1 
of each of them, to avoid damaging contact when the 
two units deflect towards each other. When floor levels 
of two adjacent units or structures are at the same 
elevation levels, separation distance shall be R/2 times 
the absolute sum of the maximum calculated storey 
displacements #25 mm. 


12 MISCELLANEOUS 


12.1 Foundations 


The stability of foundations vulnerable to significant 
differential settlement and or overturning due to ground 
shaking shall be checked for structures in Seismic 
Zones III, IV and V. In Seismic Zones IV and V, 
individual spread footings or pile caps shall be 
interconnected with ties (see 5.3.4.1 of IS 4326) except 
when individual spread footings are directly supported 
on rock. All ties shall be capable of carrying, in tension 
and in compression, an axial force equal to A,/4 times 
the larger of the column or pile cap load, in addition to 
the otherwise computed forces. Here, A, is design 
horizontal acceleration coefficient evaluated as per 10.1 
or 10.2. 


12.2 Cantilever Projections 
12.2.1 Vertical Projections 


Towers, tanks, parapets and other vertical cantilever 
projections attached to structures and projecting above 
the roof, shall be designed for five times the design 
horizontal acceleration spectrum value specified 
in 7.3.1 and 7.3.2. 


12.2.2 Horizontal Projections 


All horizontal projections like cornices and balconies 
shall be designed for five times the design vertical 
acceleration spectrum value specified in 7.4. 


12.2.3 The increased design forces specified in 12.2.1 
and 12.2.2 are only for designing the projecting parts 
and their connections with the main structures. For the 
design of the main structure, such increase shall not 
be considered. 


IS 1893 (Part 4) : 2015 


Table 6 Categorization of Industrial Structures Table 6 — (Continued) 
(Typical) SI No. Structures/Eguipment Category 
(Clause 8.1) (1) (2) (3) 
ERE TNR NUN PN I a e NU ULL Condensate polishing, RO plant, Cooling water system, 
SI No. Structures/Equipment Category Fire protection/Extinguishing, Fighting system, Air 
(1) (2) (3) separation unit, Nitrogen/Oxygen plant, Fume and 
i) Main Plants/Process Plants a a plant, Captive power plant, Service 
e P TAN E Plant, Chemical, Fertilizer and 1) Acid/Alkali storage tank 2 
stature Plants ele) 2) Air pre-heaters, tempered water cooler/drum, pre/ 3 


1) Bagging and palletizing building 
2) Boiler and boiler house 

3) Compressor/Expander foundation 
4) Compressor house 

5) Control building (Power Plant) 6) Ash dyke 

6) Control building/Satellite Rack Room 7) Ash water pump house 


: inter/after condenser, coalescer 
2 
2 
2 
2 
7) Converters : 8) Ash water re-circulation building 
2 
2 
2 
2 


3) Air washer pump house 
4) Air/Nitrogen compressor foundation 
5) Ash collection silos 


8) Generator building/House 9) Ash/slurry pump house 

9) Generator transformer 10) Boiler and boiler house 

10) Heater/furnace 11) Chiller plant 

11) Heaters with steel stack 12) Coal ball mill 

12) Horizontal vessel/heat exchanger/filter, coalescer/ 13) Coal bunker/silo 
desalter, air fin cooler/flash drum 14) Coal handling plant 


— e — — U) U) NY U9 UC) C9 C9 b2 4 UC b2 b2 C29 R2 4 4d UC) C2 b2 4 


13) Main plant building (TD, BFP including bunker bay) 2 15) Coal slurry settling pond 

14) Machine foundations of main plant (Turbo generator, 2 16) Compressor house, turbine house 
Turbo compressor, pumps, fans, mills, etc) 17) Condenser polishing unit 

15) Pipe rack with or without deaerator, Air fin coolers, 2 18) Control and instrumentation building 
Two phase flow Lines 19) Conveyor galleries 

16) Piping 2 20) Cooling towers (wet and dry) 

17) Polymerization, extrusion building 2 21) Corex gas station (for co-generation plant) 

18) Process building closed/open conforming to 1 22) Crusher house 
Note 1 23) Crushers 

19) Process building closed/open conforming to 2 24) Cryogenic hydro-carbon handling/dozing building 
Note 2 25) Cryogenic hydro-carbon storage (Bulk storage) 

20) Process column on elevated structures Including 1 26) Cryogenic hydro-carbon storage (Day consumption) 
supporting structures conforming to Note 1. 27) Cryogenic storage tanks/vessel with hazardous/toxic 

21) Process column on elevated structures Including 2 refrigerated liquefied gases conforming to Note 1 
supporting structures conforming to Note 2. 28) Cryogenic storage tanks/vessel with refrigerated 1 

22) Process column/vessel/reactors or any other 1 liquefied gases (Day tanks) conforming to Note 2 
equipment on low RCC pedestal conforming to 29) DCP/Deludge building 
Note 1. 30) DG building and DG foundation 

23) Process column/vessel/reactors/separator/dryer or 2 31) Digester 


32) Dirty and clean oil building 

33) DM plant 

34) Effluent treatment plant 

35) Electro static precipitator- ESP 

2 36) Fans — PA, FD, GR and ID fans 
37) Filtration and chlorination plant 
38) Fire station 


any other equipments on low RCC pedestal 
conforming to Note 2. 

24) Reactor — Regenerator supporting structure 1 
conforming to Note 1. 

25) Reactor — Regenerator supporting structure 
conforming to Note 2. 


WWE WNRFNNNNNNNNWNNWNNNN NY 


26) Scrubber 2 . 
27) Settling, digestion tanks 2 39) fue aer pump house 
28) Sheds (tall and large span, high capacity cranes like 2 49) Fire water teservbiustarage- pink 
Pot roor. cast houses etc) 41) Flare knock out drum, water seal drum 
29) Smelters on RCC/steel structures 2 a a e PORE SEXES 
30) Storage silos (RCC/steel/aluminum) on elevated 2 . 
ak 2 44) Fuel oil pump house 
31) Storage silos/Bunker 2 45) Fuel oil storage tank and day tank 
rds 46) Gas holder conforming to Note 1 
32) Substation buildings z 47) Gas Holder conforming to Note 2 
33) Substation of power plant 2 48) Generator transformer 
34) Switch-gear building(Power plant) 2 49) H, plant building 
35) Switchyard structures : : 2 50) Main condensate storage tank 
36) Technological structures in RCC/steel supporting 1 51) Machine foundations for utilities (Motors, 
equipments conforming to see Note 1 1 compressor, pumps, fans, etc) 
37) Technological structures in RCC/steel supporting 2 52) Microwave towers 2 
equipments conforming to see Note 2 2 53) Nitrogen storage vessel, air receiver, chemical 2 
38) Track hopper 2 dosing vessel 
39) Transformers and radiator bank 2 54) Overhead water tank 3 
ii) Utilities 55) Pipe rack (Hydrogen, DM, power plant) 2 
[Water system (Intake, Conveying, Treatment, Storage and 56) Pipe rack offsite 3 
Pumping), ETP/STP/Waste water treatment plant, DM water, 57) Critical pipelines 2 


15 


IS 1893 (Part 4) : 2015 


Table 6 — (Concluded) 


SI No. Structures/Equipment Category 
(1) Q) (3) 
58) Piping 3 
59) Process gas compressor 2 
60) Pump house (Water and effluents, etc) 3 
61) Road/Rail loading gantry handling non-inflammable, 3 


non-hazardous material 
62) Road/Rail loading gantry handling LPG, hydrocarbon 2 
63) Switch-gear building/Substations 3 
64) Switchyard structures 3 
65) Technological structures in RCC/steel or both 2 
66) Transformers and radiator bank 3 
67) Wagon tippler 4 
68) Water Intake structure 3 
69) Water treatment plant 3 
70) Water/Effluent Storage tank (dome/cone roof) 3 
iii) Storage and handling 
(Raw material, Intermediate Product, Final Product, 
Bulk Storage of Chemicals): 
Bagging and palletizing 
Catalyst storage building 
Chemical house 
Cryogenic bulk storage tank (double walled) with 
refrigerated liquefied gases (e.g. ethylene, LNG, 
NH, etc.) 
Hazardous chemical house 
Hydrocarbon storage tanks (Cone/ Floating roof) 
Hydrocarbon storage tanks (Dome roof) 
Hydrogen bullet 
9) LPG storage shed 
10) Mounded LPG bullet 
11) Pipe rack 
12) Process water storage tank 
13) Product storage sheds/building 
14) Road/Rail loading gantry handling non- 
inflammable, non hazardous material 
15) Road/Rail loading gantry handling LPG, hydrocarbon 
16) Sphere/bullets storing hydrocarbon/with liquefied 
gases 
iv) Infrastructure 
(Administrative Block, Laboratory Building, Service 
Buildings, Road Crossings, etc) 
1) Administration building 
2) Bridges over rivers/canal/drain 
Canteen building 
Communication building/repeater station/ 
telephone exchange 
Gate and gate house 
Hospital 
Laboratory building, MCC Room 
Maintenance stores 
Maintenance Workshop 
10) Medical center/First aid center 
11) Other non-plant buildings and utility structures 
12) Service building 
13) Warehouse 


PWN WwW 


-N WWWNEPEPENNY 


NANA 


BHA NYHHWNA 


NOTES 

1 Equipment containing LPG, compressed gas of explosive 
nature or any other content whose failure/leakage can lead 
directly or indirectly to extensive loss of life/property to 
population at large in the areas adjacent to the plant complex. 


2 Equipment containing gases of explosive nature or any other 
content whose failure/leakage can lead directly or indirectly 
to serious fire hazards/extensive damage within the plant 
complex. Structures, which are required to handle emergencies 
immediately after an earthquake, are also included here. 


3 The above recommended category will be applicable to: 


16 


Design of equipment (listed above), its supporting structure 
and foundation. 


4 For the structures/equipment not included herein, the category 
shall be selected by the designer considering the classification 
defined in 8.1 


SECTION 2 STACK - LIKE STRUCTURES 


13 DESIGN CRITERIA 


Stack like structures are those in which the mass and 
stiffness is more or less uniformly distributed along 
the height. Cantilever structures like reinforced or pre- 
stressed cement concrete electric poles; reinforced 
concrete brick and steel chimneys (including multi- 
flue chimneys), ventilation stacks and refinery vessels 
are examples of such structures. Guyed structures are 
not covered here. 


14 TIME PERIOD OF VIBRATION 


Time period of vibration, T of such structures when 
fixed at base, shall be calculated using either of the 
following two formulae given (see 14.1 and 14.2). The 
formulae given at 14.1, is more accurate. Only one of 
these two formulae should be used for design. Time 
period of structure, if available, through vibration 
measurement on similar structure and foundation soil 
condition can also be adopted. 


14.1 The fundamental time period for stack like 
structures, ‘T’ is given by: 


Dein Ea 
s 
where 

C4 = coefficient depending upon the slenderness 
ratio of the structure given in Table 7, 

W, = total weight of the structure including weight 
of lining and contents above the base, 

h = height of structure above the base, 

E. = modulus of elasticity of material of the 
structural shell, 

A  - area of cross-section at the base of the 
structural shell, 
For circular sections, A = 21074, where r is 
the mean radius of structural shell and t is 
thickness, and 

g = acceleration due to gravity. 


NOTE — This formula is only applicable to stack-like structure 
in which the mass and stiffness are more or less uniformly 
distributed along the height. 


14.2 The fundamental time period, T of a stack like 
structure can be determined by Rayleigh's 
approximation for fundamental mode of vibration as 
follows : 


Te 2n 
Vers 
> wa, 

IS = E 


yw 
i=l 


where 

W, = weight lumped at i" location with the 
weights applied simultaneously with the 
force applied horizontally, 

6, = lateral static deflection under its own lumped 
weight at i location (chimney weight 
lumped at 10 or more locations), 

n = Number of locations of lumped weight, and 

g = Acceleration due to gravity. 

NOTES 


1 Any elastic analysis procedure like moment area theorem or 
matrix method may be used for determining the lateral static 
deflection d value. 


2 For determining the time period of vibration of structures 
resting on frames or skirts like bins, silos, hyperbolic cooling 
towers, refinery columns, only the formula given at 14.2 should 
be used. Approximate methods may be adopted to estimate 
the lateral stiffness of the frame or skirt in order to determine 
the lateral static deflection. Dynamic response spectrum modal 
analysis will be necessary in such cases. 


Table 7 Values of C} and C, 
(Clauses 14.1 and 17.1) 


SI k-hir, Coefficient C, Coefficient 
No. C, 
(1) Q) (3) (4) 

i) 5 14.4 1.02 
ii) 10 212 1.12 
iii) 15 29.6 1.19 
iv) 20 38.4 1.25 
v) 25 47.2 1.30 

vi) 30 56.0 1.35 
vii) 35 65.0 1.39 
viii) 40 73.8 1.43 

ix) 45 82.8 1.47 

x) 50 or more 1.8 k 1.50 

NOTES 


1 k = slenderness ratio, and 


2 r= radius of gyration of the structural shell at the base section 


15 DAMPING 


The damping factor to be used in determining S,/g 
depends upon the material and type of construction of 
the structure and the strain level. The following 
damping factors are recommended as guidance for 
different materials for fixed base condition and are 
given in the Table 8. 


17 


IS 1893 (Part 4) : 2015 


Table 8 Material Damping Factors for Design 
Basis Earthquake 


(Clause 15) 


SI No. Material For Design 
Earthquake 
(1) Q) (3) 
i Steel 0.05 
ii) Reinforced concrete 0.05 
iii) Brick masonry and plain concrete 0.07 


16 HORIZONTAL SEISMIC FORCE 


Using the period T, as indicated in 14, the horizontal 
seismic coefficient A, shall be obtained from the 
spectrum given in Fig. 1. 


The equivalent static lateral loads shall be determined 
from design acceleration spectrum value A,, calculated 
from the following equation (for site specific spectra 
(see 7.3.1) or standard specific spectra (see 7.3.2), as 


the case may be using time period T from 14.1 or 14.2. 
: s S, I 

For site specific spectra: A, = —— 

g R 


For standard specific spectra: A, = 


The horizontal earthquake force shall be assumed to 
act alone in one lateral direction at a time. 


The effects due to vertical component of earthquakes 
are generally small and can be ignored. The vertical 
seismic coefficient where applicable may be taken as 
2/3 of horizontal seismic coefficient, unless evidence 
of factor larger than above is available. 


The effect of earthquake and maximum wind on the 
structure shall not be considered simultaneously. 


Table 9 Importance Factor (I) Applicable to 


Stack Like Structures 
(Clauses 7.3.2 and 16) 
SI Type of Structure Category Importance 
No. Factor 
I 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Reinforced concrete ventilation 2 1.5 
stacks 
ii) Reinforced concrete chimneys 2 1.5 
iii) Reinforced brick masonry chimney 2 1:5 
for industry 
iv) Un-reinforced brick masonry 4 1.0 
chimney for industry 
v) Reinforced concrete T.V. towers 2 1.5 
vi) Electric/traffic light poles 4 1.0 
vii) Steel stack 2 1.5 
viii) Silos 2 1.5 


NOTE — The values of importance factor, (/) given in this 
table are for guidance. The designer may choose suitable values 
depending on the importance based on economy, strategy and 
other considerations. 


IS 1893 (Part 4) : 2015 


Table 10 Reduction Factor (R) Applicable to 
Stack Like Structures 


(Clauses 7.3.2 and 16) 


SI Type of Structure Reduction 

No. Factor, R 
(1) Q) (3) 
i) Reinforced concrete, T.V. tower 1.50 
ii) Reinforced concrete ventilation stack 1.50 
iii) Reinforced concrete chimney 1.50 
iv) Reinforced brick masonry chimney 1.25 
v) Steel chimney 2.00 
vi) Steelrefinery vessels 2.00 
vii) Un-reinforced brick masonry chimney 1.0 
viii) Reinforced electric/traffic pole 2.0 
ix) Silos 2.0 


17 DESIGN SHEAR FORCE AND MOMENT 


Either simplified method (that is equivalent static lateral 
force method) or the dynamic response spectrum modal 
analysis method is recommended for calculating the 
seismic forces developed in such structures. Site spectra 
compatible time history analysis may also be carried 
out instead of response spectrum analysis. 


17.1 Simplified Method (Equivalent Static Lateral 
Force Method) 


The simplified method can be used for stack like 
structures. The design shear force, V, and design 
bending moment, M for such structures at a distance x 
from the top, shall be calculated by the following 
formulae: 


slenderness ratio, k, given in Table 7; 


A, — design horizontal seismic coefficient 
determined in accordance with 16; 


E 
l 


total weight of structure including weight 
of lining and contents above the base; 


Eu 
| 


height of centre of gravity of structure above 
base: and 


= distribution factors for shear and moment 
respectively at a distance x from the top as 
given in Table 11. The expressions for these 
distribution for moment and shear along the 
height is given in Table 12 for use in 
computer program. 


va m 


The appropriate foundation soil and pile group stiffness 
are given in Table 13. 


17.2 Dynamic Response (Spectrum Modal 
Analysis) 


The dynamic analysis using response spectrum method 
should be carried out for important stack like structures. 
The number of mode to be considered in the analysis 
should be such that the minimum excited mass is 
90 percent. The modes could then be combined by 
modal combination of corresponding response like 
shear, moment, etc, as suggested in IS 1893 (Part 1). 
The detailed dynamic analysis using time history shall 
be required where analysis is based on site-specific 
response spectrum and compatible time history of 
ground motion. For combination of three-component 
motion (see 8.3.2.1). 


V=C A W.D, 17.2.1 Mathematical Model 
M=A,W, ID The mathematical model of stack like structures should 
t m . . . . . 
be able to represent sufficiently the variation in its 
where a QE : i 
stiffness (variation in cross-section and thickness of 
C, = coefficient of shear force depending on 
Table 11 Digitized Moment and Shear Distribution Factors D,, and D, Along the Height 
(Clauses 17.1) 
SI x/h” Moment Distribution (D) Shear Distribution (D,) 
No: Fixed Soil Pile Foundation Fixed Soil Pile Foundation 

(0 (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) 
i) 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
ii) 0.05 0.09 0.13 0.11 0.28 0.21 0.14 
iii) 0.10 0.13 0.19 0.16 0.42 0.27 0.19 
iv) 0.20 0.18 0.27 0.22 0.64 0.34 0.26 
v) 0.30 0.22 0.33 0.28 0.83 0.38 0.31 
vi) 0.40 0.27 0.39 0.33 1.00 0.41 0.35 
vii) 0.50 0.32 0.45 0.38 1.00 0.44 0.40 
viii) 0.60 0.39 0.52 0.45 1.00 0.49 0.46 
ix) 0.70 0.48 0.60 0.54 1.00 0.55 0.54 
x) 0.80 0.60 0.70 0.65 1.00 0.65 0.65 
xi) 0.90 0.77 0.83 0.80 1.00 0.80 0.80 
xii) 0.95 0.88 0.91 0.89 1.00 0.89 0.89 
xiii) 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 


D sx? is the distance from top and “A” is the height of chimney above the base. 


18 


IS 1893 (Part 4) : 2015 


Table 12 Values of Dm and Dv 
(Clauses 17.1) 


SI Soil Foundation Condition D, D, 
No. 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Fixed base or raft on hard soil x xM mE x x 
(based on N values) 04 —| + 0.6) — 1/5) + 075|-| + 0.9) — 
h h h h 
but < 1 
ii) Raft on soil No gat Ne " A 
(based on N values) 0.6] =| + 0.4] — 12] = 025( =] + oss[2) 
h h h h h 
iii) Pile foundation 1/2 4 No xy 
05 *|] + 05/2 0.66{ > - ozo) + os4[2) 
h h h h 
Table 13 Foundation Soil and Foundation Pile Group Stiffness 
(Clauses 7.3.2 and 17.1) 
SI No. Type of Foundation Stiffness 
d) 2) (3) 
i) Circular raft foundation on soil: 
1) Horizontal soil stiffness Ky = 32 (1 — v) Gro/(7 — 8v) 
2) Rocking soil stiffness (full circular raft) K.=8 Gro/3(1 —v) 
ii) Annular raft : 
1) Friction pile foundation (under reamed piles not covered) 
2) Translational stiffness of piles at the base of pile cap Ki= NE lw 1.2TP + md/2 and T, = (Elmu)? 
where 
G = shear modulus of foundation soil = pV , 
V, = shear wave velocity of the medium, 
p = soil density 
rọ = radius of circular raft foundation, 
v = poisson's ratio of soil, 
n = number of piles, 
p = modulus of elasticity of pile material, 
I, = moment of inertia of pile section, 
T, = characteristic length of pile, 
d = thickness of pile cap or raft, and 
Nn = modulus of sub-grade reaction of soil in horizontal direction. 
NOTES 


1 For rectangular foundation effective radius % 7 Vab may be taken, where a and b are the dimension of the rectangular foundation. 


2 For N values » 50, fixed base condition may be assumed. 
3 Classification of soil shall be as per IS 1893 (Part 1). 


4 When soil structure interaction effects are to be considered; shear wave velocities are to be determined by suitable methods. 


shell), lining mass and foundation modeling (that is 
foundation stiffness, soil deformations). The number 
of elements should be such as to capture the variation 
of stiffness and mass of the system. A minimum of ten 
beam elements should in general be sufficient. For axi- 
symmetric structures axi-symmetric finite elements 
shall be used. 


In case of chimneys, no stiffness is considered to be 
provided by the lining, however, the mass of lining 
above any corbel is assumed to be lumped at the corbel 
level. 


19 


NOTE — Minimum number of elements should be adequate 
to ensure that the model represent the frequencies up to 33 Hz. 


18 SPECIAL DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS FOR 
REINFORCED CONCRETE STACKS 


18.1 The total vertical reinforcement shall not be less 
than 0.25 percent of the concrete area. When two layers 
of reinforcement are required, the outside vertical 
reinforcement shall not be less than 50 percent of the 
reinforcement. 


18.2 The total circumferential reinforcement shall not 


IS 1893 (Part 4) : 2015 


be less than 0.20 percent of the concrete area. When 
two layers of reinforcement are reguired, the 
circumferential reinforcement in each face shall not be 
less than 0.1 percent of the concrete area at the section. 


18.3 The circumferential reinforcement for a distance 
of 0.2 times diameter of the chimney (from top of the 
chimney) shall be twice the normal reinforcement. 


18.4 Extra reinforcement shall have to be provided in 
addition to the reinforcement determined by design at 
the sides, top, bottom and corners of the openings. The 
extra reinforcement shall be placed on both faces of 
the chimney shell as close to the opening as proper 
spacing of bars shall permit. Unless otherwise 
specified, all extra reinforcement shall extend past the 
opening a sufficient distance to develop the full bond 
strength. 


18.5 At each side of the opening, the additional vertical 


additional reinforcement shall be placed having an area 
at least egual to one-half the established design 
circumferential reinforcement interrupted by the 
opening. 


One half of this extra reinforcement shall extend 
completely around the circumference of the chimney, 
and the other half shall extend beyond the opening to 
a sufficient distance to develop the bars in bond. The 
steel shall be placed as close to the opening as 
practicable, but within a height not to exceed twice the 
thickness. 


18.7 Deflection Criterion 


The maximum lateral deflection of the top of a stack- 
like structure under all service conditions, prior to the 
application of load factors, shall not exceed the limits 
set forth by the following eguation: 


reinforcement shall have an area at least egual to the Pase = ONOS M 

established design reinforcement for one-half of the Where 

width of the opening. Dax = maximum lateral deflection, and 

18.6 At both the top and bottom of each opening, h = height of structure above the base. 
ANNEX A 


(Clause 7.3.2) 


Table 14 Zone Factor Z 


Seismic Zone” II 
Z 0.10 


IV V 
0.24 0.36 


D These zone factors are for 5 percent damping. For other damping ratios, use multiplying factors as given in Table 15. 


Table 15 Multiplying Factors for Obtaining Values of Zone Factor Z for Other Damping Ratios 


Damping Percent 0 0.5 1.0 2 
Factors 3:2 1.9 1.6 1.4 


5 7 10 15 20 25 30 
1.0 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.6 0.55 0.5 


IS 1893 (Part 4) : 2015 
ANNEX B 
(Clause 16) 
DESIGN SPECTRUM 


To be used for the first mode 


To be used for the higher mode 


— 


—= Type | (Rock, or Hard Soil) 
Type li (Stiff Soil) 


—— Type ill (Soft Soil) 


& 
3 
2 
5 
= 
= 
2 
z 
E 
5 
5 
3 
: 
< 
2 
£ 
kai 
= 
d 


€——— Án ———  —— t — M 


l 2 3 4 5 6 
Natura | Period IT) 


2 opr hr heath kon adha 


NOTES 


These curves are for 5 percent damping. 
Ratio of //R in no case shall be more than 1.0. 
For other values of damping necessary interpolation is to be carried out in accordance with the Table 15. 


While selecting type of soil, weighted average of corrected N Values/ shear wave velocity up to 30 m shall be taken 
as per following table: 


Fwon 


SI No. Site Classification Soil Type N Values Shear Wave Velocity 

(m/s) 
i) Type | Rock/ Hard Soil >30 >750 

ii) Type II Medium Soil 10-30 300 -750 
ii) Type IIl Soft Soil <10 <300 
1+ 15T 0<T<0.10s 
For Rocky or Hard Soil Sites | 2.5 0.10s « T « 0.40s 
1/T 0.40s « T « 10.00s 
S 14+ 15T 0<T<0.10s 
= = { For Medium Soil Sites p 0.10s < T < 0.55s 
9 136/T 0.555 <T < 10.005 
1-4-157 0<T < 0.10s 
For soft Soil Sites [is 0.10s < T < 0.675 
1.67/T 0.67s < T < 10.00s 


Fic. 1 RESPONSE SPECTRA FOR ROCK AND SOIL FOR 5 PERCENT DAMPING 


21 


IS 1893 (Part 4) : 2015 


ANNEX C 
(Clause 9.2.2) 


C-0 For Category 1 structures, decoupling criteria as 
given below shall be used for the interaction effects 
between primary system (structure) and secondary 
system (equipment). 


C-1 For the purpose of this clause, the following 
notations shall be used. 


0; x M xU, 
mni MASH KT ah 
j Q7 xMx$, = Participation factor for j^ mode 


where 


mass matrix of the structural system. 

j" normalized mode shape. 

=1 

Influence vector (displacement vector) of the 
structural system when the base is displaced 


by unity in the direction of earthquake 
motion. 


C-2 All combinations of the dominant secondary 
system modes and the dominant primary system modes 
must be considered and the most restrictive 
combination shall be used. 


C-3 Coupled analysis of primary structure and secondary 
system shall be performed when the effects of interaction 
are significant based on sections C-9 and C-10. 


C-4 Coupling is not required, if the total mass of the 
equipment or secondary system is | percent or less of 
the mass of the supporting primary structure. However, 
the requirements of section C-10 regarding the multiple 
supports should be considered. 


C-5 In applying sections C-9 and C-10, one sub- 
system at a time may be considered, unless the 
subsystems are identical and located together, in which 
case the subsystem masses shall be lumped together. 


C-6 When coupling is required, a detailed model of 
the equipment or secondary system is not required, 
provided that the simple model adequately represents 
the major effects of interaction between the two parts. 
When a simple model is used, the secondary system 
shall be re-analyzed in appropriate detail using the 


22 


output motions from the first analysis as input at the 
points of connectivity. 


C-7 For applying the criteria of this section to have a 
modal mass greater than 20 percent of the total system 
mass, the total system mass is defined by: 


C-8 When detailed analysis is to be carried out for 
structures with equipment attached at a single point, 
the coupling criteria shown in Fig. 2 shall be used. 
The mass ratio in Fig. 2 is the modal mass ratio 
computed as per section C-9 and the frequency ratio is 
the ratio of uncoupled modal frequencies of the 
secondary and primary systems. 


C-9 For a secondary system dominant mode and the 
primary system mode i, the modal mass ratio can be 
estimated by: 


where 


«d 
Qa 


mode vector value from the primary 

system's modal displacement at the location 

where the secondary system is connected, 

from the i^ normalized modal vector, (b4), 
T = 

bei M &.i =1 


M mass matrix of the primary system, and 


p 
M, 


S 


total mass of the secondary system. 


C-10 Multi-support secondary system shall be 
reviewed for the possibility of interaction of structure 
and equipment stiffness between the support points, 
and for the effect of equipment mass distribution 
between support points. When these effects can 
significantly influence the structure response, reference 
shall be made to specialized literature. 


IS 1893 (Part 4) : 2015 


id 
X OEH SSEW IPDOW 
W 


0001 001D 0100 


(9.20 epon es) ^ Jen n 5 


TI 
SANE Ki 9 10 'g 'v ppoy osn 
EORR 
a 
weiss Kowud 
" A jo | @pOW PegintOuN jo kouenbaj = 19} 
Tr 1 waysts Arapucoes 
P JO n epou pbidnooun jo kouanbey = 9i 
(D 20 g tepow esp) € uoreuejdx 4 
(pennbey jon bundnon) 
O16 'g ‘y jepoy esp 
de 
| E" 


Q Ipon 8 lapon Y apor 


100 


p 
00 
50 
ai 
oz 


og 


Se 


d 


Koyanbe14 


~~ 08H 


Fic. 2 DECOUPLING CRITERIA FOR EQUIPMENT OR SECONDARY SYSTEM WITH SINGLE POINT ATTACHMENT TO THE 


PRIMARY SYSTEM 


23 


IS 1893 (Part 4) : 2015 


Town 

Agra 
Ahmedabad 
Ajmer 
Allahabad 
Almora 
Ambala 
Amritsar 
Asansol 
Aurangabad 
Bahraich 
Bengaluru 
Barauni 
Bareilly 
Belgaum 
Bhatinda 
Bhilai 
Bhopal 
Bhubaneswar 
Bhuj 
Bijapur 
Bikaner 
Bokaro 
Bulandshar 
Burdwan 
Chandigarh 
Chennai 
Chitradurga 
Coimbatore 
Cuddalore 
Cuttack 
Darbhanga 
Darjeeling 
Dharwad 


Zone 
I 
m 
II 
II 
IV 
IV 
IV 
I 
II 
IV 
II 
IV 
I 
m 
m 


ANNEX D 
( Clause 7.3.2 ) 
BASIC HORIZONTAL SEISMIC COEFFICIENTS FOR SOME IMPORTANT TOWNS 


Zone Factor, Z 
0.16 
0.16 
0.10 
0.10 
0.24 
0.24 
0.24 
0.16 
0.10 
0.24 
0.10 
0.24 
0.16 
0.16 
0.16 
0.10 
0.10 
0.16 
0.36 
0.16 
0.16 
0.16 
0.24 
0.16 
0.24 
0.16 
0.10 
0.16 
0.10 
0.16 
0.36 
0.24 
0.16 


Town 
Dehradun 
Dharmapuri 
Delhi 
Durgapur 
Gangtok 
Guwahati 
Goa 
Gulbarga 
Gaya 
Gorakhpur 
Hyderabad 
Imphal 
Jabalpur 
Jaipur 
Jamshedpur 
Jhansi 
Jodhpur 
Jorhat 
Kakrapara 
Kalpakkam 
Kanchipuram 
Kanpur 
Karwar 
Kohima 
Kolkatta 
Kota 
Kozhikode 
Kurnool 
Lucknow 
Ludhiana 
Madurai 
Mandi 


Mangalore 


Zone 
IV 
Ill 


Zone Factor, Z 
0.24 
0.16 
0.24 
0.16 
0.24 
0.36 
0.16 
0.10 
0.16 
0.24 
0.10 
0.36 
0.16 
0.10 
0.10 
0.10 
0.10 
0.36 
0.16 
0.16 
0.16 
0.16 
0.16 
0.36 
0.16 
0.10 
0.16 
0.10 
0.16 
0.24 
0.10 
0.36 
0.16 


IS 1893 (Part 4) : 2015 


Town Zone Zone Factor, Z Town Zone Zone Factor, Z 
Monghyr IV 0.24 Sadiya V 0.36 
Moradabad IV 0.24 Salem III 0.16 
Mumbai III 0.16 Simla IV 0.24 
Mysore II 0.10 Sironj II 0.10 
Nagpur II 0.10 Solapur m 0.16 
Nagarjunasagar II 0.10 Srinagar V 0.36 
Nainital IV 0.24 Surat III 0.16 
Nasik III 0.16 Tarapur IH 0.16 
Nellore III 0.16 Tezpur V 0.36 
Osmanabad III 0.16 Thane III 0.16 
Panjim III 0.16 Thanjavur II 0.10 
Patiala III 0.16 Thiruvananthapuram III 0.16 
Patna IV 0.24 Tiruchirappalli II 0.10 
Pilibhit IV 0.24 Thriuvannamalai III 0.16 
Pondicherry II 0.10 Udaipur II 0.10 
Pune III 0.16 Vadodara III 0.16 
Raipur II 0.10 Varanasi IH 0.16 
Rajkot III 0.16 Vellore IH 0.16 
Ranchi II 0.10 Vijayawada III 0.16 
Roorkee IV 0.24 Visakhapatnam II 0.10 
Rourkela II 0.10 


25 


IS 1893 (Part 4) : 2015 


ANNEX E 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Earthquake Engineering Sectional Committee, CED 39 


Organization 
Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 


Association of Consulting Civil Engineers, Bangalore 

Atomic Energy Regulatory Board, Mumbai 

Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited, New Delhi 

Building Materials & Technology Promotion Council, 
New Delhi 

Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 

Central Soils and Materials Research Station, New Delhi 

Central Water Commission, New Delhi 

Creative Design Consultants Pvt Ltd, Ghaziabad 

CSIR-Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 

CSIR-National Geophysical Research Institute, Hyderabad 

CSIR-Structural Engineering Research Centre, Chennai 


DDF Consultants Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 


Directorate General of Border Roads, New Delhi 


Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, New Delhi 


Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


Gammon India Limited, Mumbai 


Geological Survey of India, Lucknow 


Housing & Urban Development Corporation Ltd, New Delhi 


Indian Concrete Institute, Chennai 


Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai 


Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur, Jodhpur 
Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Kanpur 
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 


Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 


Indian Institute of Technology, Gandhinagar 
Indian Institute of Information Technology, Hyderabad 


Representative(s) 
Dr D. K. PauL (Chairman) 


SHRI SANDEEP SHIRKHEDKAR 
Dr. Aswatu M U (Alternate) 


Suri L. R. BISHNOI 
Suri RosHAN A. D. (Alternate) 


Suri Ravi KUMAR 


Suri J. K. PRASAD 
Suri PANKAJ Gupta (Alternate) 


CHIEF ENGINEER (CDO) 


SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER (D) II (Alternate) 


Suri NRIPENDRA KUMAR 
Dr Manish Gupta (Alternate) 


Director, Cmpp (E & NE) 
Director, EMBANKMENT (Alternate) 


Suri AMAN DEEP 
Suri BARJINDER (Alternate) 


Dr NAVJEEV SAXENA 
Dr Asay CHAURASIA (Alternate) 


Dr M. Ravi Kumar 
Dr N. PURANCHANDRA Rao (Alternate) 


Dr K. MUTHUMANI 
DR N. GOPALAKRISHNAN (Alternate) 


DR (SHRIMATI) PRATIMA R. Bose 
Suri SADANAND OJHA (Alternate) 


Suri A. K. Drxir 


Bric B. D. PANDEY 
Suri Ravi SINHA (Alternate) 


Ms Ira Dass 
Dr G G Srinivas Acuary (Alternate) 


Suri V. N. HEGGADE 
Suri ANAND Desai (Alternate) 


Suri K.C. JosHi 
Suri SAMIR MITRA 
Dr A. R. SANTHAKUMAR 


Dr Ravi SINHA 
Dr ALOK Goyat (Alternate) 


Dr C. V. R. Murty 
DR DURGESH C. Rat 


Dr A. MEHER PRASAD 
Dr. RUPEN Goswami (Alternate 1) 
DR Arun MENON (Alternate II) 


PROF ASHOK JAIN 
Dr MANISH SHRIKHANDE (Alternate 1) 
DR AsHoK MATHUR (Alternate II) 


Dr S. K. Jam 


DR PRADEEP KUMAR RAMANCHARLA 


Organization 


Indian Meterological Department, New Delhi 


Indian Road Congress, New Delhi 


Indian Society of Earthguake Technology, Roorkee 


Military Engineer Services, New Delhi 


National Council for Cement and Building Materials, Ballabgarh 


National Thermal Power Corporation, Noida 


Nuclear Power Corporation of India Limited, Mumbai 


Research, Design and Standards Organization, Lucknow 


RITES Limited, Gurgaon 
Risk Management Solutions Inc (RMSI), Noida 
Tandon Consultants Pvt Limited, New Delhi 


Tata Consulting Engineers, Mumbai 


Vakil-Mehta-Sheth Consulting Engineers, Mumbai 


Visvesvaraya National Institute of Technology, Nagpur 


Wadia Institute of Himalayan Geology, Dehradun 


In personal capacity (174/2 F,Solanipram, Roorkee) 


In personal capacity (36 Old Sneh Nagar, Wardha Raod, 
Nagpur) 


D-CAD Technologies, New Delhi 
In personal capacity (K-L/2 Kavi Nagar, Ghaziabad) 


In personal capacity (L-802, Design Arch , e-Homes Sector-5, 
Vaishali, Gaziabad) 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 1893 (Part 4) : 2015 


Representative(s) 


Suri DAL SINGH 
Suri H. S. MANDAL (Alternate) 


SECRETARY GENERAL 
Director (Alternate) 


ProF H. R. WASON 
Pror M. L. SHARMA (Alternate) 


BRIG SANDEEP RAWAT 
Lr CoL Gaurav Kausuik (Alternate) 


Suri V. V. ARORA 


DR PRAVEEN KHANDELWAL 
Suri SAURABH Gupta (Alternate) 


SHRI ARVIND SHRIVASTAVA 
Suri Racupati Roy (Alternate) 


Executive Director (B&S) 
Director (B&S)/SB-I (Alternate) 


GROUP GENERAL MANAGER (CED) 
Suri SUSHIL Gupta 


Dr MAHESH TANDON 
Suri Vinay K. Gupta (Alternate) 


Suri K. V. SUBRAMANIAN 
Suri B. B. GHARAT (Alternate) 


Ms Arpa R. SHETH 
Suri R. D. CHAUDHARI (Alternate) 


Dr O. R. JAISWAL 
Dr R. K. INGLE (Alternate) 


Dr RAJESH SHARMA 
Dr Vikram Gupta (Alternate) 


Dr S. K. THAKKAR 


Suri L. K. Jain 


Dn K. G. BHATIA 
DR A. K. MITTAL 
Dr A. S. Arya 


Suri B.K. Smua, Scientist “E” & Heap (Crvit ENGG) 
[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
Suri S. CHATURVEDI 
Scientist ‘F’ (Civi. ENGG), BIS 


and 


Suri S. ARUN Kumar 
Scientist ‘C?’ (Civil ENGG), BIS 


Working Group Involved in the Finalization 


D-CAD Technologies, New Delhi 

Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited, New Delhi 
Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 

Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 
Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai 
Nuclear Power Corporation of India Limited, Mumbai 


Tata Consulting Engineers, Mumbai 


27 


Dr K. G. Buatia (Convener) 
Dr A. K. SINGH 

Ms Ira Dass 

Dr D. K. PAUL 

Dr Ravı SINHA 

Suri U. S. P. VERMA 


Suri K. V. SUBRAMANIAN 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and guality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enguiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 39 (7807). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central |: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western  : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


AMENDMENT NO. 1 SEPTEMBER 2017 
TO 
IS 1893 (PART 4) : 2015 CRITERIA FOR EARTHOUAKE 
RESISTANT DESIGN OF STRUCTURES 


PART 4 INDUSTRIAL STRUCTURES INCLUDING 
STACK-LIKE STRUCTURES 


(First Revision) 


[Second cover page, foreword, para 4] — Substitute the following for the 
existing para: 


“This standard (Part 4) contains provisions on earthguake resistant design for 
industrial structures including stack-like structures. Industrial structures are 
covered in Section 1 and stack like structures are covered in Section 2. 


In this revision, the following significant changes were incorporated: 


a) Definitions of various terms related to earthquake engineering and 
industrial structures have been incorporated. 


b) Design spectrum for Section 1 and Section 2 has been included in 
Annex B. 


c) Industrial structures have been categorized in detail. 
d) Special design considerations for RCC stacks have been incorporated.’ 


[Page 1, clause 2, IS 1893 (Part 1) : 2002] — Substitute the following for 
the existing: 


“1893 (Part 1): 2016 Criteria for earthquake resistant design of structures: 
Part 1 General provisions and buildings (sixth revision)" 


[Page 7, clause 7.3.2, Z (explanation)] — Substitute ‘Table 14’ for 
“Table 13’. 


[Page 7, clause 7.3.2, S,/g (explanation)] — Substitute ‘Table 15’ for 
‘Table 14’. 


Amendment No. 1 to IS 1893 (Part 4) : 2015 
(Page 8, clause 7.4) — Substitute the following for the existing clause: 


‘7.4 Vertical seismic acceleration values shall be as given in 6.4.6 of 
IS 1893 (Part 1). 


[Page 11, Table 4, footnotes” and ?] — 


In the footnote ”, substitute ‘4.14.1’ for ‘4.15.1’. 
In the footnote ”, substitute ‘4.14.2’ for ‘4.15.2’. 


(Page 14, clause 10.4, para 2, line 1) — Insert ‘structures’ after the word 
‘for’. 


(Page 17, clause 14.2) — Substitute the following expression for T's , in 
place of the existing expression: 


[Page 17, Table 7, col (3) heading] — Substitute ‘Coefficient Cy’ for 
‘Coefficient Cy’. 


[Page 17, Table 8] — Substitute the following for the existing table: 
Table 8 Material Damping Factors for Design 


Basis Earthquake and Maximum Considered Earthquake 
(Clause 15) 


SI No. Material Material Damping Factors 
DBE MCE 

a) 2) (3) (4) 
i) Steel 0.02 0.04 
ii) Reinforced concrete 0.05 0.07 
iii) Brick masonry and plain concrete 0.07 0.10 


Amendment No. 1 to IS 1893 (Part 4) : 2015 


(Page 18, clause 17.1) — Substitute the following for the existing 
expression for M: 


“M= A, W, h Dm’ 


(Page 20, Annex A, clause reference) — Substitute “(Clauses 7.2 and 
7.3.2) for ‘(Clause 7.3.2)’. 


(Page 20, Table 14) — Delete ‘’” and footnote ”. 


(Page 21, Annex B, clause reference) — Substitute ‘(Clause 7.2) for 
‘(Clause 16)’. 


(Page 24, Annex D) — Substitute ‘Kolkata’ for ‘Kolkatta’. 


(Page 25, Annex D) — Substitute ‘Thiruvannamalai? for 
“Thriuvannamalai”. 
(CED 39) 


Publication Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 


AMENDMENT NO. 2 JULY 2018 
TO 
IS 1893 (PART 4) : 2015 CRITERIA FOR EARTHOUAKE RESISTANT 
DESIGN OF STRUCTURES 


PART 4 INDUSTRIAL STRUCTURES INCLUDING STACK-LIKE STRUCTURES 
(First Revision) 

(Second cover page, foreword, para 3) — Insert the following new para at the end: 
“Part 1 contains general provisions that are applicable to all types of structures, and provisions that are specific 
to buildings only. Unless stated otherwise, the provisions in Part 2 to Part 5 shall be read in conjunction with 
the general provisions (clauses 1 to 6) of IS 1893 (Part 1). 

(Page 4, clause 4.19) — Substitute the following for the existing: 
“4.19 Soft Storey — It is one in which the lateral stiffness is less than that in the storey above. The storey lateral 
stiffness is the total stiffness of all seismic force resisting elements resisting lateral earthquake shaking effects in 
the considered direction.’ 

[Page 4, clause 4.24] — Substitute the following for the existing: 
“4.24 Weak Storey — It is one in which the storey lateral strength [cumulative design shear strength of all 
structural members other than that of unreinforced masonry (URM) infills] is less than that in the storey above. 
The storey lateral strength is the total strength of all seismic force resisting elements sharing the lateral storey 
shear in the considered direction.’ 

(Page 6, clause 6.1.1, para 2, first sentence) — Substitute the following for the existing: 


‘Earthquake generated vertical inertia forces are to be considered in design, wherever appropriate.’ 


[Page 7, clause 7.3.1, expression for A)| — Substitute the following for the existing: 


where Fi is the site-specific spectral acceleration coefficient value denoting peak response acceleration 
g Ss 


corresponding to fundamental natural time period of structure. 


Price Group 2 


Amendment No. 2 to IS 1893 (Part 4) : 2015 


[Page 9, Table 2] — Substitute the following for the existing table: 


Table 2 Earthguake Force Estimation, Method of Analysis and Design for Various Categories of 


Structures 
(Clause 8.2.4) 
SI Structur Minimum Lateral Force 
No. e Earthquake Force Estimation Method of (Percent of Seismic Weight 
Category W) for Different Zones 
(see 8.1) 
ete Method of 
Hazard . : Structural Structural 
Damping Calculating : : II m IV V 
Assessment A Analysis Design 
Natural Period 
Method 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8 © (10) ay 
1) l Site Specific / 5 Yo (see 9.3; 14.1 a) Linear for Limit state 2.00 2.75 4.00 6.00 
Standard for RC and 14.2) design, design as per 
Specific Structures and IS 456 for RC; 
Seismic and 2Yofor Modal analysis b) Non- and 
Hazard steel with all linear time Design as per 
Assessment as structures stiffnesses of history IS 800 for steel 
per 7. the lateral as analysis for 
(see 9.4 and well as vertical verification 
15) load resisting of 
members and mechanism 
masses of the 
building 
modeled (For 
preliminary 
time period 
estimation, see 
9.3.2) 
ii) 2 -do- -do- -do- Linear for -do- 150 2.00 3.00 4.50 
Design 
iii) 3 -do- -do- -do- -do- -do- 125 175 2.50 3.75 
iv) 4 -do- -do- -do- -do- -do- 100 150 2.00 3.00 


(Page 12, clause 9.3, Note 2) — Substitute the following for the existing note: 


“2 There is no need to increase base shear re for industrial structures.’ 
$ 


B 
(Page 16, clause 14.2, Note 1, line 3) — Substitute “8” for ‘d’. 


(Page 17, clause 16, para 3, expression of Ay) — Substitute the following for the existing: 


‘For site specific spectra : A, {= i> 
R 


(Page 17, clause 16, para 6) — Delete. 


(Page 17, clause 16, para 7) — Delete. 


Amendment No. 2 to IS 1893 (Part 4) : 2015 


(Page 18, clause 17.2, Title) — Substitute the following for the existing title: 
17.2 Dynamic Analysis (Response Spectrum Method)’ 
(Page 18, clause 17.2, fourth sentence) — Substitute the following for the existing: 
‘Detailed dynamic analysis shall be required where analysis is based on site-specific response spectrum.’ 


(Page 20, Annex A, Table 15, title) — Substitute ‘Spectral Acceleration Coefficient S,/g’ for “Zone 
Factor Z’. 


(Page 20, Annex A, Table 15) — Insert the following note at the end: 


“NOTE — At time t = 0, the multiplying factor need not be applied, and the value is specified only for suitable interpolation between 
time t= 0 and t = 0.1 


(Page 21, Annex B, figure) — Substitute ‘To be used for fundamental mode (for fundamental natural 
period)’ for “To be used for the first mode’. 


(CED 39) 
Publication Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 


