INATA Ah IS 1349 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


Head Ha # Ha ch WI Chl чтат ҸӘ 
% тё, 


(FET GRIT ) 


Methods for Determination of Wool 
Fibre Content of Raw Wool 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 59.060.10 


© BIS 2023 


unde HA э] 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
ЖЕШ ey WAH чач, 9 RTT Ma THK AMT, 15 Reed - 110002 


MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2023 Price Group 5 


Chemical Methods of Test Sectional Committee, TXD 05 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft finalized 
by the Chemical Methods of Test Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textiles Division Council. 


This standard was first published in 1959 and subsequently revised in 1964. This revision has been made in the 
light of experience gained since its last revision and to incorporate the following major changes: 


a) The apparatus and reagent have been updated; and 


b) Reference to the Indian standards have been updated. 


Raw wool, that is, wool as shorn from the sheep or wool which is pulled, limed or ginned and carded, contains 
varying amount of impurities like sand, grease, suint, vegetable matter, tags and dung. It is, therefore, purchased 
on the basis of either laboratory scoured yield or clean wool fibre content. Formulation of an Indian Standard for 
determining the laboratory scoured yield and clean wool fibre content of raw wool has, therefore, become 
necessary. 


It was pointed out that, for a given raw wool, the value for clean wool yield obtained on the basis of the method 
prescribed in this standard differed from those obtained by some of the laboratories abroad. The Committee, on 
examining this matter in great detail, found that such differences were due to the differences in the nomenclature 
and the definition of the term used to indicate the clean wool fibre content in raw wool; in the earlier edition the 
term ‘clean wool yield’ was used in the sense of clean wool fibre content. The Committee, therefore, decided to 
prepare this revision including and defining the terms ‘laboratory scoured yield’ and ‘clean wool fibre content’ 
explicitly. This opportunity has been taken to change the sampling procedure so as to recognize the drawing of 
samples only from press-packed bales. Further changes have been incorporated in respect of reagents. In this 
revision, the determination of vegetable matter content has been made obligatory irrespective of whether the wool 
under test purports to be a “burry wool’ or ‘non-burry wool’ and consequently reference to ‘burry’ and non-burry’ 
wool is omitted. 


In preparing this standard, considerable assistance has been derived from: 

ASTM D584-10(2018) Standard Test Method for Wool Content of Raw Wool—Laboratory Scale 
Wherever a reference to any Indian Standard appears in these methods, it shall be taken as a reference to the latest 
version of the standard. Metric system has been adopted in India. Therefore, all quantities and dimensions in this 
standard have been expressed in this system. 

The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 
In reporting the result of a test made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is 


to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for Rounding off Numerical Values 
(second revision)’. 


IS 1349: 2023 


Indian Standard 


METHODS FOR DETERMINATION OF WOOL FIBRE 
CONTENT OF RAW WOOL 


( Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard prescribes methods for determination 
of clean wool fibre content (see 3.1) and laboratory 
scoured yield (see 3.2) of raw wool. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A contain provisions 
which, through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the editions indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revision, and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most 
recent editions of these standards. 


IS No. Title 


IS 460 (Part 1): Test sieves — Specification: 
2020 Part 1 Wire cloth test sieves 
(fourth revision) 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 


3.1 Clean Wool Fibre Content — The weight of 
wool fibres, free from vegetable matter, grease, dirt 
and other impurities and adjusted to the standard 
condition of 13.8 percent moisture content, 
1.5 percent alcohol extractable matter content and 
0.5 percent ash content, the latter two calculated on 
the basis of the oven-dry weight of the scoured 
specimen. 


3.2 Laboratory Scoured Yield — The total weight 
of wool fibres and vegetable matter free from grease, 
dirt and other impurities and adjusted to the standard 
condition of 13.8 percent moisture content, 
1.5 percent alcohol extractable matter content and 
0.5 percent ash content, the latter two calculated on 
the basis of the oven-dry weight of the scoured 
specimen. 


3.3 Lot — The quantity of raw wool drawn from one 
definite type of package purporting to be of one 
definite colour and quality delivered to one buyer 
against one despatch note. 


3.4 Vegetable Matter — Burrs, seeds, twigs, leaves 
and grasses that may be present in the sample of raw 


wool. Vegetable matter does not include vegetable 
fibres or tag material that may be present in the 
sample of raw wool. 


4 SAMPLING 


4.1 Sample to evaluate the laboratory scoured yield 
and clean wool fibre content of raw wool in a lot 
shall be selected so as to be representative of the lot. 


4.2 Sample to evaluate the laboratory scoured yield 
and clean wool fibre content of raw wool in a lot, 
selected in compliance with an agreement between 
the buyer and the seller, shall be held to be 
representative of the lot. 


4.3 If there is no agreed method of drawing a test 
sample, the number of bales to be selected at random 
from the lot shall be as specified in Table 1. All the 
bales so selected shall, taken together, constitute the 
bulk sample. 


Table 1 Number of Bales to be selected at 
Random from a Lot 


(Clause 4.3) 
a Lot to be Taken 
(1) (2) (3) 
1) 9 or less All 
ii) 10 to 30 10 
ш) 31 to 60 15 
iv) 61 to 100 20 


NOTE — Lots consisting of more than hundred 
bales, shall be divided into smaller lots each 
consisting of 100 bales and the remaining bales, 
if any, as one lot. 


4.3.1 With the help of a sampling tool (see Note 1), 
draw cores conforming to the requirements of Table 
2 from different portions of each bale in the bulk 
sample. Thus collect a test specimen, weighing 
about 250 g, and transfer it directly from the drum 
of the apparatus to a moisture-proof polythene bag, 
which shall be immediately sealed to avoid ingress 
of atmospheric moisture. If facilities to weigh 
accurately are available, the test specimen shall be 
weighed before transferring it to the bag (see 
Note 2). Draw similarly two more test specimens. 


IS 1349 : 2023 


All the cores so collected shall, taken together, 
constitute the gross sample. 


NOTES 


1 A 13 mm diameter tube is suitable for press packed bales. 


2 If the test specimen is weighed, its weight shall be noted 
on a label affixed to the sealed container. 


Table 2 Number of Cores to be Taken per Bale 
(Clause 4.3.1) 


SI No. No. of Bales in No. of Cores to 


the Bulk Sample Be Taken Per 
Bale 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) 5 10 
ii) 6 8 
ili) 7 7 
iv) 8 6 
v) 9 6 
vi) 10 5 
уп) 15 3 and 4 cores 
from every 
alternate bale 
уш) 20 2 апа 3 соге$ 
from every 
alternate bale 
5 QUALITY OF REAGENTS 


5.1 Unless otherwise specified, pure chemicals shall 
be used for the purpose of this test. 


NOTE — ‘Pure chemicals’ shall mean chemicals that do not 
contain impurities which effect the results of test. 


6 REAGENTS 
6.1 Scouring Solution 


6.1.1 Standard Scouring Solution — containing 3 g 
of anhydrous sodium carbonate and one gram of 
neutral soap per litre of water (see Note). 


OR 


6.1.2 Except in case of dispute any of the 
commercially available wool-scouring solution of 
the soda-ash plus nonionic synthetic detergent type. 


NOTE — Soft water having hardness not more than 60 parts 
per million should be used. 


6.2 Neutral Alcohol — 95 percent 


6.3 Sodium Hydroxide Solution — 10 percent 
(w/v) 


6.4 Dilute Acetic Acid — 0.1 percent (v/v) 
7 APPARATUS 


7.1 Tubs — minimum 4, each of at least 50 litres 
capacity. 


7.2 Basket — made of copper or stainless steel with 
the bottom made of wire cloth of the kind 
prescribed to be used for 1 mm IS Sieve [see IS 460 
(Part 1)]. 


7.3 Wringer or hydroextractor 


7.4 Balance — capable of weighing to an accuracy 
of 0.5 g. 


7.5 Drying Oven — ventilated type, capable of 
maintaining an inside temperature of 105° + 2 °C 
and provided with a balance capable of weighing to 
an accuracy of 0.5 g; the balance shall have one of 
its pans in the form of wire-cage suspended within 
the oven. 


7.6 Soxhlet extractor 


7.7 Muffle Furnace — capable of maintaining an 
inside temperature of 700 °C + 20 °C. 


7.8 Bunsen burner 
7.9 Porcelain dish or crucible 
8 PROCEDURE 


8.1 Take a sealed container. If its label indicates the 
original weight of the test specimen contained 
therein, take the test specimen out and note its 
original weight (W1). If the label of the container 
does not indicate the weight of the specimen 
contained therein, weigh the sealed container, 
remove the test specimen out of it, re-weigh the 
container, and from the difference between the two 
weighings, determine the original weight (Wi) of the 
test specimen. Open out the specimen either by hand 
or by mechanical means and free it from impurities 
like dirt, dung, strings, etc, avoiding any loss of fibre 
and vegetable matter. Heat the scouring solution to 
52 °C +5 °C and fill three tubs with it. Ratio of wool 
weight to volume of solution used for scouring bath 
shall be less than 15 g per litre. Agitate the specimen 
(enclosed in a 40 mesh net bag) in the basket for 
3 min to 5 min with hands. Use rubber gloves (alkali 
proof) for agitation. Remove the mesh bag with the 
specimen and squeeze between the rollers of 
wringers before it is passed on to the next tub. Treat 
the specimen (see Note) similarly in the second and 
third tub. Fill the fourth tub with soft water and heat 
to 52 °C +5 °C and rinse the specimen in it. Remove 


the specimen and spray it with a strong stream of 
warm water so as to flush out, as much as possible, 
sand and other soil, pass the specimen through the 
rollers of wringers and centrifuge for five minutes to 
remove the excess of water. Dry the specimen in 
drying oven at 105 °C + 2 °C to constant weight. 
Note the oven-dry weight (W2) of the specimen 
accurately. Preserve the oven-dry specimen. 


NOTE — After scouring in each bowl, recover the fibre lost 
during scouring by floatation and add the recovered fibres 
to the original sample before drying. 


8.1.1 Repeat the procedure with the remaining 
specimens. 


8.2 Determine the alcohol extractable matter content 
of the oven-dry scoured specimen by the following 
method. 


8.2.1 Take about 10 g of scoured oven-dry specimen 
(see 8.1). Re-dry it in a drying oven at 105 °C + 
2 °C, cool in a desiccator and weigh. Extract it with 
neutral alcohol in a Soxhlet extractor by heating on 
a water-bath for 20 extractions. Cool and disconnect 
the extraction flask. Recover bulk of the alcohol by 
distillation and evaporate the residue to dryness by 
drying it to constant weight in the drying oven at 
105 °C #2 °C. 


NOTE — Owing to the slight volatility of certain 
constituents of the extract and to other causes, absolute 
constancy of weight is seldom attained. Prolonged heating 
is, therefore, undesirable. The weight may usually be 
regarded as constant if the loss between the two successive 
weighings taken at an interval of 30 minutes does not 
exceed 0.1 percent of the first of the two values. 


8.2.2 Calculate the percentage of alcohol extractable 
matter content by the following formula: 


100a 
b 


where 


X =alcohol extractable matter content, percent, 
by weight; 
a = weight, in g, of the residue; and 
b = weight, in g, of the oven-dry specimen 
taken. 


8.3 Determine the ash content of scoured oven-dry 
specimen by the following method. 


8.3.1 Take at least 5 g of scoured oven-dry specimen 
(see 8.1). Place it in a tared ‘vitreous silica dish and 
re-dry it in a drying oven at 105 °C + 2 °C. Cool in 
a desiccator and weigh. Slowly ignite the specimen 
in the dish over a Bunsen burner till the specimen 
gets charred and ceases to produce volatile matter. 
Transfer the dish to a muffle furnace, maintained at 
700 °C + 20 °C, ash the charred specimen and keep 


IS 1349 : 2023 


it within the furnace for one hour or more till it 
attains constant weight. 


8.3.2 Calculate the percentage of ash content by the 
following formula: 
100a 
Z= 
b 


where 


Z = ash content, percent, by weight; 
а = weight, in g, of ash; and 


b = weight, in g, of oven-dry specimen taken. 


8.4 Determine the vegetable matter content of the 
oven-dry scoured specimen by the following 
method. 


8.4.1 From each of the scoured oven-dry specimens 
(see 8.1) take approximately equal quantities of 
wool, so as to make about 40 g. Re dry it in the 
drying oven at 105 °C + 2 °C for such period till two 
consecutive weighings do not differ by more than 
0.1 percent. 


8.4.2 Take 400 ml of sodium hydroxide solution of 
10 percent concentration in a beaker and bring it to 
the boil. Transfer the oven-dried wool to the beaker 
and boil for 3 min stirring the contents all the time. 
Allow to settle and decant through a 125 micron 
IS Sieve. Add 100 ml of cold water to the beaker and 
transfer the residue to the sieve. Wash the residue 
thoroughly with distilled water and rinse with dilute 
acetic acid to remove last traces of alkali. Wash 
finally with distilled water until the filtrate is neutral 
to litmus paper. Remove with the help of a tweezer, 
all vegetable fibres and tag material from the 
residue. 


Transfer the residue to a porcelain dish or crucible 
and dry it at 105 °C + 2 °C for such period till two 
consecutive weighings do not differ by more than 
0.1 percent. 


8.4.3 Calculate the vegetable matter content, 
percent, in the sample by the following formula: 


a хЕ x100 
= pbp 
where 
V = vegetable matter content, percent, of 
the oven-dry scoured specimen; 
a = oven-dry weight, in g, of the residue; 
= the correction factor taken to be 
equal to 1.1; and 
b = oven-dry weight, in g, of the 


specimen (see 8.4.1) 


IS 1349 : 2023 


8.5 Calculation 


8.5.1 Calculate the clean wool fibre content of the 
sample by the following formula: 


а И? х [100 — (X + Z + V)] 


Е 0.842 W1 
where 


F = clean wool fibre content, percent, of the 
sample (see 3.1); 

W2 = oven-dry weight, in g, of the specimen 
after scouring (see 8.1); 

X =alcohol extractable matter content, 
percent, of the scoured oven-dry 
specimen (see 8.2); 


Z =  ashcontent, percent, of the scoured oven- 
dry specimen (see 8.3); 

V = vegetable matter content,, percent, of the 
scoured oven-dry specimen (see 8.4); 
and 


Wi = original weight, in g, of the specimen (see 
8.1). 


8.5.2 Calculate the vegetable matter content, 
percent, in the sample by the following formula: 


W2xV 


У=———— 
0.842 W1 


where 


Vi = vegetable matter content, percent, in the 
sample adjusted to standard condition (see 
Note); 

W2 = oven-dry weight, in g, of the specimen 
after scouring (see 8.1); 


V = vegetable matter content, percent, of the 


scoured oven dry specimen (see 8.4); 


Wı = original weight, in g, of the specimen (see 
8.1). 


NOTE — The standard condition for wool shall be a 
moisture content of 13.8 percent, an alcohol extractable 
matter content of 1.5 percent and an ash content of 
0.5 percent. 


8.5.3 Calculate the laboratory scoured yield of the 
sample by the following formula: 


L=F+V, 
where 
L = laboratory scoured yield, percent, of the 
sample (see 3.2); 
F = clean wool fibre content, percent, of the 
sample (see 8.5.1); and 
Vi = vegetable matter content, percent, in the 


sample adjusted to standard condition (see 
8.5.2). 


8.6 Calculate in a similar manner (see 8.5.1, 8.5.2 
and 8.5.3) the clean wool fibre content, percent, and 
the laboratory scoured yield, percent, of the 
remaining test specimens. If the difference between 
any two of the three values for each characteristic 
exceeds 2.5 percent, draw fresh specimens in lieu 
thereof and test them. Calculate the respective mean 
of the values, separately for clean wool fibre 
content, percent, and laboratory scoured yield 
content. 


8.7 Report the values obtained as in 8.6 and 8.5.2 as 
(a) clean wool fibre content, percent; (b) laboratory 
scoured yield, percent; and (c) vegetable matter 
content, percent, respectively of raw wool in the lot. 


IS 1349: 2023 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Chemical Methods of Test Sectional Committee, TXD 05 


Organization 


The Synthetic and Art Silk Mills Research Association, 
Mumbai 

Agilent Technology India Pvt Limited, New Delhi 

Ahmedabad Textile Industry’s Research Association, 
Ahmedabad 

Bidhata Industries Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


Central Coir Research Institute, Kochi 
Central Silk Technological Research Institute (CSTRD, 


Bengaluru 

Directorate General of Quality Assurance (СОАТ &C), 
Kanpur 

Global Organic Textile Standard, Thane 

ICAR-Central Institute for Research on Cotton Technology, 
Mumbai 


Grasim Industries, Mumbai 


Indian Jute Industries Research Association, Kolkata 
Intertek India Private Limited, Mumbai 
Northern India Textile Research Association, Ghaziabad 


Office of the Textile Commissioner, Mumbai 


Raymonds Ltd, Mumbai 


Reliance Industries Ltd, New Delhi 


SGS, Mumbai 


Suditi Industries Ltd, Mumbai 


Sunil Industries, Mumbai 


Testtex India Laboratories Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


Texanlab Laboratoires Pvt Ltd, Navi Mumbai 


Textiles Committee, Mumbai 


Representative(s) 


DR MANISHA MATHUR (Chairperson) 


SHRI PRAVEEN ARYA 
DR MANOJ SURWADE (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI DEEPALI PLAWAT 
SHRI JIGAR DAVE (Alternate) 


SHRI ROHIT PACHERIWALA 
R. K. PACHERIWALA (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR, RDTE 


SENIOR SCIENTIFIC OFFICER (POLYMER) (Alternate) 


DR NIVEDITA S. 


CoL D. B. KUSHWAHA 
SHRI PURUSHOTTAM DE (Alternate) 


SHRI RAHUL BHAJEKAR 
SHRIMATI PRACHI GUPTA (Alternate) 


DR SUJATA SAXENA 
DRA. S. M. RAJA (Alternate) 


DR ROHITASVA KUMAR 
SHRI YOGIRAJ GOHIL (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI ISPITA ROY 
SHRI NARAYAN B. BORADE 
DR M. S. PARMAR 


SHRI GAURAV GUPTA 
SHRI SANJAY CHARAK (Alternate) 


SHRI PRABHAT PARASHER 
SHRI SAURAV SHEKHAR (Alternate) 


SHRI M. S. VERMA 
SHRI MAHESH С. SHARMA (Alternate) 


DR KARTHIKEYAN K. 
SHRI MICHAEL FRANCIS (Alternate) 


SHRI R. CHINRAJ 
SHRI RAJENDRA GAIKWAD (Alternate) 


SHRI PRADEEP ROONGTA 
SHRI RAMESH KHANNA (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI MEETA SHINGALA 
SHRI MAHESH SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI MILIND R. MARATHE 
SHRI VIVEK PATIL (Alternate) 


SHRI KARTIKAY DHANDA 
DR P. RAVICHANDRAN (Alternate) 


IS 1349: 2023 
Organization 
The Bombay Textile Research Association, Mumbai 


The South India Textile Research Association, Coimbatore 


The Synthetic and Art Silk Mills Research Association, 
Mumbai 


U P Textile Technology Institute 


Venture Instrumentation Technologies Pvt Ltd, Bangalore 


Wool Research Association, Thane 


In Personal Capacity, (1301, Bldg. No. 2C, Sapphire Lake 
Side, C.H.S Ltd, Near Union Bank and L and Т, Powai, 
Mumbai - 400072) 


In Personal Capacity, (102, Augustus, Lodha Paradise, 
Majiwada Thane west, Thane - 400601) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 
SHRI M. P. SATYANARAYAN 
SHRIMATI SAROJ VAIRAGI (Alternate) 


DR PRAKASH V ASUDEVAN 
SHRI S. SIVAKUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI ASHWINI A. SUDAM 
SHRIMATI LEENA MHATRE (Alternate) 


DR ARUN KUMAR PATRA 
DR SUBHANKAR MAITY (Alternate) 


SHRI VISHAL VIJAY BABU 
SHRI NAGARAJ C. (Alternate) 


DR MRINAL CHOUDHARI 
SHRIMATI SAMITA BAIT (Alternate) 


SHRI B. S. ACHARYA 


DR G. S. NADIGER 


SHRI J. K. GUPTA, SCIENTIST ‘E’/DIRECTOR AND HEAD 
(TEXTILES) [REPRESENTING DIRECTOR (GENERAL 


(Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI DHARMBEER 
SCIENTIST ‘D’/JOINT DIRECTOR 
(TEXTILES), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TXD 05 (22098). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8% Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector У, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern :C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


