NAT Alan IS 17237 : 2019 
Indian Standard 


toa ata & fare Aaea gotai 
fearga cart ater At Gifs HT — 
STATA AAT 


Code of Practice for Design and 
Construction of Civil Engineering 
Works for Ropeways — General 
Requirements 


ICS 45.100 


© BIS 2019 


anda AM sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Teg TH AMT, ay freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


July 2019 Price Group 5 


Continuous Bulk Conveying, Elevating, Hoisting, Aerial Ropeways and Related Equipment Sectional 
Committee, MED 06 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Continuous 
Bulk Conveying, Elevating, Hoisting, Aerial Ropeways and Related Equipment Sectional Committee, had been 
approved by the Mechanical Engineering Divisional Council. 


An aerial ropeway is a special form of transportation system where passengers/materials are carried on a tensioned 
wire rope supported above the ground. In ropeways handling passengers, safety, reliability, and conformance to 
high-quality and good industry practices are paramount for securing the safety of the users. Aerial ropeways are 
particularly useful in regions where the facility in surmounting natural barriers gives them a great advantage over 
railways or roads, both of which may need the heavy civil engineering work to secure easy gradient. They are 
inexpensive to maintain; pollution free; environment friendly; does not affect aesthetics; their power demand is 
modest; and, they are not seriously affected by adverse climatic conditions. 


Nothing in this standard is intended to contravene any provisions of the statutory regulations wherever they are 
in force. 


This standard refers the following standards and documents as applicable for its meaning. 
a) Safety requirements for ropeway installations designed to carry passengers: 
1) Terminology; 
2) General requirement; 
3) Ropes and its splicing, socketing; 
4) Tension device; 
5) Drive systems, other mechanical devices including carriage and grips; 
6) Electrical and electronics equipment including earthing and lightening arrestor systems; 
7) Software being used in the system inspection procedure; 
8) Wi Fi, wireless or other communication devices and systems; 
9) Civil engineering; 
10) Pre commissioning inspection. Maintenance and operation checks; 
11) Rescue and evacuation; 
12) Operation; and 
13) Quality assurance. 
b) Glossary of terms used in connection with aerial ropeways: 
1) IS 7649 
2) IS 5228 
3) IS 5229 
4) IS 9706 
5) IS 9228 
6) IS 9595 
7) IS/AISO 9001 : 2015 
Together these form the series of standards and document for design, production, installation, operation and 
maintenance of ropeway for carrying persons. 


Composition of the Panel-1 on ‘Aerial Ropeways’ of MED 06 responsible for the formulation of this standard 
is given at Annex B. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 :1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised) . The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 17237 : 2019 


Indian Standard 


CODE OF PRACTICE FOR DESIGN AND 
CONSTRUCTION OF CIVIL ENGINEERING 
WORKS FOR ROPEWAYS — GENERAL 
REQUIREMENTS 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard covers the general requirements for 
civil engineering works for ropeways like buildings, 
line towers, station foundations, anchor foundations 
and mechanical foundations. 


1.2 Grillage, brick and masonry footings and anchor 
plates are not covered in this standard. The design and 
construction of pre-stressed concrete foundations are 
also notcovered. 


1.3 Nothing in this standard shall contravene the 
provisions laid in IS 456 unless specifically mentioned 
otherwise. 


2 REFERENCES 


The Indian standards listed in Annex A contain 
provisions which through reference in the text, 
constitute provision of this standard. At the time 
of publication, the editions indicated were valid. 
All standards are subject to revision, and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most recent 
editions of the standards. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the definition of terms 
given in IS6461, IS 2809 shall apply in addition to the 
following. 


3.1 Foundation — Part of structure which is in direct 
contact with soil and transmits the load to the ground. 


3.2 Pile (Concrete) — A particular type of cast in-situ 
or precast foundation normally provided by driving 
or boring, and having uniform, bulbed, tapered, or 
corrugated section along its length. 


3.3 Rock — Foundation supporting material other than 
soil which is possible to excavate, in the case of soft 
rocks with pick-axe and shovels, and in case of hard 
rocks by special methods like blasting or chemical 
filling. 


3.4 Civil Engineering Works — Construction works 
with some intended purpose that is,plant building, 


footing/foundations for structures and machinery, 
retaining wall, earth work, slope _ stabilization/ 
protection etc. 


4 TYPES OF FOUNDATION 


4.1 The following types of foundations may be adopted 
for ropeways: 


a) Shallow foundation conforming IS 1080, IS 2950, 
IS 11089 and IS 9456. 


b) Deep foundation comprising of: 
1) Pile foundation conforming IS 2911, 
2) Caissons conforming IS 9527, and 
3) Well foundation conforming IS 3955. 
c) Machine foundation conforming IS 2974. 


4.2 Foundation on Rock 


A rock footing, may be considered to develop strength 
by the dead load of the concrete and the strength of bar 
anchorage (the pull-out value of anchor bars grouted 
in drill holes or the failure strength of rock engaged by 
bars). 


5 MATERIALS 


5.1 Cement 


This shall be ordinary Portland cement conforming 
to IS 269, blast furnace slag cement conforming to 
IS 455, super sulphated cement conforming to IS 6909, 
Portland pozzolana cement conforming to IS 1489, 
high strength ordinary Portland cement conforming to 
IS 8112, or rapid hardening Portland cement 
conforming to IS 8014. 


5.2 Steel 


This shall be mild steel and medium tensile steel 
conforming to IS 432 (Part 1), hard drawn steel 
conforming to IS 432 (Part 2), hot rolled mild steel, 
medium tensile steel, high yield strength steel and cold 
twisted steel conforming to IS 1786. 


5.3 Concrete Material 


Concrete material, mixing and quality control for 
concrete shall be in accordance with IS 456. 


IS 17237 : 2019 


6 GROUND 


The natural geological deposits over, base rock 
extending to the surface level of the earth should be 
examined. It is preferred not to build any structure 
above mining deposit. 


7 SITE INVESTIGATION 


7.1 The investigation of the site is an essential 
prerequisite to the construction of all civil engineering 
works with a view to assess the general suitability of the 
site for the proposed works and to enable in preparing 
an adequate and economic design. 


7.1.1 Inparticular, it is necessary to assess the changes 
that may occur during or after the construction of the 
structure due to the choice of materials or methods 
of construction which may adversely affect safety of 
structure or after its performance or utility. 


7.2 The investigation of the site should be carried out in 
accordance with IS 1892. As a preliminary, it is usually 
judicious to collect information relating to the site prior 
to commencing its exploration. The exploration of the 
site for an important structure requires the exploration 
and sampling of all strata likely to be significantly 
affected by the structural load. The extent of this 
exploration will depend on the site and structure. 


7.2.1 In any case, particular attention shall be paid to 
the ground water level, underground water courses, old 
drains, pits, wells, old foundation, etc, and presence 
of excessive sulphates or other injurious compound 
in the ground water and soil. The site should also be 
explored in detail, where necessary, to ascertain the 
type consistency, thickness, sequence and dip of the 
strata. 


7.3 Mass movements of the ground are liable to occur 
from causes independent of the loads imposed by the 
structure. These include mining subsidence, land slips, 
unstable slopes and creep on clay slopes. These factors 
shall be observed in detail during site investigation 
and taken into account in the layout and design of 
the proposed works. However, if necessary, expert 
advice regarding the geological and hydrological 
characteristics of the site shall be sought. 


7.3.1 Mining subsidence is liable to occur in mining 
areas. The magnitude of the movement and its 
distribution over the area of the workings and their 
vicinity can be roughly estimated. Where future 
subsidence is likely, care should be taken to design 
the superstructure and foundation sufficiently strong 
or sufficiently flexible to cater for probable ground 
movements. Long continuous buildings should be 
avoided and large building should be divided into 
independent sections of suitable size, each with its own 
foundations. Expert advice from appropriate mining 
authority should be sought. 


7.3.2 Cuttings, excavations or sloping ground near 
foundations may increase the possibility of shear 
failure in the ground supporting the foundations. 


7.3.2.1 On sloping ground on clay soils there is 
always a tendency for the upper layers of soil to move 
downhill, the extent, however, depends on the type 
of soil, the angle of slope, ground water regime and 
climatic conditions. Instability may develop even after 
a long period of apparent stability, particularly in stiff, 
fissured and over consolidated clay soil. 


7.3.2.2 Uneven surface of a slope on virgin ground, 
curved tree trunks, tilted fence posts, tilted boundary 
walls, etc, indicate the creep of the surface layers. Areas 
subject to land slip and unstable slopes shall, therefore, 
be avoided. 


7.3.2.3 Some clayey soils are susceptible to shrinkage 
and cracking in dry and hot weather, and swelling in wet 
weather. These conditions are simulated, sometimes, 
by extraneous agencies like trees, boiler installations, 
furnaces, kilns, underground cables, services and 
refrigeration installations. These factors shall be studied 
carefully before designing any foundations. Shrinkage 
of clay soils may be increased by the drying effect 
produced by nearby trees and shrubs. Swelling may 
occur, if they are cut down. No trees which grow to a 
large size shall be planted within 8 m of foundations of 
buildings. 


7.3.3 New constructions may interfere with drainage 
regime of the ground and affect the stability of existing 
structure. Adequate precautions should be taken to 
protect these. On the uphill side of a building on a 
sloping site, land drainage requires special consideration 
for diverting the natural flow of water away from the 
foundations. If excavation involves cutting through 
existing land drains, consideration should be given for 
diverting the same into the ground-drainage system. 


7.3.4 Increase in moisture extent results in substantial 
loss of bearing capacity in case of certain types of soils 
which may lead to differential settlements. On sites 
liable to be water logged in wet weather, it is desirable 
to determine the contour of the watertable surface in 
order to indicate the directions of the natural drainage 
and to obtain the basis of the design of intercepting 
drains to prevent the influx of ground water into the site 
from higher ground. The seasonal variation in the level 
of the water table is of importance in some cases. In 
case of soils with low permeability, the water levels in 
boreholes or observation wells may take a considerable 
time to reach equilibrium with ground water. Spot 
readings of water level in boreholes may, therefore, 
give an erroneous impression of the true ground water 
level. It is generally determined by measuring the 
water level in the borehole after a suitable time lapse 
for which a period of 14 h or more be used as the case 
may be. In soils with high permeability, such as sand 


and gravels, lapse of sometime is usually sufficient, 
unless the hole has been sealed with drilling mud. In 
these cases, it may be necessary to resort to indirect 
means to establish the approximate location of the 
water table. Where deep excavation is required, the 
location of water bearing strata should be determined 
with particular care and the water pressure in each 
should be observed so that necessary precautions may 
be taken during excavation. 


7.3.5 In certain localities where considerable quantities 
of soluble salts are contained in ground water and soil, 
Portland cement concrete, especially thin members 
or buried metals are subjected to deterioration and 
corrosion. Certain soils have a corrosive action on 
metals, particularly on cast iron, due to either chemical 
or bacteriological agency. In industrial areas, corrosive 
action may arise from industrial wastes that have been 
dumped on the site. Chemical analysis of samples of 
ground water or soil (or sometimes both) should be 
done to assess the necessity of special precautions. The 
following are some of suggested methods: 


a) Dense cement concrete M20 mix or richer may 
be used to reduce permeability and increase 
resistance to attack from sulphates (see IS 456). 


b) Portland pozzolana cement may be used to control 
and reduce the activities of the sulphates. 


c) Special cements like high alumina cement, super 
sulphated cement, which are sulphate resistant, 
may be used. 


d) A thick coating of bitumen may be given over 
the exposed surfaces of foundation below the 
water table to prevent infiltration of water into the 
foundation (see IS 5871). 


A thick layer of cement concrete (with sulphate 
resistant cement) and coated with bitumen be laid 
before laying of foundation concrete to prevent 
infiltration of water from sulphate bearing soil. 


e 


wm 


8 METHODS OF SITE EXPLORATION 
The most common and satisfactory methods of site 
explorations are given below: 
a) Trial pits; 
b) Boring; and 
c) Headings. 
The details of these methods are given in IS 1892. 
9 DEPTH OF FOUNDATIONS 


9.1 The depth to which foundation should be carried 
depends upon the principal factors: 


a) The securing of adequate allowable bearing 
capacity; 

b) In the case of clayey soils, penetration below the 
zone where shrinkage and swelling due to seasonal 


IS 17237 : 2019 


weather changes and due to trees and shrubs are 
likely to cause appreciable movements. 


c) In fine sand and silts, penetration below the zone 
in which trouble may be expected from frost. 


d) The maximum depth of scour, wherever relevant, 
should also be considered and the foundation 
should be located sufficiently below this depth. 


e) Other factors, such as ground movements and heat 
transmitted from the building to the supporting 
ground may be important. 


9.2 All foundations shall extend to a depth of at least 
50 cm below natural ground level. On rock or such other 
weather resisting natural ground, removal of the top soil 
may be all that is required. In such cases, the surface 
shall be cleaned and, if necessary, stepped or otherwise 
prepared so as to provide a suitable bearing and thus 
prevent slipping or other unwanted movements. 


9.3 Where there is excavation, ditch, pond, water 
course, filled up ground or similar condition adjoining 
or adjacent to the subsoil on which the structure is to 
be erected and which is likely to impair the stability 
of structure, either the foundation of such structure 
shall be carried down to a depth beyond the detrimental 
influence of such conditions, or retaining walls or 
similar works shall be constructed for the purpose of 
shielding from their effects. 


9.4 A foundation in any type of soil shall be below the 
zone significantly weakened by root holes or cavities 
produced by burrowing animals or works. The depth 
shall also be enough to prevent the rainwater scouring 
below the footings. 


9.5 Clay soils, like black cotton soils, are seasonally 
affected by drying, shrinkage and cracking in dry and 
hot weather, and by swelling in the following wet 
weather to a depth which will vary according to the 
nature of the clay and the climatic condition of the 
region. It is necessary in these soils, either to place the 
foundation bearing at such a depth where the effects 
of seasonal changes are not important or to make the 
foundation capable of eliminating the undesirable 
effects due to relative movement by providing flexible 
type of construction or rigid foundations. Adequate 
load counteraction swelling pressures also provide 
satisfactory foundations. 


9.6 For designing depth of foundation in snow cladding 
areas, the existing frost line needs to be considered. 


10 FOUNDATIONS AT DIFFERENT LEVELS 


10.1 Where footings are adjacent to sloping ground 
or where the bottoms of the footings of a structure are 
at different levels or at levels different from those, of 
the footings of adjoining structures, the depth of the 
footings shall be such that the difference in footing 


IS 17237 : 2019 


elevations shall be subject to the following limitations: 


a) 


b) 


When the ground surface slopes downward 
adjacent to a footing, the sloping surface shall not 
intersect a frustum of bearing material under the 
footing having sides which make an angle of 30 
degree with the horizontal for soil and horizontal 
distance from the lower edge of the footing to the 
sloping surface shall be at least 60 cm for rock and 
90 cm for soil (see Fig. 1). 


In case of footings in granular soil, a line drawn 
between the lower adjacent edges of adjacent 
footings shall not have a steeper slope than one 
vertical to two horizontal. 


c) In case of footing of clayey soils a line drawn 
between the lower adjacent edge of the upper 
footing and the upper adjacent edge of lower 
footing shall not have a steeper slope than one 
vertical to two horizontal. 


10.2 The requirement given in 8.1 shall not apply under 
the following conditions: 


a) Where adequate provision is made for the lateral 
support (such as with retaining walls) of the 
material supporting the higher footing. 


b) When the factor of safety of the foundation soil 
against shearing is not less than four. 


THESE SURFACECES 
SHOULD NOT 
INTERSECT 


FOOTING IN SLOPING GROUND 


UPPER FOOTING 


“— SLOPE OF JOINING LINE 


\ 


\ pe LOWER FOOTING 


NOT STEEPER THAN 
ONE VERTICAL TO TWO 


HORIZONTAL 


FOOTING IN GRANULAR SOIL OR CLAYEY SOIL 


Fic. 1 DIFFERENT TYPES OF FOOTING 


11 EFFECT OF SEASONAL 
CHANGES 


WEATHER 


During periods of hot, dry weather a deficiency of 
water develops near the ground surface and in clay 
soils, this is associated with a decrease of volume or 
ground shrinkage and the development of cracks. The 
shrinkage of clay will be increased by drying effect 
produced by fast growing and water seeking trees. 
The range of influence depends on size and number of 
trees and it increases during dry periods. In general, 
it is desirable that there shall be a distance of at least 
8 m between such trees. Special precautions either in 
the form of insulation or otherwise should be taken. 
In periods of wet weather, clay soils swell and the 
cracks lend to close, the water deficiency developed in 
the previous dry periods may be partially replenished 
and a subsurface zone or zones deficient in water may 
persist for many years. Leakage from water mains and 
underground sewers may also result in large volume 
changes. Therefore, special care must be taken to 
prevent such leakages. 


12 EFFECT OF MASS MOVEMENTS 
GROUND IN UNSTABLE AREAS 


OF 


12.1 In certain areas mass movements of the ground 
are liable to occur from causes independent of the loads 
applied by the foundations ofstructures. These include 
mining subsidence, landslips on unstable slopes and 
creep on clay slopes. 


12.2 Mining Subsidence 


In mining areas, subsidence of the ground beneath a 
building or any other structure is liable to occur. The 
magnitude of the movement and its distribution over 
the area are likely to be uncertain and attention shall, 
therefore, be directed to make the foundations and 
structures sufficiently rigid and strong to withstand the 
probable worst loading condition. In this connection, 
reference should also be made to relevant regulation/ 
standard. 


12.3 Landslip Areas 


12.3.1 The construction of structures on slopes which 
are suspected of being unstable and are subject to 
landslip shall be avoided. 


12.3.2 On sloping ground on clay soils, there is always a 
tendency for the upper layers of soil to move downhill, 
depending on type of soil, the angle of slope, climatic 
conditions, etc. In some cases, the uneven surface of 
the slope on a virgin ground will indicate that the area 
is subject to small land slips and, therefore, if used for 
foundation, will obviously necessitate special design 
consideration. 


12.3.3 Where there may be creep of the surface layer 
of the soil, protection against creep may be obtained by 
following special design considerations. 


IS 17237 : 2019 


12.3.4 On sloping sites, spread foundations shall be 
on a horizontal bearing and stepped. At ail changes of 
levels, they shall be lapped at the steps for a distance at 
least equal to the thickness of the foundation or twice 
the height of the step, whichever is greater. The steps 
shall not be of greater height than the thickness of the 
foundation, unless special precautions are taken. 


12.3.5 Cuttings, excavations or sloping ground near 
and below foundation level may increase the possibility 
of shear failure of the soil. The foundation shall be well 
beyond the zone of such shear failure. 


12.3.6 If the probable failure surface intersects a 
retaining wall or other revetment, the latter shall be 
made strong enough to resist any unbalanced thrust. In 
case of doubt, as to the suitability of the natural slopes 
or cuttings, the structure shall be kept well away from 
the top of the slopes, or, the slopes shall be stabilized. 


12.3.7 Cuttings and excavations adjoining foundations 
reduce stability and increase the likelihood of differential 
settlement. Their effect should be investigated not only 
when they exist but also when there is possibility that 
they are made subsequently. 


12.3.8 Where a structure is to be placed on sloping 
ground, additional complications are introduced. The 
ground itself, particularly if of clay, may be subject 
to creep or other forms of instability, which may be 
enhanced if the strata dip in the same direction as the 
ground surface. If the slope of the ground is large, the 
overall stability of the slope and substructure may be 
affected. These aspects should be carefully investigated. 


13 PRECAUTIONS FOR FOUNDATIONS ON 
INCLINED STRATA 


In the case of inclined strata, if they dip towards a 
cutting or basement, it may be necessary to carry 
foundation below the possible slip planes, land drainage 
also requires special consideration, particularly on the 
uphill side of a structure to divert the natural flow of 
water away from the foundations. 


14 STRATA OF VARYING THICKNESS 


Strata of varying thickness, even at appreciable depth, 
may increase differential settlement. Where necessary, 
calculations should be made of the estimated settlement 
from different thicknesses of strata and the structure 
should be designed accordingly. When there is large 
change of thickness of soft strata, the stability of 
foundation may be affected. Site investigations should, 
therefore, ensure detection of significant variations in 
strata thickness. 


15 LAYERS OF SOFTER MATERIAL 


Some soils and rocks have layers of harder material 
between thin layers of softer material, which may not 
be detected unless thorough investigation is carried 


IS 17237 : 2019 


out. The softer layers may undergo marked changes 
in properties if the loading on them is increased or 
decreased by the proposed construction or affected 
by related changes in ground water conditions. These 
should be taken into account. 


16 SPACING BETWEEN EXISTING AND NEW 
FOUNDATION 


The deeper the new foundation and the nearer to the 
existing it is located, the greater the damage is likely 
to be. The minimum horizontal spacing between 
existing and new footings shall be equal to the width 
of the wider one. While the adoption of such provision 
shall help minimizing damage to adjacent foundation, 
an analysis of bearing capacity and settlement shall be 
carried out to have an appreciation of the effect on the 
adjacent existing foundation. 


17 LOADS ON FOUNDATIONS 


17.1 Loads on a foundation are those forces imparted 
by the structure it is supporting, in any of the form 
given below: 

a) vertical either upwards or downwards, 

b) horizontal or lateral, and 


c) moment or couple. 


17.2 The following loads shall be considered for design 
of foundations: 


17.2.1 Permanent Load 


This is the actual service load/sustained load consisting 
of dead loads and live loads of a structure which give 
rise to stresses and deformations in the soil below 
foundation causing its settlement. 


17.2.2 Transient Load 


This is a momentary or sudden load imparted to a 
structure due to wind or seismic vibrations. Due to 
its transitory nature, the stresses in the soil below the 
foundation carried by such loads are allowed certain 
percentage increase over the allowable safe values. 


17.3 Foundations shall be proportioned for the 
following combination of loads: 

a) Dead load + live load, and 

b) Dead load + live load + wind load or seismic load. 
17.4 Dead load also includes the weight of column/ 


wall, footings, foundations, overlying fill but excludes 
the weight of the displaced soil. 


17.5 Live loads from the floors above as specified in 
IS 875 (Part 2), shall be taken in proportioning and 
designing the foundations. 


17.6 Where wind or seismic load is less than 25 percent 
of that due to dead and live loads, it may be neglected in 


design and first combination of load shall be compared 
with the safe bearing load to satisfy allowable bearing 
pressure. 


17.7 Where wind or seismic load is more than 
25 percent of that due to dead and live loads, 
foundations may be so proportioned that the pressure 
due to combination of load (that is, dead + live + 
wind load ) does not exceed the safe bearing capacity 
by more than 25 percent. When seismic forces are 
considered, the safe bearing capacity shall be increased 
as specified inIS 1893. In non-cohesive soils, analysis 
for liquefaction and settlement under earthquake shall 
also be made. 


18 SETTLEMENT 


18.1 Uniform Settlement 


The magnitude of the settlement that should occur, when 
foundation loads are applied to the ground, depend 
on the rigidity of substructure and compressibility of 
the underlying strata. In silts and clays the settlement 
may continue for a long period after the construction 
of structure. Due allowance shall, therefore, need be 
made for this slow consolidation settlement. In sand 
and gravels, the settlement is likely to be complete to 
a great extent by the end of the construction activities. 
In strata of organic soils, settlement may continue 
almost indefinitely. For the safety of foundations, the 
engineer-in-charge should be well familiar with all 
causes of settlement. Foundations may settle due to 
some combination of the following reasons: 


a) Elastic compression of the foundation material 
and the underlying soil; 


b) Consolidation including secondary compression; 


c) Ground water lowering that is, specially repeated 
lowering and raising of water level in loose 
granular soils tend to compact the soil and 
cause settlement of the foundations. Prolonged 
lowering of the water table in fine grained 
soils may introduce settlements because of the 
extrusion of water from the voids. Pumping water 
or draining water by wells or pipes from granular 
soils without adequate filter material as protection 
may, in a period of time, carry a sufficient amount 
of fine particles away from the soil and cause 
settlement; 

d) Seasonal swelling and shrinkage of expansive 
clays; 

e) Ground movement on earth slopes, for example, 
surface erosion, slow creep or landslides; 

f) Other causes, such as adjacent excavation, mining 
subsidence and underground erosion by streams or 
floods; and 

g) The effects of vegetation leading to shrinking and 
swelling of clay soils. 


18.2 Differential Settlements 


The foundations of different elements of a structure may 
have unequal settlements and the difference between 
such settlements will cause differential settlement. 
Some of the causes for differential settlements are as 
follows: 


a) Geologic and physical non-uniformity or 
anomalies in type, structure, thickness, and density 
of the soil medium ( pockets of sand in clay, clay 
lenses in sand, wedge like soil strata, that is, lenses 
in soil), an admixture of organic matter, peat, mud, 
etc; 

b) Non-uniform pressure distribution from 
foundation to the soil due to non-uniform loading 
and incomplete loading of the foundations; 

c) Varying water regime at the construction site; 

d) Over stressing of soil at adjacent site by heavy 
structures built next to light ones; 

e) Overlap ofstress distribution in soil from adjoining 
structures; 

f) Unequal expansion of the soil due to excavation 
for footings; 

g) Non-uniform extrusion 

settlements; and 


development of 


h) Non-uniform structural disruptions or disturbance 
of soil due to freezing and thawing, swelling, 
softening and drying of soils. 


18.3 Criteria for Settlement Analysis for Shallow 
Foundation 


18.3.1 For foundations resting on coarse grained soils, 
the settlements shall be estimated corresponding to 
the load mentioned in 17.1.3(b), since in such type of 
soils, settlements occur within a very short period of 
loading. 


18.3.2 For fine grained soils, the settlements shall 
be estimated corresponding to permanent loads. 
Dead load and all fixed equipment are considered 
as permanent. Generally, one half of the design live 
load may be taken as being permanent. The engineer 
shall use his judgement in each project work to 
determine what loads are permanent and what are 
temporary. Therefore, it appears reasonable to reduce 
the differential settlement due to live load variation by 
maintaining equal pressure for all foundations under 
the service load. This may be done by the following 
procedure: 


a) Determine the required bearing area for a column 
having the largest live load to dead load ratio. In 
the conventional method of design, the area (A) is 
given by: 

Dead load + live load 


Allowable bearing capacity 


IS 17237 : 2019 


b) Compute for this same column the design bearing 
value: 


service load 
ry 
c) Determine the area for all other columns by the 
use of,q, that is: 
Service load 
qda 


d) For calculation of settlement of foundations, 
IS 8009 (Part 1), may be referred. 


Bearing area = 


18.3.3 The total settlement of the foundations shall be 
not more than permissible. 


18.3.4 The permissible value of settlement for different 
types of structures are given in respective Indian Standards. 


18.3.5 Differential settlement and/or tilt (angular 
distortion) of the structures shall not be more than 
the permissible values. The differential settlement 
shall be obtained by taking the difference maximum 
and minimum settlement. Tilt shall be calculated by 
dividing the differential settlement by the distance 
between points of related maximum and minimum 
settlement. 


18.4 Settlement Analysis for Deep Foundation 


The permissible values of total settlement, differential 
settlement, and tilt (angular distortion) have been 
specified in the relevant Indian Standard. The settlement 
shall be calculated according to IS 8009 (Part 2). 


19 STABILITY 
AND SLIDING 


AGAINST OVERTURNING 


The stability of the foundation against sliding and 
overturning shall be checked, and the factors of safety 
shall conform to the following requirements. 


19.1 Sliding 


The factor of safety against sliding of structures which 
resist lateral forces (such as retaining walls) shall be 
not less than 1.5 when dead load, live load and earth 
pressures are considered together with wind load or 
seismic forces. When dead load, live load and earth 
pressure only are considered, the factor of safety shall 
be not less than I-75. 
NOTE — For structures founded on soils with low frictional 
coefficient (that is, slippery material), safety against sliding 
may be improved by providing anchor type cut-off walls or 
piles to take the excess load over that resisted by friction or an 
inclined underside of the base. 


19.2 Overturning 


The factor of safety for shallow foundation against 
overturning shall be not less than 1.5 when dead load, 
live load and earth pressures are considered together 


IS 17237 : 2019 


with wind load or seismic forces. When dead load, 
live load and earth pressures only are considered, the 
factor of safety shall be not less than 2.Such factor of 
safety is to be calculated on the basis of a conventional 
assumption that these foundations are free, that is, there 
is no lateral movement of the earth. The factor of safety 
of other types of foundation is covered in relevant 
Indian Standard. 


20 BEARING CAPACITY 


The safe bearing capacity for shallow foundation shall 
be calculated in accordance with IS 6403.The method 
of computation of safe bearing capacity for other types 
of foundations has been specified in the relevant Indian 
Standards. It is recommended that safe bearing capacity 
shall be calculated on the basis of soil test data and in 
the absence of such data for preliminary design; the 
local values may serve as guidelines. 


21 PRELIMINARY 
CONSTRUCTION 


WORK FOR 


The construction of access roads, main sewers 
and drains should preferably be completed before 
commencing the work of foundations alternatively, 
sufficient precautions shall be taken to protect the 
already constructed foundations during subsequent 
work. 


21.1 Clearance of Site 


Any obstacles, including the stump of trees, likely 
to interfere with the work shall be removed. Holes 
left by digging, such as those due to removal of old 
foundation, uprooted trees, burrowing by animals, etc, 
shall be back-filled with soil and well compacted. 


21.2 Drainage 


If the site of a structure is such that surface water shall 
drain towards it, land may be dressed or drains laid to 
divert the water away from the site. 


21.3 Setting Out 


Generally the site shall be levelled before the layouts of 
foundations are set out. In case of sloping terrain, care 
shall be taken to ensure that the dimensions on plans 
are set out correctly in one or more horizontal planes. 


21.3.1 The layout of foundations shall be set out with 
steel tapes. Angle should be set out with theodolites in 
the case of important and intricate structures where the 
length of area exceeds 16 m. In other cases these shall 
be set out by measurement of sides. In rectangular or 
square setting out, diagonals shall be checked to ensure 
accuracy. The setting out of walls shall be facilitated by 
permanent row of pillars, parallel to and at a suitable 
distance beyond the periphery of the building. The 
pillars shall be located at junctions of cross walls 
with the peripheral line of pillars. The centre lines of 


the cross walls shall be extended to and permanently 
erected on the plastered tops of the corresponding sets 
of pillars. The datum lines parallel to and at the known 
fixed distance from the centre lines of the external walls 
also be permanently worked on the corresponding rows 
of pillars to pillars to serve as checks on the accuracy of 
the work as it proceeds. The tops of these pillars shall 
be at the same level and preferably at the plinth or floor 
level. The pillars shall be of sizes not less than 25 cm 
wide and shall be bedded sufficiently deep into ground 
so that they are not disturbed. 


22 PROTECTION OF EXCAVATION 


22.1 The protection of excavation during construction 
of timbering and dewatering operations, where 
necessary, shall be done in accordance with IS 3764. 


22.2 After excavation, the bottom of the excavation 
shall be cleared of all loose soil and rubbish and shall 
be levelled, where necessary. The bed shall be wetted 
and compacted by heavy rammers to an even surface. 


22.3 Excavation in clay or other soils that are liable 
to be affected by exposure to atmosphere shall, 
wherever possible, be concreted as soon as they are 
dug. Alternatively the bottom of the excavation shall be 
protected immediately by 8 cm thick layer of cement 
concrete not leaner than mix 1 : 5 : 10 over which shall 
come the foundation concrete; or in order to obtain a 
dry hard bottom, the last excavation of about 10 cm 
shall be removed only before concreting. 


22.4 The refilling of the excavation shall he done with 
care so as not to disturb the constructed foundation, 
and shall be compacted in layers not exceeding 15 cm 
thick with sprinkling of minimum quantity of water 
necessary for proper Compaction. 


22.5 If required, protection wall may be constructed. 


23 CONNECTION BETWEEN STEEL 
SUPPORT STRUCTURE AND FOUNDATION 


23.1 The connections of steel support structures to their 
concrete foundations shall be ensured by anchor or 
hold down bolts. 


23.2 Number of bolts shall be determined by design 
subject to a minimum of 2 numbers. 


23.3 Correct position of anchor bolts shall be ensured. 


23.4 Nuts and washers of adequate steel grade and 
quality shall be used to secure against loosening, 
especially if subjected to dynamic loads. 


23.5 Anchor bolts shall be protected against corrosion. 


23.6 Anchor bolts to conform IS 5624. 


IS No. 
269 : 2015 


432 (Part 1) 
: 1982 


432 (Part 2) 
: 1982 


455 : 2015 


456 : 2000 


875 (Part 2) 


: 1987 


1786 : 2008 


1489 (Part 1 
and 2) : 2015 


1786 : 2008 


1892 : 1979 


1893 : 1984 


2809 : 1972 


1080 : 1985 


2950 (Part 1) 
: 1981 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 2 ) 


IS 17237 : 2019 


LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 


Title 


Ordinary portland cement — 
Specification (sixth revision) 


Mild steel and medium tensile steel 
Bbrs and hard-drawn steel wire for 
concrete reinforcement: Part 1 Mild 
steel and medium tensile steel bars 
(third revision) 


Mild steel and medium tensile steel 
bars and hard-drawn steel wire for 
concrete reinforcement: Part 2 Hard 
drawn steel wire (third revision) 


Portland slag cement — 
Specification (fifth revision) 


Plain and reinforced concrete — 
Code of practice (fourth revision) 


Code of practice for design 
loads (other than earthquake) for 
buildings and structures: Part 2 
Imposed loads (second revision) 


High strength deformed steel 
bars and wires for concrete 
reinforcement (fourth revision) 


Portlandpozzolanacement — 
Specification 


High strength deformed steel 
bars and wires for concrete 
reinforcement (fourth revision) 


Code of practice for subsurface 
investigation for foundations (first 
revision) 


IS No. 


2911 (Part 1/ 
Sec 1) : 2010 


2911 (Part 1/ 
Sec 2) : 2010 


2911 (Part 1/ 
Sec 3) : 2010 


2911 (Part 1/ 
Sec 4) : 2010 


2911 (Part 2) 
: 1980 


2911 (Part 3) 
: 1980 


2911 (Part 4) 
: 2013 


3764 : 1992 

Criteria for earthquake resistant 
design of structures (fourth 5871 : 1987 
revision) 
Glossary of terms and symbols 6403 : 1981 
relating to soil engineering (first 
revision) 
Code of practice for design and ; 
construction of shallow foundations a 
in soils (other than raft, ring and 
shell) (second revision) 8009 (Part 2) 

: 1980 


Code of practice for design and 
construction of raft foundations: 
Part 1 Design (second revision) 


Title 


Code of practice for design and 

construction of pile foundations: 
Part 1 Concrete piles, Section 1 
Driven cast in-situ concrete piles 
(second revision) 


Code of practice for design and 
construction of pile foundations: 
Part 1 Concrete piles, Section 2 
Bored cast in-situ concrete piles 
(second revision) 


Code of practice for design and 
construction of pile foundations: 
Part 1 Concrete piles, Section 
3 Driven precast concrete piles 
(second revision) 


Code of practice for design and 
construction of pile foundations: 
Part 1 Concrete piles, Section 4 
Bored precast concrete piles (first 
revision) 


Code of practice for design and 
construction of pile foundations: 
Part 2 Timber piles (first revision) 


Code of practice for design and 
construction of pile foundations: 
Part 3 Under-reamed piles (first 
revision) 


Design and construction of pile 
foundations — Code of practice: 
Part 4 Load test on piles (second 
revision) 


Code of safety for excavation work 
(first revision) 


Bitumen mastic for tanking and 
damp-proofing (first revision) 


Code of practice for determination 
of bearing capacity of shallow 
foundations (first revision) 


Specification for super sulphated 
cement (first revision) 


Code of practice for calculation of 
settlement of foundations: Part 2 
Deep foundations subjected to 
symmetrical static vertical loading 


IS 17237 : 2019 


IS No. Title IS No. Title 
8014 : 1983 Classification and nomenclature 2974 (Part3) Code of practice for design 
of dyeing and finishing machinery : 1992 and construction of machine 
(first revision) foundations: Part 3 Foundations for 


rotary type machines (medium and 


9527 (Part 1) | Code of practice for design and high frequency) (second revision) 


: 1981 construction of port and harbour 
structures: Part 1 Concrete 2974 (Part 4) Code of practice for design 
monoliths : 1979 and construction of machine 


foundations: Part 4 Foundations 
for rotary type machines of low 
frequency (first revision) 


2974 (Part1) Code of practice for design 
: 1982 and construction of machine 
foundations: Part 1 Foundation 
for reciprocating type machines 2974 (Part5) Code of practice for design 
(second revision) : 1987 and construction of machine 


fi ti : Part F ti 
2974 (Part2) Code of practice for design T a Lines st 


i : for impact machines other than 
: 1980 and construction of machine hammer (forging. and’ stamping 
foundations: Part 2 Foundations 


i ; , pig breaker, d h d 
for impact type machines (hammer E a E 


f jolter) (first revision 
foundations) (first revision) i Gi ) 


ANNEX B 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Composition of the Panel-1 on ‘Aerial Ropeways’ MED 06 


Organizations Representative(s) 
In Personal Capacity SHRI A. BHADRA (Convener) 
In Personal Capacity Suri C. K. KARMAKAR 
In Personal Capacity, Kolkata SHRI DWIJENDRA LAL Das (Invitee) 
CSIR-CIMFR, Dhanbad Dr DeBASISH BASAK 
CRS, Pvt Ltd, Kolkata SHRI K. Bose 
Damodar Ropeways & Infra Ltd, Kolkata SHRI RANJAN MUKHERJEE 
Usha Breco Limited, Ghaziabad SHRI MANOJ PANWAR 

Member Secretary 


Suri A. K. MOHINDROO 
Scientist ‘C’ (MED), BIS 


10 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 06 (13886). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi f 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


