NAT HIAF IS 17422 : 2021 
Indian Standard 


aval ari aiaa & watano 
Taree ma BH eiaa — ANAT 


Assessment of The Environmental 
Health Impacts of River Valley 
Projects — Guidelines 


ICS 13.020.30 


© BIS 2021 


anda AM St 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Te TH AMT, ay Reef — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


June 2021 Price Group 3 


Environmental Assessment and Management of Water Resources Projects Sectional Committee, WRD 24 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Environmental 
Assessment and Management of Water Resources Projects Sectional Committee had been approved by the Water 
Resources Division Council. 


The aim of Environmental Health Impact Assessment (EHIA) is to provide the decision maker with the best 
possible information on the environmental health effects by predicting and assessing the impacts of development 
on environmental parameters, which have a strong significance for health. These include, for example, increase 
in levels of malaria-carrying mosquito populations, increased contact between human and parasitic diseases, etc. 
In predicting future changes in environmental health factors, it is possible to indicate the potential changes in 
health which may be caused by development. These indications may then be used by local health experts, in 
conjunction with other considerations, to assess future changes in morbidity and mortality for presentation to the 
decision maker. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


IS 17422 : 2021 


Indian Standard 


ASSESSMENT OF THE ENVIRONMENTAL 
HEALTH IMPACTS OF RIVER VALLEY 
PROJECTS — GUIDELINES 


1 SCOPE 


This standard provides guidance on the methodology 
and criteria for Environmental Health Impact 
Assessment for the projects on hydropower, irrigation, 
drainage, flood control and multipurpose river valley 
projects. 


2 AREAS WHERE ENVIRONMENTAL 
CHANGE IS TO BE CONSIDERED 


In case of hydropower, irrigation, drainage, flood 
control and multipurpose projects, the development 
interacts with the environmental health hazards to 
cause environmental change, associated with the 
hydrological changes. The areas of such interaction are, 
but not limited to the following: 


a) Areas of construction activity for example areas 
involving blasting and excavation activities, 
vehicular movement, dumping and quarry 
activities, creation of temporary access routes and 
clearance of vegetation. 


b) Areas where water is made available for the 
development through canals, irrigation channels, 
etc. 


c) Areas where inundation takes place with the 
construction of a dam or reservoir. 


d) Areas where there is movement of people away 
or near to the project area for eg. areas involving 
introduction of workforce for construction of a 
project and where rehabilitation of communities is 
done. 


e) Areas of change in agricultural practices. 
f) Areas involved in introduction or expansion of 
fisheries/hatcheries. 


g) Areas involved in generation/storage/disposal of 
municipal/biomedical/hazardous wastes in new 
and relocated communities and in temporary 
communities during construction. 


h 


wm 


Areas used in the provision of infrastructure for 
permanent and temporary communities including 
roads, transport facilities, water supply, other 
services and utilities. 


j) Areas involved in maintenance measures 
including pest control, channel clearance. 


3 BASELINE INFORMATION 


Environmental Health Impacts of a given water 
resources project may be identified through information 
on local environmental and social conditions besides 
important temporal and spatial variations along 
with their time period and geographical coverage. 
As far as possible existing information should be 
utilized for compiling the baseline information and a 
long term monitoring mechanism should be devised 
for collecting additional information as the project 
progresses. Information should necessarily be site 
specific. Information of one area cannot be assumed 
to apply equally to a different, although superficially 
similar, area. Information on system failures should be 
collected, even by inferring likely failure rates from 
experience with similar projects elsewhere. 


This baseline information should include the following: 


a) The major health problems in the area along with 
the level of infection and degree of resistance, 
and/or diseases introduced by the migrants and 
incoming settlers. 


b 


wm 


Existing physical, biological and environmental 
factors determining disease levels in an area and 
exposure to disease. 


The size, location and characteristics of the 
existing human population, the degree of contact 
with water, sanitation arrangements, and eating 
habits to determine transmission pathways for 
existing disease problems. 


c 


wm 


d) The degree of resistance of the weeds and pests for 
the weedicide and pesticide. 


e) The nutritional status of new settlers especially for 
children in the age group of under 5 years. 


f) Prevalence of water borne, water washed and 
water based diseases. 


g) The specific vector species (of mosquito, snail, 
bird etc.) and disease organisms responsible for the 
transmission of diseases. The baseline data should 
include their life-cycles, breeding periodicity and 
periods of maximum disease transmission. 


h 


© 


Prediction of effects of development on hydrology 
and water quality particularly in new water bodies 
including increased salt levels in downstream 
flows. 


IS 17422 : 2021 


j) Information on medical/health infrastructure 
availability in the project area and its vicinity, 
namely. Primary Health Centre/Medical 
sub-centre/District Hospital etc and necessity of 
strengthening the same after evaluating the present 
and future needs of the local people/project. 


k) Information on medical facilities 
medical/paramedical staff available 
centers 


including 
in these 


m) No project scenario — There will be changes in 
the environment and health even if the proposed 
activity is not implemented. These should be 
taken into account in the assessment to provide a 
‘moving baseline’ for comparison 


4 METHODS OF OBTAINING BASE LINE 
INFORMATION 


4.1 Available Information 


Information on the existing environment can be 
obtained from local or national government statistics on 
population and health or from previous environmental 
and, ecological studies of the area or by conducting 
new studies/surveys. 


4.2 Field Information 


A comprehensive survey programme must be designed 
specifically for each different location, taking into 
account the local conditions and amount of information 
already available. The programme may require 
inputs from a range of specialists, including medical 
specialists, environmental health specialists, ecologists 
and biologists. This input should be over a period of 
time sufficient to encompass seasonal variations in 
habitats and life-cycles. Adoption of time and cost 
effective methods like utilisation of multi-spectral and 
multi-temporal satellite data and dynamic monitoring 
may be resorted to for environmental health impact 
assessment, wherever possible. The survey programme 
should include, but is not limited to, the following: 


a) Surveys of existing health problems which 
may include medical examination of a sample 
of the local population over a period of time to 
establish levels of infection, resistance to disease 
and disease variations with time. The sample of 
population examined should cover a range of 
ages, occupations and locations within the area. 
The level of infection may be found using various 
indices like Annual Parasite Index for Malaria, 
Breateux Index for Dengue. 


b) Prevalence of cases with fever and skin infection 
needs to be collected. A high prevalence or a 
sudden increase in such cases indicates a rise in 
water borne and water washed diseases. Hence 
quality of water needs to be studied. 


c) Detailed study/observation of current social habits, 
particularly detailed examination of sanitation, 
and of human contact with water should be done 
to establish current transmission routes. 


d) Vector Population sampling should be done to 
establish the main transmitters of disease. Field 
observations over a period of time should be done 
to establish the life-cycle, habitats and limiting 
factors for the vector species identified. 


4.2.1 Establishment of a monitoring system to detect 
the following: 


a) Change in prevalence of malnutrition over a 
period of time for children in the age group of 
under 5 years. 


b) Change in prevalence of water borne, water based 
and water washed diseases over a period of time. 


c) Change in pattern of endemic diseases by 
introduction of new diseases. 


5 POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH 
IMPACTS 


5.1 Effects due to the project can be beneficial or 
adverse and its impacts on all aspects of health need to 
be studied in detail. 


5.2 Effects can be local, regional, or national in scale. 
Effects may be reversible or irreversible, or irreparable. 
Effect can occur over the short or the long term, they 
may be temporary or continuous, and they may increase 
or decrease with time. 


5.3 Effects may be direct or indirect. A project activity 
may stimulate other developments which may have 
effects on the environment and health; these indirect 
effects must also be considered as consequences of the 
proposed project activity. A project activity may also 
establish precedence for further development which 
may ultimately result in a much greater effect on the 
environment and health. Effects are not necessarily 
restricted to the immediate interaction between a 
project activity and the environment but these primary 
effects by themselves can be the cause of secondary and 
higher order effects. Natural events in the surrounding 
environment (floods, etc) may also cause the project 
activity to lead to exceptional effects. 


5.4 Conducive conditions lead to increase in water 
washed diseases and spread of communicable 
diseases by the faecal-oral route. These conditions are 
overcrowding, pressure on sanitation etc., which may 
occur in newly relocated communities. New diseases or 
new strains of the diseases are likely to be introduced 
in an area through immigration of construction workers 
or new settlers. Relocated communities/ new settlers 


get exposed to diseases to which they have little or no 
immunity. There are also chances of introduction of new 
vectors, their infection and re-infection with diseases 
from new settlers and migrant population. Prevalence 
and distribution of existing infected vectors may also 
change in relation to hydrological, morphological, 
climatological, biological changes in the availability of 
suitable habitats for breeding and survival. There could 
be overburdening of health and other social services 
impacting health of residents and workers. All these 
likely impacts should be thoroughly studied. 


5.5 Possibilities of malnutrition, nutritional deficiencies 
or toxic effects exist. These occur due to changes in 
staple foods, contamination of soil or agricultural water 
supplies, pollution of air, water or soil by effluents and 
emissions, fertilizers or pesticides, reduced productivity 
of soils and fisheries, lowering or rising of water table 
etc. 


6 ASSESSMENT AND PREDICTION OF 
POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH 
IMPACTS BASED ON EXAMINATION OF 
THE PROPOSED WATER RESOURCES 
PROJECTS 


6.1 The various assessments that need to be undertaken 
are, but not limited to, the following: 


a) Assess effects of the irrigation system on 
hydrology, levels and velocity of water flow, 
rates of seepage from the system, location and 
seasonality of standing water and existence of 
wave action. Assess effects of the irrigation system 
on water quality and temperature. Also assess 
effect of submergence/ clearance of vegetation, 
aquatic vegetation and canal bank plantation. 


b) Collect and compile information on the nature of 
the completed irrigated agriculture development, 
for example the configuration of the channels, 
spillways, storage ponds, steepness of banks, 
materials to be used for construction, access 
roads, temporary accommodation for construction 
workers, etc. Information on operation of 
the system for eg. frequency of inundation, 
maintenance of water levels, use of chemicals etc. 
may also be assessed. 


c) Health related assessment — Health Risk — 
Assessment needs to be done for the residential 
population in that area. This includes Hazard 
Identification, Exposure assessment, Dose 
Response Assessment, Risk Characterization 
wherever applicable. The various assessments 
required are as follows: 


1) Assess change in incidence of water borne 
diseases including change in habitats and in 
prevalence for water borne disease organisms, 
changes in human exposure to water which 
contains disease organisms. 


IS 17422 : 2021 


2) Assess change in incidence of water based 
diseases including changes in habitats and 
in prevalence for aquatic disease vectors 
including changes in human exposure to water 
which contains disease organisms. 


3) Assess change in incidence of water related 
diseases including change in habitats for 
insect vectors; change in prevalence of disease 
transmitters, change in human exposure to 
insect vectors. 


4) Assess change in incidence of water washed 
diseases with the change in availability of 
water and/or personal hygiene facilities and/or 
change in personal hygiene practice. 


5) Assess change in incidence of all diseases with 
the immigration of an infected work force; 
immigration and sub-sequent emigration of 
previously uninfected workforce; relocation of 
communities; settlement of newcomers. 


6) Assess effects of the increased surface water, 
rise in water table, changes in water flow, 
microclimatic changes, changes in human 
settlement etc., irrigation system structure and 
hydrology on disease organisms and vector 
habitats, feeding and breeding sites etc. 


7) Assess and predict changes to environment and 
habitat factors favoring disease transmission 
and effects of changes in these factors on 
disease vectors. Assess considerations for 
increased longevity of mosquitoes, increasing 
the probability of biting humans more than 
once and thus transferring the disease. 


8) Assess availability of water supplies and/or 
personal hygiene facilities within the scheme 
and assess proper disposal of human waste. 


6.2 The various predictions that need to be done are, 
but not limited to, the following: 


a) Prediction of how human exposure to disease will 
change following the development and future 
incidence of disease in human beings. 


b) Prediction of changes in incidence of water borne, 
water based and water related disease 


c) Prediction of change in number of cases of disease 
and change in individual risk of disease, following 
the development 


7 QUANTIFICATION OF THE IMPACTS 


Quantification of the identified impacts should be done 
inorder to describe the change in different environmental 
health factors and the variables to measure the ultimate 
impact leading to the effect. This should follow the 
following logical sequence: 


a) Predictions should be done to find out the severity 
of impacts on the present state of the physical, 


IS 17422 : 2021 


biological and human environment, 
available data or by surveys and monitoring; 


using 


b) Comprehensive predictions to give complete 
information on how the physical, biological and 
human environment will change and how these 
changes will affect environmental health factors, 
for adoption of appropriate mitigating measures. 


c) Prediction of likely changes in disease incidence 
based on detailed information about the existing 
disease levels in the project area, prevailing social 
conditions and experience gained from similar 
projects elsewhere. 


d) Expert judgment to correlate information 
on magnitude of the future changes in the 
environment and on human exposure to disease 
in future disease incidence, to be followed by 
extrapolation to different areas and projects. 


8 MITIGATION MEASURES 


Adverse effects on health may be reduced by measures 
designed to influence identified factors. These measures 
should be specific to the aims of the project, types of 
development, stages in construction or operation, local 
climate and physical conditions and should include 
local, social, cultural, economical and political factors. 
They should allow the aims of the project to be achieved 
within the required time-period. These measures should 
also be specific to the types of disease organisms and 
vectors causing health effects. Key groups of measures 
are as indicated below: 


a) Existing knowledge about design which can 
reduce adverse impacts on health must be gathered 
and used in designing the project 


b) For preventing a problem from arising, smaller 
scale control of the environment during the 
operational phase is required like using physical 
measures including scrubbing of vector breeding 
sites and drainage of waterlogged areas, chemical 
measures such as spraying and biological methods 
such as introduction of a competitor or predator 
species. 

c) Control of human behavior to reduce vector- 
pathogen contact is achieved through provision 
of alternative safe water supplies, location of 
settlements away from main water bodies or 


reducing recreational and sanitary use of water 
bodies, ensuring adequate supplies of water for 
washing etc. Provisions of sewage treatment, and 
refuse/excreta disposal, controlling secondary 
disease hosts in zoonotic diseases, provision 
of adequate health care facilities and health 
monitoring. 


d) Suitable measures may be resorted to prevent or 
eliminate disease effects on human health. Based 
on the monitoring system established, continuous 
surveillance is needed for early intervention to 
control the spread of water borne, water washed 
and water based diseases. 


e) Measures need to be taken for proper collection, 
segregation, storage, transportation, processing 
and disposal of municipal solid waste, bio-medical 
waste, hazardous wastes from the construction 
and rehabilitation sites etc. 


9 ORGANISATION AND PRESENTATION OF 
INFORMATION 


In a decision making process, a choice is made amongst, 
implementing the project as proposed , implementing 
measures designed to minimize undesirable impacts, 
choosing an alternative development or abandoning the 
project, altogether. Inorder to aid the decision making 
in the environmental health impact assessment process 
for the implementation of a river valley project the 
following information should be presented sequentially: 


a) Identification of the key issues based on analysis 
of results which may affect the decision; 


b) Organization and presentation of the results of the 
assessment in a matrix format, between impacts 
and alternatives; 


c) Assigning the weights; 
d) Summarization into key alternatives and impacts; 


e) Indication of the factors affecting the decision, 
such as cost and technical feasibility; and 


f) Proposed mitigation measures. 


The approach should be to present information about 
all the impacts of alternative courses of action or 
identify those impacts which are crucial to the decision 
or to illustrate how the decision might be affected by 
different judgments about the relative importance of 
impacts. 


IS 17422 : 2021 


ANNEX A 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Composition of Environmental Assessment and Management of Water Resource 
Projects Sectional Committee WRD 24 


Organization 
Central Water Commission, New Delhi 
Central Board Of Irrigation & Power, New Delhi 


Central Ground Water Board, New Delhi 
Central Pollution Control Board, New Delhi 
Central Water Commission, New Delhi 
Geological Survey of India 

Maulana Azad Medical College, New Delhi 
Ministry of Environment & Forests, New Delhi 
Narmada Control Authority, Indore 


Narmada Water Resources and Water Supply 
Department, Gandhi Nagar 


National Institute of Hydrology, Roorkee 


Regional Remote Sensing Centre-East Under National 
Remote Sensing Centre, Hyderabad 


National Water Development Agency, New Delhi 


NHPC Limited, Faridabad 


North Eastern Regional Institute of Water and Land 
Management, Assam, Tezpur 


NTPC Limited, Noida 


THDC (India) Limited, Rishikesh 
Wapcos, Gurugram 


Meri, Water Resources Department, Maharashtra, 
Nashik 


ICAR — Central Inland Fisheries Research Institute, 
Kolkata 


IIT Roorkee 


Representative(s) 
SHRI AMRENDRA KUMAR SINGH (Chairman) 


Dr G. P. PATEL 

Suri Upay CHANDER (Alternate) 
SHRI G. C. Pati 

SRIMATI RuMI MUKHERJEE (Alternate) 
SHRI R. M. BHARDWAJ 

Suri N. C. DurGaraL (Alternate) 
Director (EM) B. B. SAIKIA 

Deputy. DIRECTOR (EM) (Alternate) 
Dr K. JAYABALAN 

Deputy DIRECTOR GENERAL (Alternate) 
Dr NANDINI SHARMA 

Dr S. KERKETTA (Alternate) 
Dr MonIT SAXENA 

Deputy Director (Alternate) 
SHRIMATI USHA DWIVEDI 


Suei V. P. KAPADIA 


Dr C. K. JAIN 
Dr PRADEEP Kumar (Alternate) 


Dr S. BANDOPADHYAY 

Dr V. M. Cuowpary (Alternate) 
SHRI R. K. JAIN 

SHRI MUZAFFAR AHMAD (Alternate) 


SHRI GAURAV KUMAR 
Suri AsHis Kumar Das (Alternate I) 
Ms Snreya (Alternate II) 


Pror AMULYA CH. DEBNATH 
Dr UzzaL Mant Hazarika (Alternate) 


Dr Vuay PRAKASH 
Dr D. L. NANDEsHWaR (Alternate) 


Dr D. L. Baart, DGM 
SHRI SURAJ AGARWAL (Alternate) 


DR AMAN SHARMA 
SHRI A. STEPHEN Leo (Alternate) 


SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER 
EXECUTIVE ENGINEER (Alternate) 


Dr B. K. Das 


DR SURENDRA KUMAR MISHRA 


IS 17422 : 2021 


Organization 


Cetus Consulting Solution Services Pvt Ltd, 


IRG Systems South Asia Pvt Limited, New Delhi 


Rs Environlink Technologies Pvt Ltd, Gurgaon 
India Water Partnership 
TERI School of Advanced Studies 


Alternate Hydro Energy Centre Indian Institute of 
Technology, Roorkee 


Mu Gamma Consultants Pvt, Ltd 


University School of Environment Management, 
GGSIP University 


AIIMS Rishikesh 
Soil & Land Use Survey of India 


Forest Survey of India 


In Personal Capacity (Jawaharlal Nehru University, 
New Mehrauli Road, New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (A-66, Vrindavan Apartment, Plot 
No. 1, Sector-6, Dwarka, New Delhi) 


In personal capacity, (Dept of Sociology Maitreyi 
College, Delhi Univ South Campus, D-104, Anand 
Niketan, New Delhi) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


Dr Asay PRADHAN 
Dr VIVEK Kumar SINGH (Alternate I) 
PRINCIPAL SCIENTIST (Alternate I) 


SHRI AMIT JAIN 
SHRI KRISHNA Kumar (Alternate) 


DR ARUN BHASKAR 
DR VEENA KHANDURI 


DR VINAY SHANKAR PRASAD SINHA 
SHRIMATI RANJANA Ray CHAUDHARI (Alternate) 


Pror ARUN KUMAR 
Pror M. K. SINGHAL (Alternate) 


Dr GIRIJA K. BHARAT 
Ms Avant! Roy Basu (Alternate) 


Dr DEEKSHA KATYAL 


Dr SUREKHA KISHORE 


SHRIMATI RAJNI TANEJA 
SHRI RAVINDRA KULKARNI (Alternate) 


SHRI ABHAY KUMAR SAXENA 
DR A. L. RAMANATHAN 


Er R. K. KHANNA 


Dr M. KAPUR SHANKAR Dass 


SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (WRD) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


SHRI ALOK SINGH 
ScIENTIST ‘E’ (WRD), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: WRD 24 (10946). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


