IS 13900 : 1993 ( Reaffirmed 2001 )

Indian Standard GENERIC SPECIFICATION FOR COLOUR PICTURE TUBE WITH ELECTROSTATIC FOCUSSING AND ELECTROMAGNETIC DEFLECTION FOR COLOUR TELEVISION RECEIVERS

UDC

621-397-331-242 : 621~397.446

@ BIS 1993

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

SkANLiARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SH+H: NEW DELHI 110002~

November 1993

Price Greup 3

Electron

Tubes Sectional Committee,

LTD 9

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation of Electron Tubes Sectional Committee ( LTD 9 ) and approval of Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. This standard is derived from the provisional specification PQC 97 `Generic specification for colour picture tube with electrostatic focussing and electromagnetic deflection for colour television receivers' which was prepared by India under International Quality Assessment System for Electronics Components ( IECQ ). In reporting the results of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance IS 2 : 1960 (Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised)`. final with

IS 13900 : 1993

Indian Standard GENERIC SPECIFICATION FOR COLOUR PICTURE TUBE WITH ELECTROSTATIC FOCUSSING AND ELECTROMAGNETIC DEFLECTION FOR COLOUR TELEVISION RECEIVERS
1 SCOPE
1.1 This standard

contains:

These processes shall be under the control of the manufacturer but need not be carried out at the same location. 4.2 Structurally Similar Components

Measurement procedure for electric and photometric parameters, - Environmental testing procedure, and - Operating endurance test procedure; for colour picture tubes (CPT ) with electrostatic focussing and electromagnetic deflection for colour television receivers. 2 REFERENCES 2J The Indian Standards listed in Annex A are necessary adjuncts to this standard. 3 GENERAL 3.1 Marking 3.1.1 The picture tube shall be attached with a label containing the following data: - Identification of the picture tube, allotted to it by the manufacturer; - Serial number; ~- The date of manufacture of the picture tube ( the year and the month ), in code or otherwise; - Trade mark; - Country of manufacture; and - Safety warning. 3.1.2 The following data shall the package: be indicated on

-

When simultaneous or successive production is proceeding on several types of tubes having common features, those common features may be sampled from each lot of each type. 4.3 Qualification The manufacturer Approval Procedures shall

meet the requirements for the primary stage of manufacture contained in 4.1 of this document. produce evidence -of conformance to the specification requirements on three consecutive lots for lot-by-lot inspection and on one lot for periodic inspection and qualification approval.

-

Samples shall be taken from the lots in accordance with IS 10673 : 1983. Normal inspection shall be used, but where the sample size is that which would give acceptance on zero defectives, additional specimens shall be taken to meet the sample size to give acceptance on one defective. 4.4 Quality Conformance Inspection The blank details specification ( see IS 13899 : 1993 ) shall prescribe the minimum test schedule. This schedule shall also specify the division into subgroups for the purpose of lot-by-lot and periodic inspection. 4.5 Alternative Test Methods The test and measurement methods given in the relevant specification are not necessarily the only methods which can be used. However, the Inspection manufacturer shall satisfy the Authority that any alternative method which he may use will give results equivalent to those obtained by the methods specified. In case of dispute, for referee and reference purposes the specified methods only shall be used.

Identification of the picture tube ted to it by the manufacturer; Trade mark; and The number of inspection lot.

allot-

4 QUALITY ASSESSMENT PROCEDURES 4.1 Primary Stage of Manufacture The primary stages of manufacture are the process of deposition of the material of the viewing screen, assembly of electron gun structure and the activition of the cathode.

IS 13900: 1993 5 TEST AND MEASUREMENT for Test shall be condiPROCEDURES Procednre-Apply the specified voItage ( current) to the heater and measure the current ( voltage:. When specified, the test shall be made at a Point in time after application of the supply. In the absence of any specified preheat tjme, the heater voltage ( current ) shall have stabilized. In case of dispute, d.c. supply shall be used. Conditions 5.5.3
to

5.1 Standard Conditions

Unless otherwise specified, all tests carried out under standard atmospheric lions for testing as specified below: Temperature Relative humidity pressure Atmospheric 15 45 86 35 "C

75 ",/o 106 kPa

be mentioned voltage time, or current; if required. Leakage the leakage current and the cathode. flowand

Heater Pre-heat

5.2 Visual Inspection Visual inspection shall be carried out under standard atmospheric conditions of test and show that: Marking is legible; moving occurring coating particles on metal quality is

Heuter-Cathode

Purpose - To measure, ing between the heater

There are no freely available; There is no corrosion surface; and External conductive satisfactory.

Procedure - Apply the specified heater voltage or current. Apply the heater to cathode voltage with the heater at a ( 1 ) positive and ( 2 ) negative potential with respect to the cathode. Measure the stable current between the heater and the cathode for each condition. Conditions to be mentioned Heater Heater voltage or current, voltage. Breakand

5.3 Marking The markings shall storage and during handling. not become illegible on service through normal

-

to cathode

5.4 Check of Dimensions The dimensioned outline drawing shall be as stated in IS 5840 ( Parts 1, 2, and 3 ) : 1970. 5.5 Test and Measurement Measurement conditions IS 10503 : 1983. 5.5.1 Total Cathode Current To measure total cathode current Procedures shall be as stated in

5.5.4 Anode Voltage down ( Flashover )

Breakdown/Voltage

that when Purpose - To verify operated with the maximum rated is no evidence cf flashover. Method A

the tube is voltages there

Pllrpose -

Procedure - Apply the specified voltages to the tube electrodes and if specified, apply scan deflection. Adjust g2 voltage to given visual cut-off of spot or raster. The cathode current shall be equal to or greater than the value calculated as follows: Cathode current l=K ( Cut off voltage where K is cathode factor specified. Conditions to be mentioned - Electrode voltages, as applicable; - Deflection/raster screen requirements; Cathode factor K. 5.5.2 Heater Voltage andfor Current Purpose - To ( current ). measure the heater voltage ) 3/2

Procedure - Apply the specified voltages to the Display the specified raster tube electrodes. over the useful screen area and adjust g2 voltage to give the specified screen luminance or There shall be no to cut-off value as required. sign of flashover within a specified period. If required, adjust the g2 voltage to cut-off value and remove the deflecting fields. Tap the tube neck using a forked, rubber covered, wooden hammer for a specified, duration unless otherwise specified, the periodicity shall A suitable design for be four taps per second. a hammer is given in Fig. 1. The tube shall be deemed not to comply with the requirements if flashover causes visible excitation of the screen after the first 5 s of tapping, and for 15 s after tapping has ceased or continuous arcing is observed. Method B Procedure - Apply the specified voltages to the tube electrodes. The circuit shall include a , 2

and

IS 13900 : 1993 specified impedance in the cathode lead and a counting device suitable for counting the voltage pulses which develop over the cathode impedance as a result of flashover. Display the specified raster over the useful screen area and adjust g2 voltage to gite the specified screen luminance or to cut-off value as required. The tube shall be deemed not to comply *.vith the requirements if more than a stated number of Bashes are counted during a specified period or continuous arcing is observed. Conditions to be mentioned voltages, as applicable; scan requirements: luminance, if required; 5.56 If required, tap the tube neck using a forked, rubber covered, wooden hammer for a specified duration. Unless otherwise specified, the periodicity shall be four taps per second. A suitable design for a hammer is given in Fig. 1. The tube shall be deemed not to comply with the requirements if stray emission causes visible excitation of the screen within a specified period after the first five seconds of operation. Conditions to be mentioned vo!tages, and and as applicable; of tapping, excitaif

Electrode Duration required;

Electrode Raster Screen

periodicity for

Duration and periodicity of tapping, if required; -- Input impedance ~of the counting device, if applicable; - Sensitivity of the counting device, if applicable; - Time discrimination between successive pulses of the counting device, if applicable; a!;4 - Period of observation for signs of flashove1..

Period of observation tion, if required. Current

visible

Ratio for R/G nnd RIB anode current ratios

Purpose between

- To determine R/G and R/B.

Procedure - Apply the specified voltages to the tube electrodes. Display the specified raster over the useful screen area and adjust g2 voltage to give the specified screen luminance or to cut-off voltage as required. Measure red, green and blue component of anode current. Conditions 5.5.7 to be mentioned

5.5.5

Stray

Emission

Purpose--To verify that, when the tube is operating with the maximum rated voltages, there is no evidence of stray emission.

Electrode voltage, as applicable; Raster screen requirements; and Screen luminance, if required. Focusstwg To Voltage measure the focus electrode

Procedure - Apply the specified voltages to the tube electrodes and adjust g2 voltage to the illumination ambient The cut-cff value. measured at the screen shall not exceed 5 IUX.
2 OFF RUBBER 00 11x IO 7.9~46 T , TUBE LONG pULfl PLYWOOD

Purpose voltage.

RUBBER SO-60 SHORE DIP. 6 x 424 LONG

STEEL SPRING OD 9*5x DIA 14B 36 LONG FITTING TIGHTLY IN HANDLE

RUDRER

BUFFER _--

SCREW

HEADS

2 OFF WXl,OD SCREW KI SZIJWE SPRiEJC

All dimensions
FIG.

in millimetres.

1

HAMMERFOR COLOUR PICTURETUBE STRAY EMISSION TEST

IS 13900: 1993 Procedure - Apply the specified vohages to the tube electrodes and produce the specified display. Adjust the g2 voltage to the specified value or to give the specified screen luminunus intensity/luminance or the specified beam current. Optimize the focus in two axes at right angles by adjustment of the focus. Unless specified otherwise this optimization of focus shall be performed at the centre of the tube face. A convenient magnifier may be used. Measure focus electrode voltage as specified. Conditions to be mentioned 5.5.8 Electrode g2 voltage luminance voltage, screen or beam as applicable; and luminous current. intensity/ Type of display; vertical deflection to get a spot over the screen. Measure the shift of the spot from the mechanical centre of the screen vertically and horizontally separately. Conditions to be mentioned 5.5.12 Electrode voltage, as applicable. Centre Resolution To verify centre resolution

Purpose -

Procedure - Apply the specified voltages to the tube electrodes. Display the specified raster over the useful screen area and adjust g2 voltage to give specified screen luminance or to cut off value as required. Measure resolution at the centre of the tube. Conditions to be mentioned -

Cathode Spot Cut-off Voltage To determine cathode spot cut-off

Purpose voltage.

Electrode voltages, as apphcable; Raster scan requirements; and Screen luminance, if required. Between External Coating between to

Procedure - Apply the specified voltages to the tube electrodes. Measure cathode voltages for specified beam current ( typically 0.1 microamps, if not specified ). Conditions to be mentioned Electrode voltages, as applicable; Beam current for cut-off. and Cut-off ratio of

5.5.13 Capacitance Anode

Purpose -- To measure capacitance external coating to anode.

Procedure - Measure the capacitance between the anode button and external conducting coating shorted with implosion protection band. 5.5.14 Centre Beam/Outer Beam Convergence centre beam/outer beam

5.5.9 Maximum Ratio of Cathode Voltages, Highest Gun to Lowest Gun Purpose - To determine cathode cut-off voltages. the maximum

Purpose - To measure convergence.

Procedure - Apply the specified tube electrodes. Switch off the vertical deflection to get a spot Measure minimum and maximum cut-off voltage to determine the Conditions to be mentioned 5.5.10 Electrode voltages,

voltages to the horizontal and over the screen. cathode spot ratio.

specified voltages to Procedure - Apply the Display the specified rasthe tube electrodes. ter over the useful screen area and adjust g2 voltage to give the specified screen luminance or to cut-off voltage as required. Measure centre beam convergence ( or outer beam convergence ). Conditions to be mentioned - Electrode voltage, as applicable; _ Raster screen requirements; and - Screen luminance, if required. 5.5.15 Interelectrode To Capacitances interelectrode capacibetween electrodes and Purpose tance.

as applicable.

Photometric Parameters

If required inspection conditions of luminance, grow chromaticity co-ordinates, nonconformity of luminance, non-uniformity of screen glow chromaticity, the white colour dynamic balance quality shall be specified or taken as specified in IS 9883 : 1981. 5.5.11 Raster Centering Shift raster centering shift, horiPurpose - To verify zontal and vertical.

measure

capacitance Procedure - Measure and all other specific electrode shorted together. 55.16 Resistance Between Metal Conductive Coating 4

Procedure - Apply the specified tube electrodes. Switch off the

voltages to the horizontal and

Hardware

IS 13906: 1993 Purpose -

external ware.

To measure the resistance between conducting coating and metal hard-

Procedure - Measure the resistance between metal hardware, that is, implosion protection band and external conductive coating. Conditions to be mentioned -

Examine the screen for uniformity of brightness either by visual inspection or by using a photometer w ith a specified aperture to compare areas of differing brightness against the specified ratio of non-uniformity.
Description of screen blemishes ..- The diameter of diagonals of the quality zones in the screen yeale;:eyl be specified. Zones are identified zone A being the central quality Y zone, surrbunded by zone B, etc. For each zone the maximum number of classified blemished permitted within stated ranges of size acd the minimum permissible separation between them shall be specified.

DC supply voltage

1.5 V to 3.0 V.

5.5.17 Ionizing Radiations
Purpose Procedure -

To measure X-ray radiation.

Apply the specified voltages to the tube electrodes. Display the specified raster over the useful screen area and adjust g2 voltage to give the specified screen luminance or to cut-off value as required. All controls accessible from the outside by hand or by a screw driver or any other tool, and those internal adjustments or presets which are not locked in a reliable manner ( solder joints and paint locking are examples of adequate locking ) are adjusted so as to give maximum radiation while maintaining an intelligible picture for 1 hour at the end of which measurement is made. Measure the amount of radiation at any readilv accessible point using a radiation monitor with an effective area of 10 cm% at a distance of 5 cm from the outer surface of the tube. The procedure shall be prescribed as in IS 616 : 1986.
Conditions io be mentioned -

The size of the blemish is defined as the sum of its length and width divided by two. The permissible separation between any two blemishes lying in adjacent qualitY zones is the sum of the permissible separation allowed for each blemish in its own zone divided by two.
CIasssiJication of Screen Blemislzes

luminance, including particles of opaque foreign matter in the glass faceplate or phosphor, pinholes in the phosphor; etc. Diffuse or translucent spots are permitted up to twice the size of a sharply defined spot.
Bubbles -

Dead spotr -. Areas of no effective

Blisters of the glass.
Colour spots -

of gas within the thickness

Electrode

voltages,

as applicable; and
Screen and Face-

plate

Raster scan requirements; Screen luminance,
qf Fhorescent

Areas of phosphor having a colour response markedly different from the rest of the screen. Diffuse colour spots are permitted up to three times the size of a sharply defined spot.
Cords -

if required.

5.5.18 Quality
Purpose -

Narrow bands of non-homageneous glass having a visibly different index of refraction from the surrounding glass. They are permitted provided that: When viewed they trace on the screen. do not distort the

To verify that the quality of fluorescent screen and faceplate is within specified limits.

the the

Procedure - Apply the specified tube electrodes. Display the ( unfocussed ) over the useful adjust g2 voltage to give the luminance.

voltages to the specified raster screen area and specified screen

They ase not visible when the screen is viewed with the eye normal to the screen and the screen is illuminated with a tungsten filament lamp mounted in a line in front of, and at approximately 45 degree to the screen face. Itztertzal etching - An area of the internal screen face etched during the chemical cleaning process during manufacture. T-checks --Fissures in the glass partially through the thickness. Cracks-Fissures the thickness. 5 in the glass extending extending through

Examine the screen for blemishes in accordance with the appropriate blemish specification ( see description of screen btemishes ). A calibrated microscope shall be used where accurate measurement is required. Where the screen is divided into zones, these may be determined either by direct measurement or by the use of an engraved graticule or frame.

IS 13900 :1993

Bruises - Fissures
Scratches of the glass.

caused

by impact. abrasion in the surface out of

5.5.21

CoIeE Test

Elongated

The tube shall be subjected to a temperature value listed in IS 9000 ( Part 2/Set 2 ) : 1977. 5.5.22 Viljration Test to test prescribed

Chips - Small fragments of glass an otherwise regular surface.

broken

The tube shall be subjected in IS 9000 ( Part 8 ) : 1981. 5.5.23 Implosion Protection The tube shall be subjected in 18.2 of IS 616 : 1986. 5.5.24 Operatirzg Endurance be operated The tube shall 1 000 hours.

Shear marks -Scar appearing on the surface of the glass. These shall not be permitted within the quality zones. 5.5.19 Dry Heat Test to a temperature 3 ) : 1977.

Test to test

prescribed

The tube shall be subjected value listed in IS 9000 ( Part 5.5.20 Damp Heat Test

as

specified

for

The tube shall be subjected IS 9000 ( Part 4 ) : 1979.

to test prescribed

in

Conditions to be mentiofzed - Operating conditions, and - Parameters for post measurements..

ANNEX
LIST IS No. 616 : 1986 OF REFERRED

A
STANDARDS Title 4 ) : 8 ) : Part state 4 Damp ) heat ( steady ( sinusoi-

( Clause 2 )
INDIAN
IS No.

Title Safety requirements for mains operated electronic and related apparatus for household and similar general use I ) : 2 ) : Dimensions tubes : Part of cathode ray 1 Tube out-lines ray

9000 ( Part 1979 9000 ( Part 1981 9883 : 1981

Part 8 Vibration dal ) test

5840 ( Fart 1970 5840 ( Part 1970

Dimension of cathode tubes : Part 2 Bases

Photometric and calorimetric methods of measurements of light emitted by a the cathode-ray tube screen Methods of measurement colour picture tubes of

5840 ( Part 3 ) : 1970 9000

Dimensions of cathode ray tubes : Part 3 EFIT terminals Basic environmental testing procedures for electronic and electrical items Part 2 Cold test

10503 : 198'3 10673 : 1983

Sampling plans and procedures for inspection by attributes for electronic items Blank detail specification for colour picture tube with electrostatic focussing and deflection electromagnetic for colour television recievers

9000 ( Part

2/ Set I to 4 ) : 1977

13899 : 1993

9000 ( Part 3/ Set 1 to 5 ) : 1977

Part

3 Dry heat

test

6

Standard Mark The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is-devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or produceres may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmoious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright ~of all its publications. No part of these publications may be r&produced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed or grade designations. to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. Revision of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of.the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following Monthly Addition'. reference: Dot : No. LTD 9 ( 850 ) Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones
: 331 01 31,

331 13 75

Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone { 331 01 13 31 75 Maniktola t-37 84 99, I 37 86 26, r-53 38 43, `~53 23 84 r235 02 16, 1235 15 19, f632 92 95, 1632 78 91, 37 85 61 37 86 62 53 16 40 235 04 42 235 23 15 632 78 58 632 78 9i

Regional

Offices :

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VIII M, V. I. P. Road, CALCUTTA 700054 Northern Southern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH

160036

: C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East )

Western : Manakalaya,

BOMBAY 400093

Branch : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD, GUWAHATI. HYDERABAP. JAIPUR. KANPUR LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHPURAM.
Printed at Printwell Printers, Aligarh, India

