**•*•••••*•**••• 



A ♦ ^ 



^ 



TTH^ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
The Right to Information, The Right to Live' 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



IS 7089 (1973): Limited Supply Plugs [PGD 19: Lubricating 
Equipments ] 




^■^^^r 



^^s^iHf 









Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 




Bhartrhari — Nitisatakarri 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen' 




'^^^^rr 






BLANK PAGE 




/Ol 



<si£L»iL, 






PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
LIMITED SUPPLY PLUGS 



IS: 7089 -1473 

( Reaffirmed 2003 ) 



UDC mi'12^1 




© Ccfiyrighi 1^74 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BKAVAK, 9 IJAIIADUR 3HAII ZAFAR MA.RC 

NEW DELHI IIOOCII 



Frkf Rs 3 <™ 



Ma^ 1974 




oz a 



IS: 7089 -1973 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
LIMITED SUPPLY PLUGS 

Lubricating Equipment Sectional Committee, EDG 63 

Chairman Representing 

Shbi R. C. Tandah Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) 

Members 
Shbi StriiENDBA Kttmab Taurus Equipment Private Ltd, Dhanbad 

AaAEWALIiA 

Shbi Pbabhas Ktjmab 
Agabwalla ( Alternate ) 
Shbi R. G. Bhubaneswaban Central Mechanical Engineering Research Institute 

( CSIR ), Durgapur 
Shbi A. K. Das ( Alternate ) 
Shbi V. P. Bidani The Fertilizer Corporation of India Ltd, Sindri 

Shbi P. K. Goel Indian Institute of Petroleum ( CSIR ) , Dehra Dun 

Shbi N. Stjbesh ( Alternate ) 
Shbi S. K. Gupta Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Shbi B. K. Ghosh ( Alternate ) 
Shbi H. N. Ojha Heavy Electricals ( India ) Limited, Bhopal 

Shbi N. Neelakakta Tecalemit ( Hind ) Ltd, Calcutta 

Shbi A. Das Gupta ( Aliemate ) 
Shbi P. S. Rao Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 
Shbi R. Ramakeishnan Ashok Leyland Limited, Madras 

Shbi V. V. Rangnekab Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals, 

New Delhi 
Shbi A. Sabkae Mining & Allied Machinery Corporation Ltd, 

Durgapur 
Shbi S.K. De ( Alternate ) 
Shbi M. V. Subbamanian Dodge & Seymour ( India ) Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Shbi P. J. Vebghese Hindustan Steel Limited, Ranchi 

Shbi N. D. Mitba ( Alternate ) 
Shbi S. M. Razvi, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Deputy Director ( Mech Engg ) 

Secretary 
Shbi S. C. Kalba 
Deputy Director ( Mech Engg ), ISI 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1974 
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act { XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



18:7089-1973 

( Continued from page 1 ) 
Panel for Lubricating Nipples, Adaptors and Connectors, EDC 63: PI 



Members 
Shei G, B. Jakhatia 

Shri N» Neelakanta 
Shei A. Saekab 

Shei S. K. De ( Alternate ) 



Representing 



Scale 



Development Commissioner ( Small 

Industries ), New Delhi 

Tecalemit ( Hind ) Ltd, Calcutta 

Mining and Allied Machinery Corporation 
Ltd, Durgapur 



IS: 7089 -1973 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
LIMITED SUPPLY PLUGS 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 5 December 1973, after the draft finahzed by the Lubricating Equip- 
ment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical 
Engineering Division Council. 

C2 The limited supply plug restricts the volume of lubricant injected 
into the system. It is used primarily on machinery where it is essential 
to avoid excessive lubrication, for instance, the food and textile machinery. 
This standard deals with the requirements of two types of limited supply 
plug assemblies. 

0.3 In the preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from 
B.S. 1486 : Part 1 : 1959 'Lubricating nipples and adapters' issued by the 
British Standards Institution. 

0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expres- 
sing the result of a test shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2- 
1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value 
should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard specifies the overall dimensions and other requirements 
for limited supply plugs for use with either grease or oil. 

1.1.1 It does not deal with the component parts of the limited supply 
plug assemblies. 

Note — Limited supply plugs for use with grease are intended to operate with 
grease of the type normally employed for lubrication of ball and roller bearings at 
normal temperature. The limited supply plugs for oil are intended to be used with 
oils having a viscosity between the 500 and 2 500 centistokes at normal temperature. 



*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). 



IS; 7089 -1973 

2. TYPES 

2.1 The limited supply plugs shall be of following two typesL 

a) Button head limited supply plug, and 

b) Hydraulic limited supply plug. 

3. DIMENSIONS 

3.1 Button Head Limited Supply Plug — The overall dimensions of 
button head limited supply plug shall be as given in Eig. 1 . The head 
profile shall conform to that for button head srrease nipples ( set IS : 4009- 



1 #" 


"% 


" k^ 


^ /,'] 


\ \^^ 


zJ^ 



rc 




10 CHAMFER- 



10 CHAMFER- 



-MIOkT— *4 

All dimensions in millimetres. 

Fig. 1 Button Head Limited Supply Plug Assembly 



•Specification for grease nipples. 



18:7089-1973 

3.2 HydrauUc Limited Supply Plug — The overall dimensions for 
hydraulic limited supply plug shall be as given in Fig. 2. The head profile 
shall conform to that for conical head grease nipples ( see IS ; 4009- 
1967)*. 

4. MATERIAL 

4.1 The body of limited supply plug shall be manufactured from free 
cutting brass conforming to IS : 319-1968t or from brass or bronze having 
hardness value in the range of 1 10 to 190 HV 5. Steel, if used, shall con- 
form to the property class 4'8 given in IS : 1367-1967J. 

4.2 The material for nipples shall be as specified in IS : 4009-1967*. 

5. WORKMANSHIP AND FINISH 

5.1 The plug shall be finished smooth and shall be free from burrs, cracks 
and other manufacturing defects. Threads shall be clearly formed and 
free from any imperfections. 

5.2 Bodies of limited supply plugs manufactured from steel shall be plated 
with zinc or cadmium. 

6. DESIGNATION 

6.1 Limited supply plugs shall be designated by the following: 

a) Type, 

b) Grease or oil, and 

c) Number of this standard. 

Example : 

A limited supply plug of button head type, for use with 
grease shall be designated as: 

Button Head Limited Supply Plug ( Grease ) IS : 7089 

7. MARKING 

7.1 A limited supply plug shall be marked with the following: 

a) The word 'GREASE' or 'OIL* whichever is appropriate, and 

b) Manufacturer's name or trade-mark. 

♦Specification for grease nipples. 

fSpecification for free cutting brass rods and sections ( revised ) . 

iXechnical supply conditions for threaded fasteners {first revision ). 



18:7089-1973 




- WHO « V - 
All dimensions in millimttres. 
Fig. 2 Hydraulic Limited Supply Plug Assembly 



IS: 7089 -1973 

7. 1.1 The limited supply plugs may also be marked with the ISI 
Certification Mark. 

Note — The use of the ISI Gertificalion Maik is governed by the provisions of the 
Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act and the Rules and Regulations 
made thereunder. The ISI Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys 
the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that 
standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which 
is devised and supervised by ISI and operated by the producer. ISI marked products 
are also continuously checked by ISI for conformity to that standard as a further 
■ safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the ISI Certifica- 
tion Mark may be granted to manufacturers or processors, may be obtained from the 
Indian Standards Institution. 

8. PACKING 

8.1 The limited supply plugs shall be packed in accordance with the best 
prevalent trade practice or as agreed between the purchaser and the 
supplier. 



