( Reaffirmed 2001 )

IS : 3396 - 1979

Indian Standard
METHODS OF TEST FOR VOLUME AND SURFACE RESISTIVITY OF SOLID ELECTRICAL INSULATING MATERIALS

( First Revision )
Electrical
Chairman SHRI A.S. LAE~JHMANAN Members SHRI B.A. GOVINDARAJ (Alternate to Shri A. S. Lakshmanan ) Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals SHRI R. S. ARORA ( Inspection Wing ), New Delhi SHRI G. R. BHATIA ( Alternate ) Dr Beck 8s Co ( India ) Ltd, Pune SHRI S. B. BAPAT SHRI R. S. LAAD ( Alternate ) Universal Petro-Chemicals Ltd, Calcutta SHRI R. CHAKRAVORTY SERI D. P. CHATTERJEE ( Alternate ) Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Bhopal SHRI M. V. DALAL DR 0. P. CHHABRA ( Alternate I ) SHRI B. K. MTJRTHY ( AZtrrnate II) Jyoti Limited, Vadodara SHRI V. B. DESAI SHHI B. G. SHARMA ( Alternate ) Bharat Bijlee Ltd, Bombay SHRI S. G. DESHMUKH SHRI A. V. BAPAT ( Alternate) Nagpal Petro-Chem Ltd, Madras DR P. DESIEA~ SERX K. VENKATRAMAN (Alternate) National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New DR R. N. DEAR Delhi . Central Power Research Institute, Bangalore DIRECTOR DEPUTY DIRECTOR ( Alternate ) Permali Wallace Ltd, Bhopal SHRI S. N. GANDHI SHRI K. A. ANTANI ( Alternate ) Kirloskar Electric Co Ltd, Bangalore SHRI P. N. HIRIYANNAIAH DR B. N. JAYARAM (Alternate) ( Continued on page 2 ) 0 Copyright STANDARDS 1980 INSTITUTION

Insulation Sectional Committee, ETDC
Representing Senapathy Whiteley Ltd, Bangalore

18

INDIAN

This publication is protected under the Indian Cop&g/k Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the nublisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 3396 - 1979
( Contimed

fromjmgr 1 )
hfcmbm Rcprcscnting Hindustan Brown Boveri Ltd, Bombay Pune Manufacturers' Association,

SHRI Y, D. DOSAJ ( Alternate ) Formica India Ltd, SHRI S. W. PATWARDH~N SBRI V. K. HIN~~~E ( Alternate ) Indian Electrical DR G. M. PHADRE SRRI G. H. RODRICXS (

DN M. S. PADRIDRI

Bombay

Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore G. R. G~VINDA RAJU DR V. PRARIIASIIANBEB ( AItsrnatc) Apar Pvt Ltd, Bombay SHRI S. R. RAXACHANI~AN SHRI S. R. GUYPA ( Alterants ) Directorate of Standardization ( DGI ), Ministry DR B. V. S. RAO of Defence, New Delhi
PROF

Alternate)

Hindustan Cables Ltd, Rupnarainpur ) National Test House, Calcutta SHRI K. K. SHaRM.4 Jhaveri Thanawala Corporation, Bombay SRRI S. S. SHARMA SHRI K. T. THANAWALA ( Alternate ) NGEF Ltd, Bangalore SERI A. N. SRIVATHSA SRRI ASWATHNARAYANA ( Alternate ) P&co Electronics & Electrical Ltd, Bombay Dn J. VAID DR S. P. BHIDP ( AItsrnate ) Crompton Greaves Ltd, Bombay SHRI C. R. VAIUER SHRI D. H. PAI (Alternate ) Research, Designs & Standards Organization SRRI V. VI%NKATESWARhX ( Ministry of Railways ), Lucknow SHRI LALLAN PRASA~ ( Alternate ) Director General, IS1 ( &-or& Member) SHBI S. P. SACHDEV, Director ( Elec tech ) Secretary Assistant Director
SHRI R. S. SARMA

SHRI I. N. BHATIA (dlternntc)` SHRI R. SEN SHRI KALYAN GH~SH ( Altera&

( Elec tech ), IS1

Solid Electrical
Convcncr SHRi A. s. LAKSHBlAN;a% ~femlcrs Snnr S. B. BAPAT

Insulating

Materials

Subcommittee,

ETDC

18 : 1

Scnapathy Whitrlcy

Ltd, Bangalore

Dr Beck & Co ( India ) Ltcl, Pune

SHRI R. S. Lanu ( Alternate ) DIRECTOR STANDARDS Research, Designs & Standards Organization DEPUTY ( Ministry of Railways ), Lucknow ( ELEO )-3 DEPUTY DIRECTOR STANDARDS ( ELE~ )-5 ( Ahnatc ) Jyoti Limited, Vadodara SRHI V. B. DESAI SERI B. G. SHARNA ( Alternats ) Permali Wallace Ltd, Bhopal SHRI S. N. GANDHI SBRI K. .4. ANTANI ( Altnnotc )

( Continued on page 23 )

2

IS : 3396- 1979

Indian Standard
METHODS OF TEST FOR VOLUME AND SURFACE RESISTIVITY OF SOLID ELECTRICAL INSULATING MATERIALS (

First Revision )
FOREWORD

0.

0.1 This Indian Standard ( First Revision) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 30 October 1979, after the draft finalized by the Electrical Insulation Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council.
0.2 This standard was first issued in 1966. This revision has been necessitated to take into account the recent developments in the methods of measurement of volume and surface resistivity. As such it has been aligned with its international counterpart. For the values of resistivity greater than 1010 Q-m, certain additional requirements in the geometry and shape of the electrodes is needed. The same has been accounted for in this revision. 0.3 In the preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from IEC Document 15A (Central Office) 35 Draft revision of publication 93 : Methods of test for volume and surface resistivity of solid electrical insulating materials, issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission ( IEC ). 0.4 In reporting the result of a test made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : Z-1960*.

1. SCOPE 1.1 These methods of test cover procedures for the determination volume and surface resistance and calculations for determination volume and surface resistivity of solid insulating materials.
*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised).

of of

3

IS : 3396 - 1979 1.2 Both volume and surface resistance tests are affected by factors: (a) the magnitude and time of voltage application, and ( c ) the temperature and geometry of the electrodes, of the ambient atmosphere during conditioning and Recommendations are made for these factors.
2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall apply, the foIlowing (b) the nature and humidity measurement.

2.1 Volume Resistance - The quotient of a direct voltage applied between two electrodes in contact with a specimen, and the steady state current between the electrodes, excluding current along the surface, and neglecting possible polarization phenomena at the electrodes, NOTE - The volume resistance generally depends on the time of clectrilicatinn.
Unless otherwise specified this time is taken as one minute. 2.2

-The quotient of a dc electric field strength Volume Resistivity and the steady state current density within an insulating material. In practice it is taken as the volume resistance reduced to a cubical unit volume. NOTE:--T%R SI unit of volume resistivity is Q-m. In practice the unit Q-cm is
also used.

2.3 Surface Resistance - The quotient of a direct voltage applied between two electrodes on a surface of a specimen, and the current between the electrodes at a given time of electrification, neglecting possible polarization phenomena at the electrodes.
otherwise specified the surface resistance is drtermined after NOTE 1 -Unless one minute of electrification. current mainly passes through a surface layer of the specimen NOTE 2 -The and any associated moisture and surface contaminant, but also includes a component through the ,volume of the specimen.

-The quotient of a dc electric field strength, 2.4 Surface Resistivity and the linear current density in a surface layer of an insulating material. In practice it is taken as the surface resistance reduced to a square area. The size of the square is immaterial.
NOTE - The SI unit of surface resistivity is P-m. referred to as ` ohm per square `. In practice this is sometimes

- Measuring electrodes are conductors of defined shape, 2.5 Electrodes size and configuration in contact with the specimen being measured.
NOTE- Insulation resistance is the quotient of a direct voltage applied between two electrodes in contact with a specimen and the total current between the The insulation resistance depends on both volume and surface resistivity electrodes. ( see IS : 2259-1963* ). of the specimen. *Methods materials. of test for determination of insulation resistance of solid insulating

4

IS : 3396 - 1979 3. SIGNIFICANCE
materials are used in general to isolate components of an electrical system from each other and from earth; solid insulating materials For these purposes it is. ganerally may also provide mechanical support. desirable to have the insulation resistance as high as possible, -consistent chemical and heat-resisting properties. with acceptable mechanical, Surface resistance changes very rapidly with humidity, while volume resistance changes only slowly, although the final change may be greater. 3.2 Volume resistivity can be used as an aid in designing an insulator for a specific application. The change of resistivity with temperature and humidity may be great and must be known when &si&ing for operating Volume redstivity measurements are often used in checking conditions. the uniformity of an insulating material, either with regard to processing or to detect conductive impurities that affect the quality of the material and that may not be readily detectable by other means. J 3.3 When a direct voltage is applied between electrodes in contact with a specimen, the current through it decreases &ymptotically towards a steady The decrease of currentwith time'may be due t'o dielectric state value. polarization and the sweep of mobile ions to the electrodes. For materials having volume resistivities less than about, ,I010 R-m ( 1012 R;cm) the steady state is in general reached within one minute, and t,his time `is .used as the electrification time. For materials of higher volume resistivity the current may continue to decrease for several minutes, hours, days, or even For such(amaterials therefore longer electrification times are-used, weeks. and if relevant, the material is characterized by the time depetidence of the volume resistivity. `0`; , a-1;, ,`X ,iP 17 3.4 Surface resistance or conductance cannot be measured accurately, only approximated,, b.ecause more or less volume con>d,ucta,nce .is nearly always involved in the measurement. The measured value is largely a property of the contamination of, the surface of the specimen at the time of measurement. However, the permitivity of the specimen influences the deposition of contaminants, and their conductive capabilities are affected by the surface characteristics of the specimen. Thus surface resistivity is not a material property in the usual sense, but can be considered to be related to material properties when contamination is involved. ' 3.4.1 With homogeneous materials the measurement of surface resistivity of a clean surface without contamination or humidity will give results which do not differ from what could be deduced from determinations of the volume resistivity. Some materials, such as laminates; may have quite different resistivities in a surface. layer and in the interior. It may therefore be of interest to measure the intrinsic property of a clean 5

3.1 Insulating

IS : 3396 - 1979 Cleaning procedures aimed at surface. should be fully specified bearing in mind or procedures on the surface. producing consistent results the possible effect of solvents

3.4.2 The surface resistance, especialb when high, often changes in an and in genera1 depends strongly on the time of erratic manner, electrification; for measurements, one minute of electrification is usually specified. 4. POWER SUPPLY

4.1 A source of very steady direct voltage is required. This may be either by batteries or a rectified and stabilized power supply. The degree of stability required is such that the change in current due to any change in voltage is negligible compared with the current to be measured. 4.2 Commonly specified test voltages to be applied to the complete specimens are 85, 100, 250,500, 1 000, 2 500, 5 000, 10 000 and 15 000 V. Of these the most frequently used are 100, 500 and 1 000 V. 4.3 In some cases the specimen the applied voltage. resistance depends upon the polarity of

4.4 If the resistance is polarity dependent, this should, be reported. The geometric ( logarithmic ) mean of the two resistance values is taken as the result. 4.5 Since the specimen resistance voltage should be ,reported. 5. MEASURING METHODS may be voltage .. . il dependent, the test

AND

ACCURACY high

5.1 Methods -The resistances are either

methods commonly in use for measuring direct methods or comparison methods.

5.1.1 The direct methods depend upon simultaneous the direct voltage applied to the unknown resistance through it ( voltmeter-ammeter method ).

measurement of and the current

5.1.2 The comparison methods establish the ratio of the unknown resistance to the resistance of a known resistor, either in a bridge curcuit, or by comparison of currents through the resistances at fixed voltage. 5.1.3 Examples illustrating the principles are described in Appendix A.

5.1.4 The voltmeter-ammeter method requires a reasonably accurate voltmeter, but the sensitivity and accuracy of the method depend mainly on the properties of the current-measuring device, which may be a galvanometer, an electronic amplifier instrument, or an electrometer. 6

IS:3396-1979 5.1.5 The bridge method requires only a sensitive current detector as measuring instrument, and the accuracy is mainly determined by the known bridge arm resistors, which are obtainable with high precision and stability over a wide range of resistance values.
5.1.6 The accuracy of the current comparison method depends on accuracy of the known resistor, and on the stability and linearity of current-measuring device, including associated measuring resistors, whereas the exact values of current are insignificant, as long as voltage is constant. the the etc, the

5.1.7 Determination of volume resistivity in accordance with 10.1 using a galvanometer in the voltmeter-ammeter method is feasible for resistances up to about 1011 a, for higher values the use of a dc amplifier or electrometer is recommended. 5.1.8 directly In the bridge method it is not possible to measure in the short-circuited specimen ( see 10.1 ). current-measuring devices to facilitate determination the current

5.1.9 The methods utilizing matic recording of the current state ( see 10.1 ).

permit autoof the steady

5.1.10 Special circuits and instruments for measuring high resistance These may be used, provided that they are sufficiently are available. accurate and stable, and that where needed they enable the specimen and the current measured before to be properly short circuited, electrification. 5.2 the for also 5.3 Accuracy - The measuring device should be capable of determining unknown resistance with an overall accuracy of at least f 10 percent resistances below 1O'O Ll, and &20 percent for higher values. See Appendix A. Guarding

5.3.1 The insulation of the measuring circuit is composed of materials which, at best, have properties comparable with those of the material Errors in the measurement of the specimen may arise from: under test. a) b) Stray current from spurious external voltages which are usually unknown in magnitude and often sporadic in character. Undue shunting of the specimen resistance, or the current-measuring device by insulation, of unknown, and possibly variable magnitude. 7 reference resistors, having resistance

IS :3396 - 1979
5.3.2 An approximate correction of these difficulties may be obtained by making the insulation resistance of all parts of the circuit as high .as possible under the conditions of use. This may lead to unwieldy apparatus which is still inadequate for measurement of insulation resistances higher than a few hundred megohms. A more satisfactory correction is obtained by using the technique of guarding. 5.3.3 To ensure satisfactory operation of the equipment a measurement should be made with the high potential lead to the specimen disconnected. Under this condition, the equipment should indicate infinite resistance within its sensitivity. If suitable standards of known values are available, they may be used to test the operation of the equipment. 5.3.4 Guarding depends on interposing, in all critical insulated parts, guard conductors which intercept all stray currents that might otherwise cause errors. The guard conductors are connected together, constituting the guard system and forming with measuring terminals a three-terminal network. When suitable connections are made, stray currents from spurious external voltages are shunted away from the n-.easuring circuit by the guard system, the insulation resistance from either measuring terminal to the guard system shunts a circuit element which should be of very much lower resistance, and the specimen resistance constitutes the only direct path between the measuring terminals. By this technique the probability of error is considerably reduced. Figure 1 shows the basic connections for guarded electrodes used for volume and suface resistance measurements.

IA

Volume

ReslstWy

1B

Surface

Resistivity

FIG. 1

BASK

CONNECTIONS 8

FOR GUARDED

ELECTRODES

IS : 3396- 1979
5.3.5 Proper use of the guard system for the method involving cur-rem measurement is illustrated in Fig. 2 and 4, where the guard system is shown connected to the junction of the voltage source and current measuring device. In Fig. 3, for the Wheatstone bridge method, the guard system is shown connected to the junction of the two lower-valued resistance arms. In all cases, to be effective, guarding must be complete, and must include any control operated by the observer in making the measurement.

FIG.

2

VOLTMETFR-AMPEREMETER METHOD USED MEASURING VOLUME RESISTANCE

FOR

FIG. 3

WHEATSTONE BRIDGE METHOD USED FOR MEASURING VOLUME RESISTANCE

9

Is : 3396 - 1979

FIG.

4

AMMETER METHOD USED FOR MEASURING VOLIJME RESISTANCE

5.3.6 Errors in current measurements may result from the fact that the current-measuring device is shunted by the resistance between the guarded terminal and the guard system. This resistance should be at :;;ascm and preferably one hundred times that of the current-measuring . In some brrdge techmques, the guard and measuring terminal are brought to nearly the same potential but a standard resistor in the bridge is shunted by the resistance between the unguarded terminal and the guard system. This resistance should be at least ten and preferably one hundred times that of the reference resistor. 5.3.7 Electrolytic, contact, or thermal emf existing between and guarded terminals can be compensated if they are small. must be taken that such emf do not introduce appreciable errors measurements. 6. TEST SPECIMENS Resistance guard Care in the

6.1 Volume

6.1.1 For the measurement of voIume resistance the test specimen may have any practicable form that allows the use of a third electrode to guard against error from surface effect. For specimens that have negligible surface leakage, the guard may be omitted when measuring volume resistance provided that it has been shown that its omission has negligible effect on the result. 6.1.2 The gap on the surface of the specimen between the guarded and guard electrodes should be of uniform width and as narrow as possible 10

IS : 3396 - 1979 provided that the surface leakage does not cause error in the measurement. A gap of 1 mm is usually the smallest practicable. 6.1.3 The average thickness of the specimen is determined in accordance with the relevant specification, the measuring points being distributed uniformly over the area to be covered by the measuring (guarded ) electrode. 6.1.4 Examples of electrode arrangements with three electrodes are shown in Fig. 5 ( circular electrodes on a flat specimen ) and Fig. 6 ( cylindrical electrodes on a tubular specimen). In the measurement of volume resistance electrode No. 1 is the guarded electrode, electrode No. 2 is the guard electrode, and electrode No. 3 is the unguarded electrode. The diameter 6 (Fig. 5), or length l1 ( Fig. 6) of the guarded electrode should be at least ten times the specimen thickness, 6, and for practical reasons usually at least 25 mm. The diameter d4 (or length 14 ) of the unguarded electrode, and the outer diameter d3 of the guard electrode (or length 1s between the outer edges of the guard electrodes ) should be equal to the inner diameter ds of the guard electrode ( or length Is between the inner edges of the guard electrodes) plus at least twice the specimen thickness. .-, . -_ -< \

, /
I

/

\

\

I

\ \\

___+--_ .",
j

!
\ --__
/ cH

,@

\\

/ /'

/'

:

FIG. 5

EXAMPLE OF ELECTRODE ARRANGEMENT FLAT SPECIMEN 11

ON

IS : 3396 - 1979

do

FIG. 6

EXAMPLE OP ELECTRODE ARRANGEMENT ON TUBULAR SPECIMEN

6.2 Surface Resistance-For the measurement of surface resistance the test specimen may have any practicable form that allows the use of a third electrode to guard against error from volume effects. The threeelectrode arrangements of Fig. 5 and 6 are recommended. The resistace of the surface gap between electrode No. 1 and 2 is measured directly by using electrode No. 1 as the guarded electrode, electrode No. 3 as 12

IS : 3396 - 1979 the guard electrode and electrode No. 2 as the unguarded electrode. The resistance so measured includes the surface resistance between electrode No. 1 and 2 and the volume resistance between the same two electrodes. With suitable dimensioning of the electrodes, however, the effect of that volume resistance can be made negligible for wide ranges of ambient conditions and material properties. This condition may be achieved for the arrangement of Fig. 5 and 6 when the electrodes are dimensioned so that the surface gap width, g, is at least twice the specimen thickness; 1 mm is normally the smallest practicable. The diameter & ( or length II ) of the guarded electrode should be at least ten times the specimen thickness 6, and for practical reasons usually at least 25 mm. 6.2.1 suitable Alternatively, straight electrodes dimensions may be used. or other arrangements with

NOTE - For comparative measurements of surface resistance it is recommended to use the arrangement of Fig. 5 with dl = 50 mm, da = 60 mm, da = 80 mm.

7. ELECTRODE

MATERIAL electrodes for insulating materials should be of readily applied, allows intimate contact with the and introduces no appreciable error because of The electrode or contamination of the specimen. corrosion resistant under the conditions of the test. typical electrode materials that may be used. The used with suitable backing plates of the given form or

7.1 General -The a material that is surface specimen electrode resistance material should be The following are electrodes must be and dimensions.

It may be advantageous to use two different electrode materials methods of application to see if appreciable error is introduced.

types of commercially available, 7.2 Conductive Silver Paint -Certain either air-drying or low-temperature high-conductivity silver paints, baking varieties are sufficiently porous to permit diffusion of moisture through them and thereby allow the test specimens to be conditioned This is a particularly useful feature in after application of the electrodes. studying resistance-humidity effects as well as changes with temperature. However, before conductive paint is used as an electrode material, it should be established that the solvent in the paint does not affect the Reasonably smooth edges of guard electrical properties of the specimen. electrodes may be obtained with a fine-bristle brush. However, for circular electrodes, sharper edges may be obtained by the use of a compass and silver paint for drawing the outline circles of the electrodes and filling in the enclosed areas by brush. Clamp-on masks may be used if the electrode paint is sprayed on. 13

IS : 3396 - 1979 7.3 Sprayed Metal ~-Sprayed metal may be used if satisfactory adhesion to the test specimen can be obtained. Thin sprayed electrodes may have certain advantages in that they are ready for use as soon as applied. They may be sufficiently porous to allow the specimen to bc conditioned, but this should be verified. Clamp-on masks may be used to produce a gap between the guarded and the guard electrodes. 7.4 Evaporated or Sputtered Metal - Evaporated or sputtered metal may be used under the same conditions as given in 7.3 where it can be shown that the material is not affected by ion bombardment or vacuum treatment. 7.5 Liquid Metal Electrodes - Liquid metal electrodes may be used and give satisfactory results. The metal forming the upper electrode should be confined by stainless steel rings, each of which should have its lower rim reduced to a sharp edge by bevelling on the side away from the liquid metal. Fig. 7 shows the electrode arrangement. Mercury is not recommended for continuous use or at elevated temperatures due to toxic effects. 7.6 Colloidal Graphite suitable medium, may in 7.2. - Colloidal graphite, be used under the dispersed in water or other same conditions as given

7.7 Coducting Rubber - Conducting rubber may be used as an electrode material, and it has the advantages that it can be applied and removed from the specimen quickly and easily. As the electrodes are applied only during the time of measurement, they do not interfere with the conditioning of the specimen. The conducting rubber material must be soft enough to ensure that effective contact to the specimen is obtained when a reasonable pressure is applied.

ELECTRODE

No.1

ELECTRODE

No.2

[ELECTRODE

~0.3

FIG. 7

ARRANGEMENT OF LIQUID ELECTRODES 14

IS :3396 - 1979 7.8 Metal Foil

7.8.1 Metal foil may be applied to specimen surfaces as electrodes for volume resistance measurement, but they are not suitable for surface resistance measurement. Lead, antimonial lead, aluminium, and tin foils are in common use and are usually attached to the specimen by a silicone grease, oil or other suitable minimum quantity of petrolatum, material, as an adhesive. A pharmaceutically obtainable jelly of the following composition is suitable as a conductive adhesive:
Anhydrous molecular Water Soft soap ( pharmaceutical Potassium chloride quality ) polyethylene weight 600 glycol of 800 parts by mass 200 parts by mass 1 part by mass 10 parts by mass

7.8.2 The electrodes shall be applied under a smoothing pressure sufficient to eliminate all wrinkles and to work excess adhesive towards the edge of the foil where it can be wiped off with a cleansing tissue. such as the finger has been used Rubbing with a soft material successfully. This technique can be used satisfactorily only on specimens With care the adhesive film can be that have very smooth surfaces. reduced to 0.002 5 mm or less. 8. SPECIMEN

MOUNTING

specimens for measurement, it is important that there shall be no conductive paths between the electrodes or between the measuring electrodes and earth that will have a significant effect on the That part of the surface of a reading of the measuring instrument. specimen which is to be measured shall not be touched by anything other than an untouched surface of another specimen of the same material. When surface resistance is to be measured, the surface shall not be cleaned unless agreed or specified. 9. CONDITIONING 9.1 The conditioning that a specimen should receive depends upon the material being tested and should be specified in the material specification. Recommended conditions are given in IS : 2260-1973* and the relative humidities associated with various salt solutions are given in Mechanical vapourization systems may be used. IS : 8145-197St.
conditioning and testing of solid electrical *Specification for preconditioning, insulating materials (Jrst reuision ). +Specitication for test chambers of non-injection type for constant relative humidity.

8.1 In mounting

15

IS : 3396 - 1979 Both volume and surface resistivities are particularly sensitive to The change is exponential. It is therefore temperature changes. necessary to measure the volume and surface resistance of the specimen Extended periods of conditioning are while under specified conditions. required to determine the effect of humidity on volume resistivity since the absorption of water into the body of the dielectric is a relatively slow Water absorption usually decreases volume resistance. Some process. specimens may require months to reach equilibrium. 10. TEST PROCEDURE in accordance with 6, 7, 8 and 9 are used in

10.0 Specimens prepared the following procrclurcs. 10.1 Volume Resistivity

10.1.1 hfeasure the specimen thickness, the dimensions of the electrodes, and the width of the surface gap ( g ), with the required accuracy. 18.1.2 Before measurement the specimen must be brought into a dielectrically stable condition. TO obtain this, short circuit the measuring electrode No. 1 and 3 of the specimen ( Fig. IA ) through the measuring device and observe the changing short circuit current, while increasing the sensitivity of the current-measuring device as required. Continue until the short circuit current attains a fairly constant value, small compared with the expected steady state value of the current under electrification, or if relevant, the current at 100 min of As there is a possibility of a change in the direction of electrification. the short circuit current, the short circuit should be maintained even if The magnitude and direction of the short circuit the current passes zero. current Ii are noted when it becomes essentially constant, which may require several hours. 10.1.3 Then apply the specified direct voltage and start a timing device simultaneously. Unless otherwise specified, measure the current after the following times of electrification: 1, 2, 5, 10, 50: 100 minutes. If two successive readings of the current are the same, the test may be terminated, and the current thus found used to calculate the volume resistivity. The electrification time until the first of the identical measurement is recorded. If the steady state is not reached within 100 minutes, the volume resistivity is reported as a function of electrification time. 10.2 Surface Resistivity and the width of the

10.2.1 Measure the dimensions of the electrodes. surface gap ( g ), with the required accuracy. 16

IS : 3396 - .1979 10.2.2 Apply the specified direct voltage, and determine the resistance between the measuring electrodes on the specimen surface ( electrode No. 1 and 2, Fig. 1B). The resistance shall be determined after one minute of electrification, even though the current has not necessarily reached a steady state value within this time. 11. CALCULATION 11.1 Volume Resistivity

formula:

11.1.1 The

volume resistivity

shall be calculated

from the following

where P = volume resistivity in Q-m, Rx = volume resistance in CJ measured as specified in 10.1, A = effective area of the guarded electrode in m2, and 3 = average thickness of the specimen in m. 11.1.2 Formulae for calculating the effective area A for some particular electrode arrangements are given in A-3. 11.1.3 For some materials with high resistivity, particularly when they are in the form of thin films, the short circuit current Ia prior to electrification ( wz 10.1) may not be negligible compared to the steady state current Is during electrification. In such cases the volume resistance is determined, as: Rx = Ux/( Is&L, ) where Rx= volume resistance in hl, Ux= applied voltage in V, Is = steadi state current in A during electrification, and 10 = short circuit current in A prior to electrification. The minus sign is used when IO is in the same directions the plus sign is used. 11.2 Surface Resistivity from the following formula: as Is, otherwise

The surface resistivity shall be calculated Ps = Rx Pls 1'

IS : 3396 - 1979 where P, & P 2 = surface = surface = resistivity resistance in 0, in fJ measured as specified in 10.2. for the

effective perimeter in m of the guarded electrode particular electrode arrangement employed, and in m between the electrodes.

= distance

11.3 Reproducibility - Because of the variability of the resistance of a given specimen with test conditions, and because of non-uniformity of the are usually not same material from specimen to specimen, determinations reproducible to closer than fl0 percent and are often even more widely divergent ( a range of values of 10 to 1 may be obtained under apparently identical conditions ). 11.3.1 In order comparable, they gradients; 12. REPORT 12.1 The report shall include at Ieast the following: of the material ( name, grade, that measurements on similar specimens are to be must be made with approximately equal voltage

4 b) 4 4 e) f) d h)

Description and identification colour, manufacturer, etc ); Shape Type and dimensions and dimensions

of the specimen; of the electrodes and guards; pre-drying, relative conditioning );

Conditioning of the specimen ( cleaning, time, humidity and temperature, etc ); Test conditions Method -4pplied Volume voltage; resistivity ( when relevant ); ( specimen temperature, of measurement;

humidity

Where specimens reach a steady state in the same electrification time, give the individual results, and report the central value as the volume resistivity. Where some specimens do not reach the steady state in this electrification time, report the number failing to do so and give the results on them separately. Where results are dependent on electrification time, report this relationship; and

i)

Surface

resistivity

( when relevant

). and

Give the individual values after one minute of electrification, report the central value as the surface resistivity. i8

IS : 3396 - 1979

APPENDIX

A

( Clauses 5.1.3 and 5.2 )
EXAMPLES A-l. . OF MEASURING METHODS THEIR A'CCURACY METHOD AND

VOLTMETER-AMMETER

A-l.1 This direct method employs the circuit shown in Fig. 2. The applied voltage is measured by the dc voltmeter. The current is measured by a current-measuring device, which may be a galvanometer (now seldom used ), an electronic amplifier instrument, or an electrometer. A-l.2 The galvanometer should have high current sensitivity and be provided with a universal shunt ( also known as Ayrton shunt ). It should be short circuited while the specimen is being charged to avoid damage The unknown resistance in SYlis calculated as: to it during this period. Rx = Ujka,
where U = applied voltage in V, the shunted and galvanometer . in ampere per k = sensitivity of scale division, U. = A-l.3 Resistances with the required deflection

in scale divisions. at 100 V

up to about 1010 to 1011 n can be measured accuracy by means of a galvanometer.

A-l.4 An electronic amplifier instrument or an electrometer with high input resistance shunted by a resistor of known high resistance, R, may be used as current-measuring device. The current is measured in terms of a voltage drop LJ, across R,. The unknown resistance, Rx, is calculated as:

Rx = R, UxIUs
where U, = applied voltage ( provided

R, < Rx )

A-l.5

A number of different ment case, and the instrument or submultiples thereof.

resistors Rs may be included in the instruis then often graduated directly in ampere

A-l.6 Here also the maximum resistance that can be measured with the required accuracy depends on the properties of the current-measuring The error in U, is determined by the indicator error, the device. 19

IS : 3396 - 1979 In adequately designed amplifiers amplifier zero drift and gain stability. and electrometers the instability in gain is negligible, and the zero drift can be held so low that it is of no concern in relation to the times involved in these measurements. The indicator error for high gain electronic voltmeters is typically & to Lj i~~q~~i af full-scale deflection, and resistors up to 1012 IR known with about the same degree of accuracy are If the voltage-measuring device has an input resistance greater feasible. than 1014 0, and full-scales defle@ion,:@~ input voltage of 10 mV, a current of lo-14* can be measured with an accuracy of about f 10 percent. A-l.7 A resistance of 1Or6 Q can `thus ge' `measured at 100 V with the required accura,cy by means. of .a.,preci$on .resistor with ver,y high or electrometer. resistance and an electronic, amph *& r v,o&meter _. A-2. COMPARISON METHODS

A-2.1 Wheatstone Bridge Method - The test specimen, is connected in one arm of a Wheatstone bridge as shown in Fig. 3. The three known arm9 shall be of as high reslstatie as~practiijable', limited by the errors inherent in such ~esist~rs.,;U~~~)t"the'~dista~ce Rje is changed in decade steps and the resistance RA is used for fine balance adjustment, and RX is fixed for the duration of measurement. The detector shall be a dc amplifier, with an input resistance high compared to any of these arms. The unknown resistance, Rx is calculated as follows:

Rx = RA fb&

:

where RA, X,x and RX are as shown in Fig. 3. A-2.1.1 The maximum percentlg . , .I & esrfi`w'. & cY&~ $ygy~~e$-i~ the sum of the percentage errors m If RA and `k, are wire-wound resistors with has adequate sensitivity. values below," for, exapnple, 1, ,hKl, .their errors ,can be made negli ible, and for measuring very high resistances, `RN could be, for instance, 7 OaQ, The accuracy which may be known with an, accuracy, of f2 percent. with which the-ratio RT+/& can .be determined depends essentially on the sensitivity of the null detector. `i`f `the unknown resistance R& Rx, the uncertainty Ar in determination of the ratio r = R,/RA is determined by Ar/r = IgRx/LT, where I, is the minimum perceivable null detector current If, for example, an electronic and LJ the voltage applied to the bridge. amplifier instrument with input resistance 1 MQ and full-scale deflection for an input volta e of lo-5 V is used, the..lowest perceivable current will be about 2 x 10-l 8 A corresponding to 2 percent of full-scale deflection. With this value of I,, 1J = 100 V, and Rx = 10's fi one gets nr/r = 0.02 or 2 percent. A-2.1.2 Resistances up to 1013 to 1014 Q can &us'be with the rrqttired accuracy by the Wheatstone bridge ,-, ,;,, ,~ 20 measured method. at 100 V

IS :3396 - 1979 A-2.2 Ammeter Method

A-2.2.1 This method employs the circuit shown in Fig. 4, and the components are the same as those described in A-l with the addition of a resistor RN of known value, and a switch to short circuit the unknown It is very important that the resistance of this switch in the resistance. open position is much higher than the unknown resistance Rx in order not to affect the measurement of the latter. This is most easily obtained by short circuiting Rx with a copper wire, which is removed when measuring RX. In general it is preferable to leave R N in the circuit at all times to limit the current in case of failure of the specimen in order to protect the the current-measuring device.
A-2.2.2 With the switch open the current through Rx and RN is determined as specified in 10 by noting the instrument deflection CL~and the shunt ratio Fx, the shunt being adjusted to give as near as possible maximum scale deflection. Thereafter Rx is short circuited and the current through RN determined by noting the instrument deflection c/-N and the shunt ratio FN, the shunt again being adjusted to give as near as possible maximum scale deflection, starting from the least sensitivity. Provided the applied voltage U does not change during the measurement, Ks can be calculated from: Ii, = RN( a~F~/r.sFx > lG0, the approximated 1) formula

If ~~FNIx,F~ may be used.

Rx = RNXNFN/~~F~

A-2.2.3 This method allows Rx to be determined with about the same accuracy as by the direct method described in A-l but has the advantage that the current-measuring device is checked in situ by the measurement of RN, the error of which can be made negligible by using a wire-wound resistor, which is readily obtainable with an accuracy of 0.1 percent or better. The measurement of the current through Rx may thus be more reliable. A-3. FORMULAE A 3.1 For FOR CALCULATING A AND p

most purposes the following approximate formulae are sufficiently accurate for calculating the effective area A and the effective perimeter p of the guarded electrode.

A-3.1.1 The Effective Area A a) Circular
electrodes ( Fig. 5 )

A = x ( dl + g)2/4
A= (a+g)(b+S)

b) Rectangular

electrodes 21

IS : 3396 - 1979 c) Square d) Tubular electrodes electrodes ( Fig. 6 ) A=(afg)' -1-x(&-&) (l,Sg)

where do, d,, g, and 1, are the dimensions indicated in Fig. 5 and 6, and a and b are length and width respectively of the guarded electrode when rectangular or square. The dimensions are expressed in metres, and A in square metres. A-3.1.2 The Efective Perimeter a) Circular c) Square d) Tubular where the meaning electrodes electrodes electrodes of the symbols ( Fig. 5 ) P=P:(d! +,Y) fi=2(a+bt2g) P=4(aSh) @=2xdo is the same as in A-3.1.1.

b) Rectangular

electrodes

22

IS : 3396 - 1979
( Continued from pagr 2 )

Membrrs
SHRI P.

Hdpr4senling

N. HIRIYANNAIA~ Kirloskar Electric CO Ltd, Bangalore Hindustan Brown Boveri Ltd, Bombay SHRI V. S. MANI DR M. S. PADBIDHI ( Alkrnutc ) SHRI S. W. PATWARLUIAN Formica India Ltd, Pune SHRI V. K. HIN~NE ( Alternate ) Sahney Kirkwood Pvt Ltd, Thane SHRI D. S. SA~NEY SHRI K. S. KAPOOB ( Altwnate ) National Test House, Calcutta SERI K. K. SEARXA Jhaveri Thanawala Corporation, Bombay SHRI S. S. SHAIWA SHRI K. T. TEANAWALA ( AltcrnaIc ) Bharat Heavy Electrlcals Ltd, Bhopal SHRI P. N. SHRIVASTAVA NGEF Ltd, Bangalore SHRI A. N. SRIVATH~A SHEI ASWATHNARAYANA ( Altcmatc ) Caprihans India Ltd, Bombay SERI S. K. VERMh DR A. GEOSH ( Allernotc )

23

INDIAN ON ELECTRICAL

STANDARDS

INSULATION

IS: New insulating oils for transformers and switchgear ( second r&ion ) Organic, baking, impregnating, insulating varnishes for electrical purposes ( firrt revision ) Airdrying insulating varnishes for electrical purposes (first revision) 352-1973 Classification of insulating materials for electrical machinery and apparatus 1271-1958 in relation to their thermal stability in service Solid pressboard for electrical purposes 1576-1967 Polyvinyl chloride sleeving the electrical purposes 1951-1961 Methods of test for paper for electrical purposes 2188-196`2 Methods of test for determination of insulation resistance of solid insulating 2259-1963 materials Preconditioning, conditioning and testing of solid electrical insulating 2260-1973 materials (Jirst reoi&n ) Adhesive insulating tapes for elecrical purposes: Part I Tapes with 2448 ( Part I )-1963 cotton textile substrates Adhesive insulating tapes for electrical purposes: Part II Tapes 2448 (Part II )-1968 with PVC substrates Built-up mica for electrical purposes 2464-1963 Method of test for electric strength of solid insulating materials at power 2584-1963 frequencies Method for determining the comparative tracking index of solid insulating 2824-1975 materials under moist conditions (.first revision ) Code of practice for climate proofing of electrical equipment 3202-1965 Varnished cotton cloth and tape for electrical purposes 3352-1965 Methods of test for volume and surface resistivities of electrical insulating 3396-1965 materials Varnish impregnated cotton sleevings for electrical purposes 3765-1966 Non-ignitable and self-extinguishing boards ( with mineral base) for 4248-1967 electrical purposes Classification and methods of tests for non-ignitable and self-extinguishing 4249-1967 properties of solid electrical insulating materials Recommended methods for the determination of the permittivity and 4486-1967 dielectric dissipation factor of electri,cal insulating materials at power, audio and radio frequencies including metre wavelengths Thin vulcanized fibre sheet ( including leatheroid ) for electrical purposes 4819-1968 fibre sheets for electrical purposes 4820- 1968 Vulcanized Method of test for determining deleterious substances in fibrous insulating 5596-1970 materials Vulcanized fibre rods and tubes for electrical purposes 5711-1970 Method of test for specific resistance ( resistivity ) of electrical insulating 6103-1971 liquids Method of test for interfacial tension of oil against water by the ring 6104-l9il method Woven asbrstos tape for electrical insulating purposes 6230-1970 Method of test for power factor and dielectric constant of electrical 6262-1971 insulating liquids 335-1972 350-1968

IS: 6659-1976 6792-1972 6855-1973 7084-1973 7571-1974 7755-1975 7809 (Part 7809 ( Part 7809 ( Part 7809 ( Part Electronic grade ceramic materials (first recision ) Method for determination of electric strength of insulating oils Method of sampling for liquid dielectrics Bitumen based filling compounds for electrical purposes Methods of tests for ceramics for telecommunication and allied purposes High tension insulating cotton tape impregnated with bitumen based compounds I )-1975 Pressure sensitive adhesive tapes for electrical purposes: Part I General requirements II )-1977 Pressure sensitive adhesive tapes for electrical purposes: Part II Methods oftest III/Set 1 )-1977 Pressure sensitive adhesive tapes for electrical purposes: Pa-t III Specifications for individual materials, Section 1 Plasticized polyvinylchloride tapes with non-thermosetting adhesive III/Set 4)-1977 Pressure sensitive adhesive tapes for electrical purposes: Part III Specifications for individual materials, Section 4 Cellulosic paper creped with thermosetting adhesive III/Set 5 )-1977 Pressure sensitive adhesive tapes for electrical purposes: Part III Specifications for individual materials, Section 5 Cellulosic paper with thermosetting adhesive Air drying anti-tracking insulating varnishes for electrical purposes I )-1977 Guide for determination of thermal endurance properties of Part I Temperature indices and thermal electrical insulating materials: endurance profiles electrolytic corrosion with insulating Methods of test for determining materials Presspaper for electrical purposes

7809 ( Part

8264-1976 8504( Part

8516-1977 8570-1977

INTERNATIONAL
Base

SYSTEM

OF UNITS

(SI

UNITS)

Units QVANIYY us17 metre kilogram jrcond ampere kelvin candela mole SYMBOL
m

Length Mass Time Electric current Thermodynamic temperature Luminous intensity Amount or substance Sopplementzwy QUANTITY Plane Solid angle angle Units Uaita

kg 8 A
K cd mo)

WrnT radian steradian UNIT newton joule watt weber resla hertz siemens volt pascal

SYMBOL

rad sr DEIIIWITION = 1 kg.m/s' = 1 N.m * = = = = = P

Derived

QUANTITY

SYMBOL

Force Energy Power FIUX Flux density Frequency Electric conductance Electromotive force Pressure, stress

1 N
rr

W Wb T H S V Pa

lJ 1w 1 Wb 1 T 1 H 1S IV 1 Pa

1 J/s
1 1 1 1 1 1 V.s Wb/ms c/s (s-1) A/V W/A N/m'

