**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 6158 (1984) : Recommended Practice for Safeguarding 
Against Embrittlement of Hot-dip Galvanized Iron and Steel 
Products [MTD 24: Corrosion Protection] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



Indian Standard 



'^''iih,\mm 



RECOMMENDED PRACTICE FOR 

SAFEGUARDING AGAINST EMBRITTLEMENT OF 

HOT-DIP GALVANIZED IRON AND 

STEEL PRODUCTS 

f First Revision ) 



UDC 669-1 -01 5 . 669-586-5 • 620-192-4S) 




® Cefiyright I5M» 

INDIAN $TANDAEDS INSTIT.UTIQIt 

llANAK 9HAVAN, 9 BAHACUK SHAH 2AFAft MAItd^ 

nm DELHI 110002 

Cw% ^<^ ISO) 



AMENDMENT NO. 1 JUNE 1999 

TO 

IS 6158 : 1984 RECOMMENDED PRACTICE FOR 

SAFEGUARDING AGAINST EMBRTTTLEMENT OF 

HOTDIP GALVANIZED IRON AND STEEL PRODUCTS 

(Second Revision) 

( Page 4, clause hi) — Substitute the following for the existing clause: 

'1.1 This »tJin<<an1 prrscribrs foctofs which »rr ir^non^Jhir fr»r r«iwng 
embrittlemcnt in steel products during gaivani/Jng process aiid pixKx*durc for 
detecting embrittlement and to safeguard against them/ 

( Page 4, clause 1) — Insert the following new clauses and renumber the 
subsequent clauses: 

*2 TERMINOLOGY 

2.1 Embiittleiiieiit — It is the total or partial loss of ductility in steel. An 
embrittled product chancteristictlly faib by firacture without appreciable 
deformatioiL Types of embrittlement usually encountered in galvanized steel are 
related to ageing phenomena, cold working and absorption of hydrogen/ 

[ Page 4, clause 2.1 ( renumbered 3*1 ) ] — Substitute the following for the 
existing Clause: 

'2.1 Base Metal( Steels) — Only steels produced by open hearth, basic oxygen 
and electric furnace shall be used for galvanizing. Basic open-hearth or basic 
electric steel should .always be specified with carbon and phosphorus content 
being as low as practicable. Bessemer steels should never be used where the 
material is cold formed and not subsequently annealed prior to galvanizing. 
Carbon should not exceed 0.2S percent where severe cold-forming operations 
precede gatvinising.' 

( Page 5, clause 1.13 ( renumbered X13 ) J — Substitute the following for 
the existing clause: 

'123 The smaller hot rolled shapes including thicknesses up to 6 mm , may be 
cold worked by punching without subsequent annealing or stress telieving. 
Shapes 8 mm to 17 mm in thickness are not seriously affected as to serviceabltty 



Amend No. 1 to 18^158 : 1984 

by cold working in punching. The heavier shapes, 18 mm and ovci; should Ik 
reamed or drilled after punching or suitably thermally treated prior to 
galvanising.' 

[ Page 6, clause 322A ( renumbered 422A ) J — Substitute *25 mm' for 
^2JSmm\ 



( MTD20) 



Reprography Udii, BIS, New Delhi, M*n 



IS : 6158 . 1984 

Indian Standard 

RECOMMENDED PRACTICE FOR 

SAFEGUARDING AGAINST EMBRITTLEMENT OF 

HOT-DIP GALVANIZED IRON AND 

STEEL PRODUCTS 

(First Revision) 



Hot-Dip, Sprayed and Diffusion Coatings 
Sectional Committee, SMDC 28 

Chairman Representing 

Shri V. R. SuBRAMANiAN Indian Hot Dip Galvanizer*s Association, New Delhi 

Members 

Shri P. K. Banerjek The Tinplate Co of India Ltd, Golmuri 

Shri K. S. Banninthaya Steel Authority of* India Ltd ( R&D Centre ) 

Shri J. N. Bhattaoharyya National Test House, Calcutta 

iHEMist & Metallurgist Ministry of Railways, Nt-w Delhi 

Assistant Chemist & 
Metallurgist ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. Ganeshan Kamani Engineering Corporation Ltd, Bombay 

Shri B. G. Sohoni ( Alternate ) 
Shri Brijlal Khastriya Steel Authority of India Ltd, Rourkela Steel Plant, 

Rourkela 

Shri J. N. Bhambrry ( Alternate ) 
Shri Ramesh Chanjjka The Indian Steel and Wire Products Ltd, 

Mahajan Jamshedpur 

Shri Darshan Singh ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. Nbelakantan Zenith Steel Pipes Ltd, Bombay 

Dr a. R. Keskar ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. Paul Guest Keen Willams Ltd, Howrah 

Shri L. Pugazhanthy Indian Lead, Zinc Information Centre, New Delhi 

Shri B. N. Saha Ministry of Defence ( DGI ), New Delhi 

Shri A. Bhattacharya ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. N. Sinoh EMC Steelal Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri M. M. Malhotra ( Alternate ) 
Shbi N. K. Singhal The Indian Iron and Steel Co Ltd, Burnpur 

Shri A. Sbkgxjfta ( Alternate ) 
Shri J. L. Sonbji Special Steels Ltd, Bombay 

Shri M. R. Doctor ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on pagi 2 ) 



© Copyright 1985* 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication ia protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means expept with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 6158 - 1984 

( Continued from pagi 1 ) 

Mimbers Representing 

Shki S. G. Tudbkar Steel Authority of India Ltd, Epkaro Steel Plant, 

Bokaro Steel City 
S»Bi J. C. Erby ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. Raohavendran, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director ( Struc & Met ) 

Secretary 

Shhi S. K. Gupta 

Deputy Director ( Metals ), ISI 

Hot-Dip Galvanizing Subcommittee, SMDC 28 : 1 
Convener 
Shri V. R. Subramanian Indian Hot Dip Galvanizer's Association, New Delhi 

Members 

Shui V. P. Anand EMC Steelal Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri S. N. Sinqh ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. D. Bali Hyde! Designs Directorate, Chandigarh 

Shri J. S. Bedi Hope's Metal Windows ( India ) Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri A. K, Sobti ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. S. Bhullar General Engineering Works, Bharatpur 

Shri M. S. Mahta ( Alternate ) 
Director Central Electricity Authority, New Delhi 

Deputy Director ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. Dutta The Indian Tube Go Ltd, Jamshedpur 

Shri N. R. Natarajan ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. K. Guha The Fort William Co Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri S. Kumar ( Alternate ) 
Joint Director ( Chem ) Ministry of Railways 

JoiNTT Director ( T.I )-l ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. C. Mahajan The Indian Steel & Wire Products Ltd, 

Jamshedpur 

Shri Avtar Singh ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. M\hapatua Steel Authority of India Ltd, Rourkela Steel Plant, 

Rourkela 

Shri S. S. Sinha ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. Majumdar Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 
Shbi p. G. Mukherjeb Posts & Telegraph Department, Calcutta 

Shri K. Mitra ( Alternate ) 
Dr T. Mukherjeb Tata Iron and Steel Co Ltd, Jamshedpur 

Shri S. Nbelakantan Zenith Steel Pipes Ltd, Bombay 

Dr A. R. Kbskar ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. D. Parikh Kamani Engineering Corporation Ltd, Bombay 

Shri L. Puoazhanthy Indian Lead, Zinc Information Centre, New Delhi 

Shri A. Sengupta The Indian Iron & Steel Co Ltd, Bumpur 

Shri R. A. Shai^bhao Special Steels Ltd, Bombay 

Shri S. S. MuraNjaw ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. M. Tanxja Directorate General of Supplies & Disposak, 

New Delhi 

Shbi G. M. Gupta ( Alternats ) 
Shri Vijay Kapoor Guest, Keen, Williami Ltd, Howrah 



IS: 6158. 1984 

Indian Standard 

RECOMMENDED PRACTICE FOR 

SAFEGUARDING AGAINST EMBRITTLEMENT OF 

HOT-DIP GALVANIZED IRON AND 

STEEL PRODUCTS 

( First Revision } 



0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Indian 
Standards Institution on 20 December 1984, after the draft finalized by 
the Hot-Dip, Sprayed and Diffusion Coatings Sectional Committee had 
been approved by the Structural and Metals Division Council. 

0.2 This standard was earlier published in 1971. In this revision, the 
embrittlement lest for small galvanized articles has been modified, 
keeping in view of the experience gained since the last publication of 
the standard. 

0.3 Embrittlement of galvanized steel means the loss of ductile properties 
of steel during galvanizing. It may be partial or complete and seldom 
manifests itself except at points which have been cold-worked, for example, 
by punching; the effect is noted in specimens with stress concentration, 
such as is caused by notches, holes, fillets of small radii and sharp bends. 

0.4 Galvanizing embrittlement of steel is primarily a form of strain 
ageing. Such embrittlement occurs because of exposure to the temperature 
incident to the application of zinc coating on steels which are susceptible 
to strain ageing as a result of strains induced by cold-work. Embrittle- 
ment can also occur as a result of hydrogen absorption in pickling as 
described in 2.3. 

0.5 Strain ageing denotes changes taking when the final operation 
consists of cold-working. Ageing may result in an increase in hardness 
and strength, a loss in ductOity and impact resistance; the reappearance 
of a sharply defined yield point in the stress-strain curve of a tension test, 
and similar changes in other properties. The ageing changes proceed 
relatively slow at room temperature^ but at an accelerated rate as the 
ageing temperature is raised. 



IS : 6158 - 1984 

1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard prescribes various factors which are responsible for 
causing embtittlement in steel products during galvanizing process and 
procedure to safeguard against them. 

2. FACTORS IN EMBRITTLEMENT 

2.1 Base Metal ( Steels ) — Only steels produced under the trade 
designation of open- hearth, basic oxygen, and electric-furnace shall be 
used for galvanizing if any cold-working without subsequent annealing 
or stress-relieving is to precede galvanizing. Basic open-hearth or basic- 
electric steel should always be specified with carbon and phosphorus 
contents being as low as practicable. Bessemer steels should never be 
used where the material is cold-formed and not subsequently annealed 
prior to galvanizing. Steels should not exceed 0*25 percent carbon 
content where severe cold-forming operations precede galvanizing. 

2.U Steels vary in their susceptibility to galvanizing embrittlement. 
Aluminium-killed steels are least susceptible to embrittlement, while the 
difference between semi-killed and silicon-killed steels is not precise. 
Rimmed steels are subject to embrittlement during galvanizing, 
particularly where heavy sections and sharp bends are involved. 

2.1*2 Coarse grained steels are more susceptible to embrittlement than 
fine grained steels. To maintain high resistance to impact after cold- 
working, aluminium-killed steels should be chosen and they should be 
normalized after rolling to become fine grained. The impact resistance 
of semi-killed and rimmed steels may also be increased by normalizing 
after rolling. 

2.1.3 Malleable and nodular iron will be decidedly embrittled by 
heating to 454*^0 as in galvanizing. The chemical composition of the iron 
castings, particularly the phosphorus and silicon content, is an important 
factor in galvanizing embrittlement. Prolonged annealing and slow 
cooling of malleable iron tend to make it more susceptible to subsequent 
embrittlement. 

2.1.4 Castings shall be of such composition that will preclude the 
possibility of embrittlement within their service temperature range, 
caused by galvanizing. Otherwise, they should be immunized against 
galvanizing embrittlement by rapid cooling from 676**C, preferably by 
water-quenching. 

2.1.5 The design of the product, the selection of the proper steel and 
method of fabrication to withstand normal galvanizing operations 
without embrittlement is the responsibility of the fabricator. Except 
where the design, the selection of the steel and the method of fabrication 



IS } 6158 - 1984 

18 specified by the purchaser, it is the responsibility of the fabricator to 
select suitable steel which will withstand normal galvanizing operations, 

2.2 Gold-Working 

2.2.1 The physical properties of steels are changed by cold-working. 
Thus hardness is increased and shock resistance is decreased. Cold- 
working may be of the nature of rolling, bending, upsetting, punching, 
shearings etc. Any form of cold-working reduces the ductility of steel. 

2.2.2 For intermediate and heavy shapes, plates and hardware, any 
severe cold- working operations should subsequently be followed by 
annealing or stress-relieving. In the galvanizing operation there is no 
injurious loss of ductility unless the material has previously received 
jsevere localized cold-working. 

2.2.3 The smaller hot-rolled shapes including thicknesses up to 6 mm, 
may be cold-worked by punching without subsequent annealing or 
stress-relieving. Shapes 8 mm to 17 mm in thickness are not seriously 
affected as to serviceability by cold-working in punching. The heavier 
shapes, 18 mm and over, should be reamed or drilled after punching. 

2.2.4 It is the responsibility of the fabricator to ensure that residual 
stresses caused by cold-working are sufficiently relieved or are such that 
-subsequent galvanizing operations will not result in embrittlement of the 
steel. 

11.3 Pickling Practice 

2.3.1 Hydrogen absorption in the pickling process has a major effect 
on reducing the ductility of the steel. Surface roughness resulting from 
the pickling operation is a further cause of the loss in ductility. The 
previous treatment of steel, for example by cold-working, determines the 
magnitude of the effect to a large extent. Increasing the temperature of 
the pickling bath, as well as prolonging the immersion period, increases 
the resulting embrittlement. 

2.3.2 Complete recovery from the effect of hydrogen embrittlement 
may be achieved by prolonged heating of the articles at 150°C after 
pickling. 

2.3.3 It is the responsibility of the galvanizer to ensure that the steel to 
be galvanized is not overpickled either by excessively high pickling 
temperatures or by long immertion periods. 

NoTB I — Use of inhibitor! in pkkling bath may minimize etching and 
embrittlement. 

NoTB 2 — Hot alkaline dtaoing or anodic acid etching baths may be used 
instead of acid picklinc to avoid hySrogen embrittlement. 



IS t 6158 - 1984 

2*4 Shot-Blastiiig — Shot or sand blasting may be used on some 
products instead of pickling to avoid hydrogen embrittlement. 

3. EMBRITTLEMENT TEST 

3.0 If desired by the purchaser, the following embrittlement tests may 
by carried out. 

3.1 Small Galvainized Articles 

3.1.1 Subject to base material and dimensional limitations, the tests 
given in 3.U.1 and 3«1.1.2 shall apply. 

3.L1.1 A convenient bend test for embrittlement of galvanized steel 
hardwares, such as, bolts, pole and tower steps, insulator devices, braces, 
rods, etc, consists of clamping one end of the article in a vice and bend- 
ing the other end through 90^. A suitable length of pipe may be used 
as a lever. An embrittled article will not withstand a 90"* bend, 
whereas an article in the manufacture of which proper precautions 
against embrittlement have been taken will withstand such bending. If 
such a test is made on threaded articles, it shall be made on the 
unthreaded portion. 

3.1.1.2 Castings and steel hardware, of such shape and size that they 
do not permit bending, may be struck a sharp blow with a 1-kg hammer. 
If the material is not embrittled, it should not crack under such a blow. 

3.2 Galvanized Angles Test 

3.2.1 The elongation measured in accordance with 3.2.3.1 shall be 
not less than 5 percent. When the specimen does not show 5 percent 
elongation, the reduction in thickness shall be measured in accordance 
with 3.2.2.2. The sum of the percentage of elongation plus the average 
percentage reduction of thickness shall not be less than 10. 

3.2.2 Test Procedure 

3.2.2.1 For determining the elongation after fracture, 50 mm gauge 
length ( Fig. lA ) shall be prick-punched in the middle of the edge of the 
vertical leg of the angle along a line parallel to its length and centred 
directly under the hole. After the test, the sum of the distances along 
this line from each punch mark to the corresponding edge of the fracture 
shall be measured to 0*25 mm, with a flexible scale and the percentage of 
elongation calculated. For specimens under 12 mm in thickness, or 
those in which the distance from the edge of the hole to the edge of the 
angle is less than 10 mm the elongation shall be measured over a 2 '5 mm 
gauge length. 



IS : 6158 - 1984 

3.2.2.2 For determining the percentage reduction of the thickness after 
fracture, the reduction shall be measured with a ball-point micrometer 
at the three locations indicated in Fig. IB, namely, a, outer side of hole; 
6, inner side of hole; c, middle of leg. The percentage reduction of 
thickness shall be calculated on the basis of the original thickness of the 
angle and the average of the three values at a, h and c. 

3«2.2*3 The length of the test specimen and the distance between 
the supports are given below: 

Leg of Angle Length Between Minimum 

Support, Li Length, L2 

mm 

Up to and including 100 

Over 100 up to and including 150 

Over 150 up to and including 200 

BENDING LOAD 



I 



mm 


mm 


350 


460 


510 


610 


760 


915 




lA 




FRACTURE 



IB 
AH dimensions in millimetres. 
Fio. 1 Galvanized Angle Test 
7 



IS 1 6158 • 1984 

3.2*2«4 The kind of hole, punched, subpunched and reamed, or 
drilled shall be that employed in the fabricated material which the 
si>ecimen represents. The dimensional values, diameter, and location 
of hole, shall be not less than those employed in the structural details. 
Care should be taken not to place the hole near stamped or rolled-in 
identification mark. 

3.2«2«5 The test shall be made upon galvanized specimens having a 
temperature not below 15**C and not over 32''C when tested. 

3«2.2«6 The test may be made in a universal testing machine. 

3.2*3 Number of Tests — One test from each thickness of angle from 
each melt of steel shall be made. In case there is a reasonable doubt 
that the angles represented by the specimens in thie first test are not free 
of injurious embrittlement, two additional test shall be made, and if no 
failure to meet the requirements of 3.2.1 occurs in either of these tests the 
angles represented shall be considered acceptable. 



lO 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 



Mdnak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 
Talaphones : 26 60 21, 27 01 31 Telegrams : Mariaksanstha 

( Corvimon to all OHIcas ) 

HBglonal Off tees Ul9phon9 

•Western . Manakalaya, E9 MIOC, Marol Andheri ( East ), BOMBAY 400093 6 32 92 95 
tEastern : 1/U C. I. T, Scheme VII M, V, I P. Road, Maniktola 36 24 99 

CALCUTTA 700064 

Southern : C. L T. Campus, MADRAS 600113 41 24 42 

Northern ; B69 Phase VIL Industrial Focal Point 8 73 28 

S. A. S NAGAR 160051 ( Punjab ) 



48 
49 



BfMncfi Offices . 

'Pushpak\ Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, AHMADABAD 380001 12 63 

\2 63 

•F Block, Unity BIdg, Narasimharaja Square, BANGALORE 560002 22 48 06 

Gangotrl Complex, Bhadbhada Road, T, T. Nagar, BHOPAL 462003 6 27 16 

22E Kalpana Area, BHUBANESHWAR 751014 . 5 36 27 

6,8-56C U N, GMPta Marg, HYDERABAD 500001 22 10 83 

R14 Yudhlster Marg, C Scheme, JAIPUR 302006 6 98 32 

1 17/418 B Sarvodaya Nagar. KANPUR 208006 4 72 92 

Patliputra Industnal Estate, PATN A 800013 6 23 06 

Hantex BIdg ( 2nd Floor ), RIy Station" Road, TRIVANDRUM 696001 32 27 

Inspection Office ( With Sata Point ) : 

Institution of Enginears ( India ) Butldina 1332 Shlvatl Nagar PUNE 410006 S 24 36 



•Saidi Of ftca in Bombay Is at Novaliy Chambart, Grant Road, 89 65 28 

Bdmbay 400007 
^•les Offlca in Calcutta la at S Chowrlngbat Approach, P. 0* 27 68 00 

Pilncep Straat Calcutta 700072 , ^^ 

Pi^njtid at Pflnto^aph, filW D«li371iri9!t 



