( Reaffirmed 2001 )

IS : 9502 - 1980

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR MUSCOVITE MICA COMPONENTS ELECTRONIC EQUIPMENT
Mica Sectional Committee,
Chairman SHRI S.N. PUI~I Members Chatturam Horilram Pvt Ltd, P. 0. JhumriTelaiya ( Bihar ) SHRI GOPI KRISHNA BHADANI ( Alternate ) Bihar Mica Exporters Association, Giridih SHXI BASUDEV BHARATIA SHRI N. S. CHAKRABORTY ( Alternate) Government of Bihar CHAIRMAN, BIHAI~ MICA SYNDICATE Indian Bureau of Mines, Nagpur CONTROLLER SHRI M. MUKHERJEE ( Alternate ) Department of Mines and Geology, Government SH~LIY. N. DAVE of Rajasthan, Jaipur SHRI R. S. SHAI~MA ( Alternate ) Export Inspection Council of India, Calcutta SHRIG.C. DE SHRI P. P. SAXENA ( Alternate ) Mica Trading Corporation of India Ltd, Patna SHRI D. GUPTA Madras Mica Association, Gudur SIIRI P. Kohl REDDY ( Andhra Pradesh ) SKRI C. V. K~ISHNAIAH ( Alternate ) S H 11I S EIA N liA R P & A s A D Seth Pusalal Mansinghka Pvt Ltd, Bhilwara MANSINGII~A Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Hyderabad SHRI N S. N. MUR~~HY S& M. V. DALAL ( Alternate ) SHRI B. K. MUKTHY (Alternate) In personal capacity ( Mica Exporter, Bhilwara ) SHRI SURYA PRAK~SH NATHANY C. M. Rajgarhia, Giridih ( Bihar) SHRI R. L. RAJGARHIA SHRI S. K. RAJGARHIA (Alternate) Universal Enterprises, Gudur ( Andhra Pradesh ) SHRI A. SYAMASUNDARA REDDY Central Glass and Ceramic Research Institute SHRIS. B. ROY ( CSIR ), Calcutta DR S. MANDAI. (Alternate) SHRI S. P. BHADANI ( Continued on page 2 ) 0 Copyright 1980 INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. Geological

FOR

ETDC

9

Representing Survey of India, Calcutta

IS : 9502 - 1980
( Continuedfrom page 1) Representing

Members

SHRI KISTO KUI\XAR SAHA SHRI A. K. CHOWDHURY SERI BISHW.~JIT SAMONTA

Peak Electronics
( Alternate )

Pvt Ltd, Calcutta Association, Jhumri-

Kodarma Mica Mining Telaiya ( Bihar )

SHRI UMESH CHAN~I~A ACRAWALA ( Alternate ) Ranjan Mica Industries, Calcutta SRRI S. R. SENGUPT4 National Test House, Calcutta SHRI U. S. VERMA SHRI P. C. PRA~HAN (Alternate) J. V. Electronics Ltd, New Delhi SHRI OM WADHWA Director General, IS1 (Ex-oficio Member) SRRI S. P. SACHDEV, Director ( Elec tech ) (Secretary )

2

IS : 9502 - 1980

Indian Standard.
SPECIFICATION FOR MUSCOVITE MICA COMPONENTS ELECTRONIC EQUIPMENT
0.
0.1 This

FOR

FOREWORD
Standards the Mica Division

Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Institution on 12 May 1980, after the draft finalized by Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Council.

made of muscovite mica are used in electronic 0.2 Components equipment, vacuum tubes, gas discharge devices, etc. The object of this standard is to lay down minimum technical requirements, test methods and acceptance conditions for muscovite mica components for electronic e'quipment. 0.3 While preparing this standard, considerable assistance has been derived from IS0 5816-l 979 ` Muscovite mica components for electronic Organization for Standardization. equipment ' , issued by the International 0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the. result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : Z-1960". The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard covers requirements of stamped components of muscovite mica of diameter up to and including 40 mm for use in It covers components made from natural block electronic equipment. mica only.
1.2 This standard components.
*Rules for rounding

does

not

deal

with

fabricated

or

processed

mica

off numerical

values

( revised).

3

IS : 9562 .- 19w 2. TERMINOLOGY the 2.1 For IS : 1885 ( Part 3. BASIC purpose LITI)-1980* of standard, this shall apply. definitions given in

DIMENSIONS

3.1 Classification 3.1.1 The components Group I or less, are classified into three groups according of diameter of diameter of diameter to size: 15 mm more more

a) b) 4

components

that fit into a circle

that fit into a circle Group II - components than 15 mm but not more than 25 mm, and Group III - components that fit into a circle than 25 mm but not more than 40 mm.

3.2 Thickness - The mica components are manufactured in thicknesses The thickness shall be uniform to within ranging from 0'1 to 0.5 mm. Cl.02 mm. 4. REQUIREMENTS -The shape and size of the component 4.1 General tolerances on the dimensions shall be according to drawings agreed to by the supplier. as well as the the purchaser's

shall be 4.2 Surface Cliaracteristics - The surface of the component reasonably flat according to the specimen sample, as agreed to between The convexity of the surface of the the purchaser and the supplier. component permitted shall be agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier. 4.3 Cracks

cracks joining the periphery of the 4.3.1 Through Cracks - Through components to the inside opening and between the openings shall not be The total length of cracks running from opposite directions allowed. between any two adjacent openings or any opening and the periphery of the component shall not exceed one-third of the space between them; the length of any through cracks running from opposite directions shall be not more than one-fourth of the width of the bridge.
*Elrctrotcclmical vocabulary: Part LIII Mica.

4

IS :9502

- 1980

Provided the purchaser and the supplier agree, through cracks of lengths up to 3 mm can be allowed, if the total length of such cracks from opposite directions between two adjacent openings or between the opening and the periphery of the component does not exceed half the distance between them. If the distance between the openings is 2 mm or less, the total length of through cracks running from opposite directions shall not exceed one-third of the width of the bridge. 4.3.2 Not-Through Cracks - Not-through cracks up to a depth of one-third of the thickness of the component shall be allowed between the openings or between the openings and the periphery of the components. 4.4 Holes -- Holes within 2 mm of the opening or periphery shall not be permissible. The exact type of holes which may be permitted shall be agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier according to the specimen supplied. 4.5 Foreign Material - Inclusion of foreign minerals ( such felspar, quartz and other minerals of pegmatite) and impurities such ` oil ' stains are not allowed. as as

4.6 Stains - Stains of various colours, other than those due to rust or corrosion, are allowed on the surface of the component provided that the total area covered by the stains does not exceed 10 percent of the total surface area of the component for Group I, and 25 percent for Groups II and IT1 (see 3.1.1 ). 4.7 Spots -- Black spots distributed at distances of less than 1 mm from the periphery of the internal opening and on bridges of width less than 3 mm are not allowed. 4.8 Lamination -The periphery and on the according to the sample size and type of lamination on the external periphery of the internal openings shall be agreed upon by the purchaser and the supplier.

4.9 Defects and Fins - The size, type and location of defects, fins and holes shall be according to the sample agreed upon by the purchaser and the supplier. 4.10 Scratches -Scratches due considered as grounds for rejection. to knife or blade shall not be

4.11 TeethComponents with the permitted. Such components detected counted in the sum of the components ( see 6.4). 5

teeth chipped off shall not be during the test are rejected and not complying with the standard

IS :9502

- 1980
AND CRITERIA OF ACCEPTANCE for

5. SAMPLING 5.1 General acceptance.

- The components in each box of supply shall be tested Samples are taken from each parcel box.

NOTE If components of different block stamp are parked samplvs shall be taken of each block stamp srparatcly.

in thr Same box,

5.2 Sample Size - From each box, 0.5 percent of the components with a minimum of 100 shall be sampled for testing of the supplied components to check compliance with all the requirements of this standard. Samples shall be drawn at random so as to be representative of the lot. 5.3 Criteria for Acceptance -If the failing to comply with the requirements equal to 8 percent of the samples taken, all considered as having passed. If the sum is more than 8 percent, double the number same order as before, and retested. sum of all the components of 4.2 to 4.11 is less than or the pieces in the box shall be of the components which fail of samples are taken in the

If then, the sum of all the components which fail is less than or equal to 8 percent of the samples taken, all the pieces in the box shall be considered as having passed. If the sum of the components which fail is more than 8 percent, all the pieces in the box, shall be rejected. 6. TEST METHODS - The components by visual inspection are checked and comparison for with

6.1 Visual Examination compliance with 4.2 to 4.11 standard specimens.

6.2 Thickness-The thickness of the component is measured with a dial gauge provided with a spherical point and with an accuracy of 0'01 mm. The uniformity and correctness of the thickness shall be The radius of the sphere of the clamping terminal shall be checked. 1% mm. 6.2.1 Tolernllces on Thickness the drawings shall not exceed: a) the lower tolerance components, and h) the upper tolerance components. The amount of deviation -The limit -in limit -in tolerances more more on thickness than than 5 20 specified of in the

percent percent +0-l

of the mm.

shall in no case be more than

6.3 Depth of Cracks -The approximate depth to which cracks have penetrated shall be estimated by visually examining the opposite side of the cracked surface against a light source. Alternatively, the actual 6

IS : 9502 - 1980 depth to which cracks have penetrated can also be determined by splitting the cracked side of the component in to several parts till all the cracked films are lifted and measuring the thickness of each individual films with a dial gauge. 6.4 Dimensions of Openings the sample batch for verifying ` Go - No-Go ' gauges. Fifty pieces shall be picked out from the dimensions of the openings with

6.4.1 Round O~cnin~~ - The dimensions of round openings shall be The opening shall be checked with a set of ` Go -No-Go' gauges. considered to be within acceptable tolerances if the ` Go ' gauge passes freely and the ` No-Go' gauge does not pass through it. As employed an alternative, projection method as given in 6.4.2.1 may be subject to agreement between the purchaser and the supplier.

KOTE 1- If the tolerance on the opening is 0.03 mm or less, up to 20 percent of the components tested may have openings through which passage is possible for the gauge which is one unit ( equivalent to O,Ol mm) above the maximum permissible dimensions, or impossible for the gauge which is one unit below the minimum permissible dimensions; but even in such openings, passage should be possible for the gauge which is 2 units (equivalent to 0.02 mm ) above the maximum allowed dimensions, or impossible for the gauge which is 2 units below the minimum allowed dimension. NOTE 2-If the tolerance on the opening is more than 0.03 mm! not more than 5 percent of the components tested may have openings through whmh passage is possible for the gauge which is one unit ( equivalent to 0.01 mm) above the maximum permissible dimensions or impossible for the gauge which is one unit below the minimum permissible dimensions, but even in such openings, passage should be possible for the gauge which is 2 units ( equivalent to 0.02 mm ) above the maximum allowed dimensions or impossible for the gauge which is 2 units below the minimum allowed dimension.

the layout of the openings as 6.4.2 Irregular Openings - For determining well as the dimensions and shape of irregular openings, a sample of not less than 5 components shall be taken from the box. The components shall be adjusted satisfactory if the arithmetic mean of each dimension is Otherwise, double the number within the limits allowed in the drawing. of pieces shall be taken and tested again; if inadequacies in the layout of the openings are found in this new test also then all the components from this box shall be rejected. 6.4.2.1 Projection method for dimensions of opena'nplr - The dimensions of irregularly shaped openings shall be checked with a profile projector by the method of superimposing the drawing of the component on the projection of the openings at a magnification of 50 times. The opening shall be adjudged satisfactory if its projection coincides with the drawing and remains within the specified tolerances. 7

IS : 9502 * 1980 6.4.2.2 Microscopic method or projection method for relative disposition of openings - The relative disposition of the openings and the dimensions of the components according to the drawing shall be verified on a Shop Measuring Microscope or on a Profile Projector by the method of superimposing the drawing on the projected image of the component The component shall be under a magnification of 10 to 30 times. considered as conforming to the drawing if all the contours of the projected image of the component coincide with the drawing, or its dimensions do not exceed the specified tolerances.
NOTEIt is essential that the drawing which is superimposed on the profile of the component has to b- accurately made; preferably on a co-ordinatograph. These drawings shall also be made on durable non-shrinking special material ( mylar or polythrne ).

6.5 Geometrical Dimensions - The initial basis for the measurement of the geometrical dimensions of the component shall be established according to drawings or catalogue, with the agreement between the purchaser and the supplier. 6.6 Radii of Rounding -- The radii shall be checked bv projecting the image over the image. 6.7 Permissible measurement unless in Table 1. of rounding in the components and superimposing the drawing

permissible Tolerances - The otherwise specified by the buyer,

tolerances in shall be as given

TABLE

1

PERMISSIBLE

MEASUREMENT

TOLERANCES TOLEJPANCI;' &O.lmm *45 minutes ( angular )

DIJIIWSIONS Exposed Exposed linear dimensions angular dimensions from component

Shift of openings axis

As specified in drawing; otherwise 30.05 mm As specified in drawing; otherwise 10.05 mm & 0'05 mm As specified in drawing; othcrwisr 50 percent of tolerance

Misalignment and other deviations from thr form of opening Radii of curves Asymmetry of openings in component location of

8

IS : 9502 - 1980 6.8 Area of Stains or Spots - The component plate to be tested shall be placed on a stand and illuminated from below. A square piece of translucent graph paper of 1 mm size shall be placed on the plate; the graph pattern being made of small squares. Each square, of which the stain covers more than half the area, shall be denoted by a plus. ( +) sign; each square, of which the stain covers less than half the area, shall be denoted by a minus ( - ) sign and squares where there is no stain shall be given the zero ( 0) sign.
In this way, all the squares inside the plate are marked. For the purpose of evaluation, two categories, namely, squares with the stain, marked with a plus ( + ) sign; and squares without the stain, marked with a zero ( 0 ) sign shall be taken into account. Of the squares marked with a minus ( - ) sign one half shall be added to each category. The ratio of the number of squares gives the percentage 7. PACKING of squares with stain to the total area occupied by the stains. number

7.1 The components shall be packed mass of 200 g to 500 g. The packets boxes with inside paper lining.

in paper packets, each shall be tightly packed

having a in sturdy

7.2 Each box shall contain only components of the same block The gross mass of each box with the components shall not exceed
NOTE -

stamp. 20 kg.

in the same box, but it is obligatory block stamp' ( s ) on each packet.

may be packed

Components of different block stamps ( according

to the same drawing) to indicate the name of the

8. MARKING 8.1 Every box shall be labelled and indelibly marked on it:
having the following information clearly

a) b) 4 4

Number

of the box; name; name;

Purchaser's Supplier's Name

of the article; net masses; and as agreed to between the manufacturer

Gross and e> f>Any other

information and the purchaser.

9

IS : 9502 - 1980

8.1.1 The box may also be marked

with the IS1 Certification

Mark.

NOTE- The use of the IS1 Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of the Indian Standards Institution (Certification Marks ) Act and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The ISI Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by IS1 and operated by the producer. ISI marked products are also continuously checked by IS1 for conformity Details of conditions under which a to that standard as a further safeguard. licence for the use of the IS1 Certification Mark may by granted to manufacturers or processors, may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution.

8.1.2 Markings on Accompanying Document - Each box shall contain an by the responsible official. This document signed accompanying document shall contain the following information: a) b) Name of the manufacturer;

Date of packing; of box; in the box and number of components in

c) Number

d) Number of packets each packet; e) Reference f) Number

and number of block

of the drawing and

of the detail;

stamp(s);

g).Mass 9. TRANSPORT

and number AND

of the components STORAGE

in the box.

the components shall be protected 9.1 During `transport and storing, from moisture and the boxes shall be protected from mechanical damage.

IO

