( Reaffirmed 2000 )

1s :3753-1984

lndian Standard
METHODS OF SAMPLING FOR ALCOHOLIC DRINKS

( First Revision)

Sampling Methods for Food Products and Agricultural Inputs Sectional Committee, AFDC 57
Chairman DR PREMNARAIN Representing Indian Agricultural Statistics ( ICAR ), New Delhi Research Institute

Members SHRI S. C. RAI ( Alternate to Dr Prem Narain ) AGRICULTURAL MARKETINGADVISER Directorate of Marketing and Inspection ( MinisTO THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA try of Rural Reconstruction ), Faridabad SHRI S. K. SHARMA(Alternate ) Fedegetiiin of Biscuit Manufacturers of India, SHRI G. S. ARORA SHRI R. C. AROUA SHRI J. G. BHANDARI
SHRI D. S. CHADHA

Directorate of Economics and Statistics ( Ministry of Agriculture ), New Delhi Roll;eI$ur Millers' Federation of India, New

SHRI K. B. THIAGARAJAN ( Alternate ) Central Committee for Food Standards ( Ministry of Health and Family Welfare), New Delhi SHRIMATIDEBI MUKHERJEE( Alternate ) SHRI P. R. DONGRE Central Statistical Organization, New Delhi Directorate of Plant Protectton, Quarantine DR R. C. GUPTA and Storage ( Ministry of Agriculture ), Faridabad SHRI R. S. SHARMA( Alternate ) DR E. K. JAYANARAYANAN Mohan Meakin Ltd, Mohan Nagar ( UP ) SHRI JITENDRA MOHAN ( Alternate ) ( Continued on page 2 ) @ Copyright 1984

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act (XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS :3753-1984
( Continued from page 1 ) Members Representing DR D. C. JOHRI Central Avian Research Institute, Izatnagar SHRI SUSHIL KUMAR ( Ahernate ) SHRI M. N. K~,AN Department of Dairy Development (Ministry Agriculture ), New Delhi
DEPUTY COMMISSIONER ( DAIRY PRODUCTS ) ( AIrernate) DR K. M. NARAYANAN National Dairy Research Institute

of

( ICAR ),

Dr S. K. GUPTA ( Alternate ) SHRI K. R. NAR~YANA RAO Food Corporation of India, New Delhi SHRI T. N. RAMACHANDRARAO ( Alternate ) PR,)F OF SUGAR CHEMISTRY National Sugar Institute, Kanpur Central Food Technological Research Institute KUMARI D. RAJALAKSHMI ( CSIR ), Mysore SHRI B. S. RAME.W ( Alternate ) SHRI N. RAMADIJRAI Tea Board, Calcutta SEW R. N. MONDAL ( Alternate ) DR K. G. RANAMURTHY Indian StatistIcal Institute, Calcutta SHRI A. N. NANKANA ( Alternate ) Ministry of Agriculture ( Department of Food ). SHFU G. D. SHARMA

Karnal

DR B. K. NANDI ( Alternate ) DR L. N. SINGH DR N. SHARMA( Alternate ) SHRI T. THARANATHSHET

New Delhi
Indian India Veterinary Pepper and Research Institute ( ICAR ),

Izatnagar Spice `Trade Association,

SHRI MANIKANT V. KHONE ( Aliernate ) BRIG R. N. VARMA Quartermaster General's Branch, Army Headquarters, New Delhi LT-COL S. KAPOOR ( Alternate ) Director General. IS1 ( Ex-officio Member) SHRID. S. AHLIJWALIA. _.

Director

( Stat )

'

Secretary
SHRI A. K. TALW'AR

Deputy Director

( Stat ), IS1

IS :3753 - 1984

Indian Standard
METHODS OF SAMPLING FOR ALCOHOLIC DRINKS

( First Revision )
0. FOREWORD 0.1This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted
by the Indian Standards Institution on 20 March 1984, after the draft finalized by the Sampling Methods for Food Products and Agricultural Inputs Sectional Committee had been approved by the Agricultural and Food Products Division Council. 0.2 The alcoholic industry is at present a well organized and established industry in India. Substantial quantities of the products are bemg exported also. It is, therefore, imperative that there is strict quality control and due consideration is given to sampling procedures which will help in prop-r and objective evaluation of the various characteristics. This standard lays down the methods of sampling for alcoholic drinks. While evolving this sta;ldard, due weightage has been given to the trade practices. 0.3 The sampling procedures given in this standsrd include, besides lot inspection plan, recommended provisions for process control. Proper quality control during process would substantially reduce quality fluctuations anj help the manufacturer in achieving in-built quality of the product. Lot mspection plan would enable the manufacturer or purchaser or other independent inspection and testing agencies to decide the conformity or otherwise of the material to the relevant specification. 0.4 This standard was originally issued in 1967. In this revised version, recommended provisions of procecs control for the guidance of the manufacturer have been elaborated, the definition of lot and scale of sampling have been suitably modified in the light of experience gained and modified tolerances for net volume given in individual material specifications. The provisions regarding attribute type of requirements and net volume have been appropriately incorporated in the criteria for conformity. A modified design of the weighted sampling can has also been included. 3

IS: 3753-1984 0.5This standard is intended to introduce uniform methods of sampling for alcoholic drinks. It does not deal with the specifications of the materials, but prescribes only the sampling procedures for determining the conformity of the manufactured products to the specified quality, besides recommended process control provisions, and thus forms a necessary adjunct to the series of Indian Standard specifications for individual alcoholic drinks.
0.6 This standard is subject to the restrictions imposed under the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954, and the rules framed thereunder, and the State Excise Duty Rules which permit the withdrawal of duty free samples for testing. It is recommended that samples for testing by ISI or any other government recognized inspection and testing agency, whenever called for, may also be exempted from excise duty.

1.SCOPE
1.1 This standard prescribes the methods of sampling and criteria for ascertaining the conformity of the alcoholic drinks to the relevant material specifications. It also includes the recommended provisions for process control for the guidance of manufacturers. 2. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS OF SAMPLING

2.1 In drawing, preparing, storing and handling samples, the following precautions and directions shall be observed as far as possible:

4 Samples shall be taken in a protected place not exposed to damp air, b) 4 To draw a representative sample, the contents of each container selecd) 4 f> d
ted for sampling shall be mixed as thoroughly as possible by suitable means; Precautions shall be taken to protect the samples, the' material being sampled, the sampling instrument and the containers for samples from extraneous contamination; Samples shall be placed in suitable clean, dry and airtight glass containers. The sample containers shall be of such a size that sufficient head space to allow for expansion of the liquid, is left after pouring in the sample; Each sample container shall be sealed airtight with a suitable stopper after filling and marked with full details of sampling, the date of sampling and the year of manufacture of the material; and dust or soot; The sampling instrument shall be clean and dry;

h> Samples shall be stored in a cool, dark and dry place.
4

IS : 3753 - 1984 3. SAMPLING INSTRUMENTS 3.0 The following types of sampling instruments may be used : a) Sampling can or weighted sampling can for taking samples from various depths of large tanks, and b) Sampling tube. 3.1 Sampling Can - It consists of a metal container of suitable capacity ( about 1 litre ) attached to a suitable lead. The can has a removable stopper, to which is attached a light chain (See Fig. 1 ). For taking a sample, it is lowered in the tank to the required depth, and the stopper is removed by means of the chain for filling the container.

iI0

FIG. 1 SAMPLING CAN

3.2 Weighted Sampling Can - This can, shown in Fig. 2, may be made of suitable metal. It shall be of suitable capacity, for example, 1 litre, and of such dimensions that it will pass freely through the tank dip-hatch. The can shall be of such a mass as to sink rapidly in the material to be sampled. The metal used to weigh the apparatus shall either be fitted externally or 5

IS : 3753 - 1984 , be contained in the space provided by fitting the can with a false bottom. The apparatus shall be provided~with means to permit filling at any desired level and closure, and shall have a suitable long chain or cord of nonsparking material attached to it.

4mm (OR BSWG) BRASS WIRE HANDLE 7 --

t 65mm APPROX

Fi
LLOOP FOR ATTACHING OPERATING CORD
I

REINFORCED

/LIP

I

I I

:

I

I

:

/

LUGS RIVETED AND SOLDERED

I

\

/' b

,I

\

\\

\

CORK

0'

I I
1

lmm

:APACITY 1 LITRE APPROX

ItOR 19SV NON SPA ING MET BODY

I

OETAIL OF CORK

230'mm

k-

8Omm APPROX 4 FIG. 2 WEIQHTED SAMPLING CAN

6

IS:37533.3 Sampling Tube -

1984

It is made of metal or thick glass and is 20 to 40 mm in diameter and 0'5 to 1`0 m in length ( see Fig. 3 ). The upper and lower ends are conical and reach 5 to 10 mm diameter at the narrow ends. Handling is facilitated by two rings at the upper end. For taking a sample, the tube is first closed at the top with the thumb or a stopper and lowered until the desired depth is reached. It is then opened for a short time to admit the material and finally closed and withdrawn. 3.3.1 For small containers, the size of the sampling tube may be altered suitably. 3.4 Materials - All the materials used for fabricating the sampling instruments shall be such as not to contaminate or chemically affect the sample or the material being sampled. 4. PROCESS CONTROL 4.1 One sample from each consignment of raw materials received in the factory shall be tested for important requirements of that material. Adequate
p-5 TO 10mm DIA

\ 20 TOLO

mm' DIA

F5

70 10mm OIA TUBE

FIG. 3 SAMPLING

7

IS:3753

- 1984

control shall be exercised on the quality of water used for the manufacture and for this purpose IS : 4700 - 1968* may be referred. 4.2 The manufacturer shall make appropriate checks and take representative samples at intermediate stages of processing so as to control the quality fluctuations and hence ensure that the finished material is of desired quality. 4.3 The inspection levels given below are recommended over the manufacturing process. for routine control

4.3.1 Fermented Alcoholic Beverages ( Beer and Wines) 4.3.1.1 Beer - The entire quantity of beer manufactured and stored at a time in each bottling vat just prior to bottling shall constitute a batch. The recommended frequency of testing for various characteristics at different stages of manufacture is given in Appendix A. 4.3.1.2 Wines - The provisions similar to that of beer given in 4.3.1.1 shall apply with the modification that the stage `wort boiling' shall be deleted and the stage `Meshing' shall be replaced by `juice extraction'. 4.3.2 Distilled Alcoholic Beverages 4.3.2.1 Whisky, rum, gin and brandy-The quantity manufactured at a time in the compounding/dilution/distillation constitute a batch.

of material tank shall at

The recommended frequency of testing for various characteristics different stages of manufacture is given in Appendix B. 5. LOT INSPECTION

5.1 If the manufacturer has maintained an adequate and satisfactory system of quality control in the manufacture of alcoholic drinks, the resulting data and information may be made available to the purchaser alongwith the material supplied to enable him to judge the acceptability of the consignment. When it is not possible to provide this information or if the purchaser so desires, the procedure laid down in the following clauses shall be followed for determining the conformity of material to the requirements of the specification. 5.2 Scale of Sampling 5.2.1 Lot - The quantity of packed alcoholic drink of the same type, belonging to the same batch of manufacture ( see 4.3.1.1 and 4.3.2.1) and packed in a day, shall constitute a lot.
*Quality tolerances for water for fermentation industry.

8

IS:3753

-1984

5.2.2 For ascertaining the conformity of the material to the requirements of the relevant specification, samples shall be tested from each lot separately. 5.2.3 the size for net selected The number of bottles to be selected from a lot shall depend on of the lot and shall be according to Table 1. The bottles selected volume according to co1 3 of Table 1 shall be in addition those according to co1 2 of Table 1.
TABLE 1 SCALE OF SAMPLING No. OF BOTTLES IN THE LOT SAMPLESIZE h__--_-_-__,~ r-----Requirements Other Net Volume Then Net Volume (2) (3) 9 36 12 36 15 72 21 108

(1) up to 5 000 5001 ,, 10000 10001 ,, 15 000 15 001 and above

5.2.3.1 These bottles shall be chosen at random from the lot. In order to ensure the randomness of selection, procedures given in IS : 4905-1968X may be followed. 5.2.4 Initially the number of cartons equal to the number of bottles to be taken from the lot in one set (SEC 5.3.3 ), shall be chosen at random. These cartons thus selected shall be opened and the bottles in these cartons examined visually for the condition of packing, the external appearance and the fill. The lot shall be considered satisfactory for inspection of other characteristics given in the specification, if all the bottles in the cartons opened are found meeting the requirements for these characteristics. 5.2.5 In case any defective bottle is found according to 5.2.4, twice the number of cartons shall be opened and the bottles examined for similar characteristics. If no defective bottle is found, the lot shall be considered satisfactory for inspection of other characteristics given in the specification. 5.3 Preparation of Test Samples

5.3.1 From each of the cartons opened according to 5.2.4, three bottles shall be taken from its different layers so as to obtain the required number of bottles in the sample ( see co1 2 and 3 of Table 1).
*Methods for random sampling.

9

IS:3753

- 1984

5.3.2 In case the number of cartons to be opened is according to 5.2.5, the number of cartons equal to the number of bottles in a set (see 5.3.3) shall be taken at random from these cartons and then the required number of bottles picked up according to 5.3.1. 5.3.3 The sample' bottles selected as in 5.3.1 or 5.3.2 shall be divided at random into three equal sets and labelled with all the particulars of sampling. One of these sets of sample bottles shall be for the purchaser, another for the vendor and the third for referee. The sample bottles to be tested for net volume shall be kept separately. 5.3.4 Referee Sample - Referee sample shall consist of a set of sample bottles marked for this purpose and shall bear the seals of the purchaser and the supplier. These shall be kept at a place agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier so as to be used in case of a dispute between the two. 5.4 Number of Tests 5.4.1 Beer and Wines - Tests for carbon dioxide, microbiological requirements pH and organoleptic requirements in this sequence shall be carried out on the individual sample bottles selected according to co1 2 of Table 1. The net volume shall be tested on each of the individual bottles selected in each set ( see 5.3.3 ). Tests for the remaining requirements of this specification shall be conducted on the composite sample prepared by thoroughly mixing approximately equal quantity of material from the individual sample bottles selected a in each set (see 5.3.3). for ethyl alcohol content by 5.42 Whisky, Gin, Brandy, Rum -Tests hydrometer method shall be carried out on individual sample bottles selected in each set (see 5.3.3 ) and net volume shall be tested on each of the individual bottles selected in each set (see 5.3.3). Organoleptic requirements shall also be tested on individual sample bottles. Tests for remaining requirements of the relevant specification shall be carried out on the composite sample prepared by thoroughly mixing approximately equal quantity of material from the individual sample bottles selected in each set ( see 5.3.3 ). 5.5 Criteria for Conformity - The lot shall be declared as conforming to the requirements of the relevant specification if 5.5.1, 5.5.2, 5.5.3 and 5.5.4 are satisfied. 5.5.1 For those characteristics tested on the composite sample, all the test results shall satisfy the corresponding specification requirements. 5.5.2 For each characteristic other than organoleptic and microbiological 10

IS : 3753 - 1984 the individual samples, the average (x) and range (R) shall be computed as follows : The sum of test results Average (F) = Number of test results
tested on

Range

(R) = Difference between the maximum and the minimum values of the test results

5.5.2.1 If the specification limit for the characteristic is given as minimum, the value of expression ( X - 0'6R ) shall be calculated from the relevant test results. If the value so obtained is greater than or equal to the minimum limit, the lot shall be deemed to have conformed to the requirements of that characteristic. 5.5.2.2 If the specification limit for the characteristic is given as a maximum, the value of expression (X + 0'6R ) shall be calculated from the relevant test results. If the value so obtained is less than or equal to the maximum limit, the lot shall be considered as satisfying the requirements of that characteristic. 5.5.2.3 If the characteristic has two sided specification limits, the values of the expression ( X - 0.6~) and ( X + 0'6R ) shall be calculated from the relevant test results. If the values so obtained lie between the two specification limits, the lot shall be considered as meeting the requirements of that characteristic. 5.5.3 For organoleptic and microbiological requirements, if all the test results on each of the individual samples satisfy the relevant specification requirements, the lot shall be considered as satisfying the requirements of that characteristic. 505.4 For net volume the bottles selected from each set ( see 5.4 ) meant for testing net volume shall be randomly divided into groups of 12 bottles each. The net volume shall be the volume indicated on the bottle subject to the tolerance for individual bottle given in the relevant specification. The total volume of 12 bottles shall also be examined according to `relevant tolerances. The lot shall be deemed to have satisfied the requirement of net volume if 5.5.4.1 and 5.5.4.2 are satisfied. 5.5.4.1 Each individual sample bottle shall satisfy the requirement of net volume indicated on the bottle subject to the corresponding tolerances given in the individual material specification. 5.5.4.2 Each group of 12 bottles shall satisfy the requirement of net volume subject to the corresponding tolerances given in the individual material specification. 11

IS : 3753 - 1984

APPENDIX
(Clause 4.3.1.1 )

A

RECOMMENDED FREQUENCY OF TESTING AT DIFFERENT STAGES OF MANUFACTURE OF BEER SL No. STAGE CHARACTBRISTICS Specific gravity Specific gravity Specificgravity and ternperature Colour, clarity, ethyl alcohol content, pH and carbon dioxide FREQUBNCY One sample from each wort kettle One sample from each mesh tank One sample from mentor each fer-

i) Wort boiling ii) Meshing iii) Fermentation iv) Bottling tank

A composite sample from each batch after the material is filtered and carbonized. For this purpose, small portions of material drawn periodically at every two hours shall be mixed thoroughly One sample from each storage tank at regular intervals a) Three samples at regular intervals per shift from each machine b) One sample per shift from each machihe c) 12 bottles per hour in each shift Three samples per shift from each machine

v) Storage vi) Bottling machine

Specific gravity, and pH a) Organoleptic ethyl alcohol tent b) Microbiological quirements c) Net volume

colour and conre-

vii) Pasteurization

Temperature effective tion

control for pasteuriza-

12

IS : 3753 - 1984

APPENDIX ( Clause 4.3.2.1 )

B

RECOMMENDED FREQUENCY OF TESTING AT DIFFERENT STAGES OF MANUFACTURE OF WHISKY, RUM, GIN AND BRANDY
SL No. STAGE CHARACTERISTICS FREQUENCY

i) Meshing

Dilution and gravity of solution Temperature fic gravity

specific molasses and speci-

One sample from each mesh tank One sample from each fermentation tank

ii) Fermentation iii) Distillation

All requirements given A composite sample prepared in the relevant proby mixing portions of duct specification exmaterial taken at different cept maturation and intervals from last distillation column in a shift net volume Quality of maturation One sample every three months from each wooden cask or barrel or vat a) One representative from each batch sample

iv) Maturation

v) Bottling

a) Colour,

clarity and ethyl alcohol content (by pycnometric or hydrometer method as per the requirements)

b) Net volume

b) One sample every half-anhour

13

