Indian Standard

IS : 4682 ( Part VII) - 1974 ( Reaffirmed 2006 )

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR LINING OF VESSELS AND EQUIPMENT CHEMICAL PROCESSES
PART VII CORROSION A-ND HEAT RESISTANT 1993 )

FOR
METALS

( Second Reprint

FEBRUARY

UDC

66'023'3 : 621 642 : 669'018'8

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN, 9

INDIAN
BAHADUR DELHI NEW 110002
a._

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR MARG

Gr 9

May

1975

IS :4682(PartvIr) -1974

Indian Standard
LINING
PART VII

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR OF VESSELS AND EQUIPMENT CHEMICAL PROCESSES
CORROSION AND HEAT RESISTANT

FOR
METALS

Chemical
ChairtMn Da 0. P. K-MDA

Engineering

Sectional

Committee,
Rcprsscnting
Limited,

EDC 57
Bombay

Larsen & Toubro

SHRI P. M. MEHTA (A&ma& to Dr 0. P. Kharbanda) SHRI A. K. BASIJ Indii Institute of Chemical Engineers, Calcutta PROP G. S. R. NARAS -URTY (Alkmats) SHRX S. D. BHASIN I. C. I. (India) Private Limited, Calcutta SHRI S. SEN GUPTA (Al&mate) SHRI B. R. BHAT~ACHARJEE The A. P. V. Engkering Co Private Ltd, SHRI B. BANERJEE(Alfern&) Calcutta SHRl A. K. Boss Directorate General -of Technical Development, New Delhi SHRI A. B. MALUCK (Alhnatc) DR K. S. CHARI The Fertiliir Association of India, New Delhi SHRI P. T. GHERIAN Oil and Natural Gas Commission, Dehra Dun SHRI&~~D~~~;;WDAR The Fertilizer Corporation of India Ltd, New Delhi TVRAM (Alternab) DR L. K. DO&WAMY Counx&~ Scientific and Industrial Research, New 1 SHIU M. V. KUNTE (Altinuk) DR H. E. EDIJLJEE Indian Chemical Manufacturers' Associitiou, Calcutta SHRI R. S. GROPER The Ralph M. Parsons Co of Asia, Bombay SHRI B. D. MELLO (Alum&)

(Continuedon page 2)

Q Copyrig& 1975
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS This

publication is protected under ~the I&an Cbpyri@ Act (XIV of 1957) and reproduction in whole or in partby any means cxczpt wtih written permission of the publisher &all be deemed to be an lnfrineement of copyright under the aaid Act.

IS : 469!2(Part VII) - 1974
(Continned from page 1)

Members
DR H. K. Josrir Sum K. C. JAIN (Akrnatc) PROP N. R. KAMATH SHRI K. A. NAIK (Al&mate) SHRI I. P. KAPun
Y

@resenting
Indiia$.~poration Ltd (Refineries Division), Bombay Association,

Indian Institute Of Technology, Indian Chemical Calcutta

Manufacturers

SHRI R. ~~L~DAS (Allernate) DR M. G. KRISHNA

Indian Institute of Petroleum (CSIR), Dehra Dun SHRI H. K. MULWANDANI (Alferaate) SHRI K. Mmmm Diictoratepf Industries, Government of Haryana, SHRI B. B. MATIWR Thez$%ith and General Mills Co Ltd,

SW I. B. LAL (&ma@ Smu Y. R. MEHTA Engineers' India Ltd, New Delhi Snm R. C. MICRA Heavy Blectricals (India) Ltd, Bhopal SHRI K. C. MOHAN Hindustan Steel Ltd, Ranchi SHRI -C. N. KHA~TAGIR (&&aate) Walchamlnagar Ind&rles Ltd, Bombay SHRI K. M~JXH~RJEE Smu R. C. RATHI (Altcraurc) SHRI P. K. Pm Esso Standard Relining Co of India Ltd, Bombay 3 SHRI H. B. DEWI (Altcnlatc) SHIU R. PRABHAMR Tata Chemicals Ltd, Mithapur SHRI S. N. BHATTACHARYA(Altewuatc) SHRI R. v. ~GHAVAN Vijay Tanks and Vessels Pvt Ltd, Bombay SHRI B. S. RAJPAL DBSMET (India) Pvt Ltd, Bombay SHY K. S. SESHADRI(Alternate) Pennwalt India Ltd, Bombay DR N. RAJA~EKHARAN SHRI J. S. KAUL (Alfwnatc) Bharat Heavy Plate and Vessels Ltd, New Delhi SHRI A. P. RAO SHRI M. VEN~(ATARATNAM (Altcmafe) SHRI H. S. RAO Lloyd's Register of Shipping, _. - Bombay SHRI B. R. K. GUPTA (Altewde) . SHRI V. M. -0 The K. C. P. Ltd, Madras SHRI K. SAMSAS~VA RAO (Alternate) Burmah-Shell Refineries Ltd, Bombay SHRI R. SADAGOPACHARS SHRI S. L. ARANHA (Alternate) &RI D. S. SAsTnY . Hmdustan Organic Chemicals Ltd, Bombay SHRI D. P. DANI (Alternate) National Physical Laboratory (CSIR), New Delhi DR J. K. N. SHARMA Dire$t;e~eneral of Supplies 8s. Disposals, SHRI S. %JBBIAH DR V. C. THAKAR SHRI A. K. MISER (A&male) DR Y. VENKATESHAM Associated Cement Companies Ltd, Bombay of

National Research Development Corporation India, New Delhi lh D. S. VUIWANATH Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore DR P. K. DIZSHPANDE (Alternate) Director General, IS1 (Ew-a$cio Member) SHRI S. M. RAzvr, Director (Mech Engg) (Secrela~)

(Continuedon page 41)

2

xs:4632@artvII)-1374

Indian Standard
LINING
PART VII

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR OF VESSELS AND EQUIPMENT CHEMICAL PROCBSS~S
CORROSION AND

FOR

HEAT `RESISTANT METALS

0.

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard (Part VII) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 31 July 1974, after the draft finalized by the C&mica1 Engineering Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering Division Council. 0.2 This standard is ~being issued in many parts; the corrosion and heat resistant metal lining of vessels and equipment is covered in this part; the other types of linings are covered in the remaining parts of this standard. 0.3 This part of the code offersguidance to manufacturers and users of vessels lined with corrosion and heat resistant steels. It is advisable to .test the suitability of the lining material for the particular service conditions enviPreliminary tests should be carried saged before lining is commenced. out with welded test panels in the corrosive conditions under consideration. This code does not offer guidance on the selection of any particular metal or method of lining to meet specific corrosion conditions. It does not include the deposition of metal by electrolysis or by spraying. 0.4 Metal linings `in the form of sheets or strips can be applied to vessels and equipment of steel construction by the use of welding. Sheet or strip material may also be used for the fabrication of linings which may be loose or mechanically attached to a vessel of steel or other material. 0.5 Vessels can also be manufactured from steel plates to which a layer of the required lining metal has been integrally bonded during the manufacture of the plate. Clad plates of this type can be obtained in many grades of stainless steel and the nickel-rich corrosion resistant alloys. 0.6 Lining of the surfaces of vessels and equipment can also be accomplished by the overlay method of welding whereby a continuous surface of weld metal is laid down. 0.7 A combination of two or mope of the above methods may be used together while lining the surfaces of vessels and equipment. 3

ls : 46s2 (Part vll)

- 1974

OS It is desirable that early consultation and exchange of information should take place between the lining contractor and all parties concerned in the design, manufacture, erection and use of the vessels. Appendix A gives details of information to be exchanged at this stage. 0.9 In the preparation of this standard considerable assistance has been derived from RS CP 3003 : Part 7 : 1970 `Lining of vessels and equipment for chemical processes, Part 7 Corrosion and heat resistant metals' issued by the British Standards Institution. 0.10 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard (Part VII) lays down recommendations on the design of corrosion and heat resistant metal linings, method of application of linings, inspection and testing. 1.1.1 This does not cover deposition of metal by electrolysis, spraying or by explosion. 2. MATERIALS FOR LlNINGS

2.1 Martensitic/Ferritic Corrosion Resisting Steels - Martensiticl ferritic corrosion resisting steel containing 11.5 to 14 percent chromium and with carbon content controlled to a maximum of 0.08 percent is suitable for linings subjected to the less onerous corrosive conditions. The fact that the coefficient of thermal expansion of these steels is very close to that of carbon steels commonly used for vessels requiring linings minimizes the stresses set up between lining and vessel at the points of attachment during operation at high temperatures. These materia!s have air-hardening properties and are susceptible to cracking in the weld or heat-affected zone. They can be obtained in sheet, strip or plate or as a cladding on carbon, carbon manganese and low alloy steels. 2.2 Austenitic Stainless Steels - Austenitic stainless steels complying with IS : 691 I-19727 are grades of chromium nickel stainless steels offering good corrosion resistant properties both in the as wrought condition and after welding. It is an advantage to control the carbon content to as low a figure as practicable in th e lining materials as some inevitable carbon pick-up, however slight, should be anticipated from the welding processes
*Rules for rounding off numericalvalues (rez&f). tSpecification for stainless steel plate, xheet and strip.

4

15:468!2(PartVII)-1974 used in fixing the lining to the vessel. All of the above materials can be obtained in solid form or as a cladding on carbon, carbon manganese and low alloy steels. When any of these materials are to be used for linings required to operate at temperatures above lOO"C, consideration should he given to the possible effect of the difference in coefficient of thermal expansion of these grades of stainless steel compared with carbon, carbon manganese and low alloy steels. 2.3 Nickel - Nickel of 99-O percent minimum purity is commonly used in industry and has good resistance to corrosion, particularly by alkalis. This metal, however, should not be used in contact with highly oxidizing acids or salts. The grade of nickel to be selected is dependent upon the service conditions for which the plant is designed. 2.4 Other Metals - Subject also to demonstration and suitability for the proposed fabrication and service, other weldable corrosion or heat resistant metals based on iron, nickel and/or cobalt may be used. 3. DESIGN OF VESSELS AND EQWMENT 3.1 Design Considerations 3.1.1 General - In general, it is recommended that vessels to be fitted with a corrosion resistant lining should be of welded construction from carbon, carbon manganese or low alloy steel plates, using butt-welded joints wherever possible. The inner weld beads should be ground off flush and smooth in order to ensure that the lining plates can bed down with, good contact against the inner walls of the vessel over the whole area. Wherever possible, the shape should be cylindrical with ends either flat, conical or dished and with as large a radius as possible in any corners which o&r. Jr-regular shapes can be lined but will be mare difficult and costly. The vessel should be fabricated and tested in accordance with recognized standards of good design and practice to suit the operating conditions, with the thickness of the shell and ends being adequate to meet the required For guidance on strength under operating pressures and temperatures. these requirements, reference may be made to IS : 803-1962* and IS : 2825-1969t. Whether the lining is attached to the wall or not it is not generally considered in the calculations to determine the strength of the vessel. In respect of integrally clad plates credit for cladding thickness should be considered in basing the design calculations. No corrosion allowance need be made in assessing the thickness of the shell. If thermal stresses are likely to be set up by the attachment of &he corrosion resistant lining then the necessary allowances should be made in the design of the *Code of practice for design, fabrication and erection of vcrtieal mild steel cylindrical welded oil storage tanks. ICode for untied prcssurc vessels. 5 FOR LINING

IS

I 4682 (Pazt

VII) - 1974

vessel. Post weld heat treatment should be given as specified in IS : 2825-1969*. The required thickness of lining will depend upon the information available concerning corrosion under operating conditions. The selection of the correct type of material to meet these conditions is important and it is recommended that welded test plates of the chosen lining material be subjected to searching tests under the worst operating conditions before a finai selection is made. It is necessary that the corrosion rate of the lining be known so that the thickness of the lining can be made adequate for the intended life of the vessel. The drawing of the vessel should give full details of construction, including any holes through the shell that are required for test purposes and the method of lining should also be shown. These test holes should be drilled through the shell before the lining is applied. If the sheet lining method is to be used then due attention to access should be given, and if this is through a manhole then the design of the lining should cater for this and prefabrication outside the vessel limited to the extent it is necessary. It may be considered an economy in some cases to fully flange one end of the vessel in order to simplify the access for sheet lining. Should the vessel be required to have good heat transfer properties, it is recommended that clad steel or weld overlay be used for construction. If sheet or strip lining is required then means other than jackets should be used to heat or cool the contents of the vessel. Internal coils of pipes or external heat exchangers are suitable means of providing heat transfer surfaces in such cases.

3.1.2 Internal: Fittings - Where internal fittings are required,. such as support rings, brackets, coil supports, footstep bearings, etc, it is normal to fabricate these from solid corrosion resistant alloy of the same specification as the lining material, Where these are fixed to the vessel wall and are expected to carry some load under operating conditions, it is desirable to fix them in position before lining is commenced, using a suitable welding techPique to minimize dilution of the weld by the shell material. The lining can then be arranged to shield this wetd and the weld attaching the lining to fitment will then be undiluted corrosion resistant alloy. It is essential that such junctions of fittings to shell wall be fully detailed on a drawing and approved. Internal fittings may be fitted direct to the lining when the vessel is constructed of clad plate or the lining is by weld overlay, provided special precautions are taken to ensure the integrity and strength of the bond. 3.13 Externul Fittings-Special care should be taken in designing the fittings on a vessel which break through the shell, such as manholes, branches, sight glasses, agitator glands, etc. These may be in solid corrosion resistant material, as in Kg. 1, for simplicity, but this can prove expensive. *code for unfiredpressurevessels. 6

STEEL

SHELL

LINING WELDS

BRANCH

FIG. 1

SOLID ALLOY BRANCH

Carbon steel fittings ~may be adequate provided good provision is made for a continuous lining of the corrosion resistant material to be welded oo all Extra care is needed where such linings surfaces exposed to the product. on the fittings meet the shell lining, and provision for anchoring the latter in the area adjacent to any fittings should be studied to avoid operational stresses damaging the shell lining. 3.1.4 Flanged Openings- The corrosion resistant lining should be taken on to the sealing surface of the joint face of all flanged openings. Whenever possible, branches, nozzles, manholes, etc, with flanged faces should be lined before attaching them to the shell so that the joint face can be machined after welding (see Fig. 2). Where this is not possible, it is necessaryto take precautions so that subsequent welding does not unduly distort the joint face. With pressure vessels the flanges will be thick enough for the faces to be fitted with a corrosion resistant bar or plate between 6 mm and 12 mm thick inserted within the bolt circle (su Fig. 3). Provision should be made for this in the design of the flanges as this gives a good facility for making a sound undiluted attachment to the lining. 3.2 Materials for Vessels

33.1 Carbon-or Carbon Manganese Steels - Carbon or carbon manganese steels are the most suitable-group of materials from which a vessel should be constructed if it is to be subsequently fitted with a lining. The quality and thickness of the material chosen should be such that the subsequent welding of the lining in position will not adversely affect the structure of the vessel.

IS:4682 (Part Vll) - 1974
THIS FACE MACHINED AFTER WELDING I

7

FLoy FAC'NG
LOY WELDS

STEEL

BRANCH

EEL

FLANGE

Fro. 2

FLANGEDOPENING WITH ALLOY FACING

THIS FACE MACHINED AFTER WELDING

AL_LDY

RING

INSER T

EEL

FLANGE

FIG. 3

FCANGED OPENING

The surfaces to be lined should be smooth and clean and free from scale. Iron grit blasting is recommended as a suitable finish. The vessel should preferably be of welded construction throughout, with all internal welds ground smooth and flush. Where an existing steel vessel of riveted design is being considered for lining, the riveted joints should be finally sealed by a cover strip, as shown in Fig. 4. 8

Is : 4692(Parcvn)
SEAL WELD ALLOY LINING PROBLEMS THIS SPACE TO ABE REDUCED IN PR4CTICE OF AIR EXPANSION

- 1974
TO A

TO REDUCE

ELL

\ / VINTERMITTENT

WELD

FIG. 4

RIVETED JOINT COVER

Where higher operating temperatures or pressures, or both, are necessary, then low alloy steels may be required. 3.2.2 Cast Iron-Where it is necessary for an existing cast iron vessel to be lined, this can be satisfactorily carried out using studs attached to the reverse side of the lining and passing through the vessel wall, as shown in Fig. 5. No attempt should be made to weld lining materials directly to the surface of ordinary prey cast iron vessels. Backing strips are screwed to the cast iron where any welded joints in the lining occur.
CAST IRON SHELL STUD CK WELDED OF LINING TO

FIG. 5

STUD FIXING METHOD -

CAST IRON SHELLS

Another method of construction is one where the lining is riveted to the cast iron vessel by rivets of the same material as the lining. Small sized rivetsmay be used with considerable benefit. 3.2.3 Concrete - Concrete is a suitab!e material for large vessels, and provision for the fixing of a lining to new vessels should be included in the 9

IS : 4682 (Part

VII) - 1974

design of the vessel. For existing vessels suitable backing strips of steel can be fixed at the points where joints in the lining occur, as shown in Fig. 6. New concrete vessels that are to be lined can have suitable steel backing strips cast in position, as shown in Fig. 7. In order to avoid corrosion behind the lining, it maybe necessary to apply a coating to the vessel, such as bitumen.
THIS SPACE TO BE REDUCED TO A PRACTICE TO REDUCE OF AIR EXPANSION

STEEL

BATTEN

FIG. 6

BATTEN FIXING METHOD-

EXISTING CONCRETE VJXSELS

3.2.4 Wood - New and used vessels of wood are suitable for lining but attention should be drawn to the danger of shielding corrosion of the surface lining in contact with the wood, if the wood becomes wet. If a used vessel is to be lined it should be thoroughly cleaned and prepared to ensure against the outer surface of the lining being attached. A number of backing strips should be screwed or nailed flush with the surface of the The methods of vessel to be lined where the joints in the lining occur. lining the vessels are shown in Fig. 8. vessel designed to be made from clad material 3.3 Clad Vessels -A should have special attention given to ensure that a continuous cladding to Clad plates are available with varying the inner surfaces is practicable. thicknesses of cladding and backing plates. Because of welding difficulties it is recommended that the cladding should not be less than I.0 mm. For plates up to 12 mm thick it is suggested that 20 percent cladding fulfils `normal requirements and as the total plate 10

Is : 4682 (Parr WI) - 1974
CONTINUOUS WEQ LINING

ANCRETE

/TE; dR WITH OCCASIONAL REINFORCING ROOS WELDED TO FLANGE FOR ANCHORAGE A

FILLET

BUTT WELD

LINING

H OCCASIONAL REINFORCING RODS WELDED TO FLANGE FOR ANCHORAGE 8 FIG. 7

METHODS OF FIXING LINING -

NEW

CONCRETE

T'.~NRP

thickness increases the percentage of cladding may decrease. Cn thick plates a cladding of 2.5 to 3.0 mm is usually sufficient to meI_t corrcsion rt+rirements. Clad plates can be obtained in a variety of sizes and frequently these are greater in size than those obtainable in the solid alloy. The clad&g is metallurgically bonded to the steel backing plates during manufacture. Where there is a differential coefficient of expansion between the carbon steel backing plate and the cladding, account should be taken of' the internal stresses which may beproduced in the vessel by the temperature variations. 11

I!3:468Z(PartVll)-1974
The vessel should be designed for welded construction throughout and In welding clad steels it all welds should be My detailed on a drawing. is important to ensure that the continuity of cladding is preserved and that the corrosion resiskance of the weld is not impaired by dilution with the parent metal.
LINING Y-"HEET -' CONTINUOUS WELDS

/ BACKING STRIP OF LINING MATERIAL 60 TO 75mm x 2 mm NAILED OR SCREWED TO WOOD AND HOUSED IN FLUSH

A

\

STRIP CONTINUOUS WELD ON BACKING 60 TO 75mmx 2 OF LINING MATERIAL NAILED OR SCREW `ED TO WOO0 AND HOUSED IN FLUSH

CONTINUOUS

FIG.

8

JOINTS IN LININGS FOR TIMBER VESSELS 12

IS :

468!2 (Part

VII)

-

1974

A welded clad vessel may be heat-treated after fabrication, if necessary. Due account should be given to the et&t of this heat treatment which it may have on the backing plates and on the lining materials. 4. DESIGN OF LININGS

4.1 General Factors Affecting Design - The design of lining used will depend upon a number of considerations including: a) range of operating temperature, b) range of operating pressure, c) corrosive media present, d) erosion, e) accessibility of inner surface for application of lining, f) whether lined during original manufacture or after installation, g) condition of vessel if already in service, and h) cost. 4.2 Integral Cladding - The integral cladding method of lining can be The considered only when a vessel is being initially designed for lining. design consideratians for the manufacture of clad vessels are dealt with under 3.3. Vessels made from clad material using the recommended welding techniques probably offer the best solution to all the relevant design considerations in 4.1. The bonding of the lining to the shell is good and therefore suitable for vacuum conditions, and this method also gives very good heat transfer properties. A variety of corrosion resistant metals is a -bailable for the designer's choice. The hazard of dilution of the weld meti*' is not great if the approved weld techniques are followed. Weld preparation on the edges of plates to be butt-welded together is important (see Fig. 9) and alignment before welding is vital if sound welds are to be achieved, as shown in Fig. 10. Four methods of butt-welding plates are in satisfactory use, the first, shown in Fig. 11, being suitable for all ranges of thickness of plate and cladding. The method shown in Fig. 12 is more slaited to thick plates and the third and fourth methods, shown in Fig. 13 and 14, are used when Tables 1 and 2 give only one ride of the plate is accessible to the welder. recommended alloys for the electrodes used in the welding of clad steels. Two methods of arranging flanged openings in clad vessels are shown in Fig. 15 and 16. In both cases provision is'made for the sound junction of the flange to the shell plate while at the same time preserving continuity of the clad surface. 4.3 Sheet Lining - The sheet method of lining utilizes sheet material for lining and the sheet is usually applied in the largest pieces that can be handled on the particular application. The sheetz are attached to the vessel shell by plug welding through pierced holes (sde Fig. 17A), or by spot welding as shown m Fig. 17B. When being attached to a finished vessel the sheets should be held to conform closely to the inner surface contour whilst being fixed and s:lould be securely held in position during -weMing. 13

@
TABLE 1 FILLER WIRRS FOR WELDING MARTRNSFRC AND AUSTRNI'IIC STAINLESS STEELS AND NICKEL ALLOYS AND FOR WELDING MARTENSITIC AND AUSTENITIC STAINLEsS STRELS AND,NlcJcEL ALLOYS TO MILD STEEL, ALSO FOR WJXDING THE CLAD SZDE OF CLAD STEFaL- INERT GAS TUNGSTEN ARC AND INERT GAS METAL ARC PROdESSES
l

*

Cl.ADDINO

MATERIAL

(1)
12% Cc

(2)
IS : 69111972t S-III,

(5)

(61 (&O- S-Eii, ($OFIreDfeZable)

(7) S-3fU$ (.8_ prefkble)

pref&rable;

(8) S-X$(2;: OO 1 preferable)

W

iw)

(9) If service conditions demand weld deposit of similiir composition to the cladding, a special low carboo Cr wire 12% should be used and a pzheat of 2cw~edls recomweld beat treatment of 7w75@c is also derirabie.

io x

. Apost

IS/8 CrNi or 1818 CrNi and Nb stabilized 18/8/3 CrNiMo

25/12 CrNi (preferably molybdenum bearing) 25/12 CrNi (preferably molyb,denum bcarins) 25/12 CrNi (preferably ZX:: in3)

18/S CrNi

S-;$$

(22;

S-BOINb

pre k erable)

S-B04 (2.03.0% MO preferable)

S-BOINb

18/8/3 CrNiMo

S-B04 (2.03.0% MO preferable)

S-B02Mo

S-B04 (2.03.0� MO pre 1" able)

S-B02Mo

25/12 CrNi

25/12 CrNi

25/20 CrX

25/20 CrNi (preferably molybdenum bearing) Nickel with tions Ti

25/20 CrSi

S-B04 (2.03.0% MO preferable)

S-B05

Nickel

and AI addi-

IS;~~~~S-Nil

IS i E7S-Ni!2

NiCu

alloy

NiCu alloy additions

with

Ti

and

Al

ISi9~~~ S-Ni> Is~957805+7S-NiS S-Ni 3 Contains 3% manDeposits ganese. from this wire will age-hniden at 4 tr e I s - relieving tempcrat"*cs of steel.

NiCrFe

alloy

80/20 NiCr

NiCrFe alloy with No, NiCrFe alloy with Ti

IS ;2;%3: S-Nif rods and bare electrodes.

.

G

*Specification tSpecitication $Specification

for corrosiod and heat-resisting chmmiuni-nickel steel solid welding for rtabdess steel, plate, sheet and strip. for nickel and nickel alloy bare solid welding rods and electrodes.

TABLE 2 FLUX COATED ELECTRODES FOR JO-0 MAR'i'ENSITIC ALLOYS TO STEEL, AND FOR WELDING THE CLAD SIDE OF CLAD
(Clawr ELECTRODE Mxrmu.u 4.2)

AND AIJSTENfTIC STEEL -MANUAL

METAL

STAINLESS
ARC

PROCESS

S'I7lELS AND h'ICKEL
ONLY

'

Root

Paw (3)

Subsequent (4)

Pa&

r-

Root

Pass

Subsequent (6)

Passe; (7)

25/12 CrNi (preferably molybdenum bearing)

25/12 CrNi (preferably molybdcnum bearing)

ISg ;2W& - `("2";t

._

3:O % MO addition preferable)

If service conditioll9 demand electrodes of similar comporition to the cladding. a s cial low carbon 12 p" /o CF weld rod should be used sang preheat recommended. Of 200"c:: port weld heat treatment at 700-750% is also desirable.

18/8CrNi

IS: 6911-1972'

25/12 CrNi (prcferably molybdenum bearing) 25/12 CrNi (preferably molyb.denum bearing) 25112 CrNi (preferably molybdenum bearing) 25/12 CrNi (prcferably molybdenum bearing) 25/12 CrNi (preferably molybdenum bearing)

1818 CrNi

I&&6

- l%"d .3.0% MO addition preferable)

1; %!&6-1969t _

18/8 CrNiTi or Nb stabilized

IS:6911-1972'

18/S CrNi (Nb stabilized)

18/8/3 CrNiMo

IS: 6911-1972'

181813 CrNiMo 3.0% MO a`ddition preferable) 25/12 CrNi 1"s R5$2C6 - la26p 3:O o/o MO addition preferable) 25/20 CrNi 3.0 % MO addition preferable) steel covered electrodes for manual metal arc welding. 1"s:;: _ 1&5;;5-1969t f -1969t

25/12 CrNi

25/20 CrNi

*Specification tSpecitication

for stainless steel, plate, sheet and strip. for corrosion-resrsting chromium and chromium-nickel

IS : 4682

(Part VII) - 1974

FIG. 9

ACCEPTABLE TYPES OF EDGE PREPARATIONOF CLAD PLATES FOR WELDING

CORRECT

IblCORRECT

FIG. 10

EDGE ALIGNMENTOF CLAD PLATE FOR WELDING

Sheet lining is not recommended where severe temperature, gradients or For steady temperatures or vacuum frequent cyclic operations occur. working the spacing of plug welds should not exceed 75 mm between centres. Where vessels operate at normal pressure and room te,mperature, spacings up to 300 mm can be considered. Access for any preformed parts should be considered and this can dictate the size of pieces and the general pattern of lining adopted. Sheet lining offers a wide choice of materials and thicknesses, enabling most corrosion problems to be met. The risk of dilution of the lining material during its attachment to the shell -should be carefully guard+=4 against and in general it is to be expected that where attachment is mau!, directly to the shell by welding, spot welding or plug welding, some dilution Where this cannot be tolerated it is first necessary of the lining will occur. to fix a pattern of backing strips to the shell to coincide with the joints in the lining sheets and then weld the lining to these. Sheet linings are not the most suitable for vacuum working conditions, and for this duty should be avoided if possible in favour of other methods. Variations in temperature can also lead to weld fractures where the lining material differs in expansion coefficient from the shell material. Due to the air space present, heat transfer across the lined shell wall is poor. 17

IS : 4682 (Part VII) - 1974

WELD BACKING PLATE SIDE COMPLETELY USING CARBON STEEL ELECTRODES. ENSURE THAT WELD BEAD 1 DOES NOT PENETRATE 1.5mm ROOT FACE 44 CLADDING

CKING

TURN OVER AND CUT BACK CLAD SIDE CLEAN METAL WITH REGULAR' PROFILE

TO

B

-

BACKING

MAKE ELECTRODE

1 USING HlGH ALLOY ROOT RUN OF WELD WELD 2 WITH ALLOY EQUAL TO CLAI;)tJiNG

C
FIG. I1 WELDING SEQUENCE FOR CLAD PLATE

18

IS : 4682 (Part VII) - 1974

FOR

A PLATE

EDGE

PREPARATION
BACKING f-

&ADDING

8 COMPLETELY WELD BACKING PLATE GRIND FLUSH ON CLAD SIDE
ALLOY WELO AS' CLADDING HIGHER rCOMBAT ALLOY DILUTION f-

AND
CL ADDltjG

- BACK ING

C WELD
FIG. 12

CLAD

SIDE

WITH

TWO

LAYERS
PLATES

WELDING SEQUENCE FOR CLAD PLATES-THICK

19

IS : 4682 (Part VU) - 1974
PREPARATION

mm GAP GAP A

FOR

THICK FOR

CLADDING.
THIN CLAOOING

REQUIRED

WELD

CLADDING

IN ROOT USING TIG FILLER METAL

WITH, GOOD WELDING IF CLAOOING

THIN

UP 0 S

TIG WELO WITH SOFT ON FILLER WIRE

WELDING BY SHALLOW PENETRATION OCEOURE WITH DEPOSITING OF TAL OF BACKING STEEL WELO WITH FILLER ETAL COMPATIBLE WITH CLAbOlNG WELD .WITHOUT LER METAL IF OOING THIN

C
NOTEFIG. 13 In some cases it may be desirable to weld completely in alloy electrodes. WELDING SEQUENCE FOR CLAD PLATE WITH ACCESS TO BACICXNO SIDE ONLY 20

IS : 4682 (Part VII) -- 1974

PORARY

BACK

UP

FIRST \aLLOY

LAYER OF WELD

DOING

/WELD BACKING MAT~ERIAL USING ELECTRODES SUITABLE FOR THE BACKING MATERIAL B

FIG.

14 WELDING

SEQDNCEFOR

Acams TO THE CLAD SIDE ONLY

CLAD PLATE WITH

The cost of installing sheet lining is appreciably less than strip lining and is best suited for use on existing vessels with good access, not too severe corrosive conditions and not under vacuum. 4,4 Strip Lining - The strip method employs the use of small strips of lining material cut and formed to be a good fit to the inner surface of the The entire surface is shielded vessel to be lined and welded into position. in this manner and the pattern of strips employed is varied to suit the profile Depending upon the temperature range, also the pressure of the vessel. or vacuum expected, the width of the strips is varied from 150 to 5 mm (see Table 3). The length of strip will depend upon local conditions (see 5.3). The reduced width for austenitic stainless steels is because of the higher thermal expansion compared with ferriticjmartensitic steels and Dished heads there is a greater susceptibility of the former to buckling. 21

IS : 4682 (Part VII) - 1974 and the knuckle radii joining them to the shell wall can be lined by a pattern of pieces as shown in Fig. 18 or 19. A number of different methods can be employed to weld the strips in position to suit operational requirements (a) lap or joggle, (b) butt strap, and these fall into four main groups: (c) shingle, and (d) fillet butt. These are illustrated in Fig. 20. Strip lining oglers better performance than sheet lining for fluctuating high temperature and pressure conditions. For vacuum conditions the width and thickness ofthe strip should be calculated. The hazard of dilution of the weld metal by the shell can largely be eliminated by the correct choice Access need not be more than is normal for any of welding technique. Internal vessel and all parts can pass through a-normal 450 mm manhole. fittings can be sealed by the use of strips cut to suit. The surface conditions of used vessels should be brought to a reasonably smooth condition and any deep pitting welded up to ensure a good bond between lining and shell.
SOLID GLLOY CLADDING FLANGE THIS FACE MACHINED

MATCH ,COMPATIBLE

CLADDING

FIG. 15
ALLOY FLANGE CLAD

SOLID FLANGE ON CLAD SHELL
THIS FACE MACHINED AFTER WELDING r--

FIG. 16 ALLOY CLAD FLANGE ON CLAD SHELL 22

IS : 4682 (Part VII) - 1974

TABLE

3

RECOMMENDED STRIP WIDTHS MAXIMUM VARYING TEMPERATURE CONDITIONS (Clause 4.4)

FOR

MAXIMW OPERATING T&ERATURE OC Up to and including Over 230 to 400 " ,, 455 `1 2, 510 " I, 230 400 455 510 540

,

MAXIMUMS STRIP WIDTH * I Austenitic Nickel FerriticJMartensitic Chromium Steels Chromium Steels mm mm 150 115 to 130 100 90 75 150 75 to 100 65 to 75 -

4.5 Weld Metal Overlay - A layer of corrosion resistant weld metal is This is carried out by manipulatdeposited on the inner surface of the shell. ing the shell and using automatic or semiautomatic arc welding processes. For localized areas around branches and fittings manual arc weld deposits can be used. Some weld metal dilution is unavoidable in the first run and it may be necessary to make a second pass over the surface being clad, giving a much reduced pick-up from the shell material. However, by using an overalloyed filler material in relation to the cladding analysis desired, a satisfactory single layer cladding is sometimes possible. Preheating is recommended to minimize stresses. This method of lining is It calls for a fabriuseful for thick vessels as an alternative to clad plate. cation shop with specialist facilities to undertake the work and is more-suitable for cylindrical vessels. 4.6 Thickness of Lining of the lining material should 4.6.1 General Consiahation - The thickness be decided by considering the following:

4
1,)

Desired life of vessel; Corrosion allowance; Erosion allowance; of shape of lining; or the Complexity

Cl 4 e)

Duty of the vessel, particularly with respect to temperature pressure cycling and including start-up and shut-down and possibility of vacuum conditions being encountered; of lining; where lining is to be carried out; and

f 1 Method d Location h) cost.

23

IS : 4682 (Part VII) - 1974

L IN CENTRE TH ALLOY WELD

A PLUG

WELDING
SPOT WELDING

B SPOT
FIG. 17
WELDS

WELDING

FOR FIXING OF LINING SHEETS

It is prudent to calculate for the lining to last the total life of the vessel. Even with the provision of test and inspection holes, any failure in the lining is likely to be detected only after considerable damage is sustained The correct choice of alloy for the' lining is very by the outer shell. important. Where erosion is expected, such as opposite tangential inlet branches, nozzles, etc, it is good practice to fit as thicker panel to act as a wear plate so that the losses by erosion match that by corrosion elsewhere in the vessel. Sometimes 4.6.2 Sheet Linings - Normally sheet linings are 3 mm thick. the thickness is increased to 4.5 mm in connection with severe corrosive or Where the method of fixing is by fusion welding, linings erosive conditions. thinner than 1.5 mm are not recommended, as the application becomes very difficult and the increase in cost Exceeds the saving in material. 4.6.3 Strip Lining - Normally it is adequate for linings to be a maximum Strip linings are frequently of 3 mm thick and a minimum of 1.5 mm. These thicknesses made in 2 mm or 2.6 mm material with good results. enable the strips to be formed to the contour of dishings and corner radii The longer straight strips on the where dishings and cylinders meet. cylindrical portion of vessels can be pushed into position by hand and tack welded into the shell without prior forming being exact. 24

IS : 4682 (Part VII) - 1974

HED CROWN ZONE

UCKLE DIUS ZONE

WEDGE

PIECE'_/ NUMBERS SHOW SEQUENCE OF FIXING STRIPS DISHED ZONE01

HEEL

W-Y 1-1 WEDGE FIG. PIECES -

t

18

LAYOUT

OF

STRIPS FOR

LINING DISHED HEADS

25

IS : 4682 (Part VII) - 1974
WELDING (WHEN COMPLETING RUN 1, ENSURE THAT LINING SEGMENTS ARE FIRMLY HELD AGAINST STEEL)

TANGENTIAL

_.*--_. INTF-FrTlnN

_.... .-.. . POlNT
A

I

-2% ~TWEEN ct. 0F INNER SEGMENTS

\
\
OF CLOSING SEAM

/
UM TANGENT

J
LINE

1

I

Ld.hll

FOR DISHEDHEADS FIG. 19 ALTERNATIVE LAYOUT OF SEOMENTS

26

IS : 4682 (Part VII) - 197-S

CUN

_a.._ .. .. .^..^
I INULJljb

....vrw....2lr.12 INltKMII ItNl

CONTINUOUS r--

-WELDS

Y INTERMlTTENi
A LAP OR JOGGLE METHOD
B

WELDS

BUTT

STRAP

METHOD

CONTINUOUS

WELD

C SHINGLE

METHOD

D FILLET

BUTT

METHOD

FIG. 20 TYPESOF STRIPS LININGM&HODS

27

IS:468Z(PartVll)-1974 It is recommended that strip linings not less than 1.5 mm thick be used for floors and walls of vessels where the welding will be done in the downhand, vertical and horizontal positions. If overhead welding is required, such as for heads in situ, 2 mm is the minimum thickness recommended. Thinner linings can be used but they require a higher degree of welding skill and this, together with the necessity to be precise with the fitting, greatly adds to the labour costs and often will be more costly than heavier linings. 4.6.4 Integral Cladding - Integral cIad plates for vessels should have a minimum of 1 .O mm of cladding if the plate is 5 mm thick. Twenty percent thickness of cladding is usually adequate for the normal range of plate thickness and on thick plates a maximum of 2.5 to 3.0 mm is generally sufficient. 4.6.5 Weld Overlay - The minimum thickness of the corrosion resistant layer applied by this method is 2 mm. For severe service duty this should be increased to 6 mm. Weld overlays thinner than 2 mm are not recommended in view of the dilution effect from the base metal. To minimize the dilution effects it may be necessary to specify the minimum number of deposited layers. 4.7 Internal Fittings in Lied Vessels - It is recommended that the material to be used for the fittings inside a vessel that is to be lined should be +Uresistant as that used for the lining, and wherever possible of the same alloy. The welding process and tiler material should be chosen to give the best bond with the shell and the correct corrosion resistant properties. Great care should be taken to ensure that the lining is continuous in the vicinity of fittings. 5. METHODS
OF LINING

5.1 Preparation of Material - The cutting of alloy material should be done with great care, and where heat is being used for cutting the material the burnt material should be removed by mechanical means. Grinding should be done with an uncontaminated wheel and care exercised that large amounts of heat are not generated. In fabricating nickel and nickel alloys, precautions should be taken to prevent pick-up of sulphur. Before shket.or strip linings or integral clad plates are welded, all surfaces of the weld zone should be cleaned. Oil and grease may be removed by a suitable solvent; light rust by wire brushing; and scale by grinding or grit blasting. The suppliers of materials have their recommended methods for achieving clean conditions and these should generally be used.
in the proximity

28

IS:4682(PartvII)-1974
Filler metals, such as bare wires or strips, should be degreased and flux coated electrodes should be oven-dried to manufacturer's recommendations. The surface of the vessel to be lined should be smooth and free of sudden In the case of meta changes in contour, and any blemishes made good. vessels, the surface to be lined may be rectified by welding and grinding, provided the necessary precautions applicable to the backing material are taken. In the case of the relining of wood vessels, these should be free of corrosive media, to avoid shielding corrosion. 5.2

Sheet Lining

5.2.1 General Considerations - Sheet linings can be applied to steel, cast The layout of panels for the lining iron, concrete and wooden vessels. should be first detailed on drawings and then carefully cut out to the exact shape. With used vessels, which may be irregular in shape, it is sometimes preferred to cut the exact shape of each piece as the job proceeds. Where the wall contour is irregular or acutely curved, preforming the Where the material is severely cold panels near the contour is advisable. worked it should be heat-treated and descaled before fitting. Where the contour is uniformly curved preforming may not be necessary, provided that the panels are properly pressed tightly against the shell wall by suitable struts or jacks.
The size of the lining panels will depend upon access land should large as possible so as to reduce the welding of edges to a minimum. be as

5.2.2 Carbon Steel Vessels - The holes for plug welding the centre of the panels to the vessel are usually punched or drilled, and with panels 3 mm For austenitic steel, punching thick and less, these need not be chamfered. should be avoided. The diameter of the holes should be between 12 mm The plug holes are best welded by first welding the edge and 25 mm. of the hole to the shell, forming an unbroken ring of weld. This can be wire brushed with a brush of a material compatible with that of the sheet and inspected before filling in the centre with weld as a separate operation. It is possible to combine the welding of the edge of the plug hole with the filling-in stage and in this case it is beneficial to reduce the hole size. The panel should be located in position by jacking or clamping, the central plug hole welded to the shell, and then work continued progressively The edge of the panel is then outwards until all plug holes are tacked. tack-welded to the shell with stitch welds about 12 to 25 mm long at not more than 150 mm centres. When the first panel has been fixed the adjacent ones should be similarly fixed before the edges of the panel are sealwelded to the shell. The gap between each panel should be between 6 mm and 8 mm according to thickness of the lining, and a three-weld bead technique should be used, as in Fig. 20D.. If desired, panels may be joggled and lapped over the adjacent panel as described in 5.3.

29

Is:4682

(Part

VII)

- 1974

The lining may also be fixed to the shell by MIG-spot welding (inert gas consumable electrode spot welding). This has the advantage that for thin linings no hole is required, which saves the cost of drilling and demands less care in positioning of the torch. With thicker linings a hole is required, but this will be much smaller (diameter equal to or little greater than the thickness) than that needed for plug welding. TIG-spot welding (inert gas tungsten arc spot welding) can be used, but is less advantageous in that a hole is necessary, with smaller thickness of lining and there is probabl) more dilution; also the addition of filler wire has to be made manually. Where no weld dilution whatsoever can be permitted, backing strips of the same composition as the lining may be first fixed to the vessel wall to These coincide with the pattern of joints in the panels of lining materials. may be either welded, riveted or screwed in position, care being taken to stagger the fixing to miss any welds in the lining sheets. A small air space is unavoidable with this method, which would be undesirable in applications where good heat transfer qualities are required. 5.223 Cad Iron Vessels -While attaching linings to cast iron vessels, studs through the vessel wall may be used to fix the lining panels from the outside, and this has the advantage of offering a very smooth and clean finish to the inner surface (see Fig. 5). Due to difficulty of location of studs and holes in the shell its use is limited to the more simple applications. 5.2.4 Concrete and Wooden, Vessels - The technique of fming backing strips to the vessel wall described in 5.2.2 may Abe used while fixing linings to concrete or wooden vessels and some types ofjoints are shown in Fig. 6, 7 and 8. Also, in the case of concrete and wooden vessels the backing strips can be satisfactorily fixed in position with a `nail gun', using pins fixed through the backing strip into the concrete. Care should be taken to experiment with cartridge strength to ensure that the heads of the fixing pins are flush with the face of the backing strip. 5.3. StripLining- Strip lining can be satisfactorily carried out on weIded carbon steel vessels. Strips are normally formed to shape to conform to the contour of the vessel. The length of the strips is varied to suit local conditions, for example, if lining is applied in a shop with all normal factory facilities available, strips from 600 to 3 000 mm length may be used. However, if work is being undertaken in the field the maximum length should be reduced to 1000 mm. The widths of strips vary between 50 and 150 mm. The narrower widths are used for linings which operate at high temperatures or experience severe thermal cycle. For strip linings in stainless stee!s 3 mm thick or less and which are`to be operated at elevated temperatures the maximum widths recommended are given in Table 3. Figure 20 shows four methods of fixing strips, namely: a) lap or joggle, b) butt strap, c) shingle, and d) fillet butt.

IS : 4682 (Part VII) - 1974
The iap or joggle, butt strap and shingle methods for fixing prevent any detrimental effect from weld metal dilution. However, they are much more costly in lining material than the fillet butt method and the covered welds in these lapped methods cannot be inspected- in service. With the lap or joggle method a forming operation is required for the joggled edge, with the butt strap method four weld heads are employed for each joint, with the shingle method it is difficult to make a proper fit of the lapping edge and finally, these lapped linings will not withstand high hydrostatic pressure without a tendency to pull away the lapped weld bead. A three-weld bead technique can be used to minimize dilution from the shell material. A further precaution against dilution can be achieved by the use of higher alloy electrodes than the lining material, for example, 25112 chromium-nickel electrodes are often used for intermediate and buffer layers while welding stainless steel linings to carbon steel. It has been found in special cases where a higher alloy cannot be used, such as pure nickel and nickel alloy liners, that the dilution effect in the weld can be further reduced by using a five-bead technique for the fillet butt joint. With the fillet butt method the strips are tack-welded to the shell with a gap between 6 mm and 8 mm wide according to the thickness of the lining and the position of the weld, that is, downhand, horizontal or vertical. The overriding consideration in fixing the gap width is to ensure that when two adjacent strips have been welded as shown in Fig. 20D the shell is completely covered. In this way dilution of subsequent runs of weld with shell material is kept to a minimum. The method of fixing strips in position on flat or cylindrical surfaces is as follows: The first strip is applied horizontally to the vessel wall, pressed firmly into contact with the wall and tack-welded in position. A number of such strips may be tacked -at a time if so desired once the required The strips are then welded with one spacing has been established. or two ~weld beads all round according to the method shown in Fig. ZOD. The strips are then tested and inspected and any leaks repaired (see 6.2.2). The strips are then thoroughly dried and cleaned and subsequent weld beads added according to whether the three- or five-weld bead technique has been agreed between the customer and the contractor. In manual metal arc welding a slight weaving of the top cover bead may be permitted. Strip lining can be carried out satisfactorily on the dished, ellipsoidal, conical and hemispherical heads commonly used in construction of pressure vessels. A suitable method of arranging the lining plates for a dished head is as follows: As shown in Fig. 18, the surface of the dishing can be considered to be in three zones: a) the cylindrical portion designed for direct attachment to the shell, 31

IS : 4682 (Part VII) - 1974 b) the knuckle radius, c) the dished crown. and

The cylindrical zone should be included in the pattern of strips used to line the wall of the vessel and this should extend to the tangent line where cylinder and knuckle meet. The knuckle radius zone is a relatively short radius area and is lined with a series of narrow width strips arranged radially. The length of the strip is arbitrary but should extend from the tangent hne to a point between 50 and 75 mm beyond the actual intersection points of the knuckle and the dishing radius. This should not exceed 300 mm and normally 200 to 250 mm suffices and this gives reasonable flexibility of fit-up. These strips should be a combination of rectangular and wedge-shaped pieces. The measurements of the -wedge-shaped pieces shown in Fig. 18C can be determined for any particular size and shape of dished head by comparing the periphery of the inside diameter of the dished head with that of the diameter of the intersection zones (2) and (3). A suitable measurement for Y and W- Y in Fig. 18C may be chosen and a number of such wedgeshaped pieces arrived at. For very large heads the use is recommended of one wedge-shaped piece to two rectangular pieces while with very small heads two wedges to one rectangular gives a better arrangement. Before strip lining starts the tangent line between the straight portion and the knuckle radius should be marked on the vessel wall and a circle should be scribed showing the extent of the knuckle strips on the dished area of the pressing. In attaching the strips to this knuckle area an effort should be made to keep the long edges of the strips radial and this is easily checked- as work proceeds. Adjustment can be made from time to time either by using a specially cut wedge or by inverting one of the existing wedge pieces. The dished zone is lined by using a herringbone pattern of layout and a practical sequence for doing this is shown in Fig. 18. The knuckle radius zone having been completed at this stage, the ends of the parallel strips can be cut to produce a satisfactory fit-up for welding to the knuckle strips. As an alternative to lining the knuckle radius and dished crown with strips shaped as described above, equal segments may be used as shown in Fig. 19. The segments should be arranged radially and should be preformed to the correct shape. The width of the segments will be determined by the size and shape of the dished head; for large diameter heads it will be found necessary to increase the number of knuckle and crown radii segment plates. 5.4 Weld Metal Overlay-A layer of corrosion resistant weld metal is deposited on the surface of the plate in contact with the corrosive environment. This may be carried out by any of the manual,msemi-automatic or 32

IS : 4662 (Part WI) - 1974 automatic metal arc processes, generally in a downhand position, using round or strip electrodes. Cylinders and formed heads are best positioned on suitable manipulators. The base metal surface to be layered should be clean and descaled by Preheat may be applied, where the type either grit blasting or grinding. of base metal and thickness warrants, in order to prevent possible heat affected zone defects. Due to fusion of the base metal, some dilution of the weld metal occurs in the first run. The effect of this, however, may be reduced by depositing a Diffusion of base metal elements into the layer of over-alloyed material. weld metal is greatly reduced by a second layer and may possibly be eliminated at the surface of a third layer. Weld metal overlay method of lining is particularly suitable for heavy sections. 6. INSPECTION, 6.1 -Inspection 6.1.1 Quality control of the material and fabricating procedures for loose lined, overlayed and clad equipment is very important since failure in service may cause irreparable harm. Inspection should cover the fabrication of the vessel or equipment to be lined, the material to be used, the lining procedure throughout fabrication and the lining after completion. 6.1.2 Quality control procedures should include the following : a> The manufacture of the vessel should be to th,e appropriate specification and, where applicable, a pressure test should have been carried out unless special dispensation has been obtained. The internal surface of thevessel should-be thoroughly clean and b) free from scale or foreign matter, and all surfaces to be lined should be smooth. c) All materials used for the lining or cladding of plates should be to the agreed specification and the cladding should be inspected to see that it is of uniform thickness and free from faults. d) The welder should be tested as detailed in 6.2.1 or, where required, in accordance with the requirements of other authorities. e> The fit-up lining sheets and strips, the edge preparation and welding gaps should be in accordance with the approved procedure and the recommendations of this code. f > Welder's work after sealing runs as have been laid down should be examined for lack of fusion, porosity, ~cracks, etc. Special care should be taken to avoid stray arc striking and spatter on the surface of the corrosion resistant lining. 33 TESTING, MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR

IS : 4662 (Part VII) - 1974

g)

h) j>

When several welders are working on a vessel each operator should identify his own work with a symbol (stamping is not permissible) so that inspection can relate faulty work to an individual and introduce early steps to effect remedy. Inspection should ensure that no filling-in runs of weld are laid down on strip lining using the fillet butt technique until all adjoining strips have been thoroughly cleaned down, tested and inspected. On completion of welding the surface of the weld should be brushed clean and made free from all welding slag, and examined with Particular attention should be paid dye penetrant for any cracks. to the inspection of any test holes in the linings that have been filled after testing. Qualification Tests

6.2 Welders'

6.2.1 Qualification tests are necessary for each of the welders empIoyed on the various welding procedures involved in the construction of the vessel. Where the outer vessel is built to a specification, for example, IS : 2825-1969*, the welders' qualification tests should be in accordance with that specification. Welders' qualification tests for corrosion and heat resistant metal linings or corrosion and heat resistant metal clad materiah should take cognizance of the method of construction of the vessel. Test welds should be carried out under the same conditions and using similar equipment, technique and materials of similar type and thickness as those used in the construction of the vessel or lining. Where positional welding is involved the various positions should be reproduced in the qualification tests. For each type of weld detail employed on the construction of the vessel or lining, a simulated test weld should be undertaken by each welder to be employed on the particular detail. A welder should be given an opportunity to familiarize himself with somewhat special techniques required before heis subjected to these tests. 6.2.2 Each test weld should be subjected to : a> a visual examination, which should reveal no lack of fusion, undercutting or cracks in the metal or adjacent material; b) macrosectioning and microscopic examination, where appropriate, which should show that sound root fusion with the shell material is achieved and that the weld is sound and free from porosity; bend tests, direct, reverse and side, where appropriate; a dye penetrant examination; radiography and/or ultra-sonic examination, where appropriate; and ferritic determination of the weld metal and a microhardness survey of the weld/base metal interface, where appropriate. *Code for unfired pressurevessels. 34

ls:4662(PartvIQ-1974
6.2.3 Welders' qualification tests may be omitted by agreement, where the welder concerned has passed appropriate tests and has been regularly employed on welds similar to those in question. 6.2.4 During the fabrication it may be necessary to retest welders. of Vessels

6.3 Testing

6.3.1 Gene& - This code covers a variety of types of vessels which my be subjectkd in service to a wide range of conditions. The tests described below reflect this variety of circumstances, and it is not necessarily appropriate that al! the tests be applied to a particular vessel. The tests are basically of two types, those intended to prove the integrity of the vessel as a whole and those intended to show that the lining is free from leaks. The order in which the tests are to be carried out should be considered carefully, both from safety aspects and effect of one test on other tests; for example, water trapped in small leaks in a lining following a hydraulic pressure test may prevent the leaks being found in a sensitive leak test. In vessels operating at temperatures above 100�C it is esse&al that water is not trapped between the lining and the shell, and this is most likely to occur during testing operations. Where test holes are drilled through the vessel walls they should be left as tell-tale holes to show any leak in service. They will then serve as vents to release any vapour pressure behind the sections of lining during opera&e should there be any water or other volatile liquid included as `a result of testing or in the event of a leak. Where the lining itself is drilled these holes should be efficiently sealed after testing. This can be done by either plug welding or by welding a disc of lining material over the hole. After grinding plug weld, the surface should be flush with lining surface. It may be convenient to pierce and extrude the holes in the lining plate when they are 2 mm or thinner to enable threads to be cut. This extruded hole can be either hammered flat or ground flush before seal welding after testing (S.M Fig. 21). 6.3.2 Pressure Test

6.3.2.1 Goal - Pressure tests can .serve two purposes, to prove that the shell of the vessel is satis&ctory for the intended service, and to prove the integrity of the lining under working-zonditions. In some cases there are advantages in using separate tests at' different times for these purpc~~~. The shell should be tested hydraulically to the test pressure laid down in the specification to which it is m3de, but it may be convenient to carry out this test before work on the lining is complete, or even before it is begun, and to prove the lining by a pneumatic or hydraulic test at lower pressure (at least working pressure) when the vessel is comglete. Appropriate precautions should be taken if a pneumatic test is used, and such a test should be done only if fabrication operations done after the 35

xs:4682(.PartvIx)-1974 main pressure test are such that they do not impair the integrity of the shell. The use of a pneumatic test has the advantage that sensitive leak detection techniques can be used subsequently.
6.3.2.2 Testing of integrally clad vessels - Integrally clad vessels should be hydraulically tested to the normal test pressure for the vessel and should be left standing under test for 24 to 48 hours. Where parts of the vessel, such as branches, are of a lined construction, consideration should be given to treating it as a lined vessel.

TEST Y-

HOLE

EXTRUDED
TEST HOLE LINING fCKING

PLAIN
DISC OF LINING MATERIAL -WELDED OVER PLUG WELDED TEST HOLE 1 /PLUG WELD SHOULD BE FLUSH WITH LINING SURFACE

FIG. 21

TESTINGHOLES IN LININGS 36

Ist4682(Partvx9-1974 6.3.2.3 Testing of toose litud m.wls - The loose lined vessels should be pressure tested w.hen complete after test for continuity of the lining. Where a prior hydraulic test to the normal test pressure has been done this test may be to a lower pressure, at least the working pressure, and may be a pneumatic test. After a final hydraulic test the vessel should be drained and ey tstleand the welds then checked for seepage after whrtewashmg the .
6.3.3 Tests for Continuity of the Lining 6.3.3.1 DJV @n&ant test - The use of dye penetrants on the sealing welds is recommended when the lining plates have been plug welded after test. Any suspicious areas of dampness showing after hydrostatic whitewash test can usefully be rechecked by dye penetrant examination. 6.3.3.2 Air tat -The lining should first be tested by introducing a pneumatic pressure between the shell and lining and the welds swabbed with soap and water. A pressure of about 35 kPa is adequate to detect any leaks and shese will show up as a cluster of bubbles. High pressure is not an indication of more stringent testing, as the air fkom pinholes may jet through the soapy water and produce few or no bubbles and hence not be detected. There is also a danger of lifting and bulging the lining with pressures above 50 kPa. Air may be introduced by one of the following two methods : a) Drilled and tapped -holes through the vessel, or b) Drilled and tapped holes through the lining plates. Another method requires a rubber cup of suitable size and similar in shape to a stethoscope which is attached by a rubber tube to a small vacuum pump. The rim of the cup is moistened with soap solution, glycerine or other viscous liquid so that a seal is formed and the cup moved over the surface of the welded seams. Where the weld is sound the cup will either collapse under suction or draw air through the sealing liquid, and leaks are found where there is no collapse or drawing in of air. This method is particularly suitable for testing or locating leaks in large tanks on site but will be successful only when the weld beads are kept flush with the adjoining metal. A further alternative is to use a vacuum box fitted with a glass top and sealed to the vessel by a soft rubber gasket. The surface of the vessel is moistened with ~a soap solution and the box placed over the area to be tested, the presence of a leak being-shown by formation of bubbles visible through the glass top of the vacuum box. It is not necessary to introduce air pressure between shell and lining, although the sensitivity is increased if this is done. A more sensitive test is obtained by introducing~air into the vessel -itself and check;. br leakage at vent holes in the shell. Leakage can be detected 37

Is:4622(Partv29-1374 by use of soap solutions, ultra-sonic detectors or by connecting manometers indicating devices to the vent holes. This technique allows c#othapressUre use dhigher air pressures than can be safely introduced between the shell and lining, but can only show the approximate location of a leak, which should be located accurately by, for example, dye-penetrant examination of the inner surface of the vessel or one of the sensitive leak detectionmethods described in cSL3. 633.3 sapsitioc Iwk &t&ion techniques* - A number of techniques can be used inwhich the vessel or the space between shell and lining is pressurized with air containing a small amount of an `impurity', the -active agent; leaks are detected by devices which are very sensitive to traces of the active agent. The techniques are extremely sensitive, and should be used only when it is important to ensure that the integrity of the lining is greater than can be established by the methods described in 6.3.3.1 and 6.3.3.2. 3Jezause the detection elements are so sensitive, the level of leakage rate that is considered significant should be determined by experiment, calculation or prior experience and the techniques should apply only after an air test has been done to eliminate major leaks which would contaminate the air surrounding or inside the vessel and prevent small leaks being detected. The tests are best done by introducing air containing the detection agent~into the space between sheil and lining, and examining the inner surface of the vessel for leaks. Greater sensitivity can be obtained by pressurizing the vessel and testing at vent holes in the shell, as higher pressures can be used, but this method does not allow precise location of individual leaks. Four basic methods are available, differing in the nature of the impurity and method of detection. In each case a sample of air from the region under test is drawn through the sensing element : detection agent is a>The dichlorofluoromethane, a halogen or halogen compound, such as and the sensing element depends on the increase in positive ion formation which occurs at a heated platinum -surface when the halogen content of the surrounding air increases. The detection agent is helium gas, and the sensing clement a mass spectrometer. The detectionagent is a radioactive isotope and the sensing element is a scintillation countcror other appropriate device. The detection agent is hydrogen, helium or argon, and the sensing element depends on changes in thermal conductivity of air caused by de presence of the second gas.

b) 4 4

Suitable precautions against the hazards introduced by the presence of the active agents should be taken. *Then techniquesare special, and few limed vessels will be made for duties where the use of such sensitive methods would Abejustified. 38

ls:4692(Partvll)-1974
8.3.4 Testing of Varscls Subject to Arduous Conditions - Additional tests for vessels which are to be operated under vacuum conditions or subject to thermal and pressure recycling should be considered. 6.4 Maintexynce
and Repair

6.4.1 Any lined vessel should be placed on a schedule for routine inspection for possible failure of the lining, which may be caused by : a) corrosion, either general or localized; b) erosion by movement of a product in the vicinity of branches; c) distortion and ultimate tearing of lining plates due to operational stresses; d) cracks; and e) bulging of the lining due to moisture trapped behind the lining during fabrication, expansion of gas, forced behind the lining through a pinhole under high pressure, when the high pressure is released, or collapse of a loose lining due to inadvertent exposure to vacuum conditions. 6.4.2 When repair entails only the re-welding of the lining plates where a fracture has occurred this can be done by simply grinding out the faulty weld until the sound shell material is reached and re-welding, using the same technique as for strip lining. If, however, the product produces conditions injurious to welding and some seepage is apparent behind the lining as a result of the fracture, then the lining plates affected should be stripped off, the shell thoroughly cleaned and fresh lining plates fitted. Localized corro&on, pitting or eroded areas where the penetration has not come right through the lining can be repaired by building up with weld metal or with further overlaying of more lining plates. In either case the surface should be thoroughly cleaned and made of a profile that is acceptable to the welder before repair work commences. When lining plates have become buckled and distorted they should_not be hammered back into position. The affected plates should be removed, the shell thoroughly cleaned and the area relined. In some instances, where lining failure has allowed liquid to seep behind the plates but has been detected before extensive corrosion has taken place, it is possible to remove the liquid by heating the vessel and lining to a temperature of at least 200�C. If this device is resorted to, extreme care should be taken to ensure that all moisture and products of corrosion have been removed before the repair is effected. 6.4.3 If tellstale holes or holes to prevent build-up of gas pressure have been incorporated in the shell it is important that the holes are kept open and that operating personnel are instructed to report any evidence of a leak immediately. 39

Is r4682 (PartvIq-1974

APPENDIX
(Chuse 0.8)

A

EXCHANGE OF INFORMATION A-l. Early consultation and exchange of information should take place
between all parties concerned in the design, manufacture and use of vessels and equipment which are intended to have a corrosion resistant lining. An accurate detailed drawing, to scale, should be available to all parties concerned. A-2. These consultations should cover the following : a) Construction of equipment or vessel to be lined, including location of welds, design of branches and fittings, joints and internal supports for any 1-e equipment to be fitted later; b) Nature and concentration of media for which the vessel or equipment is to be used; c) Operating temperature and pressure ranges; d) Whether vessel will be subjected to vacuum; e) Other factors influencing stresses on lining, for example, expansion, construction, vibration, erosion, etc; f) Velocity of contents and abrasive characteristics to be met, especially at points of their entry to the vessel; g) Means of access of lining materials and installation crew and equipment, lifting facilities, etc; h) Where existing vessel has been in service on site, details of site conditions that may affect this work being carried out in situ; j). Safety measures on site; k) Existing surface finish of the vessel to be lined, that is, pitting or thinning due to corrosion, inclusion of traces of product, etc; m) Inspection and testing of the lining and vessel, including welders' qualification tests; n) Whether the vessel is to be internally or externally heated; p) Media other than working media which will be used, for example, steam or chemical agent for cleaning; and q) Start up and shut down conditions.

40

IS:4682(partVII)-1974
(Continuedfrom page 2)

Process Vessels Subcommittee,
Convener SHRI A. P. RAO Bharat Heavy patnam

EDC
Representing Plate

57 : 2
Vessels Ltd, Visakha-

and

Members SHR~ C. BABU RAO (Alternate Shri A. P. Rao) SHRI B. R. BHATTACHARJEE SHRI B. BANERJEE (Altemats) to The A. P. V. Calcutta Engineering Co Private Ltd,

SHRI N. K. BUZRUK SIIRI R. SADAGOPA CHARI SHRI S. L. AR~NHA (Alternate)
SHRI R. SHRI S. GHOSH

National Chemical Laboratory (CSIR), Poona Burmah-Shell Refineries Ltd, Bombay

S. GROVER The Ralph M. Parsons Co of Asia, Bombay SHRI P. V. S. NAMBOOTHIRIPAD (Alternate) I. C. I. (India) Private Ltd, Calcutta

DR S. K. CHANDA (Alternate) DR ASCHARHUSAIN Regional Research Laboratory, Hyderabad SHRI H. SHRIPATI RAO (Alternate) SHRI H. H. JETHANANDANI The Fertilizer Corporation of India Ltd,
Dhanbad

Distt

DR 0.

P. KHARBANDA Larsen & Toubro Limited, Bombay MEHTA (Alternate) DR M. G. KRISHNA Indian Institute of Petroleum, Debra Dun SHRI H. K. MULCHANDANI (Alternate) SHRI P. K. PAI Esso Standard and Refining Co of India Ltd, Bombay SHRI V. M. RAO The K. C. P. Ltd, Madras SHRI K. SAMBASWA RAO (Alternate) DR D. C. TAPADAR Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi DR D. S. VISWANATH Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore
SHRI P. M.

41

