IS 4015:

1995

( Reaffirmed 2003 )

GUIDEFORHANDLINGCASESOF PESTICIDEPOISONING
( First Revision

ICS 65.100 .

@ BIS 1998

BUREAU

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS

MANA.K BHAVAN. 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG NEW DELHI 110002
February

1998

i

PriceGroup

8

Pesticides Sectional Committee, FAD 1

FOREWORD `~`hisIndian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Pesticides Sectional Committee had been approved by the Food and Agriculture Division Council. me use of various chemical pesticides for the control of pests of agricultural and public health importance is on the increase in the country. Large-scale and long-term use of some of these chemicals has often been found to result in toxic manifestations both in man and livestock. As some of these compounds are highly toxic, it is extremely essential to exercise great care in their use. Pesticide poisoning may result from careless handling by the people engaged in its application. Such poisoning may result even from continuous contact, by absorption, through skin or by inhalation of toxic vapour by the workers in the course of normal handling of the material, or by swallowing it accidently or intentionally. In all such cases of poisoning, immediate medical attention is essential, but even before this becomes available, application of certain well accepted first-aid measures is necessary. It was, therefore, suggested that an Indian Standard guide should be published covering both the first-aid measures and necessary information for the physician who has to attend cases of pesticide poisoning. It js very essential that all the necessary precautions, such as wearing protective gloves, overall and masks should be taken before commencing the application of pesticides in the field. The use of gas-masks, respirators and safety goggles is imperative before commencing any fumigating operation indoors. During the application of pesticides strict care should be taken not to come into contact with pesticides in any manner. Washing of hands and the exposed parts of the body with soap and plenty of water is very important after completing any kind of pesticides operation. The containers of pesticides should be tightly closed and stored in a safe place beyond the reach of children, pets and livestock after using the same. Keeping the above in view, this standard was published in 1967 in two parts. The standard has been revised to incorporate the following changes in addition merging both parts in one document: a) Routes of entry of the pesticides; b) Inclusion of World Health Organisation (WHO) classification by hazard; and

c) Preventive measures of pesticides poisoning. These are the general guidelines for treatment of pesticide poisoning cases. However, the treatment of individual patient should be undertaken considering the physical and medical status of the patient. Symptomatic and supportive therapy should be given to every patient depending on the condition. In case any further details are required any standard text books of medical toxicology may be consulted.

E4015:1!m

Indian Standard

GUIDE FOR HANDLING CASES OF PESTICIDE POISONING ( First Revision )
1 SCOPE
1.1This guide outlines the basic informations intended for the use of a physician with regard to the definition/classification of pesticides, routes of entry in the body, first-aid measures, supportive therapy, specific chemical antidotes, signs and symptoms of poisoning, diagnosis and treatment of different groups of pesticides, preventive measures in relation to poisoning due to different types of pesticides and their formulations during their manufacture, testing or in the field applications.

3 DEFINITION Pesticide means any substance or mixture of substances intended for preventing, destroying, controlling or mitigating any pest including vectors of human or animal diseases, unwanted species of plants or animals causing harm during or otherwise interfering with the production, processing, storage; transport or marketing of food, agricultural commodities, wood and wood products or animal foodstuffs or which may be administered to animals for the control of insects, arachnids or other pests in or on their bodies. The term includes substances intended for use as a plant growth regulator, defoliant, desiccant, or agent for thinning fruit or preventing the premature fall of fruit, and substances applied to crops either before or after harvest to protect the commodity from deterioration during storage and transport. 4 CLASSIFICATION OF PESTICIDES

2 ABBREVIATIONS 2.1 The abbreviations used in this standard to indicate each class of pesticides and their formulations are given below: Abbreviations AC Bc CB DP DS EC FC Fg Fu Gr Hr In L LV MO GC OP PGR RB Ro SL SP Sol Tc ULC WP ws Class of Pesticide or Formulation Acaricide Bactericide Bait Concentrate Dustable Powder Powder for Dry Seed Treatment Emulsifiable Concentrate Flowable Concentrate Fungicide Fumigant Granule Herbicide Insecticide Liquid Low Volume Molluscide Grgano-Chlorine Grgano Phosphorus Plant Growth Regulator Bait (Ready for use) Rodenticide Soluble Concentrate Soluble Powder Solution Technical Ultra low Volume Liquid Wettable Powder Water Dispersible Powder for Slurry Treatment

4.1 Pesticides are generally classified according to the type of pests against which they are used. These are given under 4.1.1 to 4.1.9. 4.1.1 Insecticides These are substances or mixture of substances used for the control of insects. Common examples are BHC, DDT, Malathion. 4.1.2 Fungicides These are substances or mixture of substances used for the control of fungi. Common examples are Carbendazim, Copper oxychloride, Mancozeb. 4.1.3 Acaricides These are substances or mixture of substances used for the control of mites. Common examples are Dicofol and Chlorobenzilate. 4.1.4 Rodenticides These are substances or mixture of substances used for the control of rats, mice and other rodents. Common examples are Zinc phosphide, Warfarin and Bromadialone.

, IS4015:1998 41.5

Fumigants

These are substances or mixture of substances which are used in the control of insects or other pests by fumigation. Common examples are Methyl bromide, Ethylene dibromide. 4.1.6 Molluscicides
These are substances or mixture of substances which

4.29 Organic Acids Including Chlorophenoxy Group and Phenolic Compounds 2,4-D, Dinocap.

4.210 Inorganic and Organometallic (Arsenicals,
Mercurials, Copper Compounds)

are used in the control of slugs and snails. Common examples are Metaldehyde, Fentin acetate. 4.1.7 Nematicides
These are substances for mixture of substances which

Ethyl mercury chloride, Phenyl mercury acetate, Copper oxychloride, etc. 4.211 Pthalamide Fungicides Captafol, Captan. 4.2.12 Thiocarbamates Cartap Hydrochloride, Chlorothalonil, Thiram, Zineb. 4.2.U Miscellaneous Nicotin Sulphate, Sulphur. 4.3 Classificatiod Table 1) 4.4 Classifkation
of Pesticides by Hazard as per WHO Recommendation 4.4.1 Basis of Classtfkation The classification distinguishes between the more and of Pesticides Based on Acute Toxicity Under the Insecticides Rules, 1971- (See

are used in the control of nematodes. examples are Aldicarb. 4.1.8 Plant Growth Regulators

Common

These are substances or mixture of substances applied

with the objective of regulating or enhancing the growth and development of plants. Common examples are Alpha naphthyl acetic acid, Ethepon, Gibberellic acid. 4.1.9 Herbicides
These are substances or mixture of substances used for

the control of weeds. Common examples are 2,4-D, isoproturon, Paraquat. 4.2 Classification According to Chemical
Stnlcture

the less hazardous forms of each pesticide in that it is based on the toxicity of the technical compound and on its formulations. In particular, allowance is made for the lesser hazards from soilds as compared with liquids. The classification is based primarily on the acute oral and dermal toxicity to the rat since these determinations are standard procedures in toxicology. Where the dermal LD 50 value of a compound is such that it would place it in a more restrictive class than the oral LD 50 value would indicate, the compound, will always be classified in the more restrictive class.
Provision is made for the classification of a particular compound to be adjusted if, for any reason, the acute hazard to man differs from that indicated by LD 50

On the basis of their chemical structure, the pesticides may be classified as given in 4.2.1 to 4.2.13. 4.21 Organochlorine BHC, DDT, Lindane, Endosulfan, etc. 4.2.2 Organophosphorus Chlorpyriphos, Diazinon, Dichlorvos, Phorate, etc. 4.2.3 Carbamate Aldicarb, Benthiocarb, Carbofuran. 4.2.4 Pyrethroids Allethrin, Alphamethrin, Cypermethrin. 4.2.5 Coumarins/In&ndiones (Anticoagulants) Bromadialone, Coumachlor, Warfarin. 4.2.6 Halogen Fumigants Methyl bromide, Ethylene dibromide and Carbon tetrachloride mixture. 4.2.7 Cyanide Fumigants Sodium cyanide, Calcium cyanide. 4.28 Phosphine Fumigants Aluminium phosphide, Zinc phosphide.
2

assessments alone. 4.4.2 Guidelines to WHO classification of pesticide by hazard. "EXTREMELY Class Ia Table 1 HAZARDOUS" Class Ib `HIGHLY HAZARDOUS" Table 2 "MODERATELY Class II Table 3 HAZARDOUS" "SLIGHTLY III Class Table 4 HAZARDOUS" Technical products unlikely to present Table 5 acute hazard in normal use. Technical products not included in the Table 6 classification and believed to be obsolete or discontinued for use as pesticides.

Table 1 Classification of Pesticides Based on Accute Toxicity under the Insecticides Rules, 1971 (Clause 4.3)

SI
No. (1)

categorical
ClasSifiCatiOtl

Symbol

Oral LD 50

(2)

(3)

Rats (mg/k& (4)

in

DermalLD 50 inRats (m&g) (5)

Statement Specified on Label of the Container (6)

Calculated Probable Lethal Dose for 70 kg. Person (7)

9

Extremely toxic pesticides

1 - 50

l-200

a) Keep out of the reach of children b) If swallowed or if symptoms of poisoning occur, di physician immediately

A taste (less than 7 drops) to one teaspoonf (t.s.0

w

ii)

Highly toxic pesticides

51 - 500

201-2000

Keep out of the reach of children

Between 5 to 30 ml

iii)

Moderately toxic pesticides

501-5000

2001-20000

Keep out of the reach of chidren

Between (1 lb) 30 ml to 475 ml

iv)

Slightly toxic pesticides

More than 5ooo

More than 20000

-

More than 475 ml

t: .. 5

IS 4015: 1998 Table 7 : Gaseous or volatile fumigants not under the WHO classified Recommended classification of pesticides by hazard. BODY influence the absorption of toxic ingredients and the actions of these materials on vital tissues. Well nourished, comfortably housed workers, enjoying adequate rest and hygiene, are less vulnerable to toxic chemicals than persons who are burdened with malnutrition, disease and fatigue. 5.3 Absorption by way of lungs is very rapid (a few seconds); by the gut intermediate in rate (minutes to hours); and across the skin usually slower still (hours to days). Chemicals absorbed by the lungs and skin enter the systemic circulation directly; those absorbed from the gut are carried mainly by the portal circulation to the liver, where biotransformations may occur before they enter the systemic circulation. 5.4 Ingestion of pesticide may occur as a result of contamination of food, drink and smoking material. Dermal exposure is of particular importance in workers who have extensive body surface exposure to foliage residues. This commonly occurs during the harvesting of fruit crops previously treated with pesticides. 6 PREVENTION OF POISONING

5 ENTRY

OF PESTICIDES

5.1 Pesticide exposure to human beings can be acute or chronic. It may be occupational or non-ocupational, intentional or unintentional, accidental or incidental. On exposure the entry of pesticides in the human body may be by either of the following routes (see Fig. 1): i) Oral (by mouth), ii) Respiratory (by inhalation), iii) Dermal (through skin), and iv) Ocular (through eye). 5.2 Since individuals are often exposed in more than one way, the total exposure from all sources needs to be considered while assessing the health risks. The other factors at the time of exposure like duration of exposure, formulation (its acidity or pH, vehicle, physical state that is solid, liquid, gas and concentration of active ingredients) task performed, weather conditions (temperature, humidity, wind direction) and the conditions of skin (soreness or abrasions, wetness, location or part exposed) all

6.1 Pesticide poisoning or adverse effects due to pesticides can be prevented by using these pesticides

FIG. 1 WAY OFENTRY OFPESTICIDE~ INHUMANBODY

4

IS 4015 : 1998

safely and judiciously. The following precautions are required to be taken during use of pesticides:

7.1.1 Termination of Exposure

9 Always use registered and approved pesticide
in appropriate doses and by correct technology with all the precautions as indicated on the labels and leaflets. Pesticides should not be stored in insecure places or along with food, feed or fodder. These should be stored in lock, away from the reach of children, incompetent persons and animals. To avoid the skin contamination and inhalation during the use of pesticide, protective garments and equipments like apron, goggles, face mask, gum boots and respirator (in case of highly toxic pesticides) should be worn. In case of any spillage or splash over the skin, it should be washed first with cold water then with water having normal temperature and then with lukewarm water. Adequate ventilation is essential at places where pesticides are measured, mixed, bagged or otherwise transferred from one container to another. Eating, drinking or smoking should be avoided while working with pesticides. Pesticide containers should not be used for storing any other things like grains, fodder, water, etc. Empty pesticide containers should be disposed off safely. Water sources/lines and grounds should not be contaminated by left over pesticides. Clogged nozzles of sprayers should not be opened by blowing. These may be opened by pin or stick or by washing with soap and water. Pesticides should not be sprayed in excessive heat or strong wind conditions or before or during the rainfall. Care should be taken of the wind direction and the spray should be done in the direction of wind not against it. Re-entry (entry in field after last spray) into the pesticide sprayed field should be made after a minimum period of 24 h or prescribed period which is indicated on the label of the containers

Shift the affected person from the contaminated environment. 7.1.2 Decontamination
7.1.2.1 Skin contact

ii)

iii)

Remove all contaminated clothings and the contaminated part should be washed with lot of water and soap. First wash should be done with cold water, if available, then with water having environmental temperature and subsequently with lukewarm water. 7.1.2.2 Eye contamination Wash the eyes with plenty of clean cold water or tap water. 7.1.2.3 Inhalation
Carry the person to the open to fresh air. Clothings

iv)

v)

around the neck and chest must be loosened. 7.1.2.4 Ingestion If victim is fully conscious and vomiting is to be induced then induce it by making the patient drink one or two glasses of water rapidly. Induce vomiting by tickling the back of the throat with fingers. Milk, alcohol and fatty substances should not be administered to such victims because it may enhance the absorption of fat soluble pesticides.
NOTE- The common practice of inducingemesis by hypertonic saline or common salt solution is neither safe nor verf effective andtherefore shouldbe avoided. Do not inducevomiting or give anythingby mouthto unconsciouspatient.

vi) vii)

viii) ix)

7.1.3 Position/posture

of Unconscious Patient

x)

If the person is unconscious lay him in semi-prone position, head down and turned to one side. 7.1.4 Body Temperature Control If the patient is feeling extremely hot or excessive sweating is there then water sponging may be done. If the person is feeling cold then body temperature may be maintained by covering him with sheets or blankets. 7.1.5 Di@xlty
in Breathing

xi)

7 MANAGEMENT OF PESTICIDE POISONING 7.1 First-Aid Measures @e-hospital
Care)

In order to prevent further deterioration in the condition of the affected person certain first-aid measures can be undertaken before doctor reaches the site or the patient is sent to hospital.

Observe the respiratory passage for any obstruction with foreign bodies such as artificial dentures, viscid secretions, dropping back of tongue etc, and remove/correct the cause. If the condition persists and person is unable to breath on his own then give artificial respiration. The patient is laid on his back, airway cleared by pulling chin up and head tilted back and mouth cleaned with a soft, clean cloth. Then

5

IS 4015 : 1998
mouth to mouth or mouth to nose respiration may be given by filling the chest of the person with air 10 times per minute and ensuring the chest movement with such blow. In case of poisoning by fumigants like Aluminium phosphide, Ethylene dibromide, Methyl bromide continuous mouth to mouth breathing should not be given by one person for more than 1 min. 7.1.6 External cardiac massage may be done in case the heart beat ceases. 7.1.7 Other Measures 7.1.7.1 If the person suffers from convulsions then a spoon or wooden block may be placed in the mouth between the jaws. Minimize noise and any manipulation of the patient that may trigger seizure activity. 7.1.7.2 Patient should be placed in a peaceful environment and should not be disturbed. Very fast driving over the bumpy roads may be avoided. 7.1.7.3 Person attending the victim should avoid direct contact with heavily contaminated clothings and vomitus. Wear gloves and apron while washing pesticide from skin and hair. 7.2 Supportive Threapy (Hospital Care) depending on type of arrhythmia. If facilities are available then Central Venous Pressure may be monitored. 7.2.1.4 Management of CNSfunctions Look for state of consciousness and condition of pupil. If convulsions occur, treat as follows: Diazepam - S - 15 mg i.v. at the rate of not more than 2 mglmin. If necessary repeat for every lo-15 min to a maximum of 30 mg. In children - the dose is 0.25 0.40 mg/kg body weight, which may, be repeated every lo-15 min if necessary to a maximum of 10 mg. However, while administering diazepam, precaution is to be taken to administer it slowly to avoid hypotension and respiratory depression. Facilities should be available for intubating the patient in case of diazepam related respiratory depression. If seizure recurr following diazepam then either of the following drugs may be used:

9 Phenytoin Sodium
(Dilantin, Epileptin)

The dose is 15-18 mg/kg at a rate not more than 15 mgl min. 5 mg/kg i.v., at a rate not more than 50 mg/min repeated every 20 min upto a maximum of 3 doses.

ii)

7.2.1 Stabilization
7.2.1.1 Evaluation of airway
sion.

Phenobarbitone Sodium (Luminal, Gerdinal)

See for any dyspnoea, air-hunger, hoarseness stridor, substernal or intercostal retractions and cyanosis. In case of respiratory insufficiency, following mesures should be taken: 0 Lift the chin and tilt the head back, ii) Clear secretions, iii) Use nasopharyngeal or oropharyngeal airways if needed, iv) Tracheal intubation`in comatose patients, and or v) If above mesures fail, cricothyroidectomy tracheostomy may be attempted as a last resort. 7.2.1.2 Assessment of ventilation and oxygenation

NOTE - Phenobahitone may produce respiratory depres-

7.2.1.5 Fluid, electrolyte and acid base balance should
be maintained. 7.2.1.6 Measures to reduce absorption measures may be taken to reduce

The following absorption:

0 Eye
ii) Irrigate with neutral solution (Normal saline) for 15-20 min. Skid Remove contaminated clothes. Irrigate with copious amount of water or saline. Do not use neutralizing substances. Gut a) Gastric lavage, b) Absorption by activated charcoal, and c) Cathartics.

Signs of inadequate ventilation or oxygenation are cyanosis, tachypnoea hypoventilation, suprastemal anticr intercostal retraction and altered mental stauts. In ca,se of inadequate ventilation or oxygenation, oxygen supplementation and if required, intubation may be done. 7.2.1.3 Muintenance of circulation Look for signs and symptoms of shock or cardiac dysfunction and treat accordingly by infusing intra veinal (i.v.) fluids normal saline or ringer lactate vasopressors, like dopamine or antiarrhythmic drugs

iii)

a) Gastric Lavage
Contraindications Ingestion of strong corrosives. Coingestion of sharp objects.

IS 4015 : 1998 Unconscious patients with seizures. Unconscious patients should be intubated before lavage. Kerosene oil (if kerosene oil is used as vehicle/solvent in pesticide formulation then gastric lavage should be done). during its transit down the alimentary canal. Though the therapist who administers charcoal to a poison victim is not obliged to remove it by inducing emesis or by aspirating the stomach contents, but it may be safer to do so if the poison is known to be highly toxic. To minimize the time available for desorption, it is probably useful to speed transit of charcoal poison complex through the bowel. c) cathartics `The usefulness of cathartics in the treatment of poisoning has not been proved unequivocally. The commonly used cathartics are saline cathartics (for example Magnesium citrate, Magnesium sulphate, Sodium sulphate, Disodium phosphate) and Saccharide (Sorbitol). Dosage of each of cathartics are given below.

Method Patient should be in left lateral position. Gastric intubation may be done with an orogastric tube 32-40 F in adults and 16-26 F in children. First sample of lavage fluid should be saved for analysis. In children (upto 6 years age) 25-50 ml of warm isotonic saline should be used for lavage every time. In children between 7-12 years 50-100 ml and in adults 200-250 ml tap water should be used. The lavage fluid be left inplace for about 1 min and then allowed to drain by gravity for several minutes and the lavage should be continued until clear fluid is recovered or until a minimum of 2 L has been used.

-

Magnesium sulphate -

150-250 ml of 10 percent solution in adults and 1-2 ml/kg in children. It contains 8.3 milliequivalent of magnesium per gram of salt.
adults and 4 ml/kg in children. It contains milliequivalent of magnesium per gram of salt. 16

Magnesium citrate - 250 ml of 10 percent solution in

Complications Pulmonary aspiration tension perforation, Oesophageal pneumothorax and empyema. Epistaxis if large tubes are inserted nasally. Electrolyte imbalance if lavage solutions other than saline are used in children (upto 6 years of age). b) Absorption by Activated Charcoal

Sod&m sulphate -

150-250 ml of 10 percent solution in adults and l-2 ml/kg in children. It contains 14 milliequivalent of sodium per gram of salt.

Sorbitol -

Activated charcoal is very effective in preventing the absorption of ingested substances when given within first few hours of exposure. Since neither emesis nor lavage completely removes ingested substances, administration of activated charcoal after initial decontamination procedures is recommended in most cases of overdose.

Commercially Sorbitol suspension is available a 20 percent (w/v) activated charcoal in 70 percent Sorbital. In serious patients 300 ml of undiluted solution and in ambulatory or less serious patients 300 ml diluted with water in ratio of 1 : 1 (that is 35 percent solution) is given. For children recommended doses are 4.3 ml/kg of commercial solution diluted to 1 : 1. Magnesium cathartics should be avoided in patients with pre-existing renal failure or in those who are likely to develop renal dysfunction. Sodium cathartics should be avoided in severe hypertension, renal failure and heart failure. Cathartics use should be avoided in case of ingestion of corrosives, severe diarrhoea, paralytic ileus, electrolyte imbalance or recent bowel surgery. 7.2.1.7 Measures to enhance elimination

Precautions -

Indications -

Contraindications-

Ingestion of strong acids, alkalis.

Dosage - A minimum of 0.5 - 1.O g/kg body weight of activated charcoal or 10 times the estimated amount of ingested chemical should be given in form of slurry (diluted at least 1: 4 with water) orally or viaorogastric tube.
The charcoal slurry must be mixed thoroughly to prevent the formation of charcoal plugs. A minimum of 250 ml of fluid is recommended if the powder form is used. Once the poison in the stomach or upper bowel is fully adsorbed on the charcoal particles, it is innocuous unless desorption occurs 7

The following
elimination:

measures

may be taken to enhance

Precautions -

i) Forced diuresis and pH alteration Forced diuresis or alteration of the urinary pH may enhance the renal excretion of certain poisons. Altering the urinary pH may increase the excretion of certain weakly acidic or basic drugs by increasing the amount of the ionized (polar) form in the urine for

IS 4015: 1998 example 2, CDichlorophenoxy acetic aid (2, 4-D), poisoning cases may get benefit from alkaline diuresis. ii) Extracorporeal removal Peritoneal dialysis, hemodialysis, plasmapheresis exchange transfusion and haemoperfusion are capable of removing many toxin from the blood stream. 7.2.1.8 Specific chemical antidotes Though for many of the pesticides specific chemical antidotes or specific pharmacological antagonists are not available, but wherever available, they should always be administered, as early as possible after establishment of diagnosis (see Table 2). 7.2.1.9 Emergency treatment of a chemically injured eye Examine the eye and periorbital structures in good light by a magnifying glass. 0.5 percent buffeted solution of tetracaine/xylocaine may be used as local anaesthetic for facilitating the examination of an injured eye. It may be instilled with a sterile dropper gently over the outer-canthus. Irrigate eye, lids etc. thoroughly with isotonic saline (0.85 percent NaCl) for 10 to 15 min. It will reduce the local injury and may be helpful in some cases to limit the systemic intoxication. If local ocular sign and symptoms are severe than instill a 2 percent buffered sterile solution of fluorescein. Greenish areas of stain mark the regions where the conjunctiva, cornea or sclera is damaged and eroded. If these areas are extensive, a dry sterile pad should be applied to the eye and the patient should be referred to an ophthalmologist. 8 SYMPTOMS, SIGN, DIAGNOSIS AND TREATMENT OF PESTICIDE POISONING 8.1 Organochlorine Compounds
8.1.2 Treatment

If convulsions occur, place the victim in the left lateral decubitus position with the head down and put a padded tongue blades between the teeth to protect the tongue. Remove dentures. Aspirate oral and pharyngeal secretions and, if possible, insert an oropharyngeal airway to maintain an open air passage unobstructed by tongue. Avoid any stimuli which may provoke/exaggerate convulsions. 8.1.3 To control convulsions drugs like diazepam, phenytoin sodium and phenobarbitone sodium may be administered. Diazepam dosage for adults is 5 15 mg i.v. at a rate of not more than 2 mg/min if necessary, repeat every lo- 15 min to a maximum of 30 mg. In children the dose is 0.25-0.40 mglkg body weight, which may be repeated every lo-15 min, if necessary, to a maximum of 10 mg. While administering the diazepam, precaution is to be taken to adminster it slowly to avoid hypotension and respiratory depression. Facilities should be available for intubating the patient in case of diazepam related respiratory depression. If i. v. administration of diazepam is not possible then it may be given undiluted in dosage of 10 mg in adults and 5 mg in children by per rectum route. The same dosage may be repeated in 2 to 4 h if required. i) Phenytoin Sodium, : The dose is 15-18 (Dilantin, Epileptin) mg/kg at a rate not than 50 more mg/min. ii) Phenobarbitone Sodium (Luminal, Gerdinal)
:

8.1.1 Signs and Symptoms The onset of symptoms after oral ingestion are within 45 mitt to several hours. Nausea and vomiting frequently occur after oral ingestion. However, the common symptoms of poisoning are due to CNS toxicity and manifest as apprehension, excitability, paraesthesia, dizziness, headache, disorientation and tremors. In severe cases stupor, coma and convulsions occur. Other features of exposure are cardiac arrhythmias, seizures with resultant hypoxemia, severe metabolic acidosis, respiratory depression Hydrocarbon pneum onitis due to and death, solvent vehicle (xylene, benzene, toluene) is also reported.

5 mg/kg i.v., at a rate not more than 50 mg/min repeated every .20 min upto a maximum of 3 doses. Respiratory and depression hypotension may occur as a result of i.v. administration.

8.1.4 Decontaminate the patient concurrently. Monitor pulmonary ventilation and cardiac status. If available cholestyramine mixed with pulpy fruit or liquid may be given in dose of 4 g, 4 times a day before meals and at bedtime. It accelerates the biliary-faecal excretion of the more slowly eliminated organochlorine compounds.

-

DO NOT GIVE EPINEPHRINE, OTHER ADRENERGIC AMINES ORATROPINE. DO NOT GIVE MILK, ANIMAL OR VEGETABLE OILS OR FATS BY MOUTH.

IS 4015 : 1998 8.2 Organophosphorus 821 Compounds hypertensive crises. If seizure activity develops oxygenation benzodiazepines and antidotal therapy should precede the use of barbiturates or phenytoin. 8.2.4 Decontamination of skin, eyes or gut as the case may be continued simultaneously. Monitor respiratory and cardiac status. Patient must be observed closely for atleast 96 h or longer in case of organophosphate ingestion for occurrence of intermediate syndrome. For intermediate syndrome only symptomatic treatment is required. 8.3 Carbamates 8.3.1 Signs ana'Symptoms Sign and symptoms of carbamate poisoning are similar to the organophosphate poisoning, but are less severe and has a shorter duration. 8.3.2 Treatment Establish clear airway. Administer oxygen. required, ventilate the patient mechanically. Administer atropine sulphate i.v. in the doses indicated in case of organophosphate poisoning. If as

Symptoms and Signs

Early symptoms of poisoning are headache, nausea, dizziness, anxiety and restlessness. Worsening of poison state, is manifest as muscle twitching, weakness, tremor, incoordination, vomiting, abdominal cramps, urinary and faecal incontinence, increased bronchial secretions, bronchospasm, cough and occasionally pulmonary oedema. Sweating, lacrimation, salivation, miosis, bradycardia, conduction block and hypotension also occurs. In severe cases twitching, fasciculation, weakness of muscles, diminished respiratory effort, hypertension, tachycardia, tremors, convulsions, confusion and coma may also occur. Rarely normal sized or dilated pupils (mydriasis) and cardiac conduction defects rn..c be seen. Usually recovery is within 24-48 h. In fatal cases the cause of death is increased pulmonary secretion and inadequate ventilation. Some patients develop intermediate syndrome after 34-96 h which is characterized by weakness of proximal limb muscles, neck flexors and respiratory paralysis manifesting as acute ventilatory insufficiency. 0.22

Treatment

Establish a clear airway by aspiration of bronchial secretions. Administer oxygen. In severe poisoning, it may be necessary to support pulmonary ventilation mechanically for several days. 8.2.3 In adults administer atropine sulphate i.v. l-5 mg every 5 to 15 min till atropinization is achieved (that is flushing of skin, dry mouth, dilated pupils). In the process of atropinisation the pulse rate may go upto 140/min. No maximum dosage have been prescribed, even dosage of upto 200 mg during 1st hour of treatment has been given. The signs of atropine intoxication are fever and delirium. Maintain atropinization for 2-12 h or longer depending on the severity of the poisoning. In children atropine in dose of 0.05 mg/kg body weight should be administered and repeated every 5-15 min until atropinization is achieved. Maintain atropinization by repeated doses of 0.02-0.05 mg/kg body weight. Administer pralidoxime (protopam, 2-PAM), a cholinesterase reactivator in case of severe poisoning by organophosphorus compounds. 1.0 to 2.0 g dissolved in 100 ml of normal saline i.v. over a period of 15-20 min may be administered in adults at a rate not more than 0.2 g/min. In children doses are 20-50 mg/kg body weight i.v., injecting not more than half the total dose per minute. Doses of pralidoxime may be repeated in l-2 h, then at 10-12 h intervals if needed. Blood pressure should be monitored during i.v. administration because of occasional occurrence of

83.3 Persons not poisoned or only slightly poisoned by N-methyl carbamates (for example Baygon, Sevin, Furadan, Lannate, MIPC) may develop signs of atropine toxicity from such large doses. Fever, and delirium are the main signs of atropine toxicity. If these signs appear while patient is fully atropinized, atropine administration should be discontinued, at least temporarily, and severity of poisoning is re-evaluated. Use of pralidoxime is contraindicated in carbaryl and chemically related (N-methyl carbamate poisoning. However, in case of mixed poisoning of organophosphate and carbamate or unknown anti-cholinesterase poisoning with significant nicotinic effects like muscular fasciculation and muscle weakness etc, cautious administration of pralidoxime may have to be considered. Decontamination should be done concurrently. Monitor respiratory and cardiac status. Observe patient closely for atleast 24 to 48 h. The use of morphine, theophylline, phenothiazines and reserpine and succinyl choline is probably contraindicated in N-methyl carbamate poisoning cases. Adrenergic amines should be given only in cases of specific indication such as marked hypotension. 8.4 Synthetic Pyrethroids 8.4.1 Signs and Symptoms Mammalian toxicity is extremely low. Contact dermatitis (erythema, vesiculation, bullae) anaphylactoid reactions (pallor, tachycardia, diaphoresis) and rhinitis and asthma may occur

9

IS 4015 : 1998
following exposure. Symptoms usually begin several hours after.cutaneous exposure and resolves within 24 h. Tremors, ,ataxia, laboured breathing and salivation may occur after heavy exposure. 0.4.2 Treatment
NOT&-- Vitamin K3 (Menadione) and Vitamin K4 (Menadiol) are not specific antidotes for these anticoagulants.

8.6 Halogen Fumigants

8.6.1 Signs and Symptoms
Early symptoms of acute poisoning include headache, dizziness, nausea, vomiting, tremor and ataxia. Repeated prolonged exposure may lead to incoordination, muscle weakness and areflexia. In case liquid comes in contact with skin, severe burning, blister formation and skin necrosis may occur. Ethylene dibromide causes severe irritation of skin, eyes and respiratory tract. The liquid causes blistering and erosion of skin and is corrosive to eyes. After absorption person may suffer from pulmonary oedema and CNS depression. If ingested, the liquid forms often cause pulmonary oedema and shock within a Death is due to respiratory or circulatory minute. failure. If victim survives, injuries to the brain, liver and kidney are life threatening. 8.6.2 Diagnosis

Treatment is supportive and symptomatic. Topical vitamin E may be used for paraesthesia due to pyrethroids containing an alphacyano group (for example Fenvalerate, Cypermethrin, Flycythrinate). Antihistaminics are effective in controlling most allergic reactions. Severe asthmatic reactions may require administration of epinephrine, theophylline and/or corticosteroids. 8.5 Coumarin and Indandione (Anticoagulant)

Rodenticides 8.51 Signs and Symptoms
Clinical effects result from bleeding when compounds are consumed over several days. The casual ingestion of warfarin in a toddler will not result in symptoms; however, the new super warfarin rodenticides (difenacoum and brodifacoum) cause prolonged severe depression of clotting factors and mild bleeding in a dose of 0.12 mg/kg. Acute clinical effects depend on the site of hemorrhage and include hemoptysis, hematuria, gastrointestinal bleeding, abdominal or back pain, haemarthrosis, epistaxis, cerebrovascular accidents and multiple ecchymotic lesions. Maximum depression of coagulation factors occurs 36-72 h after warfarin ingestion. The superwarfarin compounds produce coagulation defect lasting 6-8 weeks. However, depression of prothrombin time upto 8 months has been reported after ingestion of 10 mg of Brodifacoum. 8.5.2 Diagnosis

Determination of blood bromide concentations if facilities available. Normal levels are less than 1 mg/lOO ml. 8.6.3 Treatment No specific antidote is available, therefore treatment is supportive and symptomatic. Decontamination of skin, eyes or gut depending on the type of exposure. If pulmonary oedema occurs then treat it accordingly by placing the victim in a sitting position with a back rest and administer oxygen and furosemide, 40 mg i.v. Morphine 3.5 mg i.v. slowly may be administered to allay anxiety and promote deeper respiratory excursions. Aminophylline 0.25-0.5 g slowly i.v. may also be given. 8.7 Phosphine Fumigant

Prothrombin time determination (if facilities exist) An increase in prothrombin time occurs. Complete haemogram provide baseline to mesure blood loss prospectively. 8.5.3 Treatment Administer specific antidote phytonadione (Vitamin Kl) orally in doses of 15-25 mg in adults and 5-10 mg in children alternatively aquamephyton may be given intramuscularly in doses of 5-10 mg in adults and l-5 mg in children. Vitamin Kl has a shorter duration of action and so must be given repeatedly. Antidotal therapy in cases of severe bleeding should be supplemented with transfusions of fresh blood or fresh frozen plasma. Determine prothrombin time and haemoglobin concentrations every 6-12 h to assess effectiveness of antihemorrhagic measures. Ferrous sulphate therapy may be given to rebuild lost erythrocyte mass.

8.7.1 Signs and Symptoms
Aluminium phosphide and zinc phosphide release phosphine gas upon contact with moisture and cause fatalities. Zinc phosphide hydrolyses slowly as compared to aluminium and magnesium phosphide. The fatal dose of aluminium phosphide for a 70 kg adult is 0.5 g. For zinc phosphide lethal dose veries, but most fatal cases have ingested more than 20 g zinc phosphide. Ingestion of phosphides may cause nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, retrosternal and abdominal pain, tightness in the chest and coughing, headache and dizziness. In more severe cases this may progress to cardiovascular collapse, pulmonary oedema, cyanosis and respiratory failure. Pericarditis, renal failure, and hepatic damage including jaundice, may develop later. Symtoms may be delayed and death may occur upto one week after posioning.

10

IS 4015 : 1998 Inhalation of phosphine or phosphide may cause severe pulmonary irritation. Mild exposure may cause only mucous membrane irritation, with initial symptoms mimicking an upper respiratory tract infection. Other symptoms may include nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, headache, fatigue, and coughing whilst more severe symptoms may includei ataxia, paraesthesia, intention tremor, diplopia and jaundice. Very severe cases may progress to acute pulmonary oedema, cardiac arrhythmias, convulsions, and coma. Renal damage and leukopenia may also occur. Exposure to 1400 mg/cubic metre (1000 ppm) for 30 min may be fatal. There is no evidence for cumulative effects from intermittent low level exposure averaging 14 mg/ cubic metre ( 10 ppm or less). 8.7.2 Diagnosis 8.8 Phenolics, Nitrophenolic and Nitrocresolic Herbicides This does not include the household disinfectants Carbolic Acid, Phenol, Cresol, etc. 8.8.1 Signs and Symptoms Yellow staining of skin and hair occur as a result of topical contact and systemic absorption of toxic amount of nitrophenolic and nitrocresolic compounds. It results in staining of sclera and urine. Early symptoms of poisoning include sweating, thirst, fever, headache, confusion, malaise and lassitude. Warm flushed skin, tachycardia, tachypnoea, convulsions, laboured breathing and cyanosis are indicative of severe poisoning. 8.8.2 Diagnosis like

The typical garlic odour of phosphine is best guideline for diagnosis. Change of silver nitrate impregnated paper to black after treatment with victim's vomitus or gastric aspirate confirms the diagnosis. 8.7.3 Treatment No specific antidote is available, therefore, treatment remains supportive and symptomatic. Serum electrolytes should be frequently monitored and maintained. Cardiac monitoring should be done for cardiac arrythmias and blocks. Xylocaine (Xylocard) 2-3 mg i.v.kg bolus'followed by l-4 mg/ kg/hour may be given in cases of ventricular arrhythmias till arrhythmias stop. It may be continued till 24 to 48 h depending on the condition of patient. For block, pacemaker may be implanted, if facilities exist. Aluminium phosphide will release phosphine gas in stomach, if it comes in contact with water. Therefore, if ipecac is administered, it should perhaps be not followed with fluids. Gastric lavage may also be dangerous. If activated charcoal is administered, it should perhaps be mixed with sorbitol not with water. For maintenance of blood pressure, give l-2 1 normal saline or Ringer lactate. If there is no improvement in blood pressure then central venous line should be put in and a pressure of 8-12 cm of water is to be maintained with i.v. fluids. If central venous pressure is more than 12 cm of water or i.v. fluids fails to increase the blood pressure, start dopamine drip at rate of 10 pg/kg/min and titrate according to blood pressure. Magnesium sulphate has been tried in aluminium phosphide poisoning cases. However, its therapeutic efficacy has not been established. If facilities are available, the magnesium levels should be monitored, if magnesium sulphate therapy is to be given. 3 g of magnesium sulphate in 500 ml of 5 percent dextrose should be given in first 3 h. This is followed by 6.0 g in 500 ml of 5 percent dextrose in next 24 h.

Clinical. 8.8.3 Treatment

Do not await confirmation before commencing treatment but save urine and blood samples for confirmation. No specific antidote exists. Treatment is symptomatic and supportive. Decontamination, reduction of elevated body temperature by physical means (like sponge bath, cool blankets etc), i.v. fluids and diazepam in cases with agitation and involuntary motor activity may be attempted. Haemodialysis (if facilities exist) may be considered in very severe cases.
NOTE-Do not administer atropine, aspirin or other salicylates which may enhance the toxicity of phenols.

8.9 Chlorphenoxy

Compounds

8.9.1 Signs and Symptoms The compounds are moderately irritant to skin, eyes and respiratory and gastrointestinal tract. InhaIation of spray may cause burning sensation in nasopharynx and chest and coughing may results in coughing. Ingesion of large quantities cause irritation of stomach, vomiting, pain in chest and abdomen, diarrhoea, headache, mental confusion, bizzare behaviour and finally unconciousness. Myotonia (stiffness of muscles of extremities) occurs in 2, 4-D poisoning. Areflexia is sometimes observed body temperature may be moderatley elevated. Metabolic acidosis, moderate temporary elevations of blood urea nitrogen and serum creatinine, liver cell injury, T-wave flattening and inversion have been reported. 8.9.2 Diagnosis Clinical. 0.9.3 Treatment START Treatement 11 TREATMENT is symptomatic IMMEDIATELY. and supportive. No

IS 4015 : 1998 specific antidote exists. Decontaminate eyes, skin and/or gut depending on the exposure. i.v. fluids may be given a urine flow of 4-6 ml/min is desirable to limit concentration of the toxicant in the kidney. Forced alkaline diuresis alkalinization of urine by adding sodium bicarbonate (44-88 mEq/litre) in i.v. fluids is effective. UrinepH should be maintained in the range of 7.6 to 8.8. Potassium chloride 20-40 mEq/litre may be added in i. v. fluids to combat the potassium losses. 8.10 Thiocarbamates and Related Compounds

Occurrence of vomiting due to poisoning or due to
addition of emetic in the paraquat preparations should not give false sense of security to the treating physician and treatment for poisoning should be continued. Diquat is less damaging to skin than paraquat. Early symptoms are similar to those of paraquat but pulmonary injury is less prominent. However, the toxicity to CNS is more as compared to paraquat. 8.113 Clinical. 8.11.2.1 Simple calorimetric test of urine Diagnosis

8.10.1 Signs and Symptoms They are moderately irritating to human skin, eyes and respiratory mucous membranes. SYSTEMIC POISONING IS RARE but in high dosage nausea, vomiting, headache, diarrhoea hypothermia, ataxia and muscle weakness occur which may result in respiratory paralysis. If high dosage of thiram and metallic bis-dithiocarbamate are ingested with alcohol then disufiram like reaction may occur. 8.10.2 Diagnosis Clinical and estimation of urinary xanthurenic acid for confirming the absorption of thiram. 8.103 Treatment

Take one volume of urine. Add 0.5 ml of freshly prepared 1 percent sodium hydrosulphite in 1 N sodium hydroxide. Development of blue colour at the end of 1 min indicate the presence of paraquat at a concentration of more than 0.5 mg/l. 8.11.3 Treatment No specific antidote is available, therefore treatment is symptomatic and supportive. Decontaminate skin and eyes. If paraquat or diquat have been ingested in any amount IMMEDIATE ADMINISTRATION OF ADSORBENT is the therapeutic measure most likely to affect the outcome of paraquat or diquat ingestion favourably BENTONITE (7.5 percent suspension) and FULLER'S EARTH (30 percent suspension) are highly effective, but sometimes not available. Administration of activated charcoal along with sorbital in suspension is also beneficial. Because corrosive damage to the osophagus and stomach may render these structures vulnerable to perforation, the gastric lavage tube must be introduced very gently. CHECKFREQUENTLYFORBOWEL SOUNDS. Ileus occurs commonly in diquat poisoning but less often in paraquat poisoning. Cathartics should not be administered if the gut is atonic. Morphine sulphate may be given to control the pain associated with deep mucosal erosion of mouth, pharynx and oesophagus. Mouth washes, cold fluids, ice creams or anaesthetic lozenges may relieve pain in the mouth and throat. Haemoperfusion and haemodialysis may be considered, however these may offer only marginal benfit.
NOTE OXYGEN DO NOT ADMINISTER SUPPLEMENTAL because it may enhance the pulmonary injury.

No specific antidote exists, therefore treatment is supportive and symptomatic. Decontaminate of skin, eyes and gut. Administer i-v. fluids to accelerate excretion of toxicants. In case of dithiocarbamate (Ziram) poisoning ascorbic acid in dose of 10-20 mg/kg may be administered i. v. at a rate not exceeding 0.2 g/min "AVGID INTAKE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES FOR THREE WEEKS". 8.11 Bypyridylium (Paraquat and Diquat)

8 11.1 Signs an&Symptoms Corrosive effects of paraquat leads to early symptoms of burning pain in mouth, throat chest and upper abdomen. Giddiness, headache, fever, myalgia and diarrhoea also occur. Proteinuria, haematuria, pyruria and azotemia reflect renal injury while oliguria and anuria indicate tubular necrosis. Cough, dypnoea, tachypnoea, progressive cyanosis, air hunger are the pulmonary mainfestations which can appear 2-14 days after exposure. Late complications include pulmonary fibrosis which is the cause of death in most of the cases. Other manifestations are hepatic failure and toxic myocarditis. Classical sign of paraquat poisoning is formation of a pharyngeal membrane which resembles that of diphtheria. Local effects of concentrated form are fissures of the skin, loss of fingernails, dryness, blistering and ulceration. Inhalation causes bleeding from nose. Eye contact leads to severe conjuctivitis and cornea1 opacification. 12

8.12 Urea Derivatives 8.12.1 Signs and Symptoms Irritation of eyes and mucous membrane occur with some compounds, Ingestion of large quantities may result in nausea, vomiting and diarrhoea. 812.2 Clinical. Diagnosis

IS 4015 : 1998 8.12.3 Treatment

Specific antidote BAL or dimercaprol given intramuscularly increases the excretion of arsenic. Doses schedule Severe poisoning 3.6 mglkg every 4 hourly 3.0 mg/kg every 6 hourly 3.0 mg/kg every 12 hourly Mild poisoning 2.5 mg/kg every 6 hourly 2.5 mg/kg every 12 hourly 2.5 mg/kg per day

No specific antidote is available, therefore treatment is supportive and symptomatic. 8.13 Arsenical Compounds
8.13.1 Signs and Symptoms

1st day 3rd day 4th day
NOTES

Symptoms usually appear within 1 h but may be delayed for several hours. Garlic odour of breath and feces may halp to identify the toxicant in severely poisoned patient. Inflammation of mouth, pharynx and oesophagus, or bloody diarrhoea, proteinuria, hematuria, glycosuria, oligouria, casts in urine and in severe cases acute tubular necrosis may occur. Headache, dizziness, muscle weakness, spasms, hypothermia, lethargy, delirium, coma, convulsions, shock, cyanosis and cardiac arrhythmias may also occur. Injury to blood forming tissues may result. 0.13.2 Diagnosis 8.13.2.1 Clinical and gutzeit test Add 5 ml of urine to few drops of concentrated sulphuric' acid and few granules of elemental zinc. Cover the top of the tube with a piece of filter paper to which a drop or two of 1 percent silver nitrate solution has been added. Browning or blackening of the paper indicates that amine has been evolved from the urine.
8.13.3 Treatment

1 Dimercaprol isprovided asa 100 mg/ml solutionin oil. It may produce some side effects like nausea, headache,burning and tinglingsensation, sweating,pain in backandabdomen,tremors, restlessness, tachycardia and hypertension. Fever, coma and convulsions may occur at very high doses. Sterile abscess may form at injectionsites. Acute symptoms usually subsidein 30-90 min. Antihistaminic drugs given few minutes before injection of BAL may prevent some of the side effects. After the gastrointestinal tract is free of arsenic (indicated by passageof charcoalblack stool, if activatedcharcoalis given) BAL should be replacedby d- penicillamine orally. Dosage is as follows: Adults : d-penicillamine 0.5 g 6 hourly 30-60 min before meals and bedtime for 5 days. Children under 12 yearsof age d-penicillamine 0.1 gikg body weight not exceeding 1.Og divided into 4 dosesgiven 30-60 min before meals and at bedtime for 5 days. 2 d-penicillamine shouldnot be given to individuals allergic to penicillin. Discontinue chelation therapy when 24 h urinary arsenicexcretion falls below 50 mg/day.

The general supportive treatment remains the same except that the cathartics should not be administered.

8.13.4 Various pesticides,

their groups, acute LD 50 and antidotes are given in Table 2.

13

Is 4015 : 1998 Table 2 (Clauses 7.2.1.8 and 8.13.4)
SI No. Name of Pesticides Group/Chemical Family Acute LD SO (m&W b.4 OrPVDeTmnl
(4) 945l2ooo 930/13300 0.9315.0 685/>2500 Acid loo0 79/>500 Atropine, PAM. possibly

Antidote

(1)
1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6.

(2)
Acephate Alachlor Aldicarb Allethrin alpha Naphthyl acetic acid alpha-cypermethrin (Alphamethrin) Aluminium phosphide Anilophos Atrazine Aureofungin Barium Carbonate Benomyl Benzene Hexachloride (BHC) In/O.P

(3)

(5)
in conjunction symptomatic with and

HR/Anilides/Acetamide In/Carbamate WPyrethroids lPGR/Carboxylic derivative WPyrethroids

No specific antidote. supportive therapy. Atropine No specific antidote, suppottive therapy. - do -

symptomatic

and

No specific antidote, symptomatic treatment, if ingested do not induce vomiting or give liquids No specific antidote, supportive therapy. symptomatic and

I. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13.

Fu/Inorganic HRI0.P HR/Triazine Antifungal/Antibiotic RO/Inorganic FglBenzimidazole 400 3080/7500 540/15ooo 900 1oooo/>lGOoo 100

Atropine in conjunction with 2-PAM. No specific antidote supportive therapy. -doSymptomatic and supportive therapy. Add 5-IOgofsodiumsulphate tolavagesolution. No specific antidote, supportive therapy. No specific treatment.Give convulsions. Atropine sympotmatic and symptomatic and

In/OC

antidote, symptomatic i.v. Diazepam to control

14.

Benthiocarb (Thiobencarb) Bitertanol Bromadiolone Butachlor Captafol Captan CaIbaiyI Cartap Hydrochloride

HREarbamate FgfTriazole RO/Coumarin HR/Acetamide/Anilide Fg./Phthalimide Fg./Phthalimide WIhiocarbamate ImThiocarbarnate

1300/>200 5000/>5000(rat) 1.12R.I 3300/> 13GOo 5ooo/> 15400 9ooo/15400 500/>2000 325/>1000

15. 16. 17. 18. 19. 2G. 21.

No specific antidote, supportive therapy. Vitamin Kl No specific antidote, supponive therapy. - do - do Atropine

symptomatic

and

symptomatic

and

Sulphydryl agents, i.v. injections of L-Cysteine or I.M. Injections of BAL, apply steroids against dermatitis. No specific antidote, supportive therapy. Atropine, if in eyes homatropine. No specific antidote, supportive therapy. symptomatic then 1 drop and of and

22. 23. 24. 25. 26. 27. 28. 29. 30.

Carbendazim Carbofuran Carboxin Chlormequatchloride (CCC) Chlorpyriphos Chlorothalonil Copper Oxychloride Copper Sulphate Coumachlor

FgJBenzimidazole
CEUb

15ooo/1otmo
5.012550 3820/>8000 67OWUl 135/2000 lOOOO/loooO 1440 300 900/33(rat)

InMJarbamate Fg./Anilide PGR IN/OP Fg/Phthalimide Fg/lnorganic copper camp. Fg/lnorganic copper compound Ro/Coumarin

symptomatic

Choline chloride (or other choline salts) scholine salts) or neostigmine sulphate Atropine. PAM. possibly in conjunction symptomatic with and

No specific antidote, supportive therapy. -do- do Vitamin K I

14

IS 4015 : 1998 Table 2 SI No. Name of Pesticides Group/Chemical Family

Continued
Acute LD 50 (m&t b.wt)

Antidote

OralDermal

(1)
31. 32.

(2)
Coumatetralyl Cuprous Oxide Cypermethrin

(3)
Coumarin Fg/lnorgnnic copper compound WPyrethroids

(4) 16/25-50 470ln.a 303/>2400 Vitamin K I BAL and

(5)

subsequent

penicillamine

administration. No specific antidote, treatment. If ingested vomiting or give liquids. No specific antidote, supportive therapy. - do - do Atropine, PAM. -doNo specific antidote, supportive therapy. 690/2100 4620/>2ooo 150/800. 980/4700 638 3400 1000/>1500 375/> 1600 -do-doAtropine, PAM. possibly in conjunction symptomatic with and symptomatic and possibly in conjunction with symptomatic do not induce and

33.

34. 3.5. 36. 31. 38. 39.

Dalapon Decaethrin (Deltamethrin) Dichlorodiphenyl I trichloro ethane(DDT) Diazinon Dichlorvos *

HR/QC, Ah Carboxylic acid In/Synthetic Pyrethroid In/DC

9330/>2000 80/>2000 113/2510

symptomatic

In/OP In/OP Fu/Halocarbon

300/540-650 561107

Dichloropropene and Dichloropropane Mixture (DD Mixture) Dicofol Diflubenzuron Dimethoate Dinocap Dithianon Diuron Dodine

40. 41. 42. 43. 44. 45. 46. 47.

AC/DC. lniUrea In/OP

Bridged Diphenyl Derivative

Fg0Wrophenol Fg/Quinone HR/Uma derivative FglGuanidine

No specific antidote, supportive therapy. -do-do-do-do-

24-DichlorophenoxHRlChlorophenoxy yacetic acid (2.4-D) Sodium, Anine & Ester Salt Ehtylene Dichloride and Carbon Tetrachloride Mixture (BDCT Mixture 3 Edifenphos Endosulfan Ethepon Ethion Etofenprox Ethylene Dibromide

48.

Treatment of Ethylene Dibromide and carbon tetrachloride.

: I)
FgiOP In/DC, Sulfurous acid derivative PCR/Ethylene generation In/OP Bridged diphenyl Fu I5W700-800 (rats) Alropine, PAM. possibly in conjunction with

49. 50. 51. 52. 53. 54.

80/360 4OOOl5730 20819 I 5 NA/>2140 146 mg/kg/n.a

No specific treatment.

antidote,

symptomatic and with and

No specific antidote, symptomatic generation supportive therapy. Atropine, PAM. possibly in conjunction symptomatic

No specific antidote, supportive therapy.

No specific antidote, symptomatic and supportive therapy. In Acidosis, Sod.bicarbonate is administered and urine is monitored. After inhalation move victim to fresh air, keep lying down and warm. No specific antidote, supportive therapy. symptomatic and

55.

Fenarimol

Fg

2500/>2000

56. 57.

Fenitrothion Fentbion

In/OP InlOP

503/890-l

300

Atropine, PAM. -do-

possibly

in conjunction

with

29l-3151330

15

IS 4015 : 1998 Table 2 SI No. (1) 58. Name of Pesticides Group/Chemical Family

Continued
Acute LD 50 (m%kg b-0 OraVDermal (4)
45 I/2500

Antidote

(2)
Fenvalerate

(3)
`InlPyrethroids

(5)
No specific antidote, if ingested perform gastric lavnge.

59.

Ferbam

Fg/Dithiocarbamate

1700

No specific antidote, supportive therapy.

symptomatic

and

60.

Fluchloralin

HR

550

6 I.

Formothion Fluvalinate Fosetyl-Al Glyphosate

IntOP WPyrethroids, Trifluromethyl Fg/OP, 0rga;loalumi HR/OP,Glycine derivative

3655/>1000 261/>2000 5400/>2000

Atropine, PAM.

possibly in conjunction

with

62.
63. 64.

No specific antidote, symptomatic treatment gastric lavage. No specific antidote, supportive therapy. -dosymptomatic and

43/5OvO

65. 66. 67. 68.' 69. 70. 71.

Gibberellic acid

PGR HR/Urea derivative Fg BHC) In/oC

>15ooo I800/>2OOO(rat) 490 88.900 -do-do-do-do-

Isoproturon
Kitazin Lindane(Gamma Lime Sulphur Malathion Meleic Hydrazide

In/OP PGR/Pyridazine

2100/4100 6950/>2000 I7/>5000 700/~1OOO(rat) 2780/3100 8000/>10000 (rat)

Atropine, possibly in conjuction with PAM. No specific antidote, supportive therapy. Atropine No specific antidote, supportive therapy. symptomatic and symptomatic and

72. 73. 74. 75.

Methomyl Methylchlorophenoxy acetic acid (MCPA) Metolachlor Mancozeb

In/Carbamate HR/Chlorphenoxy Acetamide Fg/Dithioca&amte

No specific antidote, symptomatic treatment No specific antidote, symptomatic treatment, if swalloved induce vomiting stomach administer waqh out the saline Iaxaives. provide circulatory suppon. etc. No specific antidote, supportive therapy. symptomatic and

76.

Metaldehyde

MO/Aldehydes

77. 78.

Methabenzthiazuron Methyl Bromide

HRNrea Fu

2500/>500

(rat)

-dO-

0.63 (6 hours)

No specific antidote, symptomatic. In Acidosis, Sod.bicarbonate is administered and urine is monitored. After inhalation. move victim to fresh air, keep lying down and warm. Atropine, possibly in conjuction with PAM. See Methyl Dibromide. Bromide and Ethylene

79. 80.

Methyl Parathion Methyl Bromide Ethylene Dibromide (I:1 &3:l) Metoxuron HRAJrea

14.01420

81.

No specific antidote, symptomatic derivatives supportive therapy. 2200/>20000 14.0/130-250 670/>3 100 -do-

and

82. 83. 84.

Metribuzin Monocrotophos Metalaxyl

HlUliiazine In/OP Fg/Acylalanine

Atropine, possibly in conjuction with PAM. No specific antidote, supportive therapy. symptomatic and

85.

Mickel Chloride

Fg/Inorganic

135

No specific antidote, content symptomatic and supportive therapy.

16

IS 4015 : 1998 Table 2 No.

Continued Acute LD 50 0Wkg b.wt) OrPUDeIlllai (4) 50-60/50 65l250 5000/>1OWo 1000 1050/>5000 5OW>2000 -doAtropine possibly in conjuction with PAM. No specific antidote, symptomatic and supportive therapy. No specific antidote, symptomatic and supportive therapy. No specific antidote, symptomatic, ingested do not induce vomiting. if Antidote

si

Name of Pesticides

Group/Chemical Family

(1)
86. 87. 88. 89. 90. 91.

co
Nicotine Suiphate Oxydemeton-methyl Oxyfluorfen Paradichiorobenzene Pendimethalin Permethrin WOP

(3) In/Aikaloids HRIDiphenyi Ether, Ttifluromethyi Fg HR/Nitro Compound WPyrethroids

(5)

Nospecificantidote, symptomatic treament. if ingested obtain immediate medical attention. Atropine, possibly in conjunction with PAM. -do-do-do-doStomach wash with 5 percent Sod bicar bonate solution, egg white or medicinal charcoal suspension, administer medical BALor Peniciilamine. Give Sod.citrate (l-4 gm orally) every 4 hours. No specific antidote, andsupportive therapy. Atropine No specific treatment. antidote, symptomatic symptomatic

92. 93. 94. 95. 96. 97.

Phenthoate Phorate Phosalone Phosphamidon Pirimiphos-methyl Phenyimercuryacetate (PAM)

in/OP in/ In/Op In/OP In/OP FglOrganomercury

4OoI2iOO 2.0/2.5-6.2 120/>1000 7.W267 2018/>2000 30

98. 99. 100. 101. 102. 103.

Propanil Propetamphos Propoxur Pyrethrum Quinalphos Carbaryl:Gamma BHC(4:4)

HRIAcetamideIAnilides OP InKarbamates in/Pyrethrum In/OP lnlmisc HR/Triaxine HR Fu BC

14W7OOO 11912825 95/>500 500/5000 62/l 750

Au-opine in conjuction with 2-PAM.

Atropine, possibly in conjuction with PAM. See Carbaryl and gamma BHC.

104. Simaxine
105. 106. 107. Sirmate Sodium Cyanide Stmptocyline (streptomycin sulphate + tetracyclin hydrochloride(9: 1) Sulphur Temephos Triallate Trichloro acetic acid (TCA) Trichlorphon Tricyclaxole

5000/>10200 2165 6 900

No specific antidote, symptomatic and supportive therapy. -do-do-do-

108. 109. 110. 111. 112. 113.

Fg./lnorganic In/OP HR/QC,Carbanate HR in/OP/oC OP

>3000 4600/1300-1930 2165/3200 400 560/>2000 314/>2OBO

-doAtropinc, possibly in conjunction with PAM. -do-doAtropine, possibly in conjunction with PAM. Atropine, possibly in conjunction with 2-PAM.

17

Is 4015 : 1998 Table 2 St No. (1) 114.
115. 116.

Concluded
Acute LD 50

Name of Pesticides

Group/Chemicai Famiiy

Antidote

(m&i! b.wO
OlIlUDe~IIi
(3) Fg/Morphoiine/Aniiides In./OP Fg/Dithiocarbonate (4) 650/>4ooo (rat) 120/>1ooo 560/>1000

(2)
Tridemorph Thiometon Thiram

(5) No specific
antidote, supportive therapy symptomatic and

Atroiine possibly in conjunction with PAM. No specific antidote, symptomatic andamatesupportive therapy. If swallowed, induce vomiting, wash out the stomach, administer saline laxatives, provide circulatory support. No specific antidote, supportive therapy. -doAmine. pokibiy in conjunction with PAM. Combined with blood and symptomatic and

117. 118. 119. 120. 12 1. 122.

Triadimefon Thiophanate-methyl Triazophos Warfarin Zinc Phosphide Zineb

Fg/Triazole Fg/Benzimidazole ca&onate InlOP RO/Cumarin RO/Inorganic FgJDithiocarbamate

602/>2ooo 6O@Y>lOOOO 66/i 100 IO 45/2ooo-5ooo >5200/6ooO

Vitamin Kl transfusion.

No specific antidote, supportive therapy.

symptomatic

No specific antidote, symptomatic treatment. If swallowed, induce vomiting, wash out stomach, administer saline laxatives. provide circulatory support. (rat) -doNo specific treatment. -doAtropine, PAM. possibly in conjunction with antidote, symptomatic

123. 124. 125. 126. 127.

Ziiam Baciilusthuringiensis Chlorobenziiate Chiorfenvinphos Cyfluthrin

Fg/Dithiocarbamate in/Biopesticide AC/Benzilate InlOP In/Pyrethroid

1400/%000 />5000 (rat)

2784-3880/>10,000 24-39/31-108(rat) 5oo(oxylol)/>5ooo 900 (PEG 4@3)/2O(water/ Gramphor) (cc) 46/50-120 315/>2000 524M/>5OOO(rat)425F 2189ML2OOO6071F/ >2OOCY>2500 79M/1293-1507 56F/

No specific treatment. -dodoAtmpine

antidote,

symptomatic

128. 129. 130. 131. 132. 133. 134. 135. 136. 137. 138. 139. 140. 141. 142. 143. 144. 145. 146

Dieldrin d-tram aliethrin Fenobucarb(BPMC) Hexaconazole Iprodione Lambdacyhalothrin Myclobutanil Neem Products Oxaxiazon Oxycarboxin Paraquat dichloride Penconazole Praliethrin Pretiiachlor Pmfenofos Pmpiconzole Trifluralin Validamycin Methoxy ethyl mercury chloride

In/Cyclodiene In/Pyrethroid Ill/Carb~te Fg.flriazoie

No specific antidote, treat symptomatically. -do-do-do-do-do-do-do-dodo-doAtropine, PAM. possibly in conjunction antidote. with Treat

FgJImidazoiidine In/Pyrethroid FgiTriazoie In/Biopesticide HR/Oxadiazole Fg/Oxathion HR/Parquat FgiTriazole In/Pyre&mid HR/Acetaniiide In/OP Fg./Triazoie HR Dinitmaniline Fg./Giucopymoside Fg./Organomercurial ion

16OOM/5ooO 2290F >5ooo/>1oooo >5ooo/2ooo >2OOtY>16ooO 157/236-500 mg. Paqut ion/perks. 2125/>3ooo&at) 64OM1>5000 (rat)46OF/ 6099/>3100 358 3300 (rat) 1517/>4OOO(rat) 5ooo/>5ooo 20000/>5000 -

specific No symptomatically. -do-doD-penicillamine.

18

Bureau of lndian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indim Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending toconnected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publication), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendment.. or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot: No. Amendments Amend No. Date of Issue FAD 1 ( 4037 ).

Issued Since Publication Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters:

OF INDIAN STANDARDS Telegrams: Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone 323 76 17,323 38 41 { 337 84 86 99,337 85 9120 61 26,337 { 602025 60 38 43

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones: 323 0131,323 33 75,323 94 02 Regional Offices: Central Eastern Northern Southern Western Branches
: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg

NEW DELHI 110002
. l/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola

CALCUTTA

700054 160022

: SC0 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH

: C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113

{ 235 02 15 16,235 19,235 04 23 42 15
: Manakalaya,

E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093

{ 832 92 78 91,832 95,832 78 58 92

: AHMADABAD.

BANGALORE. BHGPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.
Rind at Simco F'rinting Prcsa, Delhi, India

