IAT WAP IS 2549 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


ха е ater (9) Т Әт — 
баат 


( FAT FRAT ) 


Processed Ferrous Scrap — Code 
for Classification 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 77.080.10, 77.080.20, 77.140 


© BIS 2023 


Ue AH SRT 

Ly BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
RD HAF WM, 9 FET Me AH AM, ag feet - 110002 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


January 2023 Price Group 8 


Wrought Steel Products Sectional Committee, MTD 04 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by Wrought Steel Products Sectional Committee had been approved by the Metallurgical Engineering Division 
Council. 


This standard was first published in 1963 and subsequently revised in 1994. While reviewing the standard, in the 
light of experience gained during these years, the committee decided to revise it to bring it in line with the Institute 
of Steel Recycling Industries (ISRI) classification. 


In this revision, the following significant changes have been made: 


a) Scope of the standard has been expanded to include all types of ferrous scrap. The entire ferrous scraps 
are divided into three segments “Home Scrap”, “Prompt Scrap” and “Obsolete Scrap”. All forms of 
“Prompt Scrap” and “Obsolete Scrap” are included. 

b) “Home Scrap” which can be directly sold to market is also included. However, “Home Scrap” which is 
consumed internally by steel manufacturing units are excluded and kept beyond the scope of present 
standard. 

c) Discusses cleanliness, contamination, non-conformity and safety in detail. 

d) Classification based on forms, sizes and shapes enables to separate re-melting scrap from re-rolling and 
re-manufacturing types of scrap. Post initial sorting, the segregated re-melting scrap may be further 
reduced in shredders, slitters or cutters to reduce sizes for increasing the bulk density of the finished 
batches. The final prepared re-melting scraps are either supplied in loose form (including sheared and 
shredded), bundled form or baled. 

e) Provision for supplying the coated samples are also adequately covered in the existing revision. 

f) The existing standard introduces new type of scrap category like light melting scrap (LMS), terne plate 
bundle, incinerator bundle, steel can bundle, expanding variety of turnings and borings, foundry scraps, 
automotive scraps (end of vehicle life), rail road scraps and tyre bead wires. In addition, various 
dimensions in the existing standard is being kept in line with ISRI standard to create harmony between 
domestic and exported ferrous scraps. 

g) Introduces a new section on remanufacturing scraps. All home, prompt and obsolete scraps that can 
directly translate into finished components without the need of re-manufacturing or re-rolling are also 
included. 


This standard has been prepared to assist the industry in maximizing utilization of ferrous scraps. The domestic 
consumption of iron and steel scrap is bound to increase, and the standard is expected to remove ambiguity and 
confusion that might arise from individual interpretation of different grades of scrap and terminology used in 
ferrous scrap industry. 


With increasing steel production and India becoming second largest steel producer in the world, the stress will be 
on raw material to fulfill domestic demand. In such a scenario, scrap utilization to the maximum possible extent 
will reduce the burden not only on raw material mining but also on carbon emission and energy consumption. In 
order to adopt the philosophy of maximizing scrap-based steelmaking it was envisaged to build a robust and 
detailed scrap standard which will be on par with all international standards. The second revision aims towards 
rationalizing the earlier version and make it more friendly and broader covering almost every possible variety of 
ferrous scrap. 


(Continued on third cover) 


IS 2549 : 2023 


Indian Standard 
PROCESSED FERROUS SCRAP — CODE FOR 
CLASSIFICATION 


( Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard classifies: 


a) Ferrous scrap generated at steel processing 

and product manufacturing sites (termed as 

Prompt Scrap); 

Ferrous scrap generated post end of useful 

life (Obsolete Scrap); and 

c) Ferrous scrap generated at вее] 
manufacturing units (Home Scrap) which 
can be sold to market rather recycling 
internally. 


b 


mM 


1.2 The scope is valid for all types of Ferrous scraps 
including cast iron, tool steel, alloy steel and 
stainless steel. 


1.3 Other internal wastes like flue dust, BF 
BOF/EAF/IF slags, spent pickle liquor, mill scale, 
BOF filter cake etc. are beyond the scope of this 
standard generally termed as “By-products”. 


1.4 Home Scrap which are consumed internally by 
steel manufacturing units are excluded and kept 
beyond the scope of this standard. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions, which 
through reference in this text constitute provisions 
of this standard. At the time of publication, the 
editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of 
the standards listed below: 


IS No. Title 

IS 1387: 1993 General requirement for the 
supply of metallurgical 
materials 

IS 1956 Glossary of terms relating to 


iron and steel: 


(Part 3): 2019 Long products (including bars, 
rods, sections апа wires) 
(second revision) 


(Part 4): 2013 Flat products (second revision) 


IS 7598 : 
1990 


Classification of steels 


3 GENERAL CONDITIONS 


General requirements relating to the supply of 
material shall conform to IS 1387. 


4 TERMINOLOGY 


4.1 Baling — Hydraulically compaction process for 
aggregating loose scraps having high surface area 
and low density. 


4.2 Briquetting — Compaction process of small 
scraps assisted by heating depending on the type of 
materials. 


4.3 Shearing — Slicing heavy pieces of ferrous 
scrap including I-beams, ship plates, pipes and 
railroad car sides. 


4.4 Shredding — Reduction of big size ferrous 
scrap into small pieces using hammer mills. Mostly 
automotive hulk and white goods are reduced in 
shredder. 


4.5 Incineration — Ferrous scraps subjected to 
combustion for removal of organic/inorganic 
materials from surface. 


4.6 Coating/Plating — Thin metallic, nonmetallic 
and organic layer adhering to substrate, giving 
resistance to wear/corrosion. This include zinc, zinc- 
aluminum, silicon, zinc-iron, tin, enamel, 
chrome/nickel/cadmium etc. 


5 CLEANLINESS 


5.1 All grades of ferrous scrap shall be free of dirt, 
nonferrous metal or foreign materials of any kind, 
any excessive rust, corrosion, byproduct 
contamination like slag, mill scale, baghouse dust, 
grinder dust, sludge etc. However, the term free of 
dirt, nonferrous materials or foreign material of any 
kind are not intended to preclude the accidental 
inclusion as far as possible. 


5.2 All grades of ferrous scrap shall be free of 
amounts of combustible nonmetallic materials, 
including, but not limited to rubber, plastic, fabric, 
wood, oil, lubricants and other chemical or organic 
substances as far as possible. 


IS 2549 : 2023 


6 RESIDUALS 
6.1 Copper 


All grades of ferrous scrap shall be free of visible 
metallic copper, which means free of copper-wound 
electric motors, rotors, braking system, sheets and 
copper coated materials, bearing shells, wires and 
cables, electromagnet, copper fittings and radiator 
cores. 


6.2 Tin 


All grades of ferrous scrap shall be free of tin in any 
form such as tin cans, tin coated materials etc. as 
well as bronze elements such as solders, collapsible 
tubes, tin plate foils, rings, bearing shells unless 
specified etc. All tin coated materials to be treated 
separately under tinned or coated scraps. 


6.3 Lead 


All grades of ferrous scrap shall be free of lead in 
any forms such as batteries, solder, wheel weights, 
cable sheath, bearings, bearing shells, lead acid 
batteries including automotive batteries etc. Terne 
plate scrap is classified separately and shall not be 
mixed with any other form of scrap. 


6.4 Chromium, Nickel and Molybdenum 


Use of chromium, nickel and molybdenum 
containing mechanical parts such as motors, drive 
gears, axles, gear boxes, gear wheels, tools and dies 
shall be restricted in all grades of ferrous scrap. 


6.5 Mercury 


All grades of ferrous scrap shall be free of mercury 
and mercury containing materials. Mercury 
containing materials include but are not limited to: 
mercury wetted or containing relays, switch gear, 
dry cell batteries, rectifiers, gauges, thermometers, 
manometers, barometers, fluorescent lighting 
fixtures, advertising signs, high intensity and 
mercury vapor lights. 


6.6 Cadmium 


All grades of ferrous scrap shall be free from 
cadmium containing materials. Cadmium 
containing materials include but are not limited to: 
Ni-Cd batteries used in applications like locomotive 
starting, emergency braking, coach lightening, air 
conditioning, military communication, solar energy 
storage, operation theater, plating, plastics, 
pigments etc. However, copper, chromium, nickel 
and molybdenum in the steel substrate is acceptable 
under the limitation prescribed by IS 7598. 


6.7 MIXTURE OF GRADES 


No delivery shall contain a mixture of grades, unless 
mutually agreed between the supplier and the 
purchaser. 


6.8 NON-METALLIC RESIDUALS 


6.8.1 In any grades of ferrous scrap following are not 
permissible, but not limited to, which includes; 


a) Refrigerants (including CFCs and HCFCs), 
heat pumps and air conditioners. Persistent 
organic pollutants (POPs) found in various 
sources; 


b) Clinical and medical wastes like syringes, 
medicines, vaccines, containers, glass 
wares, gloves, bandages, swabs, tissues, test 
tubes, veterinary wastes etc; 


c) Asbestos or asbestos containing materials, 
such as pipe insulation, fire retardants, acid 
resistant and surfacing material; 


d) Arsenics or arsenic containing material used 
in electrical circuits, wood preservatives etc; 


e) Oils, gasoline, petroleum products and 
antifreeze. This includes hydraulic fluids, 
gear oils, coolants and grease. Hydraulic 
equipment must have hydraulic hoses 
removed, cylinders cut open and drained; 


f) Items that contain or have contained poly- 
chrominated biphenyls, including small 
capacitors, printed circuit boards, X-ray 
screens, CT scanners, monitors, paints, 
sealants, fluorescent light ballasts and 
electrical transformers or transformer 
components; 


g) Automobile airbags, which contain sodium 
azide. Paint cans or other paint containers. 
Cyanides used in insecticides and pesticides; 


h) Acetylene, freon, propane and other organic 
compounds containing bottles and other 
sealed containers. Sealed containers are 
described as air or watertight containers 
without visible openings. Any material 
containing hazardous or toxic substances; 


j) Military scrap of any kind, unless mutually 
agreed between supplier and the purchaser 
in advance. Explosives, fracturing guns, 
unbroken shells and tubes, transformers or 
any explosive residues; 


К) Tyres, wood, dirt, yard debris, concrete, 
asphalt, glass, excessive fluff, rubber, other 
non-metallic materials; and 


т) Isotopes of chromium (hexavalent 
chromium etc), poly-brominated biphenyl, 
poly-brominated diphenyl ethers, deca- 
brominated diphenyl ethers, hexa-bromo 
cyclo-dodecane, perfluoro octane sulfonates 
etc are restricted. 


6.8.2 All deliveries of ferrous scrap shall comply 
with the statutory requirements for 
preservation of health and safety 


7 SAFETY AND RADIOACTIVITY 


7.1 All grades of ferrous scrap shall exclude 
pressurized, fuel, closed or insufficiently open 
containers of all origins, which could cause 
explosions and hazards. 


7.2 All grades of ferrous scrap shall exclude 
dangerous material, inflammable or explosive, fire- 
arms (whole or in part), ammunitions, dirt or 
pollutants which may contain or emit substances 
dangerous to human health or to the environment or 
to the steel production process. 


7.3 All grades of ferrous scrap shall be checked, 
within the limitations of accessibility and in strict 
compliance with appropriate detection equipment 
for radioactivity, to identify material presenting 
radioactivity in excess of the ambient level of 
radioactivity. 


7.4 All grades of ferrous scrap shall be checked, for 
any radioactive material in sealed containers even if 
no significant exterior radioactivity is detectable due 
to shielding or position of the sealed source in the 
scrap delivery. 


7.5 Any ferrous scrap potentially resalable be 
sheared or cut prior to delivery. All deliveries shall 
comply with Ше statutory requirements for 
preservation of health and safety. 


8 CLASSIFICATION OF SCRAP BASED ON 
SOURCE OF GENERATION 


All ferrous scraps shall broadly be classified in three 
different types based on the source of generation. 


8.1 Home Scrap 


All grades of ferrous scrap in clean form generated 
in steel manufacturing unit which is used for internal 
consumption by charging back to melting furnace, 
cupola or foundries. However, home scrap covered 


IS 2549 : 2023 


in this specification is designated for sale for 
external consumption. 


8.2 Prompt Scrap 


All grades of ferrous scrap in clean form generated 
in steel product consuming and processing units 
while re-processing. 


8.3 Obsolete Scrap 


АП grades of ferrous scrap generated post 
completion of useful service life. The end of life 
cycle is post completion of its service period fixed 
by regulatory or statutory bodies or being discarding 
by the user/owner for scrappage. 


9 CLASSIFICATION OF SCRAP BASED ON 
USE 


9.1 Steel Scrap for Re-melting 


Any ferrous scraps suitable for the process of re- 
melting through BOF/EAF/IF route is classified 
under this category. The collected scraps can be used 
directly or reduced to smaller sizes for charging in 
the furnace. Compaction shall be carried for low 
density scraps. 


9.2 Steel Scrap for Re-rolling 


Any ferrous scrap either home, prompt or obsolete 
fit for re-rolling application without need of re- 
melting. The scrap should be internally sound and its 
chemical composition shall conform the final 
specification. The scrap shall be of appropriate 
dimension fit for rolling and translating it into the 
finished product conforming to the requirements of 
the final product standard. 


9.3 Steel Scrap for Re-manufacturing 


Any scrap either home, prompt or obsolete without 
the need of re-melting or re-rolling can be translated 
into end components meeting final product standard 
only by means of mechanical operations. 


10 REMELTING SCRAP 


The various classification of re-melting scraps based 
on shapes and sizes are: 


10.1 Heavy Melting Scrap (HMS) 


Major source of HMS is generally obsolete scraps; 
however, it can also have scrap coming from home 
scrap as well prompt scraps. This scrap is mostly 
generated while dismantling of buildings, bridges, 
ships, automotive, plant & machinery etc. 


IS 2549 : 2023 


10.1.1 No. 1 Heavy Melting Scrap (HMS-1) 


It shall consist of reasonably clean ferrous uncoated 
scraps of thickness not less than 6 mm and in sizes 
not exceeding 1 500 mm x 600 mm. Individual 
pieces shall be free from attachment and shall be so 
cut as to lie flat in the charging box in loose form 
and meant only for re-melting. 


The standard sizes usually include: 


a) 900 mm x 600 mm; 
b) 600 mm x 600 mm; 
c) 450 mm x 450 mm; and 
d) 300 mm x 300 mm. 


However, sizes other than the above can also be 
supplied as agreed between the buyer and the 
supplier. 


10.1.2 No. 2 Heavy Melting Scrap (HMS-2) 


It shall consist of reasonably clean ferrous coated 
and uncoated scraps of thickness not less than 3 mm 
in sizes and not exceeding 1 500 mm x 600 mm. 
Individual pieces shall be free from attachment and 
shall be so cut as to lie flat in the charging box in 
loose form and meant only for re-melting. 


The standard sizes usually include: 


a) 900 mm x 600 mm; 
b) 600 mm x 600 mm; 
c) 450 mm x 450 mm; and 
d) 300 mm x 300 mm. 


However, sizes other than the above can also be 
supplied as agreed between the buyer and the 
supplier. 


10.2 Light Melting Scrap (LMS) 


Light melting scrap are thin gauge ferrous scraps 
generated either as home, obsolete or prompt scraps. 
The biggest source could be obsolete scrap like 
galvanized or non-galvanized automotive bodies, 
roofing, panels, ducts, boxes, cabins etc. 


10.2.1 No. 1 Light Melting Scrap (LMS-1) 


It shall consist of reasonably clean ferrous uncoated 
scrap less than 3 mm thickness and in sizes not 
exceeding 1 500 mm x 600 mm. Individual pieces 
shall be free from attachment and shall be so cut as 
to lie flat in the charging box in loose form and 
meant only for re-melting. 


The standard sizes usually include: 


a) 900 mm x 600 mm; 
b) 600 mm x 600 mm; 
c) 450 mm x 450 mm; and 
d) 300 mm x 300 mm. 


However, sizes other than the above can also be 
supplied as agreed between the buyer and the 
supplier. 


10.2.2 No. 2 Light Melting Scrap (LMS-2) 


It shall consist of reasonably clean ferrous coated 
scrap (see 4.6) less than 3 mm thickness and in sizes 
not exceeding 1 500 mm x 600 mm. Individual 
pieces shall be free from attachment and shall be so 
cut as to lie flat in the charging box in loose form 
and meant only for re-melting. 


Other standard sizes shall be 900 mm x 600 mm, 
600 mm x 600 mm, 450 mm x 450 mm and 300 mm 
x 300 mm. 


10.3 The contracting parties may mutually agree for 
sizes other than those indicated standard sizes in 
both No.1 and No.2 HMS and LMS, but sizes shall 
not exceed 1 500 mm x 600 mm. 


10.4 The HMS and LMS can also be supplied in 
compressed form in a charging box. Sizes shall not 
exceed 1 500 mm X 600 mm and weighing not less 
than 1 200 kg/cubic meter. However, the coated and 
the uncoated scrap shall not be mixed and to be 
supplied separately in charging boxes. Mixing is 
allowed based on mutual agreement between the 
purchaser and the supplier. 


10.3 End-Cuts/Crops/Shears 


This ferrous scrap is generally home scrap generated 
mostly at steel manufacturing units. It shall consist 
of reasonably clean ferrous scrap in finished and 
semi-finished forms. 


10.3.1 End Cuts of Semi-Finished 


It shall consist of crop-ends, cuttings, shearing, of 
slabs, bars, blooms, billets, ingots, forging scraps, of 
not less than 25 mm thick, and in sizes not exceeding 
1 500 mm х 600 mm. 


The standard sizes usually include: 


a) 900 mm x 600 mm; 
b) 600 mm x 600 mm; 
c) 450 mm x 450 mm; and 
d) 300 mm x 300 mm. 


However, sizes other than the above can also be 
supplied as agreed between the buyer and the 
supplier. 


10.3.2 Heavy End Cuts 
It shall consist of crop-ends, cuttings, shearing, 


trims, off cuts, side cuts, of forgings, plates, bar, 
rods, structural shapes, tubes, wires, angles, 


channels, axles, wheels, rails etc. of not less than 
6 mm thick, and in sizes not exceeding 1 500 mm x 
600 mm. 


The standard sizes usually include: 


a) 900 mm x 600 mm; 
b) 600 mm x 600 mm; 
c) 450 mm x 450 mm; and 
d) 300 mm x 300 mm. 


However, sizes other than the above can also be 
supplied as agreed between the buyer and the 
supplier. 


10.3.3 Light End Cuts 


It shall consist of crop ends, cuttings, shearing, side 
cuts, trims, offcuts of tubes, wires, angles, channels, 
plates, strips etc. of not more than 6 mm thick, and 
in sizes not exceeding 1 500 mm x 600 mm. 


The standard sizes usually include: 


a) 900 mm x 600 mm; 
b) 600 mm x 600 mm; 
c) 450 mm x 450 mm; and 
d) 300 mm x 300 mm. 


However, sizes other than the above can also be 
supplied as agreed between the buyer and the 
supplier. 


NOTE — The contracting parties may mutually agree for 
sizes other the indicated standard sizes in end cuts (semi- 
finished or finished under heavy and light section), but sizes 
shall not exceed 1 500 mm x 600 mm. 


10.4 Bushellings and Shovelings 


These are the residues of manufacturing units in the 
form of small ferrous scrap pieces generated after 
manufacturing of the final components. 


10.4.1 No. 1 Bushellings 


It shall consist of clean ferrous scrap not exceeding 
1 500 mm x 600 mm in any dimension including 
new factory bushelling such as sheet clippings, 
stampings, punching etc. of any gauge. It shall be 
free from coating (see 4.6), such as lime coating, 
vitreous enameling zinc coating, tinned etc. It shall 
also be free from electrical sheets over 0.5 percent 
silicon, old automobile bodies and fender stock and 
tinned products. It shall not include material 
obsolete scrap sources. 


10.4.2 No. 2 Bushellings 


It shall consist of clean ferrous scrap not exceeding 


IS 2549 : 2023 


1 500 mm x 600 mm in any dimension including 
new factory bushelling such as sheet clippings, 
stampings, etc containing coating (see 4.6), such as, 
lime coating, vitreous enameling, zinc coating, 
tinned etc. of any gauge. It shall also contain 
material from obsolete scrap except electrical sheets 
over 0.5 percent silicon, old automobile bodies and 
fender stock and tinned products. 


10.4.3 Silicon Clippings 


It shall consist of clean silicon bearings and treated 
ferrous scrap including new factory bushellings and 
shoveling, for example clippings, stampings, 
punching. May not include old auto body and fender 
stock. Free of metal coated, limed, vitreous 
enameled and electrical sheet containing minimum 
1 percent silicon of any gauge. 


10.4.4 Silicon Bushellings 


Clean silicon bearing ferrous scrap, not exceeding 
300 mm in any dimension, including new factory 
busheling (for example, sheet clippings, stampings, 
etc), having a silicon content of 0.5 percent to 
5.0 percent of any gauge. 


10.4.5 No. 1 Shovelings 

It shall consist of clean uncoated ferrous scrap not 
exceeding 150 mm in any dimension including new 
factory clippings, punching and stampings of any 
gauge. 


10.4.6 No. 2 Shovelings 


It shall consist of clean ferrous scrap with coating 
(see 4.6) not exceeding 150 mm in any dimension 
including new factory clippings, punching and 
stampings of any gauge. 


10.5 Shredded Scrap 


This scrap shall be generated out of obsolete ferrous 
scrap or prompt ferrous scrap. These are the 
generated when big obsolete and prompt scrap are 
shredded into small pieces in a shredded machine. 


10.5.1 Shredded Scrap 


It shall consist of homogeneous ferrous scrap 
fragmented into pieces not exceeding 200 mm in any 
direction and magnetically separated. It shall be 
commercially free from dirt, non-ferrous metal and 
foreign materials and shall exclude grindings, scarf 
and turnings and borings. The classification is done 
based on minimum average density as indicated in 
Table 1. 


IS 2549 : 2023 


Table 1 Shredded Scrap Classes 
(Clause 10.5.1) 


SI No. Class Minimum 
Average Density 

(1) (2) (3) 

i) No. 1 Shredded 1100 kg/cubic 
Scrap meter 

ii) No. 2 Shredded 950 kg/cubic 
Scrap meter 

iii) No. 3 Shredded 800 kg/cubic 
Scrap meter 

iv) No. 4 Shredded 600 kg/cubic 
Scrap meter 


NOTE — The contracting parties may mutually agree for 
densities other than those in the table above, but minimum 
average density shall be greater than 600 kg/ cubic meter. 


10.6 Bundle Scrap 


Tightly compacted bales of light and heavy gauges 
scrap produced in hydraulic balers. This may consist 
of prompt ferrous scrap and obsolete ferrous scrap 
in bundle form, generally in different bulk density. 


10.6.1 No. 1 Bundle (Hydraulic Baled) 


It shall consist of prompt ferrous scrap, cuttings or 
punching hydraulically compressed to a minimum 
bulk density of 1 200 kg/cubic meter. It shall be free 
from paint or coating (see 4.6) of any kind. It may 
include chemically detinned material but shall not 
include any material containing more than 
0.5 percent silicon. May include Stanley balls or 
mandrel wound bundles or skeleton reels, tightly 
secured. 


10.6.2 No. 2 Bundle (Hydraulic Baled) 


It shall consist of prompt/obsolete and galvanized 
ferrous scrap, auto body and fender stock 
hydraulically compressed to a minimum bulk 
density of 1 200 kg/cubic meter. It may include 
fence wire, sheets, rebars and light coil spring. It 
shall not include other metal coated ferrous scraps 
like tin and lead coated, vitreous enameled scraps 
etc. 


10.6.3 No. 3 Bundle (Hydraulic Baled) 


It shall consist of prompt and obsolete tinned, 
galvanized, enameled and other metal coated ferrous 
scrap hydraulically compressed to a minimum bulk 
density of 1 200 kg/cubic meter. It shall reasonably 
be free from dirt, non-ferrous material and 
non-metallics of any kind. It may include all coated 


ferrous scrap not suitable for inclusion in No. 2 
bundle. 


10.6.4 Silicon Bundle (Hydraulic Baled) 


It shall consist of silicon sheet cuttings and 
punching containing over 0.5 percent silicon, 
hydraulically compressed to a minimum bulk 
density 1 200 kg/cubic meter. 


10.6.5 Terne Plate Bundles 


New terne plate ferrous scrap, lead bearing clippings 
or skeleton scrap, compressed or hand bundled, to 
charging box size, and hydraulically compressed to 
minimum bulk density of 1 200 kg/cubic meter 
(Hand bundles are tightly secured for handling with 
a magnet). May include Stanley balls or mandrel 
wound bundles or skeleton reels, tightly secured. 


10.6.6 Detinned Bundles 


It shall consist of chemically processed tin 
clippings, cuttings and punching. The tin content 
shall not exceed 0.1 percent. It shall be 
hydraulically compressed to minimum bulk density 
of 1 200 kg/cubic meter. 


10.6.7 Incinerator Bundle 


Tin can scrap, compress to the size of the charging 
box and shall be hydraulically compressed to 
minimum bulk density of 1 200 kg/cubic meter. 
Processed through a recognized garbage incinerator. 


10.6.8 Steel Can Bundles 


Steel can scrap compressed to charging box size and 
shall be hydraulically compressed to minimum bulk 
density of 1 200 kg/cubic meter. Cans may be baled 
without removal of paper labels, but free of other 
nonmetallic materials. May include tin coated 
containers. The percentage of tin in the bundle to be 
mutually agreed between the supplier and the 
customer. 


NOTE — All bundles indicated in 10.6.1 to 10.6.8 can be 
bundled manually as per customer requirement provided the 
minimum bulk density of respective grades 15 being 
followed. bulk density other than those indicated shall be 
allowed on mutually agreed between the customer and the 
supplier. 


10.7 Ferrous Turning and Boring Scrap 


It shall consist of heavy and light ferrous turning and 
borings in both treated and untreated conditions 
from different foreign impurities of dirt, grease, oils 
etc. It also has the provision for mixed scrap where 
turnings and borings can be mixed. This is generally 
prompt scrap generated at the steel product 


manufacturer end. However, it may generate 
internally at plant level while scarfing or as an 
obsolete scrap. 


10.7.1 Heavy Steel Turnings 


It shall consist of clean steel heavy turnings, drilling 
or screw cuttings. It shall be free from springy, 
bushy, tangled or matted materials, lumps, iron 
borings, non-ferrous metals in a free State, scale, 
excessive oil and badly rusted or corroded stocks. 
Heavy steel turnings shall be free of light turnings 
like machine shop turnings and shall include rail 
chips, railroad axle and heavy forgings with 
minimum bulk density of 1 200 kg/cubic meter in 
the original state of production. 


10.7.2 Light Steel Turnings 


It shall consist of clean steel light turnings, drilling 
or screw cuttings. May include materials resulting 
from crushing, raking or other process. It shall be 
free from springy, bushy, tangled or matted 
materials, lumps, iron borings, non-ferrous metals in 
a free State, scale, excessive oil and badly rusted or 
corroded stocks. The density should be mutually 
agreed between the customer and the supplier. 


10.7.3 Mixed Steel Turnings 


It shall consist of clean steel turnings mixed with 
from cast or malleable iron, stainless steel and 
alloyed steel turnings but free from non-ferrous 
metals ina free state, scale or excessive oil and badly 
rusted or corroded stocks. The density should be 
mutually agreed between the customer and the 
supplier. 


10.7.4 Steel Turning with Boring 


It shall consist of clean steel both heavy and light 
turnings with borings. It shall be free from non- 
ferrous metals in a free State, scale, excessive oil and 
badly rusted or corroded stocks. The density should 
be mutually agreed between the customer and the 
supplier. 


10.7.5 Mixed Steel Turning with Boring 


It shall consist of clean steel turnings, including 
stainless steel, alloy steel, cast iron turnings and 
borings, mixed in any proportion free from non- 
ferrous metals in a free state and scale, and shall be 
free from badly rusted or corroded stocks. The 
density should be mutually agreed between the 
customer and the supplier. 


IS 2549 : 2023 
10.7.6 Old Turning 


It shall consist of obsolete heavy and light ferrous 
turnings including stainless steel, cast iron and alloy 
steel mixed with cast iron turnings including 
springy, bushy, tangled or matted materials, free 
from cast iron borings, badly rusted or corroded 
stock reasonably free from excessive oils, scales and 
dirt, but shall exclude grindings, scale and non- 
metals in a free state. It may also include heavy 
turnings from axles and forgings or rail chips. The 
density should be mutually agreed between the 
customer and the supplier. 


10.7.7 Mixed Old Turning with Boring 


It shall consist of old steel, stainless steel and alloy 
steel mixed with cast iron turnings including 
springy, bushy, tangled or matted materials, lumps 
iron borings, cast iron borings and turnings, badly 
rusted or corroded stock but shall exclude grindings, 
scale and non-metals in a free state. The density 
should be mutually agreed between the customer 
and the supplier. 


10.7.8 Briquetted Iron Borings 


It shall consist of cast iron borings and turnings, 
briquetted to a solid mass, free from non-ferrous 
metals and scale, and shall be free from badly rusted 
or corroded stocks. 


10.7.9 Briquetted Steel Turnings 


It shall consist of steel turnings and borings 
briquetted to a solid mass, free from nonferrous 
metals and scale and shall be free from badly rusted 
and corroded stocks. Bulk density can be mutually 
agreed to between the interested parties. 


10.7.10 Special Boring Grades 

10.7.10.1 No. 1 Chemical boring 

New clean cast or malleable iron borings and 
drillings containing not more than 1 percent oil, free 
from steel turnings, or chips, lumps, scale, corroded 
or rusty materials. 

10.7.10.2 Briquetted cast iron borings, hot process 
Cast iron borings, heated, briquetted, to a density of 


approximately 85 percent, oil and water content 
under 1 percent. 


IS 2549 : 2023 


10.7.10.3 Briquetted cast iron borings, cold process 


Cast iron boring briquettes, free of steel and non- 
ferrous material, hydraulically compressed into a 
cohesive solid, reasonably free of oil, and having a 
density of not less than 60 percent. 


10.7.10.4 Malleable boring 


Clean malleable iron borings and drillings, free of 
steel turnings, scale, lumps and excessive oil. 


10.7.10.5 No.2 Chemical boring 


New clean cast or malleable iron borings and 
drillings containing not more than 1.5 percent oil, 
free from steel turnings, or chips, lumps, scale, 
corroded or rusty materials. 


NOTE — Prior information on the briquetting process shall 
be shared to the customer and shall follow the one which is 
mutually agreed between the customer and the supplier. 


10.8 Cast Iron Scrap 


Different grades of scraps should not be mixed with 
each other in bundle form. The bundle should 
maintain the purity (free of non-ferrous, organic and 
inorganic material) of each grade by 98 percent 
minimum. However, based on the mutual 
agreement, mixed bundles can be used in EAF and 
IF. 


10.8.1 Machinery Grade Cast Iron 


It shall consist of clean and close-grained cast iron 
of low phosphorous grade used exclusively for the 
manufacture of soft machinable casting. It shall be 
of cupola size and shall not exceed the dimension 
and weight shown in Table 2. The classifications are 
machinery grade cast iron No. 1 and No. 2. 


Table 2 Classes of machinery grade cast iron 
(Clause 10.8.1) 


SINo. Class Maximum Size Maximum 
Weight 
© О) (3) (4) 
i) No. 1 400 mm x 400 40 kg 
mm 
ii) No.2 600 mm x 750 75 kg 
mm 


NOTE — Weight and dimension other than those 
indicated in the above table can be supplied based on the 
mutual agreement between the contracting parties. 
However, minimum weight shall be less than 75 kg and 
sizes shall be less than 600 mm x 750 mm. 


10.8.2 Cast Iron Grades 


It shall consist of clean cast iron scrap, such as pipes 
(excluding soil pipes), railway sleepers, chairs or 
plates. It shall avoid mixing of melting pots, stove 
plates, grates, burnt iron, railway brake blocks or 


foreign material with other classes. Class No. 1 
material shall be used for cupola charging, for 
charging in cupola furnaces for induction melting, 
the dimension shall not exceed 600 mm x 750 mm 
and piece shall weigh as indicated in the Table 3. 


Table 3 Classes of Cast Iron Grades 
(Clause 10.8.2) 
SINo. Class Source Maximum 
Weight 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 


Pipes (free from 
soiled pipes), 
i) No. 1 sleepers, | chairs, 
column, agricultural 
tool, machinery parts 


75 kg 


Railway brake 
blocks, soil pipe, 
counterweights of 
lifts ог cast-iron, 
ii) No.2 automotive engines, 
heavy cast iron 
pieces, hammers, 
heads, gates, risers, 
machinery parts 


250 kg 


Melting pots, stoves, 
grates, burnt iron, 
railway brake blocks, 

ш) No.3 radiators, cylinders, 250 kg 
driving wheel centers 
miscellaneous items 
(Burnt Scrap) 


10.8.3 Charging Box Cast 


Clean cast iron scrap in sizes not over 
than 1 500 mm in length and 750 mm in width, 
suitable for charging in a furnace without 
preparation. Free from burnt iron, brake shoes or 
stove plates. 


10.8.4 Mixed Cast Iron 


May include all grades of cast iron except burnt iron. 
Dimensions not over 600 mm x 750 mm and no 
pieces over 75 kg in weight. 


10.8.5 Cast Steel Scraps 


Steel castings not over than 1 200 mm long and 
450 mm wide and thickness not less than 3 mm, free 
from alloys and attachments. May include head, 
gates, risers, truck sides, frames, bolsters etc. Other 
standard sizes include 1 500 mm length maximum 
and 450 mm wide maximum with thickness over 
than 3 mm. 


10.9 Ingot Mould and Bottom Plate Scrap 


It shall consist of used, rejected unbroken ingot 


mould and bottom plates of mould. However, there 
are classes based on the weight restriction and shall 
be followed as indicated in Table 4. Size restriction 
for broken ingot mould is 600 mm x 900 mm x 
1500 mm. 


Table 4 Classes of Ingot Mold and Bottom Plate 
Scrap 
(Clause 10.9) 


Class Maximum 
SUNG: Weight 
@) (2) (3) 
1) Unbroken No weight 
restriction 
ii) Semi-broken No 1 < 10 000 kg 
iii) Semi-broken No 2 < 3 000 kg 
iv) Broken No 1 < 500 kg 
v) Broken No 2 < 50 kg 
10.10 Skull Scrap 


It shall consist of ferrous cast iron and cast steel skull 
scrap produced out of steel melting units, cupola, 
electric arc furnace and induction furnace, shall be 
reasonably free from slag and impurities and in 
pieces shall weigh maximum as indicated in the 
table below. The scrap is classified into processed, 
semi-processed and unprocessed category based on 
the nature of purity of the ferrous material in the 
scrap. The maximum allowable slag percent in the 
scrap shall comply as indicated in Table 5. The skull 
scrap is divided in cast steel skull scrap and cast-iron 
skull scrap 


10.10.1 Cast Steel Skull Scrap 


It shall consist of cast steel skull scrap produced in 
the process of steel making including foundries. The 
scrap also includes ladle bottom where the first two 
forms are described in Table 5. 


Table 5 Classes of Cast Steel Skull Scrap 
(Clause 10.10.1) 


SINo. Class Maximum Maximum 
Weight % Slag 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Processed < 500 kg <3% 
ii) Roe <2500ke <5% 
processed 


The third form of skull scrap may include 
unprocessed scrap where maximum weight and 


IS 2549: 2023 


% slag can vary based on mutual agreement 
between the contracting parties. 


10.10.2 Cast Iron Skull Scrap 


It shall consist of cast iron skull scrap produced in 
foundries and steel plants. The scrap also includes 
ladle bottom where the first two forms are described 
in Table 6. 


Table 6 Classes of Cast Steel Skull Scrap 
(Clause 10.10.2) 


SI №. Class Maximum Maximum 
Weight % Slag 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
1) Processed < 500 kg <3 % 
ii) Semi 


processed S2500kg 55% 


The third form of cast steel skull scrap may include 
unprocessed scrap where maximum weight and % 
slag can vary based on mutual agreement between 
the contracting parties. 


10.11 Foundry Scrap 


Ferrous scrap generated from foundry can also be 
classified under but not limited to the following 


10.11.1 Foundry Steel 


Steel scrap of thickness greater than or equal to 
3 mm, not over 600 mm in length x 450 mm in 
width. Individual pieces free from attachment. May 
not include nonferrous metals, cast or malleable 
iron, cable, vitreous enameled or metal coated 
materials. The other standard size includes 300 mm 
in length and 450 mm in width. 


10.11.2 Foundry Steel Bushellings 


Black carbon steel scrap of thickness greater than or 
equal to 3 mm thickness not more than 600 mm x 
300 mm size with manganese content not more than 
0.5 percent. Other parameters based on mutual 
agreement between the customer and the supplier. 


10.11.3 Foundry Shredded Clips 


Shredded black 1 000 series carbon steel scrap, 
3 mm and over in thickness, minimum average bulk 
density of 1 200 kg/cubic meter with manganese 
content not more than 0.5 percent . Other parameters 
based on mutual agreement between the customer 
and the supplier. 


IS 2549 : 2023 


10.12 Specific Stainless and Alloy Steel Grades 
10.12.1 200 Series Stainless Steel Scrap 


It shall consist of all types of clean stainless-steel 
scrap, which containing minimum 13.5 percent 
chromium and a minimum of 0.4 percent copper, 
free of foreign attachments and other 
contaminations. Apart from chromium and copper, 
other elements may also be present as per the 
chemistry of the grade. 


10.12.2 300 Series Stainless Steel Scrap 


It shall consist of clean stainless steel scrap only in 
solids and turning, containing a minimum of 
6 percent nickel, 15 percent chromium and free of 
harmful contaminants shall be supplied in loose or 
bundle form. Apart from nickel and chromium, other 
elements may also be present depending on the 
chemistry of the grade. Particulars concerning 
physical description, grading, additional analysis 
and preparation to be agreed upon between buyer 
and seller. 


10.12.3 400 Series Stainless Steel Scrap 


It shall consist of all types of clean stainless-steel 
scrap solids and turnings, containing minimum 
10.5 percent chromium and shall be free of foreign 
attachments and contaminants. Apart from 
chromium, other elements may also be present 
depending on the chemistry of the grade. Particulars 
concerning physical description, grading, additional 
analysis and preparation to be agreed upon between 
buyer and seller. 


10.12.4 Duplex and other Grades of Stainless Steel 
Scrap 


It shall consist of all types of clean stainless-steel 
scrap solids and turnings, and shall be free of foreign 
attachments and contaminants. Various elements 
may be present in the grade depending on the 
chemistry of the grade. Particulars concerning 
physical description, grading, additional analysis 
and preparation to be agreed upon between buyer 
and seller. 


10.12.5 High Speed Steel Scrap (6-5-2) 


It shall consist only of 6-5-2 type high speed steel 
scrap solid and turnings either in loose, shredded or 
bundle form, containing not less than 5.5 percent 
tungsten, 4.5 percent molybdenum, 1.7 percent 
vanadium. It shall be free from any other alloys, 
foreign attachments, oil and other contaminants. 
Particulars concerning physical description, 
grading, additional analysis and preparation to be 
agreed upon between buyer and seller. 


10.12.6 High Speed Steel Scrap (18-4-1) 


It shall consist of 18-4-1 type high speed steel scrap 
solid and turnings, containing not less than 
17 percent tungsten, 3 percent chromium and 
1.5 percent vanadium. It shall be free from any other 
alloys, foreign attachments, oil апа other 
contaminants. Particulars concerning physical 
description, grading, additional analysis and 
preparation to be agreed upon between buyer and 
seller. 


10.12.7 Other Alloy Steel Scrap 


It shall consist of alloy steel scraps of varying 
alloying elements mutually agreed between the 
customer and the supplier. It shall be free from any 
other alloy and foreign attachments, oil and other 
contaminants. Particulars concerning physical 
description, grading, additional analysis and 
preparation to be agreed upon between buyer and 
seller. 


10.13 Auto Dismantle Scrap (ELV) 


Scrap generated from dismantling of obsolete 
automotive ferrous scrap can be classified under the 
following scrap. This is also called as end of life of 
vehicle (ELV) scrap. 


10.13.1 Auto Casts 


Clean automotive ferrous scraps like springs, 
crankshafts, camshafts, valves, studs, autoblocks, 
bearings, axles, brakes, brake shoes, gears, chains, 
links etc. Free of nonferrous materials and 
nonmetallic parts and must not be over 900 mm x 
450 mm. Other standard size being 600 mm x 
450 mm. 


10.13.2 Auto Structurals 


Clean automotive ferrous scrap like bumpers, 
fenders, rails, recliners, reinforcements, pillars, 
hinges, panels, internals etc. Free of nonferrous 
materials and nonmetallic parts and must not be over 
750 mm x 750 mm. 


10.13.3 Auto Slabs 


Clean auto slabs of dimensions must not be over 
900 mm x 450 mm maximum to be used directly for 
charging in the furnace. Can be charged individually 
or in bundles. Other standard size being 600 mm x 
450 mm. 


10.14 Railroad Scrap 


Ferrous scrap generated specifically from obsolete 
rails and railway tracks/scrapped cars which can be 
broadly categorized as follows. May fit in other 


sections classified earlier, but this section is for 
customers and supplier to categorize only graded 
railway scraps. 


10.14.1 Rail Wheels and Tires 


All locomotive tires and wheels, solid cast steel, 
forged, pressed and/or rolled steel car and/or 
locomotive wheels etc. All pieces should be loose 
form and should not be attached to each other. 


10.14.2 Rails 


Clean steel of any thickness however the sizes is 
restricted to 900 mm maximum and weighing not 
more than 25 kg. 


10.14.3 Axles 


Solid car or locomotive friction bearings, roller 
bearing etc of diameter as given in Table 7. 


Table 7 Categories of Railroad Axles 
(Clause 10.14.3) 


SI No. Categories Diameter 
(1) (2) (3) 
1) Class А < 200 mm 
il) Class B > 200 mm 


10.14.4 Obsolete Track апа Car Material (OTCM) 


This include all obsolete track materials of any 
diameter and thickness. The length of the individual 
pieces should not be greater than 1 500 mm in 
length. This includes fish plates, spikes, track bolts, 
nuts screws, lock washers, anchors, tie plates, 
angles, splice bars, bolsters, guard rails, frogs, 


IS 2549: 2023 


switch points, tee, girders, couplers, knuckles, brake 
shoes etc. 


10.14.5 Springs 


This includes all types of railway springs, valve 
springs, leaf springs, coils, elliptical springs etc. of 
diameter not less than 3 mm. 


10.14.6 Locomotive Bodies 


This includes bodies of steel wagons cut with 
maximum size of 1 500 mm x 900 mm. 


10.14.7 Railway Coated Scrap 


Galvanized, tinned or any metal coated and/or gas 
retorts, and/or any other iron or steel material not 
otherwise classified. 


10.15 Tool Steel 


This include all kind of obsolete tool steel scrap. 
May be offered based on the mutual agreement with 
the customer and the supplier. This includes dies, 
anvils, hammers, blocks etc. 


10.16 Tyre Bead Wires 


Tyre bead wire is used in all kinds of automobile 
tyres, tyre of earth moving equipment and aircrafts. 
Can be supplied in loose, shredded or bundle form. 
This include pulled bead wires (truck and 
passengers), processed tire wires etc. Percentage of 
rubber and fiber along with the scrap to be mutual 
agreed between the suppler and the consumer. 
Standard grading of percentage fibers/rubbers is 
described in Table 8. 


Table 8 Rubber and Plastic Content in Pulled Bead Wire and Processed Wire 
(Clause 10.16) 


SI No. Categories Truck/ Processed Ferrous Wire 
Passenger Pulled Bead Wire 

(1) (2) (4) 

i) Grade 1 <2% 

ii) Grade 2 5 % to 10 % 2% to 5 % 

iii) Grade 3 >10% 5 % to 10 % 

iv) Grade 4 -- >10% 

v) Grade 5 > 20 % 


11 REROLLABLE FERROUS SCRAP 
11.1 Defectives and Rejects 


It shall consist of cuttings, rejected and discarded 
ingots, slabs, blooms, billets, bars, rods, angles, 


shapes and section rails and railway material such as 
wheels, tyres, axles, sleepers, sleeper bars, fish 
plates and flat rolled product suitable for re-rolling 
without undergoing process of melting and of length 
up to 5 000 mm and up to 2 000 mm width with 
thickness or diameter 5 mm minimum. In case of 


IS 2549 : 2023 


rails and railway materials the maximum length is 
restricted to 10 000 mm. 


11.2 Obsolete and Salvaged 


It shall consist of obsolete, old and salvaged plate, 
sheets, strips, bars, angles, channels, beams, rail and 
railway materials such as wheels, tyres, axles, 
sleepers, sleeper bars, fish plates and flat rolled 
product including their cuttings and shearing. It also 
includes materials obtained from breaking of old 
ships suitable for rerolling without undergoing the 
process of melting. It also includes plates, beams 
and structural generated as a resulted of dismantling 
of old buildings, airports, bridges, industries, 
warehouses, stations etc. It also includes material 
generated from other sources like dismantling 
railway wagons, truck bodies, defense equipment, 
yellow goods etc. The maximum length shall be up 
to 5 000 mm and up to 2 000 mm width with 
thickness or diameter 5 mm minimum. In case of 
rails and railway material the maximum length is 
restricted to 10 000 mm. 


11.3 Crop Ends 


It shall consist of crop ends (front and back end 
cuttings) of semi-finished or finished products like 
slabs, blooms, billets, rods, bars, plates, strips, 
sheets, angles, channels, rails etc. suitable for re- 
rolling of maximum and minimum sizes agreed 
between the consumer and the suppler. 


12 REMANUFACTURING SCRAP 
12.1 New Scrap 


It shall consist of end cuts or rejected material from 
finished products like plates, strips, sheets, bars, 
angles, channels, beams, rails, rods, rebars, axles, 
wheels, bearings, gears etc. which can be used 
directly for the process of refurbishing products 
directly without undergoing the process of re- 
melting or rerolling. It shall consist of prompt and 
home scrap only. 


12.2 Obsolete Scrap 


It shall consist of cuttings or shearing’s generated 
from salvaged obsolete products like plates, strips, 
sheets, bars, angles, channels, beams, rails, rods, 
rebars, axles, wheels, bearings, gears etc. which can 
be used directly for the process of refurbishing 
products directly without undergoing the process of 
re-melting or rerolling. It shall consist of obsolete 
scrap only. 


Use of remanufacturing scraps is limited to mutual 
agreement between the manufacturer апа the 
supplier. The internal soundness, chemical 
composition, microstructure and mechanical 
properties should be evaluated and shall be in 
conformance with the end standard in which the 
finished component finally complies. 


IS 2549 : 2023 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Wrought Steel Products Sectional Committee, MTD 04 


Organization 
SAIL, RDCIS, Ranchi 


All India induction furnace association, New Delhi 


AM/NS Steel (Hazira, Surat) 


Bharat Heavy Electrical ltd, Bhopal 


Central Boilers Board, New Delhi 


Cold Rolled Steel Manufacturers Association of 


India, New Delhi 
DMRL, Ministry of Defence, Hyderabad 


Institute of Steel Development and Growth, Kolkata 


Indian Machine tools Manufacturers association 


JSW steel Ltd, Dolvi/Salem 


JSW Ltd, Bellary 


Jindal Steel & power Itd (JSPL) 


Ministry of Defence (DGOFB), Kolkata 
Ministry of Defence (DGQA), Ichapur, WB-743 144 


Ministry of Shipping, New Delhi 


Ministry of Steel (Govt. of India), New Delhi 


Power Grid Corporation, Haryana 


Rashtriya ispat Nigam Limited, Vishakapatnam 


Research Designs and Standards Organization 


(RDSO), Lucknow 
SAIL, Bhilai Steel Plant, Bhilai 


SAIL, Bokaro Steel Plant, Jharkhand 


Representative(s) 
SHRI NIRVIK BANERJEE (Chairperson) 


SHRI A. К. SHARMA 
SHRI PRABHAKAR MISHRA (Alternate) 


SHRI DEEPAK GUPTA 
SHRI KALPESH DAVE (Alternate) 


SHRI S. K MAHAJAN 
SHRI ARUN KHARE (Alternate) 


SHRI T. S. G NARAYANNEN 
SHRI S. K JAIN (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJIV CHATURVEDI 
SHRIN. K. SOOD (Alternate) 


SHRI R. У. S. NAGESH 
SHRI P. L. КАО 

SHRI SAJAL KUMAR GHORAI (Alternate) 
SHRI Y. BALARAMAIAH 


SHRI SUBHASIS CHAKRABORTY 
SHRI B. M. HASAN (Alternate) 


SHRI DEVASISH MISHRA 
SHRI G. V. RAMANA (Alternate) 


SHRI MORESHWAR BORKAR 
SHRI JOY DUTTA (Alternate) 


SHRI R. D. BARMA 


SHRI K YADAV 
SHRI G. SUBBA RAO (Alternate) 


SHRI ANIL PRUTHI 
SHRI RAMJI SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI PARAMJEET SINGH 


SHRI BHAGIRATHI PRADHAN (Alternate) 
SHRI MANOJ KUMAR GUPTA 


SHRI DEEPAK KUMAR SAHOO (Alternate) 
SHRIMATI RUCHIRA GUPTA 
SHRI SHANKAR JEE (Alternate) 


SHRI MANOJ KUMAR GUPTA 
SHRI SALISH ORAON (Alternate) 


SHRI SHRIRANG KHANKHOJE 
SHRI K.V. SHANKAR (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI BISWASI SUNITA MINZ 
SHRIMATI ROSELIN DODRAE (Alternate) 


IS 2549: 2023 
Organization 


SAIL, Research & Development center for Iron & 
Steel, Ranchi 


SAIL, Rourkela Steel Plant, Rourkela 


Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers 
(SIAM), New Delhi 


Steel Authority Of India Limited, ISCO Steel Plant, 
Barddhaman 


Tata Blue Scope Steel Ltd, Pune 


Tata Motors Ltd (Pune) 


Tata Steel Ltd, Jamshedpur 


The Tin Plate Company of India Ltd, Jameshedpur 


In Personal Capacity, (New Delhi) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


SHRI Р. PATHAK 
SHRI S. SRIKANTH (Alternate) 


SHRI KUNTAL PATWARI 
SHRI RAMAKRISHNAN P. (Alternate) 


SHRI KARTIKE KARWAL 
SHRI КАМІЅНКА CHANA (Alternate) 


SHRI A. DAS GUPTA 
SHRI SAIKAT DE (Alternate) 
SHRIMATI PREETI DEWANGAN (Young Professional) 


SHRI RAJESH MAHESHWARI 


SHRI PRADEEP KULKARNI 
SHRI LOKESH PALIWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI AVTAR SINGH SAINI 
SHRI SUDIPTO SARKAR (Alternate) 


SHRIS. J. DEY 
SHRI SUBRATA SADHU (Alternate) 


SHRI A. С. В. DAS 


SHRI ЅАМЛУ MAINI, SCIENTIST ‘F’/SENIOR DIRECTOR 
AND HEAD (METALLURGICAL ENGINEERING) 
[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Panel for revision of standard on classification of ferrous scrap MTD 04/P 25 


Organization 
Ministry of Steel, New Delhi 


Directorate General of Foreign Trade (DGFT), 
New Delhi 


Iron Steel Scrap and Ship breakers Association 
of India, Mumbai 


IZA India (International Zinc Association), 
New Delhi 


Material Recycling Association of India (MRAD, 
Mumbai 


MSTC Limited, Kolkata 


Tata Steel Limited, Jamshedpur 


Representative(s) 
SHRI PARMIJEET SINGH (Convenor) 


SHRI SANJAY TIWARI 


SHRI NAGAR SETH 


SHRI KENNETH DE SOUZA 
SHRI RAHUL SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI SATISH KOHLI 
SHRI ZAIN NATHANI (Alternate) 
SHRI RITESH MAHESHWARI (Alternate) 


SHRI TANMOY SARKAR 
SHRI CHIRAG SINDHU (Alternate) 


SHRI SUDIPTO SARKAR 
SHRI ANEESH SINGHAL (Alternate) 
SHRI BASDA BANERJEE (Alternate) 


Member Secretary 
SHRI ARUN PUCCHAKAYALA 
SCIENTIST ‘D’/JOINT DIRECTOR, 


(METALLURGICAL ENGINEERING), BIS 


(Continued from second cover) 


Ferrous scrap is the prime raw material for secondary sector and used in primary steelmaking to the tune of around 
15%, to improve efficiency and minimize production cost. The availability of right raw material and graded scrap 
at competitive rate is imperative for the growth of steel industry. Steel Scrap is most conducive for circular 
economy as it can be reused and recycled infinitely. Availability of graded scrap in India is a concern and being 
a scrap deficit country, the standard will help in abridging the gap of our knowledge in graded scrap and will align 
the processing, segregation and categorization of all scrap processors in the country towards similar direction. 
This will promote a healthy and competitive ecosystem in the country which will further stress on maximizing 
scrap collection and availability of graded scrap. 


The composition of the committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is listed at Annex A. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MTD 04 (19972). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : 601/А, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8% Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector У, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : СІ.Т. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri | 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


