IS 15959 : 2011 


IRENI apie (Reaffirmed 2016) 
Aya alex AT, ger sik cis Paar D fery 
sitesi amr fafa — veri ARI 


Indian Standard 
DATA EXCHANGE FOR ELECTRICITY METER 
READING, TARIFF AND LOAD CONTROL — 
COMPANION SPECIFICATION 


ICS 17.220.20; 35.100.01; 91.140.50 


© BIS 2011 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 


April 2011 Price Group 12 


Equipment for Electrical Energy Measurement, Tariff and Load Control Sectional Committee, ETD 13 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Equipment 
for Electrical Energy Measurement, Tariff and Load Control Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Electrotechnical Division Council. 


With development of electronic meters having possibilities of metering data being integrated into business processes 
of service providers and in turn with generating agencies, thus opening up multiple opportunities in power system 
management at both micro and macro levels and being guided by the National Electricity Policy of the Central 
Government after enactment of the Electricity Act, 2003, the Committee initiated the work of formulating standards 
on Data Exchange for Electricity Metering Equipment in 2006. 


Two options were taken up for interoperable use of meters in a data network. In 2007, the Committee decided to 
adopt the International Standard IEC 62056 already available in various parts. However it was felt that only 
adoption was not sufficient for proper implementation as the selective features of the standard available at that 
time were not adequate for use by different utilities collectively. In view of urgent power reforms programme of 
the Central Government and the metering data integration involved, the Electrotechnical Division Council in 
April 2008, while appreciating the other option of Common Framework based solution being developed by Indian 
Electrical and Electronics Manufacturers Association (IEEMA), advised the committee and divergent stakeholders 
for rapid implementation of the IEC Standard available. The Committee inducted experts and held a series of 
meetings for evolving this Indian Standard for proper implementation of the IEC Standard based on open protocol 
and wide ranging selective features thereof, for application in Indian networks. 


The Central Electricity Authority (CEA), a body under the Electricity Act, 2003, to prepare regulations on installation 
and operation of meters and to record data regarding electricity from generation to utilization and the Central 
Power Research Institute, a Society under the Central Government, with established conformance test facilities 
for meters conforming to IEC 62056 at its Bangalore Laboratory, both members of the Committee, were involved 
in preparation of category-wise comprehensive list of metering parameters for use in national networks. The 
Report titled “Standardization of Metering Parameters” finalized with object identifier codes as requested was 
submitted to BIS in April 2009 for facilitating preparation of Indian Standards/Guides on Metering data exchange. 
Some assistance has also been derived from CBIP Publication 304 Manual on Standardization of AC Static 
Electrical Energy Meters (for electrical energy and tariff related parameter terminologies). 


Device Language Message Specification (DLMS) with functionalities of Companion Specification for Energy 
Metering (COSEM) based on open protocols and maintained by Device Language Message Specification User 
Association, DLMS UA, Geneva, in the form of four technical Reports, namely “Blue”, “Green”, “Yellow” and 
“White” Books, have been adopted by IEC on regular basis in the International Standards mentioned above for 
interoperable use of electricity meters in a data network. The continuous development of DLMS/COSEM open 
communications protocols for data retrieval, updation, and reconfiguration of metering devices, has enabled 
diverse operators to access safely and quickly data from metering equipment provided by diverse manufacturers. 


This standard, a Companion Specification in the form of a Guide, is intended to provide a field level basis for 
efficient and secure transfer of electricity metering data in an open manner with judicious application of features 
and protocols of the International Standards. 


This specification refers to latest updates of Interface classes and OBIS codes available in 9th edition (2009) of 
the Blue Book of DLMS UA. This also refers to updates of procedures and services available in 7th edition 
(2009) of the DLMS UA Green Book. These revised Technical Reports of DLMS UA, considered as pre-standards 
for several parts of IEC 62056, will be adopted by IEC in due course and subsequently by BIS in adopted Indian 
Standards being published. Till such time these books, accessible by members of DLMS User Association in 


(Continued on third cover) 


IS 15959 : 2011 


Indian Standard 


DATA EXCHANGE FOR ELECTRICITY METER 
READING, TARIFF AND LOAD CONTROL — 
COMPANION SPECIFICATION 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard is intended for use as companion to 
IS/IEC 62056 (Parts 21, 42, 46, 47, 53, 61 and 62) 
series of standards on ‘Electricity metering: Data 
exchange for meter reading, tariff and load control’ for 
proper application/implementation of the provisions 
thereof. 


1.2 These generic metering data exchange standards 
based on DLMS/COSEM open protocols and features, 
provide a coverage for structured modelling of metering 
functionalities as available at communication 
interface(s), with procedures for identification of these 
data objects by mapping into respective codes, and 
finally for direct local exchange or remote exchange 
of these data messages by transporting over various 
layers of communication channels with specified 
procedures and services, as applicable. 


1.3 This Companion Specification provides guidelines, 
specifies optional DLMS/COSEM elements and 
outlines boundary requirements for design of such 
DLMS/COSEM compliant electricity meters for 
possible applications in Indian electricity networks (see 
also Annex A). Such selections may involve: 


a) COSEM interface classes, their instances, 
attributes and methods to be supported, event 
and status tables, identified objects, DLMS 
services, communication media and protocol 
stacks. 

b) Requirements for Direct Local Data Exchange 
involving HHU (MRI) and Remote Data 
Exchange with HOST Computer. 

c) The necessary country/project specific codes, 
not documented by DLMS UA, are included 
in Annex A for specified usage of electricity 
meters. 


1.4 The following are outside the scope of this standard 
and will be decided by user/manufacturer/system 
integrator: 


a) HOST computer — Metering equipment 
connectivity; 

b) Compatible modem (Data Communication 
Equipment) and its requirements for chosen 
communication medium; and 


c) Values and distribution methods of secret 
keys. 


1.5 Metering functions are outside the scope of this 
standard and are covered by prevailing Indian Standards 
as applicable. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex H contain provisions 
which, through reference in this text, constitutes 
provisions of this standard. At the time of publication 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision and parties to agreements based on 
this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent edition of the 
standard indicated at Annex H. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given 
in IS/IEC/TR 62051-1 and the following shall apply. 


3.1 Network — A data communications system that 
allows a number of devices to communicate with each 
other. It indicates interconnection of these devices in a 
way concordant with the communications profile 
selected. It does not necessarily mean a diverse or wide- 
ranging set of connections, nor any routing capability 
(see also 13.23 of IEC 62051). 


3.2 Architecture — Overall requirement and 
application of the communication network, indicating 
structure and hierarchy (see also 4.3 of IEC 62051). 


3.3 Object — A collection of characteristic attributes 
and specified methods (see also DLMS UA, Blue Book). 


3.4 Object Modelling — A technology independent 
model of a meter can be represented by a list of objects 
as seen through an interface and provides controlled 
access to their attributes and methods. The data objects 
related to metering functionalities and parameters can 
be mapped into identifier codes forming a message for 
transportation according to an open protocol (see also 
DLMS UA, Blue Book). 


3.5 Access Point — A physical interface point used to 
transfer data from/to the meter network. It may be a 
gateway from a LAN to a higher order network or an 
interface to temporary reading equipment such as a HHU 
(MRI), a portable PC, etc (see also 4.2 of IEC 62051). 


IS 15959 : 2011 


3.6 Held Unit (HHU) — A portable device for reading 
and programming equipment or meters at the access 
point (see also 4.19 of IEC 62051 and Annex J). 


3.7 Meter Reading Instrument — These are 
synonymous with HHU (see also G-1.7 and G-1.8 of 
IS 14697). 


3.8 Configuration — Setting of measurement and 
communication parameters to operate the meter 
correctly (see also 4.7 of IEC 62051). 


3.9 Protocol — The rules for communications system 
operation that must be followed if communication is to 
be effected (for example for meter reading and 
programming) ( see also 13.72 of IEC 62051). 


3.10 Open Protocol — The rules for communications 
system operation suitable for meter reading and limited 
programming of meters and data collection equipment 
of different types and from different manufacturers 
through open standardized documents, for example 
DLMS/COSEM (see also 3.1.65 of IS/TEC 62051-1). 


3.11 Interface — A point or means of interaction 
between two systems (for example between a meter 
and a data collection equipment) (see also 13.50 of 
IEC 62051). 


3.12 Parameter — A single identifiable metering or 
other quantity which may be read or altered within 
meter readings, tariffication, or control and may have 
multiple aspects such as its value, scaling, timestamp, 
etc. 


3.13 Parameterization — Setting of those parameters 
that define the configuration of the metering device, 
which implies writing values of COSEM object 
attributes. The parameterization tool can be seen as a 
special client. 


3.14 Data Concentrator — A device used to hold the 
data from a number of meters, in a way that identifies 
the data from each meter, and allows it to be accessed 
in real time by a higher-level data collector. Typically 
a concentrator is accessed in a manner similar to the 
meters, but supports faster or cheaper communication, 
and has greater storage capacity than available with 
the meters themselves (An example of use is to 
concentrate data from a number of electrical distribution 
substations). 


3.15 HOST Computer — A computer system to which 
data collected by HHUs is returned for processing, and/ 
or which can collect data remotely from a meter or data 
concentrator. 


3.16 Data Encryption — The changing of the form of 
a data stream in such a way that only the intended 
recipient can read or alter the information and 


nauthorized messages may be detected. It ensures data 
security (see also 13.29 of IEC 62051). 


3.17 Key — Transforms a particular message using an 
algorithm to make it unreadable to anyone except the 
recipient, to preserve integrity, authenticity and 
confidentiality of the message or vice versa, through a 
standardized procedure (see also DLMS UA, Green 
Book). 


3.18 Confidentiality — Preserving authorized 
restrictions on information access and disclosure, 
including means for protecting personal privacy and 
proprietary information. A loss of confidentiality is the 
unauthorized disclosure of information (see also NIST 
FIPS PUB 199 : 2004). 


3.19 Integrity — Guarding against improper 
information modification or destruction, and includes 
ensuring information non-repudiation and authenticity. 
A loss of integrity is the unauthorized modification or 
destruction of information (see also NIST FIPS PUB 
199 : 2004). 


3.20 Open Systems Interconnections (OSI) — A 
framework for communication processes in which the 
process is divided into seven functional layers, arranged 
one above the other with each having a separate 
responsibility. Each layer communicates with the layer 
immediately above and below it (see also 12.1 and 12.4 
of IEC 62051). 


3.21 Collapsed Architecture — A subset of the OSI 
reference model which consists of only three layers: 
Physical layer, Data link layer and Application layer. 


3.22 Layer — One of seven functional entities within 
the OSI model (normal and collapsed architecture) as 
given in Table 1 (see also 12.2 of IEC 62051). 


Table 1 OSI Model — Functional Layers 


SI No. Layer Normal Collapsed 
ad) (2) (3) (4) 
i) 7 Application Application 
ii) 6 Presentation — 
ili) 5 Session — 
iv) 4 Transport — 
v) 3 Network — 
vi) 2 Data link Data link 
vii) 1 Physical Physical 


3.22.1 Physical Layer (OSI Layer 1) — That layer of 
the OSI reference model which provides bit 
transmission between one node and the next, physical 
interfacing with media, data signal encoding and defines 
electrical parameters, connector size, shape and 
pinouts. 


3.22.2 Data Link Layer (OSI Layer 2) — That layer of 
the OSI reference model which performs and controls 
specified transmission service functions by means of a 
link protocol. 


3.22.3 Network Layer (OSI Layer 3) — That layer of 
the OSI reference model which establishes the source 
to destination path across the network, switches, routes 
and controls congestion of information packets. 


3.22.4 Transport Layer (OSI Layer 4) — That layer of 
the OSI reference model which provides reliable 
transmission of layer 7 messages end-to-end across the 
communication network. 


3.22.5 Session Layer (OSI Layer 5) — That layer of 
the OSI reference model which establishes and 
terminates end-to-end sessions, provides process 
synchronization, and determines if half-duplex or full- 
duplex is to be used. 


3.22.6 Presentation Layer (OSI Layer 6) — That layer 
of the OSI reference model which establishes the syntax 
(form) in which data is exchanged. 


3.22.7 Application Layer (OSI Layer 7) — That layer 
of the OSI reference model which provides end-user 
services such as file transfers, electronic messages and 
remote data base access. 


3.23 Conformance Testing — Planned and regulated 
process of evaluation of a type of metering equipment 
in order to gain confidence about implementation of 


1-1 HDLC PORT. 


Meter 
Category 
A/B/C 


(Server) 1-1 HDLC PORT. 


P2 1-1. HDLC PORT. 


Data communication equipment 


PSTN Modem, GSM/GPRS Modem 


Hand held unit 
Data concentrator 


IS 15959 : 2011 


declared features of this standard and generic standards 
IEC 62056 in that particular type, by a laboratory 
authorized for the purpose (see also DLMS UA, Yellow 
Book and Annex K ). 


4 ARCHITECTURE 


4.1 The typical connectivity scheme between a meter 
(server) and the client, considered for this standard, is 
shown in Fig. 1. 


4.2 Physical Requirements 


The meter (server) shall support a minimum of two ports 
for data communication, as given below: 


a) P1 — An Electrical port compatible with 
RS 232 or RS 485 specifications. This shall 
be used for remote access from the HOST 
(Client) or DC (Client). 

b) P2—Anoptical port complying with hardware 
specifications detailed in IS/IEC-62056-21. 
This shall be used for local access from a HHU 
(MRI. 

c) The P1 and P2 both shall support the 3-layer 
Connection Oriented COSEM/HDLC profile, 
with a minimum and default baud rate of 9600. 


d) Both Pl and P2 shall support 4 byte and one 
byte addressing both. HHU can read from 
either port. 


The optical port is not required to support any mode of 


Link to base 
computer 
system 


RS 232/RS 485 Port — For remote access 


Optical port — For local access 


Fic. | MESSAGE FLow CONNECTIVITY SCHEME BETWEEN METER/SERVER AND CLIENT 


IS 15959 : 2011 


ISAEC-62056-21, that is, mode of usage shall be direct 
HDLC (see also Fig. 1). 


4.3 Requirements for Simultaneous Operation 


The meter (server) is not required to allow more than 
one association to be open at any one time. Optical 
port shall have priority when both ports are accessed 
simultaneously. This means that if the electrical port is 
connected and being accessed for data, any attempt to 
connect on optical port shall cause the connection on 
electrical port to be interrupted and the optical 
connection processed after sending ‘DM’ 
(Disconnected Mode) message to HOST. Any further 
attempts to communicate on electrical port while the 
optical port is being used shall be returned with a ‘DM?’ 
code. This is an indication to the HOST that the meter 
is temporarily busy. 


5 LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF METERS 


The meter represents one physical device as mentioned 
in 4.5 of IS/TEC 62056-62. 


The physical device (meter) hosts one logical device 
as mentioned in 4.5 of IS/IEC 62056-62, which is the 
management logical device. This has SAP (Service 
Access Point) address 1, as mandated in IS/IEC 62056- 
53. The physical device address (lower HDLC address) 
shall also be set to a default value of ‘256’ on supply 
and the actual communication address shall be 
programmed on installation. 


The meter shall support the Logical Name (LN) 
referencing mechanism as defined in Annex C.1 of 
IS/IEC 62056-62. Short name referencing as defined in 
Annex C.2 of IS/IEC 62056-62 is not required to be 
supported. 


The meter shall support three associations in the 
management logical device 


a) Public client association (PC); 
b) Meter reader association (MR); and 
c) Utility settings association (US). 


5.1 Mandatory Objects 


The following objects as given in Table 2 are mandated 
by IS/IEC 62056-62. 


5.2 Association Properties 


5.2.1 The PC association shall contain the following in 
addition to mandatory objects: 


a) Meter’s real-time clock; and 
b) Meter serial number. 


5.2.2 The MR association shall contain the following 
in addition to mandatory objects: 


a) Profile objects allowing bulk collection of data 
defined by the parameter lists in Annex C, D, 
E, F and G; and 

b) Simple objects allowing ad-hoc access to 
items in the instantaneous parameters list. Ad- 
hoc access to the profile objects shall also be 
possible. 


5.2.3 The US association shall contain in addition to 
mandatory objects: 


a) All the objects accessible via the MR 
association; and 

b) Simple and compound objects allowing 
tariffication and configuration of the meter 
(see also 9). 


5.2.4 The object list of each association is detailed in 
Annex C, D, E, F and G. Mandatory objects do not 
necessarily appear in these tables. Access rights for each 
data item are also shown in Annex C, D, E, F and G. 
The association properties, object list, and access rights 


Table 2 Mandatory Objects 
(Clause 5.1) 


SI No. Object OBIS Code Interface Class Requirements 

d) (2) (3) (4) (5) 

i) Logical device name 0.0.42.0.0.255 IC = 1 (Data) Value data type will be octet-string with maximum 
length 16. 

ii) Current association 0.0.40.0.0.255 IC = 15 (Association LN) This object will refer to the currently connected 
association object. The meter shall have three 
association objects, of which the currently 
connected one shall be accessible via the OBIS 
0.0.40.0.0.255 

NOTES 


1 The logical device name shall have a maximum length of 16 characters, and shall have as its first three characters the manufacturer’s 


3-letter code as specified in 4.6.2 of IS/IEC-62056-62. 


2 The three letters manufacturer ID's are administered by the FLAG Association, in co-operation with the DLMS UA. 


are identical on ports Pl and P2. 


5.2.5 The required associations shall have the properties 
as given in Table 3. 


5.3 Descriptive Notes for Logical Structuring 
5.3.1 Associations 


Each logical device can organize the data objects into 
different associations, each having different access 
rights to the list of objects. Each association defines 
the SAP address pair of the client and server logical 
device addresses that participate in the data transaction. 


5.3.2 Objects 


All meter data is represented by COSEM interface 
objects. COSEM interface objects are instances of the 
COSEM interface classes. 


5.3.3 Attributes and Methods 


The actual placeholders of the different data elements 
of the meter are the attributes of the objects, whereas 
the methods exposed by the objects allow manipulating 
the attributes in defined manners. 


5.4 Referencing Methods 


5.4.1 DLMS/COSEM provides two referencing 
methods to access the meter data, Logical name 
referencing and Short name referencing. Under LN 
referencing, data is accessed by specifying the Logical 
name (OBIS code) of the object, the Class ID and the 
attribute (or method) index. Under SN referencing each 
attribute and method of each object has its own 
individual address. 


5.4.2 Access rights are specified for each attribute and 
each method of every data object in the meter. Attributes 
may have the following access rights: 


a) No access; 

b) Read access; 

c) Write access; and 
d) Read-write access. 


IS 15959 : 2011 


5.4.3 Methods may have the following access rights: 


a) No access; and 
b) Execute access. 


5.4.4 Access rights are specific to each association. 
Different associations may have different object lists, 
or award different access rights to the same set of data 
objects. Thus the grouping of data into associations 
gives different views of the same real data. 


6 USAGE OF DLMS/COSEM PROVISIONS 


6.1 Usage of Interface Classes 


6.1.1 This standard defines the set of interface classes 
to be used for various types of data. The interface class 
for the identified parameters is specified in Annex C to 
Annex G. 


6.1.2 Either requiring support or offering support for a 
class shall not imply support for all its attributes. 
Required attributes are listed under respective Annex 
as notes. Not supporting an attribute can be 
implemented as given below: 


a) Attribute does not appear in the object list; 
and 


b) Attribute appears in the object list but with 
no access rights. 


6.1.3 Attribute O referencing (indicating access to all 
attributes in one request, as specified by Bit 10 of the 
conformance block) is not required to be supported in 
any case. 


6.1.4 References to classes may be made in the form 
of capture-IDs or register-table entries even if the 
corresponding classes are not supported for direct data 
access. 


6.1.5 References to OBIS codes may be made in the form 
of capture-IDs, masks, or scripts even if the corresponding 
objects are not individually accessible. In this case those 
items will not appear in the Association object. 


Table 3 Association Properties 
(Clause 5.2.5) 


SI No. Feature Public Client Meter Reader Utility Settings 
ad) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) SAP address pair in format (client, server) (16,1) (32,1) (48,1) 
il) Application context — Basic security LN without ciphering LN without ciphering LN without ciphering 
iii) Application context — Advanced security Not applicable LN-Ciphered LN-Ciphered 
iv) Sign on authentication mechanism (see also 7.3.7.2 Lowest Level Low Level (LLS) High Level (HLS) 
of IS/IEC-62056-53) 
v) Services required in conformance block Get, Get 
with block transfer Get, Get with block transfer, 
Selective access Get, Set, Action, Get and set with 
block transfer, Selective access 
vi) OBIS codes 0.0.40.0.1.255 0.0.40.0.2.255 0.0.40.0.3.255 


IS 15959 : 2011 


6.2 Requirements for Interoperability 


6.2.1 A client device supporting the parameters, 
functions, and classes of the minimum specification, 
along with suitable configuration of system-dependent 
features (such as physical addresses, timeout thresholds, 
and secret keys), shall be able to retrieve all of the 
specified data items and perform any of the specified 
updates without particular knowledge about the server. 


6.2.2 Given the knowledge that a certain client or a 
certain server implements particular additional features 
defined as in this standard, a server can be built to return 
data and receive updates from that client, or a client 
can be built to retrieve data and perform updates upon 
that server, respectively, without further special 
knowledge other than system-dependent features. 


6.2.3 Interpretation of the data shall be possible by any 
user with adequate knowledge of electricity metering 
provided that a complete set of data has been retrieved. 


6.3 Country-Specific OBIS Codes 


Within this Companion Specification, country-specific 
variations or additions to quantities such as energy types 
are managed by the allocation of new codes in the full 
OBIS format. The country-specific OBIS codes 
introduced in this document are in the format — 
a.b.94.91.e.f, along with interface class and attributes, 
where C = 94 indicates a country-specific code and 
D = 91 is allocated for India. 


7 ASSOCIATION AND DATA SECURITY 


As per the provisions of the DLMS/COSEM protocol, 
data access control mechanism and encryption/ 
authentication mechanism shall be supported. Access 


control mechanisms shall be used in the association 
establishment phase and encryption/authentication 
mechanism shall be used in the data communication 
phase. 


7.1 Security Profiles 
Two security schemes are defined in this standard. 
7.1.1 Basic Security 


The basic security profile does not provide for 
encryption or authentication during data 
communication stage. The only security provided for 
is the sign-on authentication security provided by low 
level and high level security as applicable for the 
respective associations. 


7.1.2 Advanced Security 


Encryption, authentication, or both can be performed 
by the application programme and transferred using 
ciphered PDUs. All systems must implement basic 
security. Implementation of advanced security is 
discretionary. When implemented it shall be as provided 
in NIST SP 800-38-D. 


7.2 Security Setup (Class id: 64, Version: 0) 


The following interface class is defined in addition to 
those published in the National/International Standard 
(see also IS/IEC 62056-62). 


Instances of this IC contain the necessary information 
on the security policy applicable and the security suite 
in use within a particular AA, between two systems 
identified by their client system title and server system 
title respectively. They also contain methods to increase 
the level of security and to transfer the global keys as 
given in Table 4. 


Table 4 Security Setup 
Sl Security Setup 0....n Class_id = 64, Version = 0 
No. Data Type 
Min Max Def. Short Name 
a) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 
i) Attributes: 
a) logical_ name (static) octet-string — — — K 
b) security-policy (static) enum — — — x + 0x08 
c) security-suite (static) enum — — — x + 0x10 
d) client-system-title (dynamic) octet-string — — — x + 0x18 
e) server-system-title (static) octet-string — — — x + 0x20 
ii) Specific methods: m/o 
a) security_activate o x + 0x28 
b) global_key_transfer o x + 0x30 
NOTE — Use of this interface class is only required for Advanced Security profile implementations. Implementations of Basic 


Security profiles shall not contain this Class. 


7.3 Security Setup Objects 


7.3.1 The following object identifiers as given in Table 5 
are defined in addition to those given in 
IS/IEC 62056-62. 


Table 5 Object for Security Setup 


Security Setup IC OBIS Code 
Objects ——— ——, 
A B C D EF 
(1) (2) (3) 4 6) © @ (8) 


Security setup 64 — Security setup O b 43 0 e 255 


7.3.2 Instances of the IC Security setup are used to set 
up the message security features. For each Association 
object, there is one Security setup object managing 
security within that AA. Value group E numbers the 
instances. This specification defines 2 values for E 
corresponding to the 2 associations as given in Table 6. 


Table 6 Security Setup Object OBIS Code for 
Association Levels 
(Clauses 7.3.2 and 7.4.1) 


SI Security Setup Object 
No. OBIS Code 
ad) (2) (3) 


i)  0b43.01.255 
ii) 0.b.43.0.2.255 


Association Description 


Meter Reader Association 
Utility Settings Association 
NOTE — These instances of the Security Setup interface 
Class are only required for Advanced Security profile 


implementations. Implementations of Basic Security profile 
shall not contain these instances. 


7.4 LN Association Interface Class 


7.4.1 This standard utilizes version 1 of the Association 


IS 15959 : 2011 


LN Interface Class (IC = 15). The version 1 of IC = 15 
adds an extra attribute ‘security_ setup_reference’ 
(attribute 9) which will be used to contain the reference 
to an instance of a Security Setup class, namely one of 
the two instances defined in Table 6. 


7.4.2 The implementation of version 1 of Association 
LN Interface class is not required for Basic Security 
profile. 


7.4.3 The following Interface Class definition is defined 
in Table 7 in addition to those published in 
IS/IEC 62056-62. 


7.4.4 COSEM logical devices able to establish AAs 
within a COSEM context using LN referencing model 
the AAs through instances of the “Association LN’ IC. 
A COSEM logical device has one instance of this IC 
for each AA the device is able to support. 


7.5 Descriptive Notes for Data Security 
7.5.1 Access Control for Association 


The DLMS/COSEM standard provides three different 
sign-on authentication mechanisms for each 
association’s access to meter data applied at the time 
of performing COSEM OPEN operation. 


7.5.1.1 Lowest level security 


Open access without any authentication at sign-on. This 
shall be used by the public client. 


7.5.1.2 Low level security (LLS) 


Password based sign-on where the client authenticates 
itself to the meter using a password. The Utility Settings 
association shall provide access to write the password 
for all associations that utilize this authentication 
scheme (Currently only the Meter Reader association 
object). This is accomplished by providing write access 


Table 7 LN Association Interface Class 


(Clause 7.4.3) 
SI Association LN 0 MaxNbofAss. Class_id = 15, Version = 1 
No. Data Type F 
Min Max Def. Short Name 
0) (2) (4) (5) (6) (7) 
i) Attributes: 

a) logical_name (static) octet-string — — — x 

b) object_list (static) object_list_type — — — x + 0x08 
c) associated_partners_id associated_partners_type — — — x + 0x10 
d) application_context_name application-context-name — — — x + 0x18 
e) xDLMS_context_info xDLMS_context_type — — — x + 0x20 
f) authentication_mechanism_name mechanism-name — — — x + 0x28 
g) LLS_secret octet-string — — — x + 0x30 
h) association_status enum — — — x + 0x38 
j) security_setup_reference (static) octet-string — — — x + 0x40 

ii) Specific Methods: m/o 

a) reply_to_HLS_authentication (data) o x + 0x60 
b) change_HLS_secret(data) o x + 0x68 
c) add_object(data) o x + 0x70 
d) remove_object(data) o x + 0x78 


IS 15959 : 2011 


to the ‘LLS_secret’ attribute (attribute number 7) of 
the Meter Reader association LN object. This write 
access is provided only through the Utility Settings 
association. 


The MR association object has an OBIS code 
0.0.40.0.2.255. The LLS_secret of this object shall be 
changed only through US association. 


7.5.1.3 High level security (HLS) 


HLS mechanism defines a 4-pass sign-on scheme where 
the client and server exchange challenges (a random 
number or code) and then reply to the challenges with 
a processed response. The processing performed on the 
challenges is an encryption using a secret ‘key’. The 
Utility Settings association shall provide write access 
to the ‘secret’ attribute of the Utility Settings 
association. The US association object has an OBIS 
code 0.0.40.0.3.255. The HLS secret of this object can 
be changed using method 2 of this object. The 
encryption mechanism used for processing the 
challenges shall be AES-128 algorithm as provided in 
NIST FIPS PUB 197 : 2001. 


7.5.2 Encryption for Data Communication 


The confidentiality of data communicated between the 
meter and the client is handled by the encryption 
mechanism chosen in the application context. 
Associations utilizing the ‘Logical name with ciphering’ 
application context provide encryption/decryption 
services for data messages. Ciphering may be: 


a) Authentication, providing message integrity; 
b) Encryption, providing confidentiality; and 
c) both. 


8 EVENT HANDLING 


This clause adds the definitions for the event code 
object and event log object. 


8.1 Event Code 


8.1.1 An event code object is used to hold the identifier 
corresponding to most recent event. Data, register or 
extended register classes can be used to model this object. 
DLMS allows defining country specific reference table 
that lists all possible events with corresponding 
identifiers (see Annex G). For the purposes of this 
specification the Interface Class used for this object is 
restricted to IC = | (Data) as given in Table 8. The value 
attribute of the object will have a DLMS data type ‘long 
unsigned’ (16 bit integer) which will contain the event 
identifier for the last recorded event (identifier taken from 
the reference tables (see Annex G). 


8.1.2 Value group E allows to classify events into 
different categories as needed. Currently DLMS allows 


10 values (0...9) for value group E, enabling user to 
define up to 10 event categories. 


Table 8 Event Code 
(Clause 8.1.1) 


Event IC OBIS Code 
Code ee 
A B C D E F 
a) (2) 3) © 6 © 0 (8) 
Event code 1—Data 0 b 96 11 e 255 


8.1.3 This standard defines 7 categories for 
classification of events and correspondingly 7 event 
code objects as given in Table 9. 


Table 9 Event Code OBIS Codes 


Sl Event Code Object 
No. OBIS Code 
d) (2) (3) 


i) 0.b.96.11.0.255 

ii) 0.b.96.11.1.255 
iii) 0.b.96.11.2.255 
iv 0.b.96.11.3.255 

VW. 0.b.96.11.4.255 
vi) 0.b.96.11.5.255 
vii) 0.b.96.11.6.255 


Event Category Description 


Voltage related events 

Current related events 

Power failure related events 
Transaction related events 

Other events 

Non-rollover events 

Control events for connect/ 
disconnect 


NOTES 


1 The 7th Event code object is required only where remote 
load control by means of connect/disconnect are specified by 
agreement between the utility and the manufacturer. 


2 Reference to Annex G and the relevant tables may be made 
for the valid Event Identifier values defined for the above 7 
categories by this standard. 


8.2 Event Log 


8.2.1 An event log is a profile generic object provided 
to store historical values of the event code object for a 
given category of event as given in Table 10. The capture 
object includes object attribute definitions of associated 
data. Associated data includes event code and other 
relevant information such as timestamp, instantaneous 
electricity related information (such as current/voltage/ 
energy register, contents etc at the time of the event). 


8.2.2 For the purpose of this standard, the capture 


objects will include the entries specified in Annex G. 


Table 10 Event Log Profile 
(Clause 8.2.1) 


Event IC OBIS Code 

Log — ov. 
A B C D E F 

a) 2) 8 4 6) © (0) (8) 


Event log 7 — Profile Generic 0 b 99 98 e 255 


8.2.3 Value of group E allows to classify event logs into 
different categories as needed. Currently DLMS allows 
10 values (0...9) for value of group E allowing to define 
up to 10 event log categories as given in Table 11. 


8.2.4 This standard defines 7 categories for 
classification of event log objects with a one-to-one 
correspondence with the 7 event code categories 
defined in 8.1. 


8.2.5 Event Log Storage Recommendations 


This standard recommends a total storage of 200 events 
in the event logs. The division of the specified storage 
space across the 7 compartments specified above shall 
be by the agreement between the utility and the 
manufacturer. 


The event code and event log parameters are accessible 
through the MR and US associations with read-only 
access (see Annex J). 


Table 11 Event Log OBIS Codes 
(Clause 8.2.3) 


Sl Event Log Object 
No. OBIS Code 
d) (2) (3) 


i) 0.b.99.98.0.255 
ii) 0.b.99.98.1.255 
iii) 0.b.99.98.2.255 
iv) 0.b.99.98.3.255 
v) 0.b.99.98.4.255 
vi) 0.b.99.98.5.255 
vii) 0.b.99.98.6.255 


Event Category Description 


Voltage related events 

Current related events 

Power failure related events 
Transaction related events 

Other events 

Non-rollover events 

Control events for connect/ 
disconnect 


NOTE — The 7th Event log category is reguired only where 
remote load control by means of connect/disconnect are 
specified by agreement between the utility and the manufacturer. 


9 TOU METERING 


9.1 DLMS/COSEM provide a number of interface 
classes to deal with TOU metering. These include 
activity calendars (objects that specify the time- 
switches for tariffs based on a season/week/day profile 
tree) and schedules (a simple tabular listing of time- 
switch scripts associated with a date-time). 


9.2 These objects associate a script (stored in a script 
table object, IC = 9) with each time-switch. The script 
usually defines the list of registers that get enabled for 
that time-switch using a register activation object (IC 
= 6) that stores masks of registers that can be selectively 
enabled/disabled. 


9.3 For the purpose of this standard, the activity 
calendar (IC = 20) shall be used as given in Table 12. 


9.4 An instance of a script table class, the tariffication 
script table object will be used to store the scripts related 


IS 15959 : 2011 
to each time-switch in the schedule as given in Table 13. 


Table 12 Activity Calendar OBIS Code 


(Clause 9.3) 
Activity IC OBIS Code 
Calendar ——————. 
A B C D E F 
a) (2) 3) 4 6) © (7) (8) 
Activity Oo 20 — Activity O b 13 0 0 255 


Calendar Calendar 


Table 13 Tariff Script Table OBIS Code 
(Clause 9.4) 


Script Table IC OBIS Code 
———— ————ı 
A B C D E F 


NM) 6) © M (8) 
10 0 100 255 


d) (2) 
9 — Script Table 0 b 


Tariffication 
Script Table 


9.5 This standard utilizes a simple mechanism for 
associating TOU/TOD scripts with tariffs, as described 
below. Use of the Register Activation object is not 
required. 


9.6 Under this mechanism, script identifiers in the 
tariffication script table are inherently associated with 
tariffs, as defined below. 


9.7 Script identifiers from 1 to 16 are associated with 
the Activation of Tariff Rate Registers 1 to 16. 
Implementations that do not require 16 different tariff 
rates shall use identifiers from 1 to the required number. 
For example if 8 tariffs are defined, script identifiers 1 
to 8 shall be used, where scripts 9 to 16 are reserved 
for future use. Scripts identifiers 17 to 32 are associated 
with Maximum Demand tariffs 1 to 16. 
Implementations that do not require 16 different tariff 
rates shall use identifiers from 1 to the required number. 


9.8 The activity calendar shall be used to associate 
activation times to different Tariff rates simply by using 
the appropriate script identifiers. All scripts shall point 
to a dummy OBIS code and attribute index which has 
no associated meaning. 


9.9 To ensure coordination of the updates to various 
attributes, activity calendar shall be updated by writing 
to the passive-calendar attributes. The end of the update 
process is indicated by update of the activation date 
attribute with an appropriate value, causing all changes 
to become effective simultaneously. 


9.10 Use of the special days table is not considered 
presently in this standard. 


10 BILLING PERIODS 


10.1 Billing period resets are driven by an instance of 


IS 15959 : 2011 


the single action schedule class in conjunction with a 
script table. The data of the billing period is stored ina 
profile generic object as given in Table 14. Each entry 
in the profile buffer captures the billing period values 
for a specific billing period. 


Table 14 Billing Period OBIS Code 


Profile IC OBIS Code 
Generic 
A B C D E F 
a) (2) 3) (4 6) © D (8) 
Data of 7 — Profile Generic 1 b 98 1 0 255 
Billing 
Period 
Profile 


10.2 This standard specifies the single action schedule 
object to drive the end of billing period resets as given 
in Table 15. The object will contain the time-date entries 
at which billing period resets are scheduled. 


Table 15 Single Action Schedule OBIS Code 


Single IC OBIS Code 
Action AL 
Schedule 
A B C D E F 
(1) (2) 3) 4 6 © @ (8) 
MDI Reset/ 22 — Single Action 0 b 15 0 0 255 
End of Schedule 
Billing 
Period 


10.3 Each time-date entry in the execution time array 
will be associated with a link to a single script in the 
MDI reset/end of billing period script table. The script 
table object as given in Table 16 will be programmed 
with scripts to handle the billing period resets. 


Table 16 Billing Script Table OBIS Code 


Script Table IC OBIS Code 
A B C D E F 
d) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (0) (8) 
MDI Reset/End 9 — Script Table O b 10 O 1 255 
of Billing 
Period Script 
Table 


10.4 The script table will contain a single script that 
specifies the capture method invocation for the 
corresponding data of billing period profile 
(1.0.98.1.0.255). Therefore a single action schedule 
entry will trigger a call to the script table to execute the 
capture method at a specific time (namely the end of 
the billing period) which will cause a billing period 
entry to be made in the profile for the current period 
and trigger the start of a new billing period. Other 


10 


actions internal to the meter may also be triggered by 
the end of each billing period, but are not required to 
be expressed as scripts here. 


11 HISTORIC DATA 


11.1 Historic data can be accessed by two mechanisms 
in DLMS-COSEM. One mechanism provides access to 
past values of specific quantities by using a VZ (billing 
period number) related value for F in the OBIS code of 
the original quantity. The other mechanism is profile 
generic objects, where individual billing data set is one 
entry. Profile generic object method is supported in this 
specification for accessing historical data. 


11.2 Billing Period Counter 


11.2.1 The meter will contain an instance of a billing 
period counter object as given in Table 17. 


Table 17 Billing Period Counter OBIS Code 


Billing IC OBIS Code 
Period $<“. @@ a 
Counter 
A B C D E F 
a) (2) 3) 4 6) (6) @ (8) 
Billing 1 — Data 0 b 0 1 0 255 
Period 
Counter 


11.2.2 The value attribute of the object will have a 
DLMS data type unsigned 32 bit and cumulative value 
since installation The meter will contain an instance of 
a Data object that provides the number of available 
billing periods in the meter as given in Table 18. 


Table 18 Available Billing Periods OBIS Code 


Number of IC OBIS Code 
Billing Periods 
A B C D E F 
a) (2) 3) (4) 6) © (7) (8) 
Available Billing 1 — Data O b O 1 1 255 
Period 


11.2.3 The above can be read by the client to identify 
how many previous billing period’s data is available in 
the meter. The value attribute of the above object will 
have a DLMS data type unsigned (8-bit character). 


11.3 Profiles 


11.3.1 Historic data like load profiles etc are supported 
in IEC 62056 by the Profile Generic Interface Class 
(IC = 7). This object supports capture of other meter 
object attributes at specific intervals or on demand. The 
captured data is stored in the buffer attribute 
(Attribute 2) of the Profile generic class. This class also 
supports selective access to filter the buffer data in 


response to GET requests. There are two mechanisms 
for selective access viz. selective access by entry and 
selective access by range. 


11.3.2 This standard requires that the selective access 
by range shall be supported for block load profile and 
daily load profile. This standard requires support for 
selective access by entry for billing data profile and 
event log profiles. 


11.3.3 In case of selective access by range, this standard 
imposes that the restricting object is to be an instance 
of the clock interface class (IC = 8) and the date-time 
attribute of the object is captured in the buffer. 


11.3.4 Selective access by entry and range supports 
filtering the profile buffer by rows as well as by 
columns. However this standard doesn’t require support 
for filtering by columns ( see also Annex L). 


11.3.5 Any configuration change in profile capture object 
will be treated as given in 5.6 of IS/IEC 62056-62. 


12 COMMUNICATION PROFILES 


IEC 62056 adopts the collapsed architecture subset of 
the open systems interconnect reference model. 
Figure 2 illustrates the system used. This standard 
requires that the three-layer serial Connection- 
Orientated (CO) profile shall at least be supported. 


The 3-layer serial CO profile consists of COSEM, 
logical link control (LLC), and high-level distribution 
line control (HDLC) on a serial physical channel. This 
profile may be extended by using modems to handle 
different carriers such as PSTN, GSM, or GPRS, 
Radio, Zigbee, etc, by tunneling HDLC frames over 
these media. 


The addition of dial-up modem connections as 


11 


IS 15959 : 2011 


described in IS/IEC 62056-42 is required only where 
modem is fitted internal to the meter. 


13 COMMUNICATION SETUP OBJECTS 


This stantard requires the communication setup objects 
as given in Table 19 to be supported in the meter 
implementation. This document also recommends that 
a specific baud rate may be fixed between the utility 
and the manufacturer for each project. The suggested 
default baud rate is given in 4.2. 


Table 19 Communication Setup Object 


Communication IC OBIS Code 
Setup and HAN 
Related Objects 
for Serial 
Communication 
A B C DE F 
(1) (2) 3) 4 6) © 7 (8) 
IEC HDLC Setup 23 —IECHDLC 0 b 22 0 0 255 
Setup 


14 CONNECT/DISCONNECT CONTROL 


In implementations that reguire remote Connect/ 
Disconnect control, effected by operation of an output 
pulse from the meter, this specification reguires support 
for the disconnect control object as given in Table 20. 


Table 20 Disconnect Control Object 


Disconnector IC OBIS Code 
A B C D E F 
a) (2) (3) (4) 6) © @ (8) 
Disconnect 70 — Disconnect 0 b 96 3 10 255 
Control Control 


IS 15959 : 2011 


3-layer 
CO HDLC 


Fic. 2 COMMUNICATION PROFILE OPTIONS 


IS 15959 : 2011 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 1.3) 


INTRODUCTION TO METERING PARAMETERS WITH DATA IDENTIFIERS 


A-1 Three categories of electricity meters have been 
selected for compiling comprehensive lists of metering 
parameters with their data identifiers as required for data 
networks in India for COSEM procedures and services. 
The relevant reference documents are listed in Annex H. 


A-1.1 Category A Meter 


This meter is identified for use at sub-station feeders 
and Distribution Transformer Centers. The parameters 
listed for this category is for “Energy Accounting and 
Audit’ purposes (see also Annex C). 


A-1.2 Category B Meter 


parameters listed for this category is for consumers who 
draw energy from the grid. For consumers who also 
supply energy to grid, the category B Meter is 
recommended (see also Annex E). 


A-2 The meters complying with this standard shall be 
considered as servers in a data network. The data 
collecting devices at the head end or HHU shall function 
as client and seek required services from these servers. 
Table 21 lists the server categories with metering 
nomenclatures and annex references. 


Table 21 Categories of Meters 


: E Se SI S Metering N lature/P Ref t 
This meter is identified for use at meter banks and No. ane GM e ee ee bni 
network boundaries. The parameters listed for this (1) (2) (3) (4) 
category is for import/export of energy. This meter 15 i) A Energy . acon ant “andil Br G 
also suitable for availability based tariff (ABT) regime metering 
(see also Annex D). ii) B Boundary/Bank/Ring/ABT metering B,D, F, G 

ili) C HV (VT/CT) and LV (CT) consumer B, E, F, G 
A-1.3 Category C Meter metering 
NOTE — The Annex B to Annex G are in continuation to this 
This meter is identified for use at HV (PT and CT Annex. 
operated) and LV (CT operated) consumers. The 
ANNEX B 
( Table 21) 


INTRODUCTION TO STANDARDIZED METER PARAMETERS LIST 


B-1 CLASSIFICATION OF PARAMETERS 


The metering parameters have been identified and 
classified as follows: 


a) Instantaneous parameters; 
b) Block profile/load survey parameters; 
c) Daily profile parameters; 
d) Parameters for accounting/billing; 
e) General purpose quantities; 

1) Name plate details; 

2) Programmable parameters; and 
f) Event conditions. 


The measurement and computation of each of these 
parameters and events shall be based on standard 
methods or based on utilities prudent practices or as 
directed by respective regulatory commission. 


13 


For each of the identified parameter, the OBIS code, 
interface class and the attributes are given in the various 
tables in Annexures. The OBIS codes listed are 
applicable for LN referencing and is mandatory to 
adhere to by the servers and clients. 


B-2 INSTANTANEOUS PARAMETERS 


The instantaneous parameters shall be continuously 
updated by the meter hardware/software as per internal 
sampling and computation time. The energy values in 
the table shall be cumulative readings from the date of 
manufacturing or installation of meter as the case may 
be. These shall be continuously updated and last 
updated value shall be available for downloading as 
and when required. Each of the parameters shall be 
readable at any instant by the HOST from remote or by 
HHU at site. The snap shot of all the instantaneous 


IS 15959 : 2011 


values of all parameters shall be readable by the HOST 
computer. 


B-3 PROFILE GENERIC OR LOAD SURVEY 
PARAMETERS (CAPTURE TIME BLOCK 15 OR 
30 MIN) 


This is an array of parameters identified for capturing 
and storing at specified time intervals or capture times. 
The capture times shall be either 15 or 30 min. The 
capture times shall be programmable by the utilities. 
The tables lists the parameters whose profile (survey) 
is to be captured and stored in the meter as per set 
capture time period. The profiles shall be readable at 
any time by the HOST from remote or by HHU (MRI) 
at site for any specified range and time. 


In the case of Category B meters the capture time shall 
be of 15 min duration. 


The data stored in the array shall be the average value 
for the captured time block and stored at the end of 
that block, except for energy values. The energy entries 
are the consumption during respective capture time 
block and posted at the end of that block. The array of 
data shall be retained inside the meter memory for the 
last 22 days for a capture period of 15 min or for the 
last 45 days for a capture period of 30 min. It is assumed 
that the number of load survey parameters is 5 which 
can be selected from the respective tables by the 
utilities. The storage days can be expanded by choosing 
less number of parameters. 


The block load profiles shall not store or return values 
(typically zero values) for conditions where the meter 
is powered down for a full day, where a full day is 
defined as the 24 h period from midnight 00 h to the 
next midnight 00 h. Under such conditions the block 
load profile for the entire 24 h period shall not be stored 
nor padded with zero entries. However if the meter is 
powered up even for a small amount of time (sufficient 
for it to boot up and record the power up event) during 
the 24 h period, it shall store and return the block load 
profile for the entire 24 h duration. 


B-4 PARAMETERS 
BILLING PURPOSE 


FOR ACCOUNTING/ 


These are parameters identified for accounting/billing 
purposes. These shall be generated by the meter for each 
billing cycle and stored in the memory. The set of data 
for last 6 (six) cycles shall be stored in the memory. At 
the end of each cycle corresponding set of data shall be 
readable by the HOST from remote or by HHU at site. 


B-5 GENERAL PURPOSE QUANTITIES 


B-5.1 Name Plate Details 


These parameters are electrical and non-electrical 


14 


quantities and are static in nature, grouped as ‘Name 
Plate Details’, containing pertinent information about 
the supplied meter. The parameters identified and 
grouped as ‘Name Plate Details’ under this 
classification are applicable for all categories of meters 
(see Annex F). 


B-5.2 Programmable Parameters 


These parameters are non electrical guantities. The 
parameters identified and grouped as ‘Programmable 
Parameters’ shall be programmable by the utility 
engineers. For the purpose of setting/altering the values 
of these parameters, the security and access rights in 
line with the methodology described in protocol, shall 
be mutually agreed between utility and manufacturer. 
The parameters shall be programmable by HOST from 
remote and HHU at site. These are applicable for all 
categories of meters ( see Annex F). 


B-6 EVENT CONDITIONS 


B-6.1 Any abnormal or a tamper condition is defined 
as an event. The meters shall identify and log both 
occurrence and restoration of such events. The meters 
shall also capture some of the parameters at the instance 
of above said log. This standard has identified the 
events to be logged and the parameters to be captured 
for each of those events (see Annex G). 


B-6.2 This standard has further classified those events 
in sub groups for easy handling. The sub groups are: 


a) Voltage related events; 

b) Current related events; 

c) Power failure related events; 
d) Transactional events; 

e) Other events; 

f) Non-rollover events; and 

g) Control events. 


B-6.3 The number of events stored in each compartment 
shall be decided by agreement between the utility and 
manufacturers. However the total number of events 
shall be 200. 


B-6.4 The event conditions identified are listed in 
Table 32 to Table 38 covering all the sub groups. For 
each type of event condition the parameters to be 
captured are listed in Table 39. The required capture 
parameters for selected event condition shall be chosen 
by the utility as per its practices and directives. 


B-6.5 The types of events to be recorded may be 
selected by the utility out of the list provided in tables. 
Table 32 to Table 38 as per utility need and practice. 
The parameters for which snapshot is to be recorded at 
time of tamper/event can also be selected out of list of 


parameters provided in ‘Capture Parameters’ in 
Table 39. 


B-6.6 The servers shall be capable of providing the 
entire list of parameters listed in the respective 
Annexure. However the utility as per its practices 


IS 15959 : 2011 


and directives may choose required parameters from 
the full list. Sequence of parameters in buffer shall 
be derived from capture object. The OBIS code for 
such selected parameters however shall remain as 
assigned. 


ANNEX C 
(Clauses 6.1.1 and A-1.1; and Table 21) 


PARAMETER LIST FOR CATEGORY A METERS 


C-1 The parameters listed here are for energy 
accounting and audit purposes. These meters are 
identified for feeder metering and DTC metering where 
the power flow is unidirectional. In circumstances 
where bidirectional power flow is to be measured then 
Category B meters shall be deployed. 


C-2 The parameters identified are grouped under 
instantaneous (see Table 22) and block load profile (see 
Table 23). The tables include the name of the parameter, 
the OBIS code and interface class. 


C-3 Association access rights are as follows: 


a) Public client — Read only for clock and no 
access for other objects. 
b) 


c) 


Meter reader — Read only for all objects. 


Utility setting — Read and write for clock and 
read only for others. 


C-4 INSTANTANEOUS PARAMETERS 


Each of the parameters is a separate entity. The OBIS 
code for each parameter is identified as per DLMS/ 
COSEM protocol. 


C-4.1 Snapshot of Instantaneous Parameters 


The parameters of Table 22 shall be captured as a profile 
generic using the country specific OBIS code 
1.0.94.91.0.255; the attribute 2 of each of the capture 
objects shall be copied into the profile at the instant of 
a request from the HOST. 


C-4.2 Scaler Profile 


This profile is meant for capturing the scaler-unit of 
each of the parameter listed in Table 22. This is 
modelled as profile generic (IC = 7) and is assigned 
the country specific OBIS code 1.0.94.91.3.255. The 
capture objects for this profile shall include the scaler- 


15 


unit attributes of the Instantaneous parameters listed 
in Table 22. Instantaneous parameters that do not have 
a scaler-unit (like IC = 1) shall not be included in the 
capture objects list. The profile buffer shall have only 
one entry. This profile is not required to be updated 
periodically. 


C-5 BLOCK LOAD PROFILE PARAMETERS 


C-5.1 This is an array of load survey data captured as a 
profile generic. The OBIS code is 1.0.99.1.0.255, with 
Interface class as 7. The capture objects of this block 
load profile are as per Table 23 and the captured attribute 
shall be attribute 2 of each interface class. The capture 
object values will be copied into buffer of this array 
automatically as per capture period which shall be set 
through OBIS code 1.0.0.8.4.255 of recording interval 1. 


C-5.2 Association access rights are as follows: 


a) Public client — No access for all objects. 
b) Meter reader — Read only for all objects. 
c) 
C-5.3 Scaler Profile 


Utility setting — Read only for all objects. 


This profile is meant for capturing the scaler-unit of 
each of the parameter listed in Table 23. This is 
modelled as profile generic (IC = 7) and is assigned 
the country specific OBIS code 1.0.94.91.4.255. The 
capture objects for this profile shall include the scaler- 
unit attributes of the parameters listed in Table 23. The 
profile buffer shall have only one entry. This profile is 
not required to be updated periodically. 


C-6 PARAMETERS 
BILLING 


The list of parameters in Table 22 and Table 23 shall 
be used for computing the daily accounting data at the 
HOST. 


FOR ACCOUNTING/ 


IS 15959 : 2011 


Table 22 Instantaneous Parameters for Class A Meters 
(Clauses C-2, C-4.1, C-4.2 and C-6) 


Sl Parameter OBIS Code Interface 
No. —— 0 ——- Class No. 
A B C D E F 
d) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) 
i) Real time clock, date and time 0 0 1 0 0 255 8 
ii) Current, Ik 1 0 31 T 0 255 3 
ii) Current, Iy 1 0 51 T 0 255 3 
iv) Current, Ip 1 0 71 7 0 255 3 
v) Voltage, Ven 1 0 32 T 0 255 3 
vi) Voltage, Vyn 1 0 52 WA 0 255 3 
vii) Voltage, Vey 1 0 72 T 0 255 3 
viii) Voltage, Vey 1 0 32 T 0 255 3 
ix) Voltage, Vey 1 0 52 7 0 255 3 
x) Signed power factor, R-phase 1 0 33 7 0 235 3 
xi) Signed power factor, Y-phase 1 0 93 T 0 255 3 
xii) Signed power factor, B-phase 1 0 73 7 0 255 3 
xiii) Three phase power factor, PF 1 0 13 T 0 255 3 
xiv) Frequency 1 0 14 T 0 255 3 
xv) Apparent power, kVA 1 0 9 T 0 255 3 
xvi) Signed active power, kW 
(+ Forward; — Reverse) | 0 1 7 0 255 3 
xvii) Signed reactive power, kvar 
(+ Lag; — Lead) 1 0 3 7 0 255 3 
xviii) Cumulative energy, kWh 1 0 1 8 0 255 3 
xix) Cumulative energy, kvarh (Lag) 1 0 5 8 0 255 3 
xx) Cumulative energy, kvarh (Lead) 1 0 8 8 0 255 3 
xxi) Cumulative energy, kVAh 1 0 9 8 0 255 3 
xxii) Number of power-failures. 0 0 96 7 0 255 1 
xxiii) Cumulative power-failure duration 0 0 94 91 8 255 3 
xxiv) Cumulative tamper count 0 0 94 91 0 255 1 
xxv) Cumulative billing count 0 0 0 1 0 255 1 
xxvi) Cumulative programming count 0 0 96 2 0 255 1 
xxvii) Billing date 0 0 0 1 2 255 3 
xxviii) Maximum demand, kW 1 0 1 6 0 255 4 
xxix) Maximum demand, kVA 1 0 9 6 0 255 4 


NOTES 

1 The items at SI No. (v), (vi), and (vii) are for 3®/4W system of measurement with neutral as reference point. 
2 The items at SI No. (viii) and (ix) are for 3 @/3W system of measurement with Y-phase as reference point. 

3 Signed power factor: (+) indicates lag and (—) indicates lead. 


4 The parameters at SI No. (xviii) to (xxvi) hold cumulative values at that instant from the date of manufacturing or installation of 
meter as the case may be. 


5 The above list is identified for the purpose of communication to HOST or HHU. 
6 The utilities may choose, based on needs, additional parameters for display purpose only. 
7 Item number at SI No. (xxv) refers to the billing period counter. 


16 


IS 15959 : 2011 


Table 23 Block Load Survey Parameters for Category A Meters 
(Clauses C-2, C-5.1, C-5.3 and C-6) 


Sl Parameter OBIS Code Interface 
No. ,—————<———. Class No 
A B C D E F Attribute 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) 
i) Real time clock — date and time 0 0 1 0 0 255 8/2 
ii) Current, J 1 0 31 87 0 255 3/2 
iii) Current, Iy 1 0 51 27 0 255 3/2 
iv) Current, J, 1 0 71 27 0 255 3/2 
v) Voltage, Van 1 0 32 27 0 255 3/2 
vi) Voltage, Vyn 1 0 52 27 0 255 3/2 
vii) Voltage, Vay 1 0 72 27 0 255 3/2 
viii) Voltage, Vey 1 0 32 27 0 255 3/2 
ix) Voltage, Vey 1 0 52 27 0 255 3/2 
x) Block energy, in kWh 1 0 1 29 0 255 3/2 
xi) Block energy, kvarh (lag) 1 0 5 29 0 233 3/2 
xii) Block energy, in kvarh (lead) 1 0 8 29 0 255 3/2 
xiii) Block energy, in kVAh 1 0 9 29 0 255 3/2 
NOTES 


1 The items at SI No. (v), (vi), and (vii) are for 3D/4W system of measurement with neutral as reference point. 
2 The items at SI No. (viii) and (ix) are for 3 b/3W system of measurement with Y-phase as reference point. 


3 The parameters at SI No. (ii) to (ix) are the average values during the block period time and stored at the end of that time block. 
4 The parameters at SI No. (x) to (xiii) are the actual energy consumption during that time block. 

5 Capture objects for 3 ®/4W are items SI No. (i) to (vii) and (x) to (xiii). 

6 Capture objects for 3 P/3W are items SI No. (i) to (iv) and (viii) to (xiii). 


7 Support for selective access shall be as defined in 11.3. 


ANNEX D 
(Clauses 6.1.1 and A-1.2; and Table 21) 


PARAMETER LIST FOR CATEGORY B METERS 


D-1 The parameters listed here are for Boundary/Bank/ 
Ring Fencing/ABT Metering. The meter records 
parameters under import and or export conditions. 


D-2 The parameters identified for this are grouped 
under instantaneous (see Table 24), block load profile 
(see Table 25) and daily load profile (see Table 26). 
The tables include the name of the parameter, the OBIS 
code and interface class. 


D-3 INSTANTANEOUS PARAMETERS 


D-3.1 Each of the parameters is a separate entity. The 
OBIS code for each parameter is identified as per DLMS/ 
COSEM protocol. 


D-3.2 Association access rights are as follows: 


a) Public client — Read only for clock and no 
access for other objects. 

b) Meter reader — Read only for all objects. 

c) Utility setting — Read and write for clock and 


read only for others. 
D-3.3 Snapshot of Instantaneous Parameters 


The parameters of Table 24 shall be captured as a profile 


17 


generic using the country specific OBIS code 
1.0.94.91.0.255. The attribute 2 of each of the capture 
objects shall be copied into the profile at the instant of 
a request from the HOST. 


D-3.4 Scaler Profile 


This profile is meant for capturing the scaler-unit of each 
of the parameter listed in Table 24. This is modeled as 
profile generic (IC = 7) and is assigned the country 
specific OBIS code 1.0.94.91.3.255. The capture objects 
for this profile shall include the scaler-unit attributes of 
the Instantaneous parameters listed in Table 24. 
Instantaneous parameters that do not have a scaler-unit 
(like IC = 1) shall not be included in the capture objects 
list. The profile buffer shall have only one entry. This 
profile is not required to be updated periodically. 


D-4 BLOCK LOAD PROFILE PARAMETERS 


D-4.1 This is an array of load survey data captured as 
a profile generic. The OBIS code is 1.0.99.1.0.255, 
with interface class as 7. The capture objects of this 
block load profile are as per Table 25 and the captured 
object shall be attribute 2 of each interface class. The 


IS 15959 : 2011 


Table 24 Instantaneous Parameters for Category B Meters 
(Clauses D-2, D-3.3 and D-3.4 ) 


Sl Parameter OBIS Code Interface 
No. ———————— a ClassNo. 
A B C D E F 
d) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) 
i) Real time clock, date and time 0 0 1 0 0 255 8 
ii) Current, Ik 1 0 31 T 0 255 3 
ii) Current, Iy 1 0 51 T 0 255 3 
iv) Current, Ip 1 0 71 7 0 255 3 
v) Voltage, Van 1 0 32 7 0 255 3 
vi) Voltage, Vyn 1 0 52 WA 0 255 3 
vii) Voltage, Vey 1 0 72 T 0 255 3 
viii) Voltage, Vey 1 0 32 T 0 255 3 
ix) Voltage, Vey 1 0 52 7 0 255 3 
x) Signed power factor, R-phase 1 0 33 7 0 255 3 
xi) Signed power factor, Y-phase 1 0 53 T 0 255 3 
xii) Signed power factor, B-phase 1 0 73 7 0 255 3 
xiii) Three phase power factor, PF 1 0 13 T 0 255 3 
xiv) Frequency 1 0 14 T 0 255 3 
xv) Apparent power, kVA 1 0 9 T 0 255 3 
xvi) Signed active power, kW 
(+ import: — export) 1 0 1 7 0 255 3 
xvii) Signed reactive power, kvar 
(+ Lag; — Lead) 1 0 3 7 0 255 3 
xviii) Cumulative energy, kWh (Import) 1 0 1 8 0 255 3 
xix) Cumulative energy, kWh (Export) 1 0 2 8 0 255 3 
xx) Cumulative energy, kVAh (Import) 1 0 9 8 0 255 3 
xxi) Cumulative energy, kVAh (Export) 1 0 10 8 0 255 3 
xxii) Number of power, failures. 0 0 96 7 0 255 1 
xxiii) Cumulative power, failure duration 0 0 94 91 8 255 3 
xxiv) Cumulative tamper count 0 0 94 91 0 255 1 
xxv) Cumulative billing count 0 0 0 1 0 255 1 
xxvi) Cumulative programming count 0 0 96 2 0 255 1 
xxvii) Billing date 0 0 0 1 2 255 3 
NOTES 


1 The items at SI No. (v), (vi) and (vii) are for 3®/4W system of measurement with neutral as reference point. 


2 The items at SI No. (viii), (ix) are for 3 D/3W system of measurement with Y-phase as reference point. 


3 Signed Power factor: (+) indicates lag and (—) indicates lead. 


4 The parameters at SI No. (xviii) to (xxvi) hold cumulative values at that instant from the date of manufacturing or installation of 


meter as the case may be. 


5 The above list is identified for the purpose of communication to HOST or HHU. 


6 The utilities may choose, based on needs, additional parameters for display purpose only. 


7 Item number at SI No. (xxv) refers to the billing period counter. 


capture object values will be copied into a buffer of 
this array automatically as per capture period which 
shall be set through OBIS code 1.0.0.8.4.255 of 
recording interval 1. 


D-4.2 Association access rights are as follows: 


a) Public client — No access for all objects. 
b) Meter reader — Read only for all objects. 
c) 
D-4.3 Scaler Profile 


Utility setting — Read only for all objects. 


This profile is meant for capturing the scaler-unit of 
each of the parameter listed in Table 25. This is 
modelled as profile generic (IC = 7) and is assigned 
the country specific OBIS code 1.0.94.91.4.255. The 
capture objects for this profile shall include the scaler- 


18 


unit attributes of the parameters listed in Table 25. The 
profile buffer shall have only one entry. This profile is 
not required to be updated periodically. 


D-5 DAILY LOAD PROFILE PARAMETERS 


D-5.1 This is an array of load survey data captured as 
a profile generic at the end of 24 h. The OBIS code is 
1.0.99.2.0.255, with Interface class as 7. The capture 
objects of this daily load profile are as per Table 26 
and the captured attribute shall be attributing 2 of each 
interface class. The capture object values will be copied 
into a buffer of this array automatically as per capture 
period which shall be set through OBIS code 
1.0.0.8.5.255 of recording interval 2. The capture 
period attribute shall be statically fixed as 24 h. 


D-5.2 Association access rights are as follows: 


a) Public client — No access for all objects. 


IS 15959 : 2011 


each of the parameter listed in Table 26. This is 


b) Meter reader — Read only for all objects. modelled as profile generic (IC=7) and is assigned the 

c) Utility setting — Read only for all objects country specific OBIS code 1.0.94.91.5.255. The 

: capture objects for this profile shall include the scaler- 

D-5.3 Scaler Profile unit attributes of the parameters listed in Table 26. The 


profile buffer shall have only one entry. This profile is 


This profile is meant for capturing the scaler-unit of not required to be updated periodically. 


Table 25 Block Load Survey Parameters for Category B Meters 


(Clauses D-2 and D-4.3) 


OBIS Code Interface 


Sl Parameter 
No. ,——— ——. ClassNo. 
A B C D E F Attribute 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) 
i) Real time clock, date and time 0 0 1 0 0 255 8/2 
ii) Frequency 1 0 14 27 0 255 3/2 
iii) Voltage, Ven 1 0 32 27 0 255 3/2 
iv) Voltage, Vyn 1 0 52 27 0 255 3/2 
v) Voltage, Vey 1 0 72 27 0 255 3/2 
vi) Energy — active import 1 0 1 29 0 255 3/2 
vii) Energy — net active energy 1 0 16 29 0 255 3/2 
viii) Energy — active export 1 0 2 29 0 255 3/2 
ix) Energy, kvarh, Quadrant I 1 0 5 29 0 299 3/2 
x) Energy, kvarh, Quadrant II 1 0 6 29 0 255 3/2 
xi) Energy, kvarh, Quadrant IH 1 0 7 29 0 259 3/2 
xii) Energy, kvarh, Quadrant IV 1 0 8 29 0 255 3/2 
NOTES 


1 The parameters listed in this table are for load survey purpose and are logged as per the block period time. 

2 The block period time for interface meters is fixed at 15 min for which the data storage will be for 22 days. 

3 The parameters at SI No. (iii) to (vi) are the average values of 15 min block and stored at the end of that time block. 
4 The parameters at SI No. (vii) to (xii) are the actual energy consumption during the 15 min time block. 

5 Item at SI No. (ii) is an ABT parameter for absolute average value. 


6 Item at SI No. (vii) is an ABT parameter for net energy in the current 15 min block. 
7 Support for selective access shall be as defined in 11.3. 


Table 26 Daily Load Profile Parameters for Category B Meters 


(Clauses D-2 and D-5.1) 


OBIS Code Interface 


Sl Parameter 
No. eo OM Class No/ 
A B C D E F Attribute 
ad) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) 
i) Real time clock, date and time 0 0 1 0 0 255 8/2 
ii) Cumulative energy, kWh (Import) 1 0 1 8 0 255 3/2 
iii) Cumulative energy, kWh (Export) 1 0 2 8 0 255 3/2 
iv) Cumulative energy, kVAh while kW Import 1 0 9 8 0 255 3/2 
v) Cumulative energy, kVAh while kW Export 1 0 10 8 0 259 3/2 
vi) Reactive energy high (V > 103 per cent) 1 0 94 91 1 255 3/2 
vii) Reactive energy low (V < 97 per cent) 1 0 94 91 2 255 3/2 
viii) Cumulative energy, kvarh, Quadrant I 1 0 5 8 0 255 3/2 
ix) Cumulative energy, kvarh, Quadrant II 1 0 6 8 0 255 3/2 
x) Cumulative energy, kvarh, Quadrant IIT il 0 7 8 0 255 3/2 
xi) Cumulative energy, kvarh, Quadrant IV 1 0 8 8 0 255 3/2 
NOTES 


1 The parameters listed in this table are meant for billing purpose and shall be logged at midnight (00 h). 


2 The storage time for these parameters is 22 days. 


3 The parameters at SI No. (ii) to (xi) are cumulative values at that instant from the date of manufacturing or installation of meter as the 


case 


may be. 


4 Item at SI No. (vi) is an ABT parameter. 
5 Item at SI No. (vii) is an ABT parameter. 
6 Support for selective access shall be as defined in 11.3. 


19 


IS 15959 : 2011 


ANNEX E 
(Clauses 6.11 and A-1.3; and Table 21) 


PARAMETER LIST FOR CATEGORY C METERS 


E-1 The parameters listed here are for HV (VT/CT) 
and LV (CT) consumer metering. This meter records 
energy in import mode. These meters shall be capable 
of recording import of energy. For customers who 
import energy and also export energy, use of category 
B meters is recommended. 


E-2 The parameters identified for this are grouped 
under instantaneous (see Table 27), block load profile 
(see Table 28), and billing (see Table 29). The tables 
include the name of the parameter, the OBIS code and 
interface class. 


E-3 INSTANTANEOUS PARAMETERS 


E-3.1 Each of the parameters is a separate entity. The 
OBIS code for each parameter is identified as per 
DLMS/COSEM protocol. 


Association access rights are as follows: 


a) Public client — Read only for clock and no 
access for other objects. 

b) Meter reader — Read only for all objects. 

c) Utility setting — Read and write for clock and 


read only for others. 


E-3.2 Snapshot of Instantaneous Parameters 


The parameters of Table 27 shall be captured as a profile 
generic using the country specific OBIS code 
1.0.94.91.0.255. The attribute 2 of each of the capture 
objects shall be copied into the profile at the instant of 
a request from the HOST. 


E-3.3 Scaler Profile 


This profile is meant for capturing the scaler-unit of 
each of the parameter listed in Table 27. This is 
modelled as profile generic (IC = 7) and is assigned 
the country specific OBIS code 1.0.94.91.3.255. The 
capture objects for this profile shall include the scaler- 
unit attributes of the instantaneous parameters listed in 
Table 27 instantaneous parameters that do not have a 
scaler-unit (like IC = 1) shall not be included in the 
capture objects list. The profile buffer shall have only 
one entry. This profile is not required to be updated 
periodically. 


20 


E-4 BLOCK LOAD PROFILE PARAMETERS 


E-4.1 This is an array of load survey data captured as a 
profile generic. The OBIS code is 1.0.99.1.0.255, with 
Interface class as 7. The capture objects of this block 
load profile are as per Table 28 and the captured 
attribute shall be 2 of each interface class. The capture 
object values will be copied into a buffer of this array 
automatically as per capture period which shall be set 
through OBIS code 1.0.0.8.4.255 of recording 
interval 1. 


E-4.2 Association access rights are as follows: 


a) Public client — No access for all objects. 
b) Public client — Read only for all objects. 
c) Public client — Read only for all objects. 


E-4.3 Scaler Profile 


This profile is meant for capturing the scaler-unit of 
each of the parameter listed in Table 28. This is 
modelled as profile generic (IC = 7) and is assigned 
the country specific OBIS code 1.0.94.91.4.255. The 
capture objects for this profile shall include the scaler- 
unit attributes of the parameters listed in Table 28. The 
profile buffer shall have only one entry. This profile is 
not required to be updated periodically. 


E-5 BILLING PROFILE PARAMETERS 
E-5.1 The contents of Table 29 are for billing purpose. 
E-5.2 Association access rights are as follows: 


a) Public client — No access for all objects. 
b) Meter reader — Read only for all objects. 
c) 
E-5.3 Scaler Profile 


Utility setting — Read only for all objects. 


This profile is meant for capturing the scaler-unit of 
each of the parameter listed in Table 29. This is 
modelled as profile generic (IC = 7) and is assigned 
the country specific OBIS code 1.0.94.91.6.255. The 
capture objects for this profile shall include the scaler- 
unit attributes of the parameters listed in Table 29 
above. The profile buffer shall have only one entry. 
This profile is not required to be updated periodically. 


IS 15959 : 2011 


Table 27 Instantaneous Parameters for Category C Meters 
(Clauses E-2, E-3.2 and E-3.3) 


Sl Parameter OBIS Code Interface 
No. _ Te © — Class No. 
A B iC D E F 

d) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) 
i) Real time clock, date and time 0 0 1 0 0 255 8 
ii) Current, Ik 1 0 31 7 0 255 3 
ii) Current, Iy 1 0 51 7 0 255 3 
iv) Current, J, 1 0 71 7 0 255 3 
v) Voltage, Van 1 0 32 7 0 255 3 
vi) Voltage, Vyn 1 0 52 WA 0 255 3 
vii) Voltage, Vey 1 0 72 T 0 255 3 
viii) Voltage, Vey 1 0 32 7 0 255 3 
ix) Voltage, Vey 1 0 52 7 0 255 3 
x) Signed power factor, R-phase 1 0 33 7 0 255 3 
xi) Signed power factor, Y-phase 1 0 93 T 0 255 3 
xii) Signed power factor, B-phase 1 0 73 T 0 255 3 
xiii) Three phase power facto, PF 1 0 13 7 0 255 3 
xiv) Frequency 1 0 14 7 0 255 3 
xv) Apparent power, kVA 1 0 9 7 0 255 3 
xvi) Signed active power, kW (+ Forward; — Reverse) 1 0 1 7 0 255 3 
xvii) Signed reactive power, kvar (+ Lag; — Lead) 1 0 37 7 0 255 3 
xviii) Number of power — failures 0 0 96 7 0 293 1 
xix) Cumulative power — failure duration 0 0 94 91 8 255 3 
xx) Cumulative tamper count 0 0 94 91 0 255 1 
xxi) Cumulative billing count 0 0 0 1 0 255 1 
xxii) Cumulative programming count 0 0 96 2 0 255 1 
xxiii) Billing date 0 0 0 1 2 255 3 

xxiv) Cumulative energy, kWh 1 0 1 8 0 255 3/2 

xxv) Cumulative energy, kvarh (Lag) 1 0 5 8 0 255 3/2 

xxvi) Cumulative energy, kvarh (Lead) 1 0 8 8 0 255 3/2 

xxvii) Cumulative energy, kVAh 1 0 9 8 0 295 3/2 


NOTES 

1 The items at SI No. (v), (vi) and (vii) are for 3 ®/4W system of measurement with NEUTRAL as reference point. 
2 The items at SI No. (viii) and (ix) are for 3 @/3W system of measurement with Y-Phase as reference point. 

3 Signed Power factor : (+) indicates lag and (—) indicates lead. 


4 The parameters at SI No. (xviii) to (xxii) hold cumulative values at that instant from the date of manufacturing or installation of meter 
as the case may be. 


5 The above list is identified for the purpose of communication to HOST or HHU. 

6 The utilities may choose, based on needs, additional parameters for display purpose only. 
7 Item at SI No. (xxi) refers to the Billing Period Counter. 

8 Item at SI No. (xxiii) — Data type to be same as for attribute 2 of IC = 8, Clock. 


Table 28 Block Load Survey Parameters for Category C Meters 
(Clauses E-2, E-4.1 and E-4.3) 


Sl Parameter OBIS Code Interface 
No. ———————— << ——————.  ClassNo./ 
A B C D E F Attribute 

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) 
i) Real time clock, date and time 0 0 1 0 0 255 8/2 
ii) Current, J, 1 0 31 27 0 255 3/2 
iii) Current, Jy 1 0 51 27 0 255 3/2 
iv) Current, Ip 1 0 71 2T 0 255 3/2 
v) Voltage, Van 1 0 32 27 0 255 3/2 
vi) Voltage, Vyn 1 0 52 27 0 255 3/2 
vii) Voltage, Vey 1 0 72 27 0 255 3/2 
viii) Voltage, Vey 1 0 32 27 0 255 3/2 
ix) Voltage, Vey 1 0 52 27 0 255 3/2 
x) Block energy, kWh 1 0 1 29 0 255 3/2 
xi) Block energy, kvarh (lag) 1 0 5 29 0 255 3/2 


21 


IS 15959 : 2011 


Table 28 (Concluded) 
Sl Parameter OBIS Code Interface 
No. nn a O EO 
A B C D E F Attribute 

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) 

xii) Block energy, kvarh (lead) 1 0 8 29 0 255 3/2 
xiii) Block energy, kVAh 1 0 9 29 0 255 3/2 

NOTES 


1 The parameters listed in this table are for load survey purpose and are logged as per the block period time. 


2 The parameters at SI No. (ii) to (ix) are the average values during the block period time and stored at the end of that time block. 


3 The parameters at SI No. (x) to (xiii) are the actual energy consumption during that time block. 
4 Capture objects for 3 ®/4W are items at SI No. (i) to (vii) and (x) to (xiii). 
5 Capture objects for 3 @/3W are items at SI No. (i) to (iv) and (viii) to (xiii). 


6 Support for selective access shall be as defined in 11.3. 


Table 29 Billing Profile Parameters for Category C Meters 


(Clauses E-5.1 and E-5.3) 


Sl Parameter OBIS Code Interface 
No. ——————-————. Cass No/ 
A B C D E F Attribute 

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) 

i) Billing date 0 0 0 1 2 255 3/2 

ii) System power factor for billing period 1 0 13 0 0 255 3/2 

iii) Cumulative energy, kWh 1 0 1 8 0 255 3/2 

iv) Cumulative energy, kWh for TZ1 1 0 1 8 1 255 3/2 

v) Cumulative energy, kWh for TZ2 1 0 1 8 2 255 3/2 

vi) Cumulative energy, kWh for TZ3 1 0 1 8 3 255 3/2 

vii) Cumulative energy, kWh for TZ4 1 0 1 8 4 255 3/2 

viii) Cumulative energy, kWh for TZ5 1 0 1 8 5 255 3/2 

ix) Cumulative energy, kWh for TZ6 1 0 1 8 6 255 3/2 

x) Cumulative energy, kWh for TZ7 1 0 1 8 7 255 3/2 

xi) Cumulative energy, kWh for TZ8 1 0 1 8 8 255 3/2 

xii) Cumulative energy, kvarh (Lag) 1 0 5 8 0 255 3/2 

xiii) Cumulative energy, kvarh (Lead) 1 0 8 8 0 255 3/2 

xiv) Cumulative energy, kVAh 1 0 9 8 0 255 3/2 

xv) Cumulative energy, kVAh for TZ1 1 0 9 8 1 255 3/2 

xvi) Cumulative energy, kVAh for TZ2 1 0 9 8 2 255 3/2 

xvii) Cumulative energy, kVAh for TZ3 1 0 9 8 3 255 3/2 

xviii) Cumulative energy, kVAh for TZ4 1 0 9 8 4 255 3/2 

xix) Cumulative energy, kVAh for TZ5 1 0 9 8 5 255 3/2 

xx) Cumulative energy, kVAh for TZ6 1 0 9 8 6 255 3/2 

xxi) Cumulative energy, kVAh for TZ7 1 0 9 8 7 259 3/2 

xxii) Cumulative energy, kVAh for TZ8 1 0 9 8 8 255 3/2 
xxiii) MD, kw 1 0 1 6 0 255 4/2 5 
xxiv) MD, kW for TZ1 1 0 1 6 1 255 4/2 5 
xxv) MD, kW for TZ2 1 0 1 6 2 255 4/2 5 
xxvi) MD, kW for TZ3 1 0 1 6 3 255 4/2 ,5 
xxvii) MD, kW for TZ4 1 0 1 6 4 255 4/2 5 
xxviii) MD, kW for TZ5 1 0 1 6 5 255 4/2 ,5 
xxix) MD, kW for TZ6 1 0 1 6 6 255 4/2 5 
xxx) MD, kW for TZ7 1 0 1 6 7 255 4/2 ,5 
xxxi) MD, kW for TZ8 1 0 1 6 8 255 4/2 5 
xxxii) MD, kVA 1 0 9 6 0 255 4/2 5 
xxxiii) MD, kVA for TZ1 1 0 9 6 1 255 4/2 5 
xxxiv) MD, kVA for TZ2 1 0 9 6 2 255 4/2 5 
xxxv) MD, KVA for TZ3 1 0 9 6 3 255 4/2 5 
xxxvi) MD, kVA for TZ4 1 0 9 6 4 255 4/2 5 
xxxvii) MD, kVA for TZ5 1 0 9 6 5 255 4/2 5 
xxxviii) MD, kVA for TZ6 | 0 9 6 6 255 4/2 ,5 
xxxix) MD, kVA for TZ7 1 0 9 6 7 255 4/2 ,5 


22 


IS 15959 : 2011 


Table 29 (Concluded) 
SI Parameter OBIS Code Interface 
No. Class No./ 
A B Cc D E F Attribute 
(D (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) 
xl) MD, kVA for TZ8 1 0 9 6 8 295 42,5 


NOTES 


1 The data are stored up to 6 billing cycles. The billing profile is modeled as Profile generic (IC = 7) object with OBIS Code 1.0.98.1.0.255. 
The capture objects of this load profile are as per Table 29. The capture object values will be copied into buffer of this object either 
automatically or asynchronously. The capture period is set to zero, billing action is controlled by billing dates as provided in 10 and 


Table 31. 


2 Support for selective access shall be as defined in 11.3. 


3 The current cycle billing parameters shall be readable as the values of the latest billing period, on demand. This shall be in addition 
to the last 6 billing period data which shall be available in the profile buffer as the last 6 entries in the buffer. 


4 The captured attributes in case of Interface Class 4 (Extended register) used for MD values will be attributes 2 and 5 (Value and 


Timestamp). 


F-1 NAME PLATE DETAILS 


The contents of Table 30 are common to all meters. 


ANNEX F 
(Clauses 6.1.1, B-5.1 and B-5.2) 


GENERAL PURPOSE PARAMETERS 


The data are meter specific information. 


F-1.1 Association access rights for name plate details 


are as follows: 


a) Public client — No access for all objects 


except meter serial number. 


b) Meter reader — Read only for all objects. 


c) Utility setting — Read only for all objects. 
F-2 PROGRAMMABLE PARAMETERS 


Association access rights for programmable parameters 
as given in Table 31 are as follows: 


a) Public client — No access for all objects 
except real time clock. 


b) Meter reader — Read only for all objects. 
c) Utility setting — Read, write for all objects. 


Table 30 Name Plate Details Parameters 
(Clause F-1) 


SI Parameter OBIS Code Interface 

No. ——— << ————— Class 
A B C D E F 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) 
i) Meter serial number 0 0 96 1 0 255 1 (Data) 

ii) Manufacturer name 0 0 96 1 1 255 1 
iii) | Firmware version for meter 1 0 0 2 0 255 1 

iv) Meter type (3P-3W/3P-4W) 0 0 94 91 9 255 1 

v) Internal CT ratio 1 0 0 4 2 255 1 

vi) Internal VT ratio 1 0 0 4 3 255 1 
vii) Meter year of manufacture 0 0 96 1 4 255 1 


NOTE — For item SI No. (iv), a value of ‘0’ indicates 3P-3W; a value of ‘1’ indicates 3P-4W. 


23 


IS 15959 : 2011 


Table 31 Programmable Parameters 
(Clause F-2) 


Sl Parameter OBIS Code Interface 
No. a AN Class 
A B C D E F 
d) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) 
i) Real time clock, date and time 0 0 1 0 0 255 8 (Clock) 
ii) Demand integration period 1 0 0 8 0 255 1 (Data) 
iii) Profile capture period 1 0 0 8 4 255 1 
iv) Single-action schedule for billing dates 0 0 15 0 0 255 22 
v) Activity calendar for time zones etc 0 0 13 0 0 255 20 


NOTES 
1 The parameters are programmable by the utility engineers with required access rights. 
2 Unit for demand integration period and profile capture period is in ‘second’. 


3 Programming of any of the parameters shall increment the ‘Cumulative programming count’ value. 


ANNEX G 
(Clauses 6.1.1 and B-1) 


EVENT REFERENCE TABLE 


G-1 EVENTS 


Any exceptional/fraud/tamper condition is considered 
as an Event and stored in an Event code object (OBIS 
= 0.0.96.11.e.255 IC = 1, values of e range from 0 to 
6). The value attribute (attr-2) of this object stores 
identifier corresponding to most recent event occurred 
in the meter. Unique identifier is assigned to occurrence 
and restoration of all possible events (identified so far) 
in the event reference tables (see Tables 32 to 38). Thus 
event code object will tell only about the most recent 
event and to get a picture of all events and associated 
information (at the time of event) an event log object 
is used. An event log object is modelled as Profile 
generic (OBIS = 0.0.99.98.e.255 IC = 7, values of e 
range from 0 to 6). The buffer attribute (attr-2) of this 


profile object will store (asynchronously) a new entry 
for every event (occurrence and restoration are 
considered as separate events). The capture objects for 
the event log object is define in Table 39. 


G-1.1 Indian Event Reference Tables 


The contents of Tables 32 to 38 are common to all 
categories of meter. 


G-1.2 Capture Parameters for Event as Applicable 
(Event Log Profile) 


Association access rights are as follows: 


a) Public client — No access; 
b) Meter reading — Read only; and 
c) Utility settings — Read only. 


Table 32 Indian Event Reference Table — Voltage Related 
(Clauses B-6.4, B-6.5, G-1 and G-1.1) 


SI No Event ID Descriptions 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) 1 R-Phase — VT link missing (Missing potential) — Occurrence 
ii) 2 R-Phase — VT link missing (Missing potential) — Restoration 
ili) 3 Y-Phase — VT link missing (Missing potential) — Occurrence 
iv) 4 Y-Phase — VT link missing (Missing potential) — Restoration 
v) 5 B-Phase — VT link missing (Missing potential) — Occurrence 
vi) 6 B-Phase — VT link missing (Missing potential) — Restoration 
vii) 7 Over voltage in any phase — Occurrence 
viii) 8 Over voltage in any phase — Restoration 
ix) 9 Low Voltage in any Phase — Occurrence 
x) 10 Low voltage in any phase — Restoration 
xi) 11 Voltage unbalance — Occurrence 


24 


IS 15959 : 2011 


Table 32 (Concluded) 
SI No. Event ID Descriptions 
a) (2) (3) 
xii) 12 Voltage unbalance — Restoration 


NOTES 


1 These are the event conditions generally recorded in consumer meters, utilities may select any the above event conditions based on 
their practice. The need and applicability of these events for other type of meters shall be considered by utility. 


2 Either occurrence or restoration is considered an event. 

3 For each of the events a certain list of parameters will be captured. 

4 The list capture parameters are given in Table 39. The utility shall select the required parameters from Table 39 as per their practice. 
5 For each of the event captured ‘Cumulative tamper count’ value will be incremented. 

6 Capture parameters mentioned in Table 39 are captured when event occurrence and restoration is logged. 

7 The attributes of each of the IC (Interface class) is to be identified while finalizing the Specification. 

8 For 3 @/AW the reference point is NEUTRAL. 

9 For 3 @/3W the reference point is Y-Phase. 

10 Support for selective access shall be as defined in 11.3. 


Table 33 Indian Event Reference Table — Current Related 
(Clauses B-6.4, B-6.5, G-1 and G-1.1) 


SI No. Event ID Descriptions 
d) (2) (3) 
i) 51 Phase — R CT reverse — Occurrence 
ii) 52 Phase — R CT reverse — Restoration 
ili) 53 Phase — Y CT reverse — Occurrence 
iv) 54 Phase — Y CT reverse — Restoration 
v) 35 Phase — B CT reverse — Occurrence 
vi) 56 Phase — B CT reverse — Restoration 
vii) 57 Phase — R CT open — Occurrence 
viii) 58 Phase — R CT open — Restoration 
ix) 59 Phase — Y CT open — Occurrence 
x) 60 Phase — Y CT open — Restoration 
xi) 61 Phase — B CT open — Occurrence 
xii) 62 Phase — B CT open — Restoration 
xiii) 63 Current unbalance — Occurrence 
xiv) 64 Current unbalance — Restoration 
xv) 65 CT bypass — Occurrence 
xvi) 66 CT bypass — Restoration 
xvii) 67 Over current in any phase — Occurrence 
xviii) 68 Over current in any phase — Restoration 
NOTES 


1 These are the event conditions generally recorded in consumer meters, utilities may select any the above event conditions based on 
their practice. The need and applicability of these events for other type of meters shall be considered by utility. 


2 Either occurrence or restoration is considered an event. 

3 For each of the events a certain list of parameters will be captured. 

4 The list capture parameters are given in Table 39. The utility shall select the required parameters from Table 39 as per their practice. 
5 For each of the event captured ‘Cumulative tamper count’ value will be incremented. 

6 Capture parameters mentioned in Table 39 are captured when event occurrence and restoration is logged. 

7 The attributes of each of the IC (Interface class) is to be identified while finalizing the Companion Specification. 

8 For 3 ®/4W the reference point is NEUTRAL. 

9 For 3 @/3W the reference point is Y-Phase. 

10 Support for selective access shall be as defined in 11.3. 


25 


IS 15959 : 2011 


Table 34 Indian Event Reference 
Table — Power Related 
(Clauses B-6.4, B-6.5, G-1 and G-1.1) 


SI No. Event ID Descriptions 
(d) (2) (3) 
i) 101 Power failure (3 phase) — Occurrence 
ii) 102 Power failure (3 phase) — Restoration 
NOTES 


1 These are the event conditions generally recorded in consumer 
meters, utilities may select any the above event conditions based 
on their practice. The need and applicability of these events for 
other type of meters shall be considered by utility. 


2 Either occurrence or restoration is considered an event. 


3 For events in Table 34, no parameters shall be captured along 


with the event. 


4 The attributes of each of the IC (Interface class) is to be 


identified while finalizing the Companion Specification. 
5 For 3 ®/4W the reference point is NEUTRAL. 
6 For 3 @/3W the reference point is Y-Phase. 


7 Support for selective access shall be as defined in 11.3. 


Table 35 Indian Event Reference Table — 
Transaction Related 
(Clauses B-6.4, B-6.5, G-1 and G-1.1) 


SI No. Event ID Descriptions 

(1) (2) (3) 
i) 151 Real time clock, date and time 

ii) 152 Demand integration period 

iii) 153 Profile capture period 

iv) 154 Single-action schedule for billing dates 
v) 155 Activity calendar for time zones, etc 
NOTES 


1 These are the event conditions generally recorded in consumer 
meters, utilities may select any the above event conditions based 
on their practice. The need and applicability of these events for 


other type of meters shall be considered by utility. 


2 Fither occurrence or restoration is considered an event. 


3 For each of the events a certain list of parameters will be 


captured. 


4 The list capture parameters are given in Table 39. The utility 
shall select the required parameters from Table 39 as per their 


practice. 


5 Capture parameters mentioned in Table 39 are captured when 


event occurrence and restoration is logged. 


6 The attributes of each of the IC (Interface class) is to be 


identified while finalizing the Companion Specification. 
7 For 3 ®/4W the reference point is NEUTRAL. 
8 For 3 @/3W the reference point is Y-Phase. 


9 Support for selective access shall be as defined in 11.3. 


26 


Table 36 Indian Event Reference Table — Others 


(Clauses B-6.4, B-6.5, G-1 and G-1.1) 


SI No. Event ID Descriptions 
d) (2) (3) 
i) 201 Influence of permanent magnet or ac/ 
dc electromagnet — Occurrence 
ii) 202 Influence of permanent magnet or ac/dc 
electromagnet — Restoration 
iii) 203 Neutral disturbance — HF and dc — 
Occurrence 
iv) 204 Neutral disturbance — HF and dc — 
Restoration 
v) 205 Very low PF — Occurrence 
vi) 206 Very low PF — Restoration 
NOTES 


1 These are the event conditions generally recorded in consumer 
meters, utilities may select any the above event conditions based 
on their practice. The need and applicability of these events for 
other type of meters shall be considered by utility. 

2 Either occurrence or restoration is considered an event. 

3 For each of the events a certain list of parameters will be captured. 
4 The list capture parameters are given in Table 39. The utility 
shall select the required parameters from Table 39 as per their 
practice. 

5 For each of the event captured ‘Cumulative tamper count’ 
value will be incremented. 

6 Capture parameters mentioned in Table 39 are captured when 
event occurrence and restoration is logged. 

7 The attributes of each of the IC (Interface class) is to be 
identified while finalizing the Companion Specification. 

8 For 3 @/AW the reference point is NEUTRAL. 

9 For 3 ®/3W the reference point is Y-Phase. 

10 Support for selective access shall be as defined in 11.3. 


Table 37 Indian Event Reference 
Table — Non-rollover Events 
(Clauses B-6.4, B-6.5, G-1 and G-1.1) 


SI No. Event ID Descriptions 
d) (2) (3) 
i) 251 Meter cover opening — Occurrence 
NOTES 


1 This event condition is generally recorded in consumer meters, 
utilities may select the above event condition based on their 
practice. The need and applicability of the event for other type 
of meters shall be considered by utility. 

2 Either occurrence or restoration is considered an event. 

3 For the event a certain list of parameters will be captured. 

4 The list capture parameters are given in Table 39. The utility 
shall select the required parameters from Table 39 as per their 
practice. 

5 Capture parameters mentioned in Table 39 are captured when 
event occurrence and restoration is logged. 

6 The attributes of each of the IC (Interface class) is to be 
identified while finalizing the Companion Specification. 

7 For 3 ®/4W the reference point is NEUTRAL. 

8 For 3 &/3W the reference point is Y-Phase. 

9 Support for selective access shall be as defined in 11.3. 


IS 15959 : 2011 


Table 38 Indian Event Reference Table — Control Events 
(Clauses B-6.4, B-6.5, G-1 and G-1.1) 


SI No. Event ID Descriptions 
d) (2) (3) 
i) 301 Meter load disconnected 
ii) 302 Meter load connected 
NOTES 


1 These are the event conditions generally recorded in consumer meters, utilities may select any the above event conditions based on 
their practice. The need and applicability of these events for other type of meters shall be considered by utility. 


2 Either occurrence or restoration is considered an event. 

3 For events in Table 38 no parameters shall be captured along with the event. 

4 The attributes of each of the IC (Interface class) is to be identified while finalizing the Companion Specification. 
5 For 3 ®/4W the reference point is NEUTRAL. 

6 For 3 @/3W the reference point is Y-Phase. 


7 Support for selective access shall be as defined in 11.3. 


Table 39 Capture Parameters for Events 
(Clauses B-6.4, B-6.5 and G-1) 


SI No. Parameter OBIS Code Interface 
gen E << En Class 
A B C D E F 
d) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) 
1) Date and time of event 0 0 1 0 0 255 8 (Clock) 
ii) Event code 0 0 96 11 0 255 1 (Data) 
iii) Current, J, 1 0 31 7 0 255 3 (Register) 
iv) Current, ly 1 0 Şi 7 0 255 3 (Register) 
v) Current, J, 1 0 71 7 0 255 3 (Register) 
vi) Voltage, Van 
(3 B/4W) 1 0 32 7 0 255 3 (Register) 
vii) Voltage, Vyn 
(3 B/4W) 1 0 52 7 0 255 3 (Register) 
viii) Voltage, Vey 
(3 P4AW) 1 0 72 7 0 255 3 (Register) 
ix) Voltage, Vay 
(3 ®/3W) 1 0 32 7 0 255 3 (Register) 
x) Voltage, Vyg 
(3 ®/3W) 1 0 52 7 0 255 3 (Register) 
xi) Power factor, R-Phase 1 0 33 7 0 255 3 (Register) 
xii) Power factor, Y-Phase 1 0 53 7 0 255 3 (Register) 
xiii) Power factor, B-Phase 1 0 73 7 0 255 3 (Register) 
xiv) Cumulative energy, kWh 1 0 1 8 0 255 3 (Register) 


NOTES 

1 These are the event conditions generally recorded in consumer meters, utilities may select any of the above event conditions based on 
their practice. The need and applicability of these events for other type of meters shall be considered by utility. 

2 Either Occurrence or Restoration is considered an event. 

3 For each of the events a certain list of parameters will be captured. 

4 The list of capture parameters are given. The utility shall select the required parameters from the table as per their practice. 

5 Capture parameters mentioned in the table are to be captured when event occurrence and restoration is logged. 

6 For 3 ®/4W the reference point is NEUTRAL. 

7 For 3 ®/3W the reference point is Y-Phase. 

8 Support for Selective access shall be as defined in 11.3. 


G-2 SCALER PROFILE unit attributes of the parameters listed above. 


This profile is meant for capturing the scaler-unit of Parameters listed above that do no have a scaler-unit 


each of the parameter listed in Table 39. This is attribute shall not be included in the capture objects 
modelled as profile generic (IC = 7) and is assigned of this profile. The profile buffer shall have only one 
the country specific OBIS code 1.0.94.91.7.255. The entry. This profile is not required to be updated 
capture objects for this profile shall include the scaler- periodically. 


27 


IS 15959 : 2011 


ANNEX H 
(Clause 2 ) 
LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN/INTERNATIONAL STANDARDS 
Indian/Interna- Title Indian/Interna- Title 
tional Standard tional Standard 
ISS 14697 : 1999 ac static transformer operated watt- IS/TEC 62056- Electricity metering: Part 61 Data 
hour and var-hour meters, class 0.2 S, 61 : 2006 exchange for meter reading, tariff and 
0.5 Sand 1.0 S — Specification load control Object identification 
DLMS UA 1000 Blue book, COSEM identification system (OBIS) 
-1 ed.9, 2009 system and interface classes IS/TEC 62056- Electricity metering : Data exchange 
DLMS UA 1000 Green book, DLMS/COSEM 62 : 2006 for meter reading, tariff and load 
-2 ed.7, 2007 architecture and protocols control: Part 62 Interface classes 
DLMS UA 1002: White book, COSEM Glossary of o IEC/TR 62051: Electricity metering — Glossary of 
ed.1, 2003 terms 1999 terms 
DLMS UA 1001 Yellow book, companion testing ISJEC/TR Electricity metering : Data exchange 
-1:2007 ed-3 process 62051-1: 2004 for meter reading, tariff and load control 
IS/IEC 62056- Electricity metering : Data exchange — Glossary of terms: Part 1 Terms 
21 : 2002 for meter reading, tariff and load related to data exchange with metering 
control: Part 21 Direct local data equipment using DLMS/COSEM 
exchange NIST Special Recommendation for block cipher 
IS/IEC 62056- Electricity metering : Data exchange Publication 800 modes of operation: Galois/Counter 
42 : 2002 for meter reading, tariff and load -38D, Nov 2007 mode (GCM) and GMAC 
control: Part 42 Physical layer NIST Federal Advanced encryption standard 
services and procedures for Information (AES) 
connection-oriented asynchronous Processing 
data exchange Standards 
IS/IEC 62056- Electricity metering : Data exchange Publication 197 : 
46 : 2007 for meter reading, tariff and load Nov 2001 
control: Part 46 Data link layer using NIST Federal Standards for security categorization 
HDLC protocol Information of federal information and 
IS/IEC 62056- Electricity metering Data exchange Processing information systems 
47 : 2006 for meter reading tariff and load Standards 
control: Part 47 COSEM transport Publication 199 : 
layer for IPv4 network 2004 
IS/IEC 62056- Electricity metering : Data exchange IETF Request Advanced encryption standard (AES) 
53 : 2006 for meter reading, tariff and load For Circulation key wrap algorithm (Informative ) 
control: Part 53 COSEM application (RFC) - 3394 : 
layer Sept, 2002 
ANNEX J 
(Clause 3.6) 


HHU (MRI) CONSIDERATION 


J-1 HHU (MRI) CONSIDERATION 


Communication standards in the Indian metering 
scenario require supporting considerations for the 
utilization of those standards in HHUs (Hand held units 
synonymous with MRI or CMRI ). This Annex provides 


28 


a suitable approach to the implementation of the IEC- 
62056 standards and this Indian Companion 
Specification in such devices. 


J-1.1 The terms of this suggested implementation are 
as below: 


IS 15959 : 2011 


a) HHUs may retrieve data from DLMS/COSEM server shall support one association with 
Meters conforming to this standard using the properties, objects, and access rights adequate 
communication ports. for transferring the stored data of the 

b) HHUs shall exclusively use the Meter Reading corresponding meter to the BCS in an efficient 
(MR) association and shall support all the manner. The server within the HHU is not 
features and specifications listed in this required to support ad-hoc access or selective 

ificati iati access to the data that differs from the requests 
specification for the MR association. q 

c) HHUs shall have the same data access rights which were earlier used to read the data from 
that are available to the MR association, as the meter. 
that available for remote meter reading. h) The BCS shall maintain a mapping table that 

d) HHU when acting as a server shall support maps the individual meter identifications (the 
the client addresses and security methods of Same IDs that are used to identify the MLT 
the Meter Reading (MR) association. during TMOL meter reading) to Logical 

e) HHUs shall provide a DLMS/COSEM server Device addresses. During upload of data from 
interface to the BCS (Base Computer System ee X BS; WE Be E e 
the Data collection sö oyak a Logical device to download the data of each 
suitable communication medium (local serial i meli SA Ma in pone 
port implementing the DLMS/COSEM CO 3- j) The mapping table described in Item I-1.6 
layer stack is suggested). above shall require that the Logical device 

fy HHUs shall internally máp the individual addresses allocated to each meter are at least 
meter data to Logical a (one Lopical unique across all meters that are to be retrieved 
Device for each meter). Inside each Logical ae a aaa ig ai kara paia e 
Device the structure and naming of the data g g 

i allocated meters. The BCS shall take care to 

shall be the same as that retrieved from the 
ni ensure that the re-use of addresses does not 

: ; : create conflicts in Meter identification. 
g) For each logical device the DLMS/COSEM 
ANNEX K 
(Clause 3.23 ) 
CONFORMANCE TESTING 
K-1 Meters claiming conformance to this specification as specified in this standard with all specified 
will be required to services supported; 

a) conform to the DLMS/COSEM base standards d) association object lists conform to this 
(IEC 62056) as certified by the conformance document with access rights and OBIS codes 
test tool (CTT). as specified here; and 

b) conform to the specific requirements and e) event related DLMS objects are implemented 


constraints of this standard as certified by 
CPRI or any other laboratory having facilities 
for the purpose. 


K-2 This certification shall ensure: 


a) 


b) 


c) 


all mandatory parameters applicable to the 
category of the meter under test are 
implemented; 

all data types where specified are conforming 
to this document; 


all application associations are implemented 


29 


with Event identifiers as specified in the Event 
reference tables in this standard. 


K-2.1 The test report from an accredited laboratory 
and having membership with DLMS UA shall be 
considered as a proof of conformance of protocol 
implementation. 


K-2.2 Systems once created in accordance with this 
specification and contemporary standards, shall be 
deemed acceptable, provided such systems are tested 
and certified through standard evaluation process. 


IS 15959 : 2011 


ANNEX L 
(Clause 11.3.4) 


DESCRIPTIVE NOTES ON PROFILE GENERIC INTERFACE CLASS 


L-1 Profile generic objects are available to capture 
values of attributes from other objects periodically or 
occasionally. They can be used: 


a) for load profiles; 
b) for historical data; and 
c) for event logs, etc. 


L-1.1 The list of attributes to capture are held by the 
capture object attribute. The values captured are held 
in the buffer attribute. 


L-1.2 The buffer can be seen as a table, with the capture 
objects as column headers and a new line of values 
added with each capture. The data in the buffer can be 


accessed in its entirety or selectively, using appropriate 
selection criteria. 


L-1.3 Profile generic objects provide attributes and 
methods for controlling and managing how data are 
captured and accessed as illustrated in Fig. 3. 


L-2 SELECTIVE ACCESS 


There are two types of selective access which allows 
reading the buffer selectively. 


L-2.1 Selective Access by Entry 


Selective Access by Entry provides a set of 4 integers 
to filter the contents of the “buffer” attribute in response 


Logical Name 
mm em me > |. 10.255 
| 01-01-07 06:00:00 

01-01-07 06:15:00 
Buffer —— = = . 

01-01-07 10:00:00 

Data index 

Capture D 
Objecis = 
Capture period = = = = —p 15 mnts 
Sort method — = = = =) FIFO 
Sort object == = = = =) Default 
Entries in use ||... <$ 
Profile entries = = = = —=b 1000 


Fic. 3 ILLUSTRATION OF A PROFILE GENERIC OBJECT CONTAINING 16 CAPTURES OF 3 ATTRIBUTES 


30 


to get requests as illustrated in Fig. 4. The 4 integers 
are as below: 


a) From-Entry — The index of the first entry to 
return from the buffer. 

b) 7o-Eniry — The index of the last entry to 
return from the buffer. 

c) From-Value — The index of the first column 
to return. 

d) 7o-Value — The index of the last column to 


return. 


Thus the selective access parameters as above can be 
used to select a subset of the rows from the buffer table. 


Also the selective access parameters as above can be 
used to select not only a subset of the rows from the 
buffer table but also a subset of the columns from among 
the selected rows. Refer to the illustration in Fig. 5. 
However this mechanism does not permit retrieving 
discontinuous ranges of columns from the buffer. 


L-2.2 Selective Access by Range 


Selective access by range permits a client to retrieve a 
subset of the rows and columns in the Profile buffer 
based on the value of one of the capture objects. 


IS 15959 : 2011 


Typically the capture object selected for this purpose 
is the Clock’s date-time attribute which is usually one 
of the capture objects in most profiles as illustrated in 
Fig. 6. The selective access parameters in this case are 
as below: 


L-2.2.1 Restricting Object 


This parameter identifies the capture object whose 
value will be used to filter the buffer. The object is 
defined by the OBIS Code and attribute index of the 
selected object. 


L-2.2.2 From-Value 


The start-range value for the subset. All selected rows 
in the buffer will have a value for the restricted object 
that is higher than or equal to this limit. 


L-2.2.3 To- Value 


The stop-range value for the subset. All selected rows 
in the buffer will have a value for the restricting object 
that is lower than or equal to this limit. 


L-2.2.4 Selected-Values 


An array of column indices specifying the columns that 
should be returned from the selected rows. 


ENTRY_DESCRIPTOR { 
00000002 
a 00000004 


NOTE — This illustration requests from 2nd row to the 4th row. 


Fic. 4 ILLUSTRATION OF SELECTIVE ACCESS OF PROFILE BUFFER BY ENTRY 


31 


IS 15959 : 2011 


entry descriptor { 
00000002 


00000004 


9002 
0003 
: 


NOTE — This illustration requests only the 2nd and 3rd columns of data from the 2nd row to the 4th row. 


Fic. 5 ILLUSTRATION OF SELECTIVE ACCESS OF PROFILE BUFFER BY ENTRY 


RANGE—DESCRIPTOR 


(0008, 0000010000FF, 02, 0000} 
1-1-7 06:00:00 

1-1-7 08:00:00 

00 } 


All Pe om 


are returned `S 


YI 01-01-07 06:00:00 
Y2 01-01-07 06:15:00 


Eo o 


YE 01-01-07 08:00:00 


Fic. 6 ILLUSTRATION OF SELECTIVE ACCESS OF PROFILE BUFFER BY RANGE 


32 


Acronyms and 
Abbreviations 


IEC 

NIST 
IETF 
DLMS 
DLMS UA 
COSEM 
HHU 

MRI 

DCE 

DC 

PSTN 
GSM 
GPRS 
802.2 LLC 
IEEE 

ASE 
ZigBee 
VZ 

IP 

PC 

MR 

US 

TCP 

UDP 
RS232/RS485 
TOU 

ABT 

CTT 

TZ 


IS 15959 : 2011 


ANNEX M 
(Foreword) 


ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS 


Description 


International Electro-technical Commission 

National Institute for Standards and Technology 

Internet Engineering Task Force 

Device Language Message Specification 

Device Language Message Specification User Association 
Companion Specification for Energy Metering 

Hand Held Unit 

Meter Reading Instrument 

Data Communication Equipment 

Data Concentrator 

Public Switched Telephone Network 

Global System for Mobile Communications 

General Packet Radio Service 

ISO/IEC 8802-2 defined Logical Link Control 

Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers 

Adaptive Server Enterprise for database security 

Low power wireless connectivity based on IEEE standard 802.15.4 protocol 
Vorwarts Zaehler (previous value counter) 

Internet Protocol 

Public Client 

Meter Reader 

Utility Settings 

Transmission Control Protocol (for connection oriented service) 
User Datagram Protocol ( for connectionless service) 


Recommended industrial Standards for communication between driver and receiver equipment 


Time of Use 
Availability Based Tariff 
Conformance Test Tool 
Time Zone 


33 


IS 15959 : 2011 


ANNEX N 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSTION 


Equipment for Electrical Energy Measurement, Tariff and Load Control Sectional Committee, ETD 13 


Organization Representative(s) 
In personal capacity (Triparna 28/10/1C, Nakuleshwar Bhattachrya, Suri SUBRATA Biswas (Chairman) 
Kalighat, Kolkata) 
Areva T&D India Ltd (ALSTOM), Kolkata Suri H. Ray 
Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Bangalore SHRI THARAK RAI 
SHRI BALASUBRAMANIAN M. (Alternate) 
Brihan Mumbai Electric Supply & Transport Undertaking, Mumbai SARI N. V. BHANDAR 
SHRI S. M. SAKPAL (Alternate) 
BSES Rajdhani Power Ltd, New Delhi SHRI BANSAL RAJESH 
SHRI Gitay Raj (Alternate) 
Bureau of Energy Efficiency, New Delhi Suri G. PANDIAN 
CG Actaris Electricity Management Ltd, New Delhi SHRI ASHOK DASH 


SHRI ASHISH TANDON (Alternate T) 
SHRI NEELABHRA PAUL (Alternate I) 


Central Board of Irrigation & Power, New Delhi Suri K. P. SINGH 
SHRI S. K. Batra (Alternate) 


Central Electricity Authority, New Delhi SHRIMATI ANJALI CHANDRA 
SHRIMATI A. K. Rasput (Alternate) 


Central Power Research Institute, Bangalore SHRI R. K. HEGDE 
SHRI B. A. SAWALE (Alternate) 
CESC Limited, Kolkata Suri UDAYAN GANGULI 
SHRI SIDDHARTHA MUKHERJEE (Alternate) 
Development Commissioner Micro, Small & Enterprises, Suri A. K. VERMA 
New Delhi 
ECE Industries Ltd, Hyderabad Suri K. K. SHARMA 
Electrical Research & Development Association, Vadodara Suri U. C. TRIVEDI 


Sarı H. K. Misura (Alternate) 


Elster Metering Private Ltd, Mumbai SHRIMATI MANJUSHRI 
Genus Overseas Electronics Ltd, Jaipur SHRI UMESH SONI 
Genus Power Infrastructures Ltd, Jaipur SHRI ARVIND KAUL 
HPL-Socomec Pvt Ltd, Gurgaon Suri C. P. Jain 

SHRI SUNDEEP TANDON (Alternate) 
IEEMA, New Delhi SHRI SUNIL SINGHVI 

SHRIMATI Anita Gupta (Alternate) 
Jaipur Vidyut Vitaran Nigam Ltd, Jaipur Suri ARJUN SINGH 
Larsen & Toubro Ltd, Mysore Suri R. M. BHAKTA 

SHRI AHUJA SANJAY (Alternate) 
Landis & Gyr Ltd, Kolkata Suri PRADIP RANJAN DUTT 


SHRI S. PAL (Alternate I) 
SHRI ANAND SRIVASTAVA (Alternate II) 
Suri R. DuBEy (Alternate MI) 


Maharashtra State Transco Ltd, Mumbai Suri SANTOSH N. KATAKWAR 
National Physical Laboratory, New Delhi Suri M. K. MITTAL 

Suri Biswas (Alternate) 
North Delhi Power Ltd, New Delhi Suri R. K. SINGH 

SHRI DESHMUKH (Alternate) 
NTPC, Noida SHRIMATI M. S. RADHA 


SHRI HIMANSHU SHEKHAR (Alternate) 


34 


Organization 


Power Grid Corporation of India Ltd, New Delhi 


PRAYAS, Secundrabad 


Rural Electification Corporation Ltd, New Delhi 


Secure Meters Ltd, Gurgaon 


The Tata Power Co Ltd, Mumbai 
Voluntary Organisation in Interest of Consumer Education, 
New Delhi 


Yadav Measurements Pvt Ltd, Udaipur 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 15959 : 2011 


Representative(s) 
Suri V. MITTAL 
Ms Punam (Alternate) 


SHRI SREEKUMAR N. 
SHRI GIRISH Sant (Alternate) 


Suri DINESH KUMAR 
SHRI P. S. HARIHARAN (Alternate) 


SHRI KAUSHIK GHOSH 
SHRI JHALORA SURENDRA (Alternate 1) 
SHRI SINGHVI S. K. (SML) (Alternate UI) 


Suri S. C. DHAPRE 
SHRI S. G. Josu (Alternate) 


Suri T. C. KAPOOR 
Sarı H. Wapuwa (Alternate) 


Suri B. M. Vyas 
Suri N. K. Buati N.K (Alternate) 


Suir R. K. TREHAN, Scientist ‘E’ and Head (ETD) 
[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRIMATI MANJU Gupta 
Scientist ‘E’ (ETD), BIS 


Panel on Metering Protocols and Interoperability, ETD 13/P1 


Central Power Research Institute, Bangalore 


Brihan Mumbai Electric Supply & Transport Undertaking, 
Mumbai 


Central Electricity Authority, New Delhi 

CESC Limited, Kolkata 

Elster Metering Private Ltd, Mumbai 
HPL-Socomec Pvt Ltd, Gurgaon 

Larsen & Toubro Ltd, Mysore 

Landis & Gyr. Ltd, Kolkata 

IEEMA, New Delhi 

Kalki Communication Technologies Ltd, Bangalore 
North Delhi Power Ltd, New Delhi 

Secure Meters Ltd, Gurgaon 


In personal capacity (Triparna 28/10/1C, Nakuleshwar Bhattachrya, 
Kalighat, Kolkata) 


35 


SHRI V. ARUNACHALAM (Convener) 


Suri S. M. SAKPAL 


SHRI ALOK GUPTA 

SHRI UDAYAN GANGULI 
Suri P. C. KARNIK 

SHRI C. P. JAN 

SHRI SANJAY AHUJA 

SHRI RAMESHWAR DUBEY 
Suri J. PANDE 

SHRI Vinoo S. WARRIOR 
Suri R. K. SINGH 

SHRI JHALORA SURENDRA 


SHRI SUBRATA BISWAS 


(Continued from second cover) 


India, may be referenced as IEC pre-standards. Contact details of these members can be found at -http:// 
www.dlms.com/organization/listofmembers/index.html. 


While writing this Specification it has been endeavoured not to contradict on principle TEC 62056 and the DLMS/ 
COSEM updates on which it is based. However, in case of any divergence/disparity, not amounting to conflict of 
interpretations that may be revealed later, provisions of this specification will prevail. 


The acronyms and abbreviations used in this standard are given in Annex M (see also IS/IEC/TR 62051-1). 
The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex N. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised) . The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: ETD 13 (6211). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 60 3843 
60 9285 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 
VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi. 


