INAI ATAF IS 16206 : 2017 
Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2022) 


gaa- ta afeat & fer 
Mra 


Safety for Gas Fired Furnaces 


ICS 25.180 


© BIS 2017 


ada AM AR 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
WM Wo, 9 FGM WAL Art, ae fereit-110002 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


September 2017 Price Group 2 


Industrial Fuel Fired Furnaces Sectional Committee, MTD 26 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft finalized by the Industrial 
Fuel Fired Furnaces Sectional Committee, had been approved by the Metallurgical Engineering Division Council. 


Safety is of utmost importance, especially for the gas fired industrial furnaces which are dealing with gas firing 
equipment. 


Main reasons are : 


a) Furnaces should be designed and equipped for safe and reliable operation; 

b) All process parameters like temperature, pressure, flow of gas, combustion air supply and distribution to 
burners should be controlled within safe limit to avoid fire hazards; and 

c) Flame monitoring and supervisory system with gas leak detection, flame arrestor as preventive measures 
against fire and explosion. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 16206 : 2017 


Indian Standard 
SAFETY FOR GAS FIRED FURNACES 


1 SCOPE 


This standard deals with safety norms to be considered 
while designing and operating industrial furnaces with 
gas firing system. 


2 GAS TRAIN EQUIPMENT 


2.1 Furnace will be provided with gas train component 
comprising the following for safe and reliable operation 
(see Fig.1). 

a) Gas filter (optional), 

b) Over pressure safety shut off valve, 

c) Gas governor, 

d) Safety relief valve in bleed line, 

e) Solenoid operated safety shut-off valves, 

f) Solenoid relief valve in bleed line, 

g) Pressure gauges, 

h) High/Low gas pressure switch, and 

j) Manual shut off/isolation valves. 


NOTES 


1 Above items will be required for natural gas/LPG/any rich 
gas. 


2 For low pressure gases like (BFG/COG) suitable gas train 
safety design device is provided. 


2.2 The above gas train will have the following safety 
interlocks: 


a) In case the gas pressure is lower than the 
desired minimum gas pressure, the low 
pressure switch will give impulse to solenoid 


VENT 
SOLENOID 
VALVE 
aby 
ar 
Faia i A 
S <> 
NL pe j 
xd (Or = 
KTA A PSL 
ay, 


j fey f 

e Y p & | 

mre i pI ais 
NATURAL OAS E oe NA 
‘cn k pg 


RSA ER 


HV = hand valve 

SSV = safety shut-off valve 
SRV = safety relieve valve 

PSL = low pressure switch 
SOV = solenoid valve 

PAH = high pressure alarm 


valves which will cut-off the gas supply to 
the furnace. 


b) In case the gas pressure is higher than the 
desired maximum gas pressure, the high 
pressure switch will give impulse to solenoid 
valves which will cut-off the gas supply to 
the furnace. In case of excessive gas pressure, 
the safety shut-off valve will cut-off gas 
supply and the safety relief valve will vent 
out excess pressure. 

c) The gas trapped to the solenoid valve will vent 
out of the shed through vent valve. 

d) Suitable filter is provided for gas train before 
the gas governor for safe operation of gas 
governor and solenoid. 


3 AUTO GAS IGNITION AND FLAME FAILURE 
SAFETY DEVICE FOR BURNERS 


3.1 For auto gas ignition of the burners through burner 
management panel/ PLC, the solenoid valve in the pilot 
gas line will be energized and will allow gas flow 
through pilot gas burners. Simultaneously, ignition 
transformer will fire and electric spark will ignite pilot 
gas flame. 


3.2 The flame of the pilot gas burners will be sensed 
by UV photo cell which through amplifier will give 
signal to the gas solenoid valve of burner to be 
energized and supply fuel gas to the main burner which 
will now get ignited with the help of pilot gas burner 
flame. After lapse of 10-15 s ignition transformer will 


ERT 
SOLENOIL 
VALVE 
“ys 


(z 
wo 
Fas u7 LEEN 
r 4 og 
ija bs w Si fav, 
4 i 
es ES k 


B van Se 


S GAs LINE AD, BAKERS 
F = filter 
GVR = governor 
PG = pressure gauge 
PAL = low pressure alarm 
PSH = _ high pressure switch 


Fic. 1 TypicAL Gas TRAIN CONTROL Loop 


IS 16206 : 2017 


shut-off and pilot gas solenoid valve will also be de- 
energized. During regular burner firing the burner 
flame will be sensed through UV photo cell and will 
maintain constant supply of gas to the burner. 


3.3 In case, the main burner flame fails due to any 
reason, the UV photo cell will immediately give signal 
through the amplifier to gas solenoid valve which will 
de-energize and shut-off the respective fuel line and 
audio- visual annunciator will show flame failure of 
respective burner. 


3.4 Pilot gas burner will be switched off automatically 
after ignition of the main burner. This pilot gas burner 
will work on intermittent principle and will remain ON 
only for pre-set ignition that is 10-15 s after which 
flame supervision that is by UV photo cell will detect 
main burner flame only. The pilot burners are used as 
interrupted manner or intermittent way and the pilot 
burners are not kept continuously ON. 


3.5 However, pilot burners are used for lean gases 
like producer gas and blast furnace gas. For rich gases 
like LPG, natural gas and coke oven gas etc, direct 
auto ignition (without a pilot burner) through spark 
igniter of main burner is done. Here, the working 
principle is similar to that of a pilot gas burner. 


4 EXCESS ZONE TEMPERATURE CONTROL 


Each zone of the furnace will be provided with a separate 
excess (override) temperature controlling system. In case 
the temperature of particular zone is not being properly 
controlled by the main zone temperature controlling 
system and exceeds beyond the safe operating 
temperature limit, this controller will give impulse to 
the respective solenoid valve to cut-off the gas supply 
to the burner. The system will include 1 number 
thermocouple, ON/OFF type temperature indicating 
controller and gas solenoid valve. In case the zonal 
temperature overshoots the maximum set value it will 
shut- off the zone fuel oil solenoid valve and at the same 
time the system will raise an audio-visual alarm. 


In case of hot redundancy in PLC control the additional 
excess temperature controller is not required. 


5 FURNACE PRESSURE CONTROL 


In order to control the furnace pressure, one set of 
furnace pressure controlling instrument is provided 
which consists of furnace pressure transmitter, pressure 
indicating controller and actuator motor for flue 
damper actuation (see Fig. 2). In this instrumentation 
system, the furnace pressure is measured with respect 
to atmospheric pressure through pressure transmitter 
which gives signal to furnace pressure indicating 
controller. Based on the desired set furnace pressure, 
the pressure indicating controller will give impulse to 
the actuator for proportionately opening/closing of the 


FwIRBMACE PRESS CONTROL LOU 


OPEN TO 


ie ATHUESFHERE 
oT ` 


FLUE 24MFER 


PT = pressure transmitter 

PIC = pressure indicating controller 
PAH = high pressure alarm 

ACT = actuator 


Fic. 2 FURNACE PRESSURE CONTROL Loop 


flue damper fitted in the flue passage. This process 
repeats all the times and controls the furnace pressure 
within the set limit to avoid flame shooting through 
furnace openings. 


6 LOW COMBUSTION AIR PRESSURE 


A low pressure switch will be installed in the 
combustion air line after the combustion air blower 
and will be interlocked with main gas solenoid valve. 
In case combustion air pressure is lower than the set 
pressure, there will be audio-visual alarm and pressure 
switch will give impulse to the gas solenoid valve which 
will cut-off the gas supply to the burner to avoid flow 
of unburnt gas in the furnace. 


7 HIGH COMBUSTION AIR PREHEAT 
TEMPERATURE AFTER RECUPERATOR 


7.1 The temperature controlling system comprising a 
thermocouple and ON/OFF temperature indicating 
controller will be provided in the combustion air line 
after recuperator so that if the temperature of 
combustion air exceeds beyond desired temperature, 
the controller will provide impulse to the modulating 
motor/pneumatic actuator of the hot air bleed control 


valve to bleed off the hot air as safety measure to avoid 
burner operation system (see Fig. 3). 


7.2 This hot air bleed control also protects the 
recuperator by allowing more cold combustion air flow 
through the recuperator tubes, thus reducing the mean 
wall temperature of the tubes. 


8 SAFETY AGAINST HIGH ENTRY 
TEMPERATURE OF FLUE GAS TO 
RECUPERATOR 


The temperature of flue gas before recuperator is 
controlled and kept within the safe limit. In this system, 
the flue gas temperature is sensed by thermocouple 
and signal is given to temperature indicating controller. 
Based on the set desired temperature of the flue gas, 
temperature indicating controller will give impulse to 
the actuator of the air control valve in the dilution air 
line which will open the air flow to the flue passage in 
order to limit the temperature of the flue gas at the 
recuperator entry. 


9 NITROGEN PURGING 


Nitrogen purging arrangement will be provided for 
purging of pipelines of gases. Purging of gas line from 
main isolating valve to burners is done before re- 
starting a furnace after prolonged shut down. 


SUNB. Alt 
7 


y 


: TEAUE 


TIC = temperature indicating controller 


CV = control valve 

PSL = low pressure switch 
PAL = low pressure alarm 
PT = pressure transmitter 


Z A oe 


IS 16206 : 2017 


10 WATER SEALING OF GAS SUPPLY LINE 


10.1 When gases like coke oven gas, producer gas and 
blast furnace gas are used as fuels, water sealing system 
is provided to ensure complete isolation of the gas flow 
to the furnace during prolonged shut down. 


10.2 The sealing system will be of “U”/ “V’?/ “drum” 
type with water inlet, overflow and drain valves, and 
gas isolation valves. When the gas flow is to be isolated, 
the gas isolation valves are closed, the sealing system 
is filled with water upto the desired overflow level. 


11 SPECIAL SAFETY SYSTEM 


11.1 Gas Detectors 


11.1.1 To detect leakage of gases from the pipelines 
or fittings, gas detectors are fitted over the gas train 
and in other suitable locations around the installed gas 
lines of furnace. 


11.2 Flame Arrestor 


For pipeline of highly inflammable gases, suitable 
flame arrestor is provided to prevent any fire hazard in 
the gas pipe installation by arresting the flame caused 
by back fire, to propagate it further. 


SPAD 


To BURNER 


Me- 


HOT AIR BLEED 


ACT = actuator 

HV = hand valve 

PG = pressure gauge 

PIC = pressure indicating controller 


Fic. 3 P & T DIAGRAM — TEMPERATURE CONTROL OF PREHEAT COMBUSTION AIR AND DILUTION AIR CONTROL 
FOR RECUPERATOR ENTRY 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MTD 26 (5080). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.1.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 26 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


