( Reaffirmed 2002 )

IS : 8218 ( Part I) - 1976

Indian Standard
SAFETY CODE FOR PLANT
LAYOUT
Committee,
Representing

RAILWAYS

PART I
Industrial
Chairman BRIM G. R. CHAINAN~ Members

Safety

Advisory Directorate

ISAC

Advice, Service & Labour Institutes ( Ministry of Labour ), Bombay

General, Factory

B. J. RANIRAKHIANI ( Alternate to Brig G. R. Chainani ) SHRI A. N. AI\ZBO Employees' State Insurance Corporation, New Delhi DR K. M. SAXENA ( Alternate ) Indian Airlines Corporation, New Delhi SHRI U. C. BANERJEE SHRI M. S. EKBOTE ( Alternate ) Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) SHRI K. BARDHAN SHRI J. P. AGARWAL ( Alternate ) United Trades Union Congress, Calcutta SHRI SUSRIL BHATTACHARYA Central Mining Research Station ( CSIR ), Dhanbad Da M. K. CRAKRABORTY DR B. SINGH ( Alternate ) Ministry of Shipping & Transport SHRI N. CHARRABORTY SHRI S. RAGHVAN ( Alternate ) CHIEF MECHANICAL ENGINEER, Railway Board, New Delhi NORTHERN RAILWAY, NEW DELHI Indian National Trade Union Congress, New Delhi SHRI J. S. DARA Builder's Association of India, Calcutta SHRI B. K. DHAR LT-COL D. K. GHOSE ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Health Services, New Delhi DR S. L. DHIR DR A. K. BANERJE.E( Alternate ) Central Electricity Authority, New Delhi DIR&;;;;~~COMMERCIAL ) DIRECTOR ( COMMERCIAL ) ( Alternate ) All India Trade Union Congress, Delhi SHRI B. D. JOSHI Ministry of Communications SHRI A. R. KESHAVA MURTHY SHRI B. NDDI ( Alternate ) India Jute Mills Association, Calcutta SHRI H. D. KHANNA Hind Mazdoor Sabha, Bombay SHRI S. KRISHNAN SHRI K. C. PARASHAR ( Alternate ) Standing Fire Advisory Committee, New Delhi SHRI P. N. MEHROTRA SRRI G. B. MENON ( Alternate ) Chief Controller of Explosives, Nagpur SI~RI I. N. MURTY SHRI K. S. SUBRAMANYAM ( Alternate ) ( Continued on page 2 )
SHRI

INDIAN

@ Copyright 1976 STANDARDS INSTITUTIYN

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyrig$t&t ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except wrth kritten permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. ; -m.

IS : 8218 ( Part I ) - 1976 ( Continuedfrom Page 1 )
Members Representing SHRI J. R. OVALEKAR National Safety Council, Bombay Smer N. RAGHAVAN ( Alternate ) DR N. M. PANT The Safety First Association of India, New Delhi SHRI V. K. MURTY ( Alfernate ) SARI S. S. PRAsAD Directorate General of Mines Safety, Dhanbad SHRI H. S. AHUJA ( Alternate ) SRRI S. G. RANADE Directorate General of Ordnance Factories, Calcutta Hindustan Steel Ltd, Bhilai SHRI S. R. C. RAO SRRI T. N. REDDY Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd, Bangalore Snnr P. SESEADRI Ministrv of Petroleum & Chemicals. New Delhi S&I JAQJIT SINGH ( Alternate I ) ' SHRI P. C. EASAW ( Alterrzate II ) Indian Chemical Manufacturers Association, Bombay SRRI D. K. SIRKAR TECHNICAL ADVISER ( BOILERS ) Central Boilers Board, New Delhi All India Manufacturers Organization, Bombav SHRI G. D. THAEOOR SHRI P. K. TRAKUR India Roads Congress, New Delhi SHRI G. VISHWANATHAN ( Alfernate ) Indian Cotton Mills Federation, New Delhi SHRI G. P. VASAND~I Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi SHRI S. VENXASWAMY Director General, IS1 ( Ex-o&o Member ) DR G. M. SAXENA, Director ( Chem ) ( Secretae)

Safety Code Subcommittee,
Convener SRRI P. R. SURENDRANATHAN Members

ISAC/%

Directorate General, Factory Advice, Service & Labour Institutes ( Ministry of Labour ), Bombay

SRRI K. C. GUPTA ( Alternate to Shri P. R. Surendranathan ) &RI K. ALIPPY Chief Inspector of Factories and Boilers, Kerala SHRI V. G. B~PAT Chief Electrical Inspector, Industries, Energy & Labour Department, Bombay SHRI J. K. ARANHA ( Alternate ) SRRI J. M. KAPUR Research, Designs & Standards Organization, Baroda House, New Delhi DR C. L. MALROTRA Employees' State Insurance Corporation, New Delhi DR K. M. SAXENA ( Alternate ) SHRI I. N. MURTY Chief Controller of Explosives, Nagpur SHRI V. K. MURTY Tata Iron & Steel Co Ltd, Jamshedpur SHRI J. R. OVALEEAR National Safety Council, Bombay SHRI N. RAGHAVAN ( Alternate ) SHRI M. K. PATANKAR Chief Inspector of Factories, Maharashtra SHRI B. K. PATNAIK Central Boilers Board, New Delhi SERI A. C. SRIVASTAVA Directorate General of Mines Safety, Dhanbad SHRI R. L. ARORA ( Alternate )

IS: 8218 ( Part I) - 1976

Indian Standard
SAFETY CODE FOR PLANT RAILWAYS
PART I LAYOUT

0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 6 September 1976, after the draft finalized by the Industrial Safety Advisory Committee had been approved by the Executive Committee. 0.2 In the preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from the following publications which is gratefully acknowledged: Model code of safety regulations for industrial establishments for the guidance of governments and industry, 1969. International Labour Organization. Accident prevention manual for industrial operations. Ed 6. 1969. National Safety Council, USA.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard lays down safe practices in the layout track, loading and unloading ) for plant railways. 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose of this standard the following terms shall apply. railway which is operated 2.1 Plant Railway -A operators of a plant, and includes both permanent stock. by the owners or way and rolling (clearances,

2.2 Permanent Ways and Tracks - Permanent ways having a line of rails fixed to ties or sleepers and laid to gauge, providing tracks for rolling stock of plant railways, and includes the necessary points and crossings, turntables, and sidings. 2.3 Rolling wagons. Stock Locomotives and goods wagons including tank

2.4 Locomotive - A self-propelled engine mounted on a truck designed to run on gauged tracks, and used for hauling other,.rolling stock in the transportation of materials. - 4`?

IS : 8218 (Part

I) - 1976 A roofed goods bogie wagon.

2.5 Bogie Wagon

2.6 Open Wagon ( Gondola ) - A goods bogie wagon designed to run on broad gauge or metre gauge track, and has raised sides and ends with no roof at the top. Unloading is done through the floor of the wagon. 2.7 Open Wagon ( Hopper ) - A goods bogie wagon designed to run on broad gauge or metre gauge track, and has raised sides and ends. Unloading is done through chutes provided at the sides. 2.8 Open Wagon sides and ends. ( BFR and BRH ) -A goods bogie wagon without

2.9 Tank Wagon - A goods bogie wagon on which the load is permanently rnounted on the underframe. 3. CLEARANCES

a tank for carrying

3.1 In so far as possible, plant railway hazards should be eliminated in the design of a new plant. Horizontal and vertical track clearances are primary considerations and the same shall be provided in accordance for the respective with the `Indian Railways - Schedule of Dimensions' It is recommended gauges in consultation with the concerned railways. that in this and all other phases of track construction, Indian Railways standards be adopted provided Municipal, State or Central regulations do not conflict. 3.2 Where platforms, building entrances, or structures are located along curved track, additional clearance shall be allowed on both sides of the curve for lateral movement of rolling stocks at centre and at ends as specified in the ` Indian Railways - Schedule of Dimensions `. 3.3 Additional track windows are installed clearance shall be allowed in adjacent buildings. also when door and

3.4 Wherever clearances are not specified particularly for the man riding on the side of a wagon, warning signs should be placed at suitable points. Side or overhead tell-tales sometimes are installed to give positive warning of approach to structures with close clearance or the driver should stop dead at such points and then proceed. 3.5 Standard clearances may not give enough protection where tracks pass doorways or corners of buildings, or other places where workers These may walk directly into tracks in front of moving wagons. locations may be safeguarded with fixed railings that force pedestrians to detour a short distance before stepping into the track. If a barrier railing is impractical, hinged bars or gates swinging horizontally are effective. Still another means is convex mirror located at the intersection of the passageway and the track at a 45" angle;in which approach railway equipment can be seen before the intersectit% reached. 4

IS: 8218 ( Part I ) - 1976 3.6 Various
methods are used to warn pedestrians at railway crossings inside plants. Blinking lights and gongs are more effective than signs. Where railway traffic is heavy, it can be safeguarded effectively by gates equipped with red lights and by watchman, who should be provided with a whistle and a hand signal lamp/flag. 3.7 The visibility of gates is increased by painting them yellow and black stripes at an angle of about 45 degrees. 3.8 Another means of protection is automatic bell warning with alternate

system.

3.9 Plant yards where plant or railway personnel may be required to shunt wagon or perform other work at night should be adequately illuminated by high intensity, high pole lights so arranged as to cast as few shadows as possible. 4. TRACK

4.1 All track fittings, and structure should be installed in accordance with Indian railway specifications for the service required.
4.2 It is essentially for safety that the track of whatever gauge be substantial and level. The rail bed should have a stable formation and be well drained through the use of gravel or crushed stone, with ties embedded and packed in ballast. To facilitate maintenance and inspection, the top surface of the ties should be left uncovered. 4.3 The size of ties varies according to different gauge sizes. Specifications used by railway are a good guide in purchasing ties for a plant railway. 4.4 The size of rails varies according to the various gauges, the loads encountered and the speeds. The principal factor in determining rail size is the type of the rolling stock. 4.5 Regardless of the size of the rails, they should be securely fastened If electric locomotives are used, joints to the ties by rail-tie fastening. should be electrically-bonded. 4.6 Rails and fittings should be inspected periodically and maintained Serious accidents may be and conform to standard specifications. caused if defects are permitted to go unremedied. 4.7 Tracks shall not be laid sharper than the maximum degree of curvature prescribed in the `Indian Railways - Schedule of Dimensions' for the various gauges. Generally, it is desirable to provide flat degree of curvatures for safer and better operation of rolling stocks in the plant yards. 4.8 Tracks should have a flat gradient at loading points. Workmen have been killed when wagons roll down the slopes an$,trap them. If it is brakes should be set tightly and necessary to stop wagon on gradients,

IS: 8218 ( Part
wagon stoppers, loading points drainage.

I) - 1976
rail clamps a gradient or rail slings used. However, for long of 1 : 1 000 is recommended for proper

4.9 Derailing switches are needed at the bottom of steep slopes and where loop lines slope and connect to main lines. Derailing switches also should be installed on the approach to permanent loading and unloading areas, where located within or outside of building. Where such areas are on tracks open at both ends, derailing switches should be placed beyond both ends of the loading and unloading area. Derailing switches should not be located in hard-paved area, as this type of surface will defect the prupose of the derailing switch. 4.10 Trestles should have a footwalk not from the nearest rail. Railing should be high. If footpaths are necessary on both should connect them. Trestles shall be anticipated loads and withstand vibration less than 1.5 m wide, measured 1 m high and tie boards 15 cm sides of the track, crosspaths designed and built to carry and shock.

4.11 Openings at ground level for conveyors and similar equipment used to unload wagons should be provided with covers that are kept in place when equipment is not in use to prevent persons from falling into them. 4.12 Hoppers or trackside bins into which material is dumped should also be covered with suitably spaced steel bars which will prevent anyone from falling or being carried through the openings. It may also be necessary to cover pathways that are under trestles in order to protect those using them from falling materials. 4.15 When tracks end in dead end, a buffer should be installed.

4.14 Point and crossing lever swinging parallel to the rails is safest. Point and crossing lamps are needed if tracks are to be used at night. 5. LOADING

AND UNLOADING

5.1 Tracks at loading and unloading areas warrant special attention because numerous accidents occur when loads are loaded into and unloaded out of wagons. When clearance between the door of the wagon and the unloading platform is wide, large gang planks are required. If the loading is considerably above or below the level of wagon openings, loading and unloading is more hazardous.
5.2 The dock should be wide enough to provide temporary storage area without interference with truck movements. Portable gang planks shall be securely anchored.

-S'!

.

