NAT Ta IS 6531 : 2021 
Indian Standard 


“ed & qq Pare — fearga cht pater 


( qav yedarı ) 


Canal Head Regulators — 
Criteria for Design 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 93.160 


© BIS 2021 


anda AM sri? 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 serere TH AMT, 4 freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


June 2021 Price Group 6 


Canals and Cross Drainage Works, WRD 13 


FOREWORD 
This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft finalized by 
the Canals and Cross Drainage Works, had been approved by the Water Resources Division Council. 


Regulators provided at the head of canal off taking from a river is termed as canal head regulator. It serves the 
purpose to regulate the supplies entering the canal and to control the silt entry into the Canal. 


This Standard was published in 1972 and the first revision was adopted in 1994. The important modifications 
made in the first revision were: 


a) Layout for curved channel head regulator in case of head works for spate irrigation system was 
added; 


b) Determination of value of C was modified; and 
c) Design criteria for curved channel sediment excluder for spate irrigation head works were included. 


The second revision of this standard has been made in view of the experience gained during the course of past 
years with use of this standard. In the present revision, the important modifications are as given below: 


a) The formula for discharge in case of partly opened gates has been revised as: 
Q- CL, 75 -HÇƏİ 


b) Figure 5 HY is given for different curves. value of ‘L’ can be determined by model test analysis. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2:1960 “Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 6531:2021 


Indian Standard 


CANAL HEAD REGULATORS — CRITERIA 
FOR DESIGN 


( Second Revision ) 


1SCOPE 


This Indian Standards covers the criteria for the 
hydraulic design of canal head regulators. 


2 REFERENCES 


The Indian Standards listed contain provisions which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below. 


IS No. Title 
4997:1968 Criteria for design of hydraulic jump 
type stilling basins with horizontal 
and sloping apron 
10430:2000 Criteria for design of lined canals and 
guidance for selection type of lining 
(first revision) 
3 LOCATIONS AND LAYOUT 


3.1 Location 


The location of canal head regulator is interlinked with 
the location of diversion work. The head regulator 
should be located as close to the diversion structure as 
possible and preferably at the end of the outer curve 
(convex bend), if available, to minimize the sediment 
entry into the off taking canal (see Fig. 1A). 


3.2 Layout 


The canal head regulator should be properly aligned so 
as to reduce silt entry into the canal to a minimum and 
avoid backflow and formation of stagnant zones in the 
pocket. To achieve this, the axis of canal head regulator 
may be located at an angle of 90? to 110? (see Fig. 1B) 
with respect to the axis of the diversion work. This 
may, however, be confirmed from model studies, if 
necessary. A typical layout of the canal head regulator 
is given in Fig. 2. 

Layout of canal head regulator in case of head works 
with sediment excluder is given in Fig. 3. 


4 HYDRAULIC DESIGN 


4.1 General 


The hydraulic design of canal head regulator consists 
of the following: 

a) Fixation of pond level (including losses through 
structures); 

b) Fixation of sill level, width of sill and shape of 
sill; 

c) Fixation of waterway, number and width of spans 
and height of gate openings, requirements of 
breast wall etc; 

d) Shape of approaches and other component parts; 

e) Safety of 
considerations; 


structure from surface flow 


f) Safety of structure from sub-surface flow 


consideration; and 


g) Energy dissipation terminal 


structures. 


4.2 Pond Level 


Pond level, in the under-sluice pocket, upstream of the 
canal head regulator should generally be obtained by 
adding the working head to the designed full supply 
level in the canal. The working head should include the 
head required for passing the designed discharge into 
the canal and the head losses in the regulator. If under 
certain situations there is a limitation of pond level, 
the full supply level should be fixed by subtracting the 
working head from the pond level. In regions of high 
altitude where there is a possibility of ice formation, 
a cover of ice of about 0.5 m may be added to the 
working head. 


arrangements, 


4.3 Sill Level 


Sill level should be fixed by subtracting from pond 
level the head over the sill required to pass the full 
supply discharge in the canal at a specified pond level. 
To obtain control on entry of silt into the canal it is 
desirable that the sillof head regulator should be kept as 
much higher than the sill of under sluices, as possible, 
commensurate with the economic waterway and the 
driving head available. If a silt-excluder is provided, 
the sill level of head regulator should be determined 
in conjunction with the design requirements of 
silt-excluder. 


IS 6531:2021 


Fic. 1A CANAL HEAD REGULATOR DOWNSTREAM A CONVEX BEND 


Ç OF HEADWORKS 


Ç OF CANAL HEAD 
REGULATOR 


Fic. 1B ALIGNMENT OF HEAD REGULATOR 


Fic. 1 HEAD REGULATOR TYPICAL ALIGNMENT 


IS 6531:2021 


AXIS OF 
BARRAGE 


LOOSE APRON 


TOE WALL 


BLOCK PROTECTION 


| "C—SHEET m 


UPSTREAM IMPERVIOUS FLOOR 


SS San 


AXIS OF 
REGULATOR 


SLOPE 11N2 DOWNSTREAM IMPERVIOUS FLOOR: 


+ DOWNSTREAM SHEET PILE 


Il INVERTED FILTER 
TOE WALL 


LOOSE APRON 


TED 
FILL 


WING "" 
SUPPORT 
ON BACK 


mt 


Fic. 2A TvPiCAL PLAN OF HEAD REGULATOR 


SPACE FOR GATE GATE GROOVE 
HOISTING PLATFORM 


AXIS CF HEAD 


BREAST WALL 
REGULATOR 


BAFFLE BLOCK 


DOWNSTREAM 


UPSTREAM 
SHEET PILE 


SHEET PILE 


— — — impervious FLOOR —,—i 
BLOCK 
BLOCK 
PROTECTION protection / 
TOE WALL 
TOE WALL LOOSE APRON 


Fic. 2B TYPICAL SECTION OF HEAD REGULATORS 


Fic. 2 LAYOUT OF CANEL HEAD REGULATOR 


IS 6531:2021 


ROAD TOP — 


BARRAGE AXIS 


xt ° 

C.C. BLOCKS s: jig . 

D n | 6 
i APRON | wys fH Ë U/S INVERTED FILTER 
oladi q | a U/S LAUNCHING APRON 

al FT Š 

c 

SILT EXCLUDER TUNNELS š 

X = R 
FLOV 


Fic. 3A TvPiCAL PLAN OF HEAD REGULATORS WITH SEDIMENT EXCLUDER 


4] 


SLT EXCLUDER TUNNELS | | 


*-»mercsa 


. PES 
PEN ME) AC MESE E 


ES 
CEMENT CONCRETE 


Fic. 3B LONGITUDINAL SECTION WITH SEDIMENT EXCLUDER 


Fic. 3 LAYOUT OF CANAL HEAD REGULATOR WITH SEDIMENT EXCLUDER 


4.3.1 The required head over the sill H, for passing a 
discharge O, with the effective waterway L , should be 
worked from the following formula: 


Q=C.L HC 
where 
= discharge in m/s; 
C= coefficient of discharge; 
L = effective waterway in m; and 


— required head over the crest for passing a 
discharge Q, in m. 


4.3.1.1 In the formula given in 4.3.1 the exact value 
of C depends on many factors, such as head over the 
sill, shape and width of the sill (W), upstream slope (Z ) 
and downward slope (Z,) of the sill, height over the 
upstream floor (P) and roughness of its surface. Some 
values of C/C, for varied H/P and H /W for un gated 
flow and for Z, = 0, Z, = 2 and Z,= 3 are shown in 
Fig. 4. C, is the theoretical value of coefficient of 
discharge generally taken as 1.705. The discharge 
reduction factor for varied submergence ratios H/H, 
should be obtained from Fig. 5 (where H, is depth of 
tail water level above the crest). The values of C should 
be determined by the model studies where values based 
on prototype observations on similar structures are not 
available. 


When the outflow is controlled by partly open gates, 
conditions similar to sluice flow develops. The required 
head in this case may be computed by the following 
equation: 

Q-C L, pa - H? | 


where 
Q = discharge, in m/s; 
C = coefficient of discharge; 
L. = effective waterway, in m; and 
H,andH, = total heads to the bottom and top 


of the orifice, in m. 


4.3.2 Width of Sill 

Width of sill should be kept according to the 
requirements of the gates, trash and stop logs subject to 
a minimum of 2/3 H. 


4.3.3 Shape of Sill 
The edges of sill should be rounded off with a radius 


equal to H.. The upstream face should generally be kept 
vertical and the downstream sloped at 2 : 1 or flatter. 


4.4 Having decided upon the effective waterway, the 
total water way between the abutments including piers 
should be worked out from the following formula: 


L-L +2(NK +K)H +W 
e p a e 


IS 6531:2021 


where 
L. = total waterways, in m; 
L, = effective waterways, in m, 
N = number of piers; 
K = pier contraction coefficient (see 4.4.1); 
K — abutment contraction coefficient (see 4.4.2); 
H, — head over crest, in m; and 


W - total width of all piers, in m. 


4.4.1 Recommended values of K are as follows: 


a) For square nose piers with corners rounded with 
radius equal to about 0.1 of the pier thickness: 


K = 0.02 
p 


b) for rounded nose piers: 


K = 0.01 
p 


c) For pointed nose piers: 


K = 0.00 
p 


4.4.2 Recommended values of K are as follows: 


a) For square abutments with head walls at 90° to the 
direction of flow: 


K.=02 | E 


b) For rounded abutments with head walls at 90° to 
the direction of flow for: 


e 


c) For rounded abutments where r > 0.5 H , and head 
wall is placed not more than 45° to the direction of 
flow: 


0.5 H, >r > 0.15 H. 
K,-04 


K,=0 


where 


r= abutment rounding radius 


IS 6531:2021 


4.5 Shape of Approaches and Other Component 
Parts 


The shape of approaches and other component parts 
should preferably be fixed by means of model studies. 
However, for works of medium size the criteria given 
in 4.5.1 and 4.5.2 may be adopted. 


4.5.1 At the upstream inlet a smooth entry should be 
ensured by providing circular, elliptical or hyperbolic 
transitions at shown in Fig. 1A and Fig. 2. The splay 
may be of the order of 1 : 1 to 3 : 1. These transitions 
should be confirmed by model studies, where necessary. 


4.5.2 At the downstream side, straight, parabolic or 
hyperbolic transitions should be provided as shown in 
Fig. 1A and Fig. 2. The splay may be of the order of 
3:1to 5: 1. These transitions should be confirmed by 
model studies, where necessary. 


4.5.3 Wing walls should normally be kept vertical up 
to the end of the impervious floor beyond which they 
should be flared from vertical to the actual slope of 
the canal section. However, in order to obtain greater 
economy the wing walls may be kept vertical up to 
the toe of glacis and beyond this they may be flared 
gradually to 0.5 : 1. 


ORZONIM. REST 


4.6 Safety of Structure on Permeable Foundation 
from Surface Flow consideration 


In the case of regulators on permeable foundation, 
the factors enumerated in 4.6.1 to 4.6.4 should be 
determined. In case of downstream non-erodible beds 
protective measures may not be necessary. 


4.6.1 Depth of Upstream Cut-off in Relation to Scour 


On the upstream side of the head regulator, cut-off 
should be provided and taken to the same depth as the 
cut-off stream of diversion work. 


4.6.2 Basin Dimensions and Appurtenances 
These should be provided in accordance with IS 4997. 


4.6.3 Thickness of Floor on Sloping Glacis with 
Reference to Hydraulic Jump 


The hydraulic jump profile should be plotted under 
different conditions of flow. Average height of the 
jump through should then be obtained by deducting the 
levels of the jump profile from corresponding hydraulic 
gradient line. This will be taken as the unbalanced head 
for which safety of glacis floor should be ensured. As a 
rough guide the unbalanced head may be assumed to be 
1/2 (d, — d ) where d, and d, are conjugate depths at the 
beginning and end of the hydraulic jump. 


FiG. 4 RECOMMENDATION OF COEFFICIENT OF DISCHARGE FOR VARIED H, P AND W 


0.8 


DISCHARGE REDUCTION FACTOR 


2- He/l= 06 
3- HeA- 1.0 
4- He/l- 1.5 
5. HeA= 2.0 


0.4 0.6 
SUBMERGENCE RATIO Hd/He 


—— He/p-03,21-0.22-2 
Help - 0.6, 21-0.22-2 
He/p = 1.0,21-0.22-2 
He/p- 1.3,21-0.22-2 


mI 


NOTE — Value of ‘L’ can be determined by model test analysis. 


DA 


IS 6531:2021 


DISCHARGE REDUCTION FACTOR 


1.0 


SUBMERGENCE RATIO Hd/He 


——— He/p=0.3,21=0.22=3 
He/p = 0.6, 21-0.22-3 
Hef = 1.0,21=0.Z2=3 
He/p= 1.3, Z1 =0. Z2=3 


--— 


Fic. 5 VARIATION OF DISCHARGE REDUCTION FACTOR FOR SUBMERGED FLOW 


4.6.4 Length and Thickness of Upstream | and 


Downstream Loose Aprons 


Just at the end of concrete floor on the downstream an 
inverted filter 1.5 to 2 d long (d being the depth of scour 
below bed), consisting of 600 to 900 mm deep concrete 
blocks with open gaps (100-150 mm to be suitably 
filled with coarse material) laid over 500 to 800 mm 
graded filter, should be provided. The graded inverted 
filter should conform to the following design criteria: 


D,, of filter > s> D,, of filter 
D, of foundation Da, of foundation 


where D, in mm 


4.6.4.1 Dovvnstream of the inverted filter, loose apron 
1.5D long consisting of either boulders of not less 
than 40 kg in vveight or vvire boulder crates should be 
provided so as to ensure a minimum thickness of 1 m in 
launched position. 


4.6.4.2 Upstream of the impervious floor, blocks and 
loose apron should be provided which should be similar 
to that provided in the corresponding weir or barrage. 


4.7 Safety of Structure on Permeable Foundation 
from Sub-surface Flow Considerations 


For this, the factors enumerated from 4.7.1 to 4.7.3 
should be considered. 
4.7.1 Exit Gradient at the End of Impervious Floor 


It should be determined from accepted formulae 
and curves. The factors of safety of exit gradient for 
different types of soils should be as follows: 


a) Shingle 4to 5 
b) Coarsesand 5t06 
c) Fine sand 6to 7 


4.7.2 Total Floor Length of Impervious Floor and 
Depth of Downstream Cut-off 


These two parameters are inter-related. Total floor 
length can be decreased by increasing the depth of 
downstream cut-off and vice versa, but increase in the 
depth of downstream cut-off should result in increase 
in the concentration of uplift pressures, especially in 
the lower half of the floor. A balance between the two 
should be arrived at on the basis of economic studies 
and other requirements, if any. 


IS 6531:2021 


4.7.2.1 Minimum of total floor length reguired should 
be the sum of: 


a) horizontal floor in the downstream from surface 
flow considerations (see 4.6); 


b) length reguired to accommodate sloping glacis 
and crest; and 


c) about 3 m extra, upstream of the crest or length 
reguired from other considerations. 


4.7.2.2 Depth of downstream cut-off should be worked 
out for this floor length to ensure safe exit gradient. If 
depth of downstream cut-off so calculated is excessive, 
it can be reduced in increasing upstream floor length. 
As a rough guide depth of downstream cut-off should 
not be less than (4/2 * 0.5), where d is the water depth 
in metre corresponding to full supply discharge. 


4.7.3 Thickness of Downstream Floor with Reference 
to Uplift Pressure 


Uplift pressures at key points on the floor should be 
determined from the accepted curves and formulae, 
corresponding to the condition of high flood level in 
the rivers upstream of head regulator and no water in 
the canal downstream of head regulator. Upstream of 
sill, only nominal floor thickness of about 1 m should 
be provided. 


5 OPERATION 


5.1 Provision for Breast Wall 


If the maximum flood level to be attained after 
construction of the weir is not very high as compared 
to the full supply level of canal, that is, if the difference 
is up to 1 m, gates may be carried right above the 
high flood level. However, when the difference is 
considerable, economy may be achieved by limiting 
the height of gates and providing a breast wall to stop 
the floods. 


5.2 Working Platform 


A bridge and working platform should be provided for 
the operation of gates. The height of working platform 
depends upon the travel of gates. When there is a breast 
wall, the gate has to rise up to its bottom whereas in 
other case it has to go above high flood level. The 
working platform should be such that counter-weights 
are clear of water in the canal. 


5.3 The canal head regulator may have to be operated 
under partially open conditions during high flood 
which may have to be taken under considerations while 
designing the height of gates. 


6 SEDIMENT EXCLUSION DEVICES 


6.1 Sediment excluder is a device constructed in the 
river bed in front of a canal head regulator to prevent, 
as far as possible, sediment entering into the off 


taking canal. Sediment exclusion becomes necessary, 
where excessive sediment entry into the canal causes 
silting-up and gradually reduces its capacity. Such 
devices are necessary, if sediment entering the canal is 
harmful. 


6.2 Fundamental Principle 


Stream carries most of sediment load of coarser grade 
near the bottom. If these bottom layers are intercepted 
and removed before the water enters the canal, most 
of the sediment load causing silting up would be 
withdrawn. This is generally achieved by constructing: 


a) tunnel type sediment excluders suitably located in 
front of different bays of the head regulators, and 


b) a curved channel with skimming weir towards the 
canal. It is recommended that hydraulic model 
tests be carried out to check the performance of 
the proposed design. 


6.3 Design Criteria for Sediment Excluder 


6.3.1 Approach 


The river approach plays an important part and it should 
be kept straight to the mouth of the excluder tunnels as 
far as possible. 


6.3.2 Design of Tunnels 


a) Location and Number of Tunnels — The excluder 
tunnels are located in front of the canal head 
regulator and their alignment is generally kept 
parallel to the regulator. The number of tunnels 
is determined by the available discharge for 
escapages, approach conditions and length of the 
canal regulator. Usually four to six tunnels are 
provided. Any change in the alignment, if found 
necessary, should be on smooth curves. 


Spacing and Bell Mouthing of Tunnels — The 
tunnel nearest to the head regulator has to be 
of the same length as that of the regulator. The 
consecutive tunnels should be spaced at such 
distances that the mouth of the one nearer to the 
head regulator comes within the suction zone of 
the succeeding tunnels and no dead zone is left 
between the two to permit sediment to deposit. 
The extent of suction and distance between mouth 
of two tunnels should normally be determined by 
model studies. Generally a distance of about 12 m 
may be adequate. The tunnels should be suitably 
bell mouthed at the inlet to minimize entry losses 
and improve suction. Bell mouthing should be 
done within the thickness of divide wall and may 
be done on any suitable elliptical curve. 


b 


— 


c 


— 


Size of Tunnels — Size of tunnels depends upon 
the number of tunnels, self-clearing velocity of 
flovv required to be provided, vvhich may be kept 
3 m/s for the alluvial and 4.0 to 4.5 m/s for the 
boulder stage river, and the discharge available for 
escapades. Besides, the convenience of a man for 
inspection and repairs should also be kept in view. 


d) Roof and Bed of Tunnels — The roof slab of the 
tunnels should be kept flush with sill of the canal 
regulators and the bed kept at the upstream floor 
level of weir/anicut/barrage. 


e) Exit — All the tunnels outfall into the stilling 
basin through one or two under sluice bays of 
the weir or anicut next to the canal regulator. It 
is usually one in case of sandy reaches and two 
in the case of rivers in shingle or boulder stage. 
The tunnels should be suitably throttled laterally 
or vertically or both as the conditions may be, 
to produce accelerating velocities in the tunnels, 
maximum being at the exit end so that sediment 
material once extracted does not deposit anywhere 
in the tunnels. 


f) Bend Radius — Straight tunnels should be 
preferred for the sediment excluders, however, ifa 
bend becomes inevitable, its radius may vary from 
5 to 10 times the tunnel's width. 


Transitions — All transitions to piers in bell 
mouthing at top or sides should preferably be 
elliptical, the major axis being in the direction of 
flow and two to three times the minor axis. 


wa 


g 


6.3.3 Control Structure 


The excluder tunnels are operated by under-sluice 
gates. These should be regulated either for the tunnels 
to run full bore or to remain completely closed. 


6.3.4 Outfall Channels 


No separate outfall channel is required for the sediment 
excluders. As mentioned in 6.3.2 (e), these outfall into 
the river downstream of the weir or anicut through 
under-sluice bays. In the case of shingle or boulder bed 
rivers a provision of some additional contrivance that 
Is, a sort of guide wall in the stilling basin may become 
necessary to eliminate formation of big deposits there. 


6.3.5 Escapage Discharge and Minimum Working Head 


Seepage discharge is generally governed by sediment 
size and load. Escapage discharge of 15 to 20 percent 
of canal discharge is generally required. A minimum of 
0.5 m to 0.75 m working head is required for sediment 
excluders on sandy rivers and a minimum of 1.0 m to 
1.25 m for excluders on shingle or boulder beds. 


6.3.6 Losses in Tunnels 


These should comprise friction losses and losses at the 
bends and transitions and should be computed by the 
following formulae: 


a) Friction loss: 


where 


IS 6531 : 2021 


h,— head loss, in m; 
V= Velocity in, m/s; 
L= Length of tunnel, in m; 
N — rugosity coefficient (see IS 10430); and 
R= hydraulic mean depth. 
b) Loss due to bend: 


h. = loss due to bend; 


f= 0.124 + 3.134 (S/2r)'?; 
g- acceleration due to gravity; 
— angle of deviation, in degrees; 
— width of tunnel, in m; and 
r= radius of bend along centre line of tunnel, 


in m. 
c) Transitional loss due to change of velocity in 
expansion in metre. 


iL 
i 2g) (2g 


K — coefficient which may vary from 0.1 to 0.5 
from gradual to abrupt transitions; 
h = transitional loss due to change of velocity 
in expansion, in m; 
V and V, — velocities before and after the transition 
in, m/s; and 
g= acceleration due to gravity in, m?/s. 


6.4 Design Criteria for Curved Channel Sediment 
Excluder for Spate Irrigation Head works 


The layout of curved channel sediment excluder is 
shown in Fig. 3. Some factors relevant to such a design 
are: 


a) River flow variability; 

b) Sediment transport rates in the river; 

c) Availability of water for sluicing purposes; 

d) Availability of head for sluicing purposes; and 
e) River mobility. 


6.4.1 Principle of Design 


Water surface in curved channel flow becomes super 
elevated (higher on the outside) and a spiral flow 
develops. The bottom current moves towards the inside 
of bend, and in this region the sediment will be moved 
away from the outside of the bend provided the current 
Is sufficiently strong. For spate irrigation systems, the 
principle can be used by constructing a suitably curved 
local sluice and approach channel. 


IS 6531:2021 


6.4.2 Water Requirement for Sluice Flow 

A sluice flow of about 10 to 20 percent of the canal flow 
should be provided for sediment exclusion. 

6.4.3 Tail Water Level 


The efficiency of the curved channel sediment excluder 
is strongly dependent upon tail water level. For 
variation of tail water depths from 84 to 116 percent 


10 


(of weir crest height from downstream floor) the 
efficiency varies from 75 to 30 percent. To preserve the 
curvature effect of the sluice channel velocities should 
not be too low and hence depths of flow should not be 
too large. 


6.4.4 It is desirable to verify the hydraulic design of 
curved channel sediment excluder through model 
studies. 


IS 6531:2021 


ANNEXA 
(Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Composition of Canal & Cross Drainage Works, Sectional Committee, WRD 13 


Organization 


Central Water Commission, New Delhi 


Brahmaputra Board, Guwahati 

Bhakra Beas Management Board, Punjab 

Central Board of Irrigation & Power, New Delhi 
Central Soil and Materials Research Station, New Delhi 
Central Water & Power Research Station, Pune 

Central Water Commission, New Delhi 


DHI (India) Water and Environment Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 
Indian Institute of Technology BHU, Varanasi 


Jacob Consulting Engineering Services(India) Ltd, 
New Delhi 


IIT, Roorkee, Roorkee 


In Personal Capacity, Jaipur 
IIT, Delhi 
Irrigation Department, Govt of Andhra Pradesh, 


Hyderabad 
Irrigation Department, Haryana 
Irrigation Department, Govt of Punjab, Chandigarh 
Irrigation Department, Govt of Uttar Pradesh, Lucknow 
Irrigation Division, O/O Chief Engineer, 
Thiruvananthapuram 
Irrigation Research Institute, Roorkee 
Maharashtra Engineering Research Institute, Nashik 
Narmada Water Resources, Water Supply & Kalpasar 


Deptt, Gandhinagar 
NHP Ltd, Faridabad 


11 


Representative(s) 


CHIEF ENGINEER DESIGN (N & W) (Chairman) 


SHRI GAYA PRASAD SINGH 
SHRI SHYAMAL KR DEKA (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR DESIGNS 
SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER (Alternate) 


DR G. P. PATEL 
Suri M. L. BAWEJA (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJEEV KUMAR 
SHRI MAHABIR Drxit (Alternate) 


DR NEENA ISAAC 
SHRI SURESH KUMAR (Alternate) 


Director BCD (N & W) 
DIRECTOR (Alternate) 


DR FLEMMING JAKOBSEN 
DR PRABHAT KR SINGH DIKSHIT 


Suri PrusH K. Datta 
SHRI RAJIB CHAKRABORTY (Alternate) 


DR DEEPAK KASHYAP 
SHRI ASHISH PANDY (Alternate) 


SHRI Y. C. AGRAWAL 
Dn B. R. CHAHAR 


SHRI I. S. N. RAJU 
SuPDT ENGINEER (CANAL) (Alternate) 


SHRI SANDEEP TANEJA 
SHRI PRADEEP YADAV (Alternate) 


EXECUTIVE ENGINNER (CDO) 
Director (CDO) (Alternate) 


SHRI CHANDRA SHEKAR VISHWAKARMA 
SHRI UPENDRA NATH Kuwar (Alternate) 


Suri K. A. Josuv 
SHRI MANJU BALAKRISHNAN (Alternate) 


SHRI LALIT KUMAR SHARMA 
SHRI NAVEEN SINGHAL (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJENDRA PAWAR 
Suri M. M. PARATE (Alternate) 


Suri A. M. BARVE 
Suri B. H. CHAUDHARI (Alternate) 


SHRI AJAY MITTAL 
SHRI SHRISH DUBEY (Alternate) 


IS 6531:2021 


Organization 


Public Works Department Govt of Tamil Nadu, Chennai 
Sardar Sarovar Narmada Nigam Ltd, Gujarat 
WAPCOS Limited, New Delhi 


Water Resources Department Govt of Bihar, Patna 


Water Resources Department, Raipur 
Water Resources Department, Madhya Pradesh, Bhopal 
Water Resources Department of Rajasthan, Jaipur 


Water Resources Development Organisation, Bengaluru 
BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


SuPDT ENGINEER DESIGN, WRD 
SurDT ENGINEER (CANALS) (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR (CANALS) 
CHIEF ENGINEER (DESIGN) (Alternate) 


SHRI SHAMBHU AZAD 
Suri A. K. GEHLOT (Alternate) 


SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER 


SHRI R. K. NAGARIA 
Suet U. R. Ratuor (Alternate) 


Suri V. K. WASHIK 
SHRI BHAGWaTI PRASAD Gupta (Alternate) 


CHIEF ENGINEER (ID & R) 
DIRECTOR (CANAL SID & R) (Alternate) 


NOMINATION A WAITED 


SHRIMATI RACHNA SEHGAL, SCIENTIST “F” AND HEAD (WRD) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


SHRI DUSHYANT PRAJAPATI 
Scientist ‘D’ (WRD), BIS 


12 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
“BIS Catalogue’ and “Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: WRD 13 (15459). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, TV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


