(Superseding

IS 7091:1989 IS 7377 : 1974 )

Indian Standard

( Reaffirmed 2004 )

SHOTPEENINGOFSTEEL PARTSSPECIFICATION (First Revision)

Stxwrd Reprint JUNE 1996

UDC 621.787.6

. @ BIS 1989

BUREAU
M~AK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR NEW DELHI

STANDARDS
SHAH 110002 ZAFAR MAE

l

Price Group 4

Springs Sectional Committee, EDC 75

FOREWORD This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 1 March 1989, after the draft finalized by the Springs Sectional Committee had been approved by the Engineering Division Council. Shot peening is intended to induce surface compressive stresses in metal parts for the purpose of improving resistance to fatigue and stress corrosion cracking. Springs, axles and aircraft landing gears are typical examples of such parts. To have the desired effect, shot peening requires that specified intensity and coverage be achieved on critical areas where the high tension stresses or stress ranges are most likely to cause fatigue or stress corrosion failures in service. Actual experience *with service failures or fatigue tests may sometimes be required to discover or confirm the location of areas subject to critical stressing as a result of service, design, and/or manufacturing conditions. To follow a uniform practice in shot peening, the standards IS 7001 : 1973 `Method for shot peening and test for shot peened ferrous metal parts' and IS 7377 : 1974 `Specification for intensity of shot peening of helical and laminated springs ( railway rolling stock )' have been revised and brought out as a single standard. In the preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from SAE J 442 Aug 79 `Test strip; holder and Gauge for shot peening' and SAE J 443 Jan 84 `Procedure for using standard shot peening test strip'. The main modifications are: Incorporation of general concept, method of control, recommendation for selection of test strip, a> designation of intensity of measurement, present practice of measurement; correlation of A, N and C strips as checked on an Almen gauge, tolerance for acceptance;

b) Deletion

of tables of arc height in relation to cross section thickness of parts of simple shape to be shot peened, and Almen arc height in respect of laminated springs made of steel of different composition; and of earlier figures in respect of test strip sizes, gauge holder and Almen gauge.

Modification c>

IS 7001 r 1989

Indian Standard

SHOTPEENINGOFSTEEL PARTSSPECIFICATION (First Revision )
1 SCOPE Covers the engineering requirements for shot peening of steel parts by laying down the characteristics and method of test. 2 OUTLINE OF METHOD OF CONTROL Intensity is used mainly for two purposes: a) To check the performance of a_ peening machine including parts handling methods, and b) To specify a desired result on a part. Specification of an intensity ( for instance, 12 A ) implies an arc measured when saturation has been obtained ( see 3.3 ). Complete visual coverage is an indication of saturation if uniform shot is used for peening ( see 3.4 ). 3.3 Saturation A plot of peening time versus arc height can be used to define saturation. By peening a series of longer peening test strips, using increasingly times, with all other conditions maintained constant, and plotting the series of points on a graph of time versus arc height, a curve will develop. These points define a curve with a general shape as shown in Fig. 1. 3.3.1 An arc height increase of 20 percent for doubled peening time may be adequate for some applications. An increase of 10 percent for double peening time defines the knee for critical applications. A smaller percentage increase than 10 percent requires longer peening time to reach this `knee' in the curve. 3.4 Coverage Complete visual coverage is defined as a uniform and complete dimpling or obliterating of the original surface of the part of work piece as determined by visual examination using a 10 x magnifying glass. For practical purposes, 90 percent coverage is considered complete. 3.5 Arc Height It is determined by measuring the camber or arc of test strip N, A or C which has been peened one side only. Normally only the A strip is used for evaluation of peening intensity for laminated and helical springs. 3.6 Shots Shots should be initially inspected before using and also controlled throughout the peening cycle. The actual amount of sampling and inspection required will vary with each operation and with 1

2.1 The control of a peening machine is primarily a matter of control of properties of a blast of shots in its relation to the work being peened. The basis of measurement of these properties is as follows. 2.1.1 If a flat piece of steel is clamped to a solid block and exposed to a blast of shots, it will be curved upon removal from the block. The curvature will be convex on the peened side. The extent of this curvature on a standard sample serves as a means of measurement of the blast. The degree of curvature depends upon the properties of the blast, the properties of the test strip, and the nature of exposure to the blast, as follows. 2.1.1.1 Properties of the blast are dependent on the velocity, size, shape, density, kind of material and hardness of the shots. `2.1.1.2 The properties of exposure to the blast are the length of time, angle of impact, and shot flow rate. 2.1.1.3 The properties of the test strip depend upon the physical dimensions and mechanical properties of the strip. 3 TERMINOLOGY 3.1 Shot Peening A cold working method to induce compressive stress by pelting the surface of steel parts with shots for increasing the fatigue strength, 3.2 Peening Intensity Intensity is expressed as the arc height of a shotpeened test strip. The curvature is a function of the mass of the shot, its hardness, its velocity, its angle of impingement on the peened surface, and the exposure time of the strip to the shot stream.

IS 7991 f I989

Y 2 0 c-' g I

LESS THAN 10' WHEN EXPOSU DOUBLED. USE LESS CRITICA

0

T

2T EXPOSURE
FIN. 1

TIME

INTENSITY DETERMINATIONCURVE

' This

requirements for shots quality, cleanliness, etc. control should serve as a check on the effectiveness of equipment including the shot separator. The same reasoning applies to other peening media, such as, glass beads, slurries, etc. The shot peening media such as cut wire shots shall be free from sharp edges. Unless otherwise specified on the drawings, if only a minimum intensity is specified, the maximum intensity should not exceed the minimum intensity by more than 2C for C strip, 4A for A strip, and 6N for N strip. At all times, intensity is assumed to be at 90 percent coverage. The maximum intensity shall not cause undue warpage of the part and shall be below the threshold of erosion of the base material.

strips shall be at the discretion of the inspecting officer to a maximum of 1 per 8 hours shift of production, shot peened under similar operating conditions. 4.1.2

Almen Strips

These are steel strips of standard dimensions according to details given in Fig. 2. These are used purely as a means of duplicating a peening intensity that has already been established on the specified part. 4.1.3

Almen Test Strip Holder

The holding fixture of test strips for shot peening shall be of standard dimensions given in Fig. 3. 4.1.4

`3.6.J Ideally, shots for peening should be tough and harder than the steel parts or springs to be tested. The roughness of the shot peened surface shall be agreed between the manufacturer and the purchaser. 3.7 Angle of Impact This is the angle between the surface of piece that is to be shot peened and the direction of the stream of shots. The intensity of peening is directly proportional to the impact angle. 4 TEST 4.1 Almen Strip Test of test with Almen strips or similar 4.1.1 Frequency of Test The frequency

Almen Gauge

The gauge for determining the curvature of the test strip is shown in Fig. 4. The curvature of the strip is determined by a measurement of the height of combined longitudinal and transverse arcs across standard chords. This arc height is obtained by measuring the displacement of a central point on the non-peened surface from the plane of the four balls forming the corners of a particular rectangle. To use this gauge, the test strip is located so that the indication stem bears against the non-peened surface. The details of Almen gauge and the method of measurement of intensity of blast are given in Annex A.

I

f

I

19.0 18.9

1 I
N
I--

i

i

1.29zg

1 2.39zo.02

All dimensionr in millimetren.

FIG.2

TEST STR~~P SPECIFICATIONS

HOLDER \

TEST \

STRIP

FOUR M5 PAN HEAD MACHINE SCREWS WITH HEX NUTS

'

18

LO 76.2

L-1
Fm.3

All dimensions in millimetres.
ASSEMBLED

TEST STRIP AND HOLDER

3

STEEL

IN ONE PLANE?O.os

*Did indicator to be grduated iu value uf 0'01 mm, c~er fdctiun jeweled m equipped with CXtCrwion&It.

cluckwha dw,

back adjustable

bracket,

luw

All dimen#iont in millimetret. Fro. 4 4.1.5 &ale of MIorrrrrnmr ALMEN GAUOB E,"`B" . 4.1.6 Dcsignolion of I&nsit' Measnrmd of intensity of sbot peening are given in

There are three measuring scales for the intensity of shot peening, each being distinct from the other according to the type of test piece used. TJmt!

4 b)
4

AJmen N scale
low intensity Almen
medium

for test piece of type N, of shot peening;
of type C,

A scale for test piece of type A, intensity of shot pcening; and

The standard designation of intensity measurement includes the gauge reading, the test strip used and number of this standard. This can .be considered a dimensionless number relating to the number of graduation read on the dial indicator of the AJmen gauge.
Exarnplr a) The gauge reading of the pemed test strip `A' as measured on gauge 13 shall be designated asz b) 4 ISA-IS7001 6- 8C IS 7001

Almm C scale for test piece high inteusity of shot. peeniog.

With the test pieces of Type N, A and C, the maximum cambers 045, 060 and 0.58 mm, respectively can be measured.

This signifies gauge reading on the C size tert strip measured with same gauge. Tbia example is typical of tbe method used for spcciijhg a gauge reading tolerance for an application, 4.1.7 Rdztionship Betwee Tat &i$+s between test strip6 N, A and C are shown in Fig. 5. This curve shows N, A and C strips readings for conditions of identical blast and exposure. ' 4.1.S Gtnrrat Prows Carol

5 PRBPARATION PEENING

OF PARTS POR

5.1 Parts &au- be free from grease, dirt, oil, corrosion and corrosion preventive coatings; -mcb aa, anodic coatings, plahg, and paintr. 5.2 AlI beat treatmenta to meet requirements for mechanical propcrtiea sbal1 be completed prior to peer&g. 5.3 Unless otherwise specified, all machining and required lirbing of areas to be peened shall be complete x" , all fillet8 shall be properly formed, all burra shall be removed and all sharp edges and comers to be peened shall be broken prior to peening. 5.4 When magnetic particle 07 fluorescent iuspection is required, parta may be subjected to such yA~ctiye=e the parts being peened wbere. 6 POST TREATMENT

The relationship

The process of pee&g, in common with many other processes, cannot at present be adequately controlled by non-destructive inspection of tbe peened parts. Therefore; it is nuxsaary to control the proccsa itself to achieve &n&tent, and reliable results. Meastirements of surface residual stresses by X-ray diffraction can be a us&l tool, where applicable, to monitor variation in sbot peeuing proccas.
4.1.9 It is recommended that tbe standard test strip A be used for intensitiea that produce IVC heights of 6A to 24A. For intensities below SA, the standard N strip is recommended and for intensities above 24A, the wdard C strip is recommended. 28

After peening and removal of protecting maska, all Jots shall be removed from surface of partn and only methods wbicb will not erode m scratch surfices sbdl be used.

21

20

16

Fro. 5

CORRZLATION OF A, N AM, C STR~ M CHECXED ON AN ALMEN GAVQB

IS 7001 I 1989 6.1 Temperatures of stresses to which parts are subjected in subsequent processing shall not be so high as to reduce stresses imposed by peening or to affect the mechanical properties of the material adversely. 6.2 Protection Helical springs and spring plates shall be coated immediately after shot peening with a thin film of suitable rust preventive as agreed the purchaser and the manufacturer. 6.3 F&goe Test between

Subject to mutual agreement between the purchaser and the manufacturer, fatigue test on readily shot peened helical springs or spring plates shall be carried out for ascertaining the improved fatigue life.

ANNEX

A

( Clause 4.1.4 )
PROCEDURE FOR USING STANDARD SHOT PEENING TEST STRIP A-1 PROCEDURE BASED ON ARC HEXGHT VERSUS PEENING TIME RELATIONSHIP
A-l.1 Fasten the test strip tightly to the test strip holder. A-1.2 Expose the surface `X' strip to the blast to bemeasured. of exposure or its equivalent, and centrally

( Fig. 3 ) of the Record the time

A-2.2 With an estimated setting of the machine ( shot type and size, shot flow rate, shot velocity, and angle of impingement ) , a series of test strips should be exposed to the flow of shot, each for a different exposure time so that a curve shown in Fig. 1 may be established.
A-2.3 If the intensity measurement obtained from the curve does not fall within the desired limit, the machine settings must be changed, If a higher arc height is desired, either greater shot velocity or larger shot is necessary, assuming a given type of shot. If lower arc height is desired, a lower shot velocity or smaller shot is needed. These velocity changes may be made by changing wheel speed or air pressure. In certain cases, an adjustment may be made in the direction of the shot stream but the most efficient peening is obtained with the direction of the main part of the blast stream normal to the critical section of the part being peened. A-2.4 After new settings are made, arc heights are again determined using new test strips as prescribed in A-1.2. A-2.5 Suppose with the first trial, curve B of Fig. 6 is obtained, and the desired arc height is as indicated by the horizontal broken line. The shot velocity or shot size is accordingly too high and one or both must be reduced. Suppose the second trial resulted in curve C. Here, either the shot velocity or shot size is too small. Repeat trials until the desired curve, such as, `D' in Fig. 6 is obtained for the required arc height. A-2.6 When the machine settings are found that yield the desired arc height and coverage, the time of exposure is also indicated. For example, from curve D in Fig. 6, the time of exposure T, corresponding with point Q on the curve, is that which would ordinarily be used. A-2.6.1 A typical production peening specification designates a peening intensity range, such as, 10A to 14A and 9 percent coverage, which means an arc height between IOA and 14A as 6

A-1.3 Remove the strip from the holder and measure the arc height of the non-peened side of the strip on the Almen gauge. A-l.4 Using different exposure times and a new test strip, repeat steps A-1.1, A-1.2 and A-l.3 sufficiently to determine a curve similar to Fig. 1 making sure to plot points well beyond the knee of the curve.

A-l.5 Visually examine the surface of the test strip to determine full surface area coverage, using 10 x magnifying glass.
A-l.6 Good practice requires the use of a new test strip for each arc height measurement. A used strip will not fit as tightly against the block as a new strip and will give erroneous reading of arc height. A-l.7 Movement of test strip holder will be required during peening if surface `X' is not fully exposed within the blast stream. A-2 PRODUCTION SET UP PROCEDURE PEENING MEASUREMENT The procedure to be used in making a production set up in which a setting of the machine is to be determined for a desired arc height and shot size may be described as follows. A-2.1 Provide a fixture to support the test strip in a manner to simulate the most `critical Surface Of the part to be pecned. In cases where more than one critical surface is to be peened, the fixture should provide for mounting of the rquired additional test strips.

IS 7001 : 1989 measured on a standard test strip `A' with 90 percent of part covered by dimples. Production parts are then peened for a time equivalent to that required tp create this arc height, as determined on the saturation curve, and to visual coverage inspection. Because the shape and hardness of many parts differ from that of the test strip, peening time to achieve complete coverage may vary from the time required to saturate the test strip. For optimum results, always peen a part with shot as hard or harder than the part to be peened. A-2.7 Determination Coverage of Surface Area continuous residual fluorescent tracer on surface ( minute flecks are acceptable ) indicates that full coverage has not been obtained. Coat set-up part with dye marker ink. Peen part to intensity and exposure time determined in A-l.6 and then visually examine with white light for remains of dye marker ink. Any indication of continuous dye marker ink on surface ( minute flecks are acceptable ) indicates that full coverage has not been maintained. After a part has been shot peened, a transparent replica of the surface can be made. This replica can be compared with other replicas having various degrees of coverage, by projection on a screen. Expose polished test strip to shot peening stream, identical to that used to determine the arc height. Place in the field of metallurgical camera. Using transparent paper, and a magnification of approximately 50 diameters, outline the dented areas which can be identified by the contrast of the polished strip and the inclined surfaces of the indentations. Measure the area of all the indentations with a planimeter. The ratio of indented area to the total area is the percentage of coverage.
CURVE B -SHOT VELOCITY SHOT SIZE TOO GREAT rAND/OR

4

d)

Full surface area coverage on part or test strip may be determined by using any one or combination of the following optional procedures: Inspect all ( 100 percent ) surfaces of fillets, cavities, grooves, and holes using 10 x magnification. A fully covered surface, is indicated when it is covered by overlapping dimples which obliterate all prior surface definition. Coat set-up part with fluorescent sensitive tracer. Peen part to intensity and exposure time determined in A-1.6, then visually examine using ultra-violet light to view fluorescent tracer. Any indication of

e)

CURVE 0 -SHOT VELOCITY SHOT SIZE CORRECT

AND

, I I I

/

, FOR LESS

10"loINCRE AS&OR CRITICAL PARTS

20%

1 _. c ,-a-CURVE SHOT C-SHOT SIZE TOO VELOCITY SMALL AND/OR

3

T

2T TIME OF EXPOSURE
Fra. 6

OR QUANTITY

OF SHOT

IXTENSITY DETERMINATION CURVES B, C AND D

7

ANNEX B ( Clause 4.1.5 )
SCALES OF INTENSITY OF SHOT PEENING

Intensity of Shot Pccning ( Almcn Degrcce ) * 4N E 10N 12N 14N 16N 18N 6A 1% 12A 14A 16A 18A 20A 24A 7c 9c 11c I3C 15c

Test Piece

TVpe of

Camber Value in mm

N

0.10 o-15 0.20 0.25 o-30 0.35 0.40 o-45 0.15 0.20 O-25 0.30 0.35 0.40 0.45 OF50 0.60
_'

A

C

0.18 0.23 O-28 o-33 0.38 0 43 0.48 o-53 0.53

*Limit

deviations

on the intensity

of shot peeoing:

+2 1 0 ] Almen

degree

Bureau of Indian Standards

is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.
BIS

Copyright

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symboIs and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publication), BIS.
Review of Indian Standards

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot: No. EDC 75 ( 4954 )
Amendments Issued Since Publication

Amend No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones: 323 0131,323 83 75,323 94 02 Regional Offices: Central Eastern
:

Telegrams: Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone 32376 17,3233841 { 337 84 99,337 337 85 9120 61 86'2%; 1 602025 60 38 43

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 l/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTI-A .700054

:

34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 Northern : SC0 335-336, Sector " Southern Western
:

C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 { 235 02 15 16,235 19,235 04 23 42 15 ManakaIaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093 { 832 78 92 95,832 78 92 58 91,832

:

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.
Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India

