NAT Alan IS 3614 : 2021 
Indian Standard 


tft Rte exami 3k 
atann-ae — farts 


( TEAM FRAT ) 


Fire Doors and Doorsets — 
Specification 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 91.060.50; 13.220.50 


© BIS 2021 


anda HM eat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Te TH MT, ay freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


May 2021 Price Group 11 


Fire Safety Sectional Committee, CED 36 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Fire Safety Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 


One of the fire safety requirements to be taken into consideration while planning and designing industrial and 
non-industrial buildings is to provide the means for restricting spread of fire, both internally and externally. The 
spread of fire can be minimized if the respective floor areas are limited and divided into smaller sections, each 
section being separated by perfect separating walls and openings therein fitted with fire doors. The design of fire 
doors and the materials to be used in their construction have to be such that the doors are capable of providing an 
effective barrier to the spread of fire and smoke. 


This standard was published in two parts. Part 1 was published in 1966 providing therein adequate guidance 
to both the manufacturer and the user in regard to materials to be used and construction to be adopted for 
fire-check doors capable of giving the required fire protection. Part 2 of the standard published in 1992, covered 
the fire resistance test and the performance criteria thereon. Ever since the publication, lot of improvements and 
developments including in the construction material and construction technology of fire rated doors had taken 
place. This revision aims to comprehensively cover provisions relating to various aspects of fire doors, which are 
currently followed around the world. 


Fire protection, and stopping the fire and smoke from spreading has gained significance, as safety and security 
of human life has been a prime concern. The availability of vast experience based on the usage of fire rated 
doors, latest knowledge related to fire and smoke management, the revision of Part 4 ‘Fire and Life Safety’ of 
National Building Code of India 2016 and other information including standards worldwide have provided inputs 
to this revision of the standard. There are lot of stakeholders involved and the common understanding related 
to the requirement of fire and smoke check needs to be comprehensively dealt. This standard has been revised 
comprehensively to give a better understanding of the requirements right from the design of the product, its 
manufacture and through its actual application and compliance for safety of human life and property. 


In this revision, significant modifications have been carried out in revamping the provisions right from the 
definition of fire door to the testing of the product, supply, installation and handing over/commissioning. Some of 
the major changes in this revision are highlighted hereunder: 

a) Scope of the standard has been widened to cover fire door assembly, hardware, etc. 

b) Relevant provisions have been aligned to those given in Part 4 ‘Fire and Life Safety’ of National Building 
Code of India 2016. 
Terminology has been updated in line with those in National Building Code of India 2016 and as per other 
international literature. 


Cc 


wa 


d 
e) Four types of fire door, with individual requirements have been covered. 


Fire doors have been classified as insulated and uninsulated. 


wa 


f) All hardware that are part of the door/frame/assembly have been specified to be in line with manufacturing 
requirements of the fire door, emphasizing the important role of fire door manufacturer towards ensuring 
the intended performance. 


g) Fire test requirements have been intended for the complete assembly of fire door. 
h) Automation of sliding doors and rolling shutters has been introduced. 


j) Provisions on material handling and installation to ensure that product performs to the intended use has 
been introduced. 


k) Validity of test certificates has been specified including when there is a change in component(s) or 
manufacturing process. 


(Continued to third cover) 


IS 3614 : 2021 


Indian Standard 
FIRE DOORS AND DOORSETS — SPECIFICATION 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard lays down quality requirements 
including the requirements regarding materials and 
details of construction of fire rated metal swing doors, 
wooden composite swing doors, metal sliding doors 
and metal rolling shutters. The standard also provides 
requirement on the supply, installation and maintenance 
of fire door assemblies. This also covers the protection 
of door openings or the wall openings where the fire 
door is to be installed, and also floors and ceilings from 
the spread of fire and smoke within, into or out of a 
building so as to ensure proper compartmentation. 


1.2 This standard does not cover doors which are 
horizontal or vertical sliding and swinging doors that 
are used in hoist way doors for lifts and dumb waiters. 
Fire safety curtains and vault doors are also not covered 
in this standard. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A contain provisions 
which through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions and terms shall apply. 


3.1 Active Leaf — The first operating door of a pair 
door/double leaf door, which is usually the door on 
which a lock is installed. 


3.2 Ambient Temperature — The temperature of the 
laboratory room in which the tests are conducted. 


3.3 Anchor — A mechanical device for attaching 
frames to the surrounding structure. 


3.4 Approved — Acceptable to 
authority. 


the competent 


3.5 Astragal — A vertical or horizontal moulding or 
strip usually metallic, attached to the meeting edge of 
one leaf of a pair of doors (double leaf doors) to protect 
against weather conditions, to minimize the passage 


of light between the door leaves, and/or to retard the 
passage of smoke, flame or gases during a fire; and, in 
the case of a half door, to ensure that the lower leaf of 
the door closes in conjunction with the upper leaf. 


3.6 Competent Authority — An organization, office or 
individual responsible for enforcing the requirements 
of a standard, or for approving equipment, materials, an 
installation, or a procedure. 


3.7 Automatic Closing Device — A device, attached to 
a door or window frame, that causes the door or window 
to close when activated as a result of a predetermined 
temperature, rate of temperature rise, smoke, or through 
a combustion detector. Activation may also be through 
a building management system (BMS). 


3.8 Automatic Closing Door — Door that opens and 
closes once the automatic closing device is activated. 


3.9 Binders (Sliding Door, Horizontal and 
Vertical) — Pieces of hardware used to hold a sliding 
door to the wall, preventing lateral movement of the 
door from the wall. 


3.10 Bi-parting Door — A vertically sliding door in 
which half of the door moves up and half of the door 
moves down in order to open, or a horizontal sliding 
door in which one door moves to the right and one 
moves to the left in order to open. 


3.11 Borrowed Light — A stationary window unit 
that is installed in an interior partition that allows the 
passage of natural or artificial light from one area into 
an adjoining space. 


3.12 Bottom Bar [Rolling Shutter (Metallic)] — A 
structural reinforcing member at the lower edge of the 
door curtain assembly. 


3.13 Box Track — Type of track used with sliding 
doors that is formed from a sheet of steel and shaped 
as box. 


3.14 Brackets [Sliding Door (Metallic), Rolling 
Shutter (Metallic)] — Plates bolted to the wall or to 
extensions of the guide wall angles that serve to support 
the barrel and form end closers for the hood. 


3.15 Builder’s Hardware — All hardware that 
are independently tested for durability, usage and 
individual type testing for fire rating. All hardware to 


IS 3614 : 2021 


be used on fire rated door shall be components of a fire 
door assembly, supplied by the door manufacturer as a 
unit but may be installed at site. 


3.16 Bumpers (Sliding Door) — Stops, installed to 
limit the closing or opening movement of a sliding 
door. 


3.17 Centre Latch — A latch used to hold the two 
halves of a bi-parting fire door together, which is 
usually in two pieces surface-mounted to doors and 
interlocked in the closed position. 


3.18 Chafing Strip (Sliding Door) — A metal strip 
applied to the back surface of a sliding door to protect 
the door surface from damage from the wall. 


3.19 Channel Frame — A frame that consists of head 
and jamb members of structural steel channels, either 
shop assembled or field assembled, to be used with 
masonry walls. 


3.20 Closing Device — A means of closing a door from 
the partially or fully opened position. 


3.21 Door Coordinator — A device used on pairs 
of swinging doors that prevents the active leaf from 
closing before the inactive leaf closes. 


3.22 Door Closer — A mechanical hydraulic device 
that, where applied to a door and frame, causes an open 
door to close by mechanical force. The closing speed 
can be regulated by this device. 


3.23 Door Holder/Release Device — A fail-safe 
device, controlled by a detection device, used on an 
automatic closing door to release the door at the time 
of fire. 


3.24 Double Egress Doors — A pair of swinging doors, 
each leaf of which swings in the opposite direction of 
the other. 


3.25 Dutch Door — A door divided horizontally so 
that the lower part can be shut while the upper part 
remains open. 


3.26 Egress Side — The side of an opening from which 
people (traffic) exit. 


3.27 EPDM Gasket — Gaskets made of ethylene 
propylene diene monomer rubber to prevent movement 
of smoke from one side to other in a draft control test. 


3.28 Finish Frame — A frame attached to a sub-frame 
(rough buck), to which the door is attached. 


3.29 Fire Door — The door component of a fire door 
assembly. 


3.30 Fire Door Assembly (Doorset) — Any 
combination ofa fire door, a frame, hardware, and other 
accessories that together provide a specific fire resistant 


rating to the opening in terms of its integrity and 
insulation properties when installed in the openings. 


3.31 Fire Door Frame — A component, forming the 
perimeter of an opening in a fire door assembly, that 
is supplied in fabricated or knock-down condition, and 
anchored to the surrounding structure and to which the 
door leaf is attached. 


3.32 Fire Door Frame for Lights — A fire rated 
frame that, in addition to a door opening, contains an 
opening(s) for use with glazing materials. Various types 
include transom light, side light, and transom and side 
light frames. 


3.33 Fire Door Frame for Panels — A fire rated 
frame that, in addition to a door opening, contains an 
opening(s) for use with fixed panels of solid metal. 
Various types include transom panel, side panel, and 
transom and side panel frames. 


3.34 Fire Resistance Rating — The time, in minutes, 
that material(s) or assemblies will withstand the 
standard fire exposure as established in accordance 
with standard method of test for integrity or integrity 
along with insulation properties. 


3.35 Flush Bolts, Automatic — A mortised bolt 
installed near the top or bottom of the inactive leaf of 
a pair of doors that holds the inactive leaf in a closed 
position and is released automatically when the active 
leaf is opened. 


3.36 Flush Bolts, Manual — A mortised bolt installed 
near the top or bottom of the inactive leaf of a pair 
of doors in which the bolts are manually extended 
or retracted into or out of the head member or sill by 
means of a lever. 


3.37 Fusible Link — Two pieces of metal held together 
by low melting point solder. 


3.38 Glazing Clips/Beading — Steel clips or beading 
used to hold glass in place in vision pane. 


3.39 Glazing Material — A transparent or translucent 
material used in fire door assemblies and fire windows. 


3.40 Governor [Sliding (Vertical), and Rolling Steel 
Doors] — A mechanical device that limits the speed of 
descent of the door during automatic closure. 


3.41 Guide [Sliding (Vertical), and Rolling Steel 
Doors] — Vertical assembly in which the curtain 
travels and that is fastened to the jamb, retaining the 
edges of the door curtain and closing the space between 
the curtain edges and the jamb. 


3.42 Guide Rail [Sliding Door (Vertical)] — A steel 
member, attached to the wall or frame, used with 
vertical sliding doors to guide the door. 


3.43 Guide Shoe [Sliding Door (Vertical)] — A 
member attached to vertical sliding doors used to guide 
and retain the door on the guide rail. 


3.44 Guide Wall Angle [Sliding (Vertical), and 
Rolling Steel Doors] — The component of the guide 
assembly that is fastened to the jamb. 


3.45 Hanger [Sliding Door (Horizontal)] — A 
member used to attach a horizontally sliding door to 
track and to cause the door to roll on or in the track. 


3.46 Heat-Actuated Device — Devices that include 
fixed temperature releases, rate-of-temperature- 
rise releases, and door closers with hold-open arms 
embodying a fusible link. 


3.47 Hollow Metal Door — A set of door frame 
and sandwiched shutter made of galvanized steel or 
stainless steel (commonly of the flush type), fabricated 
of sheet steel and reinforced by light metal channels, 
and has a hollow core, sometimes filled with a light 
filler material. 


3.48 Hood (Rolling Steel Door) — A sheet metal 
housing that mounts horizontally between the brackets, 
serving as an enclosure for the coiled rolling shutter and 
closing the space between the door coil and the lintel. 


3.49 Impact Switch — A device that can be attached 
to a power-operated fire door to stop or reverse the 
closing motion of a power-operated door upon meeting 
an obstruction. 


3.50 Inactive Leaf — The leaf of a pair of door leaves 
that ordinarily is latched closed (the other being the 
only operating leaf). 


3.51 Integrity — Ability of a separating element of 
building construction, when exposed to fire on one 
side, to prevent the passage of flames and hot gases or 
the occurrence of flame on the unexposed side. 


3.52 Insulation — Resistance to temperature rise on 
the unexposed face up to a maximum of 180 °C at any 
single point and a maximum average temperature of 
140 °C. 


3.53 Intumescent Seal — The seal used to impede the 
flow of heat, flame or gases, which only becomes active 
when subjected to elevated temperature. 

NOTE — Intumescent seals are components which expand, 


helping to fill gaps and voids, when subjected to heat in excess 
of the ambient temperature. 


3.54 Keeper — A guide and a restraint used on latching 
devices. 


3.55 Knocked Down Frame — Door frame furnished 
by manufacturer in three or more basic parts for 
assembly in the field. 


IS 3614 : 2021 


3.56 Labelled — Equipment or materials to which has 
been attached a label, symbol, or other identifying mark 
of an organization (that is acceptable to the competent 
authority) concerned with product evaluation, that 
maintains periodic inspection of production of labelled 
equipment or materials, and by whose labelling the 
manufacturer indicates compliance with appropriate 
standard(s). 


3.57 Lap-Mounted Door [Sliding Door (Vertical, 
Horizontal), Rolling Steel, Swinging Door] — Doors 
mounted on the face of a wall and overlapping the 
opening by a prescribed dimension. 


3.58 Latching Device — A spring-loaded latch 
bolt or a gravity operated steel bar that, after release 
by physical action, returns to its operating position 
and automatically engages the strike plate when it is 
returned to the closed position. 


3.59 Lintel — A horizontal member spanning and 
carrying the load above an opening. 


3.60 Louvre, Automatic — An opening in a door with 
a series of slats or blades to allow passage of air and 
designed to close automatically in the event of fire. 


3.61 Mullion — A fixed or removable vertical member 
set in a double door opening that allows both leaves 
to be active or set between a door and a side light or a 
separate framed, glazed area. 


3.62 Muntin — A bar member supporting and 
separating panes of glass within a sash, door, or glazing 
frame. 


3.63 Power-Operated Fire Doors — Doors 
that normally are opened and closed electrically, 
pneumatically, or mechanically. 


3.64 Self-Latching Bolt — An automatic-latching 
device that engages in a keeper to hold a door leaf in a 
closed position and that can only be released manually. 


3.65 Service Counter Door — A labelled fire door 
assembly used for the protection of openings in walls 
where the primary purpose of the opening is for 
non-pedestrian use, such as counter service for food, 
a pharmaceutical dispensary, package and baggage 
transfer, or observation ports. 


3.66 Side Light — An opening in a fire door frame 
alongside the fire door opening that is filled with 
glazing material. 


3.67 Side Light Frame — A fire door frame prepared 
for the application of a glazing material alongside the 
door opening. 


3.68 Side Panel Frame — A door frame prepared for 
the installation of a fixed solid metal or wood panel 
alongside the door opening. 


IS 3614 : 2021 


3.69 Single-Point Latch — A latch located in the edge 
of a door to engage either in the frame or in the edge of 
the inactive leaf of a pair of doors. 


3.70 Sliding Hardware — A system of rails, hangers, 
rollers, guides, binders, and closing devices that are 
self-closing by means of gravity, weights, and pulleys 
or spring actuated devices. 


3.71 Smoke Detector — A device that senses visible or 
invisible particles of combustion. 


3.72 Spring Hinge — A closing device in the form of 
a hinge with a built-in spring used to hang and close 
the door. 


3.73 Spring Release Device [Sliding Door (Vertical, 
Horizontal), Rolling Steel Door] — A device 
that, when activated, releases part of the spring 
counterbalancing force and causes the door to close. 


3.74 Stay Rollers [Sliding Door (Horizontal)] — A 
device used on horizontally sliding doors at their back 
lower corners to guide the door and prevent the door 
from moving away from the wall under fire conditions. 


3.75 Electric Strike — A strike that, when activated, 
either releases or retains a projected latch or dead bolt. 


3.76 Open Back Strike — A strike applied to the 
inactive leaf of a pair of doors and cut away at the back 
to allow either leaf to open or close independently. 


3.77 Strike Plate — A wear plate for projecting 
hardware or a wear plate and keeper for a latch bolt. 


3.78 Struts — Adjustable vertical members that extend 
from the head of the hollow metal door frame to the 
ceiling to hold the frame rigidly in place. 


3.79 Swing-in Door — A door that swings into a room 
or building. 


3.80 Swing-out Door — A door that swings out of a 
room or building. 


3.81 Three-point Latch — A self-latching device 
designed to latch a door at the top, bottom, and edge by 
an interconnected mechanism so that all latches operate 
simultaneously. 


3.82 Track Binder [Sliding Doors 
(Sheet Metal)] — A device mounted on a sheet metal 
sliding door that projects behind the track to prevent 
the door from moving away from the wall under fire 
conditions. 


3.83 Transom — An opening in a fire door frame 
above the door opening that is filled by a solid panel or 
with glazing material. 


3.84 Transom and Side Light Frame — A fire door 
frame prepared for the application of a glazing material 
above and alongside the door opening. 


3.85 Transom and Side Panel Frame — A fire door 
frame prepared for the application of solid metal or 
wood panels above and alongside the door opening. 


3.86 Transom Light Frame — A fire door frame 
prepared for the application of a glazing material 
above the door opening that has a horizontal member, 
such as a transom bar provided to separate the glazed 
opening from the door opening. 


3.87 Transom Panel — A panel, fixed or removable, 
installed in a frame above the door. 


3.88 Transom Panel Frame — A fire door frame 
prepared for the application of a transom panel above 
the door opening that has a horizontal member, such 
as a transom bar provided to separate the transom 
opening from the door opening. 


3.89 Vent [Sliding Door (Horizontal, Tin Clad 
Only)] — A hole cut in a fire door to allow for venting 
of the products of combustion. 


3.90 Window Ventilator — The part of a projected 
window, casement window, or pivoted window that 
opens. 


3.91 Viewer — A viewing device installed in a door 
to allow observation of persons opposite the security 
side (inside) of the door without having to open the 
door. 


3.92 Wedge [Sliding Door (Horizontal, Tin Clad), 
and Flush Sheet Metal] — A plate mounted on the 
face of a sliding door designed to force the door 
against the wall. 


4 DETERMINATION OF FIRE RESISTANCE 
OF DOORS 


4.1 The fire resistance of a door assembly shall be 
determined by subjecting a full-size construction to 
test in accordance with the procedures laid down 
in IS/ISO 3008-1. The test standard requires the 
tested construction to be fully representative of the 
assembly to be used in practice in terms of materials 
and methods of construction, size, number of leaves 
and mode of operation including all glazed openings 
and essential building hardware. 


If the provision of supplies made is already covered 
by the specimen tested earlier or covered under third 
party certification programme, then additional tests 
may not be required for determination of fire resistance 
of doors, except under following circumstances: 


a) Change in design and construction of door 
including infill material. 


b) Overall perimeter of the door, width and height 
or total area is more than the tested specimen. 
This is applicable for both, doors with or without 
vision pane. 


c) Change in size of the vision glass or vision pane. 


NOTE — Vision pane on a fire door shall not be more than 
0.12 m? for uninsulated door and in case of insulated door, 
it shall be not more than 0.06 m’. For other provisions of 


vision panes, see 6. 


d) For doors with continuous partitions as a part of an 
assembly or fixed glazed partitions, it is necessary 
to provide assessment report from approved 
laboratory based on one or more combination of 
test reports. These reports shall be validated for 
integrity or integrity along with insulation. 

e) Time gap of testing should not exceed five years. 
However, in case of any material and design 
change, it should be tested and certified once 
again. 


4.2 The fire resistance is expressed in terms of the 
number of minutes for which the assembly meets the 
relevant criteria, that is, integrity and insulation or only 
integrity in accordance with this standard, the details of 
which shall be included in the report. 


For the purpose of classification of fire resistance, doors 
are classified to the last specific fire resistance period 
that has been passed during the test before failure 
occurs. Where more than one criterion is assessed 
during the test, it is possible that for each of these 
criteria, a different classification period might apply. 


5 CLASSIFICATION OF FIRE DOORS BASED 
ON FIRE RESISTANCE 


5.1 The manufacturers shall follow a standard 
procedure for labelling the product as per the following 
criteria. Fire ratings for fire door assemblies are given 
in minutes and prefixed by the letters ‘FD’ that is, 
FD 30 equates to a 30 min fire door or doorset. 


Fire doors shall be tested for the criteria as listed below 
along with the minimum requirements in Table 1: 

a) Integrity 

b) Insulation 


IS 3614 : 2021 


5.2 Insulated Door 


Insulated doors shall be tested for both integrity and 
insulation and designated accordingly. For example, if 
a door has passed 120 min of integrity, and 30 min of 
insulation, then it is designated as ‘FD 120 with 30 min 
insulation’. The provision of this standard requires any 
insulated fire door to have a minimum insulation fire 
resistance period of 30 min. 


5.3 Uninsulated Door 


A door tested for fire rating of integrity only and not 
requiring any minimum insulation shall be considered 
as uninsulated door. The door shall be designated 
accordingly. For example, if a door has passed 120 min 
of integrity alone and no insulation or for insulation less 
than 30 min, it is designated as ‘FD 120’. 


5.4 Maximum fire rating (integrity) for hinged type 
door is 180 min and for rolling shutters, 240 min. 


Fire door label shall show whether the door is insulated 
or uninsulated and the rating for both integrity and 
insulation with the manufacturer’s details and door 
classification (see 7). 


The testing procedure shall be as given in 4. 


6 VISION PANE ON FIRE DOORS 


Fire doors can be fitted with glazed vision pane. 
However, vision panes are sensitive to the substrate into 
which they are fitted. Vision pane should only be cut 
into doors that are designed to receive apertures. Vision 
pane should therefore only be fitted into a fire door 
under the control of fire door manufacturer. Apertures 
should not be cut on-site. The glass should not exceed 
in area or any of the dimension of that previously tested 
specimen (perimeter or square metre). 


Maximum allowed size for a vision pane (glass) or pane 
is 0.12 m’ for uninsulated door. For insulated doors the 
maximum glass shall not exceed more than 0.06 m?. The 
glazing material (glass) shall remain clear fire rated for 


Table 1 Classification of Insulated and Uninsulated Door with Fire Rating 
(Clause 5.1) 


SI No. Fire Door Classification Uninsulated Door Insulated Door 
Integrity Insulation Integrity Insulation 

min min min min 
a) 2 (3) (4) (3) (4) 
i) FD 30 30 NA 30 30 
ii) FD 60 60 NA 60 30 
iii) FD 90 90 NA 90 30 
iv) FD 120 120 NA 120 30 
v) FD 180 180 NA 180 30 


IS 3614 : 2021 


the entire duration of intended test (for integrity) of the 
door assembly. Wired glass shall not be used as vision 
pane; also interlayered glass or laminated gel glass, that 
becomes opaque and affects visibility shall not be used. 


Wherever, the user/application requires larger vision 
pane, the overall glass area can be increased by up to 
15 percent of the door leaf size, provided the the door 
has been tested with a larger glass. Such increase is not 
applicable for any insulated door. 


Each individual glazing unit shall be identified with a 
label of the glass manufacturer with intended rating. 
The label shall be visible after installation. 
NOTE — Apertures other than those used for vision pane 
should be discussed by the purchaser with the fire door 
manufacturer. 


7 TYPES OF FIRE DOORS 


7.1 Fire doors shall be of the following types: 
a) Fire rated hinged doors (Metallic), 
b) Fire rated hinged doors (Wooden composite), 
c) Fire rated sliding doors (Metallic), and 
d) Fire rated rolling shutter (Metallic). 


7.2 Fire Rated Hinged Doors (Metallic) 


This covers all types of fire rated hinged door (both 
insulated and uninsulated) which are metallic (also 
known as the hollow metal door or sandwiched 
panel door). The overall specification covers sizes, 
design, materials, general construction requirements 
and finishing of standard steel fire doors and frames. 
It is intended to define standard items not subject to 
variations. The products defined herein should have 
demonstrated successful performance to established. 


7.2.1 Material 


Zinc coated steel shall be of the alloyed type and shall 
conform to IS 513 (Parts 1 and 2) or IS 277. The coating 
weight shall meet or exceed the minimum requirements 
for coatings of 120 g/m”, total of both sides. 


When zinc coated steel is specified for anchors and 
accessories, and electrolytic alloy deposited zinc coated 
steel shall be provided. Materials like embossed design, 
grained steel design can be used as fire doors for better 
aesthetics, duly covered under galvanized material. 
Surface interior finishes on the doors, if any shall not 
compromise the construction integrity of the doors. 


Alternative materials like stainless steel or laminated 
steel may be used in fire doors when tested and comply 
to all requirements of this standard. Test certificates 
for galvanized steel shall not be used for stainless steel 
doors and vice-versa as the composition of material 
changes, and so is the performance of the door. 


7.2.2 Sizes 


The maximum door way opening size for any hinged 
fire door compartment shall not exceed 7.2 m? with the 
maximum permissible width of 2.4 m and height of 
3.0 m. 


NOTE — The maximum area of door can be increased for 
specific requirement as mutually agreed to between the parties. 
This will be based on clause of field of direct application. 
However the same shall not be applicable for insulated doors. 


7.2.3 Construction 


Construction shall be of the type of fire door and frame 
assembly that has been investigated and successfully fire 
tested in accordance with this standard. The assembly 
shall be identified by label(s) and/or an approved 
identification marking of the certification agency 
accepted by the competent authority. The door label 
shall indicate the applicable fire test rating for the door 
construction furnished, as per 5. 


7.2.4 Fire Door Frames 


Fire door frames are not affected by the fire resistance 
ratings that apply to doors. There is no fire rating for a 
basic fire door frame unless the labelling on the frame 
specifically states that the frame is rated for fire rating as 
a complete assembly including door leaf and hardware. 
The minimum steel sheet thickness recommended for 
frames shall be 1.2 mm (18 gauge) for a frame depth of 
150 mm. Any addition in depth shall eventually change 
or require higher sheet thickness of at least 1.6 mm (16 
gauge) and with provision for additional anchors as 
per the tests indicated and/or those mutually agreed to 
between the parties. Also, higher thickness of material 
can be used. Door frames shall have grooved profile 
with provision for smoke seal in either single rebate or 
double rebate, with or without architrave, all tested as an 
assembly. 


Alternatively, any change in the frame design shall be 
either confirmed by third party certification and approval 
as per the requirement or by new type test depending upon 
the approval of the authority under whose jurisdiction 
the product may be used. The maximum depth of the fire 
rated frame shall not be more than 350 mm. All types of 
frames either as an assembly or, otherwise shall conform 
to the requirement of this standard. 


Frame design and construction shall be as per the tested 
specimen both for single and double rebate profile. 
Frames can be supplied in butt, mitered or welded 
assembly, with proper reinforcement and protection for 
taking required hinges, locks and strike plates, including 
door closers. 


Fire rated EPDM (ethylene propylene diene monomers) 
or suitable fire rated gaskets are required for doors to 


control the spread of smoke. A bottom seal may not be 
required for smoke and draft control assemblies. 


NOTES 


1 If there is any other combination, the entire assembly needs 
to be tested. 


2 Fire rated door assembly tested with 1.2 mm thick steel 
frames can be manufactured with increased sheet thickness 
of the specimen tested to meet the durability and operational 
requirement. For example, if 1.2 mm frame is tested and 
approved, use of higher thickness 1.6 mm can be acceptable, 
without any additional test. However, reducing the sheet 
thickness of the tested specimen sample to meet any specific 
requirement shall not be permitted. Similarly, by increasing the 
sheet thickness, manufacturer shall not exceed the size (width/ 
height) or intended duration of the specimen tested. 


7.2.5 Door Leaf 


There are various constructions used for the 
manufacture of fire doors. These can be used in a 
number of configurations, which vary from single 
leaf and double leaf single swing, with a possible 
option for storey-height doorsets using transoms or 
flush-over panels. It is important to note that doors 
tested in one configuration might not be suitable for 
another configuration. 


Single skin door leaf shall not be used as fire doors. 
Doors tested with single skin shall not be part of this 
standard. 


For 120 min fire door, the minimum sheet thickness 
recommended for door leaf shall be 1.2 mm (18 gauge) 
for uninsulated and insulated door. Door leaf with 
60 min rating shall be with minimum 0.8 mm 
(20 gauge), provided they satisfy the requirement of 
fire door testing. The maximum door leaf width for 
single leaf shall not exceed 1 250 mm in width and 
the provision of maximum door width and door height 
shall be in line with the sizes as mentioned in 7.2.2. 


The infill material used, shall be resin bonded. Materials 
like resin bonded honeycomb paper core, mineral wool, 
ceramic wool and proprietary material may be used as 
infill, provided they satisfy the requirement of fire door 
rating. Polyurethane foam (PUF) as an infill material 
for fire doors shall not be permitted. 


The performance of the door varies based on the infill 
material and hence interchanging the infill material to 
satisfy the requirement shall not be permitted without 
carrying out additional tests. Doors shall be tested for 
different categories as insulated and uninsulated door. 


The maximum allowable limit for bottom undercut 
of the door shall not be more than 19 mm for doors 
fixed on the floor. In case of a door fixed on sill (where 
the bottom of the door is above the floor level, say by 
100 mm and above), the undercut should not be more 
than 9 mm. The maximum undercut a door manufacturer 
can provide shall be based on the test evidence. 


The internal construction of the door shall be provided 
with rigid reinforcement in addition to the core. All 


IS 3614 : 2021 


double leaf fire door assembly shall be provided with 
and tested with astragals to ensure compatibility with 
actual fire performance. 


7.2.6 Intumescent Seal 


It is mandatory for the door manufacturer to test and 
supply insulated doors with intumescent seal. There 
are various types of intumescent seals, all of which can 
react differently. Intumescent seals shall be provided by 
the fire door manufacturer on all three sides of the door 
leaf and on the meeting stile of the double leaf door 
or as per test evidence. Alternatively, the same can be 
provided on the frame and meeting stile of the double 
leaf door. It is essential that the intumescent seal to 
be used is of the same formulation, dimensions and 
configuration as that in the door manufacturer’s fire test 
report. 


Intumescent seal provided on the door leaf shall expand 
in the event of fire closing the gap between the frame 
and shutter. This should be independent of smoke seal, 
which is fixed either in the grooved frame profile or 
stuck with adhesive on the entire perimeter of the frame. 


NOTES 


1 All fire doors are required to have smoke seal and intumescent 
seal as standard component of the door assembly. 


2 There are different types of smoke seals available, and the 
most appropriate type shall be chosen. 


7.2.7 Vision Pane 


The provision of glazing and glazing material should 
be in line with the maximum permissible limit outlined 
in 6 and Table 2. The hourly rating of the door dictates 
the type of door and the maximum size of the vision 
panes used on the door. 


Table 2 Vision Pane for Fire Rated Doors 


(Clause 7.2.7) 
SI TypeofDoor Maximum Maximum Maximum 
No. Width Height Area 
mm mm m? 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) — Uninsulated 400 800 0.12 
door (height 300) (width 150) ` 
ii) Insulated 200 400 0.06 
door (height 300) (width 150) i 
7.2.8 Louvres 


Fire rated louvres can be used on fire doors subject to 
the same have been tested as a complete assembly on 
a fire door and labelled. It can be used and shall not 
exceed maximum area of 0.135 m°, maximum width of 
300 mm and maximum height of 450 mm. Doors with 
glass lights, or doors equipped with fire exit devices 
may not have louvres. All louvered fire rated doors 
shall have label indicating the size of the louvres and the 
test certificate reference of the louvre’s manufacturer. 


IS 3614 : 2021 


7.2.9 Builder’s Hardware 


All hardware used on fire doors shall be fire rated, and 
certified except for hinges, if it is of minimum size 
100 mm x 75 mm x 3 mm and in stainless steel of 
grade SS 304 and above. Similarly, pull handles may 
not require specific fire rating if it is in stainless steel 
of grade SS 304 and above. All other mechanical and 
functional hardware like, locks, panic devices, lever 
handles, door closers, shall be type tested and certified 
for use on fire doors for specified rating and need 
not necessarily part of specimen testing as detailed 
in 4.1. Third party certified products from approved 
certification body may be used as a component if it 
satisfies the requirements for use on fire door. Individual 
test certificate for hardware shall be obtained from the 
approved test agency or copy of type test carried out 
by the manufacturer not earlier than five years may be 
submitted. All hardware shall carry appropriate label as 
per best practices for fire rating and the test certificates 
shall be made available for evaluation by the competent 
authority. 


Products which are not covered under the Indian 
Standards may be used on fire doors provided the same 
are type tested tested or used on specimen door and 
certified for use on fire doors with respective fire rating. 
Since the nature of hardware is based on application 
and function, the certified products can be used on 
fire doors as long as they satisfy the requirement of 
intended fire rating. 


The provision of latched and unlatched door is 
applicable on all fire doors without any modification of 
the standard requirement. If the door is tested in latched 
condition with lever handle, then the manufacturer 
shall supply the doors only in latched condition. Use 
of dead lock (without latch only cylinder operated) on 
fire doors is allowed subject to the door being tested 
in unlatched condition, wherein the door is held in 
position with the pressure of door closer. Shaft locks 
shall be type tested for fire door application as they may 
not be cylinder operated. 


The hardware include hinges, locks and latches 
(lever operated), lever handles, exit devices, door 
closers (concealed and surface mounted), flush bolts 
(mechanical or automatic), seals and thresholds. In 
addition, it shall also include all electrified hardware 
like electric strike, magnetic locks and motorized locks 
and closing devices. 


The door manufacturer shall ascertain the use of 
particular hardware with proper certification. If the 
door manufacturer is not supplying hardware as part 
of the assembly, then the door shall be construed as 
non-fire rated and shall not be acceptable to authorities 
having jurisdiction. The standard makes it mandatory 
on the door manufacturer to supply the hardware along 
with glazing material as a complete system, so that 
there is no scope of deviation in the functionality and 


performance of the product. The following hardware 
shall have labels, without which the fire door shall not 
carry any label of certification: 


a) Locks, latches and dead bolts — Visible label of 
certification on lock for end for fire rating along 
with proper certification. 


b) Emergency exit devices (panic devices) — Visible 
label of certification on the panic devices with 
proper certification. Towards the use of panic 
devices, the same is allowed as projections in clear 
width of the door(s). 


c) Door closers — Visible label of certification on 
the door closer body (does not include covers). 
Mechanical hold-open units are not allowed on 
fire rated doors. 


All fire doors shall be equipped with proper EPDM 
smoke seals to limit the spread of smoke. Other 
seals like door bottoms, surface mounted and 
perimeter seals can be used in addition to smoke 
seals, subject to the requirement or for acoustic 
doors. 


e) All hardware — Visible label of certification on 
all accessories which are directly related to the 
performance rating of fire doors. 


d 


wm 


f) Door eye viewer shall be fire rated to the same 
rating as of the door but limited to 60 min for 
fire doors of rating above 60 min. The maximum 
size of the hole shall not be more than 19 mm, 
factory prepared for receiving the hardware. 
No modification shall be carried out at site. 


ae 


Signs can be fixed on the door by using adhesives 
and the overall size of the signage shall not be 
more than 5 percent of the face of the fire door 
leaf on which it is attached. 


8 


h) Where the hardware does not come with certified 
label like electrified hold open devices, door 
coordinators or stops, then the same has to be 
certified by the manufacturer of hardware for 
suitability on use of fire doors with relevant type 


test certificates. 


© 


wma 


Door holder/release devices for swinging doors 
should, wherever possible, be installed at the top 
of the door as close as possible to the lock edge and 
should be located to avoid interference with any 
other hardware. If necessary, the holder/release 
may be permitted to be located at the bottom of 
the door as close as possible to the lock edge with 
the device installed on the wall or floor. 


j 


k 


a 


Fire door shall not have the following hardware: 
1) Tower bolts, 

2) Aldrops, 

3) Slide bolts, and 

4) Chains with pad locks. 


m) Fire doors shall carry dead bolts (cylinder 
operated), if the door is tested only in unlatched 
condition. 


n) Wherever electrified hardware is used, the fire 
door shall carry electrical conduits inside the door 
leaf and power transfer between the frame and 
door leaf for secure transfer of wires. 


wm 


All fire doors once installed shall be self-closing 
and all hold open devices shall be electrified 
and should be actuated by active fire and smoke 
detector, in case of an emergency. 


P 


All double leaf doors shall have concealed lever 
action flush bolts on top and bottom of the inactive 
leaf (except panic device door). If the door height 
is more than 2 100 mm, then the flush bolt shall be 
with extended rod. Automatic flush bolts can be 
used as an alternative to mechanical flush bolt, if a 
door coordinator is used. 


ma 


q 


f 


Saal 


Single leaf doors can have single point panic 
device or two point panic device on the door based 
on the architectural requirement. However, for a 
double leaf door only the following combination 
is allowed: 


1) One number of single point latch on the active 
leaf and one number panic device with vertical 
shoot bolt on top and bottom on inactive leaf. 


2) One number of each panic device with vertical 
shoot bolt on both top and bottom on active 
and inactive leaf. 


3) Panic bolts without bottom rod is not allowed 
on fire doors unless the same has been tested 


and approved on a assembly of doors. 


wa 


4) If the width of inactive leaf is less than 
450 mm, then, one panic device may be 
allowed. However, the inactive leaf shall still 
have lever action flush bolts both on top and 


bottom. 


wa 


5) All double doors with electromechanical/ 
electrical devices and/or panic device shall be 
equipped with door coordinator demonstrating 
the sequence of closing when opened together 


at the time of fire approval. 


wa 


6 


wm 


Electrified panic device can be used if security 
is a concern. Security hardware used shall be 
in fail-safe mode in case of an emergency. 


S 


na 


Electromagnetic locks and electrified security 
locks can be used on all fire doors in combination 
with other hardware like latches, panic devices 
provided they are of fail-safe type. Fail secure 
type cannot be used on any escape routes and exit 
pathways. 

Any further requirement of hardware can be based 
on the standard for architectural hardware or as per 
international standard(s). 


IS 3614 : 2021 


7.3 Fire Rated Hinged Doors (Wooden Composite) 
7.3.1 Material 


Timber and timber boards/composite material used in 
the construction of fire doors shall be of thoroughly 
seasoned hard wood. The moisture content of any 
material used in the construction of wooden composite 
door sets comprises of frame and shutter when used in 
door set shall not be more than 15 percent, in accordance 
with IS 287. 


7.3.2 Sizes 


The maximum door way opening size for any hinged 
wooden fire door compartment shall not exceed 
3.78 m° with the maximum permissible door width 
shall not be more than 1 800 mm and height of 2 100 m. 
The door sets shall be factory prepared for all hardware 
and no work shall be carried out on doors at site. 


7.3.3 Construction 


Door frames should be supplied by the door 
manufacturer only, with proper certification and test 
results for the size of the door sets. The maximum rating 
for a fire door shall generally be 120 min. The options 
available being: 


a) 30 min wooden composite doorset, 
b) 60 min wooden composite doorset, and 
c) 120 min wooden composite doorset. 


Suitability of different timber species for doorframes 
shall be checked by the door manufacturer, since some 
materials are not recommended for door manufacturing. 


Rating for fire door assemblies are given in min and 
prefixed by the letters ‘FD’ that is, FD 30 equates to 
a 30 min fire door or doorset. The most commonly 
specified integrity levels are: 

1) FD 30 — 30 min (half an hour), 

2) FD 60 — 60 min (1 h), and 

3) FD 120 — 120 min (2 h). 
All dedicated fire doors providing a half hour or greater 
performance are usually fitted with intumescent seals. 
The intumescent fire seal should be encased in a PVC 
sheath on all four sides and can be of any colour. 
The intumescent seal should be of adequate size as 
per the test sample tested at the laboratory. Usually a 
combination of intumescent fire seal and intumescent 
fire and smoke seal is placed facing each other on all 
joints. The joints here are referred as: 


i) Frame and shutter facing each other in case of 
single leaf that is, on both frame and door leaf. 


ii) Also at shutter to shutter facing in double leaf that 
is, on the meeting stile of the double leaf door. 


IS 3614 : 2021 


The intumescent fire seal shall be independent of 
smoke seal. The intumescent seal may not be required 
at the bottom of the door leaf. Intumescent seals may be 
visible at the head of the door. Intumescent seals shall 
be minimum 10 mm wide and 4 mm thick for 60 min 
door and 15 mm wide and 4 mm thick for 120 min door. 


Doorsets shall be tested for integrity and insulation, as 
mentioned earlier. 


7.3.4 Vision Pane 


Glazing may range from a small vision pane in a door 
to a glazed screen for maximum light transmission and 
safety. The same shall not be more than 0.06 m? with 
the maximum width or height not exceeding 300 mm. 
Ordinary glass cracks when exposed to heat and is 
liable to fall out fairly early in a fire. Fire resisting clear 
fire rated glass shall be used for the intended fire rating. 


The size of the glass and the method of its retention 
are important factors which influence its integrity. As 
the temperature approaches the softening point, a large 
sheet will tend to collapse earlier than a smaller one. 
On the unexposed face, beading retaining the glass 
is subjected to radiant and conducted heat through 
the glass and to convection currents at the top of the 
pane. This can raise the temperature sufficiently to 
ignite timber beading after about 20 min. To delay the 
ignition of beading to 30 min, it is necessary to provide 
protection by impregnation of a surface coating or a 
surface covering of non-combustible material or fit a 
fire resistant glass secured using a fire resistant glazing 
systems which hold the glass firmly in place during 
normal use, but in the event of fire, the intumescent 
material expands securing and insulating the glass and 
protecting the surrounding timber. 


For longer periods of fire protection, an improved 
retention system for the glazing is needed, the glass 
pane should be small and the method of fixing it 
should ensure that no direct path can be created for the 
transference of hot gases. 


7.3.5 Intumescent Paints 


Intumescent paints and varnishes can be used only on 
timber-based fire resisting doorsets where a maximum 
performance of 30 min integrity is required, and not 
suitable for 120 min door. These products require 
extremely specific application techniques and are 
reliant on the underlying condition of the doorset 
construction. They shall not be used as a substitute in 
any other condition other than 30 min door. Great care 
should be taken to ensure that full-scale test data for 
the product is both available and appropriate for the 
application. 


7.3.6 Builder’s Hardware 


The provision of latched and unlatched door is 
applicable on all fire doors without any compromise of 
the standard requirement. If the door is tested in latched 


10 


condition with lever handle, then the manufacturer 
shall supply the doors only in latched condition. Use of 
dead bolts on fire doors are allowed subject to the door 
has been tested in unlatched condition. 


This shall be in line with the hardware conditions and 
application as recommended, see 7.2.9. 


7.4 Fire Rated Rolling Shutters (Metallic) 


The provisions of this standard cover all types of rolling 
shutters which are tested for fire rating and intended 
use of compartmentalization of structural opening. This 
includes both semi-automatic (that work with fusible 
link) and automatic (completely motorized) rolling 
shutters. It includes the use of sensors and automation 
devices including motors to suit various construction 
requirements. The average closing speed of fire rated 
rolling shutters shall be 50 mm/s to 100 mm/s. 


7.4.1 Material 
See 7.2.1. 


7.4.2 Size 


Fire rated rolling shutter shall suit the structural 
opening size of maximum 24 m? for a given opening. 
The maximum width shall not be more than 6 m and the 
maximum height shall not be more than 6 m. The sizes 
are measured for the clear structural opening width and 
height of wall or steel structure. 


7.4.3 Construction 


7.4.3.1 Rolling shutter 


The rolling shutter shall be formed of rolled steel of not 
less than 0.8 mm or 1.2 mm and 1.6 mm in thickness 
based on the intended fire rating. Each slat shall be 
provided on both edges curls to form an inter-locking 
hinge extending the full width of rolling shutter; the 
centre of inter-lock shall be not less than 45 mm or 
more than 75 mm (nor more than 125 mm if the slats 
are thicker in mm), and the bridge depth shall be not 
less than 10 mm. The rolling shutter shall extend at 
least 50 mm into the channel guides. 


The rolling shutter shall be secured to the barrel by 
either of the following methods: 


a) Rings or collars of MS or GI as per IS 6248, not 
less than three in number, shall be scarves or bolted 
to the barrel and fixed at centres not exceeding 
0.50 m. A flat steel bar at least 25 mm x 6 mm 
shall be attached to the rings or collars, and the top 
slat shall be attached to the bar by screws or bolts 
not less than 8 mm in diameter spaced not more 
than 300 mm apart; or 


Chains shall be of mild steel not less than 
1 mm x 12 mm thick and 40 mm wide, each 
link being formed of at least three layers of strip 
riveted together with two 3 mm rivets. The links 
shall be coupled by means of mild steel pins not 
less than 3 mm in thickness. Each chain shall be 


b 


we 


attached to the barrel by screws not less than 8 mm 
in diameter spaced not more than 300 mm apart 
and shall be riveted to the top slat of the rolling 
shutter by at least two rivets not less than 5 mm in 
diameter, through the connecting link. 


The rolling shutter shall be of such a length as to extend 
from the floor of the opening to the top of the barrel and 
then round at least a quarter of the circumference of the 
barrel before fixing to it. 


7.4.3.2 End lock 


The end lock shall be constructed of steel not less than 
3 mm thick, fitted at each end of each slat and welded 
or riveted thereto with two tinned or black iron rivets 
not less than 3 mm diameter. 


The end locks shall be so designed as to fit the contour 
of the rolling shutter slats and fill the channel guides as 
closely as possible, consistent with the movement of 
the rolling shutter. 


7.4.3.3 Bottom rail 


The bottom rail of the rolling shutter shall be of T-bar 
not less than 100 mm and the bottom rail may be 
built up of two mild steel angles, each not less than 
50 mm x 50 mm x 3 mm, one angle to be provided 
on each side of the bottom slat of the rolling shutter, 
and both angles to be securely bolted or riveted to the 
rolling shutter as described before. The rolling shutter 
shall extend to a minimum depth of 35 mm between 
the angles or plate and T. Spot welding at maximum of 
300 mm centres, in lieu of bolting or riveting may also 
be suitably adopted. 


The bottom rail shall extend to the full width of the 
rolling shutter except for that portion necessary for 
housing within the channel guides, and shall make 
close contact with the sill when the shutter is closed. 


7.4.3.4 Guides 


The rolling shutter shall move in channel guides 
constructed of galvanized steel or cold rolled steel 
not less than 3 mm thick extending continuously from 
within the barrel enclosure to within a distance of not 
more than 30 mm and not less than 20 mm from the 
floor of the opening. 


The guides shall be of a depth sufficient to allow the 
rolling shutter to extend at least 50 mm to 65 mm into 
the guides based on the size. 


7.4.3.5 Brackets, supporting axle and roller 


The brackets shall be of steel and shall be of enclosed 
type, arranged to support the bearings of the axle and 
shall be of sufficient size to close completely the ends 
of the barrel enclosure. 


7.4.3.6 Barrel and axle 


The barrel shall be of mild steel tube not less than 
80 mm outside diameter and not less than 3 mm in 


IS 3614 : 2021 


thickness, mounted on a mild steel axle not less than 
25 mm in diameter, the axle shall extend the full length 
of the barrel with a minimum bearing of 25 mm at each 
end. The barrel shall enclose helical steel springs for 
counter-balancing the rolling shutter with or without 
counterbalancing. 


The barrel shall be mounted on rigid or self-aligning 
ball bearings and be fitted with a spring charging device 
to enable the spring to be adjusted after the rolling 
shutter is in position. 


7.4.3.7 Barrel enclosure 


The barrel shall be completely enclosed with steel 
pressed casing in an angular or square shape. This 
should also cover the motor. The thickness of the cover 
shall be minimum 1.2 mm. 


7.4.3.8 Chains 


Chains shall be provided instead of handles or angles. 
The same should be hanging up to a height of 1.0 m 
from the floor level. This is mandatory for the rolling 
shutters in case of an emergency or any power failure. 


7.4.4 General Requirement of Fire Rated Rolling 
Shutter 


a) It should be fire rated for minimum 120 min and 
maximum 240 min. 


b) Power operated fire rolling shutter are those that 
normally are opened or closed by power. They 
shall be permitted to be furnished with a sensor 
that causes the door closer to stop or reverse 
upon contact with an obstruction under normal 
conditions. 


c 


wa 


Power operated fire rolling shutter shall be 
equipped with an automatic closing device that, 
upon activation, will cause the door to close 
irrespective of power loss or operation under 
normal conditions, and remain closed or be 
capable of opening and then reclosing until the 
automatic closing device has been reset. 


d) An automatic closing device (motorized) shall be 
installed on every rolling shutter. 


e) Rolling shutters shall close automatically upon 
activation of detector or release of a fusible link. 


f) The automatic closing mechanism shall be 
enclosed in a metal housing to protect the 
mechanism from debris and ensure operation in 
the event of fire. 


ar 


A governor, where employed on a door, shall be an 
integral mechanism working in coordination with 
the closing device and shall control the closing 
speed of the door. 


8 


7.4.5 Operator 


The operator 
specification: 


shall be of minimum following 


IS 3614 : 2021 


a) Operator/motor of 220 V, 50 Hz single phase type 
for shutter size up to 5 000 mm x 5 000 mm; and 
if the size of the rolling shutter is more than the 
above mentioned size, then the operator shall be 
of 415 V, 50 Hz, 3 phase. It should be provided 
along with additional accessories like, one unit 
push button switch (up, stop, down), and have 
IP 65 rating. 


Motor capacity — 1 H.P., for sizes less than 
5 000 mm x 5 000 mm, 3 H.P., for sizes above 
5 000 mm x 5 000 mm. 
c) Current rating — 5 Amp for sizes less than 
5 000 mm x 5 000 mm, 9 Amp for sizes above 
5 000 mm x 5 000 mm, 


Additional accessories for fire operation fusible link 
and 24 V solenoid release, including fire alarm backup 
panel. 

NOTE — See also Part 4 ‘Fire and Life Safety’ and Part 


8 ‘Building Services, Section 2 Electrical and Allied 
Installations’ of SP 7. 


b 


wm 


For other builders hardware, the requirements as 
recommended in 7.2.9 shall be applicable. 


7.5 Fire Rated Sliding Door (Metallic) 


The requirements of the fire rated sliding door 
including automated sliding door with telescopic 
sealing arrangement, horizontal single or double 
(bi-parting) are given hereunder. Doors shall be 
equipped with self-closing or automatic closing devices 
to ensure that they shall close or be closed at the time of 
a fire. Closing devices shall be a system of weights or a 
certified closing device. Automatic closing doors shall 
not have a delay of more than 10 s in the initiation of 
closing or reclosing. 


7.5.1 Material 


When specified, hot dipped zinc coated galvanized 
steel shall be of the alloyed type and comply with 
IS 277. Metallic coating by hot-dip process, 
zinc-coating or zinc-iron alloy-coating (galvannealing) 
using hot-dip process may also be used. The weight of 
coating shall meet or exceed the minimum requirement 
of 122 g/m? total for both sides. 


7.5.2 Sizes 


The maximum size of the opening shall be limited to 
48 m’ and the maximum permissible wall width shall 
be 8.0 m and wall height shall be 6.0 m. For opening 
heights above 6.0 m, the manufacturer shall provide 
relevant certificate of approval. The maximum fire 
rating for the door shall be 120 min. 


7.5.3 Construction of Sliding Door Leaf 


7.5.3.1 Sliding door leaf 


Flush, fully bonded door with groove/spring element 
connection of galvanized steel sheet of minimum 


12 


0.75 mm thickness without primer-coating shall be 
used. Thickness of each element shall be minimum 
72 mm with the panel depth varying between 230 mm 
to 1 550 mm each. They shall be connected at factory 
or in strict supervision at site by internal threaded rods. 
Maximum individual panel weight should not be more 
than 180 kg with 30 min insulation for both 90 min and 
120 min integrity fire doors. 


The system shall be supported by hydraulic soft stop 
for continuously adjustable closing speed of 0.08 m/s 
to 0.2 m/s which is invisibly integrated into the weight 
box. Grip handle and recessed handle shall be provided 
for manual opertaion. Integrated floor guide roller with 
ball-bearing shall be provided for smooth operation. 
Integrated guidance damper for single-leaf doors 
and surface-mounted guidance damper bracket for 
double-leaf doors shall also be provided. 


The track shall be cold rolled, galvanized C-profile 
with three-way adjustable suspension brackets and bolt 
plug-in connection for a precise track joint. Track wall 
connection profile may be used to compensate for any 
irregularities in the wall. Two set of galvanized pairs of 
rollers with ball-bearing per panel shall be provided. 
Track should be cladded with galvanized sheet steel 
cover. 


Unless tested otherwise, doors shall lap the openings at 
least 102 mm at the sides and top. Where doors provide 
protection of openings located in walls above floor 
level and no projection sill is provided, the doors shall 
lap the bottom of the opening at least 102 mm. 


Attachment of the door assembly to the wall shall 
be by means of through wall bolts. As an alternate, 
expansion anchors shall be permitted to be used in 
concrete, brick or filled concrete masonry unit walls if 
the requirements in 7.5.4 are met. 


7.5.4 General Requirement of Fire Rated Sliding Door 


See 11.3.1, 11.3.2 and 11.3.3 for requirements of closing 
devices, releasing devices and hardware respectively. 


7.6 General Requirement of Fire Doors 


The fire ratings for 30, 60, 90, 120, 180 min shall 
be acceptable for evaluation of products and their 
intended usage and application. This should comply 
with respective requirement of Part 4 ‘Fire and Life 
Safety’ of SP 7 based on application. 


Fire doors shall be classified based on their intended 
rating. All fire doors shall be classified and labelled for 
integrity and for insulation as applicable for insulated 
doors. 


All fire doors shall be identified by a label preferably 
bearing a unique number. 

Where the products are tested and certified by any 
approved laboratory, the label shall specify the name 
of the agency and the certificate number. 


Labels shall be applied in locations that are easily visible 
and convenient for identification by the competent 
authority. All components shall be labelled in fire 
door assembly as required and shall be considered as 
evidence that specimens of such devices or materials 
have been evaluated by test(s) and that such devices 
or material are manufactured under in-plant and 
follow-up inspection programme. 


Specification of items which are generic in nature, 
such as hinges, locks, lever handles, closing devices 
shall be in line with respective standards like IS 208, 
IS 1341, IS 3564, IS 6315, IS 12817, and IS 14912. 
Any architectural hardware which does not have a 
label or supporting third party certification for intended 
fire rating, shall not be used as a component in the 
assembly of fire doors. The liability of identification 
and submission of relevant test documents shall be with 
the fire door manufacturer, who will be responsible for 
the system as a complete assembly. 


All fire doors shall be provided with fire rated smoke 
check sealing, which is also applicable for all type 
of fire doors, swing, sliding and rolling shutters. The 
performance of fire doors shall include smoke check. 
Proper seals should be provided to stop the spread of 
fire and smoke in a building. It is not mandatory to 
have a door bottom seal, unless desired or the area 
under consideration is pressurized. 


Where sliding fire doors are used, the same shall be 
labelled for relevant fire rating including all accessories 
as an assembly. 


Rolling steel fire door shall be labelled for required fire 
rating and shall be furnished as a complete assembly 
that includes slats, rolling shutters, bottom bars, barrel, 
guides, brackets, hood, automatic closing devices and 
any other component required. 


For other builder’s hardware, the requirements as 
recommended in 7.2.9 shall be applicable. 


8 MARKING AND LABELLING 


8.1 The fire door manufacturer shall supply frame and 
doors with appropriate labels in the prescribed format. 
The fire door manufacturer shall maintain record of 
all labels supplied with the following information for 
evaluation by competent authority: 


a) Name of the project; 
b) Buyer’s purchase order number, and address; 
c) Serial number, and the year of manufacture; and 
d) Fire rating, and label details. 
8.2 The label shall be affixed on the door leaf that 
is visible and convenient for identification by the 
competent authority. 
8.3 The label shall contain the following information: 


a) Name of the manufacturer, 


13 


IS 3614 : 2021 


b) Type of fire door, 

c) Fire rating classification (see 5), 
d) Serial number of the door, 

e) Year of manufacture, and 

f) Certificate reference number. 


8.4 BIS Certification Marking 


The product (fire door and doorsets) conforming to the 
requirements of this standard may be certified as per the 
conformity assessment schemes under the provisions of 
the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and the Rules 
and Regulations framed thereunder, and the product may 
be marked with the Standard Mark. 


8.5 The fire door manufacturer shall provide the test 
data on request to the concerned authority under whose 
jurisdiction the product is supplied. 


9 STORAGE, HANDLING, 
INSTALLATION OF HINGED DOORS 


AND 


9.1 Site Storage 


All doors and frames shall be stored horizontally under 
cover. The units shall be placed on at least 100 mm 
high wood sills or in a manner that will prevent damage 
including rusting. The use of non-vented plastic or 
canvas shelters that can create a humidity chamber 
shall be avoided. A 6.3 mm space between the doors 
shall be provided to promote air circulation. If the 
wrapper on the door becomes wet, it must be removed 
immediately. Proper jobsite storage is extremely 
important in maintaining the quality and integrity of the 
factory finish including paint applied, if any. Improper 
storage of materials will have an adverse effect on the 
factory finish including factory applied paints. 


9.2 Frame Installation 


9.2.1 Frames shall be installed plumb, level, rigid 
and in true alignment as recommended in the erection 
instructions for steel frames and installation guide for 
doors and hardware. All frames, other than drywall 
slip-on types, shall be fastened to the adjacent 
structure so as to retain their position and stability. 
Slip-on dry wall frames shall be installed in prepared 
wall openings in accordance with manufacturer’s 
instructions. The maximum allowable gap between the 
frame shall not be more than 5-8 mm and should be 
sealed with proper sealant once the frames are installed. 
It is critical that correct methods of installation are 
adopted to ensure that a doorset, when fixed into the 
wall, will achieve the fire rating designated for the 
opening. 

It is strongly recommended that installation of 
fire doorsets is carried out by the manufacturer 
or, alternatively by installers trained in fixing the 
doorsets in accordance with the manufacturer’s fixing 
instructions. The same shall be guaranteed by the 
manufacturer on completion of installation. 


IS 3614 : 2021 


9.2.1.1 Compatibility of the surrounding structure 


The type of surrounding structure or wall/partition 
into which a fire door can be installed will have to be 
determined by fire resistance test and should not be 
changed without agreed expert opinion or test evidence. 
The type of surrounding structure or wall/partition can 
exert an influence upon the fire performance of the 
assembly, hence it should be suitably fire rated. The 
manufacturer’s recommendations should be followed 
with regard to the approved types of surrounding 
structure within which the door may be fitted. 


9.2.1.2 Sealing between door assembly and surrounding 
structure 


In order to maintain the fire resistance of a fire-resisting 
wall or partition when fitted with a door assembly, 
the junction between the two elements should be 
adequately sealed. Ideally a wall or partition should be 
built up to the rear of the door frame without gaps. This 
is not always possible, and to ensure easy installation of 
the door assembly, the opening should be made within 
the permissible tolerance of 5 mm on all three sides. 
The gap between door frame and wall opening can vary 
greatly and is usually masked with an architrave and/or 
with fire stop sealant. For partitions, the maximum gap 
shall not be more than 2.5 mm on all three sides. 


9.2.2 Where grouting is required in masonry 
installations, frames shall be suitably braced or fastened 
in such a way that will prevent the pressure of the grout 
from deforming the frame members. Head members 
of frames shall not be grouted with the grout mixture. 
Grout shall be mixed with cement and sand slurry to a 
maximum ratio of 1:3. 


Steel frames, including fire rated frames do not 
necessarily require grouting to achieve fire rating. 
Grouting shall not be used for frames installed in 
plasterboard walls. 


Alternatively, use of fire rated polyurethane foam or 
such fire rated materials may be recommended for all 
kind of frames. 


9.3 Door Installation 


9.3.1 Doors shall be installed and fastened to maintain 
alignment with frames to achieve maximum operational 
effectiveness and appearance. Doors shall be adjusted to 
maintain perimeter clearances of maximum 3 to 4 mm. 
Shimming shall be performed by the installer as needed 
to ensure that the proper clearances are achieved. 


9.3.1.1 Clearance gaps 


Failure of fire-resisting door assemblies under test can 
be due to burn-through at the clearance gap between 
the door leaf edge and the door frame. Doors should 
be hung to give an equal gap across the head and 
down both jambs. A typical gap to achieve good fire 
performance is between 2 mm and 4 mm. With the 
exception of uninsulated fire doors, it is recommended 


14 


that all fire doors are fitted with intumescent seals or 
combined intumescent and smoke seals. Certain smoke 
seals might require a larger gap in order to operate 
without causing significant frictional increases, but the 
gap should remain within tested tolerances. 


9.3.1.2 Under-door (threshold) gaps 


Under-door (threshold) gaps should be in accordance 
with the manufacturer’s installation instructions for 
the particular doorset design. When fitted, smoke seals 
should give an even contact with the floor but should 
not exhibit significant increased frictional forces that 
could interfere with the closing action of the door. The 
maximum undercut gap shall not be more than 19 mm, 
provided the same has been tested in similar condition 
(see also 7.2.5). 


9.4 Hardware Installation 


Installation of hardware items shall be in accordance 
with good practices and hardware manufacturer’s 
recommendations/templates. Installation guide for 
doors and hardware and recommended practice for 
hardware if available shall be followed. All hardware 
shall be reinforced with appropriate reinforcement 
including screws and fasteners as suggested by the 
hardware manufacturer’s manual. 


9.4.1 Fixing of Smoke Seal 


When it is necessary to fit seals on site, either in the 
frame or the door edge, it is important to follow the 
manufacturer’s recommendations precisely for the type 
and mode of operation of the door concerned. Care is 
necessary when fitting self-adhesive seals to ensure that 
the groove is dry and free from dust or sawdust to ensure 
a good bond. The self-adhesive action deteriorates at 
lower temperatures, and additional mechanical fixing 
might be necessary if the seals are fitted at temperatures 
below 10 °C. Seals may be surface-mounted if they 
are sufficiently thin, but such seals are more prone to 
detachment than those fitted into grooves. 


9.5 Installation of Factory Applied Finish Painted 
Materials 


In addition to storage and handling precautions, it is 
imperative that the work of all other rough trades must 
be completed prior to the installation of factory applied 
finished painted product. 


9.6 Door and Frame Maintenance 


Once the doors and frames are installed, the owner or 
end user shall responsibly and properly maintain the 
doors and frames in accordance with good practices 
and as per the manufacturer’s maintenance manual. 


9.6.1 Fire doors are intended to provide a similar level 
of fire resistance as the fixed elements of building, for 
example, walls and floors, and evaluated by the similar 
procedures and criteria. However, since such doors are 
often opened and closed many times a day, this mobility 
is likely to cause a more rapid deterioration in the fire 


resistance performance. This deterioration can take two 
main forms: 


a) Damage to the leaf or the components making up 
the assembly, and 


b) Wear and tear in the building hardware, or a 
reduction in the effectiveness of fixings, causing 
the door to fail to self-close, thereby resulting in a 
breach of the fire barrier. 


It is important, therefore, for periodic inspection, 
maintenance and repair of any damage shall be 
undertaken on a regular basis, for the required fire 
resistance to be maintained. The marking of individual 
components can be an aid to the correct replacement of 
those components when necessary. 


10 STORAGE, HANDLING 
INSTALLATION OF ROLLING SHUTTERS 


AND 


10.1 Site Storage 


All rolling shutters shall be stored horizontally under 
cover in the job site. The surface of the floor shall be 
flat and should have sufficient support for the hood. 
The slats shall not touch the floor and shall be rolled 
on to the hood. The minimum space under the rolled 
slates and floor shall be 100 mm. The place shall be dry 
and free from water or wet surface including wrappers. 
Proper site storage is important in maintaining the 
quality and integrity of the applied paint surface. 


10.2 Mounting of Rolling Shutter 


The mounting for rolling shutter shall be, either on the 
face-of-wall or between the jamb. Shutters mounted on 
the face of the wall and subject to damage from falling 
debris shall be protected by the building structure. Fire 
rated rolling shutters shall have minimum 800 mm 
head room clearance for fixing of hood and operator. 


10.3 Supporting Construction 


Walls shall be plumb and true, present smooth surfaces, 
and have a fire resistance rating as required by the 
competent authority. Walls shall be of brick, concrete, 
or concrete masonry unit construction except that, 
where hollow concrete masonry units are used, the 
wall opening shall be reinforced to provide anchorage 
for door-mounting hardware equal to that of brick or 
concrete. Heads of door frames and other structural 
openings shall be reinforced or suitable lintels shall be 
provided, depending on the type of wall construction 
and loads to be supported. Frames may not be required 
for rolling shutter installations. Where frames or 
jambs are provided, nominal structural steel or formed 
steel plate shall be used. Frames or jambs shall be in 
accordance with the manufacturer’s listing. 


10.4 Assembly Components 


An automatic closing device shall be installed on 
every rolling shutter (motorized). Rolling shutter shall 
close automatically upon activation or release of a 
fusible link or detector. The automatic-door closing 


15 


IS 3614 : 2021 


mechanism shall be enclosed in a metal housing to 
protect the mechanism from debris and ensure operation 
in the event of fire. A governor, where employed on 
a door, shall have an integral mechanism working in 
coordination with the closing device and shall control 
the closing speed of the door. 


Power operated fire doors are those that normally are 
opened or closed by power. They shall be furnished 
with a sensor that causes the door closer to stop or 
reverse upon contact with an obstruction under normal 
conditions. Power-operated fire doors shall be equipped 
with an automatic closing device that, upon activation, 
will cause the door to close irrespective of power loss or 
operation under normal conditions, and remain closed 
or be capable of opening and then reclosing until the 
automatic-door closing device has been reset. 


10.5 Assembly of Rolling Shutters 


10.5.1 Guides 


The guides shall be mounted plumb and with sufficient 
clearances allowed for vertical expansion when exposed 
to fire. The guides used between jamb-mounted doors 
shall be either exposed or concealed in a pocket or 
wall reveal. Attachment of the door assembly to the 
wall shall be by means of through-wall bolts. As an 
alternative, expansion anchors shall be permitted to 
be used in concrete, brick, or filled concrete masonry 
unit walls if the following conditions are met: 


a) Expansion anchors shall be manufactured from 
steel and shall be zinc-coated or cadmium 
coated. 

b) Where used in brick or filled concrete masonry 

unit walls, the result of the shear and tensile load 

applied to the bolt shall not exceed 1/12" of the 
proof test load. 


c 


wm 


No expansion anchor shall be set closer to the edge 
of the wall opening than six times the diameter 
of the anchor or closer to another anchor than 
eight times the diameter of the anchor. 

d) Where structural steel frames are used at jambs, 
guides shall be secured to the frame with machine 
bolts of not less than 9.5 mm in diameter. 


10.5.2 Brackets 


Brackets mounted on the face of the wall shall be 
bolted either to the wall or to an extension of the 
guide wall angle with not less than two through-bolts 
or machine bolts 12.7 mm in diameter per bracket. 
Brackets mounted between the jambs shall be secured 
to the lintel or to the side of the jambs by not less than 
two machine bolts of 12.7 mm diameter. 


10.5.3 Hoods and Housings 


Where the rolling shutter is mounted on the face of the 
wall or between jambs, the metal hood and housing 
shall be secured tightly to the brackets or wall. Where 
a flame baffle is provided, fusible link connection to 


IS 3614 : 2021 


the flame baffle shall be permitted to be independent of 
the detectors or fusible link connections that activate 
the door’s automatic door closing mechanism. 


11 STORAGE, HANDLING AND 
INSTALLATION OF HORIZONTAL SLIDING 
DOORS 


11.1 Site Storage 


Sliding door panels should be stored horizontally under 
cover. The surface of the floor shall be flat and should 
have sufficient support at the bottom with wooden 
spacers. The panels shall not touch the floor and shall 
be covered with wrappers to avoid exposure to dust and 
water. The place shall be dry and free from water or 
wet surface including the wrappers. Proper site storage 
is important in maintaining the quality and integrity of 
the applied paint surface. 


11.2 Sliding Door Panels 


11.2.1 Sliding door panels shall be permitted to be 
single section or multiple sections. Connection 
between the panels shall be in accordance with 
the manufacturer’s instructions and the individual 
published listing. Hollow metal or composite doors 
shall be furnished in not more than five panels, 
constructed for either field or factory assembly. For 
bi-parting doors, not more than four panels shall 
comprise a single leaf. Personnel swinging-type pass 
doors shall be permitted to be used if tested with the 
sliding door. The pass door shall be provided with 
hinges, latch set, and spring hinges or door closer. 


11.2.2 Mounting of Sliding Doors 


Horizontally sliding doors shall be wall mounted 
in a track attached to a wall in accordance with the 
manufacturer’s instructions. When in the closed 
position, the clearance between the wall and the sliding 
door or the frame and the sliding door shall not be more 
than 19 mm. Unless tested otherwise, sliding doors 
shall lap openings at least 102 mm at the sides and top. 
Where sliding doors provide protection of openings 
located in walls above floor level and no projection sill 
is provided, the sliding door shall lap the bottom of the 
opening at least 102 mm. Bi-parting doors shall have 
an astragal securely attached in place so as to project 
a minimum of 19 mm unless otherwise required or 
permitted in the individual manufacturer’s published 
listing. 


11.3 Supporting Construction 
11.3.1 Walls 


Walls shall be plumb and true and have a fire resistance 
rating as required by the authorities. They shall be of 
brick, concrete, or concrete masonry; the wall opening 
shall be reinforced to provide anchorage for door 
mounting hardware equal to that of brick or concrete. 


16 


Attachment of the door assembly to the wall shall be by 
means of through-wall bolts. As an alternate, expansion 
anchors shall be permitted to be used in concrete, brick, 
or filled concrete masonry unit walls if the following 
conditions are met: 


a) Expansion anchors shall be manufactured from 
steel and shall be zinc-coated or cadmium coated. 


b) The compressive strength of the concrete shall not 
be less than 13.8 MPa (2 000 psi), and the bolt 
load shall not exceed the proof test load. 


c 


wm 


Where used in brick or filled concrete masonry 
unit walls, the bolt load shall not exceed 1/12" of 
the proof test load. No expansion anchor shall 
be set closer to the edge of the wall opening than 
six times the diameter of the anchor, or closer to 
another anchor than eight times the diameter of 
the anchor. 


11.4 Assembly Components 


11.4.1 Closing Devices 


Fire rated sliding doors shall be equipped with 
self-closing or automatic door closing devices to ensure 
that they shall close or be closed at the time of a fire. 
Closing devices shall be a system of weights or a 
certified closing device. Automatic closing doors shall 
not have a delay of more than 10 s in the initiation of 
closing or reclosing. 


The average closing speed shall be not less 152 mm/s, 
not including any initial delay time. The average closing 
speed for doors used in buildings where access by the 
general public is not restricted, shall be not more than 
610 mm/s. 


11.4.2 Releasing Devices 


Power operated doors not equipped with standby or 
emergency power shall be equipped with an integral 
or a separate labelled releasing device that shall 
automatically disconnect the door from the control of 
the power operator at the time of a fire. The releasing 
device shall be activated at the time of the fire by 
detectors or fusible links installed on both sides of the 
wall and interconnected so that the operation of the 
single detector or fusible link shall allow the door to 
be disconnected and closed. If closing is achieved by 
power operation, standby or emergency power shall be 
provided. The time delay from failure of normal power 
operation to emergency power operation shall not 
exceed 10 s. The standby or emergency power source 
shall be sufficient to operate a minimum of 50 closing 
cycles of the door. If door opening also is achieved 
by power operation, the standby or emergency power 
source shall be sufficient to operate a minimum of 
50 opening and closing cycles of the door. 


Power operation shall not allow opening if temperatures 
on either side of the door reaches 260 °C (500 °F). 


11.4.3 Hardware 


Only hardware certified for use with the door shall be 
permitted to be used. Fire door hardware shall include 
tracks, hangers, track brackets, bumpers, binders, pull 
handles, stay rollers, centre latch and centre floor stop 
if required, astragal, and centre binders. Tracks shall 
be flat, box, angle, J-section, or round. Tracks shall 
be inclined or level, depending on the manufacturer’s 
procedure. 


The wall bolts shall not be less than 15.8 mm 
in diameter. The bolt spacing depends on the 
manufacturer’s specific test. Not less than two hangers 
shall be provided for each door. At least two binders 
shall be required on the vertical jambs and at least one 
shall be required at the head. 


17 


IS 3614 : 2021 


Bi-parting sliding doors shall be provided with the 
sill binders or centre guides if required by individual 
manufacturers. Stay rollers shall be installed in an 
approved manner. Where doors are power operated, 
centre-parting doors requiring a centre latch shall 
be provided with a fusible link arrangement that 
shall hold the latch in an unlatched position during 
day-to-day operation while causing the latch to operate 
and secure the door in the event of a fire. Handles 
shall be provided for opening the doors from either 
side. If flush pulls are used, they shall not be located 
back-to-back. 


IS 3614 : 2021 


IS No. 
208 : 1996 


277 : 2018 


287 : 1993 


513 

(Part 1) : 2016 
(Part 2) : 2016 
1341 : 2018 


3564 : 1995 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 2 ) 


LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 


Title 
Door handles — Specification 
(fifth revision) 
Galvanized steel strips and 


sheets (plain and corrugated) — 
Specification (seventh revision) 


Permissible moisture content 
for timber used for different 
purposes — Recommendations 


(third revision) 


Cold reduced carbon steel sheet 
and strip 


Part 1 Cold forming and drawing 
purpose (sixth revision) 

Part 2 High tensile and 
multi-phase steel (sixth revision) 


Steel butt hinges — Specification 
(sixth revision) 


Hydraulically 
closers 
(fourth revision) 


regulated door 
Specification 


18 


IS No. 
6248 : 1979 


6315 : 1992 


12817 : 2013 


14912 : 2001 


16231 (Part 4) : 
2019 


SP7 
(Part 4) : 2016 
(Part 8/Sec 2) : 
2016 


IS/ISO 3008-1 : 
2019 


Title 


Specification for metal rolling 


shutters and rolling grills 
(first revision) 
Floor springs (hydraulically 


regulated) for heavy doors — 
Specification (second revision) 


Stainless steel butt hinges — 
Specification (second revision) 


Door closers, concealed type 
(hydraulically regulated) — 
Specification 


Code of practice for use of glass in 
buildings: Part 4 Safety related to 
human impact (first revision) 


National Building Code of India: 
Part 4 Fire and life safety 


Part 8 Building Services: Section 2 
Electrical and allied Installations. 


Fire resistance tests — Door 
and shutter assemblies 
Part 1: General requirements 
(under prepartion) 


IS 3614 : 2021 


ANNEX B 
( Foreword ) 


GENERAL GUIDANCE FOR FIRE DOOR PERFORMANCE 


B-1 GENERAL 


B-1.1 Each class of device (for example, 
doors/shutters) has certain advantages and limitations, 
and the importance of each of these characteristics 
needs to be considered for the specific opening under 
consideration, based on performance. A device cannot 
be expected to perform properly except under the 
condition for which it was designed. This does not 
only include testing and meeting the provision of the 
standard but also the functionality of the product in use. 


B-1.2 Fire door assemblies for the protection of 
openings depend on the use of labelled fire doors 
and frames, certified and labelled latching devices, 
swinging and sliding hardware, and closing devices 
having the required fire protection ratings that close 
or are closed at the time of fire. The effectiveness of 
the entire assembly as a fire barrier could be destroyed 
if any component is omitted or even if one of the 
component is substandard in quality. 


B-1.3 Where fire doors are used in a means of egress, 
they are required to swing along the direction of exit 
travel except for doors on individual small rooms, 
which may be permitted to swing in. The following 
types of doors may not be permitted to be used on exits: 


a) Rolling steel doors or shutters, and 
b) Horizontal or vertical sliding doors. 


B-1.4 Fusible link or similar door-closing arrangements 
are of limited value for exit purposes because quantities 
of smoke can pass through the door opening before 
there is sufficient heat to fuse the link. 


B-1.5 Doors of small to moderate sizes are more 
suitable for exit purposes than very large doors because 
of the relative ease of operation of smaller doors. 


B-1.6 Horizontally sliding doors for exit purposes are 
not suitable because they are difficult to reopen once 
they are closed in the case of fire. Swinging doors that 
are integral with the sliding fire doors are considered 
suitable if they are tested and certified and if they are 
furnished without any obstruction to clear the passage. 


B-1.7 Any assembly provided in accordance with the 
provisions of this standard does not necessarily provide 
the same degree of protection against the spread of 
fire that is provided by the wall in which the assembly 
is installed, assuming that the wall has certain fire 
resistance. Therefore, the size and number of openings 
in any wall required to have fire resistance should 
be kept to the minimum necessary for the normal or 
emergency operation of the occupancy. 


19 


B-1.8 Safety glazing is also an important consideration 
when using glazing materials in fire door’s vision pane 
and in fire resistance rated walls that could be subject to 
accidental human impact [see IS 16231 (Part 4)]. 


B-1.9 Access doors installed in a horizontal plane 
(horizontal access doors) for use in fire-rated floors, or 
floor-ceiling or roof-ceiling assemblies are designed 
to maintain the fire resistance rating of the building 
construction material. The size and number of such 
door openings should be limited in accordance with the 
fire-rated assembly. Horizontal access doors differ from 
access doors installed in the vertical plane (vertical 
access doors) because they are tested to perform as 
an essential component of the fire-rated assembly 
in which they are installed so that the rating of the 
entire assembly is maintained by the installation of 
the horizontal access door. Therefore, these doors do 
not have a fire protection rating. Vertical access doors, 
however, are tested in accordance with the same test 
used to measure the fire performance of standard size 
doors. 


B-1.10 Fire doors, shutters, are of value only if properly 
maintained so that they close or are closed during the 
time of fire. Periodic inspection of doors/shutters, 
with immediate attention to any necessary repairs 
and correction of any defects that could interfere 
with operation, is an important responsibility of the 
management of the property. 


B-1.11 The use of swinging, non-rated doors mounted 
in openings in fire walls, which could interfere with the 
closing of the fire doors, should not be permitted. 


B-2 INSTALLATION AND MAINTAINANCE 


The competent authority may decide upgrading of 
existing installations to meet current standards and 
requirements only where the lack of compliance with 
this standard presents a serious fire or life safety 
hazard. It should be noted that care and maintenance of 
materials for ongoing and existing installations should 
be maintained in accordance with the standards under 
which they were installed. 


B-3 Electronic and similar storage of details of range 
of fire doors (model/variety) including their unique 
serial number and compliance to this standard should 
preferably be maintained for reference and use. 


B-4 FIRE PROTECTION RATING 


The fire protection rating of a fire door presumes that the 
door is installed with the appropriate frame, hardware, 
and other accessories required by this standard. In any 
instance where any of the required elements are not 


IS 3614 : 2021 


supplied, omitted by the manufacturer of the door, the 
assembly rating is void for the purpose of this standard 
and the opening protection is not considered equivalent 
to the certified or otherwise indicated fire protection 
rating of the door component. 


B-5 SUPPLY AND INSTALLATION 


For the purpose of fire protection, fire rated door and 
hardware supplied by two different agencies will 
be construed as non-fire rated in nature. The door 
manufacturer shall not put fire rated label on such doors, 
where they have no control over the supply of such 
material. All components which forms a complete fire 
door assembly and qualifies the definition of fire door 
shall be supplied and installed by the door manufacturer 
or by its trained installer. The door manufacturer shall 
be responsible for the entire assembly. If required, the 
manufacturer shall give an undertaking in writing to the 
fire authority about the products supplied with proper 
certification and also confirming that the material was 
supplied by him as a complete assembly and installed 
at site as per certification. If there is any deviation 
in supplies (such as due to unforeseen reasons), the 
manufacturer should mention it to the competent 
authorities to enable them decide on (accepting or 
rejecting) the deviation. It is suggested to take prior 
approval in case of any deviation(s). 


B-6 Doors are of several classifications, types, and 
methods of operation. Fire door assemblies consist of 
individually certified components that are essential for 
the satisfactory performance of the complete assembly. 
Some certification cover one or more components in 
addition to the door. 


B-7 Fire doors/shutters, are of value only if properly 
installed so that they close at the time of fire. They 
should be self-latching, except if the certified fire door 
supplied is tested in unlatched condition. All fire doors 
shall be self-closing. Non-egress doors like horizontal 
and vertical shaft doors, may not have the self-closing 
device if the door under consideration is always in 
latched or locked condition. 


B-8 Where the fire door assembly has components 
with different fire rating, then the components with the 
least fire rating will be considered as the rating of the 
assembly. 


B-9 In communicating doors or connecting rooms 
between hotel sleeping rooms, the closing devices may 
be omitted with the approval of the competent authority. 
In a residential apartment’s entrance door, there may be 


20 


an exception for not using a closing device as the door 
will remain always in closed condition. 


B-10 Adequate spring power is essential for hydraulic 
door closers to close a fire door with sufficient force 
to overcome the resistance of the latching mechanism. 
However, too much spring power causes opening 
resistance and makes it difficult for the persons with 
disabilities, the elderly, and young children to open 
doors. See also Annex B of Part 3 ‘Development control 
rules and general building requirements’ of SP 7. 


Door closers may be classified in sizes from 2 to 6 
with an increased closing force for higher numbers. 
Generally, a minimum size 4 or above closer should 
be used on exterior fire doors and a minimum size 
3 or above closer should be used on interior fire doors. 
Door widths greater than 970 mm in exterior and 
1 020 mm in interior parallel or single lever arm 
applications, and abnormal air pressures usually 
require an increase to the next size. A combination of 
these factors could necessitate an increase of two sizes. 
Individual manufacturer’s recommendations should be 
consulted. Spring hinges should be adjusted to achieve 
positive latching when allowed to close freely from an 
open position of 30°. 


B-11 Certified and labelled door holder/release devices 
for swinging doors should, wherever possible, be 
installed at the top of the door as close as possible 
to the lock edge and should be located to avoid 
interference with any other hardware. If necessary, the 
holder/release may be permitted to be located at the 
bottom of the door as close as possible to the lock edge 
with the device installed on the wall or floor. 


B-12 Structural changes in the design of frame may 
have an impact on the fire rating of the door. Any 
changes in depth of frame or two-piece frame (both 
side architrave), use of sub-frames and pressure fixed 
frames should be based on proper test evidence and 
certification under third party certification program. 


B-13 Fire door/shutters may lose their purpose unless 
they are properly maintained and closed or are able 
to close at the time of fire. A periodic inspection 
and maintenance program should be implemented 
and should be the responsibility of the property 
management. See also Annex B of Part 12 ‘Asset and 
facility management’ of SP 7. 


B-14 Hinges, catches, closers, latches, and stay rolls 
are especially subject to wear and needs maintenance. 


IS 3614 : 2021 


ANNEX C 
( Foreword ) 


SUPPLY/INSTALLATION OF FIRE DOORS 


C-1 LETTER OF COMPLIANCE 

The typical letter for supply and installation of fire rated doors is given below: 
To 
The Owner or End User 
Project Name 


Location 
Sub: Confirmation of supply and installation of fire rated doors and doorsets in (project name) 
Ref: Certification numbers: 
1) (Product type, Issuing lab, Date of issue) 
2) (Product type, Issuing lab, Date of issue) 


Further to the receipt of order (reference) we hereby confirm the following material has been supplied and 
installed as a complete assembly. The products supplied are detailed below vide (list of unique serial number of 
labelling) and are as per the above tested specimen. 


Door Type Size Quantity Door Unique Invoice Remarks 
(Wall Opening) Classification | Serial No. of No. 
Code Labeling 
1 000 x 2 100 
Fire door 100 mee Fully compliant 
900 x 2 400 Invoice No. 
Total doors 100 


As a primary supplier of fire door and hardware, we hereby confirm the products supplied and installed are 
covered under our certification programme/test reports (details enclosed). All hardware supplied are equally fire 
rated, the individual test certificates of components and door assembly are also attached herewith. 


Door Manufacturer: 
(sign and seal) 


Encl: Copies of certificates-indicating date of testing and validity date 


C-2 TYPICAL CONTENTS OF TEST REPORT 


C-2.1 The detailed test report shall typically include the following: 
a) Name of testing laboratory, 
b) Name of sponsor, 
c) Date of test, 
d) Ambient temperature, 
e) Objective, 


f) Detailed construction specifications with drawings indicating the side of fire exposure, and method of 
fixing, 


g) Test procedure, 
h) Performance criteria, 


21 


IS 3614 : 2021 


j) Results (tables/graphs/figures): 
1) Temperature measurements; and 
2) Observations 

k) Conclusions. 


C-2.2 A typical of the fire door test certificate is given below. 


FIRE DOOR TEST CERTIFICATE 


This is to certify that, the fire doorset has been tested and certified for fire rating in accordance with the fire door 
specification standard [IS 3614 : 2021] as manufactured by: 


MANUFACTURER NAME (in bold) 
Postal address of the factory 
Telephone number 
Email ID 


Tested product 
Insulated fire door/Uninsulated fire door 


(Choose the relevant door category from the above) 


XXXXXX 


Certificate number as issued by testing laboratory 


Date of test: 03 June 2021 
Date of issue of test certificate: 03 June 2021 
Validity of the test certificate: 02 June 2026 


Issuing authority details: 


Signed and sealed by the issuing laboratory. 


22 


IS 3614 : 2021 


MANUFACTURER NAME (in bold) 


(Certificate number and manufacturer name to be included in every page) 


This is to certify that the following specimen of fire door assembly has been tested for maximum of 
____ minutes (specify actual fire rating) in accordance with IS 3614 : 2021 and IS/ISO 3008-1 : 2019 


Product tested: < Mild steel fire doorset with (mention infill) material > or the relevant 
doorset 


Category of test: Insulated doorset/Uninsulated doorset (select) 


Doorset size: Single/Double leaf doorset of size (indicate Width x Height) with or 
without vision pane tested in latched/unlatched (select relevant type) 
condition Total square metre area including frame. 


Testing criteria: Integrity: 123 minutes (mention maximum rating, as recorded) 


Insulation: 48 minutes (mention maximum minutes if it is an insulated door; as the 
insulation criteria is not applicable for uninsulated doors) 


Door Specification: 1.1 Frame profile size: (mention profile size) 


1.2 Frame type: Grooved or Normal 

1.3 Frame sheet thickness: (mention sheet thickness) 
2.1 Door leaf thickness: (mention shutter thickness) 
2.2 Door sheet thickness: (mention sheet thickness) 
3.1 Vision pane size: (width x height) 


3.2 Total area: m? 


Contd/- 


Date of test: 03 June 2021 
Date of issue of test certificate: 03 June 2021 
Validity of the test certificate: 02 June 2026 


Issuing authority details: 
Signed and sealed by the issuing laboratory. 


23 


IS 3614 : 2021 


MANUFACTURER NAME (in bold) 


(Certificate number and manufacturer name to be included in every page) 


3.3 Type (Clear for entire duration of test) 
4.1 Intumescent seal (only for insulated door) mention size and model 
4.2 Smoke seal model and specification 

Hardware Specification: 5.1 Hinges — size, model number, and make 


5.2 Locking device — model number and make (latched or unlatched 
(tested in latched or unlatched condition) 


5.3 Flush bolts — model number, make (only for inactive leaf) 
5.4 Door closing devices 


5.5 Additional accessories (if any) 


This is to certify that (manufacturer name) has successfully passed specimen doorset sample tested as per 
above specification. This test relates to fire doorset specification providing a maximum fire resistance of 
123 minutes for integrity and 48 minutes of insulation (if tested for insulation) as defined in IS 3614 : 2021. 
This certification is limited to following conditions. 


1. The doors are approved to be used on fire openings based on 


Specimen sample tested. 


a. 
b. Physical evaluation of sample door in line with the specification 


. Documentary evidence of various hardware including glass used, confirming the type and make. 


. Design parameters as submitted for sample inspection. 


Contd/- 
Date of test: 03 June 2021 
Date of issue of test certificate: 03 June 2021 
Validity of the test certificate: 02 June 2026 


Issuing authority details: 
Signed and sealed by the issuing laboratory. 


24 


IS 3614 : 2021 


MANUFACTURER NAME (in bold) 


(Certificate number and manufacturer name to be included in every page) 


. The testing laboratory has conducted factory inspection and production control before testing the product. 
(Include this clause only if the manufacturing facility is not BIS approved. If the laboratory does not have 
any factory inspection then the same should be mentioned). 


. This certificate is limited to the specimen sample manufactured and installed as per IS 3614 : 2021 at the 
time of test. It does not allow for any deviation in maximum width and height as per IS 3614 : 2021 


. Doorset is tested as a complete assembly including vision pane. The maximum size of the vision pane 
cannot be more than the square metres of the glass pane tested. The maximum width of the vision pane 
cannot be more than the tested specimen, height(s) may vary as per IS 3614 : 2021 


. This certificate is for single swing, single or double leaf doorset. (For double swing and double egress 
doors separate test needs to be conducted) 


. If the doors are tested in latched condition, any latching device like mortise sashlock, latch lock and panic 
devices which is fire rated and backed by individual specimen test certificate or not. Use of dead bolts is 
not permitted. 


. For doors tested in unlatched condition, that is, with dead bolts (not engaged in the frame or inactive leaf 
of the door), it is acceptable to use any latched devices as mentioned in condition 6 above. 


. Any reduction or changes in location of the hardware other than the tested specimen may not necessarily 
give the similar performance of the tested specimen. 


Contd/- 


Date of test: 03 June 2021 
Date of issue of test certificate: 03 June 2021 
Validity of the test certificate: 02 June 2026 


Issuing authority details: 


Signed and sealed by the issuing laboratory. 


25 


IS 3614 : 2021 


MANUFACTURER NAME (in bold) 
(Certificate number and manufacturer name to be included in every page) 
. The construction of the wall opening shall be of similar rating or more to have the intended fire resistance 


rating. 


. Labels shall be affixed on the doorset leaf with the certificate number and fire rating confirming if it is 
insulated or uninsulated door. 


. This test certificate is incomplete if it is not submitted along with the manufacturing and construction 
details as signed and attested by the laboratory. 


. This compliance certificate is based on the detailed test report as issued to the manufacturer. Further 
clarification on the test report can be obtained from the issuing authority as mentioned below: 


Testing laboratory details for verification of test report: 


Name of the contact person: 
Contact number: 
E-mail ID: 


Enclosed: Construction details of the door, signed and sealed. 


Date of test: 03 June 2021 
Date of issue of test certificate: 03 June 2021 
Validity of the test certificate: 02 June 2026 


Issuing authority details: 
Signed and sealed by the issuing laboratory. 


Pg-5 


+***END OF REPORT ***** 


26 


IS 3614 : 2021 


ANNEX D 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Fire Safety Sectional Committee, CED 36 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity (K-33, Green Park, 
New Delhi) 


Advance Firetec and Research Lab Pvt Ltd, 
New Delhi 


Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 
CSIR-Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


Central Industrial Security Force, New Delhi 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Centre for Fire Explosive & Environment Safety, 
Delhi 


Chennai Petroleum Corporation Limited, Chennai 


City and Industrial Development Corporation, 
Navi Mumbai 


Delhi Fire Services, New Delhi 


Delhi Metro Rail Corporation Limited, New Delhi 


Directorate General of Quality Assurance, Ministry 
of Defence, New Delhi 


Directorate of Fire and Emergency Services, Panaji 


Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


Fire and Security Association of India, Gurugram 
Fire Safe India Foundation, Mumbai 


FM Engineering International Limited, Bengaluru 
Fyrprotek (Fire Engineers & Consultants), 

New Delhi 
GAIL (India) Limited, New Delhi 


Hilti India Private Limited, Gurugram 


Indian Association of Structural Engineers, 
New Delhi 


Representative(s) 


Suri S. K. DHERI (Chairman) 


SHRI S. K. NANDI 
SHRIMATI INDU SHARMA (Alternate) 


Suri A. K. TANDLE 


SHRI SUVIR SINGH 
Suri A. A. ANSARI (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJNATH SINGH 
Suri A. K. VERMA (Alternate) 


SHRI CHAITANYA KUMAR VERMA 
Suri M. V. CHAcpati Rao (Alternate) 


Dr K. C. WADHWA 


Suri J. P. K. Hepat 


SHRI ARVIND MANDKE 


DIRECTOR 
CHIEF FIRE OFFICER (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI PAPIYA SARKAR 
SHRIMATI RASHMI BHARDWAJ (Alternate) 


CONTROLLER QA (FE) 
JoINT CONTROLLER QA (FE) (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR 


SHRI SURESH MENON 
Suri R. B. Buutpa (Alternate) 


SHRI SURESH MENON 
SHRI MILINDKUMAR DESHMUKH 


SHRI SRIKANTH YAJJALA 
SHRI MANIKANDAN KRISHNAMOORTHY (Alternate) 


SHRI GULSHAN KHURANA 


Suri D. P. NANDA 
Suri R. P. SincuH (Alternate) 


SHRI BRIJBHUSHAN SINGH 
SHRI ARAVIND CHAKRAVARTHY (Alternate) 


Suri S. C. MEHROTRA 
SHRI SITARAM AGGARWAL (Alternate) 


27 


IS 3614 : 2021 


Organization 


Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 


Indian Oil Corporation Limited, Noida 


Institution of Fire Engineers (India), New Delhi 


J & K Fire and Emergency Services, Srinagar 


Johnson Controls (I) Pvt Ltd, Pune 


Karnataka Fire Services, Bengaluru 


Lloyd Insulations (India) Limited, New Delhi 


Maharashtra Fire Services, Mumbai 


Military Engineer Services (E-in-C’s Branch), 
New Delhi 


Ministry of Home Affairs, New Delhi 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas, New Delhi 


Mumbai Fire Brigade, Mumbai 


NTPC Ltd, Noida 


National Association of Fire Officers (NAFO), 
Mumbai 


Nohmi Bosai (India) Pvt Ltd, Gurugram 
Pacific Fire Controls, Delhi 


Proion Consultants, New Delhi 


Reliance Refineries Limited, Jamnagar 


State Bank of India, Mumbai 


Tamil Nadu Fire and Rescue Services Department, 
Chennai 


Techno Fire Protection Services Pvt Ltd, Pune 


The Automotive Research Association of India, 
Pune 


The Indian Institute of Architects, Mumbai 


Telangana State Disaster Response & Fire Services, 


Hyderabad 


U.P. Fire Services, Lucknow 


Representative(s) 


PROF VISHAL KUMAR 
PROF UMESH Kumar SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI AASHISH R. GOKHALE 


SHRI U. S. CHILLAR 
Suri M. S. Patyat (Alternate) 


SHRI V. K. SINGH 
SHRI BASHIR AHMED SHAH (Alternate) 


SHRI SANTOSH MuZUMDAR 
Suri AsHIsH D. SAWANT (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Suri K. K. Mirra 
SHRI SANJEEV ANGRA (Alternate) 


SHRI S. S. WARICK 


SHRI SANJAY AGARWAL 
Lt CoL SRIRAM Somancul (Alternate) 


Suri D. K. SHAMI 


SHRI S. C. GUPTA 
Suri B. R. GADEKAR (Alternate) 


CHIEF FIRE OFFICER 
Deputy CHIEF FIRE OFFICER (Alternate) 


SHRI SANTOSH KUMAR JHA 
SHRI DOONDESHWAR V. (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI AJIT RAGHAVAN 


SHRI RAKESH KUMAR ARORA 
SHRI DAKSH ARORA (Alternate) 


SHRI SANDEEP GOEL 


SHRI VARADENDRA KOTI 
SHRI UMESH KHANDALKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI VINAYAK GOKHALE 
FIRE OFFICER (Alternate) 


Suri M. SHAHUL HAMEED 
SHRIMATI MEENAKSHI VIJAYAKUMAR (Alternate) 


Suri D. G. KoIMATTUR 


SHRI CHARUDATTA S. MUKHEDKAR 
Suri R. D. CHAUDHARI (A/ternate) 


AR VIJAY GARG 


SHRI C. LAKSHMI PRASAD 
Suri V. PApAIAH (Alternate) 


SHRI AMAN SHARMA 


28 


IS 3614 : 2021 


Organization Representative(s) 
UL India Private Limited, Bengaluru SHRI SURESH SHANMUGAM 
West Bengal Fire Services, Kolkata Suri G. K. BHATTACHARYA 
In personal capacity (B-/52, I Floor, East of SHRI HEMANT KUMAR 


Kailash, New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (D-317, I" Floor, Nirman Suri R. C. SHARMA 
Vihar, New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (A-45, Sector-70, Noida) Dr H. S. KAPRWAN 


In personal capacity (274, Tapovan Senior Citizens SHRI T. R. A. KRISHNAN 
Foundation, Coimbatore 641 010) 


BIS Directorate General SHRI SANJAY PANT, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (CIVIL ENGINEERING) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


SHRI ARUN KUMAR S. 
SCIENTIST ‘E’ (CivıL ENGINEERING), BIS 


Composition of the Drafting Group of IS 3614 under CED 36 


Organization Representative(s) 
In Personal Capacity (K-334, Green Park, New Delhi) Suri S. K. Duer (Chairman) 
In personal capacity (4-45, Sector-70, Noida) Dr H. S. KAPRWAN 
CSIR-Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee Dr Suvir SINGH 
Pacific Fire Controls, Delhi SHRI RAKESH KUMAR ARORA 
Proion Consultants, New Delhi SHRI SANDEEP GOEL 
Shakti Hormann Pvt Ltd, Secunderabad SHRI SYED MOHAMED 


SHRI MAHESH KUMAR SINGH (Alternate) 


29 


(Continued from second cover) 


An informative annex (see Annex B) on general guidance for fire door performance requirement has been 
introduced. Another such informative annex (see Annex C) on supply/installation of fire doors has been included. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for formulation of the standard is given in Annex D. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 36 (13652). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


