IS 13838 :-la93 ( Reaffirmed 2006 )

MECHANICAL TESTING OF METALS DETERMINATION OF POISSON'S RATIO

UDC 669 : 620'17

0

BIS 1993

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR

STANDARDS
SHAH 110002 Price Group ZAFAR MARG

NEW DELHI

July 1993

2

Mechanical

Testing

of Metals

Sectional

Committee,

MTD

3

FOREWORD This Tndian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Mechanical Testing of Metals Sectional Committee, had been approved by the Metallurgical Engineering Division Council. When uniaxial force is applied to a solid, it deforms in the direction of the applied force, but also If the solid expands or contracts laterally depending on whether the force is tensile or compressive. is homogeneous and isotropic, and the material remains elastic under the action of the applied force, the lateral strain bears a constant relationship to the axial strain. This constant, called Poisson's ratio; after a French scientist that developed the concept, is a definite material property just like Young's modulus and Shear modulus. Poisson's ratio is used for design of structures -where all dimensional application of force need to be taken into account, and in the application of elasticity to structural analysis. changes resulting from of the generalized theory

The accuracy of the determination of Poisson's ratio is usually limited by the accuracy of the transverse strain measurements because the percentage errors in these measurement are usually Since a ratio rather than an absolute quantity is greater than in the axial strain measurements. measured, it is only necessary to know accurately the relative value of the calibtatien factors of the extensometers. Also, in general, the values of the applied loads need not be accurately known. It is frequently expedient to make the determination of Poisson's ratio concurrently with determinations of Young's modulus and the proportional limit. In preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from ASTM Standard E 132-86 `Standard Test Method for Poisson's Ratio at Room Temperature, issued by the American Society for Testing and Materials, USA. In reporting the results of a test made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, or calculated. is rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for off numerical values ( revised )`. observed rounding

IS 13838 :i993

Indian Standard
MECHANICAL TESTING OF METAL~S DETERMINATION OF POISSON'S RATIO
1 SCOPE
1.1 This standard prescribes the method for determination of Poisson's ratio of metallic materials from tension tests at room temperature. 1.2 This method is limited to specimens of metallic materials of rectangular cross-section and stresses at which creep is negligible compared to the strain produced immediately upon loading. 2 REFERENCES The following Indian Standards adjuncts to this standard.
IS No.

3.3 Proportional

Limit ceases to be

The stress at which the strain just proportional to the applied stress. 3.4 Shear Modulus ( G ) Shear modulus is the corresponding strain. ratio of

shear

stress

to

3.5 Young's Modulus ( E) Young's modulus is the ratio of tensile pressive stress to corresponding strain. 4 APPARATUS 4.1 Load Load shall be applied either by cali6rated dead weights or in a testing machine that has been calibrated in accordance with IS 1828 ( Part 1 ) : 1991. 4.2 Extensometers Unless specified otherwise in product standard, Class A extensometers as per IS 12872 : 1990, shall be used.
NOTE If exceptions are provided in the product standard for using extensometers of types not covered in IS 12872 : 1991, it may be necessary to apply the

or

com-

are

necessary

Title

1828 (Part

Metallic material - Verification 1) : 1991 of static uniaxial testing machines: Part 1 Tensile testing machines ( second revision ) Determination of Young's modulus, tangent modulus and chord modulus ( jht revision ) Metallic materials - Verification of extensometers used in uniaxial testing

2854 : 1990

12872 : 1990

3 TERMINOLOGY 3.0 For following the purpose _of this definitions shall apply. standard, the

corrections, for example, the correction for transverse sensitivity of bonded resistance gauges.

3.1 Linear Strain The change per unit length due to force applied. 3.1.1 Axial Strain parallel to the longitudial axis of of a linear dimension

The linear strain the specimen. 3.1.2

Transverse Strain ( perpendicular )

4.2.1 It is recommended that at least two pairs of extensometers be used; one pair measuring axial strain and the other for transverse strain; with the extensometers of each pair parallel to each other and on opposite sides of the specimen. Additional extensometers may be used to check on alignment or to obtain better average strains in the case of unavoidable variations in thickness. The extensometers should be placed on the specimen with a free distance of at least one specimen width between and extensometer and the nearest fillet, and at least two specimen widths between any extensometer and the nearest grip.
NOTE - Three possible arrangements of extensometers,.among the many that have been used, are shown m Fig. 1. Arrangement (a ), which requires only two pairs of extensometers, can be used if the conditions are very nearly ideal with respect to axiality of load and constancy of cross-section within the length An additional in which the extensometers are placed. pair of extensometers is used in arrangement ( b ) to provide some compensation for the effect of a uniform variation in thickness in the axial direction. The other arrangement of three pairs of extensometers, arrangement ( c ), provides a check on alignment.

The linear strain in transverse to the axis of the specimen. 3.2 Poisson's Ratio ( 0)

The absolute value of the ratio of transverse strain to the corresponding axial strain in a body subjected to uniaxial stress, usually within the elastic range, that is, below the proportional limit. 1

IS 13838 : 1~993 -Cc..-

hTva

_I_ +I_ I I (a)
FIG. 1

-

lb)

NOTE - Each symbol indicates the location of a pair of extensometers on opposite sides of the specimen. THREE POWBLE ARRANGEMENTSOF EXTENSOMETERS

1
(cl

verifying that the differences in strain, indicated by the axial extensometers, are small compared In general, alignment to the average axial strain. may be improved by increasing the free length of the specimen between grips. 6.3 Make and strain simultaneous measurements and record the data. of load

6.4 Speed of Testing

The speed of testing shall be low enough to make negligible the thermal effects of adiabatic expansion or contraction, and high enough to ma-ke creep negligible. In loading with dead weights, avoid temporary overloading due to inertia of the weights. 6.5 Applied Load

5 TEST T _.l

SPECIMENS and Preparation of Specimens

Selection

The applied loads shall correspond to stresses that are within the linear portion of the stress-strain curve, that is, less than the proportional limit. The precision of the value of Poisson's ratio obtained will depend on the number of data pair strain taken of longitudinal and transverse ( see Fig. 2 ).
L

In the selection and preparation of test specimens, special care shall be taken to assure obtaining representative specimens that are straight and uniform in thickness. 5.2 Dimensions In general, it is recommended that the length of the portion of the specimen that is of constant width be at least five times the width, and that the length of the specimen between grips be at least seven times the width. The width itself should be at least equal to the thickness. If fillets are used near the ends of the specimen, these fillets should have a radius not less than the The width minimum width of the specimen. shall be constant throughout the entire length over which the extensometers are placed and for an additional distance ( at least equal to the width ) at each end, unless specified otherwise in the product standard. 6 PROCEDURE 6.1 Measurement of Specimens
w

/

LONGITUDINAL

2' Q

E
m w
cl d

I
I

@2 I

I
'LAIN
---I

/

P

/

"
FIG. 2

Ct
APPLIED LOAD, P

PLOT OF AVERAGE STRAIN VERSUS Lo,~D

6.6 Strain Readings Read all extensometers at the same load.

Measure width and thickness throughout the length in which the extensometers are to be placed. Make the measurements of width with calipers having a least count of 0'025 mm. Measurements of thickness may be made with a micrometer having a least count of 0'0025 mm.
NOTE -For thin sheet, a survey of thickness variation by more sensitive devices, such as a pneumatic or electric gauge, may be needed to determine thicknesses with the required accuracy.

6.7 Temperature Record the temperature. peratures during the test. 7 EVALUATION Avoid changes in tem-

OF DATA

6.2 Alignment Use care to ensure axial alignment of the specimen. The alignment may be checked with the arrangement of extensometers of Fig. 1 ( c ) by 2

7.1 The average longitudinal strain ( et ) indicated by the longitudinal extensometers and the average transverse strain ! et ) indicated by the transverse extensometers, are plotted against the applied load ( P), as shown in Fig. 2. A straight line is drawn through each set of points, and the slopes, dct/dP and da/dP, of these lines are determined. Poisson's ratio is then calculated as follows: o ( da/dP)/( da]dP )

IS 13838: 1993 7.2 The errors which may be introduced by drawing a straight line through the points can be reduced by applying the method of least squares. The values of Poisson's ratio thus obtained should coincide with that obtained for a single large load increment for stresses below the proportional limit.
NOTE -For

the average stress and on the stress range for which it is measured and, hence, should not be regarded as Poisson's ratio. If this ratio is nevertheless, as a value of `Poisson's reported, ratio' for stresses beyond the proportional limit, the range of stress should be stated. 7.4 Poisson's ratio will have more than one value Deviations from if the material is not isotropic. isotropy should be suspected if the Poisson's ratio ( o ) determined as per this standard, differs significantly from that determined by +ubstituting the values of Young's modulus ( E) and shear modulus ( G ) in the following equation: o = (E/G2) where E and G shall precision than the measurement of 0. 1

the method of least squares, random variations in the data are considered as variations in strain. In determining the stress range ( load range ) It for which data should be used in the calculations. is helpful to examine the data using the strain deviation method described in IS 2854 : 1990. Due to possible small offsets at zero load and small variations in establishing the load path in the specimen during the first small increment of load are typically not included in the calculations, and the line is not constrained to pass through zero.

7.3 Above the proportional limit, the ratio transverse strain to axial strain will depend

of on

be measured with greater precision desired in the

Standard

Mark

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provts~ons of the Bureau of` Indian Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BlS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau harmonious development of the activities of standardization, and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright

.

qf Indian Standards Act. 1986 to promote
marking and quality certification of goods

No part of these publications may be reproduced in BIS has the copyright of all its publications. the free use, in the any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude of necessary details, such -as symbols~and sizes, type or grade course of implementing the standard, designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed: if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards Monthly Additions'. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following reference: Dot : No. MTD 3 ( 3744) Amendments Amend No. Issued Since Publication Date of Issue c Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Marg,

New Delhi

110002 Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone

Regional Central

Offices: : Manak'Bhavan, NEW DELHI 9 Bahadur 110002 Shah Zafar Marg

I"' 331 O' 13 75 31 Maniktola 37 84 99, 37 86 26, 53 38 43, 53 23 84 235 02 16, { 235 15 19, 632 92 95, { 632 78 91, 37 85 61 37 86 62 53 16 40 235 04 42 235 23 15 632 78 58 632 78 92

Eastern

: l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, CALCUTTA 700054 : SC0 445-446, : C. I. T. Campus, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH IV Cross Road, Marol, MADRAS Andheri

Northern Southern -Western

160036 600113

: Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, BOMBAY 400093

( East )

Branches

: AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. FARtDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

COTMBATORE. JAIPUR. KANPUR.

Printed at Printrade,

New Delhi.

India

