( Reaffirmed 2001 )

IS: 11064 - 19S4

hdian Standard
GUIDE FOR CONSTRUCTION AND USE OF ROOMS OR BUILDINGS PROTECTED BY PRESSURlZATlON, FOR INSTALLATION OF ELECTRTCAL APPARATUS FOR EXPLOSIVE GAS ATMOSPHERES
Electrical
Chairman *SHRI S. K. BISWAS( Members K. SEN [ ADet-me to Shri S. K. Blswas ( Gupta ) ] SHRI S. B, C. AGARWALA Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Hyderabad SHR~V P. GUPTA ( Alternate 1 ) &RI G H. SAHA ( Altertratd II ) SHRI V. ANANTARAMAN Lar en & Toubro Ltd, Bombay SHRI M. V. LAKSHMINARASHIMHAN ( Alternate ) SHRI I-`. K. CHAKRABORTY Indran Oil Corporation Ltd ( Refineries Division ), New Delhi SHRI A. S. NAMBUDURI ( Alternate ) SHRI S. CHANDRA Macneill & Magor Ltd ( Industries Division ), Calcutta SHRI A. K. HAZRA ( Alternate ) SHRI CHARANJI,~ LAL Chief Controllerate of Explosives, Nagpur SIIH~B. R. DAVE( Alternate ) SHRI B. A. CHETTY Electronics Commission ( IPAG Headquarters ), New Delhi SHRI S. G. DES~MUKH Bharat Bijlee Ltd, Bombay SHRI P. N. JASUTKAR( Alternate ) DIRECTOR( COMMERCIAL ) Central Electricity Authority, New Delhi DEP~JTYDII~ECTOR ( Alternate ) SHRI D. P. GIJP~.A. Directorate General of Technical Development, New Delhi
SHRI N. GUPTA )

Apparatus for Explosive Atmosphrres Committee, ETDC 22
Directorate

Sectional

Repressnting General of Mines Safety, Dhanbad

*Shri S. K. Bisw.ls ( Gupta ) was Chairman standard was finalized.

for the meeting

in which

this draft

( Continued on page 2 ) @ Copyright 1985 INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act

I

IS : 11064- 1984 ( Continuedfrompage
Members SHRI H. N. GUPTA

1)
Representing

Directorate General Factory Advice Services & Labour Institute, Bombay SHRI V. S. SASIKIWIR ( Alternate ) The Association of Mining, Electrical and MechaSHRI S. N. GHOSH nical Enginerr. II. K., Calcutta Siemens India Ltd. Bombay SHRI S. N. GHOSH Electronics Corporation of India Ltd, Hyderabad SHRI G. L KHANDUJA SHRI CH. VENKATESWARLU( Alter/late ) 1 arllt Advisory Committee, Bombay SHRI T. R. A. KRISHNAN SHRI 1. M. KHKJSHU( Alternote ) Jndian Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Ltd, New Delhi SHRI S. LAL SHRI G. L. CHAWLA ( Alternute ) Central Building Research Institute ( CSIR ), SHRI MAHESH CHANDKA Roorkee Tata Consulting Engineers, Bombay SHRI M. M. MEH~A SHRI R. C. BaJPAI ( Alternate ) Directorate of Standardization Department of COL M. C. NANGIA Defence Production, Ministry of Defence Engineers-in-Chief's Branch, New Delhi SHRI H. R. KHAN ( Akernate ) SHRI T. NITYANANDAS. Loss Prevention Association of India Ltd, Bombay SHRI V. S. OZARDE Crompton Greaves Ltd, Bombay DR M. S. PADBI~RI Hindustan Brown Boveri Ltd, Bombay SHRI N. SUNDARARAJAN ( Alternate ) SHRI AMALENDURAY Food Corporation of India Ltd, New Delhi SHRI V. THYAQARAJAN( AIfernate ) DR S. K. SARKAR CentraDlbrninndgResearch Station ( CSIR 1, SHRI A. S. ANSARI ( Alternate ) DR V. K. SHRINIVASAN Kirloskar Electric Co Ltd, Bangalore SHRI M. GANESH ( Alternate ) SHRI A. N. SRIVATHSA NGEF Limited, Bangalore SHRI S. L. SRIDHARAMURTHY ( Alternate ) SHRI K. P. SINGH National Hydroelectric Power Corporation Ltd, New Delhi SHRI V. R. SONONB Ministry of Defence ( DGI ), New Delhi SHRI K. RAJAGOPALAN ( Alternate ) SHRI SIJRKSH KUMAR The Fertilizer ( Planning and Development ) India Ltd, Dhanbad ( Bihar ) SHRI G. S. SINGH ( Alternate ) SHRI V. V. P. SWAMY Coal India Ltd, Ranchi SHRI A. S. R. MURTHY ( Alternate ) SHRI G. N. THADANI Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi SHRI S. G. GOKHALB ( Alternate ) DR K. S. UPPAL Ministry of Defencc ( R & D ), New Delhi SHRI R. SRINIVASAN( Alternate ) SHRI S. P. SACHDEV, Director General, IS1 ( Ex-officio Member ) DIRECTOR ( Elec tech ) Secretary SHRJ R. K. MONOA Deputy Director ( Elec tech ), IS1

Senior

2

IS:11064-

1984

Indian Standard
GUIDE FOR CONSTRUCTION AND USE OF ROOMS OR BUILDINGS PROTECTED BY PRESSURIZATION, FOR INSTALLATION OF ELECTRICAL APPARATUS FOR EXPLOSIVE GAS ATMOSPHERES
0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standaras Institution on 23 August 1984, after the draft finalized by the ,Electrical Apparatus for Explosive Atmospheres Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council. 0.2 This standard is one of a series of standards on pressurized enclosures. The requirements of pressurized enclosures with no internal source of flammable gas or vapour are covered in IS : 7389 ( Part 1 )-1976*. 0.3 The object of this guide is to lay down the principles of protection of electrical apparatus by pressurization, adapting them to suit in the case of rooms or buildings containing electrical apparatus and protecteJ by internal over-pressure against the iugress of the potcntia!ly explosive external atmosphere. 0.4 In the preparation of this guide, assistance has been derived from IEC Publication 79-13 ( 1982 ) Electrical apparatus for explosive gas atmospheres: Part 13 Construction and use of rooms or buildings protected by pressurization, issued by International Electrotechnical Commission. 1. SCOPE 1.1 This guide defines the conditions in which an electrical apparatus liable to cause an ignition may be used in a room or building situated where flammable gases or vapours may bc present, the ingress of these gases or vapours into the room being prevented by maint*ililing inside it a protective gas at a higher pressure than that of the outside atmosphere. *Specification for pressurized enclosures of electrical equipment for use in hazardous areas : Part I Pressurized enclosures with no internal source of 11ammabk gas or
vapour (first
revision ).

IS : 11064- 1984 1.2 This guide includes recommendations for the construction, equipping and operation of rooms or buildings and their aksociated parts. such as inlet and exhaust ducts for the protective gas, alld auxiliary control devices necessary for the satisfa,:tory pr,)duction and maintenance of the overpressure. 1.3 This guide also recommends the tests necessary installation conforms to these recommendations and placed on the rooms or bti;ldings. to show that the the marking to be

1.4 This guide concerns only rooms and buildings in the interior of which there is no internal release ( actual or potential ) of flammable gases and vapours. 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose of this guide, the following definitions shall apply.

2.1 Room or Building - An enclosure ( or enclosures ) provided with doors, cable ducts. conduits, etc, containing electrical apparatus and of sufficient size to permit the entry of a person who may be expected to work or remain inside the enclosure for a prol(,nged period.
NOTE -Throughout the rest of this guide, the without distinction to designate rooms or buildings. term

`room' is

employed

2.2 Opening -

Any

aperture,

door,

window

or non-airtight an overpressure

fixed

panel. the

2.3 Protective Gas - The gas used to maintain room, or to purge air in these circumstances.

within

2.4 Pressurization - A type of protection by which the jhgress of an explosive atmosphere into a room is prevented by maintaining therein a protective gas at a pressure greater than that of the surrounding atmosphere. 2.5 Pressurized Room - A room in which the protective gas is maintained at a pressure greater than that of the surrounding atmosphere. 2.6 Pressurization with Leakage Compensation - A method in which the supply of protective gas is suficient to maintain the overpressure in the room, with a flow corresponding to the inevitable leakages from the room and its associated ducts, all the exit openings being closed.

2.7 Pressurization with Circulaticrn of Protective Gaq - A method in which the internal overpressure is maintained within the room and its associated ducts, a continuous and intentional flow of protective gas passing through these, through apertures of controlled 4 section.

IS:llC64 2.8 Purging - The operation of passing a quantity of protective through a room and its associated ducts in order to reduce concentration of flammable gas or vapour within to a safe level. 3. CLASSIFICATION OF THE INTERIOR OF THE ROOM

- 1984 gas
any

3.1 The different hazardous zones given in IS : 5572 ( Part 1 )-1978* enables to drive, the classification of the zone, whele the room is situated. 3.2 It is considered that the interior of a room should receive, in the absence of pressurization, a classilication based on the most hazardous area into which the room has at least one direct opening. 3.3 Pressurization of the room after purging, permits the use of electrical equipment, which is not otherwise suitably protected for the area classification.
NOTE -

hazardous considered

The atmospheres inside a rcom which is partially situated in a zone, but all of whose openings lead into non-hazardous zones, is as non-hazardous.

4. PRINCIPLES 4.1 Protective

OF CONSTRUCTION

OF ROOMS

Gas Ducts and Their Connections used for protective gas and physical resibtar:ce ducts and their connections suitable for their intended

4.1.1 The materials should have chemical use.

4.1.2 The ducts and connections shall be capable of withstanding 1.5 times, the maximum overpressure specified for normal service, with a minimum of 200 Pa. Appropriate safety devices shall be installed if there is a possibility of overpressures occurring during service capable of causing dangerous deformation of ducts or connections. 4.1.3 The `position, dimensions and number of supply ducts shall The number of ducts shall sufficient to ensure effective purging. chosen in relation to the design and arrangement of the apparatus to protected. be be be

4.1.4 The supply ducts should be considered as forming part of the In particular, where they pass through a hazadous area, it is desirable that they be pressurized with respect to the surrounding atmosphere. However, if the mechanical integrity and sealing of the ducts can be guaranteed, then it is permissible for the pressure within the ducts to be lower than that of the surrounding atmosphere.
room.

*Classification of hazardous areas ( other than mines ) for electrical installaions: Part 1 Areas having flammable gases and vapours (first revision ). 5

IS:11064

-1984

4.2 Entry of Ducts for Electrical and Gas Service 4.2.1 The entry of cables or electrical conduits and other serviced ( protective gas, water, etc ) directly into the room should be so effected that the necessary overpressure can be maintained and entry of flammable substances precluded.
4.2.2 Where exhaust apertures open into a hazardous zone. it is recommended to provide them with automatic closing valves or flaps to prevent, as far as practicable, the ingress of the external explosive atmosphere in case of failure of pressurization. 5. PROTECTIVE MEASURES

5.0 Protective measures shall be adopted to prevent the electrical apparatus installed in a pressurized room from giving rise to an explosion at the moment of switching on, or in the case of failure of pressurization. These measures should be determined by the characteristics of the electrical apparatus, by the environmental conditions, and by the use of safety devices to monitor the inside atmosphere, or to actuate an alarm or possibly switch the power supplies off automatically. Such measures arc given in 5.1 to 5.3 and also summarized in Table 1. 5.1 Energizing - During initial start-up, or after shutdown and whatever the classification of the hazardous area, it is necessary, before energizing any electrical apparatus in the room which is not suitably protecfcd for the classification of the area: a) Either to ensure that internal atmosphere is not hazardous ( see Note 1 ) or to proceed with prior purging of sufficient duration that the internal atmosphere may be considered nonhazardous ( see Note 2 ), and To pressurize the room.

b)

NOTE 1 - An atmosphere is considered non-hazardous when, at all points in the room. the enclosures and associated ducts. the concentration of flammble eases or vapours is below 25 percent of the lower explosive limit. The placr of measurement shall be judiciously chosen to determine the highest concentration of' gas.

NOTE 2 - Generally, the volume of protective gas required for purging is estimated as at least five times the internal volume of the room and its associated ducts.

5.2 Failure of Pressurization

52.1 First Case h The atmosphere in the room, considered as nonhazardous when pressurized, is classified Zone 1 in the abseuce of pressurization, according to 3 ( exceptional case )`.
6

TABLE

1

SUMMARY

OF PROTECTIVE MEASURES TO BE TAKEN FAILURE OF PRESSURIZATION SYSTEM ( Clause 5.0 ) ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT INSTALLED EQUIPMENT SUITABLE FOR USE IN ZONE 2 0) a) Suitable alarm or both ), ( visible or audible

IN THE EVENT OF

THE

CLASSIFICATION OF INTERIOR OF THE ROOM* (1)

EQUIPMENT SUITABLE FOR ZONE 1 (2)

EQUIPMENT NOT PROTECTED FOR ANY HAZARDOUS AREAS

(4) a) Suitable alarm or both ), b) Immediate pressurization, ( visible or audible

b) Immediate action pressurization, and

to

restore

action and

to

restore

Zone 1
4

No action necessary

disconnection of c) Programmed Power supplies if the pressurization cannot be restored for an extended period or if the concentration of flammable gas is rising to a dangerous level.

c) Automatic interruption of the power supplies as rapidly as practicable within a prescribed de!ay time having regard to the needs of a programmed shutdown.

a) Suitable !alarm or both ), b) Immediate ization, Zone action and

( visible
to

or

audible pressur-

restore

2

No action necessary

No action

necessary

c) Programmed disconnection of power supplies if the pressurization can not be restored for an extended period or if the concentration of flammable gas is rising to a dangerous level. areas

t; .. =: g p

.

*For classification in the event of absence ( other than mines ) for electrical installations

of hazardous of pressurization see IS : 5572 ( Part 1 ) I978 Classification : Part 1 areas having flammable gases and vapours (first revision I'.

G

g

IS:11064 -1984 5.2.1.1 If any electrical apparatus installed in the room is not suitable for a hazardous area, the following provisions should be made: a) Suitable of pressurization, b) Immediate alarm ( visible or audible or both ) indicating and absence

action

to restore

pressurization,

c) Automatic interruption of the power supplies as rapidly as practicable within a prescribed delay time having regard to the needs of a programmed shutdown. In determining the delay time, account shall be taken of the precautions adopted to prevent the ingress of dangerous gas mixtures, and the probable effects of gas diffusion, convection and breathing of the room. This delay may also be prolonged to facilitate a programmed shutdown of the apparatus in the interest of safety provided that it is verified that the atmosphere immediately outside the room is not dangerous. 5.2.1.2 If any electrical apparatus installed in the room is appropriate for Zone 2, the following provisions shall be made: a) b) c) Suitable alarm ( visible or audible pressurization, Immediate action to restore or both ) indicating and pressurization concentration absence of

pressurization,

Programmed disconnection of power supplies if cannot be restored for an extended period or if the of flammable gas is rising to a dangerous level.

52.2 Second Case -- The atmosphere in the room, considered as nonhazardous when pressurized, is classified Zone 2 in the absence of pressurization according to 3 ( most frequent case ). 5.2.2.1 If any electrical apparatus installed in the room is not suitable for a hazardous area, the following provisions should be made: a) Suitable alarm pressurization, ( visible or audible to restore or both > indicating and canof absence of

b) Immediate c)

action

pressurization,

Programmed disconnection of power supplies if pressurization not be restored for an extended period or if the concentration flammable gas is rising to a dangerous level. Measure the

5.3 Other Protective

5.3.1 Whatever protective measure are adopted, provisions given in 5.3.1.1 to 5.3.1.4 should be made. 8

complementary

IS : 11064 - 1984 5.3.1.1 All electrical apparatus uhich is to bc energized in the absence of pressurization, particu!arly that v\ hich assures p~~siurization, lighting and essential telecommunication should he suirabic for use in the zone corresponding to its position; in the case 1~ hc-l-c thij apparatus is inside the room, it is necessary to take into account the zoue corresponding to the classification of the inside of the room ( see 3 ).
lighting and essential NOTE - These provisions permit installations to remain in service, even in lhe event ot danger. telecommunication

5.3.1.2 The visible or audible alarm shall be so located as to be immediately percieved by the responsible personnel who shall take the necessary action. 5.3.1.3 For monitoring the satisfactory functioning of the pressurization, either a pressure monitoring device or a flow monitoring device or both should be used.
NOTE - Electrical interlock on the fan motors is not suitable to indicate failure of pressurization. They do not give an indication in the event of, for example, rhe fan belt slipping, the fan becoming loose on the shaft or reverse rotation of fan.

5.3.1.4 In cal apparatus protective gas breakdown of of maintaining 6. VALUES

certain circumstances. such as the necessity of keeping electriin operation, it may be advisabic to provide two sources of so that each on: can take over from the other in case of a Each source should be independently capable one source. the necessary overprcssure. AND OF PROTECTIVE GAS FLOW

OF OVERPRESSURE

6.1 The pressurization system shall be capable of ensuring a sufficient outward protective gas speed through the openings of the room when all these openings are open at the same lime. The velocity should be greater than that of external air currents but should not lead to so great a pressure in the room as to make it difficult to open and close the doors.
NOTE - Where doors, windows and openings are provided these are to be closed when checking this requirement. with interlocks,

6.2 A minimum overpressure of 25 Pa ( 0'25 m bar ) with outer atmosphere should be maintaiued at all points inside its associated ducts at which leaks are liable to occur, windows being closed.

respect to the the room and all doors and

6.3 If there is any air-consuming equipment inside the pressurized room, the flow through the pressurization system should be capable of covering all needs; if not, the extra air required should be supplied by a separate system.
NOTE 1 - The pressurization system may a!so include air-conditioning devices over and above the equipments requirements of 6.1 to 6.3. heating, ventilating and necessary to fu@l the

9

IS : 11054- 1984
The design of a pressuriz:d room will also need to consider : ai the number of persons expected to stay in the room in order to ensure the necessary renewai of the air; and b) the type of amaratm to b: installed in the room and their need for coohng air, if any. 7. PROTECHVE GAS SUPPLY NOTE 2 -

7.1 The protective gas should not, by virtue of any chemical products or impurities which it may contain, produce deleterious effects or introduce a risk of reduced safety.
NOTE - The protective gas may also be u;ed cooling the appsratus. 8. VERIFICAI`ION for other purposes, such as for

A ND TESTS

8.1 Before putting a pressurized room into service, the technical documentation should be examixd and ii` necessary, a test shall be carried out. 8.2 In particular, it should be assured that: protective measures at the all the a) the construction of the installation and the are such that purging can be eRected, and b)

the minimum over pressure ( see 6.2 ) can be maintained minimum flow rate of the pressurization system with openings closed, in normal working conditions. be clearly marked

9. MARKING 9.1 All doors I^rom the pressurized room should outside, by the following notice or an equivalent: `WARNING PRESSURIZED ROOM on the

CLOSE

THIS DOOR'.

9.2 Inside thz room, the following inFormation should be displayed: Minimum required overprrssurs, or corresponding rate of flow of protective gas. 9.3 Rules to be observed for the installation in question: a) When switching on: In accordance with 5.1, a notice should be displayed close to the switch of the pressurization fan and to the general circuit-breaker for the room, with the following or equivalent wording: `WARNING - The pressurization fan should be allowed to run for t minutes before switchiug on the installation, unless it has been checked that the atmosphere in ths room is not hazardous.' NOTE- t is the time required for purging at minimum flow rate.
b) In case of pressurization failure: Jn accordance with 5.2, a detailed list should be given indicating the apparatus to be switched off, the delays, if any, allowed for each operation, and any other measures to be taken particularly in the event of pressurization failure.

10

