IS 795 : 2013 


NRA Wh 
Fada at dant da aries 
(SAT FRAT ) 
Indian Standard 
GUIDE FOR PREPARATION OF ABSTRACTS 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 01.140.20 


© BIS 2013 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 


October 2013 Price Group 2 


Documentation and Information Sectional Committee, MSD 05 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Documentation and Information Sectional Committee had been approved by the Management and Systems 
Division Council. 


The number of learned periodicals has grown so large in recent years, that a reader has to spend considerable 
time in glancing through myriads of articles before selecting those really useful to him. Further, there is also the 
difficulty of having access to all the periodicals. To overcome these difficulties, abstracting periodicals are being 
published in several subject areas. 


It is important that there should be some uniformity in the preparation and presentation of abstracts. Taking these 
into consideration this standard was first published in 1956 and revised in 1976. This revision has been taken up 
for making the standard up to date with the changes that have taken place during these years. This standard gives 
the salient features of indicative, informative and indicative-informative abstracts and also gives guidance for 
abstracting articles and other learned documents, such as overviews, review articles, theses, and the like. 


In this standard, considerable assistance has been taken from the following: 


ISO 214 : 1976 Documentation — Abstracts for publications and documentation 
ANSI/NISO 239.14-1997 Guidelines for abstracts 


It is hoped that there guidelines will facilitate the work of authors, editors and others charged with preparing 
abstracts, and that the abstracts so prepared will prove more useful to readers. 


IS 795 : 2013 


Indian Standard 
GUIDE FOR PREPARATION OF ABSTRACTS 


( Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard lays down general guidelines for 
preparation of abstracts. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contains provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
listed below: 


IS No. Title 


2381 (Part 1): Information and documentation — 
2009/ Bibliographic references: Part 1 
ISO 690 : 1987 Content, foam and structure 


7150 : 1974 Specification for library catalogue 
and abstract card 
3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definition shall apply. 


3.1 Abstract — An abstract is defined as an 
abbreviated, accurate representation of the content of 
a document. It is usually accompanied by an adequate 
bibliographical description to enable the original 
documents to be traced. 


4 PURPOSE 


The primary purpose of an abstract is to help the users 
to decide whether the contents of the document are 
such that they need to read it in full. 


NOTE — Secondary publications and services can often make 
verbatim use of the abstract provided in primary documents, if 
these abstracts are carefully prepared. 


5 TYPES AND CHOICE 


5.1 Abstracts may be broadly divided into two classes, 
theme oriented and user oriented (slanted). These 
abstracts can be either indicative or informative 
(see Annex A for examples) or combination of both. 


5.1.1 Informative Abstract 


This provides a concise but comprehensive summary 
of the significant contributions to the knowledge 


contained in a document. On many occasions it serves 
as an adequate substitute for the original for the purpose 
of obtaining a specific item of information. 


NOTE — These types of abstracts are mainly used for analytical 
studies. 


5.1.2 Indicative Abstract 


This embodies a general statement of the nature and 
scope of a document. The primary purpose is to give 
the reader several clues as to whether or not the 
information being sought is contained in the original 
record. 


NOTE — These types of abstracts are mainly used for 
publications like editorials, essays, books, conference 
proceedings, bibliographies, annual reports, directories, etc. 


5.1.3 Informative-Indicative Abstract 


In certain cases documents can be partly descriptive 
and partly informative, for which abstracts shall be a 
combination of both Informative abstract and Indicative 
abstract. 


5.2 Choice of Abstract 


Informative abstracts are especially desirable for texts 
describing experimental work and documents devoted 
to a single theme. However, some discursive or lengthy 
texts, such as overviews, review articles, or theses, may 
permit the preparation of an abstract that is only an 
indicative or descriptive guide to the original. 


6 GUIDELINES FOR ABSTRACTING 


6.1 An abstract should contain all the essential 
information, like the nature and purpose of the work, 
new approach, novel findings, results and conclusions. 
These essential aspects of the original document should 
be conveyed in a concise but precise manner. The 
guidelines given in 6.2 to 6.4.2 are most suitable for 
informative abstracts. However, for preparing 
indicative abstracts and informative-indicative abstracts 
these should be followed to the extent possible. 


6.2 The author’s treatment of the subject and the nature 
of the document should be explained by means of 
expressions, such as brief, comprehensive, theoretical, 
experimental, review, survey and case history. 


6.3 Context 


The purpose, methods, results and conclusions 
presented in the original document should be stated 


IS 795 : 2013 


without repeating information already conveyed by the 
title of the document either in that order or with initial 
emphasis on findings. 


6.3.1 Purpose 


The primary objectives and scope of the study should 
be stated unless these are already clear from the title 
of the document or can be derived from the remainder 
of the abstract. 


6.3.2 Methodology 


The techniques or approaches employed should be 
described, but only to the degree necessary for 
comprehension. New techniques should be identified 
clearly and the basic methodological principle, the 
range of operation, and the accuracy obtained should 
be described. 


6.3.3 Results and Conclusions 


Results and conclusions should be clearly presented. 
They may be abstracted jointly to avoid redundancy. 


6.4 Presentation 


The main findings should be highlighted indicating the 
advance in knowledge. It should not contain evaluation 
or criticism of the material abstracted. However, 
obvious errors and omissions may be indicated. 


6.4.1 Data 


In the case of scientific publications where new data 
are presented the presence of the data should be 
specifically indicated in the abstract. 


6.4.2 Collateral Information 


Findings or information incidental to the main purpose 
of the study but of value to other subject areas should 
be included, for example, modification of methods, 
new instruments, new compounds, newly determined 
physical constants, and newly discovered documents 
or data sources. Their relative importance may not be 
exaggerated in the abstract. 


6.4.2.1 Notwithstanding this, in slanted abstracts, the 
stress may be given to the collateral information when 
the abstract is meant for the secondary publication 
devoted to the specific subject field. 


6.4.3 Additional Information 


Presence of tables, illustrations, and references should 
be indicated within parentheses at the end of the 
abstract. This information may be given in abbreviated 
form, for example, 4 tab, 5 fig., 10 ref, etc. 


6.4.4 The address of the author should be mentioned. 
In case there is more than one author working at 
different places, preferably the address of the first 


author may be given after the names of the authors, 
unless otherwise specified. 


NOTES 


1 The address of the organization should be given in case the 
author is affiliated to an organization. 


2 E-mail address should also be given. 
6.4.5 Bibliographical Reference 


The bibliographical reference should precede the text 
of the abstract and conform to the requirements 
of IS 2381. 


7 STYLE 


7.1 Generally accepted rules for good writing are also 
applicable to the writing of abstracts. Clarity and 
concise expression characterize a good abstract. The 
abstract should be intelligible in itself without there 
being need to refer to the document abstracted. 


7.2 Language 


Simple sentences should be used for abstracts. The 
abstracts should be accurate, concise, and 
unambiguous. 


7.2.1 The first sentence of an abstract should not name 
the type of document (for example ‘This paper reviews’, 
‘The study presents’, etc), since the information is 
inferred from the title or text of the abstract. 


7.2.2 Without prejudice to precision or clarity, complete 
sentence need not always be used. 


7.2.3 Use of passive voice and present tense may be 
preferred for indicative abstracts, while active voice 
and past tense may be preferred in case of informative 
abstracts. However, conclusions should be written in 
present tense. 


7.2.4 Abbreviations/acronyms commonly understood 
or easily intelligible in the context may be used. 


7.2.5 Standard nomenclature should be used. 
Unfamiliar terms, abbreviations, and symbols should 
be defined the first time they occur in the abstract. 


7.2.6 Trade jargon and colloquialism should be 
avoided. 


7.2.7 Both overuse and awkward omission of articles 
should be avoided. 


NOTE — The above rules are illustrative not exhaustive. 


7.3 The abstract should be written in a single paragraph, 
except when the abstract is very long. 


8 PLACEMENT 


8.1 Abstract(s) should precede the text of the article. 


8.2 In case there are more than one abstract, abstracts 


in languages other than the language of the article 
should be placed immediately after the abstract given 
in the language of the article. 


9 FORMAT 


It is desirable to present the abstract and its 


IS 795 : 2013 


bibliographical citation in format suitable for 
documentation cards. In case abstract cards are used, 
they should conform to IS 7150. Maximum printing 
dimensions of 70 x 100 mm will permit use of card 
sizes of either 74 x 105 mm (A7) or 75 x 125 mm 
(International library catalogue cards). 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 5.1) 


EXAMPLES OF DIFFERENT TYPES OF ABSTRACTS 


A-1 SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 


A-1.1 Examples of the different types of abstracts for 
the following article are given below: 


CHAKRABORTI S K, KUNDU N (Chemotherapy 
Department, Chittaranjan Das Cancer Research Centre, 
Calcutta-26) : Pyrimidinodiguanidines as potential 
anticancer drugs : Synthesis of N, (5-uracil)-Ns- 
substituted diguanidines. Indian J Cancer 1967, 4 (4), 
409-1 1. 


Informative abstract 


Six diguanidines substituted at 5 positions, have been 
synthesized as potential anticancer drugs, by condensing 
5-aminouracil with substituted cyanoguanidines. Uracil 
was nitrated with fuming HNO;, and H,SO, and the 
5-nitrouracil was redd. to the corresponding 
5-aminouracil. Substituted syanoguanidines prepared by 
reacting dicyandiamide with different aromatic amines, 
were condensed with 5-aminouracil to obtain the 
required pyrimidinodiguanidines. The constitution of 
these compounds were confirmed by their clemental 
analysis, UV absorption maxima at 260 u and the 
formation of characteristic coloured complexes with Cu 
and Ni salts. The aqueous solution of hydrochlorides of 
the diguanidines were used for biological testing. Their 
toxicity to mice was: LDs,, 300 mg/kg body weight by 
IP injection and 40 mg/kg body weight by IV injection. 
Little anti-tumour activity has been observed with N,- 
(5-uracil)-Ns-p-chloropenyldiguanidine. 


Indicative abstract 


Six N,-(5-uracil)-N,-substituted diguanidines have 
been synthesized and their constitution confirmed. 
A preliminary observation on the biological 
properties of these compounds is also reported. One 
of the compounds showed some anti-tumour 
activity. 


Slanted abstract for chemistry 


Synthesis of the following substituted diguanidines is 
reported: N,,- (5-uracil) diguanidine (I); N,,-(5-uracil)- 
Ns-phenyldiguanidine (ID); N,,-(5-uracil)-Ns-p-methyl 
phenyldiguanidine (ID; N,,-(5-uracil)- N,-p-methoxy 
phenyidiguanidine (IV); N,-(S-uracil)-N.- 
pchlorophenyldiguanidine (V); and N,,-(5-uracil)-Ns,- 
p-nitrophenyldiguanidine (VD). Uracil was nitrated with 
fuming HNO, and H,SO,, and the 5-nitrouracil was 
reduced to 5-aminouracil. Substituted cyanoguanidines 
were prepared by reacting dicyanidiamide with different 
aromatic amines according to the procedure of Curd ct 
al (with trop Med 1945, 39, 208-16). A mixture of 10 m 
mole, of 5-aminouracil, 10 m mole of the cynaguanidine 
in 10 ml of water was heated under reflux after adding 1 
ml (approximately 10 m mole.) of concentrated HCI, 
for 2-10 h. The pyrimidinodiguanidines were deposited 
as crystal hydrochlorides on cooling the mixture 
overnight. The mother liquor on treatment with 
(NH,),SO,, gave further crop of the product as normal 
sulphates. The constitution of these compounds were 


IS 795 : 2013 


confirmed by their elemental analysis, UV maxima at 
260 u, as well as by their ability to form characteristics 


colour complex with Cu and Ni salts. Particulars of these 
compound are listed below: 


Compound mp Reaction Time Yield Formula 
h Percent 
I 350º 2 88 CHO,N,-HCI 
Il 235° 2 85 C,,H,,0, N,.HCI 
NI 243º 4 70 C,,H,,0, N,.HCI 
IV 242° 3 78 C,,H,,0, N,.HCI 
V 265° 4 82 C,,H,,0, N,.CLHCI 
VI 275° 10 48 C,,H,,0, N,-HCI 


A preliminary observation on the biological properties 
of these compound showed compound (V) to have little 
anti-tumour activity. 


For Medicine 


Six N,,-(5-uracil)-Ns,-substituted diguanidines have 
been prepared as possible anticancer agents. The 
aqueous solution of hydrochlorides of the diguanidines 
were tested for their biological properties. Their 
toxicity to mice was av. LDs,, 300 mg/kg body weight 
by IP injection and 40 mg/kg weight by IV injection. 
No significant change in the Icucocyte count in the 
peripheral bood was seen on adming. some of these 
compound 50 mg/kg body weight, IP for 6 days. In 
another set of experiment little anti-tubour activity was 
seen in the compd. N,-(5-uracil)-Ns,-p-chlorophenyl- 
diguanidine, when it was admind. 15 mg/kg body 
weight, IV daily for 6 days, 24 h after transplantation 
with Schwartz leukamia solid variety on strain A inbred 
male mice. Compared to control, in 30% cases the 
survival time increased slightly and the nodule 
decreased though not significantly. 


Indicative-Informative Abstract 


RAO K S, NEELIMA SATYAM (Civil Engineering 
Department, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New 


Delhi 110016): Liquefaction studies for seismic 
microzonation of Delhi Region. 


After the devastating 2001 Bhuj earthquake, the 
national capital region of Delhi has attracted major 
attention with several scientific studies in recent times. 
This region, being in zone-IV, has experienced many 
earthquakes in the past and recent times. It also faces 
the danger of severe seismic threat from the central 
himalayan seismic gap. Seismic microzonation, which 
is a subdivision of an area into micro zones depending 
upon site-specific seismic response, is an effective 
mitigation effects such as land sliding, lateral 
spreading, or large ground settlement. The 
phenomenon of liquefaction of soil had been observed 
for many years, but was brought to the attention of 
engineers after the Niigata (1964) and Alaska (1964) 
earthquakes. Since Delhi falls in the area with high 
seismic probability, there is need for the assessment of 
liquefaction potential. An extensive geotechnical 
borehole database has been prepared after compiling 
more than 1 200 boreholes at various locations of 
Delhi, along with geological and seismological details. 
In this article, with the collected borehole data an 
attempt is made to assess in details the liquefaction 
potential of soils using SPT-based methods and also to 
present a liquefaction hazard map. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue” and “Standards : Monthly Additions”. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MSD 05 (0387). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 CIT. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 
VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


