**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 12426 (1988) : Code of Practice for Wrapping and Packing 
of Bicycle Components and Spare Parts [TED 24: Transport 
Packages] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC 6291 18301 : 621798 : 00676 



IS: 12426 -1988 



"TCI 



Indian Standard 



( Reaffirmed 2003 ) 



CODE OF PRACTICE FOR WRAPPING AND PACKING 
OF BICYCLt COMPONENTS AND SPARE PARTS 



CO 
« 

■D 
O 
O 

o 

CD 

c 



o 

E 
'en 

o 

(0 

Q_ 



1. Scope — Prescribes the code of practice for wrapping and packing of bicycle components and 
parts for inland transport. 

2. Terminology — For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given in IS : 4261-1967 'Glossary 
of terms relating to paper and pulp based packaging materials' and IS : 6703-1972 'Glossary of wooden 
packaging terms', shall .apply. 

3. Method of Wrapping and Packing 

3.1 For inland transport the components are individually wrapped as given under 3.2 and seat loose 
in trucks. 

3.2 Individual components shall be wrapped or packed as under: 



SI No. Components 

i) Frame 

ii) Fork 



Mi) 


Mudguards ( front and 
rear) 


iv) 


Bright colour frames, forks 
and mudguards 


v) 


Handles 


vi) 


Pedals 



vii) Chain wheels and cranks 



viii) Saddles (various types and 

designs with leather 
cover/top ) 

ix-) Brakes 



x) Hubs (front and rear ) 

xi) Bottom bracket axle 

xii) Stands and carriers 

xiii) Rims and tyres 



Method of Packing ( Wrapping ) 

To be wrapped in B (narrow) Tlute corrugated paper of 
60 gsm with 3 bands of gum tape on each tube. 

The legs to be covered with corrugated rolls with 3 bands 
of gum tape on each leg and the leg covered with 
corrugated rolls with double bands of gum tape to avoid 
scratches. The top threaded portion of the fork column 
should be fitted with screwed race and covered with a 
corrugated sheet fixed with a rubber band. 

To be wrapped in 48 gsm kraft paper of HDPE/HMHD/ 
LLDPE envelopes. The white tail-end should be further 
covered with crepe paper and fixed with a rubber band. 

To be skin wrapped with 200 G LDPE sheet or equivalent 
and further wrapped in B (narrow) flute corrugated 
paper as in the case of standard black frame. 

To be completely wrapped in kraft paper and each end 
fixed with gum. 

To be wrapped in 48 gsm kraft paper, 
pedal pair to be packed in 400 G 
bags. 

To be wrapped in double layer 60 gsm kraft paper with 
bitumen layer or alternatively in 500 G LDPE or 
equivalent bags. 

To be wrapped in 48 gsm kraft paper or 400 G LDPE or 
equivalent bags. 

Front and rear brake sets along with clips and shoes to 
be packed in a carton or 300 G LDPE or equivalent 
bags and the rod assembly sent in bundles. 

Each hub to be wrapped in 48 gsm kraft paper or 
packed in 400 G LDPE or equivalent bags. 

To be wrapped in kraft paper and sent in gunny bags. 

To be wrapped in kraft paper envelopes. 

No wrapping is generally required. 



Alternatively, each 
LDPE or equivalent 



Adopted 13 June 1988 



© February 1989, BIS 



Gr 1 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 



IS: 12426 - 1988 


S/No. 


Components 


xiv) 


Chain cover 


xv) 


4 

Spokes, nipples and 
washers 



xvi) Free wheels and chains 

xvii) Rim tapes 

xviii) Small components 



xix) Accessories 



Method of Packing ( Wrapping ) 

To be wrapped in 48 gsm kraft paper envelope. 

To be wrapped in non-absorbent greased paper and the/i 
securely packed in strong paperboard carton. Different 
sizes to be packed in different cartons. Alternatively, 
spokes may also be wraped in 200 G LDPE : or equivalent 
and tied at both ends. Nipples and washers shall be 
packed in 200 to 300 G LDPE or equivalent bags and 
seated/tied at the ends. 



or equivalent bag and 
cartons, if required by 



To be wrapped in 400 G LDPE 
sealed. May also be packed in 
the dealers. 

No wrapping is generally required. 

Reflectors and steel balls to be wrapped in kraft paper 
and polyethylene bags, respectively. Components like 
draw bolts, chain adjusters, cotter pins, etc, are to be 
first packed in MARKIN cloth bags and finally sent in 
hessian bags. 

Accessories like, bells, dynamo-lights, locks, etc, shall be 
wrapped in 200 G LDPE bags or equivalent and then 
individually packed in paperboard carton. 



EXPLANATORY NOTE 



For inland transport, the bicycle components and spare parts are generally sent loose in trucks 
and it has to be ensured that the product reaches its destination without any damage. The mam 
function of wrapping bicycle components and spare parts is to protect them from atmospheric and 
transportation hazards. 

Recommendations for packaging of bicylces ( in knocked down conditions ) for export are already 
covered in IS : 8715-1978 'Code of practice for packaging of bicylces for export'. 



Printed at Printrade, New Delhi, India 



