NAT HIAF IS 4573 : 2020 
Indian Standard 


diay fara iaga ea — fafirfe 


(FAT ULP 


Power Driven Mobile Cranes — 
Specification 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 53.020.20 


© BIS 2020 


anda AM sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 serere TH AMT, ay fref — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


January 2020 Price Group 10 


Cranes, Lifting Chains and its Related Equipment Sectional Committee, MED 14 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Cranes Lifting Chains and its Related Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Mechanical Engineering Division Council. 

This standard covers mechanical, electrical, hydraulic and pneumatic portions related to design, manufacture, 
erection and testing of mobile cranes. Structural design of all types of cranes and hoists is covered 
in IS 807 : 2006 ‘Design, erection and testing (structural portion) of cranes and hoists — Code of practice 
(Second Revision)’. 

This standard was first published in 1968 and subsequently revised in 1982. In this revision following major 
changes have been made: 


a) Requirements like headrest for driver’s seat, protection against falling objects, sharp edges, emergency 
exit, cabin lighting have been added for crane operating cabin; 

b) Provision of hoisting limiter and lowering limiter have been provided as protective devices; 

c) Provisions for fire protection have been provided; and 

d) Certain other changes for better implementation of this Standard. 


The committee kept in view the manufacturing and trade practices prevailing in the country while formulating 
the standard. While revising this standard, assistance has also been derived from the following publications: 


BS EN 13000 : 2010 for Cranes — Mobile Cranes 


All the necessary information regarding the conditions under which the crane is to be used together with the 
particulars laid down in Annex A shall be supplied with the enquiry or order. The manufacturer shall supply with 
the tender the information in accordance with the proforma laid down in Annex B. 


A few typical materials for components are indicated in Annex C merely for guidance to the manufacturer and 
the user. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final 
value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


Indian Standard 


POWER DRIVEN MOBILE CRANES — 
SPECIFICATION 


( Second Revision ) 
1 SCOPE IS No./Other 
1.1 This standard covers power driven mobile cranes, Publication 
either wheel mounted or crawler mounted (tracked), of 4460 (Part 1 to 
the following types but does not include rail-mounted Part 3) : 1967 


cranes: 

a) Type | — Fully mobile full-slewing; 

b) Type 2 — Fully mobile part-slewing; 

c) Type 3 — Fully mobile non-slewing; 

d) Type 4 — Truck mounted fully mobile full- 
slewing; 

e) Type 5 — Truck mounted fully mobile part- 
slewing; 

f) Type 6 — Truck mounted fully mobile non- 
slewing; 

g) Type 7 — Semi-mobile types of any of the above 
classes; and 

h) Type 8 — Portable. 


1.2 This standard does not cover hazards related to the 
lifting of persons. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
were valid. All standards are subject to revision, 
and parties to agreements based on this standard are 
encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying 
the most recent editions of the standards: 


IS No./Other Title 
Publication 
210 : 2009 Grey iron castings — 
Specification (fifth revision) 
1030 : 1998 Carbon steel castings 
for general engineering 
purposes — Specification 
(fifth revision) 
2062 : 2011 Hot rolled medium and high 
tensile structural steel — 
Specification (seventh 


revision) 


1364 (Part 1) : 2018 


1364 (Part 2) : 2018 


1364 (Part 4) : 2003 


1364 (Part 5) : 2002 


1364 (Part 6) : 2018 


1367 (Part 1) : 2014 


1367 (Part 9/Sec 1) 
: 1993 


IS 4573 : 2020 


Title 


Gears — Spur and helical 
gears — Calculation of load 
capacity (first revision) 
Hexagon head bolts, screws 
and nuts of product grade A 
and B: Part 1 Hexagon head 
bolts (size range M 1.6 to 
M 64) (fifth revision) 


Hexagon head bolts, screws 
and nuts of product grade A 
and B: Part 2 Hexagon head 
screws (size range M 1.6 to 
M 64) (fifth revision) 


Hexagon head bolts, screws 
and nuts of product grade 
A and B: Part 4 Hexagon 
thin nuts (chamfered) (size 
range M 1.6 to M 64) (fourth 
revision) 

Hexagon head bolts, screws 
and nuts of product grade 
A and B: Part 5 Hexagon 
thin nuts — Product grade B 
(unchamfered) (size range 
M 1.6 to M 64) (fourth 
revision) 

Hexagon head bolts, screws 
and nuts of product grade A 
and B: Part 6 Hexagon nuts 
style 2 (first revision) 


Tolerance supply conditions 
for threaded steel fasteners: 
Part 1 General requirements 
for bolts, screws, studs and 
nuts (fourth revision) 


Tolerance supply conditions 
for threaded steel fasteners: 
Part 9 Surface discontinuities 
Section 1 Bolts, screws and 
studs for general applications 
(third revision) 


IS 4573 : 2020 


IS No./Other Title 
Publication 
1367 (Part 9/Sec 2) Tolerance supply conditions 
: 1993 for threaded steel fasteners: 


Part 9 Surface discontinuities, 
Section 2 Bolts, screws and 
studs for special applications 
(third revision) 


1367 (Part 10) : 
2002 


Tolerance supply conditions for 
threaded steel fasteners: Part 10 
Surface discontinuities — 
Nuts (third revision) 


1367 (Part 16) : 
2002 


Tolerance supply conditions 
for threaded steel fasteners: 
Part 16 Designation system 
for fasteners (third revision) 


1367 (Part 18) : 
1996 


Tolerance supply conditions 
for threaded steel fasteners: 
Part 18 Packaging (third 
revision) 


2016 : 1967 Specification for plain washers 


(first revision) 


5372 : 1975 Specification for taper washers 
for channels (ISMC) (first 
revision) 

5374 : 1975 Specification for taper washers 
for I-BEAMS (ISMB) (first 
revision) 

12615 : 2018 Line operated three phase a.c. 
motors (IE CODE) ‘Efficiency 
Classes and Performance 


Specification' (third revision) 


15683 : 2006 Portable fire extinguishers — 
Performance and constru- 


ction — Specification 


ISO 3795 : 1989 Road vehicles, and tractors 
and machinery for agriculture 
and forestry — Determination 
of burning behaviour of 


interior materials 


SECTION I GENERAL 
3 DESCRIPTION OF TYPES 


3.1 Type 1 Fully Mobile Full-Slewing Cranes 


Cranes having structure capable of slewing through 
unlimited revolutions in either direction with load 
as defined in load chart, able to handle loads up 
to the maximum for which they have been designed, 
and able to travel under their own power with such 
loads. 


3.2 Type 2 Fully Mobile Part-Slewing Cranes 


Cranes similar to Type 1, but having a limited arc of 
slewing. 


3.3 Type 3 Fully Mobile Non-Slewing Cranes 


Cranes similar to Type 1, but having a non-slewing 
superstructure, and which obtained the slewing effect 
only by manoeuvering the complete crane by means of 
its steering and travelling mechanism. 


3.4 Type 4 Truck Mounted Fully Mobile Full- 
Slewing Cranes 


Cranes mounted on chassis with a separate driver/ 
operator cabin, having characteristics substantially 
the same as those of truck and having a separate 
truck engine mainly for the travel motions, the crane 
superstructure and handling of the load being the same 
as described for Type 1 cranes in 2.1. 


3.5 Type 5 Truck ‘Mounted Fully Mobile Part- 
Slewing Cranes’ 


Cranes having chassis are described for Type 4 in 2.4, 
but possessing a superstructure and load handling 
abilities as described for Type 2 cranes in 2.2. 


3.6 Type 6 Truck Mounted Fully Mobile Non- 
Slewing Cranes 


Cranes having chassis as described for Type 4, but 
possessing a super structure and load handling abilities 
as described for Type 3 cranes in 2.3. 


3.7 Type 7 Semi-Mobile Cranes of any of the Above 
Classes 


Cranes which substantially comply with the 
requirements of any of the above classes, with the 
exception that they require the use of outriggers to 
enable them to handle their designed maximum loads, 
or have limitations with regard to travelling with loads. 


3.8 Type 8 Portable Cranes 


Cranes which are unable to travel under their own 
power. 


4 IDENTIFICATION AND RADIUS-LOAD 
INDICATION 


4.1 The crane shall bear one or more plaques having the 
following permanent inscriptions: 


a) Manufacturer’s name; and 
b) The safe working load or loads and the radii 
appropriate thereto. 
4.2 A small plaque shall be located in a permanent 
place on the crane bearing the following inscription: 
a) Manufacturer’s name; 
b) Manufacturer’s serial number; and 


c) Maximum safe working load at minimum radius. 


4.2.1 Other information may be furnished through 
manufacturer’s literature. 


4.3 Indication of Load at Different Radii 


A load indicator shall be provided in full view of the 
driver/operator giving the information about the radius 
at which the crane is derricked and the appropriate load 
thereof. 


4.4 An electronic device shall be fitted to the crane, 
which will give an alarm to the driver/operator when 
the safe working load is approached. The device should 
be both visible and audible. Crane system shall trip 
performing unsafe operations or all operations, if the 
100 percent safe working load is exceeded. 


5 DEFINITIONS 


The definitions of terms referred in this standard are 
given below. 


5.1 Blocking-up Base 


The effective span of the supporting base when 
outriggers, jacks or blocks are used to increase stability 
by virtue of making contact with the ground at points 
further from the centreline of the crane than the normal 
wheels or tracks. 


5.2 Crane 


Machine for cyclic lifting or cyclic lifting and handling 
of loads suspended on hooks or other load handling 
devices, whether manufactured to an individual design, 
in series or from prefabricated components. 


NOTE — “Suspended” can include additional means fitted to 
prevent swinging, rotation of the load, etc. 


5.3 Derricking 


The movement of the jib when pivoting in a vertical 
plane. 


5.4 Height of Lift 


The vertical distance between the floor level or 
datum level and the lowest point of the throat of 
the hook when the hook is in the highest working 
position. 


5.5 Hoisting 
The movement of the load (by means of a rope or 


chain) when being vertically raised or lowered, the jib 
remaining stationary. 


5.6 Jib Length 


The shortest distance between the fulcrum of the jib 
and the centre line of the jib head pulley. 
NOTE — If jibs have a portion which extends to the rear of 


the pivoting joint, that portion is ignored when stating the jib 
length. 


IS 4573 : 2020 


5.7 Load chart 


The chart indicating safe working load at different 
radii, boom length as applicable as declared by the 
manufacturer. 


5.8 Outreach 


The horizontal distance from the centerline of the 
lifting hook to the nearest point of the machine other 
than the jib (this dimension varies in accordance with 
the operating conditions of the machine). 


NOTE — For the purpose of this definition, outriggers are 
considered to be part of the machine. 


5.9 Safe Working Load 


The external load lifted or handled by the crane. It 
includes, the mass of lifting tackles, for example, 
magnets, grabs, lifting beams and hook blocks, but 
excludes wind load and inertia forces. 


5.10 Slewing 


The movement of the jib rotating about a vertical axis. 


5.11 Tail Radius 


The maximum distance from the centre of rotation to 
the tail of the revolving superstructure. 


5.12 Working Radius (Radius of Load) 


The horizontal distance from the projection of the axis 
of rotation to the supporting surface before loading, 
to the centre of vertical hoist line or tackle with load 
applied. 


6 WORKING CONDITION 


6.1 The crane shall be regarded as under service 
conditions when it is handling on firm and level ground 
at the appropriate radius any load up to the maximum 
for which it has been designed, that is, when it is lifting 
and holding or lowering the load and/or the jib, and/or is 
slewing and/or travelling in any direction, while being 
subjected to the stresses caused by a wind pressure of 
250 Pa computed as described in 6.2. 


6.2 Wind Effect 


6.2.1 Under service conditions the crane shall be able to 
withstand a steady wind pressure of 250 Pa. 


6.2.2 Under static conditions, the crane shall be capable 
of withstanding a steady wind pressure of 1 720 Pa 
(175 kgf/m?) without load. For special applications and 
extreme zones, the requirements of wind pressure shall 
be specified by the purchaser. 


6.2.3 The wind pressure under either conditions shall 
be calculated with form factors as given in IS 807. 


IS 4573 : 2020 


6.3 Technical Data and Information 


6.3.1 Instruction manual shall be provided by the 
supplier, having contents that are the responsibility of 
the manufacturer. The text shall be written so that a 
trained person will understand it, with all information 
being explicit and comprehensive. 


6.3.2 The Instructions for Use 


The instructions shall specify the required level of skills 
for operating, maintenance and rigging personnel and 
shall give information about residual risks and shall 
specify the duties of the crane operator before, during 
and after crane operation. It shall specify the sequence 
of operations before, during and after assembly, 
erection, disassembly and transport. 


6.3.3 Instructions for Maintenance and Inspection 


Instructions including drawings, where appropriate, for 
the maintenance of the crane allowing the identification 
of replacement parts shall be given. The instruction 
manual shall give instructions on specific tasks to be 
carried out at defined intervals, in order to maintain 
the safe condition of the crane. The instruction manual 
shall contain information to ensure that all maintenance 
operations can be carried out safely. Attention shall 
be drawn to all hazards which may occur during 
maintenance. 


6.3.4 Instructions for Spare Parts 


A spare parts list shall be provided to cover the complete 
mobile crane. The list shall include identification and 
location for all items supplied as replacement parts or 
assemblies. 


6.4 Marking 
6.4.1 Machine Marking 


The manufacturer’s machine marking shall be in 
accordance with relevant standard. 
6.4.2 Information and Warning 


Information and warning on mobile cranes shall be 
done preferably by signs and pictograms in accordance 
with relevant standards. 


6.4.3 Graphic Symbols 

Graphic symbols used for controls and indicators shall 
be in accordance with relevant standards. 

6.4.4 Marking of Crane Parts 


Parts of the crane which are disassembled and 
transported separately (for example, lattice/boom/jib 
section, part of the counterweight) shall be identified by 
markings if, there is a risk of unintended interchange. 


6.4.5 Marking of Outrigger Beams 


Outrigger beams shall be marked to show the fully 
extended positions. Where the crane rated capacity 


charts permit intermediate position(s) they shall also be 
marked and identified according to the charts. 


SECTION II MECHANICAL 
7 DESIGNING OF CRANE MECHANISM 


7.1 General 


The design of component parts of the mechanism 
relating to each motion shall include due allowance 
for the effects of the duty which the mechanism will 
perform in service. 


7.2 The slew drive shall be designed in such a manner 
that loads in excess of the design capacity of the jib 
are not applied during acceleration and deceleration of 
slewing speeds. 


8 STABILITY 


8.1 Condition of Tipping 


The machine is considered to be at the point of tipping 
when a balance is reached between the over-turning 
moment of the load and the stabilizing moment of the 
machine at which point addition of any further load will 
cause imbalance, when on a firm, level supporting surface. 


8.2 Tipping Load 


Tipping load is the load producing a tipping condition 
at a specified radius. Mass of hook, hook block, slings 
shackles, etc, except that of the hoist rope itself shall be 
considered part of the load. 


8.3 Backward Stability (Counter Mass Limitations) 


To maintain a reasonable margin of backward 
stability with the subject equipments, counter mass 
shall be limited by the mass distribution specified 
below, established when the machine is on a firm 
level supporting surface, equipped with the shortest 
recommended radius, with hook, hook block, bucket or 
other load handling equipment resting on the ground; 
and with outriggers, if provided, retracted and free off 
the ground. 


8.3.1 Crawler Cranes 


The horizontal distance between the centre of gravity 
of the crane and the axis of rotation shall not exceed 
70 percent of the radial distance from the axis of 
rotation to the backward tipping fulcrum in the least 
stable direction. 


8.3.2 Truck and Wheel Mounted Cranes 


8.3.2.1 With the longitudinal axis of the rotating 
superstructure of the crane at 90° to the longitudinal 
axis of the carrier, the total load on all wheels on the 
side of the carrier under the jib shall not be less than 
15 percent of the total mass of the crane. 


8.3.2.2 With the longitudinal axis of the rotating 
superstructure of the crane in line with the longitudinal 
axis of the carrier, in either direction, the total load on 
all wheels under the lighter loaded end of the carrier 
shall be not less than 15 percent of the total mass of 
the crane. 


8.4 Rated Loads 


Lifting crane rated loads at specified radii shall not 
exceed the following percentages of tipping load at 
specified radius: 


Type of crane mounting Percent 
Crawler mounted machines 75 
Rubber tyre mounted machines 85 
Machines on outrigger 85 


NOTE — If crane operation with outriggers in positions other 
than fully extended is permitted by the crane manufacturer, 
specified procedures, ratings, 
configurations that are permitted shall be provided. 


and limitations for any 


9 JIB 


Jib and its attachments shall be designed to withstand 
the sum of the stresses arising under working conditions 
including: 

a) All stresses due to load; 


b) All stresses due to mass of the jib and its 
attachments; 

c) Accelerating and retarding forces acting 
horizontally at the jib head pin due to slewing of 
the load; 

d) Accelerating and retarding forces 
horizontally due to slewing of the jib; 


acting 


e) Stresses due to wind pressure of 250 Pa; 


f) Accelerating and retarding forces acting vertically 
and horizontally due to derricking of jib; 


g) Transverse shear stress due to 2.5 percent of 
maximum axial load; and 


h) Stress due to sudden application of slew and luff 
brakes. 


10 SPEEDS 


The various operational speeds shall be as agreed to 
between the manufacturer and the purchaser. However, 
the recommended maximum speeds for a crane 
handling its working load on a firm level surface, are 
given in Annex D. 


11 WIRE ROPES 


11.1 Unless otherwise specified or agreed to by the 
purchaser, typical material for ropes may comply with 
the relevant Indian Standards (see Annex C). 


IS 4573 : 2020 


11.1.1 The breaking strength of all splicing, sockets, 
thimbles and rope anchorages shall be not less than 
90 percent of the minimum breaking strength of the 
rope or ropes to which they are attached. 


11.2 The factor of safety based on nominal breaking 
strength and rated lifted load shall be as follows: 


11.2.1 Service Condition 


The factor of safety for running ropes and standing 
ropes which pass over pulleys shall be not less than 4.0. 
For straight standing ropes the ratio should be not less 
than 3.0. 


11.2.2 Erection Condition 


The ratio for running ropes and standing ropes which 
pass over pulleys shall be not less than 3.0. For straight 
standing ropes, the ratio should be not less than 2.5. 


11.3 When the load is supported by more than one part 
of rope, the tension in each part shall be considered to 
be equal. 


11.4 The derricking rope shall be of sufficient length to 
permit the jib being raised or lowered to the horizontal 
position during erection or inspection of the crane, 
without the assistance of the hoisting rope. 


11.5 Reverse bends shall be avoided as far as possible 
12 ROPE DRUMS 


12.1 Material for Drums 


Typical material of construction of the drums can be 
cast iron, cast steel or mild steel or any other material 
specified or agreed to by the purchaser. The minimum 
requirement is as follows: 


i) Grey cast iron Grade FG 260 of IS 210 
ii) Cast steel IS 1030 
iii) Mild steel IS 2062 


12.2 Strength of Drums 


Every drum shall be designed to withstand the stress 
caused by the wound-on rope and the local bending 
stress when the rope is winding on. 


12.2.1 The bending stress due to beam action of the 
drum shall also be taken into consideration. 
12.3 Diameter of Drums and Pulleys 


The diameter of drums and pulleys measured at the 
bottom of the groove shall in no case be less than: 


a) 14d for drums, and 
b) 17d for pulleys. 


Where, d shows the diameter of the rope. 


IS 4573 : 2020 


12.4 Grooving of Drums 


Grooving shall be smooth and free from surface defects 
liable to injure the rope. The edges shall be rounded. 
The contour at the bottom of the groove shall be circular 
over an angle of approximate 120°. The radius of the 
groove shall be larger than the radius of the rope by not 
less than the appropriate amount given in Table 1. 


Table 1 Radius of Groove in Drums and Sheaves 


SI Diameter of Rope Increase Over Rope Radius 
No. (in mm) (in mm) 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Upto and including 16 1.0 
ii) Over 16 and including 24 1:5 
iii) Over 24 and including 28 2.0 
iv) Over 28 3.0 


12.4.1 The depth of the groove shall be not less than 
0.35 times the diameter of the rope. 


12.4.2 The grooves of the drum shall be so pitched that 
there is between adjacent turns of the rope a clearance 
of not less than: 
a) 1.5 mm for ropes up to and including 12 mm dia, 
b) 2.5 mm for ropes over 14 mm and including 
28 mm dia, and 


c) 3.0 mm for ropes over 28 mm dia. 


12.5 Length of Drum 


Drums may be designed to accommodate rope in a 
number of layers. There shall be not fewer than two 
dead turns at the anchored end. 


12.6 Flange 


Unless adequate arrangements are made to prevent 
the rope from running off the drum, the drum shall 
be flanged at both ends. When the rope is fully drum 
wound on the drum, the flanges shall project a distance 
of not less than 17^ rope diameters beyond the rope. A 
spur, or other wheel or a ring secured to the drum may 
be regarded as forming the flange. 


12.7 Rope Anchorage 


The end of the rope shall be anchored to the drum in 
such a way that the anchorage is readily accessible. 


12.8 The lead angle of the rope shall not exceed 5? (1 
in 12). 


13 SHEAVES 


13.1 Grooving 


Sheaves shall be machine grooved to a depth of not less 
than 1.5 times diameter of rope. The grooves shall be 


finished smooth and shall be free from surface defects 
likely to injure the rope. The contour at the bottom 
of the groove shall be circular over an angle of 130? 
approximately. The radius of the part of the groove 
shall be larger than the radius of rope by not less than 
the appropriate amount in Table 1. 


13.2 Lead Angle 


The angle between the rope and a plane perpendicular 
to the axis of the sheave shall not exceed 5? (1 in 12). 


13.3 Sheave Guards 


Sheaves shall be adequately guarded to retain the rope 
in the grooves. 


13.4 All sheaves, guide pulleys or rollers shall 
preferably be mounted on ball or roller bearings. 


13.5 Suitably designed supports shall be fitted on the 
jib and other parts of the structure where required, for 
the purpose of preventing chafing or damage of the 
ropes. 


14 SHAFTS 


14.1 General 


Shafts and axles shall have ample strength and rigidity 
and adequate bearing surfaces for their purposes. They 
shall, where necessary, be finished smoothly and, if 
shouldered, shall be provided with fillets of as large a 
radius as possible and/or be tapered to suit. 


14.2 Material 
All shafts shall be made of steel of suitable quality. 
14.3 Shaft Keys 


Relevant Indian Standards for typical keys and 
keyways are given in Annex C. However, shaft keys 
may also be designed as agreed to by the purchaser, and 
the manufacturer. 


15 BEARINGS 


15.1 Type 


Bearings shall be generally of ball, roller or ring 
lubricated type. Bush bearings may be used for shafts 
running at 450 rev/min or below. 


15.2 Due allowance shall be made for impact and 
thrust loads. Life of ball and roller bearings shall be 
calculated in accordance with the manufacturer's 
recommendations. 


15.2.1 If plain bush bearings are used the bearings 
pressure may generally not exceed 6.9 MPa on the 
projected area. 


16 GEARING 


16.1 General 


All gears shall have machine cut teeth except for slew 
racks and their engaging pinions where provided may 
have cast or machine moulded teeth. 


16.2 Material 


All gears shall be of steel (cast or wrought) except as 
provided below: 


a) Wheels may have steel rims secured to cast iron 
centres; and 


b) Worm wheels or worm wheel rims shall be of 
bronze and worm of steel for power operated 
cranes. 


16.3 Design 


Gears shall be designed in accordance with IS 4460 
(Part 1 to Part 3) or any other method as specified by 
the purchaser. 


16.4 Fixing 


Keys in gear trains shall be so fitted and secured that 
they do not work loose in service. 


16.5 Gear Boxes 


16.5.1 Gear boxes shall be so designed that the gears 
which they enclose will be automatically lubricated, the 
gear shall be readily removable and the boxes shall be 
oil tight as far as is reasonably practicable. They shall 
be of rigid construction and fitted with inspection covers 
and lifting lugs where necessary. Facilities for oil filling, 
adequate breathing, drainage and means of indicating 
clearly the correct oil levels shall be provided. 


16.5.2 Where work gearing is used as a first motion 
drive it shall have under test, the same load and time 
rating as the driving motor, and the temperature rise of 
the oil bath when measured by thermometer shall not 
exceed 40°C above the temperature of the atmosphere. 


16.5.3 Gear box feet shall be machined and shall be 
seated and positively located on an appropriate level 
surface, preferably machined. 


16.5.4 Material for the gear box may be cast iron, cast 
steel or mild steel fabricated. The typical material for 
construction is given in 12.1. 


17 TYRES, ROAD WHEELS AND CRAWLERS 


17.1 The crane shall have legible and prominent 
inscription on the chassis giving the correct inflation 
pressure of the tyres. 


17.2 Road wheels shall be fitted with resilient tyres of 
a type to suit application. When pneumatic tyres are 
fitted the valves shall be brought to the outside of the 
wheels. 


IS 4573 : 2020 


17.3 Crawler tracks shall be designed to permit 
operation of the crane without exceeding the ground 
pressure specified. 


18 BOLTS, NUTS, SCREWS AND WASHERS 


18.1 All bolts and set screws in rotating parts shall 
be locked. Bolts in tension shall be avoided wherever 
possible. 


18.2 Washers and tapered pads, provided on the under- 
side of steel sections with tapered flanges shall be tack 
welded in place. 


18.3 AII bolts and nuts shall preferably be in accordance 
with IS 1364 (Part 1), IS 1364 (Part 2), IS 1364 (Part 4), 
IS 1364 (Part 5), IS 1364 (Part 6), IS 1367 (Part 1), 
IS 1367 (Part 9/Sec 1), IS 1367 (Part 9/Sec 2), 
IS 1367 (Part 10), IS 1367 (Part 16) and IS 1367 
(Part 18). Black bolts and nuts shall not be used 
generally. The diameter shall be not less than 10 mm in 
a load carrying member. 


18.4 Washers shall conform to IS 2016, IS 5372 and 
IS 5374 as appropriate or as agreed to between the 
purchaser and the manufacturer. 


19 BRAKES 


19.1 Capacity of Brakes 


Hoisting brake when applied shall arrest the motion 
and sustain any load up to and including the test load at 
any position of the lift. 


19.1.1 Provision shall be made to control with safety the 
lowering of any load up to and including the test load. 


19.1.2 Brakes in other motions shall be capable of 
bringing the relevant motions of the fully loaded crane 
safely to rest. 


19.2 Springs 


Springs for electromechanical brakes shall be of the 
compression type and shall not be stressed in excess of 
80 percent of the torsional elastic limit of the material. 


19.3 Weights 

Brake weights, if provided, shall be securely bolted to 
their lavers, and locked. 

19.4 Brake Drums and Shoes 


The wearing surface of all brake drums shall be 
machined, and shall be cylindrical, smooth and 
free from defects. Brake drums shall, preferably, be 
balanced. 


19.5 Adjustment 


Brakes shall be provided with a simple and accessible 
means of adjustment to compensate for wear and 
removal for relining. 


IS 4573 : 2020 


19.6 Brake Effort 


Under service conditions brakes applied by hand shall 
not require a force greater than 400 N at the handle. 
Brakes applied by foot shall not require a force of more 
than 700 N at the pedal. 


19.6.1 It is recommended that the stroke of hand levers 
shall not exceed 300 mm and of pedals 150 mm. 


19.7 Locking 


Locking devices shall be provided on brake levers 
where necessary. Brake pedals shall have a non-slip 
surface. 


19.8 Temperature of the rubbing surface of all brakes 
shall not exceed 100°C for fabric lining and 200°C for 
asbestos or metals lining. 


19.9 Hoisting and Derricking Motion Brakes 


Hoisting and derricking motion brakes shall be designed 
to exert a restraining torque at least 25 percent greater 
than the torque transmitted to the brake drum from the 
suspended load. In estimating this torque the effects of 
friction in the transmission details between the load and 
the brake shall be ignored. 


19.9.1 While the above mentioned restraining torque 
is being exerted, the stresses in any part of the brake 
construction, excluding springs, shall not exceed those 
based on a factor of safety of 6. 


19.9.2 The temperature of the rubbing surfaces of the 
brake shall not exceed the allowable figure as indicated 
in 19.1.8, after the maximum safe working load has 
been raised and then lowered on the brake five times 
without pause through the specified height of lift 
(see Annex B). It is recommended that the hoisting 
and derricking motion brakes should be automatic so 
that the brakes are applied when the control handle is 
moved to the ‘Off’ or ‘Neutral’ position. 


19.3 Slewing Brake 


Suitable arrangements shall be made for arresting the 
slewing motion and preventing the superstructure from 
slewing under normal service conditions. 


19.3.1 Provision shall be made to secure the 
superstructure from slewing in its normal position for 
travelling. 


19.4 Travelling Brakes 


Effective travelling brakes shall be fitted when the 
crane is designed to travel on the highway, brakes shall 
comply with appropriate regulation and the purchaser 
shall inform the manufacturer of any requirements in 
this respect. 


19.4.1 Hand parking brakes should be capable of 
holding the crane stationary on a gradient of 1 in 8 
when applied with a hand pressure of 294 N. 


20 LIFTING HOOKS 


20.1 General 


Lifting hooks shall comply with the relevant Indian 
standard specification whenever available. 


20.2 Mountings 


Swivelling hooks shall be mounted on thrust bearings 
and a protective skirt shall be provided to enclose the 
bearings. If required a locking device shall be fitted to 
prevent rotation of hook. 


20.3 The hooks shall be: 


a) provided either with an efficient device to prevent 
the displacement of the sling from the hook, or 


b) of such shape as to reduce as far as possible the 
risk of such displacement. 


20.4 The safe working load shall be legibly stamped on 
a non-vital part on each hook and/or the bottom block 
and a test certificate shall be supplied if required. 


21 SHACKLES 


21.1 Shackles shall comply with the relevant Indian 
Standard and shall be provided with screwed pins 
which shall be suitably locked. 


21.2 Each shackle shall be legibly stamped on a non- 
vital part with an identification number and the pin of 
the shackle shall bear the same number. 


21.3 When the load on the shackle is not perpendicular 
to the axis, the allowable load shall be reduced 
depending on the angle at which it is applied. 


22 OVER-HAULING MASS 


Where an overhauling mass is used on the rope it shall 
have a smooth-bore and be bell-mounted at the top and 
bottom unless the rope is efficiently served, or otherwise 
protected, and provision shall be made for the examination 
of the part of the rope passing through the mass. 


23 PAWLS 


Where pawls and ratchet wheels are used they shall be 
of steel of suitable quality for the duty. 


24 CRANE OPERATING CABIN 


24.1 The cab shall afford the driver/operator adequate 
protection from the weather and shall have an entry 
door and an emergency exit/window. The windows 
shall be fitted with safety glass. 


24.2 The cab together with control levers and pedals 
shall allow the driver / operator, when in his normal 
driving / operating position, ample room for operation. 
It shall afford as far as possible an unrestricted view of 
load and adequate all round visibility. 


24.3 A seat shall be provided for the driver/operator 
and shall be so placed and provided with adjustments 
that all control handles and pedals are within his 
easy reach. The seat shall be able to be locked in its 
adjusted positions. If foot supports and/or armrests are 
provided, accessibility to the crane operator’s seat shall 
be maintained and the operation of the crane shall not 
be limited. 

NOTE — The seat should be provided with a headrest 


depending upon the extent of the agreement of the manufacturer 
and the purchaser 


24.4 Protection against Falling Objects 


Depending upon the extent of the agreement of the 
manufacturer and the purchaser, as a minimum, the 
roof of the crane operating cabin including windows 
in the roof shall be able to withstand the impact of a 
steel ball weighing 7 kg, falling from a height of 2 m, 
without plastic deformations exceeding 50 mm. 


24.5 Sharp Edges 


Parts of the equipment inside the cabin which are 
accessible during normal use shall not present any 
sharp edges or points which could cause injuries. Edges 
shall have radii (minimum 1 mm) or be chamferred 
(minimum 1 mm x 1 mm) or be covered achieving an 
equivalent level of safety. 


24.6 Emergency Exit 


The crane operating cabin shall have exit routes for 
emergency evacuation. Emergency exits shall be easily 
recognised and opened from inside the cabin. The 
emergency exit route in a direction other than that of 
the normal entrance to the cabin may take the form 
of an opening, for example, an opening window or 
breaking the window glass etc. 


24.7 Cabin Lighting 


All cabins shall be equipped with lighting to allow all 
information contained within the cabin, to be readily 
legible during operating conditions. The lighting shall 
be provided by a permanent installation. 


25 CONTROL LEVERS 
OPERATIONS 


FOR CRANE 


25.1 The total maximum travel of control levers shall 
be not greater than 600 mm for a lever working in one 
direction and 300 mm on either side of the neutral 
position for two way lever. 


25.1.1 The travel of foot pedals shall be not more 
than 250 mm. 


25.2 For any manual operation of control levers under 
normal working conditions, the operator shall not be 
required to exert a force greater than 122 N at the 
handle. If operated by foot, they shall not require a 


IS 4573 : 2020 


force greater than 294 N. For turning a handle, the force 
required shall not exceed 122 N. 


26 GUARDING 


26.1 General 


Effective guards shall be provided for gear wheels, 
chain drives and revolving shafts, couplings, collars 
and set screws or similar moving parts, unless those 
parts are made safe by design or by position or are 
effectively guarded by parts of the crane structure. 


26.2 Design 


The guard may be of sheet metal, perforated or 
expanded metal, wire mesh, wood, pressed fibre or other 
material as may be deemed most suitable, and should 
completely encase the parts concerned. The guards 
should be designed to allow for routine inspection and 
maintenance work. 


26.2.1 The guards should be substantially constructed 
of material suitable to withstand the atmospheric 
conditions in the situation in which the guards are to be 
used and shall be sufficiently rigid to resist distortion. 


26.2.2 The guard shall be securely attached to a fixed 
support. 


26.3 Thickness 


The thickness of metal guards shall be not less than 1 
mm and of wooden guards not less than 18 mm. 
NOTE — An increased thickness or the use of corrosion 


resisting material, is desirable in damp and corrosive 
atmospheres. 


26.4 Size of Opening and Clearance 


The minimum clearance between the guard and the 
moving parts and the size of opening in guards of 
perforated metal, woven wire, metal lattice or similar 
material shall be in accordance with the requirements 
in Table 2. 


Table 2 Size of Opening and Clearance 
( Clause 26.4 ) 


SI Size of Opening, Minimum Clearance 
No. 
mm mm 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Not exceeding 10 25 
ii) Over 10 up to and including 15 50 
ii) Over 15 up to and including 30 100 
iv) Over 30 up to and including 40 125 


NOTE — Size of opening means the greatest dimensions of the 
opening except in the case of slotted material when the length 
of the slot may be disregarded if the width of the slot does not 
exceed 15 mm. 


IS 4573 : 2020 


27 WEATHER PROTECTION 


All electrical and mechanical equipment outside cabin 
and machinery house shall be adequately protected 
from weather. All weather proof covers shall be easily 
removable. 


28 LUBRICATION 


28.1 Provision shall be made for lubricating all bearings 
which shall be easily accessible from the working 
platforms of the cranes. 


28.2 In case centralize lubrication is provided it shall be 
mentioned in Annex A. In this case provision shall be 
made at the bearings to vent excess lubricant pressure. 


28.3 Lubricating nipples, pipes, and adopters shall 
generally comply with the relevant Indian standards 
(see Annex C). 


28.4 A lubricating chart in the maintenance manual 
shall be provided indicating all the lubricating points, 
the type of lubricant and recommended frequency of 
lubrication. 


28.5 Grease lubricated ball and roller bearings shall in 
addition be packed with grease during initial assembly. 


29 PAINTING 


Before despatch of the crane the complete crane 
covering structural, mechanical and electrical parts 
shall be thoroughly cleaned of all dirt, grease, scale and 
rust and then given a single coat of primer. Mechanical 
and electrical components shall be given an additional 
finish coat of paint of colour of customer's choice. The 
exposed mechanical parts of the crane shall be given 
one coat of rust preventer. 


30 PROTECTIVE DEVICES 


30.1 Devices which are able to be operated either by 
power or by hand should be of such design that power 
may not actuate the manual drive inadvertently. 


30.1.1 Except when the mechanism driving the 
derricking drum is self locking, or when the derricking 
drum is independently driven, an effective interlocking 
arrangement shall be provided between the derricking 
clutch and the brake or pawl sustaining the derricking 
drum. The arrangement shall ensure that the sustaining 
brake cannot be released until the clutch is effectively 
engaged, and that the clutch cannot be disengaged until 
the brake is effectively engaged, whether the drum is 
under load or not. 


30.1.1.1 If a sustaining pawl is used, its installation 
and position should be such that when it engages, to 
prevent the jib from falling, the free movement of the 
jib shall not exceed an amount equivalent to the pitch 
of the ratchet wheel. 


10 


30.2 Automatic Safe Load Indicator 


A device fitted to a crane, or incorporated in its design, 
that automatically gives visual indication to the driver/ 
operator when the load being lifted or carried by the 
crane approaches the safe working load, and that also 
gives a continuous audible warning to the driver/ 
operator and other persons in the vicinity when the load 
being lifted or carried exceeds the safe working load 
(see definition of ‘safe working load"). 


30.3 Audible Warning Device 


There shall be a clearly audible warning device which 
can be operated from the driver/operator cabin. 


30.4 Hoisting Limiter 


All cranes shall be fitted with a hoisting limiter to stop 
all motions which can cause the hook block to make 
contact with the boom/jib or the boom/jib head" and 
cause damage. Bridging of the hoisting limiter shall 
only be possible for rigging operations and transport. 
The bridging device has to be of the type that requires 
to be held in the override position. 


30.5 Lowering Limiter 


All cranes shall be fitted with a lowering limiter. 
As a minimum the lowering limiter shall ensure three 
turns of rope on the drum. Bridging the lowering limiter 
shall only be possible for rigging operations, transport 
and changing of the rope. The bridging device has to 
be of the type that requires to be held in the override 
position. 


31 INTERNAL COMBUSTION ENGINES 


31.1 Internal combustion engines shall comply with 
relevant Indian Standards on the one hour basis, and a 
silencer shall be fitted to the exhaust. The exhaust pipe 
shall be fitted in such a position that the exhaust fumes 
of the engine do not reach the driver/operator. Fuel tank 
capacity shall be sufficient for at least 8 h running on 
normal crane duty, and means shall be provided for 
ascertaining the amount of fuel contained in the tank. 


31.2 When required by the purchaser, a spark-arrestor 
shall be fitted to the silencer. 


31.3 The sump and lubrication system of the engine 
shall be so arranged that efficient lubrication is 
maintained to all bearings when the engine is operating 
in any plane inclined at angle of 1 in 4 to the horizontal. 


31.4 Provisions shall be made for draining the water 
circulating system during frosty weather, the drain cocks 
being fitted in accessible position. The arrangement 
shall be such that it is not possible to leave pockets of 
water either in the system or in the pump casing. 


31.5 Internal combustion engines shall comply with the 
emission norms as specified by the statutory authority. 


31.6 Fire Protection 


31.6.1 Fire Resistance 


The floor of the cabins as well as the interior, 
upholstery and insulation (if applicable) shall be made 
of fire-retardant material. The material burning rate 
shall not exceed 150 mm/min when tested in accordance 
to ISO 3795. 


31.6.2 Fire Extinguisher 


The crane shall be equipped with a portable fire 
extinguisher as per IS 15683. The extinguisher should 
preferably be located in a cabin or be accessible near to 
the control station. 


31.7 Requirements for Transport and Travel 


To avoid risks due to hazardous movements during 
transport and travel, mechanical locks secured to the 
crane or hydraulic locking devices shall be provided, in 
particular to avoid: 


a) unintended rotation of the superstructure; 
b) unintended luffing or telescoping of the boom; and 
c) inadvertent extension of outrigger beams. 


Means for locking of other stowed components intended 
to be carried on the crane (for example, hook block, 
outrigger plates, counterweight) to avoid hazardous 
movements, shall be provided. 


31.8 Roll Over and Tip Over Protection 


Crane shall be designed that no roll over and tip 
over is possible if used as intended. Instruction for use, 
see 6.3.2 


NOTE — On mobile cranes protective structures against roll 
over and tip over are technically not feasible. 


SECTION III ELECTRICALS 
32 GENERATORS AND MOTORS 


32.1 Ratings and Enclosures 


The ratings shall be such that, under the specified 
service conditions, the temperature rise will not exceed 
the limits specified in IS 12615 for three phase a.c 
motor or other relevant Indian standards. This shall not 
preclude use of intermittent rated motors if required. 
Where d.c. motors are used, the provisions regarding 
rating and enclosure shall be as agreed to between the 
manufacturer and purchaser 


32.1.1 The enclosures shall suit the specified service 
conditions and shall be stipulated with the enquiry or 
order. 


32.2 Motors shall be suitable for frequent acceleration, 
braking and where applicable for reversing. 


11 


IS 4573 : 2020 


32.2.1 If it is intended to retard or stop the motion 
of a crane by electric braking, the motor shall be of 
suitable design to withstand this duty. 


32.3 Mountings 


Generators and motors shall be so located that the 
brush-gear and terminals are accessible for inspection 
and maintenance and normal ventilation is not 
restricted. 


32.4 Terminals 


Generator and motor leads shall be brought out from 
the frame to terminals in the terminal box fixed to the 
frame. 


33 CONTROLLERS 


33.1 General 


Controllers shall be adequately protected to prevent 
accidental contact with live parts. 


33.2 Ratings 


Controllers shall be adequately rated for the duties 
specified. 


33.3 Accessibility 


All controllers shall be so disposed that the contacts 
and terminal arrangements are readily accessible for 
inspection and maintenance. 


33.4 Marking and Direction of Operation of 
Controllers 


Where practicable, controller handles should move 
in the direction of the resultant load movement. Each 
controller shall be marked in a permanent manner to 
show the motion controlled and, wherever practicable, 
the direction of movement. 


33.5 Notching 


33.5.1 The notching for the controller handle in the 
‘OFF’ position shall be more positive than the notching 
in other positions. The handle may be provided with 
a lock, latch, dead man or spring return feature if 
specially requested by the customer. 


33.5.2 Control levers shall be provided with stops and/ 
or catches to ensure safety and facility of operation. 
If the controller drum is fitted, a star wheel will be 
regarded as complying with the requirements. 


34 RESISTORS 


34.1 General 


Resistors shall be adequately protected to prevent 
accidental contact with live parts. 


IS 4573 : 2020 


34.2 Rating 


Resistors shall be rated such that the temperature 
does not exceed the limits specified in the relevant 
Indian Standards during the operation of the crane 
under service conditions. The ohmic value and current 
carrying capacity of the resistors shall be computed and 
specified according to the actual torque requirements of 
the motion served and not on the motor size which may 
be sent by thermal requirements. 


34.2.1 Resistors shall be rated according to the service 
conditions and the mechanical class of the crane and 
shall preferably be intermittent rated. Short time rated 
resistors may, however, be used. 


34.3 Fittings 


Resistors shall be enclosed in well ventilated housing 
and wherever necessary be fitted with suitable covers. 
Resistor assemblies shall be so mounted as to ensure an 
adequate flow of cooling air. 


35 ELECTRICAL 
PROTECTIVE GEAR 


CONTROL AND 


35.1 If electrically operated contactor panel is used 
for the control of all crane motions, the protective 
devices in the panel shall be such that each crane 
motion has separate protection. 


35.2 All motors and generators shall be suitably 
protected against overloading. 


35.3 If supply is from an external source, the isolated 
switch shall be fitted in an easily accessible position. 
If supply is self-generated, and of the standard voltage 
type, the isolation switch shall be fitted in an easily 
accessible position so as to isolate the supply from the 
control panel. 


35.4 It shall not be possible to reinstate the current 
supply of the contractor closing coils of a motion until 


the controller for the motion is returned to the ‘OFF’ 
position 


35.5 To prevent quick reversal of movement by the 
operator from hoisting to lowering, an interlock in the 
middle point may be provided. 


36 BRAKE MAGNET 


Brake magnet coils shall conform to the ratios shown 
in Table 3. 


37 WIRING DIAGRAM 


A wiring diagram or a circuit diagram or both shall be 
supplied. The diagram shall give the rating of each of 
the motors, the cable sizes and such other information 
as will tend to facilitate inspection and maintenance of 
the crane. 


38 LIGHTING 


38.1 The crane shall be provided with suitable and 
adjustable lighting intended as an aid for the crane 
operator to illuminate the immediate vicinity of the 
crane under normal operational conditions. The crane 
shall have exterior lighting when required for access 
and egress. The crane shall have lighting in the 
machinery room if, inspection is necessary. 


38.2 Travelling lights shall comply with Road Vehicle 
Lighting Regulations, where applicable. 


39 CABLE WIRING FOR POWER CIRCUIT 


39.1 Cables 


Recommended cables used for crane wiring are 
prescribed in Annex C. However, other cable can be 
used as per agreement between the purchaser and the 
manufacturer. 


Table 3 Brake Magnet Ratings 
( Clause 36 ) 


SI No. Duty Magnets Magnets 
(d.c.) (a.c.) 
(D (2) (3) (4) 
i) Heavy duty Suitable for being in circuit not more than 7/2 min Suitable for being in circuit continually where the 
out of every 15 minutes brake coil operates infrequently 
Or Or 
240 operations per hour for 240 operations per hour where the time that the 
brake coil is in circuit is not more than 5 min out of 
every 15 min 
ii) Normal duty Suitable for 240 operations per hour where the time Suitable for 240 operations per hour where the time 


that the brake coil is in circuit is not more than 5 min 


out of every 15 min 


12 


that the brake coil is in circuit is not more than 5 min 
out of every 15 min 


39.2 Minimum Size 


The minimum cross-sectional area of cables shall be 
as follows: 


a) For power circuits 2.5 mm? copper or 6 mm? 
aluminium; and 


b) For control circuits 1.5 mm? copper. 


39.3 Protection 


All cables shall be adequately protected against 
mechanical damage and metal trunking may be used if 
desired. The recommended relevant Indian Standards 
on cable conduits are prescribed in Annex C. If cables 
are drawn into a steel tube, the steel tube shall be of 
heavy gauge welded or solid drawn screw joined. 


39.4 Identification 


Proper identification of cables as per wiring diagram 
shall be provided. 


39.5 Multicore Cables 


Multicore power and control cables suitably clamped 
to the crane structure may be used. Suitable clamping 
glands should be provided at both ends of each 
multicore cable. 


39.6 Current Rating 


The recommended relevant Indian Standard for ratings 
of the cables are prescribed in Annex C. Where cranes 
are equipped with one-hour rated motors. The stator 
or armature cables may be uprated by a factor of 1.4 
above the ratings for continuous duty. Similarly, 
for cranes equipped with half-hour rated motors, an 
uprating factor of 1.7 may be used. Where the cranes 
are equipped with intermittent duty rated motors, the 
factor for uprating the cable will be equal to where IDF 
Is the intermittent duty factor of the motor. 


39.6.1 The cables for rotor or armature resistor circuits 
carry current during accelerating periods only and may, 
therefore, be further uprated. For 5 min rated resistors, 
the uprating factor of 2 may be used. For intermittent 
rated resistors, suitable uprating factors may also be 
applied. 


39.6.2 Consideration should be given to such factors as 
the ambient temperature, grouping and disposition of 
the cables, and to the limitation of voltage drop, which 
will influence selection of suitable cables. 


SECTION IV HYDRAULIC 
40 HYDRAULIC EQUIPMENT 


40.1 General Requirements 


40.1.1 Back pressures which may affect the safety of 
the crane shall be prevented or effectively relieved. 


IS 4573 : 2020 


40.1.2 Provision shall be made in the installation 
for effective filtration of the working fluid and for 
protection of the fluid against pollution. 


40.1.3 The raising ofthe pressure at any point to a value 
above the safe maximum, due to any effect whatsoever, 
shall be prevented by positive means. 


40.1.4 A hydraulic circuit diagram shall be provided. 
40.2 Power Transmission 


40.1.1 Safety Devices T 
The system shall be so designed as to be failsafe. 


40.1.2 Installation 


The installation of the hydraulic system shall be such 
that as far as possible the effects of external influences 
(such as, atmospheric condition, unauthorised 
interference and mechanical impact) shall not be 
detrimental to the system. In addition installation 
stresses in the tubes shall be avoided and flexibility 
of the supporting members shall be allowed for on all 
rigid tubes. 


40.1.3 Speed of Flow 


As far as practicable cavitation and back pressure shall 
be avoided by the use of suitable speeds of fluid in 
tubing and components. 


40.1.3.1 Tubes and hoses shall be dimensioned with 
due consideration for the pressure and rate of flow of 
fluid in them. They should not be bent to radii smaller 
than recommended by the manufacturer. 


40.1.3.2 Connectors and unions shall be dimensioned 
with due consideration for the pressure and rate of flow 
of fluid in them, and the resistance they are likely to 
cause. 


40.1.4 Temperature of Fluid 


If required, under normal circumstances to keep the 
temperature of the fluid within the limits specified by 
the fluid supplier, a cooler shall be fitted. 


40.1.5 Fluid Reserve 


Tanks shall have a sufficient capacity to guarantee an 
uninterrupted flow of fluid to all rotating machinery 
whilst working, and hold a sufficient reserve of fluid to 
keep the temperature within the limits specified by the 
supplier in those cases where no other cooling device 
is fitted. 


40.2 Controls 


The circuit and control arrangement shall be such that 
no combination of control selections in one circuit can 
cause in any other circuit a movement not intended by 
the operator, unless this is essential for the operation of 
a safety device or interlock. 


IS 4573 : 2020 


40.2.1 Provision shall be made to prevent the load 
from driving hydraulic motors beyond acceptable 
limits. Hydraulically powered motions shall not allow 
un-intentional movement except for creep caused by 
normal internal leakage. 


40.2.2 Hydraulic shock caused by the sudden closure 
of a control valve coupled with the over-running action 
of a particular motion of the crane shall be effectively 
relieved. 


40.2.3 Valve lever handles shall have upon them, 
or adjacent to them, clear markings to indicate their 
purpose and mode of operation. 


SECTION V PNEUMATIC 
EQUIPMENT 


41 POWER TRANSMISSION 


41.1 The pneumatic system shall be of sufficient 
dimensions and be provided with adequate equipment 
to ensure its proper functioning, for example: 


a) Compressor; 
b) Automatic pressure regulator; 


c) Air filter (if required, one to be arranged before 
and one after the compressor); 


d) Anti freezer (for introducing antifreeze mixture 
into the piping); if necessary, for the working 
condition; and 


e) Air reservoir. 


41.2 Tubes and hoses shall be dimensioned with due 
consideration of the pressure and quantity of the air 
circulating in the system. They either shall be made 
of copper or their inner side must be protected against 
corrosion. It is recommended that for the assembly 
of piping the instruction which the manufacturer has 
issued in respect of unions and bending radii should be 
applied. Where great flexibility of piping is required, 
rotary unions should be given. The piping shall be of 
sufficient cross section and such layout as to reduce 
pressure loss due to flow in the pipe to an acceptable 
value and to permit the operation of the power motion 
without undue time lag. 


41.3 The temperature in the pneumatic system shall not 
exceed the permissible limit. 


42 INSTALLATION 


42.1 The installation of conduits and other units 
of the system should be carried out in such a way 
that a uniform inclination is obtained, if possible 
towards water drain valve. Stress shall be carefully 
avoided when assembling and the system must 
not be adversely affected by any movement of the 
super-structure or under carriage. When required a 


14 


suitable protection from a mechanical damage shall 
be provided. 


42.2 Controls and the relevant accessories shall be so 
assembled and installed that their operational safety is 
retained under operating conditions. 


43 AIR RESERVOIR 


Air reservoir together with their fittings shall be in 
accordance with an accepted standard. They shall be of 
sufficient capacity so that minimum working pressure 
is always ensured under normal working condition. 
It is recommended that the sufficient air pressure is 
available for the operation of fundamental function, to 
the safety of the machine before air may be used for 
the servo assistance etc, for machines. The air reservoir 
shall be at convenient position and its cooling should 
be assured. 


SECTION VI TESTING 
44 TEST REQUIREMENTS 


44.1 General 


44.1.1 The aim of testing is to demonstrate that 
the crane conforms to the requirements stipulated 
by the specification and to verify the behaviour of 
component parts. When conducting acceptance tests, 
the manufacturer shall be entitled to employ his own 
crane driver/operator. 


44.1.2 The tests shall be the responsibility of 
the manufacturer and shall be carried out at the 
manufacturer's works or at a place agreed to between 
the purchaser and the manufacturer. Additional tests 
may be carried out subject to agreement between the 
manufacturer and the purchaser. 


44.1.3 AII tests shall be carried out on a firm and level 
surface (+ 0.5 percent slope) during weather conditions 
in which the wind speed does not exceed 8.3 m/s. Tyres 
where fitted, shall be inflated to pressures specified by 
the manufacturer for normal crane duties. 


44.1.4 Cranes provided with outrigger jacks shall be 
tested without outrigger where permitted, and with 
outriggers fully extended unless otherwise specified by 
the manufacturer as specified in 44.1.3. 


44.1.5 The manufacturer shall clearly indicate whether 
or not the hook block is to be considered as part of the 
test load. 


The mass of slings, equalizing beams and other similar 
devices for handling test loads shall be taken as part of 
the test load. 


44.1.6 In the case of first production machines, all 
tests defined in 44.2 shall be carried out for all lengths 


of jibs and also, where applicable for all lengths and 
configurations of jib with fly jib, mast/tower with jib 
and mast/tower with jib and fly jib. 


44.1.7 In the case of subsequent production machines, 
all tests defined in 44.2 shall be carried out for all 
applicable lengths and configurations of jib, jib with fly 
jib, mast/tower with jib and mast/tower with jib and fly 
jib as specified in Table 4, 5 and 6 commensurate with 
the equipment ordered by the purchaser. 


44.2 Tests 
44.2.1 Functional Tests 


The operational functions of the complete crane shall 
be tested with no load to demonstrate the following: 


a) The satisfactory operation of each control device, 
and where fitted, each cut-out device for over 
hoisting, over lowering, over slewing and over 
derricking. 

b) The satisfactory operation of each crane motion at 
the specified unladen operating speeds or times. 


44.2.2 Overload Test 


a) An overload test shall be performed at the 
maximum specified radius or minimum specified 


IS 4573 : 2020 


jib angle and at the appropriate radius or jib 
angle for the maximum safe working load for the 
particular configuration under test. 


b) Each test shall consist of applying an overload of 
10 percent of safe working load at the appropriate 
radius or jib angle as specified in 45.2.2 (a). The 
test load shall be lifted and lowered by operating 
the barrel through one full turn after the load has 
just cleared the ground. The load need not be 
stopped during the raising operation. The load 
shall be maintained just clear of the ground for the 
remainder of the test except when it is necessary 
to clear such obstructions as outriggers. 


c) During each test, all permissible crane motions 
shall be operated separately consistent with safe 
handling and control of the test load. 


The load shall be slewed through the specified angle 
of rotation or through the maximum angle which is 
physically possible because of the shape of the test 
load. 


The load shall be derricked inwards by one radius 
decrement or jib angle increment and returned to its 
original position. During the test the derricking barrel 
must turn one full revolution. 


Table 4 Test Configurations for Telescopic Jib Arrangements 
( Clause 44.1.7 ) 


Arrangements Length of Mechanized 


Telescopic Sections 
a) 2) 


Mechanized telescope jib with fly jib Longest, appropriate to 
maximum fly jib rating 


Longest 
Mechanized telescope jib with Longest 
manual telescopic sections 
Mechanized telescope jib with Longest 


manual telescopic sections and fly jib 


Length of Extended 
Manual Telescopic Sections 


Length of Fly Jib 


(3) (4) 
— Shortest 
At minimum offset Longest 
Shortest 
At maximum offset Longest 
NS Shortest 
At minimum offset Longest 
Shortest 
At maximum offset Longest 
Shortest m 
Longest = 
Shortest Shortest 
At minimum offset Longest 
Shortest 
At maximum offset Longest 
Longest Shortest 
At minimum offset Longest 
Shortest 
At maximum offset Longest 


NOTE — If fly jib ratings at minimum offset are similar to those at maximum offset, then tests at minimum offset are not applicable. 


IS 4573 : 2020 


Table 5 Test Configurations for Strut Jib Arrangement 
( Clause 44.1.7 ) 


SI No. Arrangement Jib Length Fly Jib Length 

(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Jib Shortest — 
ii) Intermediate — 
iii) Longest — 

iv) Jib with fly jib Longest appropriate to Shortest 

maximum fly jib rating At minimum offset Longest 

v) Longest Shortest 

At maximum offset Longest 

Shortest 

At maximum offset Longest 


NOTE — If fly jib ratings at minimum offset are similar to those at maximum offset, the test at minimum offset is not applicable. 


Table 6 Test Configurations for Mast/Tower and Jib Arrangements 
( Clause 44.1.7 ) 


SI No Arrangement Length of Mast/Tower Lengths of Jib (Telescopic Or Strut) 
And Fly Jib 

(1) (2) (3) (4) 

i) Mast/tower with jib Shortest As in Table 4 or 5 
Longest As in Table 4 or 5 

ii) Mast/tower with jib and fly jib Shortest As in Table 4 or 5 
Longest As in Table 4 or 5 

44.2.3 Testing of Indicators NOTES: 


a) The settings and satisfactory operation of the 
automatic overload indicator, if fitted, shall be 
confirmed during the course of the test. 


b) The settings and satisfactory operation of the 
radius and/or jib angle indicator, if fitted, shall be 
confirmed during the course of the test. 


44.2.4 Stability Tests 


If desired, the manufacturer shall demonstrate that the 
stability of the crane complies with the requirements 
of 8, except in the following cases, at minimum radius 
(or maximum jib angle) or where structural strength 
of other limitations limit the capacity, the load applied 
do not exceed 110 percent of safe working load for the 
crane in the condition tested. At other radii the load 
applied shall not exceed the safe working load plus the 
additional load required to demonstrate the specified 
margin of stability. To compensate for tyre and other 
deflections when a load is applied, the radius shall 
be adjusted to the appropriate rated working radius 
measured at ground level. 


1) It Should not be inferred that this test required the crane to 
be brought to condition of tipping. 


2) Tests on gradients greater than 0.5 percent are excluded. 
44.2.5 Performance Test with Rated Load (s) 


44.2.5.1 Test to establish satisfactory operation of each 
crane motion shall be performed separately. The crane 
shall be subjected to all admissible movements, and 
with all normal precautions taken. 


4.2.5.2 The crane shall be set up as specified by the 
manufacturer and the tests carried out with rated load 
(s) applicable, at the maximum radius or lowest jib 
angle and at the appropriate radius or jib angle for 
the maximum safe working load for the particular 
configuration under test at the position of least stability. 
The forgoing does not exclude a customer requiring 
two motions to be tested at one time where this is 
permissible. 


44.2.5.3 During the tests described in 44.2.5 (c) to (g), 
speeds up to the maximum specified may be attained 


16 


and verified but, operating speeds, accelerations and 
declarations should be those consistent with safe 
handling and control of the load. To compensate for 
tyre and other deflections when load is applied the 
radius shall be adjusted to the appropriate rated working 
radius measured at ground level. 


44.2.5.4 Hoisting and lowering 


The rope shall be reeved in accordance with the 
manufacturer's specified arrangement for the 
configuration under test. The load shall be hoisted to 
maximum height and lowered to near ground level. 
A similar test shall be carried out on other auxiliary 
hoisting units where fitted. 


44.2.5.5 Slewing 


The revolving portion shall be slewed in both 
directions through 360° or in the case of a part slewing 
is permissible. 


44.2.5.6 Derricking 


The jib shall be derricked in both directions through the 
full range of radii or jib angles which are permissible to 
the load suspended. 


44.2.5. Telescoping 


For cranes fitted with telescopic booms the telescoping 
motion shall be tested through the range of duties 
specified by the manufacturer. 


44.2.5.8 Travelling 


Where travelling with the load is permissible, the 
travelling motion shall be tested in both directions with 
the jib in any position within the slewing arc specified 
by the manufacturer. Precautions may be taken to limit 
the swinging of the load. 


44.2.6 Travelling Tests (Crane without Load in 
Travelling Order) 


44.2.6.1 Speed 


The maximum speed of the crane (mobile or truck 
mounted shall be measured on a dry, straight, level road 
after the vehicle has gathered speed. This measurement 
shall be made in both directions and the average speed 
shall be calculated. If desired, the speeds obtained 


IS 4573 : 2020 


at the same engine revolutions may be checked for 
different gearbox ratios. The speed shall comply with 
that specified by the manufacturer. 


44.2.6.2 Maneuverability 


With the steering wheels at maximum lock, the turning 
diameter on left lock and right lock of the track traced 
by the outside and inside wheel shall be measured. 


44.2.6.3 Braking 

Depending on the classification of the crane, the 
travelling brakes shall be checked for satisfactory 
operation. 

The tests shall be demonstrated on dry hard level 


ground and shall be carried out in calm weather without 
inducing skidding. 


44.3 Certificate 


On the satisfactory completion of the tests, certified 
records shall be supplied to the purchaser. These 
records shall contain the following: 
a) Description of crane, serial number and 
manufacturer’s name; 
b) All safe working loads and their appropriate radii 
or jib angles; 
c) The test loads which were applied and their 
appropriate radii/jib angles; 
d) length of jib, fly jib and mast/tower tested; and 
e) Method of crane chassis support, namely: 
1) free on wheels/crawler tracks; 


2) on wheels/crawler track assisted by stabilizing 
jacks; or iii) on stabilizing jacks. 


44.4 Verification of Crane Details 


The general details of cranes, as supplied in accordance 
with Annexure B, shall be verified, if required, by the 
customer or his inspection agent in conjunction with 
the manufacturers. 


44.5 The engine of the crane shall comply with emission 
compliance requirements of 31.5 and a compliance 
certificate shall be furnished. 


45 This verification of safety requirements shall be 
done as given below: 


Verification of Safety Requirements Including the Proof of Competence 


Clause No. Safety Requirement Visual Check Functional Check 
44.2.4 Stability, general — e 
24.5 Sharp edges and acute angles e = 
24.6 Emergency exit e = 
24.1 Doors and windows e = 


17 


IS 4573 : 2020 


Verification of Safety Requirements Including the Proof of Competence 


Clause No. Safety Requirement Visual Check Functional Check 
24.7 Cabin lighting o — 
24.4 Protection against falling objects (tools) o — 
24.3 Seats, general e — 

25 Control levers for crane operations — e 
5.4 Safe load indicator e e 
44.2.6b Steering systems — e 
19 and 44.2.6 c Braking systems for crane motions and — e 
travel motions 
26 Guards and restraints e = 
24.1 Access e ER 
31.1 Exhaust system e = 
31.1 Fuel tanks ° = 
24.2 Crane operator’s field of view e — 
38 Lighting e — 
5.5 Prohibition-, warning- and information e — 


signs 


Key: e = mandatory, © = if required by purchaser 


18 


IS 4573 : 2020 


ANNEX A 
( Foreword and Clause 28.2 ) 


A-1 INFORMATION TO BE SUPPLIED WITH  A-1.6 Site Conditions: 


ENQUIRY OR ORDER 


The following information in regard to the details of 
the crane should be supplied at the time of enquiry/ 
order. 


A-1.1 State whether crane is required to be fully mobile, 
full slewing type, etc (see 1.1). 
A-1.2 Number of Cranes 


Is crane to be used with hook, grab or magnet? If 
required for grab or magnet, the following additional 
information should be given: 


a) Nature of material to be handled; 
b) Mass per cubic metre and grain size; 
c) Out put, in t/h; 
d) Type of grab and number of ropes; and 
e) If the purchaser is to supply the grab, give the 
empty and gross grab bucket mass. 
A-1.3 Crane Capacity in Tonnes 


A-1.4 Range of Lift in Metres: 
a) Below ground level; and 


b) Above ground level. 


A-1.5 Outreach in Metres 


19 


a) Nature of ground over which the crane will have 
to work, such as, hard roads, temporary roads, 
grass land, etc; 


b) Details of overhead or side restrictions, if any; and 


c) Particulars of the gradient and/or curves the crane 
may have to negotiate. 


A-1.7 Motive Power Required: 


State whether petrol, diesel, diesel-electric or external 
electric supply. 


A1.8 Type of Operators Cab Required 
A-1.9 Chassis Mounting: 


State whether metal, solid rebber, pneumatic tyres or 
tracks are required. 


A-1.10 Abnormal Atmospheric or Site Conditions, 
If Any. 


A- 1.11 Any Special Requirements, Such As Lighting, 
Limit Switches, and Overload Indicator. 


A-1.12 Crane Performance 


a) HOSE aea E metre/min. 
b). Slewing:.xsiiiscte cese Se Eres metre/min. 
6) Derticking: 5. eere Metre/min. 
d) Travellng...:.::5 cott Metre/min. 


IS 4573 : 2020 


ANNEX B 
( Clauses Foreword, Clauses 19.2.2 and 45.4 ) 


B-1 INFORMATION TO BE SUPPLIED BY 
THE MANUFACTURER 


The following information regarding the crane should 
be supplied to the purchaser at the time of enquiry or 
order. 


B-1.1 Type of Crane Offered With Drawing or 
Catalogue No. 
B-1.2 Crane Capacity: 
a) Load in tonnes at maximum radius, in metres; and 
b) Load in tonnes ............... at minimum radius in 
metres. 
B-1.3 Range of Lift In Metres at Approximate Radii: 
a) Above ground level ............ , or 
b) Below ground level ............. 


B-1.4 Crane Diagram Indicating: 
a) Overall length of chassis; 
b) Overall width of crane; 
c) Overall height of crane with jib in lowest position; 


d) Tail radius of the revolving superstructure to 
ends and sides of chassis and over outriggers, if 
provided; and 

e) Distanced between two kerbs in which the crane 
may be completely turned round in one movement 
on: 

1) Right look, or 
2) Left look. 


20 


B-1.5 Driving Power: 


a) State whether petrol, diesel, 
external electric supply, etc. 


diesel-electric, 


b) If motive power is external electric supply give 
details of the same. 


c) Particulars of engine, that is, make and rated HP 
with number of cylinders. 


B-1.6 Speeds of Various Motions 


B-1.7 The Maximum Gradient at which the Crane 
May Travel: 


a) Loaded, and 
b) Unloaded. 


B-1.8 Description of Brakes 
B-1.9 Description of Controls of Various Motions 


B-1.10 Particulars of Grab or Magnet, if to be 
Supplied with Crane 


B-1.11 Particulars of Operators Cabin 
B-1.12 Type and Sized of Road Wheels 
B-1.13 Total Mass of The Crane without Load 


B-1.14 Particulars of Safety and Indicating Devices 
Provided 


B-1.15 List of Tools and Accessories Supplied 


B-1.16 Any Other Important Particulars Not 
Scheduled Above 


ANNEX C 


( Clauses 11.1, 12.3, 28.3 39.1, 39.3 and 39.6 ) 


IS 4573 : 2020 


LIST OF RELEVANT INDIAN STANDARDS AND CODES OF PRACTICE FOR 
MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT 


C-1 MATERIALS 
C-1.1 Steel and Casting 


IS No. 
210 : 2009 


1030 : 1998 


1387 : 1993 


1570 


(Part 1) : 1978 


(Part 2/Sec 1) : 
1979 


(Part 2/Sec 2) : 
1987 


(Part 3) : 1979 


(Part 5) : 1985 


2062 : 2011 


Title 


Grey iron castings 
Specification (fifth revision) 


Carbon steel ^ castings 
for general engineering 
purposes — Specification 
(fifth revision) 

General requirements for 


the supply of metallurgical 
materials (second revision) 


Schedules 
steels: 


for wrought 


Steels specified by tensile 
and/or yield properties (first 
revision) 


Carbon steels  (unalloyed 
steels), Section 1 Wrought 
products (Other than wires) 
with specified chemical 
composition and related 
properties) (first revision) 


Carbon steels (unalloyed 
steels) Section 2 Carbon 
steel wires with related 
properties (first revision) 


carbon- 
cutting 


Carbon and 
manganese free 
steels (first revision) 


Stainless and heat-resisting 
steels (second revision) 


Hot rolled medium and high 
tensile structural steel — 
Specification (seventh 
revision) 


C-1.2 Threaded Fasteners, Washers 


IS No. 
1363 (Part 1) : 2002 


Title 


Hexagon head bolts, screws 
and nuts of product grade 
‘C’: Part 1 Hexagon head 
bolts (size range M 5 to M 
64) (fourth revision) 


21 


IS No. 


1363 (Part 2) : 


1363 (Part 3) 


1364 (Part 1) 


1364 (Part 2) 


1364 (Part 4) 


1364 (Part 5) 


1364 (Part 6) 


1367: 


2002 


: 2018 


: 2018 


: 2018 


: 2003 


: 2002 


: 2018 


(Part 1) : 2014 


(Part 9/Sec 1) : 


1993 


Title 


Hexagon head bolts, screws 
and nuts of product grade A 
and B: Part 2 Hexagon head 
screws (size range M 5 to 
M 64) (fifth revision) 


Hexagon head bolts, screws 
and nuts of product grade C: 
Part 3 (Style 1)Hexagon nuts 
(size range M 5 to M 64) 
(fifth revision) 


Hexagon head bolts, screws 
and nuts of product grade A 
and B: Part 1 Hexagon head 
bolts (size range M 1.6 to 
M 64) (fifth revision) 


Hexagon head bolts, screws 
and nuts of product grade A 
and B: Part 2 Hexagon head 
screws (size range M 1.6 to 
M 64) (fifth revision) 


Hexagon head bolts, screws 
and nuts of product grade 
A and B: Part 4 Hexagon 
thin nuts (chamfered) (size 
range M 1.6 to M 64) (fourth 


revision) 


Hexagon head bolts, screws 
and nuts of product grade 
A and B: Part 5 Hexagon 
thin nuts of product grade B 
(unchamfered) (size range 
M 1.6 to M 64) (—) 


Hexagon head bolts, screws 
and nuts of product grade A 
and B: Part 6 Hexagon nuts 
style 2 (first revision) 


Tolerance supply conditions 
for threaded steel fasteners: 


General requirements for 
bolts, screws, studs and nuts 
(fourth revision) 


Surface discontinuities, 
Section 1 Bolts, screws and 
studs for general applications 
(third revision) 


IS 4573 : 2020 


IS No. 


(Part 9/Sec 2) : 
1993 


(Part 10) : 2002 


(Part 16) : 2002 


(Part 18) : 1996 
3640 : 1982 


3757 : 1985 


6639 : 1972 


C-1.3 Wire Ropes 


IS No. 
2266 : 2002 


2365 : 1977 


3973 : 1984 


6594 : 2018 


Title 


Surface discontinuities, 
Section 2 Bolts, screws and 
studs for special applications 
(third revision) 


Surface discontinuities — 
Nuts (third revision) 


Designation system for 
fasteners (third revision) 


Packaging (third revision) 


Specification for hexagon fit 
bolts (first revision) 


Specification for high 
strength structural bolts 
(second revision) 


Specification for hexagon 
bolts for steel structures 


Title 


Steel wire ropes for general 
engineering purposes — 
Specification (fourth 
revision) 


Specification for steel wire 
suspension ropes for lifts, 
elevators and hoists (first 
revision) 

Code of practice for 
selection, installation and 
maintenance of wire ropes 
(first revision) 

Technical supply conditions 
for steel wire ropes and 
strands (third revision) 


C-2.1 Keys and Keyways 


IS No. 
2048 : 1983 


2291 : 1990 


2292 : 1974 


2293 : 1974 


2294 : 1986 


Title 


Specification for parallel 
keys and keyways (second 
revision) 


Tangential keys and keyways 
(third revision) 


Specification for taper keys 
and keyways (first revision) 


Specification for gib-head 
keys and keyways (first 
revision) 


Specification for woodruff 
keys and keyways (second 
revision) 


C-2.2 Welding 


IS No. 
816 : 1969 


818 : 1968 


1024 : 1999 


1323 : 1982 


C-2.3 Gears 


IS No. 
2467 : 2002 
2535 
(Part 1) : 2004 


(Part 2) : 2004 
3734 : 1983 


4460 (Part 1 to 3): 


1967 


5037 


(Part 1) : 2004 
(Part 2) : 2004 


C-2.4 Rivets 


IS No. 
1929 : 1982 


2155 : 1982 


Title 


Code of practice for use 
of metal arc welding for 
general construction in mild 
steel (first revision) 


Code of practice for safety 
and health requirement in 
electric and gas welding 
and cutting operations (first 
revision) 


Use of welding in bridges 
and structures subject to 
dynamic loading — Code of 
practice (second revision) 


Code of practice for oxy- 
acetylene welding for 
structural work in mild steel 
(second revision) 


Title 


International gear notation — 
Symbols for geometrical 
data (first revision) 


Cylindrical gears for general 
and heavy engineering 


Standard basic rack tooth 
profile (third revision) 


Module (third revision) 


Dimensions for 
gearing (first revision) 


worm 


Gears — Spur and helical 
gears — Calculation of load 
capacity (first revision) 


Straight bevel gears for 
general engineering and 
heavy engineering 


Basic rack (first revision) 


Module and diametral 
pitches (first revision) 


Title 


Specification for hot forged 
steel rivets for hot closing 
(12 to 36 mm diameter) 


Specification for cold 
forged solid steel rivets for 
hot closing (6 to 16 mm 
Diameter) 


C-3 ELECTRICAL DETAILS 


C-3.1 Motors 


IS No. 
12615 : 2018 


900 : 1992 


1231 : 1974 


2223 : 1983 


15999 (Part 1) : 2016 


15999 (Part 2)/Sec 1 
: 2011 


15999 (Part 9) : 2016 


15999 (Part 14) : 
2016 


15999 (Part 26) : 
2016 


IS/IEC 60034 
(Part 5) : 2000 


Title 
Line operated three phase 
a.c. motors (IE CODE) 


“Efficiency Classes and 
Performance Specification” 
(third revision) 


Code of practice for 
installation and maintenance 
of induction motors (second 
revision) 


Dimensions of three-phase 
foot-mounted induction 
motors (third revision) 


Dimensions of flange 
mounted ac induction motors 
(second revision) 


Rotating electrical 
machines: Part 1 Rating and 
performance (first revision) 


Rotating electrical machines: 
Part 2 Method of tests, 
Section 1 Standard methods 
for determining losses 
and efficiency from tests 
(excluding machines for 
traction vehicles) 


Rotating electrical machines: 
Part 9 Noise limits 


Rotating electrical machines: 
Part 14 Mechanical vibration 
of certain machines with 
shaft heights 56 mm and 
higher — Measurement, 
evaluation and limits of 
vibration severity 


Rotating electrical 
machines: Part 26 Effects of 
unbalanced voltages on the 
performance of three-phase 
cage induction motors 


Rotating electrical machines: 
Part 5 Degrees of protection 
provided by the integral 
design of rotating electrical 
machines (IP CODE) — 
Classification (second 
revision) 


IS 4573 : 2020 


C-3.2 Cables and Conductors 


IS No. 
9968 (Part 1) : 1988 


9968 (Part 2) : 2002 


694 : 2010 


1554 


(Part 1) : 1988 


(Part 2) : 1988 


9537 


(Part 1) : 
(Part 2) : 
(Part 3) : 


1980 
1981 
1983 


C-3.4 Switchgear 


IS No. 


IS/IEC 60947 
(Part 1) : 2007 


IS/IEC 60947 
(Part 2) : 2016 


IS/IEC 60947 
(Part 3) : 2012 


23 


Title 


Specification for elastomer 
insulated cables: Part 1 For 
working voltages up to and 
including 1100 volts (first 
revision) 


Specification forelastomer— 
Insulated cables: Part 2 
For working voltages from 
3.3 kV upto and including 
33 kV (first revision) 
Polyvinyl chloride insulated 
unsheathed and sheathed 
cables/cords with rigid and 
flexible conductor for rated 
voltages up to and including 
450/750 V (fourth revision) 


PVC 
duty) 


Specification for 
insulated (heavy 
electric cables: 


For working voltages up to 
and including | 100 V (third 


revision) 


For working voltages from 
3.3 kV up to and including 
11 kV (second revision) 


Specification for conduit for 
electrical installations: 


General requirements 
Rigid steel conduits 


Rigid plain conduits of 
insulating material 


Title 


Low-voltage switchgear and 
controlgear: Part 1 General 
rules (first revision) 


Low-voltage switchgear and 
controlgear: Part 2 Circuit 
breakers (first revision) 


Low-voltage switchgear 
and controlgear: Part 3 
Switches, disconnectors, 
switch disconnectors and 
fuse-combination units (first 
revision) 


IS 4573 : 2020 


IS No. 
IS/IEC 60947 (Part 4/ 


Sec 1) : 2012 


IS/IEC 60947 (Part 4/ 
Sec 2) : 2011 


IS/IEC 60947 (Part 4/ 
Sec 3) : 2014 


IS/IEC 60947 (Part 5/ 
Sec 3) : 2014 


IS/IEC 60947 (Part 5/ 
Sec 2) : 2007 


4227 : 1988 


900 : 1992 


C-4 EARTHING 


IS No. 
3043 : 2018 


Title 


Low-voltage switchgear and 
controlgear: 


Part 4  Contactors and 
motor-starters, Section 1 
Electromechanical contac- 
tors and motor-starters (first 
revision) 


Low-voltage switchgear and 
controlgear: Part4 Contactors 
and motor-starters, Section 2 
a.c semiconductor motor 
controllers and starters (first 
revision) 


Low-voltage switchgear and 
controlgear: Part4 Contactors 
and motor-starters, Section 3 
a.c. semiconductor motor 
controllers and contractors 
for non-motor loads (second 
revision) 


Low-voltage switchgear and 
controlgear: Part 5 Control 
circuit devices and switching 
elements, Section 1 
Electromechanical control 
circuit devices (first revision) 


Low-voltage switchgear and 
controlgear: Part 5 Control 
circuit devices and switching 
elements, Section 1 
Proximity switches 


Textiles Braided 
nylon cords for aerospace 
purposes — Specification 
(second revision) 


Code of practice for 
installation and maintenance 
of induction motor (second 
revision) 


Title 


Code of practice for earthing 
(second revision) 


24 


C-5 CRANES 


IS No. 
807 : 2006 


4137 : 2015 


4594 : 1968 


6511 : 1997 


6521 (Part 1) : 1972 


9507 : 1979 


C-6 IC-ENGINES 
IS No. 


IS/ISO 8178 (Part 4) 
: 2007 


14599 : 1999 


Title 


Design, erection and testing 
(structural portion) of cranes 
and hoists Code of 
practice (second revision) 


Heavy duty electric overhead 
travelling cranes including 
special service machines 
for use in steel works — 
Code of practice (second 
revision) 


Code of practice for design 
of portal and semi-portal 
wharf cranes (electrical) 


Lifting appliances — Range 


of maximum capacities 
for basic models (first 
revision) 


Code of practice for design 
of tower cranes: Part 1 Static 
and rail mounted 


Specification for general 
purpose electric — power 
driven winches for lifting 
and hauling. 


Title 


Reciprocating internal 
combustion engines 
Exhaust emission measure- 
ment: Part 4 Steady-state test 
cycles for different engine 
applications 


Automotive vehicles 
performance requirements 
(measurement of power, 
sfc, opacity) of positive 
and compression ignition 
engines — Method of test 


ANNEX D 
( Clause 10.1 ) 


IS 4573 : 2020 


The following maximum speeds are recommended for a crane handling its safe working load on a firm level 


surface. 


Travelling and Slewing 


Combined Mass of Crane and Safe | Upto10 | Over 10 and | Over 20 and | Over 30 and | Over 40 
Working Load, in Tonnes Up to 20 Up to 30 Up to 40 
Travelling speed with load km/h 10 8 5 4.5 3 
Rate of slewing (revolutions per 317 3 202 2 2 
minute), Mass 

Hoisting and Lowering 
Safe Working | Up to 2? | Over 2 and | Over 4 and | Over 6 and | Over 10 and | Over 15 and | Over 
Load, in Up to 4 Up to 6 Up to 10 Up to 15 Up to 25 25 
Tonnes 
Hoisting speed 37 27 18.5 14 6 4.5 
(metres per 
minute) 


Where a device is used to control the lowering speed, it should be arranged to limit the maximum lowering speed 
with full load to not more than twice the normal full load hoisting speed. 


The hoisting and lowering speeds are maximum recommended speeds for normal crane duty, but they may be 
increased for special duty cranes. 


25 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 14 (13918). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi f 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


