INATA Ah IS 18258 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


Nin cata Seas than atest naet 
ux Rura iva Ain ofater oh 
Caer A cra ct Aaa 


Evaluation of Tyres with Regard to 
Rolling Sound Emissions and/or to 
Adhesion on Wet Surfaces and/or to 
Rolling Resistance 


ICS 83.160.10 


© BIS 2023 


anedta Ae at 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
WM WH, 9 FT Me AH AM, Ag Reet - 110002 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


VTE: TUNES 


July 2023 Price Group 15 


Automotive Tyres, Tubes and Rims Sectional Committee, TED 07 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Automotive 
Tyres, Tubes and Rims Sectional Committee and approved by the Transport Engineering Division Council. 


Sound emitted due to contact between road and tyre is known as rolling sound emission. In past few years, there 
have been considerable demand for reducing this sound. This standard specifies the various test method to 
evaluate the tyre with respect to rolling sound emission and its performance on wet surface. 


In the formulation of this standard, considerable assistance has been drawn from AIS 142. 

The committee Composition responsible for the preparation of this standard is given in Annex H. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 


IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of specified value in this standard. 


IS 18258 : 2023 


Indian Standard 


EVALUATION OF TYRES WITH REGARD TO ROLLING 
SOUND EMISSIONS AND/OR TO ADHESION ON WET 
SURFACES AND/OR TO ROLLING RESISTANCE 


1 SCOPE 


It applies to new pneumatic tyres of classes C1, C2 
and C3 with regard to their sound emissions, rolling 
resistance and to adhesion performance on wet 
surfaces (wet adhesion). It does not, however, apply 
to: 


a) Tyres designed as Temporary use spare tyres 
and marked ‘Temporary use only’; 


b) Tyres having a nominal rim diameter code 
< 10 (or < 254 mm) or > 25 (or > 635 mm); 


c) Tyres designed for competitions; 


d) Tyres intended to be fitted to road vehicles of 
categories other than M, N and T; 


e) Tyres fitted with additional devices to improve 
traction properties (for example, studded 
tyres); 

f) Tyres with a speed rating less than 80 km/h 
(speed symbol F); and 


g) Professional off-road tyres. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A contain provisions 
which, through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the editions indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revision, and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged 
to investigate the possibility of applying the most 
recent edition of these standards. 


3 DEFINITIONS 


For the purpose of this standard, in addition to the 
definitions contained in IS 15633 and IS 15636 the 
following shall apply. 


3.1 Type of Tyre — In relation to this standard, a 
range of tyres consisting of a list of tyre size 
designations, brand names and trade descriptions, 
which do not differ in such essential characteristics 
as: 


a) The manufacturer's name; 
b) The tyre class (see 3.4); 
c) The tyre structure; 


d) The category of use: normal tyre, snow tyre 
and special use tyre; 


e) For class Cl tyres: 


1) In case of tyres submitted for approval 
of rolling sound emission levels, 
whether normal or reinforced (or extra 
load); and 


In case of tyres submitted for approval 
of performance adhesion on wet 
surfaces, whether normal tyres or snow 
tyres with a speed category of Q or 
below excluding H (< 160 km/h) or 
speed category R and above including 
H (> 160 km/h); 


f) For classes C2 and C3 tyres: 


2 


wm 


1) In case of tyres submitted for approval 
of rolling sound emission levels at 
stage 1, whether M+S marked or not; 
and 

2) In case of tyres submitted for approval 
of rolling sound emission levels at 
stage 2, whether traction tyre or not; 


g) The tread pattern. 


3.2 Brand Name or Trade Description 


3.2.1 Manufacturer — The person or body who is 
responsible to the Type Approval Authority (TAA) 
for all aspects of the type-approval and for ensuring 
the conformity of production 


3.2.2 Brand Name/Trademark or Trade Description 
— The identification of the brand or trademark as 
the tyre as given defined by the tyre manufacturer 
and marked on the side wall(s) of the tyre. The brand 
name/trademark may be the same as that of the 
manufacturer and the trade description may coincide 
with the trade mark. 


3.2.3 Trade Description/Commercial Name — An 
identification of a range of tyres as given by the tyre 
manufacturer. It may coincide with the brand 
name/trademark. 


3.3 Rolling Sound Emission — The sound emitted 
from the contact between the tyres in motion and the 


road surface. 


3.4 Tyre Class — It means one of the following 
groupings: 


a) Class C1 tyres: Tyres conforming to IS 15633; 


IS 18258 : 2023 


b) Class C2 tyres: Tyres conforming to IS 15636 
and identified by a load capacity index in 
single formation lower or equal to 121 and a 
speed category symbol higher or equal to N 
and/or tyres marked with LT/C; and 


c) Class C3 tyres: Tyres conforming to IS 15636 
and identified by: 


1) A load capacity index in single 
formation higher or equal to 122 
and/or tyres not marked with LT/C; 
and 

2) A load capacity index in single 
formation lower or equal to 121 and a 
speed category symbol lower or equal 
to M. 


3.5 Representative Tyre Size — The tyre size 
which is submitted to the test described in Annex B 
with regard to rolling sound emissions, or Annex D 
for adhesion on wet surfaces or Annex E for rolling 
resistance to assess the conformity for the type 
approval of the type of tyre, or Annex F for use in 
severe snow conditions. 


3.6 Temporary use Spare Tyre — A tyre different 
from a tyre intended to be fitted to any vehicle for 
normal driving conditions but intended only for 
temporary use under restricted driving conditions. 


3.7 Tyres Designed for Competition — Tyres 
intended to be fitted to vehicles involved in motor 
sport competition and not intended for 
non-competitive on-road use. 


3.8 Normal Tyre — A tyre intended for normal 
on-road use. 


3.9 Reinforced Tyre or Extra Load Tyre of Class 
C1 — A tyre structure in which the carcass is more 
resistance than that of the corresponding standard 
tyre. 


3.10 Traction Tyre — A tyre in class C2 or C3 
bearing the inscription TRACTION and intended to 
be fitted primarily to the drive axle(s) of a vehicle to 
maximize force transmission in various 
circumstances. 


3.11 Snow Tyre — A tyre whose tread pattern, tread 
compound or structure is primarily designed to 
achieve in snow conditions a performance better 
than that of a normal tyre with regard to its ability to 
initiate or maintain vehicle motion. 


3.11.1 Snow Tyre for use in Severe Snow 
Conditions — A snow tyre whose tread pattern, 
tread compound or structure is specifically designed 
to be used in severe snow conditions and that 
fulfils the requirements of 6.4. 


3.12 Special use Tyre — A tyre intended for mixed 
use both on- and off-road or for other special duty. 


These tyres are primarily designed to initiate and 
maintain the vehicle in motion in off-road 
conditions. 


3.13 Professional Off-Road Tyre — A special use 
tyre primarily used for service in severe off-road 
conditions. 


3.14 Tread Depth — It is the depth of the principal 
grooves. 


3.14.1 Principal Grooves — The wide 
circumferential grooves positioned in the central 
zone of the tyre tread, which, in the case of 
passenger and light truck (commercial) tyres, have 
the treadwear indicators located in the base. 


3.15 Void to Fill Ratio — The ratio between the 
area of voids in a reference surface and the area of 
this reference surface calculated from the mould 
drawing. 


3.16 Standard Reference Test Tyre (SRTT) — A 
tyre that is produced, controlled and stored in 
accordance with the ASTM (American Society for 
Testing and Materials) standards: 


a) E1136-17 for the size P195/75 R 14; 

b) F2493-18 for the size P225/60 R 16; 

c) F2872-16 for the size 225/75 R 16 C; 

d) F2871-16 for the size 245/70 R 19.5; and 
e) F2870-16 for the size 315/70 R 22.5. 


3.17 Wet Grip or Snow Grip Measurements 
— Specific definitions. 


3.17.1 Adhesion on Wet Surfaces — The relative 
braking performance, on a wet surface, of a test 
vehicle equipped with the candidate tyre in 
comparison to that of the same test vehicle equipped 
with a reference tyre (SRTT). 


3.17.2 Candidate Tyre — A tyre, representative of 
the type that is submitted for approval in accordance 
with this standard. 


3.17.3 Control Tyre — A normal production tyre 
that is used to establish the wet grip or snow grip 
performance of tyre sizes unable to be fitted to the 
same vehicle as the standard reference test tyre 
(see D-1.3.1.7 and F-1.3.4.3). 


3.17.4 Wet Grip Index (G) — The ratio between the 
performance of the candidate tyre and the 
performance of the standard reference test tyre. 


3.17.5 Snow Grip Index (SG) — The ratio between 
the performance of the candidate tyre and the 
performance of the standard reference test tyre. 


3.17.6 Peak Brake Force Coefficient (Pbfc) — The 
maximum value of the ratio of braking force to 
vertical load on the tyre prior to wheel lock-up. 


3.17.7 Mean Fully Developed Deceleration (Mfdd) 
— The average deceleration calculated on the basis 
of the measured distance recorded when decelerating 
a vehicle between two specified speeds. 


3.17.8 Coupling (Hitch) Height — The height when 
measured perpendicularly from the centre of the 
articulation point of the trailer towing coupling or 
hitch to the ground, when the towing vehicle and 
trailer are coupled together. The vehicle and trailer 
shall be standing on level pavement surface in its test 
mode complete with the appropriate tyre(s) to be 
used in the particular test. 


3.18 Rolling Resistance Measurement — Specific 
definitions 


3.18.1 Rolling Resistance, Fr — Loss of energy (or 
energy consumed) per unit of distance travelled. 


3.18.2 Rolling Resistance Coefficient, Cr — Ratio 
of the rolling resistance to the load on the tyre. 


3.18.3 New Test Tyre — A tyre which has not been 
previously used in a rolling deflected test that raises 
its temperature above that generated in rolling 
resistance tests, and which has not previously been 
exposed to a temperature above 40 °C. 


3.18.4 Laboratory Control Tyre — Tyre used by an 
individual laboratory to control machine behaviour 
as a function of time. 


3.18.5 Capped Inflation — Process of inflating the 
tyre and allowing the inflation pressure to build up, 
as the tyre is warmed up while running. 


3.18.6 Parasitic Loss — Loss of energy (or energy 
consumed) per unit distance excluding internal tyre 
losses, attributable to aerodynamic loss of the 
different rotating elements of the test equipment, 
bearing friction and other sources of systematic loss 
which may be inherent in the measurement. 


3.18.7 Skim Test Reading — Type of parasitic loss 
measurement, in which the tyre is kept rolling 
without slippage, while reducing the tyre load to a 
level at which energy loss within the tyre itself is 
virtually zero. 


3.18.8 Inertia or Moment of Inertia — Ratio of the 
torque applied to a rotating body to the rotational 
acceleration of this body. 


3.18.9 Measurement Reproducibility Om — 
Capability of a machine to measure rolling 
resistance. 


4 MARKINGS 


4.1 All tyres constituting the type of tyre shall be 


IS 18258 : 2023 


marked as prescribed by either IS 15633 or 
IS 15636, as applicable. 


4.2 In particular tyres shall bear following marking: 


a) The manufacturer's name or trade mark; 
b 


wm 


The trade description (see 3.2). However, 
the trade description is not required when it 
coincides with the trade mark; 

c) The tyre size designation; 

d) The inscription ‘REINFORCED’ (or 
alternatively ‘EXTRA LOAD’) if the tyre is 
classified as reinforced; 

e) The inscription ‘TRACTION’ if the tyre is 
classified as traction tyre; 

f) Alpine symbol (3-peak-mountain with 

snowflake conforming to the symbol 

(see F-2) shall be added if the snow tyre is 

classified as snow tyre for use in severe 

snow conditions; and 

The inscription MPT (or alternatively ‘ML’ 

or ‘ET’) and/or ‘POR’ if the tyre is classified 

in the category of use special’. 


Ww 


8 


NOTE — ET means Extra Tread, ML stands for Mining and 
Logging, MPT means Multi-Purpose Truck and POR means 
Professional Off-Road. 


4.3 The approval mark shall be moulded into or onto 
the sidewall of the tyre, shall be clearly legible and 
shall be located in the lower area of the tyre on 
atleast one of the sidewalls. However, in the case of 
tyres identified by the tyre to rim fitment 
configuration symbol ‘A’, the marking may be 
located anywhere on the outside sidewall of the tyre. 


5 CRITERION FOR TYPE APPROVAL/TYPE 
TEST 


5.1 The representative tyres(s) shall meet the 
performance requirements when tested as per 
Annex B with regard to rolling sound emissions, or 
Annex D for adhesion on wet surfaces or Annex E 
for rolling resistance to assess the conformity for the 
type approval of the type of tyre, or Annex F for use 
in severe snow conditions. With regard to the 
application, testing may be confined to (a) 
representative tyre size(s) of the type of tyre based 
on the criteria in 8. 


5.2 Type Approval Procedure 


5.2.1 Application for type approval to be submitted 
by the manufacturer. 


5.2.2 The application for type approval shall contain 
at least the technical information as specified in 
Annex G. 


NOTE — For type approval of tyre belonging to one family 
of tyre, brand of the tyre to be selected for type approval 
shall be left to certifying authority. Worst case selection 
shall be made at the based on the criteria specified in 8. 


IS 18258 : 2023 


5.2.3 Changes in the Technical Specifications 
of Already Type Approved Tyres 


5.2.3.1 Every functional modification in technical 
specification declared in accordance with 5.2.1 shall 
be intimated to the certifying authority. 


5.2.3.2 The certifying authority may then consider, 
whether: 


a) Tyre with modification complies with 
specified requirements; or 


b) Any further verification is required. 


For considering whether any further verification is 
required or not (criteria for extension of type 
approval) specified in 5.2.5 shall be used. 


5.2.3.3 In case of 5.2.3.2 (b), checks for those 
parameters, which are affected by the modifications, 
only need to be carried out. 


5.2.4 In the event of 5.2.3.2 (a) or in the case of 
5.2.3.2 (b) after successful compliance to the 
requirements, a certificate of compliance shall be 
validated for the modified version, as applicable. 


5.2.5 Criteria for Extension of Type Approval 


Incase asize that establishes a new worst case based on 
the criteria in 8 shall be added to the approved 
family/range of tyres, the verification shall be carried 
out for establishing compliance to the requirements 
specified in this standard. 


6 REQUIREMENTS 


6.1 Rolling sound emission limits, as measured by 
the method described in Annex B. 


6.1.1 For class C1 tyres, the rolling sound emission 
value shall not exceed the values pertinent to the 
applicable stage given below. These values refer to 
the nominal section width as given below: 


a) For stage 1 


Nominal section width Limit dB(A) 
145 and lower 72 
Over 145 up to 165 73 
Over 165 up to 185 74 
Over 185 up to 215 75 
Over 215 76 


The above limits given in stage 1 shall be 
increased by 1 dB(A) for extra load tyres or 


reinforced tyres and by2 dB(A) for special use 


tyres. 
b) For stage 2 
Nominal section width Limit dB(A) 
185 and lower 70 
Over 185 up to 245 71 
Over 245 up to 275 72 
Over 275 74 


The above limits given in stage 2 shall be 
increased by 1 dB(A) for snow tyre for use in 
severe snow conditions, extra load tyres or 
reinforced tyres, or any combination of these 
classifications. 


6.1.2 For class C2 tyres, the rolling sound emission 
value with reference to its category of use 
[see 3.1 (d)] shall not exceed the values pertinent 
to the applicable stage given below: 


a) For stage 1 


Category of use Limit dB(A) 
Normal tyre 75 
Snow tyre 77 
Special use tyre 78 
b) For stage 2 
Category of use Limit dB(A) 
Other. Traction Tyres 
Normal tyre 72 73 
Snow tyre 72 73 
Snow tyre for use in 73 75 


severe snow 


Special use tyre 74 75 


6.1.3 For class C3 tyres, the rolling sound emission 
value with reference to its category of use 
[see 3.1(d)] shall not exceed the values pertinent to 
the applicable stage given below: 


a) For stage 1 


Category of use Limit dB(A) 
Normal tyre 76 
Snow tyre 78 
Special use tyre 79 


b) For stage 2 


Category of use Limit dB(A) 


m~~ 


Other _ Traction Tyres 


Normal tyre 73 75 
Snow tyre 73 75 
Snow tyre for use in 74 76 


severe snow 
Special use tyre 75 77 


IS 18258 : 2023 


6.2 The wet grip performance will be based on a 
procedure that compares either peak brakeforce 
coefficient (pbfc) or mean fully developed 
deceleration (mfdd) against values achieved by a 
standard reference test tyre (SRTT). The relative 
performance shall be indicated by a wet grip 
index (G). 


6.2.1 For class C1 tyres, tested in accordance with either procedure given in D-1, the tyre shall meet the following 


requirements: 
Category of Use Wet Grip Index (G) 
Normal tyre > 1.1 
Snow tyre > 1.1 
Snow tyre for use in severe snow conditions and with a speed = 1.0 
symbol (‘R’ and above, including ‘H’) indicating a maximum 
permissible speed greater than 160 km/h 
Snow tyre for use in severe snow conditions and with a speed = 0.9 
symbol (‘Q’ or below excluding ‘H’) indicating a maximum 
permissible speed not greater than 160 km/h 
Special use tyre Not defined 


6.2.2 For class C2 tyres, tested in accordance with either procedure given in D-2, the tyre shall meet the following 


requirements: 


Category of use Wet grip index (G) 
Other Traction Tyres 
Normal tyre = 0.95 = 0.85 
Snow tyre > 0.95 = 0.85 
Snow tyre for use in severe snow = 0.85 = 0.85 
conditions 
Special use tyre > 0.85 = 0.85 


6.2.3 For class C3 tyres, tested in accordance with either procedure given in D-2, the tyre shall meet the following 


requirements: 


Category of use Wet grip index (G) 
Other Traction Tyres 
Normal tyre = 0.80 = 0.65 
Snow tyre = 0.65 = 0.65 
Snow tyre for use in severe snow > 0.65 > 0.65 
conditions 7 n 
Special use tyre > 0.65 = 0.65 


IS 18258 : 2023 


6.3 Rolling Resistance Coefficient Limits, as measured by the method described in Annex E. 


6.3.1 The maximum values for stage 1 for the rolling resistance coefficient shall not exceed the following (value 


in N/KN is equivalent to value in kg/t): 


Tyre class Max value (N/kN) 
Cl 13.5 (for radial tyres < 14 inch) 
12.0 (for radial tyres > 14 inch) 
12.0 (for radial tyres < 14 inch) 
C2 11.5 (for radial tyres > 14 inch) 


13.5 (for bias tyres < 14 inch) 
13.0 (for bias tyres > 14 inch) 
8.5 (for radial tyres) 
10.0 (for bias tyres) 


NOTE — For snow tyre, for use in severe snow conditions, the limit shall be increased by 1 N/KN. 


6.3.2 The maximum values for stage 2 for the rolling resistance coefficient shall not exceed the following (value 


in N/KN is equivalent to value in kg/t): 


Tyre class 


Max value (N/KN) 


12 (for tyres < 14 inch) 

10.5 (for tyres > 14 inch) 

11.0 (for radial tyres < 14 inch) 
10.5 (for radial tyres > 14 inch) 
12.5 (for bias tyres < 14 inch) 
12.0 (for bias tyres > 14 inch) 
7.0 (for radial tyres) 

9.5 (for bias tyres) 


NOTE — For snow tyre, for use in severe snow conditions, the limit shall be increased by 1 N/KN. 


6.3.3 The maximum values for stage 3 for the rolling resistance coefficient shall not exceed the following (value 


in N/KN is equivalent to value in kg/t): 


Tyre class Max value (N/KN) 
Cl 10.5 
11.0 (for radial tyres < 14 inch) 
C2 10.5 (for radial tyres > 14 inch) 


c3 } 


12.5 (for bias tyres < 14 inch) 
12.0 (for bias tyres > 14 inch) 
7.0 (for radial tyres) 

9.5 (for bias tyres) 


NOTE — For snow tyre, for use in severe snow conditions, the limit shall be increased by 1 N/KN. 


6.4 In order to be classified as a snow tyre, for use 
in severe snow conditions, the tyre shall meet the 
performance requirements of 6.4.1. The tyre shall 
meet these requirements based on a test method of 


Annex F by which: 


a) The mean fully developed deceleration 


(mfdd) in a braking test; or 


b) Alternatively, an average traction force in a 
traction test; or 

c) Alternatively, the average acceleration in an 
acceleration test of the candidate tyre is 
compared to that of a standard reference tyre. 


The relative performance shall be indicated by a 
snow index. 


6.4.1 Tyre Snow Performance Requirements 


6.4.1.1 Classes C1, C2 and C3 tyres 


IS 18258 : 2023 


The minimum snow index value, as calculated in the procedure described in Annex F and compared with the SRTT 


shall be as follows: 


Class of Snow grip index 
tyre (brake on snow method) ® 


Ref =C1—SRTT 14 Ref =C2-—SRTT1I6C Ref= C1- SRTT 14 


Snow grip index 
(spin traction method)” 


Snow grip index 
(acceleration method) 


Ref = C3N-SRTT19.5 
Ref = C3W — SRTT 22.5 


Cl 1.07 No 
C2 No 1.02 
C3 No No 


1.10 No 
1.10 No 
No 1.25 


NOTE — For subscripts a, b and c (see Annex F). 


6.5 In order to be classified as a traction tyre, a tyre 
is required to meet at least one of the following 
conditions: 


The tyre shall have a tread pattern with minimum 
two circumferential ribs, each containing a 
minimum of 30 block-like elements, separated by 
grooves and/or sipe elements the depth of which has 
to be minimum of one half of the tread depth. The 
use of an alternative option of a physical test will 
only apply at a later stage following a further 
amendment to the standard including a reference to 
an appropriate test methods and limit values. 


6.6 In order to be classified as a special use tyre a tyre 
shall have a block tread pattern in which the blocks 
are larger and more widely spaced than for normal 
tyres and have the following characteristics: 


a) For Cl tyres: a tread depth > 11 mm and void 
to fill ratio > 35 percent; 


b) For C2 tyres: a tread depth > 11 mm and void 
to fill ratio > 35 percent; and 


c) For C3 tyres: a tread depth > 16 mm and void 
to fill ratio > 35 percent. 


6.7 In order to be classified as a professional 
off-road tyre, a tyre shall have all of the following 
characteristics: 


a) For C1 and C2 tyres: 


1) A tread depth > 11 mm; 
2) A void-to-fill ratio > 35 percent; and 
3) A maximum speed rating of < Q. 


b) For C3 tyres: 
1) A tread depth > 16 mm; 


2) A void-to-fill ratio > 35 percent; and 


3) A maximum speed rating of < K. 
7 CONFORMITY OF PRODUCTION 


7.1 Periodic testing and approval based on a random 
sample of tyres from the series production of each 
type of tyre as per the approved family of tyres shall 
be carried out. The approval marking shall be made 
only on the tyres of that approved family and the 
same shall not get extended to other families of tyres, 
unless tyres from out of that have undergone the 
same testing and type approval for that family of 
tyre. 


7.2 The tyres approved under this standard shall be 
so manufactured as to conform to requirements set 
forth in Annex B with regard to rolling sound 
emissions, or Annex D for adhesion on wet surfaces 
or Annex E for rolling resistance or Annex F for use 
in severe snow conditions. 


7.3 The production and quality assurance system 
shall meet all the requirements laid out by the 
certifying authority. 


7.4 Production shall be deemed to conform to the 
requirements of this standard if the levels measured 
comply with the limits prescribed in 6.1 with an 
additional allowance of + 1 dB(A) for possible mass 
production variations. 


7.5 Production shall be deemed to conform to the 
requirements of this standard if the levels measured 
comply with the limits prescribed in 6.3, with an 
additional allowance of + 0.3 N/KN for possible mass 
production variations. 


IS 18258 : 2023 


8 WORST CASE CRITERIA (WCC) 
8.1 General Conditions 


Worst case reference is allowed for tyres of the same 
tyre range. Within the tyre range the following type 
essentials must be identical if WC-reference is 
applied: 


a) Manufacturer; 
b) Category of use; and 
c) Structure. 


8.2 WCC for Rolling Sound Emission 


8.2.1 Select the largest nominal section width. In 
case of tyres with same nominal section width select 
the lowest aspect ratio. In case of tyres with same 
nominal section width and aspect ratio select the 
largest rim diameter. 


8.3 WCC for Wet Grip 


8.3.1 Among tyres with the same tread pattern, tyres 
with the smallest nominal width, the highest nominal 
aspect ratio and smallest rim diameter give the worst 
wet grip performances. 


8.3.2 Any tyre size that meets ten percent or more 
above the minimum required wet grip value can 
represent the whole tyre size range of the tread 
pattern type. 


If the tested tyre meets the minimum required value 
but not the full extra ten percent or more above the 
required value, extra tests must be performed with 
two contrary WC-tyres. 


8.3.2.1 The tyre with the following characteristics 


Select the smallest nominal section width. In case of 
tyres with same nominal section width, select the 
highest aspect ratio. In case of tyres with same 
nominal section width and aspect ratio, select the 
smallest rim diameter. 


8.3.2.2 The tyre with the characteristics 


Select the largest nominal section width. In case of 
tyres with the same nominal section width, select the 
smallest aspect ratio. In case of tyres with the same 
nominal section width and aspect ratio, select the 
largest rim diameter. 


8.3.3 The tyre size list of tyres not meeting the extra 
10 percent is determined by the two most contrary 
WC-tyres (8.3.2.1 and 8.3.2.2), which meet the 
minimum wet grip requirement. 


If one or both WC-tyres (8.3.2.1 and 8.3.2.2), do not 
meet the minimum wet grip requirement, the next 
WC tyre(s) in line must be selected until the tyre is 


(are) rated that meet the minimum wet grip 
requirement. 


8.4 WCC for Rolling Resistance 
8.4.1 The Standard Tyre with the Lowest Load Index 


Standard tyres prove worse rolling resistance 
coefficient results versus reinforced tyres. Select the 
standard tyre in the case of tyres with the same load 
index but differing in standard and reinforced 
indication. 


Run flat tyres prove worse rolling resistance 
coefficient results versus standard tyres. Select the 
Run flat version in case of tyres with the same load 
index in both standard as in run flat version. 


If another tyre is tested other than the worst case 
tyre, a relativized limit value must be calculated and 
met. To verify if a lower load index (LI-lowest) 
meets the requirements of the standard, the limit 
value for the tested tyre (LI-candidate) is calculated 
by the formula: 


Calculated limit value = (RRC-limit value 
R117 - 0.3" N/KN) — 0.06* x (LI-candidate — 
LI-lowest) 


The tyres with a lower load index can be added to 
the tyre size list if the RRC value of the tested 
candidate tyre is equal or less than the calculated 
limit value: 


a) The calculation must be presented in the 
information document or test report of the 
application package; and 

b) Verification calculation. 

To beable to make a verification calculation on 
the rolling resistance coefficient the following 
information must be presented in the rolling 
resistance test report: 


Force method: 


Linskim : applied skim load (see E-1.4.6.1) 


Tiskim : distance from tyre axis to test drum 
outer surface at skim load 
Fiskim : Spindle Force at skim load 


F-test load : Spindle Force at test load 


Torque method: 


: applied skim load (see E-1.4.6.1) 


: Torque at skim load 


Lin-skim 
Tiskim 
Tetest load : Torque at test load 


* the limit value of the standard will be increased by a safety margin of 0.3 N/KN. 


# 


8 


the slope of rolling resistance coefficient versus load index is fixed on 0.06. 


8.5 Snow Tyres 
8.5.1 For Cl and C2 Category Tyres 


Select the tyre with the largest nominal section 
width. 


Any tyre size that meets the required value of the 
standard and the extra safety margin (or more) can 
represent the whole tyre size range. 


If the additional safety margin value is not met, extra 
tests with the defined WC-tyre must be preformed. 
If the minimum required value of the standard is 
met by the WC-tyre, the tyre range can be 
represented by this tyre. 


IS 18258 : 2023 


8.5.2 For C3 Category Tyres 


Select the tyre with the smallest nominal section 
width. 


Any tyre size that meets the required value of the 
standard and the extra safety margin (or more), then 
it can represent the tyre range. 


If the additional safety margin value is not met, extra 
tests with the defined WC-tyre must be preformed. If 
the minimum required value of the standard is met, 
the tyre range can be represented by this tyre. 


IS 18258 : 2023 


IS No./Other 
Standards 


IS 15636 : 2022 


ISO 4000-1 : 2010 


ISO 4209-1 : 2001 


ISO 8855 : 2011 


ISO 10534-1 : 1996 


ISO 10534-2 : 1998 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 2) 
LIST OF REFERRED STANDARDS 


Title 


Automotive vehicles — 
Pneumatic tyres for 
commercial vehicles — 
Diagonal and radial ply 


Passenger car tyres and 
rims — Part 1: Tyres 
(metric series) 


Truck and bus tyres and 
rims (metric series) — 


Part 1: Tyres 


Road vehicles — Vehicle 


dynamics and road- 
holding ability — 
Vocabulary 

Acoustics — 


Determination of sound 
absorption coefficient and 
impedance in impedance 
tubes — Part 1: Method 
using standing ratio 


Acoustics — 
Determination of sound 
absorption coefficient and 
impedance in impedance 
tubes — Part 2: Transfer- 
function method 


IS No./Other 
Standards 


ISO 10844 : 2014 


ASTM E 303-93 
(Reapproved 2008) 


ASTM E 501-08 


ASTM E 965-96 
(Reapproved 2006) 


ASTM E 1136-93 


ASTM E 1136-93 


(Reapproved 2003) 


ASTM F 2493-08 


Title 


Acoustics — Specification 
of test track for measuring 
noise emitted by road 
vehicles and their tyres 


Standard test method for 
measuring surface 
frictional properties using 
the british pendulum tester 


Standard specification for 
standard rib tire for 
pavement skid-resistance 
tests 


Standard test method for 
measuring pavement 
macrotexture depth using a 
volumetric technique 


Standard specification for 
a radial standard reference 
test tyre 


Standard specification for 
a radial standard reference 
test tire P195/75r14 


Standard specification for 
a radial standard reference 
test tire P225/60r16 


IS 18258 : 2023 


ANNEX B 
(Clauses 3.5, 6, 7.2 and C-3.1) 


COAST-BY TEST METHOD FOR MEASURING TYRE-ROLLING SOUND EMISSION 


B-1 INTRODUCTION 


The presented method contains specifications on 
measuring instruments, measurement conditions 
and the measurement method, in order to obtain the 
sound level of a set of tyres mounted on a test vehicle 
rolling on a specified road surface. 


The maximum sound pressure level is to be 
recorded, when the test vehicle is coasting, by 
remote-field microphones, the final result for a 
reference speed is obtained from a linear regression 
analysis. Such test results cannot be related to tyre 
rolling sound measured during acceleration under 
power or deceleration under braking. 


B-2 MEASURING INSTRUMENTS 
B-2.1 Acoustic Measurements 


The sound level meter or the equivalent measuring 
system, including the windscreen recommended by 
the manufacturer shall meet or exceed the 
requirements of Type 1 instruments in accordance 
with IEC 60651 1979/A1 1993. The 
measurements shall be made using the frequency 
weighting A, and the time weighting F. 


When using a system that includes a periodic 
monitoring of the A-weighted sound level, a reading 
should be made at a time interval not greater than 
30 ms. 


B-2.1.1 Calibration 


At the beginning and at the end of every 
measurement session, the entire measurement 
system shall be checked by means of a sound 
calibrator that fulfils the requirements for sound 
calibrators of at least precision class 1 according to 
IEC 60942. Without any further adjustment the 
difference between the readings of two consecutive 
checks shall be less than or equal to 0.5 dB(A). If 
this value is exceeded, the results of the 
measurements obtained after the previous 
satisfactory check shall be discarded. 


B-2.1.2 Compliance with Requirements 


The compliance of the sound calibration device with 
the requirements of IEC 60942 shall be verified once 
a year and the compliance of the instrumentation 
system with the requirements of 
IEC 60651 : 1979/A1 : 1993, second edition shall be 


verified at least every two years, by a laboratory 
which is authorized to perform calibrations traceable 
to the appropriate standards. 


B-2.1.3 Positioning of the Microphone 


The microphone (or microphones) shall be located at 
a distance of (7.5 + 0.05) m from track reference line 
CC' (Fig. 1) and (1.2 + 0.02) m above the ground. Its 
axis of maximum sensitivity shall be horizontal and 
perpendicular to the path of the vehicle (line CC’). 


B-2.2 Speed Measurements 


The vehicle speed shall be measured with 
instruments with accuracy of + 1 km/h or better when 
the front end of the vehicle has reached line PP’ 
(Fig. 1). 


B-2.3 Temperature Measurements 


Measurements of air as well as test surface 
temperature are mandatory. The temperature 
measuring devices shall be accurate within + 1 °C. 


B-2.3.1 Air Temperature 


The temperature sensor is to be positioned in an 
unobstructed location close to the microphone in 
such a way that it is exposed to the airflow and 
protected from direct solar radiation. The latter may 
be achieved by any shading screen or similar device. 
The sensor should be positioned at a height of 
(1.2 + 0.1) m above the test surface level, to 
minimize the influence of the test surface thermal 
radiation at low airflows. 


B-2.3.2 Test Surface Temperature 


The temperature sensor is to be positioned in a 
location where the temperature measured is 
representative of the temperature in the wheel 
tracks, without interfering with the sound 
measurement. 


If an instrument with a contact temperature sensor is 
used, heat-conductive paste shall be applied between 
the surface and the sensor to ensure adequate 
thermal contact. 


If a radiation thermometer (pyrometer) is used, the 
height should be chosen to ensure that a measuring 
spot with a diameter of > 0.1 m is covered. 


IS 18258 : 2023 


B-2.4 Wind Measurement 


The device shall be capable of measuring the wind 
speed with a tolerance of + 1 m/s. The wind shall be 
measured at microphone height. The wind direction 
with reference to the driving direction shall be 
recorded. 


B-3 CONDITIONS OF MEASUREMENT 
B-3.1 Test Site 


The test site shall consist of a central section 
surrounded by a substantially flat test area. The 
measuring section shall be level. The test surface 
shall be dry and clean for all measurements. The test 
surface shall not be artificially cooled during or prior 
the testing. 


The test track shall be such that the conditions of a 
free sound field between the sound source and the 
microphone are attained to within 1 dB(A). These 
conditions shall be deemed to be met if there is no 
large sound reflecting objects, such as fences, rocks, 
bridges or building within 50 m of the centre of the 
measuring section. The surface of the test track and 
the dimensions of the test site shall be in accordance 
with ISO 10844. 


A central part of at least 10 m radius shall be free of 
powdery snow, tall grass, looses oil, cinders or the 
like. There shall be no obstacle, which could affect 
the sound field within the vicinity of the microphone 
and no persons shall stand between the microphone 
and the sound source. The operator carrying out the 
measurements and any observers attending the 
measurements shall position themselves so as not to 
affect the readings of the measuring instruments. 


B-3.2 Meteorological conditions 


Measurements shall not be made under poor 
atmospheric conditions. It shall be ensured that the 
results are not affected by gusts of wind. Testing 
shall not be performed if the wind speed at the 
microphone height exceeds 5 m/s. Measurements 
shall not be made if the air temperature is below 
5 °C or above 40 °C or the test surface temperature 
is below 5 °C or above 50 °C. 


B-3.3 Ambient Noise 


B-3.3.1 The background sound level (including any 
wind noise) shall be at least 10 dB(A) less than the 
measured tyre rolling sound emission. A suitable 
windscreen may be fitted to the microphone 
provided that account is taken of its effect on the 
sensitivity and directional characteristics of the 
microphone. 


B-3.3.2 Any measurement affected by a sound peak 
which appears to be unrelated to the characteristics 
of the general sound level of tyres, shall be ignored. 


B-3.4 Test Vehicle Requirements 
B-3.4.1 General 


The test vehicle shall be a motor vehicle and be fitted 
with four single tyres on just two axles. 


B-3.4.2 Vehicle Load 


The vehicle shall be loaded such as to comply with 
the test tyre loads as specified in B-3.5.2. 


B-3.4.3 Wheelbase 


The wheelbase between the two axles fitted with the 
test tyres shall, for class C1 be less than 3.50 m and 
for class C2 and class C3 tyres be less than 5 m. 


B-3.4.4 Measures to minimize vehicle influence on 
sound level measurements. 


To ensure that tyre rolling sound is not significantly 
affected by the test vehicle design the following 
requirements and recommendations are given. 


B-3.4.4.1 Requirements: 


a) Spray suppression flaps or other extra device 
to suppress spray shall not be fitted; 


b) Addition or retention of elements in the 
immediate vicinity of the rims and tyres, 
which may screen the emitted sound, is not 


permitted; 


ma 


c 


wa 


Wheel alignment (toe in, camber and caster) 
shall be in full accordance with the vehicle 
manufacturer's recommendations; 


d 


wm 


Additional sound absorbing material may 
not be mounted in the wheel housings or 
under the underbody; and 


e) Suspension shall be in such a condition that 
it does not result in an abnormal reduction in 
ground clearance when the vehicle is loaded 
in accordance with the testing requirement. 
If available, body level standard systems 
shall be adjusted to give a ground clearance 
during testing which is normal for unladen 
condition. 


B-3.4.4.2 Recommendations to avoid parasitic noise: 


a) Removal or modification on the vehicle that 
may contribute to the background noise of 
the vehicle is recommended. Any removals 
or modifications shall be recorded in the test 
report; 


b) During testing it should be ascertained that 
brakes are not poorlyreleased, causing brake 
noise; 

c) It should be ascertained that electric cooling 
fans are not operating; and 


d) Windows and sliding roof of the vehicle 
shall be closed during testing. 


B-3.5 Tyres 
B-3.5.1 General 


Four identical tyres shall be fitted on the test vehicle. 
In the case of tyres with a load capacity index in 
excess of 121 and without any dual fitting 
indication, two of these tyres of the same type and 
range shall be fitted to the rear axle of the test 
vehicle. The front axle shall be fitted with tyres of 
size suitable for the axle load and planed down to the 
minimum depth in order to minimize the influence 
of tyre/road contact noise while maintaining a 
sufficient level of safety. Winter tyres that may be 
equipped with studs intended to enhance friction 
shall be tested without this equipment. Tyres with 
special fitting requirements shall be tested in 
accordance with these requirements (for example, 
rotation direction). The tyres shall have full tread 
depth before being run-in. 


Tyres are to be tested on rims permitted by the tyre 
manufacturer 


B-3.5.2 Tyre Loads 


B-3.5.2.1 The test load Q, for each tyre on the test 
vehicle shall be 50 percent to 90 percent of the 
reference load Q,, but the average test load Qt ave of 
all tyres shall be (75 + 5) percent of the reference 
load Q.. 


B-3.5.2.2 For all tyres, the reference load Q, 
corresponds to the maximum mass associated with 
the load capacity index of the tyre. In the case where 
the load capacity index is constituted by two numbers 
divided by slash (/), reference shall be made to the 
first number. 


B-3.5.3 Tyre Inflation Pressure 
Each tyre fitted on the test vehicle shall have a test 


pressure P, not higher than the reference pressure P, 
and within the following interval: 


PiX S < P,< 1.1P, x e 


For class C2 and class C3 the reference pressure P, 
is the pressure corresponding to the pressure in kPa 
or to the pressure index marked on the sidewall. 


IS 18258 : 2023 


For class C1 the reference pressure P, is 250 kPa 
for standard tyres and 290 kPa for reinforced or 
extra load tyres. The minimum test pressure shall be 
P, = 150 kPa. 


B-3.5.4 Preparations Prior to Testing 


The tyres shall be run-in prior to testing to remove 
compound nodules or other tyre pattern 
characteristics resulting from the moulding process. 
This will normally require the equivalent of about 
100 km of normal use on the road. 


The tyres fitted to the test vehicle shall rotate in the 
same direction as when they were run-in. Prior to 
testing tyres shall be warmed up by running under 
test conditions. 


B-4 METHOD OF TESTING 
B-4.1 General Conditions 


For all measurements the vehicle shall be driven in a 
straight line over the measuring section (AA' to BB’) 
in such a way that the median longitudinal plane of 
the vehicle is as close as possible to the line CC'. 


When the front end of the test vehicle has reached 
the line AA' the vehicle driver shall have put the gear 
selector on neutral position and switched off the 
engine. If abnormal noise (for example, ventilator, 
self-ignition) is emitted by the test vehicle during the 
measurement, the test shall be disregarded. 


B-4.2 Nature and Number of Measurements 


The maximum sound level expressed in A-weighted 
decibels [dB(A)] shall be measured to the first 
decimal place as the vehicle is coasting between 
lines AA' and BB' (Fig.1 front end of the vehicle on 
line AA', rear end of the vehicle online BB'). This 
value will constitute the result of the measurement. 


At least four measurements shall be made on each 
side of the test vehicle at test speeds lower than the 
reference speed specified in B-5.1 and at least four 
measurements at test speeds higher than the 
reference speed. The speeds shall be approximately 
equally spaced over the speed range specified in 
B-4.3. 


B-4.3 Test Speed Range 
The test vehicle speeds shall be within the following 


range: 


a) From 70 km/h to 90 km/h for class C1 and 
class C2 tyres; and 


b) From 60 km/h to 80 km/h for class C3 tyres. 


IS 18258 : 2023 


B-5 INTERPRETATION OF RESULTS 


The measurement shall be invalid if an abnormal 
discrepancy between the values is recorded 
(see B-3.3.2). 

B-5.1 Determination of Test Result 

Reference speed Vef used to determine the final 


result will be: 


a) 80 km/h for class C1 and class C2 tyres; and 
b) 70 km/h for class C3 tyres. 


B-5.2 Regression Analysis of Rolling Sound 
Measurements 


The tyre-road rolling sound level Lr in dB(A) is 
determined by a regressionanalysis according to: 


where 


L is the mean value of the rolling sound levels 
Li, measured in db(A): 


L=- dita Li 
n is the measurement number (n > 16); 


vp is the mean value of logarithms of speeds 
Vi: 


AA ed n 
v= —_, vj with v; = 
n vi 


a is the slope of the regression line in dB(A): 


a Èi- 0i — 7C- L) 
Èi- 0i T) 


B-5.3 Temperature Correction 


For class C1 and class C2 tyres, the final result shall 
be normalized to a test surface reference temperature 
Oref by applying a temperature correction, 


according to the following: 
Lr(Oref) = Lr (O) + K(Ger - 0) 
where 
O is the measured test surface temperature and 


Gref is 20 °C. 


Coefficient K for 3:3 db(A)/°C, when 0 > 
class C1 tyres ref, and 
70.06 dB(A)/°C when 9 < 


ref 


Coefficient K for 
class C2 tyres 


-0.02 dB(A)/°C 


NOTE — If the measured test surface temperature does not 
change more than 5 °C within all measurements, necessary 
for the determination of the sound level of one set of tyres, 
the temperature correction may be made only on the final 
reported tyre rolling sound level as indicated above, 
utilizing the arithmetic mean value of the measured 
temperatures. Otherwise, each measured sound level L; shall 
be corrected, utilizing the temperature at the time of the 
sound recording. 


There will be no temperature correction for class C3 
tyres. 


B-5.4 In order to take account of any measuring 
instrument inaccuracies, the results according to 
B-5.3 shall be reduced by 1 dB(A). 


B-5.5 The final result, the temperature corrected tyre 


rolling sound level Lr( Oref) in dB(A), shall be 
rounded down to the nearest lower whole value. 


B 


10m 


7.5m 


-X~ PDA 


IS 18258 : 


B’ 


> ©-P”’ 


microphone 


10m 


microphone 


Fic. 1 MICROPHONE POSITIONS FOR THE MEASUREMENT 


B-6 TEST REPORT 


Part 1 - 


a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 


e) 
f) 
2) 


Report 

Test Agency; 

Name and address of applicant; 
Test report no.; 


Manufacturer and brand name or trade 
description; 


Tyre class (C1, C2 or C3); 
Category of use; 


Sound level as per B-4.4 and B-4.5 at 
reference speed of (70/80)* km/h , dB(A); 


Comments (if any); 
Date; and 


Signature. 


Part - 2 Test Data 


a) Date of test; 


b) Test vehicle (Make, 
modifications, etc); 


model, 


1) Test vehicle wheelbase (mm) 
c) Location of test track: 


1) Date of track certification to 
10844 
2) Issued by 


3) Method of certification 
d) Tyre test details: 

1) Tyre size designation 

2) Tyre service description 


3) Reference inflation pressure, kPa 
4) Test data: 


2023 


year, 


ISO 


Front left 


Front right 


Rear left Rear right 


Test mass (kg) 


Tyre load index (%) 


Inflation pressure (cold) (kPa) 


5) Test rim width code: 


6) Temperature measurement sensor type: 


IS 18258 : 2023 


e) Valid test results: 


Run No.| Test | Direction | Sound level|Sound level| Air | Track | Sound level left* | Sound level right“ 
speed | of run left? right“ temp. | temp. | temp. corrected | temp. corrected 
km/h measured | measured | °C °C dB(A) dB(A) Comments 

dB(A) dB(A) 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 


a) Regression line slope 


b) Sound level after temperature correction according to B-5.3, dB(A) 


* strike out what does not apply 
# indicates relative to the vehicle. 


IS 18258 : 2023 


ANNEX C 
(Clause B-3.1) 


SPECIFICATIONS FOR THE TEST SITE 


C-1 INTRODUCTION 


It describes the specifications relating to the physical 
characteristics and the laying of the test track. These 
specifications based on a special standard describe 
the required physical characteristics as well as the 
test methods for these characteristics. 


C-2 REQUIRED CHARACTERISTICS OF 
THE SURFACE 


A surface is considered to conform to this standard 
provided that the texture and voids content or sound 
absorption coefficient have been measured and 
found to fulfil all the requirements of C-2.1 to C-2.4 
and provided that the design requirements of C-3.2 
have been met. 


C-2.1 Residual Voids Content 


The residual voids content (VC) of the test track 
paving mixture shall not exceed 8 percent. For the 
measurement procedure (see C-4.1). 


C-2.2 Sound Absorption Coefficient 


If the surface fails to comply with the residual voids 
content requirement, the surface is acceptable only 
if its sound absorption coefficient a < 0.10. For the 
measurement procedure, see C-4.2. The 
requirements of C-2.1 are met also if only sound 
absorption has been measured and found to be 
a<0.10. 


NOTE — Although the residual voids content is more 
familiar among road constructors, the most relevant 
characteristic is the sound absorption, However, sound 
absorption needs to be measured only if the surface fails to 
comply with the voids requirement. This is motivated 
because the latter is connected with relatively large 
uncertainties in terms of both measurements and relevance 
and some surfaces therefore erroneously may be rejected 
when based only on the voids measurement. 


C-2.3 Texture Depth 


The texture depth (TD) measured according to the 
volumetric method (see C-4.3) shall be as follows: 


TD = 0.4 mm 
C-2.4 Homogeneity of the Surface 
Every practical effort shall be taken to ensure that 
the surface is made to be as homogeneous as 


possible within the test area. This includes the 
texture and voids content, but it should also be 


17 


observed that if the rolling process results in more 
effective rolling at some places than others, the 
texture may be different and unevenness causing 
bumps may also occur. 


C-2.5 Period of Testing 


In order to check whether the surface continues to 
conform to the texture and voids content or sound 
absorption requirements stipulated in this standard, 
periodic testing of the surface shall be done at the 
following intervals: 


a) For residual voids content (VC) or sound 
absorption 


(a) When the surface is new: 


If the surface meets the requirements, when 
new, no further periodical testing is required. If 
it does not meet the requirement, when it is new, 
it may do so later because surfaces tend to 
become clogged and compacted with time. 


b) For texture depth (TD): 
(a) When the surface is new: 


When the noise testing starts: Then every twelve 
months (not before four weeks after laying). 


C-3 TEST SURFACE DESIGN 
C-3.1 Area 


When designing the test track layout, it is important 
to ensure that as a minimum requirement, the area 
traversed by the vehicles running through the test 
strip is covered with the specified test material with 
suitable margins for safe and practical driving. This 
will require that the width of the track is at least 3 m 
and the length of the track extends beyond lines AA 
and BB by at least 10 m at either end. Fig. 2 shows 
a plan of a suitable test site and indicates the 
minimum area which shall be machine laid and 
machine compacted with the specified test surface 
material. According to C-4.2, measurements have to 
be made on each side of the vehicle. This can be 
made either by measuring with two microphone 
locations (one on each side of the track) and driving 
in one direction, or measuring with a microphone 
only on one side of the track but driving the vehicle 
in two directions. If the latter method is used, then 
there are no surface requirements on that side of the 
track where there is no microphone. 


IS 18258 : 2023 


/ Centreline of travel A 


Dimensions in metres 


B a 


\ A 


Key C] Minimum area covered with test road surface, i. ¢. test area 


(*] Microphone (height 1,2 m) 


FIG. 2 MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS FOR TEST SURFACE AREA 


(The shaded part is called test area) 


NOTE — There shall be no large acoustically reflective objects within this radius. 


C-3.2 Design and Preparation of the Surface 
C-3.2.1 Basic Design Requirements 


The test surface shall meet following design 
requirements: 


C-3.2.1.1 It shall be a dense asphaltic concrete. 


C-3.2.1.2 The maximum chipping size shall be 8 mm 
(tolerances allow from 6.3 mm to 10 mm). 


C-3.2.1.3 The thickness of the wearing course shall 
be > 30 mm. 


C-3.2.1.4 The binder shall be a straight penetration 
grade bitumen without modification. 


18 


C-3.2.2 Design Guidelines 


As a guide to the surface constructor, an aggregate 
grading curve which will give desired characteristics 
is shown in Fig. 3 In addition, Table 1 gives some 
guidelines in order to obtain the desired texture and 
durability. The grading curve fits the following 
formula: 


P (% passing) =- = 100 


Max 

where 
d = square mesh sieve size , in mm; 
dmax for the mean curve =8 mm; 


dmax for the lower tolerance = 10mm; and 


curve 


dmax for the upper tolerance =6.3 mm 


curve 


IS 18258 : 2023 


TITT TTT 


TTTTTTTTT 


SAAI ITTY YT 


ae RMR DR 


Tri 


PUTT TTT tr 


TTTTTTTT 
TIT TTT 
Tri TTT TTT TTT 


TIT TTT TTT 


Per cent passing (by mass) 


TITT TTT 


ULLAS RARAS TTT 


di parir titipirii tiep 


iui tifirir dittjirgi http tit stii 


RASA RAAL LALALE RALAS ALARA RARI 


4 56 8 1,2 1620 25 32 


Sieve size in mm 


FIG. 3 GRADING CURVE OF THE AGGREGATE IN THE ASPHALTIC MIX WITH TOLERANCES 


In addition to the above, the following 
recommendations are given: 


a) The sand fraction (0.063 mm < square mesh 
sieve size < 2 mm) shall include no more than 
55 percent natural sand and at least 45 percent 
crushed sand; 

b) The base and sub-base shall ensure a good 
stability and evenness, according to best road 
construction practice; 

c) The chippings shall be crushed (100 percent 
crushed faces) and of a material with a high 
resistance to crushing; 

d) The chippings used in the mix shall be washed; 


e) No extra chippings shall be added onto the 
surface; 


f) The binder hardness expressed as PEN value 


8 


wa 


shall be 40 to 60, 60 to 80 or even 80 to 100 
depending on the climatic conditions of the 
country. The rule is that as hard a binder as 
possible shall be used, provided this is 
consistent with common practice; and 


The temperature of the mix before rolling shall 
be chosen so as to achieve by subsequent 
rolling the required voids content. In order to 
increase the probability of satisfying the 
specifications of C-2.1 to C-2.4, the 
compactness shall be studied not only by an 
appropriate choice of mixing temperature, but 
also by an appropriate number of passings and 
by the choice of compacting vehicle. 


IS 18258 : 2023 


Table 1 Design Guidelines 
(Clause C-3.2.2) 


SI No. pang! Valties Tolerance 
By pa mass of By mass of the 
mix aggregate 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) Mass of stones, square mesh sieve 47.6 % 50.5 % +5 
(SM) > 2 mm 
ii) Mass of sand 0.063 < SM < 2 mm 38.0 % 40.2 % 
ili) Mass of filler SM < 0.063 mm 8.8 % 9.3 % +5 
iv) Mass of binder (bitumen) 5.8 % NA +0.5 
v) Max chipping size 8 mm 6.3 mm - 10 mm 
vi) Binder hardness [see C-3.2.2 (f)] 
vii) Polished stone value (PSV) >50 
viii) Compactness, relative to Marshall 98 % 


Compactness 


C-4 TEST METHOD 


C-4.1 Measurement of the Residual Voids 
Content 


For the purpose of this measurement, cores have to 
be taken from the track in at least four different 
positions, which are equally distributed in the test 
area between lines AA and BB (see Fig. 2). In order 
to avoid inhomogeneity and unevenness in the wheel 
tracks, cores should not be taken in wheel tracks 
themselves, but close to them. Two cores (minimum) 
should be taken close to the wheel tracks and one core 
(minimum) should be taken approximately midway 
between the wheel tracks and each microphone 
location. 


If there is a suspicion that the condition of 
homogeneity is not met (see C-2.4), cores shall be 
taken from more locations within the test area. 


The residual voids content has to be determined for 
each core, then the average value from all cores shall 
be calculated and compared with the requirement of 
C-2.1. In addition, no single core shall have a voids 
value, which is higher than 10 percent. 


The test surface constructor is reminded of the 
problem, which may arise when the test area is 
heated by pipes or electrical wires and cores shall be 
taken from this area. Such installations shall be 
carefully planned with respect to future core drilling 
locations. Itis recommended to leave a few locations 
of size approximately 200 mm x 300 mm where 
there are no wires/pipes or where the latter are 
located deep enough in order not to be damaged by 
cores taken from the surface layer. 


20 


C-4.2 Sound Absorption Coefficient 


The sound absorption coefficient (normal incidence) 
shall be measured by the impedance tube method 
using the procedure specified in ISO 10534-1 or 
ISO 10534-2. 


Regarding test specimens, the same requirements 
shall be followed as regarding the residual voids 
content (see C-4.1). The sound absorption shall be 
measured in the range between 400 Hz and 800 Hz 
and in the range between 800 Hz and 1 600 Hz (at 
least at the centre frequencies of third octave bands) 
and the maximum values shall be identified for both 
of these frequency ranges. Then these values, for all 
test cores, shall be averaged to constitute the final 
result. 


C-4.3 Volumetric Macro-Texture Measurement 


For the purpose of this standard, texture depth 
measurements shall be made on at least 10 positions 
evenly spaced along the wheel tracks of the test strip 
and the average value taken to compare with the 
specified minimum texture depth, see ISO 10844 for 
description of the procedure. 


C-5 STABILITY IN TIME AND MAINTENANCE 
C-5.1 Age Influence 


Incommon with any other surfaces, it is expected that 
the tyre rolling sound level measured on the test 
surface may increase slightly during the first 
6 months to 12 months after construction. 


The surface will achieve its required characteristics 
not earlier than four weeks after construction. The 


influence of age on the noise from trucks is generally 
less than that from cars. 


The stability over time is determined mainly by the 
polishing and compaction by vehicles driving on the 
surface. It shall be periodically checked as stated in 
C-2.5. 


C-5.2 Maintenance of the Surface 


Loose debris or dust, which could significantly 
reduce the effective texture depth shall be removed 
from the surface. In countries with winter climates, 
salt is sometimes used for de-icing. Salt may alter 
the surface temporarily or even permanently in such 
a way as to increase noise and is therefore not 
recommended. 


C-5.3 Repaving the Test Area 


If it is necessary to repave the test track, it is usually 
unnecessary to repave more than the test strip (of 3 m 
width in Fig. 2) where vehicles are driving, provided 
the test area outside the strip met the requirement of 
residual voids content or sound absorption when it 
was measured. 


C-6 DOCUMENTATION OF THE TEST 
SURFACE AND OF TESTS PERFORMED ON 
IT 


C-6.1 Documentation of the Test Surface 


The following data shall be given in a document 
describing the test surface: 


a) The location of the test track; 


b) Type of binder, binder hardness, type of 
aggregate, maximum theoretical density of the 
concrete (DR), thickness of the wearing course 
and grading curve determined from cores from 
the test track; 


21 


IS 18258 : 2023 


c) Method of compaction (for example, type of 
roller, roller mass, number of passes); 


d) Temperature of the mix, temperature of the 
ambient air and wind speed during laying of 
the surface; 


e) Date when the surface was laid and contractor; 


f) All or at least the latest test result, including: 


1) The residual voids content of each core; 


2) The locations in the test area from where 
the cores for voids measurements have 
been taken; 


3) The sound absorption coefficient of 
each core (if measured), Specify the 
results both for each core and each 
frequency range as well as the overall 
average; 

4) The locations in the test area from where 
the cores for absorption measurement 
have been taken; 


5) Texture depth, including the number of 
tests and standard deviation; 


6) The institution responsible for tests 
according to C-6.1.6.1 and C-6.1.6.2 
and the type of equipment used; and 


7) Date of the test(s) and date when the 
cores were taken from the test track. 


C-6.2 Documentation of Vehicle Noise Tests 
Conducted on the Surface 


In the document describing the vehicle noise test(s), 
it shall be stated whether all the requirements of this 
standard were fulfilled or not. Reference shall be 
given to a document according to C-6.1 describing 
the results which verify this. 


IS 18258 : 2023 


ANNEX D 
(Clauses 3.5 and 7.2) 


WET GRIP MEASUREMENT 


D-1 TESTING PROCEDURE FOR MEASURING 
WET GRIP FOR C1 CATEGORY TYRES 


D-1.1 Definitions 


For the purposes of testing wet grip of C1 tyres 
following definitions apply: 


D-1.1.1 Test Run — A single pass of a loaded tyre 
over a given test track surface. 


D-1.1.2 Test Tyre(s) — A candidate tyre, a reference 
tyre or a control tyre or tyre set that is used in a test 
run. 


D-1.1.3 Candidate Tyre(s) (T) — A tyre or a tyre set 
that is tested for the purpose of calculating its wet 
grip index. 


D-1.1.4 Reference Tyre(s) (R) — A tyre or a tyre set 
that has the characteristics indicated in the 
ASTM F 2493-08 and referred to as the standard 
reference test tyre. 


D-1.1.5 Control Tyre(s) (C) — An intermediate tyre 
or a set of intermediate tyres which is used when the 
candidate tyre and the reference tyre cannot be 
directly compared on the same vehicle. 


D-1.1.6 Braking Force of a Tyre — The longitudinal 
force, expressed in newton, resulting from braking 
torque application. 


D-1.1.7 Braking Force Coefficient of a Tyre (BFC) 
— The ratio of the braking force to the vertical load. 


D-1.1.8 Peak Braking Force Coefficient of a Tyre — 
The maximum value of a tyre braking force 
coefficient that occurs prior to wheel lockup as the 
braking torque is progressively increased. 


D-1.1.9 Lockup of a Wheel — The condition of a 
wheel in which its rotational velocity about the 
wheel spin axis is zero and it is prevented from 
rotating in the presence of applied wheel torque. 


D-1.1.10 Vertical Load — The load in newton 
imposed on the tyre perpendicular to the road 
surface. 


D-1.1.11 Tyre Test Vehicle — A dedicated special 
purpose vehicle which has instruments to measure 
the vertical and the longitudinal forces on one test 
tyre during braking. 


22 


D-1.1.12 SRTTI4 — The ASTME 1136-93 
(Reapproved 2003), standard specification for a 
Radial Standard Reference Test Tire P195/75R14. 


D-1.1.13 SRTTI6 — The ASTM F 2493-08, 
standard specification for a radialstandard reference 
test tyre P225/60R16. 


D-1.2 General Test Conditions 
D-1.2.1 Track Characteristics 


The test track shall have the 


characteristics: 


following 


a) The surface shall have a dense asphalt surface 
with a uniform gradient of not more than 
2 percent and shall not deviate more than 6 mm 
when tested with a 3 m straight edge; 


b) The surface shall have a pavement of uniform 
age, composition, and wear. The test surface 
shall be free of loose material and foreign 
deposits; 

c) The maximum chipping size shall be 10 mm 
(tolerances permitted from 8 mm to13 mm); 


d) The texture depth as measured by a sand patch 
shall be (0.7 + 0.3) mm. It shall be measured in 
accordance with ASTM E 965-96 
(Reapproved 2006); and 


e) The wetted frictional properties of the surface 


shall be measured with either method D-1.2.2.1 
or D-1.2.2.2. 


D-1.2.2 Methods to Measure the Wetted Frictional 
Properties of the Surface 


D-1.2.2.1 British pendulum number (BPN) 


The British Pendulum Number method shall be as 
defined in ASTM E 303-93 (Reapproved in 2008). 
Pad rubber component formulation and physical 
properties shall be as specified in ASTM E 501-08. 


The averaged British Pendulum Number (BPN) 
shall be between 42 and 60 BPN after temperature 
correction as follows: 


BPN shall be corrected by the wetted road surface 
temperature. Unless temperature correction 
recommendations are indicated by the British 
pendulum manufacturer, the following formula is 
used: 


BPN = BPN (measured value) + temperature correction 


Temperature correction = - 0.001 8 £ + 0.34 t - 6.1 


where 


t = wetted road surface temperature in °C. 
D-1.2.2.1.1 Effects of slider pad wear 


The pad shall be removed for maximum wear when 
the wear on the striking edge of the slider reaches 
3.2 mm in the plane of the slider or 1.6 mm vertical 
to it in accordance with clause 5.2.2 and Fig. 3 of 
ASTM E303-93 (Reapproved 2008). 


D-1.2.2.1.2 For the purpose of checking track 
surface BPN consistency for the measurement of 
wet grip on an instrumented passenger car, the BPN 
values of the test track should not vary over the entire 
stopping distance so as to decrease the dispersion of 
test results. The wetted frictional properties of the 
surface shall be measured five times at each point of 
the BPN measurementevery 10 mand the coefficient 
of variation of the averaged BPN shall not exceed 
10 percent. 


D-1.2.2.2 ASTM E 1136 Standard reference test tyre 


By derogation with D-1.1.4, this method uses the 
reference tyre that has the characteristics indicated 
in the ASTM E 1136-93 (reapproved 2003) and 
referred to as SRTT14. 


The average peak braking force coefficient (U peak,avg) 
of the SRTT14 shall be (0.7 + 0.1) at 65 km/h. 


The average peak braking force coefficient (Upeak,ave) 
of the SRTT14 shall be corrected for the wetted road 
surface temperature as follows: 


Peak braking force coefficient 
(measured) + temperature correction 


(U peakavg) = 


where 


Temperature correction = 0.003 5 x (t- 20); and 
t = wetted road surface temperature in °C. 


D-1.2.3 Atmospheric Conditions 


The wind conditions shall not interfere with wetting 
of the surface (wind-shields are allowed). Both the 
wetted surface temperature and the ambient 
temperature shall be between 2 °C and 20 °C for 
snow tyres and 5 °C and 35 °C for normal tyres. The 
wetted surface temperature shall not vary during the 
test by more than 10 °C. The ambient temperature 
must remain close to the wetted surface temperature. 
The difference between the ambient and the wetted 
surface temperatures must be less than 10 °C. 


23 


IS 18258 : 2023 


D-1.3 Testing Methods for Measuring Wet Grip 


For the calculation of the wet grip index (G) of a 
candidate tyre, the wet grip braking performance of 
the candidate tyre is compared to the wet grip 
braking performance of the reference tyre on a 
vehicle travelling straight ahead on a wet, paved 
surface. It is measured with either method D-1.3.1 
or D-1.3.2. 


D-1.3.1 Using an Instrumented Passenger Car 


D-1.3.1.1 Principle 


The testing method covers a procedure for measuring 
the deceleration performance of C1 tyres during 
braking, using an instrumented passenger car 
equipped with an antilock braking system (ABS), 
where, instrumented passenger car means a 
passenger car that is fitted with the measuring 
equipment listed in D-1.3.1.2.2 for the purpose of 
this testing method. Starting with a defined initial 
speed, the brakes are applied hard enough on four 
wheels at the same time to activate the ABS. The 
average deceleration is calculated between two 
pre-defined speeds. 


D-1.3.1.2 Equipment 


D-1.3.1.2.1 Vehicle 


Permitted modifications on the passenger car are as 
follows: 


a) Those allowing the number of tyre sizes 
that can be mounted on the vehicle to be 
increased; 


b) Those permitting automatic activation of 
the braking device to be installed; and 


c) Any other modification of the braking 
system is prohibited. 


D-1.3.1.2.2 Measuring equipment 


The vehicle shall be fitted with a sensor suitable for 
measuring speed on a wet surface and distance 
covered between two speeds. To measure vehicle 
speed, a fifth wheel or non-contact speed-measuring 
system shall be used. 


D-1.3.1.3 Conditioning of the test track and wetting 
condition 


The test track surface shall be watered at least half 
an hour prior to testing in order to equalize the 
surface temperature and water temperature. External 
watering should be supplied continuously 
throughout testing. For the whole testing area, the 
water depth shall be (1.0 + 0.5) mm, measured from 


IS 18258 : 2023 


the peak of the pavement. The test track should then 
be conditioned by conducting at least ten test runs 
with tyres not involved in the test programme at 
90 km/h. 


D-1.3.1.4 Tyres and rims 
D-1.3.1.4.1 Tyre preparation and break-in 


The test tyres shall be trimmed to remove all 
protuberances on the tread surface caused by mould 
air vents or flashes at mould junctions. Fit the test 
tyres on rims specified by a recognized tyre and rim 
standards organization as listed in E-5. 


D-1.3.1.4.2 Tyre load 


The static load on each axle tyre shall lie between 
60 percent and 90 percent of the tested tyre load 
capacity. Tyre loads on the same axle should not 
differ by more than 10 percent. 


D-1.3.1.4.3 Tyre inflation pressure 


On the front and rear axles, the inflation pressures 
shall be 220 kPa (for standard- and extra-load tyres). 
The tyre pressure should be checked just prior to 
testing at ambient temperature and adjusted if 
required. 


D-1.3.1.5 Procedure 
D-1.3.1.5.1 Test run 


The following test procedure applies for each test 
run: 


D-1.3.1.5.1.1 The passenger car is driven in a 
straight line up to (85 + 2) km/h. 


D-1.3.1.5.1.2 Once the passenger car has reached 
(85 + 2) km/h, the brakes are always activated at the 
same place on the test track referred to as braking 
starting point, with a longitudinal tolerance of 5 m 
and a transverse tolerance of 0.5 m. 


D-1.3.1.5.1.3 The brakes 
automatically or manually. 


are activated either 


D-1.3.1.5.1.3.1 The automatic activation of the 
brakes is performed by means of a detection system 
made of two parts, one indexed to the test track and 
one on board the passenger car. 


D-1.3.1.5.1.3.2 The manual activation of the brakes 
depends on the type of transmission, as follows: 


a) For manual transmission, the driver should 
release the clutch and depress the brake 


24 


pedal sharply, holding it down as long 
asnecessary to perform the measurement; 
and 


b 


ma 


For automatic transmission, the driver 
should select neutral gear and then depress 
the brake pedal sharply, holding it down as 
long as necessary to perform the 
measurement. 


In both cases, a minimum of 600 N pedal efforts is 
required. 


D-1.3.1.5.1.4 The average deceleration is calculated 
between 80 km/h and 20 km/h. 


D-1.3.1.5.1.4.1 If any of the specifications listed 
above (including speed tolerance, longitudinal and 
transverse tolerance for the braking starting point, 
and braking time) are not met when a test run is 
made, the measurement is discarded and a new test 
run is made. 


D-1.3.1.5.2 Test cycle 


A number of test runs are made in order to measure 
the wet grip index of a set of candidate tyres (T) 
according to the procedure D-1.3.1.5.2.1 to 
D-1.3.1.5.2.4, whereby each test run shall be made in 
the same direction and up to three different sets of 
candidate tyres may be measured within the same 
test cycle. 


D-1.3.1.5.2.1 First, the set of reference tyres are 
mounted on the instrumented passenger car. 


D-1.3.1.5.2.2 After at least three valid measurements 
have been made in accordance with D-1.3.1.5.1, the 
set of reference tyres is replaced by a set of candidate 
tyres. 


D-1.3.1.5.2.3 After six valid measurements of the 
candidate tyres are performed, two more sets of 
candidate tyres may be measured. 


D-1.3.1.5.2.4 The test cycle is closed by three more 
valid measurements of the same set of reference 
tyres as at the beginning of the test cycle. 


Examples: 


a) The run order for a test cycle of three sets of 
candidate tyres (T1 to T3) and a set of 
reference tyres (R) would be the following: 


R-T1-T2-T3-R 
b) The run order for a test cycle of five sets of 


candidate tyres (T1 to T5) and a set of 
reference tyres (R) would be the following: 


R-T1-T2-T3-R-T4-T5-R 


D-1.3.1.6 Processing of measurement results 


D-1.3.1.6.1 Calculation of the average deceleration 
(AD) 


The average deceleration (AD) is calculated for each 
valid test run in m/s? as follows: 


where 


Sp = final speed in m/s, 20 km/h or 5.556 m/s; 


si = the initial speed in m/s,80 km/h or 22.222 
m/s; and 


d = distance covered between S; and Spin m. 
D-1.3.1.6.2 Validation of results 


The AD coefficient of variation is calculated as 
follows: 


(Standard deviation/Average) x 100 
D-1.3.1.6.2.1 For the reference tyres (R) 


If the AD coefficient of variation of any two 


IS 18258 : 2023 


consecutive groups of three tests runs of the 
reference tyre set is higher than 3 percent, all data 
should be discarded and the test repeated for all 
test tyres (the candidate tyres and the reference 
tyres). 


D-1.3.1.6.2.2 For the candidate tyres (T) 


The AD coefficients of variation are calculated for 
each candidate tyre set. If one coefficient of 
variation is higher than 3 percent, the data should be 
discarded and the test repeated for that candidate tyre 
set. 


D-1.3.1.6.3 Calculation of adjusted average 
deceleration (Ra) 


The average deceleration (AD) of the reference tyre 
set used for the calculation of its braking force 
coefficient is adjusted according to the positioning 
of each candidate tyre set in a given test cycle. 


This adjusted average deceleration of the reference 
tyre is calculated in m/s? in accordance with the 
following table: 


Number of sets of candidate tyreswithin one | Set of candidate tyres Ra 
test cycle 
T1 
l } Ra = (R, + R,)/2 
(R1 — T1 — R2) 
T1 2 1 
2 Ra = 3 R, + 3 R3 
(R1-T1-T2-R2) T2 1 2 
Ra = z% + 3 R, 
T1 3 1 
3 Ra = gE z R2 
(R1-T1 — T2 — T3 — R2) T2 Ra = (Ry + R2)/2 
T3 1 3 
Ra = 4 R, + 4 R3 


where 


R, = average of the AD values in the first test of the reference tyre set R; and 
R, = average of the AD values in the second test of the same reference tyre set R. 


25 


IS 18258 : 2023 


D-1.3.1.6.4 Calculation of the braking force 
coefficient (BFC) 


The braking force coefficient (BFC) is calculated for 
a braking on the two axles according to the 
following table. 


Test Tyre Braking force coefficient 


Reference tyre BFC(R) = | Ra /g | 


Candidate tyre BFC(T) = | Ta lg | 


where 
Ta = (a= 1, 2 or 3) average of the AD 
values for each candidate tyre (T) set 
that is part of a test cycle; and 
g = acceleration due to gravity, 9.81 m/s? 


D-1.3.1.6.5 Calculation of the wet grip index of the 
candidate tyre 


The wet grip index of the candidate tyre is calculated 
as follows: 


BFC(T) 
G(T) = |= x 125 x(t-t b 
BFC(R) 
x | — ~ -1.0 || x 1072 
E C(Ro) ) 
where 

t = measured wet surface 
temperature in °C when the 
candidate tyre (T) is tested; 

to = wet surface reference 
temperature condition, 
20 °C for normal tyres and 
10 °C for snow tyres; 

BFC(Rg) = braking force coefficient for 
the reference tyre in the 
reference conditions, 0.68; 

a for = -0.423 2, ais expressed as 

normal tyre (1/°C)]; 

aforsnow = 0.772 1, a is expressed as 

tyre (1/°0)]; 

b for = - 8.297; and 

normal tyre 

b for snow = 31.18. 

tyre 


D-1.3.1.7 Wet grip performance comparison 
between a candidate tyre and a reference tyre using a 
control tyre 


D-1.3.1.7.1 General 


Where the candidate tyre size is significantly 
different from that of the reference tyre, a direct 
comparison on the same instrumented passenger car 


26 


may not be possible. This testing method uses an 
intermediate tyre, hereinafter called the control tyre 
as defined in D-1.1.5. 


D-1.3.1.7.2 Principle of the approach 


The principle is the use of a control tyre set and two 
different instrumented passenger cars for the test 
cycle of a candidate tyre set in comparison with a 
reference tyre set. One instrumented passenger car is 
fitted with the reference tyre set followed by the 
control tyre set, the other with the control tyre set 
followed by the candidate tyre set. 


The specifications listed in D-1.3.1.2 to D-1.3.1.4 
apply. 


The first test cycle is a comparison between the 
control tyre set and the reference tyre set. The second 
test cycle is a comparison between the candidate tyre 
set and the control tyre set. It is done on the same test 
track and during the same day as the first test cycle. 
The wetted surface temperature shall be within 
+ 5 °C of the temperature of the first test cycle. The 
same control tyre set shall be used for the first and 
the second test cycles. 


The wet grip index of the candidate tyre, G(T), is 
calculated as follows: 


G (T) = G1 x G, 
where 


G, = relative wet grip index of the control tyre (C) 
compared to the reference tyre (R); and 


G,= relative wet grip index of the candidate tyre (T) 
compared to the control tyre (C) 


G, and G, are calculated as follows: 


w= E 125 +a x (t— to) +b 
BFC(R) g 
x aes 1.0)| x 107 
_ [BFC(T) 
G2 = FFE 


D-1.3.1.7.3 Storage and preservation 


It is necessary that all the tyres of a control tyre set 
have been stored in the same conditions. As soon as 
the control tyre set has been tested in comparison with 
the reference tyre, the specific storage conditions 
defined in ASTM E 1136-93 (Reapproved 2003) 
shall be applied. 


D-1.3.1.7.4 Replacement of reference tyres and 
control tyres 


When irregular wear or damage results from tests, or 
when wear influences the test results, the use of the 
tyre shall be discontinued. 


D-1.3.2 Using a Trailer Towed by a Vehicle or a 
Tyre Test Vehicle 


D-1.3.2.1 Principle 


The measurements are conducted on test tyres 
mounted on a trailer towed by a vehicle (hereafter 
referred to as tow vehicle) or on a tyre test vehicle. 
The brake in the test position is applied firmly until 
sufficient braking torque is generated to produce the 
maximum braking force that will occur prior to 
wheel lockup at a test speed of 65 km/h. 


D-1.3.2.2 Equipment 


D-1.3.2.2.1 Tow vehicle and trailer or tyre test 
vehicle 


The tow vehicle or the tyre test vehicle shall have 
the capability of maintaining the specified speed of 
(65 + 2) km/h even under the maximum braking 
forces. 


The trailer or the tyre test vehicle shall be equipped 
with one place where the tyre can be fitted for 
measurement purposes hereafter called 'test position’ 
and the following accessories: 


a) Equipment to activate brakes in the test 
position; 

b) A water tank to store sufficient water to 
supply the road surface wetting system, 
unless external watering is used; and 


c) Recording equipment to record signals 
from transducers installed at the test 
position and to monitor water application 
rate if the self-watering option is used. 


The maximum variation of toe-settings and camber 
angle for the test position shall be within + 0.5° with 
maximum vertical load. Suspension arms and 
bushings shall have sufficient rigidity necessary to 
minimize free play and ensure compliance under 
application of maximum braking forces. The 
suspension system shall provide adequate load- 
carrying capacity and be of such a design as to 
isolate suspension resonance. 


The test position shall be equipped with a typical or 
special automotive brake system which can apply 
sufficient braking torque to produce the maximum 
value of braking test wheel longitudinal force at the 
conditions specified. 


The brake application system shall be able to control 
the time interval between initial brake application 
and peak longitudinal force as specified in 
D-1.3.2.7.1. 


The trailer or the tyre test vehicle shall be designed 
to accommodate the range of candidate tyre sizes to 


27 


IS 18258 : 2023 


be tested. The trailer or the tyre test vehicle shall 
have provisions for adjustment of vertical load as 
specified in D-1.3.2.5.2. 


D-1.3.2.2.2 Measuring equipment 


The test wheel position on the trailer or the tyre test 
vehicle shall be equipped with a rotational wheel 
velocity measuring system and with transducers to 
measure the braking force and vertical load at the 
test wheel. 


D-1.3.2.2.2.1 General requirements for measurement 
system 


The instrumentation system shall conform to the 
following overall requirements at ambient 
temperatures between 0 °C and 45 °C: 


a) Overall system accuracy, force: + 1.5 percent 
of the full scale of the vertical load or braking 
force; and 


b) Overall system accuracy, speed: + 1.5 percent 
of speed or + 1.0 km/h, whichever is greater. 


D-1.3.2.2.2.2 Vehicle speed 


To measure vehicle speed, a fifth wheel or 
non-contact precision speed-measuring system 
should be used. 


D-1.3.2.2.2.3 Braking forces 


The braking force-measuring transducers shall 
measure longitudinal force generated at the 
tyre-road interface as a result of brake application 
within a range from zero percent to at least 
125 percent of the applied vertical load. The 
transducer design and location shall minimize 
inertial effects and vibration-induced mechanical 
resonance. 


D-1.3.2.2.2.4 Vertical load 


The vertical load-measuring transducer shall 
measure the vertical load at the test position during 
brake application. The transducer shall have the 
same specifications as described previously. 


D-1.3.2.2.2.5 Signal conditioning and recording 
system 


All signal conditioning and recording equipment 
shall provide linear output with necessary gain and 
data reading resolution to meet the specified 
previous requirements. In addition, the following 
requirements apply: 


a) The minimum frequency response shall be flat 
from 0 Hz to 50 Hz (100 Hz) within + 1 percent 
full scale; 


IS 18258 : 2023 


b) The signal-to-noise ratio shall be at least 20/1; 

c) The gain shall be sufficient to permit full-scale 
display for full-scale input signal level; 

d) The input impedance shall be at least ten times 
larger than the output impedance of the signal 


source; and 
e) The equipment shall be insensitive to 
vibrations, acceleration, and changes in 


ambient temperature. 
D-1.3.2.3 Conditioning of the test track 


The test track should be conditioned by conducting 
at least ten test runs with tyres not involved in the 
test program at (65 + 2) km/h. 


D-1.3.2.4 Wetting conditions 


The tow vehicle and trailer or the tyre test vehicle 
may be optionally equipped with a pavement- 
wetting system, less the storage tank, which, in the 
case of the trailer, is mounted on the tow vehicle. 
The water being applied to the pavement ahead of 
the test tyres shall be supplied by a nozzle suitably 
designed to ensure that the water layer encountered 
by the test tyre has a uniform cross section at the test 
speed with a minimum splash and overspray. 


The nozzle configuration and position shall ensure 
that the water jets are directed towards the test tyre 
and pointed towards the pavement at an angle of 
20° to 30°. The water shall strike the pavement 
250 mm to 450 mm ahead of the centre of tyre 
contact. The nozzle shall be located 25 mm above the 
pavement or at the minimum height required to clear 
obstacles which the tester is expected to encounter, 
but in no case more than 100 mm above the 
pavement. 


The water layer shall be at least 25 mm wider than 
the test tyre tread and applied so the tyre is centrally 
located between the edges. Water delivery rate shall 
ensure a water depth of (1.0 + 0.5) mm and shall be 
consistent throughout the test to within + 10 percent. 
The volume of water per unit of wetted width shall 
be directly proportional to the test speed. The 
quantity of water applied at 65 km/h shall be 18 I/s 
per meter of width of wetted surface in case of a 
water depth of 1.0 mm. 


D-1.3.2.5 Tyres and rims 
D-1.3.2.5.1 Tyre preparation and break-in 


The test tyres shall be trimmed to remove all 
protuberances on the tread surface caused by mould 
air vents or flashes at mould junctions. The test tyre 
shall be mounted on the test rim declared by the tyre 
manufacturer. A proper bead seat should be achieved 


28 


by the use of a suitable lubricant. Excessive use of 
lubricant should be avoided to prevent slipping of 
the tyre on the wheel rim. The test tyres/rim 
assemblies shall be stored in a location for a 
minimum of two hours such that they all have the 
same ambient temperature prior to testing. They 
should be shielded from the sun to avoid excessive 
heating by solar radiation. 


For tyre break-in, two braking runs shall be 
performed under the load, pressure and speed as 
specified in D-1.3.2.5.2,  D-1.3.2.5.3 and 
D-1.3.2.7.1 respectively. 


D-1.3.2.5.2 Tyre load 


The test load on the test tyre is (75 + 5) percent of 
the tyre load capacity. 


D-1.3.2.5.3 Tyre inflation pressure 


The test tyre cold inflation pressure shall be 180 kPa 
for standard-load tyres. For extra-load tyres, the cold 
inflation pressure shall be 220 kPa. The tyre pressure 
should be checked just prior to testing at ambient 
temperature and adjusted if required. 


D-1.3.2.6 Preparation of the tow vehicle and trailer 
or the tyre test vehicle 


D-1.3.2.6.1 Trailer 


For one axle trailers, the hitch height and transverse 
position shall be adjusted once the test tyre has been 
loaded to the specified test load in order to avoid 
any disturbance of the measuring results. The 
longitudinal distance from the centre line of the 
articulation point of the coupling to the transverse 
centre line of the axle of the trailer shall be at least ten 
times the hitch height or the coupling (hitch) height. 


D-1.3.2.6.2 Instrumentation and equipment 

Install the fifth wheel, when used, in accordance 
with the manufacturer’s specifications and locate it 
as near as possible to the mid-track position of the 
tow trailer or the tyre test vehicle. 

D-1.3.2.7 Procedure 

D-1.3.2.7.1 Test run 

The following procedure applies for each test run: 
D-1.3.2.7.1.1 The tow vehicle or the tyre test vehicle 
is driven onto the test track in a straight line at the 


specified test speed (65 + 2) km/h. 


D-1.3.2.7.1.2 The recording system is launched. 


D-1.3.2.7.1.3 Water is delivered to the pavement 
ahead of the test tyre approximately 0.5 s prior to 
brake application (for internal watering system). 


D-1.3.2.7.1.4 The trailer brakes are activated within 
2 m of a measurement point of the wetted frictional 
properties of the surface and sand depth in 
accordance with D-1.2.1.4 and D-1.2.1.5. The rate 
of braking application shall be such that the time 
interval between initial application of force and peak 
longitudinal force is in the range 0.2 s to 0.5 s. 


D-1.3.2.7.1.5 The recording system is stopped. 
D-1.3.2.7.2 Test cycle 


A number of test runs are made in order to measure 
the wet grip index of the candidate tyre (T) according 
to the procedure given in this clause, whereby each 
test run shall be made from the same spot on the test 
track and in the same direction. Up to 3 candidate 
tyres may be measured within the same test cycle, 
provided that the tests are completed within one day. 


D-1.3.2.7.2.1 First, the reference tyre is tested. 


D-1.3.2.7.2.2 After the reference tyre is tested, at least 
6 valid measurements are performed in accordance 
with C-1.3.2.7.1, the reference tyre is replaced by 
the candidate tyre. 


D-1.3.2.7.2.3 After six valid measurements of the 
candidate tyre are performed, two more candidate 
tyres may be measured. 


D-1.3.2.7.2.4 The test cycle is closed by six more 
valid measurements of the same reference tyre as at 
the beginning of the test cycle. 

Examples: 

a) The run order for a test cycle of three 
candidate tyres (T1 to T3) and the reference 
tyre (R) would be the following: 

R-T1-T2-T3-R 


b) The run order for a test cycle of five 
candidate tyres (T1 to T5) and the reference 


IS 18258 : 2023 


tyre (R) would be the following: 
R-T1-T2-T3-R-T4-T5-R 


D-1.3.2.8 Processing of measurement results 


D-1.3.2.8.1 Calculation of the peak braking force 
coefficient 


The tyre peak braking force coefficient (Upeak) is the 
highest value of u(t) before lockup occurs, calculated 
as follows for each test run. Analogue signals should 
be filtered to remove noise. Digitally recorded 
signals must be filtered using a moving average 
technique. 


fnt) 
t) =|- 
n) Pa 
where 
u(t) = dynamic tyre braking force 
coefficient in real time; 
fa(t) = dynamic braking force in real 
time, in N; and 
f(t) = the dynamic vertical load in real 


time, in N 


D-1.3.2.8.2 Validation of results 


The Upeak coefficient of variation is calculated as 
follows: 


(Standard deviation/Average) x 100 
D-1.3.2.8.2.1 For the reference tyre (R) 


If the coefficient of variation of the peak braking 
force coefficient (wpeak) of the reference tyre is 
higher than 5 percent, all data should be discarded 
and the test repeated for all test tyres (the candidate 
tyre(s) and the reference tyre). 


D-1.3.2.8.2.2 For the candidate tyre(s) (T) 


The coefficient of variation of the peak braking 
force coefficient (upeak) is calculated for each 
candidate tyre. If one coefficient of variation is 
higher than 5 percent, the data should be discarded 
and the test repeated for this candidate tyre. 


IS 18258 : 2023 


D-1.3.2.8.3 Calculation of the adjusted average peak braking force coefficient 


The average peak braking force coefficient of the reference tyre, used for the calculation of its braking force 
coefficient, is adjusted according to the positioning of each candidate tyre in a given test cycle. This adjusted 
average peak braking force coefficient of the reference tyre (Ra) is calculated in accordance with the following 


table: 


Number of sets of candidate tyreswithin one Set of candidate tyres Ra 
test cycle 
1 TI Ra = (R, + R3)/2 
(R1 — T1 — R2) | 
T1 2 1 
2 Ra = 3 R, + 3 R3 
-T1-T2- T2 1 2 
(R1-T1-T2-R2) A ee 
R 
T1 
3 Ra = 4 R, + 4 R3 
R1 — T1 — T2 — T3 — R2) T2 Ra = (Ri + R2)/2 
T3 1 3 
Ra = 4 R, + 4 R3 
where where 
R, = average of the AD values in the first t = measured _wet surface 
test of the reference tyre set R; and temperature in “C when the 
candidate tyre (T) is tested; 
R,= average of the AD values in the second to = iet auitace reference 
test of the same reference tyre set R. temperature condition, 20 °C 
f It d 10 °C fi 
D-1.3.2.8.4 Calculation of the Average Peak REA : Pe Get 
Braking Coefficient (U peak, avg) snow tyres; 
di Upeak,avg (Ro) = peak braking force coefficient 


The average value of the peak braking coefficients 
(U peak, avg) is calculated according to the following 
table, 


Test tyre U peak, avg 
Upeak,avg (R)=Ra, 
(see D-1.3.2.8.3) 


H peak, avg (T) = Ta 


Reference tyre 


Candidate tyre 


where 


Ta = (a = 1, 2 or 3) average of the peak braking 
force coefficients measured for one 
candidate tyre within one test cycle. 


D-1.3.2.8.5 Calculation of the wet grip index of the 
candidate tyre 


The wet grip index of the candidate tyre [G(T)] is 
calculated as follows: 


Upeak.avg (T) 
Upeakavg (R) 
p x (Z= L10) x107? 


Upeakavg (Ro) 


30 


for the reference tyre in the 
reference conditions, 0.85; 


afornormal = - 0.423 2, a is expressed as 


tyre (1/°C),; 
a for snow = 0.772 1, a is expressed as 
tyre (1/°C),; 
b for normal = - 8.297; and 
tyre 
b for snow = 31.18. 
tyre 
D-2 TESTING PROCEDURE FOR 


MEASURING WET GRIP FOR C2 AND C3 
CATEGORY TYRES 


D-2.1 General Test Conditions 
D-2.1.1 Track Characteristics 


The surface shall be a dense asphalt surface with a 
uniform gradient of not more than 2 percent and shall 
not deviate more than 6 mm when tested with a 3 m 
straight edge. The test surface shall have a pavement 
of uniform age, composition, and wear. The test 


surface shall be free of loose material or foreign 
deposits. The maximum chipping size shall be from 
8 mm to 13 mm. The sand depth measured as 
specified in EN13036-1 2001 and 
ASTM E 965-96 (reapproved 2006) shall be 
(0.7 + 0.3) mm. The surface friction value for the 
wetted track shall be established by one or other of 
the following methods according to the discretion of 
the testing agency. 


D-2.1.1.1 Standard reference test tyre (SRTT) 
method 


The average peak braking coefficient (Upeak,avg) of the 
ASTM E1136-93 (reapproved 2003) reference tyre 
(Test method using a trailer or a tyre test vehicle as 
specified in C-2.2.1) shall be 0.7 + 0.1 (at 65 km/h 
and 180 kPa). The measured values shall be 
corrected for the effects of temperature as follows: 


pbfc = pbfc (measured) + 0.003 5 x (t - 20) 
where 


t = wetted track surface temperature in °C. 


The test shall be conducted using the lanes and 
length of the track to be used for the wet grip test. 


For the trailer method, testing is run in such a way that 
braking occurs within 10 m distance of where the 
surface was characterized. 


D-2.1.1.2 British Pendulum Number (BPN) Method 


The averaged British pendulum number (BPN) 
British pendulum tester method as specified in 
ASTM E 303-93 (reapproved 2008) using the pad as 
specified in ASTME 501-08 shall be (50 + 10) BPN 
after temperature correction. BPN shall be corrected 
by the wetted road surface temperature. Unless 
temperature correction recommendations are 
indicated by the British pendulum manufacturer the 
following formula can be used: 


BPN = BPN (measured value) — (0.001 8 x t?) 
+ 0.34 xt-6.1 


where 


t = wetted road surface temperature in °C. 


D-2.1.1.2.1 Effects of slider pad wear 


The pad should be removed for maximum wear when 

the wear on the striking edge of the slider reaches 
3.2 mm in the plane of the slider or 1.6 mm vertical 
to it. Check the test track testing surface BPN 
consistency for the measurement of wet grip on a 
standard vehicle. 


In the lanes of the track to be used during the wet 
grip tests, the BPN shall be measured at intervals of 
10 m along the length of the lanes. The BPN shall 
be measured 5 times at each point and the 
coefficient of variation of the BPN averages shall 


31 


IS 18258 : 2023 


not exceed 10 percent. 


D-2.1.1.3 The testing agency shall satisfy itself of the 
characteristics of the track on the basis of evidence 
produced in test reports. 


D-2.1.2 The surface may be wetted from the 
track-side or by a wetting system incorporated into 
the test vehicle or the trailer. If a track-side system is 
used, the test surface shall be wetted for at least half 
an hour prior to testing in order to equalize the 
surface temperature and water temperature. It is 
recommended that  track-side wetting be 
continuously applied throughout testing. The water 
depth shall be between 0.5 mm and 2.0 mm. 


D-2.1.3 The wind conditions shall not interfere with 
wetting of the surface (wind-shields are permitted). 
The ambient and the wetted surface temperature 
shall be between 5 °C and 35 °C and shall not vary 
during the test by more than 10 °C. 


D-2.1.4 In order to cover the range of the tyre sizes 
fitting the commercial vehicles, three Standard 
Reference Testing Tyre (SRTT) sizes shall be used to 
measure the relative wet index: 


a) SRTT 315/70R22.5 LI=154/150, 
ASTM F2870; 
b) SRTT 245/70R19.5 LI=136/134, 


ASTM F2871; and 


c) SRTT 225/75 R 
ASTM F2872 


16 C LI=116/114, 


The three standard reference testing tyre sizes shall 
be used to measure the relative wet index as follows: 


a) For C3 tyres: 
1)Narrow family (SN < 285 mm): SRTT 
245/70R19.5 LI = 136/134 


2)Wide family “SN > 285 mm): SRTT 
315/70R22.5 LI = 154/150 


b) For C2 tyres: SRTT 225/75 R 16 C 


LI=116/114 
where 


Syn = nominal section width of the tyre. 


D-2.2 Test Procedure 


The comparative wet grip performance shall be 
established using either D-2.2.1 or D-2.2.2: 


D-2.2.1 Trailer or Special Purpose Tyre Evaluation 
Vehicle Procedure 


D-2.2.1.1 The measurements are conducted on 
tyre(s) mounted on a trailer towed by a vehicle or a 
tyre test vehicle. 


IS 18258 : 2023 


Brake on the test position is applied firmly until 
sufficient braking torque results to produce 
maximum braking force that will occur prior to 
wheel lockup at a test speed of 50 km/h. The trailer, 
together with the towing vehicle, or the tyre 
evaluation vehicle shall comply with the following 
requirements. 


D-2.2.1.1.1 Be capable of exceeding the upper limit 
for the test speed of 50 km/h and of maintaining the 
test speed requirement of (50 + 2) km/h even at the 
maximum level of application of braking forces. 


D-2.2.1.1.2 Be equipped with an axle providing one 
test position having a hydraulic brake and actuation 
system that can be operated at the test position from 
the towing vehicle if applicable. The braking system 
shall be capable of providing sufficient braking 
torque to achieve the peak brake force coefficient 
over the range of tyre sizes and tyre loads to be 
tested. 


D-2.2.1.1.3 Be capable of maintaining longitudinal 
alignment (toe) and camber of the test wheel and tyre 
assembly throughout the test within + 0.5° of the 
static figures achieved at the test tyre loaded 
condition. 


D-2.2.1.1.4 In case a track wetting system is 
incorporated, the system shall be able to deliver the 
water such that the tyre and track surface in front of 
the tyre are wetted before the start of braking and 
throughout the duration of the test. The apparatus 
may be optionally equipped with a 
pavement-wetting system, less the storage tank, 
which, in the case of the trailer, is mounted on the 
tow vehicle. The water being applied to the 
pavement ahead of the test tyres shall be supplied by 
a nozzle suitably designed to ensure that the water 
layer encountered by the test tyre has a uniform cross 
section at the test speed with a minimum splash and 
overspray. 


The nozzle configuration and position shall ensure 
that the water jets shall be directed toward the test 
tyre and pointed toward the pavement at an angle of 
15° to 30°. The water shall strike the pavement 
0.25 m to 0.5 m ahead of the centre of tyre contact. 
The nozzle shall be located 100 mm above the 
pavement or the minimum height required to clear 
obstacles which the tester is expected to encounter, 
but in no case more than 200 mm above the 
pavement. The water layer shall be at least 25 mm 
wider than the test tyre tread and applied so the tyre 
is centrally located between the edges. The volume 
of water per unit of wetted width shall be directly 
proportional to the test speed. The quantity of water 
applied at 50 km/h shall be 14 1/s per meter of the 
width of the wetted surface. The nominal values of 
rate of water application shall be maintained within 
+ 10 percent. 


32 


D-2.2.1.2 Test procedure 


D-2.2.1.2.1 Fit the test tyres on rims specified by a 
recognized tyre and rim standards organization as 
listed in E-5. Ensure proper bead seating by the use 
of a suitable lubricant. Excessive use of lubricant 
should be avoided to prevent slipping of the tyre on 
the wheel rim. 


Check the test tyres for the specified inflation 
pressure at ambient temperature (cold), just prior to 
testing. For the purpose of this standard the testing 
tyre cold inflation pressure Pt shall be calculated as 


follows: 
Q: 1.25 
P = P. x (=) 
where 
P. = inflation pressure marked on the 
sidewall. If Pis not marked on the 
sidewall refer to the specified 
pressure in applicable tyre standards 
manuals corresponding to maximum 
load capacity for single applications; 
Q, = static test load of the tyre; and 
Q- = maximum mass associated with the 


load capacity index of the tyre. 


D-2.2.1.2.2 For tyre break-in, two braking runs are 
performed. The tyre shall be conditioned for a 
minimum of two hours adjacent to the test track such 
that it is stabilized at the ambient temperature of the 
test track area. The tyre(s) shall not be exposed to 
direct sunshine during conditioning. 


D-2.2.1.2.3 The load conditions for testing shall be 
(75 + 5) percent of the value corresponding to the 
load index. 


D-2.2.1.2.4 Shortly before testing, the track shall be 
conditioned by carrying out at least ten braking test 
runs at 50 km/h on the part of the track to be used 
for the performance test programme but using a tyre 
not involved in that programme. 


D-2.2.1.2.5 Immediately prior to testing, the tyre 
inflation pressure shall be checked and reset, if 
necessary, to the values given in D-2.2.1.2.1. 


D-2.2.1.2.6 The test speed shall be at (50 + 2) km/h 
and shall be maintained between these limits 
throughout the test run. 


D-2.2.1.2.7 The direction of the test shall be the same 
for each set of tests and shall be the same for the test 
tyre as that used for the SRTT with which its 
performance is to be compared. 


D-2.2.1.2.8 Deliver water to the pavement ahead of 
the test tyre, approximately 0.5 s prior to brake 
application (for internal watering system). The 
brakes of the test wheel assembly shall be applied 
such that peak braking force is achieved within 0.2 s 
and 1.0 s of brake application. 


D-2.2.1.2.9 For new tyres, the first two braking runs 
are discarded for tyre break-in. 


D-2.2.1.2.10 For the evaluation of the performance 
of any tyre compared with that of the SRTT, the 
braking test should be run at the same area on the 
test pad. 


D-2.2.1.2.11 If R1 is the initial test of the SRTT, R2 
is the repeat test of the SRTT and T is the test of the 
candidate tyre to be evaluated the order of testing 
shall be as follows: 


R1-T-R2 
A maximum of three candidate tyres may be tested 
before repeating the SRTT test, for example: 
R1-T1-T2-T3-R2 


D-2.2.1.2.12 Calculate the peak braking force 
coefficient, {peak for each test using the following 
equation: 


fnt) 
t) = 2 
HO= Ro 
where 
u(t) = dynamic tyre braking force 
coefficient in real time; 
fa(t) = dynamic braking force in real 


time, in N; and 


IS 18258 : 2023 


the dynamic vertical load in real 
time, in N. 


KO = 


Using above equation for dynamic tyre braking force 
coefficient, calculate the peak tyre braking force 
coefficient, peak, by determining the highest value of 
u(t) before lockup occurs. Analogic signals should 
be filtered to remove noise. Digitally recorded 
signals may be filtered using a moving average 
technique. 


Calculate the average values of peak-braking 


coefficient (peak, avg) by averaging four or more 
valid repeated runs for each set of test and reference 
tyres for each test condition provided that the tests 
are completed within the same day. 


D-2.2.1.2.13 Validation of results 
a) For the reference tyre 


If the coefficient of variation of the peak braking 
coefficient (standard deviation/average X 100) 
of the reference tyre is higher than five percent, 
discard all data and repeat the test for this 
reference tyre. 


b) For the candidate tyres 


The coefficients of variation (standard 
deviation/average X 100) are calculated for all 
the candidate tyres. If one coefficient of 
variation is greater than five percent, discard the 
data for this candidate tyre and repeat the test. 


R, is calculated as follows: 


Number of sets of candidate between two | Set of candidatetyres to be Ra 
successiveruns of the reference tyre qualified 
1 T1 Ra = (Ry + R2)/2 
(R1 — T1 — R2) | 
2 T1 2 1 
(RI—T1—T2—R2) Ra=z3 Ritz Rz 
T2 1 2 
Ra = 3 R, + 3 R3 
T1 3 1 
3 Ra — 4 R, + 4 R3 
R1 — T1 — T2 — T3 — R2) T2 Ra = (R + R2)/2 
T3 1 3 
Ra = 4 R, + 4 R3 
where 
R, = average of the peak braking coefficient in the first test of the reference tyre; and 
R, = average of the peak braking coefficient in the second test of the reference tyre. 


33 


IS 18258 : 2023 


D-2.2.1.2.14 The wet grip index (G) shall be 
calculated as follows: 


_ Hpeak,avg (T) 
Hpeak,avg (R) 


It represents the relative wet grip index for braking 
performance of the candidate tyre (T) compared to 
the reference tyre (R). 


D-2.2.2 Standard Vehicle Procedure 


D-2.2.2.1 The vehicle used shall have two axles and 
be equipped with an anti-lock braking system (for 
example, standard production vehicle of M2, M3, 
N1, N2 or N3 category). The ABS shall continue to 
fulfil the utilisation of adhesion requirements 
defined in the standard as appropriate, and shall be 
comparable and constant throughout the tests with 
the different tyres mounted. 


D-2.2.2.1.1 Measuring equipment 


The vehicle shall be fitted with a sensor suitable for 
measuring speed on a wet surface and distance 
covered between two speeds. To measure vehicle 
speed, a fifth wheel or non-contact speed-measuring 
system shall be used. 


The tolerances shall be as follows: 


a) For the speed measurements: + 1 percent or 
+ 0.5 km/h, whichever is greater; and 


b) For the distance measurements: + 1 x 10! m. 


A display of the measured speed or the difference 
between the measured speed and the reference speed 
for the test can be used inside the vehicle so that the 
driver can adjust the speed of the vehicle. A data 
acquisition system can be also used for storing the 
measurements. 


D-2.2.2.2 Test procedure 


Starting with a defined initial speed, the brakes are 
applied hard enough on the two axles at the same 
time to activate the ABS system. 


D-2.2.2.2.1 The Average Deceleration (AD) is 
calculated between two defined speeds, with an 
initial speed of 60 km/h and a final speed of 20 km/h. 


D-2.2.2.2.2 Vehicle equipment 

The rear axle may be indifferently fitted with 2 or 4 
tyres. For the reference tyre testing, both axles are 
fitted with reference tyres. (A total of 4 or 6 reference 
tyres depending on the choice above mentioned). 


For the candidate tyre 
configurations are possible: 


testing, 3 fitting 


a) Configuration 1: Candidate tyres on front 
and rear axles, it is the standard 
configuration that should be used every time 
it is possible; 

b) Configuration 2: Candidate tyres on front 
axle and reference tyre or control tyre on 


34 


rear axle, allowed in such cases where fitting 
the candidate tyre on the rear position is not 
possible; and 


c) Configuration 3: Candidate tyres on rear 
axle and reference tyre or control tyre on 
front axle, permitted in such cases where 
fitting the candidate tyre on the front 
position is not possible. 


D-2.2.2.2.3 Tyre inflation pressure 


For a vertical load higher or equal to 75 percent of 
the load capacity of the tyre, the test inflation 
pressure P, shall be calculated as follows: 


TENS ar 


For a vertical load lower than 75 percent of the load 
capacity of the tyre, the test inflation pressure P, 
shall be calculated as follows: 


P, = P. x 0-75*° = (0.7) x P. 


where 

P. = Inflation pressure marked on the 
sidewall. If P.is not marked on the 
sidewall refer to the specified pressure 
in applicable tyre standards manuals 
corresponding to maximum load 
capacity for single applications; 

Q, = Static test load of the tyre; and 

Q; = maximum mass associated with the 


load capacity index of the tyre. 


Check the tyre pressure just prior to testing at 
ambient temperature. 


D-2.2.2.2.4 Tyre load 


The static load on each axle shall remain the same 
throughout the test procedure. The static load on 
each tyre shall lie between 60 percent and 
100 percent of the candidate tyre's load capacity. 
This value shall not exceed 100 percent of the load 
capacity of the reference tyre. Tyre load on the same 
axle should not differ by more than 10 percent. 


The use of fitting as per configurations 2 and 
3 shall fulfil the following additional 
requirements: 


a) Configuration 2: Front axle load > Rear axle 
load, the rear axle may be indifferently fitted 
with 2 or 4 tyres; and 


b) Configuration 3: Rear axle load > Front axle 
load x 1.8 
D-2.2.2.2.5 Tyre preparation and break-in 


The test tyre shall be mounted on the test rim 
declared by the tyre manufacturer. Ensure proper 
bead seating by the use of a suitable lubricant. 


Excessive use of lubricant should be avoided to 
prevent slipping of the tyre on the wheel rim. 


Place the fitted test tyres in a location for a minimum 
of two hours such that they all have the same ambient 
temperature prior to testing, and shield them from the 
sun to avoid excessive heating by solar radiation. For 
tyre break-in, perform two braking runs. 


Condition the pavement by conducting at least ten 
test runs with tyres not involved in the test 
programme at an initial speed higher or equal to 
65 km/h (which is higher than the initial test speed to 
guarantee that a sufficient length of track is 
conditioned). 


D-2.2.2.2.6 Procedure 


D-2.2.2.2.6.1 First, mount the set of reference tyres 
on the vehicle. The vehicle accelerates in the starting 
zone up to (65 + 2) km/h. Activation of the brakes 
on the track is made always at the same place with a 
tolerance of 5 m in longitudinal and 0.5 m in 
transverse. 


D-2.2.2.2.6.2 According to the type of transmission, 
two cases are possible: 


a) Manual transmission 


As soon as the driver is in the measuring zone 
and having reached (65 + 2) km/h, the clutch is 
released and the brake pedal depressed sharply, 
holding it down as long as necessary to perform 
the measurement. 


b) Automatic transmission 


As soon as the driver is in the measuring zone 
and having reached (65 + 2) km/h, select neutral 
gear and then the brake pedal is depressed 
sharply, holding it down as long as necessary to 
perform the measurement. 


Automatic activation of the brakes can be performed 
by means of a detection system made of two parts, 
one indexed to the track and one embarked on the 
vehicle. In that case braking is made more rigorously 
at the same portion of the track. 


If any of the above-mentioned conditions are not met 
when a measurement is made (speed tolerance, 
braking time, etc), the measurement is discarded and 
anew measurement is made. 


D-2.2.2.2.6.3 Test running order 
Examples: 


For a test of 3 sets of R-T1-T2-T3-R 
candidate tyres (T1 to T3) 


and a reference tyre R 


35 


IS 18258 : 2023 


For a test of 5 sets of tyres R-T1-T2-T3-R-T4- 


(T1 to T5) anda reference T5—R 
tyreR 
D-2.2.2.2.6.4 The direction of the test shall be the 


same for each set of tests and shall be the same for 
the candidate test tyre as that used for the SRTT with 
which its performance is to be compared. 


D-2.2.2.2.6.5 For each test and for new tyres, the first 
two braking measurements are discarded. 


D-2.2.2.2.6.6 After at least 3 valid measurements 
have been made in the same direction, the reference 
tyres are replaced by a set of the candidate tyres (one 
of the 3 configurations presented in D-2.2.2.2.2) and 
at least 6 valid measurements shall be performed. 


D-2.2.2.2.6.7 A maximum of three sets of candidate 
tyres can be tested before the reference tyre is 
re-tested. 


D-2.2.2.2.7 Processing of measurement results 


D-2.2.2.2.7.1 Calculation of the 
deceleration (AD) 


average 


Each time the measurement is repeated, the average 
deceleration AD (m/s?) is calculated as: 


2222 
sf -si 
2d 


AD= 


where 


d = distance covered between the initial speed s; 
and the final speed sp. 


D-2.2.2.2.7.2 Validation of results 


a) For the reference tyre —If the coefficient of 
variation of AD of any two consecutive 
groups of 3 runs of the reference tyre is 
higher than 3 percent, discard all data and 
repeat the test for all tyres (the candidate 
tyres and the reference tyre). The coefficient 
of variation is calculated by the following 


relation: 
standard deviation 
x 100 
average 
b) For the candidate tyres — The coefficients 


of variation are calculated for all the 
candidate tyres is calculated by the 
following relation: 
standard deviation 
————__ x 100 
average 
If one coefficient of variation is greater than 
3 percent, discard the data for thiscandidate tyre and 
repeat the test 


IS 18258 : 2023 


D-2.2.2.2.7.3 Calculation of the average AD 


If Ry is the average of the AD values in the first test of the reference tyre and R2 is the average of the AD values in 
the second test of the reference tyre, the following operations are performed: 


Number of sets of candidate between two | Set of candidatetyres Ra 
successive runs of the reference tyre to be qualified 
1 T1 Ra = (Ri + R2)/2 
(R1 — T1 — R2) } 
2 T1 2 1 
(R1-T1-T2-R2) Ra =z Ritz Rz 
T2 1 2 
Ra = 3 R, + 3 R3 
T1 3 1 
3 Ra = 4 R, + 4 R3 
R1 — T1 — T2 — T3 — R2) T2 Ra = (Ri + R2)/2 
T3 1 3 
Ra EF 4 R, + 4 R, 
D-2.2.2.2.7.4 Calculation of braking force c) For Configuration C3 (reference tyres on 
coefficient, BFC front axle and candidate tyres on rear axle): 
BFC(R) and BFC(T) are calculated according to Wet Grip Index 
following table: _ BFC(T) x (—a — b + h x BFC(R)) + b x BFC(R) 
Test Tyre Braking force coefficient BFC(R) x (~a + hx BFC(T) 
R 
Reference tyre BFC(R) = "2 Jg here 
Candidate tyre BFC(T) = Ta / g G = centre of gravity of the loaded 
vehicle; 
Whëre m = mass (in kilograms) of the loaded 
vehicle; 
Ta = (a= 1, 2 or 3) aver age of the AD a = horizontal distance between front 
values for each candidate tyre (T); axle and centre of gravity of the 
and i i loaded vehicle in m; 
g = aa due to gravity, b = horizontal distance between rear 
9.81 mys", axle and centre of gravity of the 
i 7 ' loaded vehicle; 
D-2.2.2.2.7.5 Calculation of the relative wet grip . . 
performance index of the tyre h = vertical distance between ground 
level and centre of gravity of the 
The wet grip index represents the relative loaded vehicle (m); 
performance of the candidate tyre compared to the y = loaded vehicle acceleration (m/s2); 
reference tyre. The way to obtain it depends on the j ý 
test configuration as defined in D-2.2.2.2.2. The wet F SA eon due to the gravity 
grip index of the tyre is calculated as follows: (m/s?), 
i . : XI = longitudinal (X-direction) reaction 
a) For configuration C1 (candidate tyres on both of the front tyre on the road; 
axles): i 
) X2 = longitudinal (X-direction) reaction 
BFC(T . 
Wet Grip Index = (T) of the rear tyre on the road; 
BFC(R) Zl = normal; (Z-direction) reaction of the 


b) For configuration C2 (candidate tyres on front tyre on the road; and 


front axle and reference tyres on rear axle): Z2 = normal (Z-direction) reaction of the 
rear tyre on the road. 


Wet Grip Index 
NOTE — When h is not precisely known, worst case 


= BFC(T) x (a+b + hx BFC(R)) -a x BFC(R) values shall apply, 1.2 for configuration C2, and 1.5 
= BFC(R) X (b+ hx BFC(T) for configuration C3. 


36 


IS 18258 : 2023 


a T 


FIG. 4 NOMENCLATURE EXPLANATION RELATED TO GRIP INDEX OF THE TYRE 


D-2.2.2.2.8 Wet grip performance comparison 
between a candidate tyre and a reference tyre using 
a control tyre 


D-2.2.2.2.8.1 When the candidate tyre size is 
significantly different from the reference tyre, a 
direct comparison on the same vehicle may be not 
possible. This approach uses an intermediate tyre, 
hereinafter called the control tyre. The principle lies 
upon the use of a control tyre and 2 different vehicles 
for assessing a candidate tyre in comparison with a 
reference tyre. One vehicle can fit the reference tyre 
and the control tyre, the other the control tyre and 
the candidate tyre. All conditions are in conformity 
with D-2.2.2.1.2 to D-2.2.2.2.5. 


D-2.2.2.2.8.2 The first assessment is a comparison 
between the control tyre and the reference tyre. The 
result (wet grip index 1) is the relative efficiency of 
the control tyre compared to the reference tyre. 


D-2.2.2.2.8.3 The second assessment is a 
comparison between the candidate tyre and the 
control tyre. The result (wet grip index 2) is the 
relative efficiency of the candidate tyre compared to 
the control tyre. The second assessment is done on 
the same track as the first one and within one week 
maximum. The wetted surface temperature shall be 
in the range of + 5 °C of the temperature of the first 
assessment. The control tyre set (4 or 6 tyres) is 
physically the same set as the set used for the first 
assessment. 


D-2.2.2.2.8.4 The wet grip index of the candidate 
tyre compared to the reference tyre is deduced by 


37 


multiplying the relative efficiencies. 


It is permitted to use a previous SRTTs comparison. 
The comparison results shall be checked periodically. 
NOTE — When the test expert decides to use an SRTT tyre 
as a control tyre (that is, in the test procedure two SRTTs 
are compared directly instead of an SRTT with a control 


tyre) the result of the comparison between the SRTTs is 
called the local shift factor. 


D-2.2.2.2.8.5 Selection of a set of tyres as a control 
tyre set 


A control tyre set is a group of identical tyres made 
in the same factory during one week period. 


D-2.2.2.2.8.6 Reference and control tyres 


Before the first assessment (control tyre/reference 
tyre), normal storage conditions can be used. It is 
necessary that all the tyres of a control tyre set have 
been stored in the same conditions. 


D-2.2.2.2.8.7 Storage of control tyres 


As soon as the control tyre set has been assessed in 
comparison with the reference tyre, specific storage 
conditions shall be applied for control tyres 
replacement. 


D-2.2.2.2.8.8 Replacement of reference and control 
tyres 


When irregular wear or damage results from tests, or 
when wear influences the test results, the use of the 
tyre shall be discontinued. 


IS 18258 : 2023 


D-3 TEST REPORTS EXAMPLES OF WET GRIP INDEX 


Example 1: Test report of wet grip index using trailer method 


Test report number: 


Test date: 


Type of road surface: 


Texture 
(mm): 


depth 


u peak (SRTT14 E1136) : 


Or BPN: 


Speed (km/h): 


Water depth (mm): 


No 


6 


7 


Size 


Service 
description 


Tyre 
identification 


Rim 


Pattern 


Load (N) 


Pressure (kPa) 


upeak 


WIAD] u A IunIN]| = 


Average 


Standard 
deviation o 


(o/average)<5 
percent 


Ra, Adjusted 


Wet grip index 


Surface temp. 
CC) 


Ambient temp. 
CC) 


Remarks 


38 


IS 18258 : 2023 


Example 2: Test report of wet grip index using passenger car method 


Driver: Test date: 
(Track: [Passenger Car Initial speed (km/h): 
Texture depth (mm): | Brand: 
IBPN: Model: Final speed (km/h) 
Water depth (mm): [Type: 
INo. 1 2 3 4 5 
[Brand Uniroyal TYRE B TYRE C TYRE D Uniroyal 
Pattern ASTM F 2493PATTERN B PATTERN C PATTERND |ASTM F 2493 SRTT16 
SRTT16 SRTT16 
Size IP225/60R16 SIZE B SIZE C SIZE D IP225/60R16 
Service description [97S ILI/SS ILI/SS ILI/SS 97S 
Tyre identification XXXXXXXXX YYYYYYYYY ZZZZZZZZZ |NNNNNNNNN XXXXXXXXX 
Rim 
Front axle pressure 
(kPa) 
Rear axle pressure 
(kPa) 
Front axle load (kg) 
Rear axle load (kg) 
Wet surface temp 
(CC) 
[Ambient temp 
CC) 
Braking| Average | Braking | Average Braking Average Brakin Average 
distance|deceleration| distance |deceleration| distance (m) | deceleration g deceleration 
(m) (m/s?) (m) (m/s?) (m/s?) distanc (m/s?) 
e (m) 
IMeasurement 1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
[Average AD (m/s?) 


Standard deviation 


(Validation of results 
(Coeff. of variation 
(percent) < 3 percent 


[Adjusted average 
IAD of ref. tyre, Ra 
(m/s) 


IBFC(R) reference 
tyre (SRTT16) 


IBFC(T) candidate 
tyre 


Wet grip index (%) 


39 


IS 18258 : 2023 


ANNEX E 
(Clauses 3.5, 6.3.7.2, 8.4.1, D-1.4.1.4.1 and D-2.2.1.2.1) 


ROLLING RESISTANCE MEASUREMENT 


E-1 TEST PROCEDURE FOR MEASURING 
ROLLING RESISTANCE 


E-1.1 Test Methods 


It specifies the alternative measurement methods. 
The choice of an individual method is left to the 
tester. For each method, the test measurements shall 
be converted to a force acting at the tyre/drum 
interface. The alternative measurement methods and 
measured parameters are as follows: 


a) In the force method, the reaction force 
measured or converted at the tyre spindle; 


b) In the torque method, the torque input 
measured at the test drum; 


c) In the deceleration method, the measurement 
of deceleration of the test drum and tyre 
assembly; and 


d) In the power method, the measurement of the 
power input to the test drum. 


E-1.2 Test Equipment 
E-1.2.1 Drum Specifications 
E-1.2.1.1 Diameter 


The test dynamometer shall have a cylindrical 
flywheel (drum) with a diameter of at least 1.7 m. 


The F, and C, values shall be expressed relative to a 
drum diameter of 2.0 m. If drum diameter different 
than 2.0 m is used, a correlation adjustment shall be 
made following the method in E-1.6.3. 


E-1.2.1.2 Surface 


The surface of the drum shall be smooth steel. 
Alternatively, in order to improve skim test reading 
accuracy, a textured surface may also be used, which 
should be kept clean. 


The F, and C, values shall be expressed relative to the 
smooth drum surface. If a textured drum surface is 
used (see E-2.7). 


E-1.2.1.3 Width 


The width of the drum test surface shall exceed the 
width of the test tyre contact patch. 


E-1.2.2 Measuring Rim (see E-3) 


The tyre shall be mounted on a steel or light alloy 


measuring rim, as follows: 


a) For class Cl tyres, the width of the rim shall 
be as defined in ISO 4000-1; and 

For class C2 and C3 tyres, the width of the 
rim shall be as defined in ISO 4209-1. 

NOTE — In cases where the width is not defined in the 
above-mentioned ISO standards, the rim width as 
defined by one of the standards organizations as 
specified in E-5 may be used. 
E-1.2.3 Load, Alignment, 
Instrumentation Accuracies 


b 


wm 


Control and 


Measurement of these parameters shall be 
sufficiently accurate and precise to provide the 
required test data. The specific and respective values 
are shown in E-2. 


E-1.2.4 Thermal Environment 
E-1.2.4.1 Reference conditions 


The reference ambient temperature, measured at a 
distance not less than 0.15 mand not more than 1 m 
from the tyre sidewall, shall be 25 °C. 


E-1.2.4.2 Alternative conditions 


If the test ambient temperature is different from the 
reference ambient temperature, the rolling resistance 
measurement shall be corrected to the reference 
ambient temperature in accordance with E-1.6.2. 


E-1.2.4.3 Drum surface temperature 


Care should be taken to ensure that the temperature 
of the test drum surface is the same as the ambient 
temperature at the beginning of the test. 


E-1.3 Test Conditions 
E-1.3.1 General 


The test consists of a measurement of rolling 
resistance in which the tyre is inflated and the 
inflation pressure allowed to build up, that is capped 
air. 


E-1.3.2 Test Speeds 


The value shall be obtained at the appropriate drum 
speed specified as follows: 


Tyre Class Cl C2 and C3 C3 
Load index All LI< 121 LI > 121 
Speed symbol All All J 100 km/h and lower or K 110 km/h and higher 
tyres not marked with 
Speed (in km/h) 80 80 60 80 


40 


E-1.3.3 Test Load 


The standard test load shall be computed from the 
values shown in Table 2 and shall be kept within the 
tolerance specified in E-2. 


E-1.3.4 Test Inflation Pressure 


The inflation pressure shall be in accordance with 
that shown in Table 2 and shall be capped with the 
accuracy specified in E-2.4. 


E-1.3.5 Duration and Speed 


When the deceleration method is selected, the 
following requirements apply: 


a) The deceleration j shall be determined in exact 
dw/dt or approximate Aw/At form, where œ is 
angular velocity and t is time. If the differential 
form dw/dt is used, then the recommendations 
of E-6 are to be applied; 


b) For duration At, the time increments shall not 
exceed 0.5 s; and 


IS 18258 : 2023 
c) Any variation of the test drum speed shall not 
exceed | km/h within one time increment. 
E-1.4 Test Procedure 
E-1.4.1 General 


The test procedure steps described below shall be 
followed in the given sequence. 


E-1.4.2 Thermal Conditioning 


The inflated tyre shall be placed in the thermal 
environment of the test location for a minimum of: 


a) 3h for class C1 tyres; and 
b) 6h for class C2 and C3 tyres. 


E-1.4.3 Pressure Adjustment 
After thermal conditioning, the inflation pressure 


shall be adjusted to the test pressure, and verified 
10 min after the adjustment is made. 


Table 2 Test Loads and Inflation Pressures 
(Clauses E-1.3.3 and E-1.3.4) 


SI No Tyre class C1" C2 and C3 
Standard Reference or LI > 121 
Load extra load 
a) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) Load - % of maximum 80 80 85> 
load capacity 
ii) Inflation pressure kPa 210 250 Corresponding to maximum load capacity for single 


2 For those passenger car tyres belonging to categories which are not shown in ISO 4000-1, the inflation pressure shall be the inflation pressure 


application 


recommended by the tyre manufacturer, corresponding to the maximum tyre load capacity, reduced by 30 kPa; 


> As a percentage of single load, or 85 percent of maximum load capacity for single application specified in applicable tyre standards manuals 


if not marked on tyre; and 


° Inflation pressure marked on sidewall, or if not marked on sidewall, as specified in applicable tyre standards manuals corresponding to maximum 


load capacity for single application. 


NOTE — The inflation pressure shall be capped with the accuracy specified in E-5. 


E-1.4.4 Warm-Up 


The warm-up durations shall be as follows: 


Tyre class Cl C2 and C3 C3 
Li<121 LI > 121 
Nominal Rim Diameter All All < 22.5 = 22.5 
Warm up duration 30 min 50 min 150 min 180 min 


41 


IS 18258 : 2023 


E-1.4.5 Measurement and Recording 


The following shall be measured and recorded 
(see Fig. 5): 


a) Test speed U,; 
b) Load on the tyre normal to the drum surface Lm; 


c) The initial test inflation pressure as defined in 
E-1.3.3; 


d) The coefficient of rolling resistance measured 
C,, and its corrected value Cyc, at 25 °C and for 
a drum diameter of 2 m; 


e) The distance from the tyre axis to the drum 
outer surface under steady state r; 


f) Ambient temperature tamb; 

g) Test drum radius R; 

h) Test method chosen; 

j) Test rim (size and material); and 


k) Tyre size, manufacturer, type, identity number 
(if one exists), speed symbol, load index, DOT 
number (Department of Transportation). 


All the mechanical quantities (forces, torques) will 
be orientated in accordance with the axis systems 


specified in ISO 8855. 


The directional tyres shall be run in their specified 
rotation sense. 


E-1.4.6 Measurement of Parasitic Losses 


The parasitic losses shall be determined by one of the 
following procedures given in E-1.4.6.1 or E-1.4.6.2. 


E-1.4.6.1 Skim test reading 
Skim test reading follows the following procedure: 


a) Reduce the load to maintain the tyre at the test 
speed without slippage. The load values should 
be as follows: 


1) Class C1 tyres: recommended value of 
100 N, not to exceed 200 N; 


2) Class C2 tyres: recommended value of 
150 N, not to exceed 200 N for machines 
designed for class C1 tyre measurement or 
500 N for machine designed for class 
C2 and C3 tyres; and 


3) Class C3 tyres: recommended value of 
400 N, not to exceed 500 N. 


b) Record the spindle force F, input torque T;, or 
the power, whichever applies; and 


c) Record the load on the tyre normal to the drum 
surface Lm- 


E-1.4.6.2 Deceleration method 


The deceleration method follows the procedure 
below: 
a) Remove the tyre from the test surface; and 


b) Record the deceleration of the test drum 
(A@p,/AT) and that of the unloaded tyre 


(AwT0/At) or record the deceleration of the 
test drum JDO and that of the unloaded tyre 


JTO in exact or approximate form in 
accordance with E-1.3.5. 


FIG. 5 FIGURE FOR MEASUREMENT AND RECORDING 


42 


E-1.4.7 Allowance for Machines exceeding (Om) 
criterion 


The steps described in E-1.4.3 to E-1.4.5 shall be 
carried out once only, if the measurement standard 
deviation determined in accordance with E-1.6.5 is: 


a) Not greater than 0.075 N/KN for class C1 and 
C2 tyres; and 


b) Not greater than 0.06 N/KN for class C3 
tyres. 


If the measurement standard deviation exceeds this 
criterion, the measurement process will be repeated 
n times as described in E-1.6.5. The rolling 
resistance value reported shall be the average of the 
n measurements. 


E-1.5 Data Interpretation 
E-1.5.1 Determination of Parasitic Losses 
E-1.5.1.1 General 


The laboratory shall perform the measurements 
described in E-1.4.6.1 for the force, torque and 
power methods or those described in E-1.4.6.2 for 
the deceleration method, in order to determine 
precisely in the test conditions (load, speed, 
temperature) the tyre spindle friction, the tyre and 
wheel aerodynamic losses, the drum (and as 
appropriate, engine and/or clutch) bearing friction, 
and the drum aerodynamic losses. 


The parasitic losses related to the tyre/drum 
interface Fpexpressed in N shall be calculated from 
the force, torque, power or the deceleration, as 
shown in E-1.5.1.2 to E-1.5.1.5. 

E-1.5.1.2 Force method at tyre spindle 


Fpis calculated as follows: 


T 
Fo = RC + T) 


where 

K= tyre spindle force in N 
(see E-1.4.6.1); 

Te = distance from the tyre axis to the 
drum outer surface understeady state 
conditions, in m; and 

R= test drum radius, in m. 


E-1.5.1.3 Torque method at drum axis 


Fpl is calculated as follows: 


Fy =T;/R 


43 


IS 18258 : 2023 


where 
Tt = input torque in N.m, (see E-1.4.6.1); 
and 
R = test drum radius, in m. 


E-1.5.1.4 Power Method at Drum Axis 


F, is calculated as follows: 


p 
_3.6VXxA 
pl ™ Un 
where 

V = electrical potential applied to the 
machine drive, in V; 

A = electric current drawn by the machine 
drive, in Ampere; and 

Un, = test drum speed, in km/h. 


E-1.5.1.5 Deceleration method 


Fp is calculated by either of the following: 


Ip (Aw Ip (Aw 
Pn = (Cm) Ba 
R \ Ato / R, \ Ato 
or 
Ip I 


where 
Ip = test drum inertia in rotation, in 
kg.m2 ; 
R = test drum surface radius, in m; 
Wpo = test drum angular speed, without 
tyre, in rad/s; 
joo = deceleration of the test drum, 
without tyre, in rad/s?; 
Ato = time increment chosen for the 
measurement of the parasitic 
losses without tyre, in s; 
Ir = spindle, tyre and wheel inertia in 
rotation, in kg.m?; 
Rr = tyre rolling radius, in m; 
W709 = tyre angular speed, unloaded tyre, 
in rad/s ; and 
Ito = deceleration of unloaded tyre, in 


rad/s. 
E-1.5.2 Rolling Resistance Calculation 


E-1.5.2.1 General 


The rolling resistance F, expressed in N, is 
calculated using the values obtained by testing the 


IS 18258 : 2023 


tyre to the conditions specified in this international 
standard and by subtracting the appropriate parasitic 
losses Fy, obtained according to E-1.5.1. 

E-1.5.2.2 Force method at tyre spindle 

The rolling resistance F,, in N, is calculated using the 


following equation: 


F. =F,(1 + 1,/R) — Foi 


where 

F, = the tyre spindle force in N; 

Fy = parasitic losses as calculated in 
E-1.5.1.2; 

rų = distance from the tyre axis to the drum 
outer surface under steady state 
condition, in M; and 

R = test drum radius, in m. 


E-1.5.2.3 Torque Method at Drum Axis 


The rolling resistance F,, in N, is calculated using the 
following equation: 


Tt 
k=% fp 


E-1.5.2.4 Power method at Drum Axis 


The rolling resistance F,, in N, is calculated using the 
following equation: 


3.6VXxA 
on 7) — Fl 
where 
V = electrical potential applied to the 
machine drive, in V; 
A = electric current drawn by the 
machine drive, in Ampere; 
U» = test drum speed, in km/h; and 
Fy = parasitic losses as calculated in 


E-1.5.1.4; 
E-1.5.2.5 Deceleration Method 


The rolling resistance F,, in N, is calculated using 
either of the following equations: 


ee a 


RXIT =>) 
seed 
Aty pl 


Ry? 


44 


where 
Ip = test drum inertia in rotation, in 
kg.m’; 
R = test drum surface radius, in m; 
A@,y = test drum angular speed 
increment, without tyre, in rad/s; 
At, = time increment chosen for 
measurement, in s; 
Ir = spindle, tyre and wheel inertia in 
rotation, in kg.m?; 
R: = tyre rolling radius, in m; 
Fy = parasitic losses as calculated in 
E-1.5.1.5; and 
jy = deceleration of the test drum, in 


rad/s?. 
E-1.6 Data Analysis 
E-1.6.1 Rolling Resistance Coefficient 


The rolling resistance coefficient C;is calculated by 
dividing the rolling resistance by the load on the tyre. 


ous 
eF 
where 
F, = rolling resistance in N; and 
Lm = test load in kN. 


E-1.6.2 Temperature Correction 


If measurements at temperatures other than 25 °C 
are unavoidable (only temperatures not less than 
20 °C or more than 30 °C are acceptable), then a 
correction for temperature shall be made using the 
following equation: 


Fy5 =F [1 +K (tamb ~ 25)] 


where 
Fys = rolling resistance at 25 °C, in N; 
F; = rolling resistance, in N; 
tamb = ambient temperature, in °C; 
K for class C1 tyres = 0.008; 
K for class C2 and C3 tyres = 0.010; and 
with a load index equal or 
lower than121 
K for class C3 tyres withaload = 0.006. 


index greater than 121 
E-1.6.3 Drum Diameter Correction 


Test results obtained from different drum diameters 


shall be compared by using the following theoretical 
formula: 
Fro = K Foi 


where 


R= [Ry / Ra) (Ro + Tr) 
Ri +17 


Ri = the radius of drum 1, in m; 

Rə = radius of drum 2, in m; 

rr = one-half of the nominal design 
tyre diameter, in m; 

Fro. = rolling resistance value measured 
on drum 1, in N; and 

F2 = rolling resistance value measured 


on drum 2, in N. 
E-1.6.4 Measurement Result 


Where n measurements are greater than 1, if 
required by E-1.4.6, the measurement result shall be 
the average of the C, values obtained for the n 
measurements, after the corrections described in 
E-1.6.2 and E-1.6.3 have been made. 


E-1.6.5 The laboratory shall ensure that, based on a 
minimum of three measurements, the machine 
maintains the following values of Om, as measured 
on a single tyre: 

a) For tyres of classes Cl and C2 : om 
< 0.075 N/KN; and 


b) For tyres of class C3: om < 0.06 N/KN. 


If the above requirement for om is not met, the 
following formula shall be applied to determine the 
minimum number of measurements n (rounded to 
the immediate superior integer value) that are 
required by the machine to qualify for conformance: 


n 


where 
x for tyres of classes Cl and = 0.075 N/KN; 
C2 and 
x for tyres of class C3 = 0.06 N/KN 


If a tyre needs to be measured several times, the 
tyre/wheel assembly shall be removed from the 
machine between the successive measurements. 


If the removal/refitting operation duration is less 
than 10 min, the warm-up durations indicated in 
E-1.4.3 may be reduced to: 


a) 10 min for tyres of class Cl; 
b) 20 min for tyres of class C2; and 


45 


IS 18258 : 2023 


c) 30 min for tyres of class C3. 


E-1.6.6 Monitoring of the laboratory control tyre 
shall be carried out at intervals no greater than one 
month. Monitoring shall include a minimum of 
3 separate measurements taken during this one 
month period. The average of the 3 measurements 
taken during a given one- month period shall be 
evaluated for drift from one monthly evaluation to 
another. 


E-2 TEST EQUIPMENT TOLERANCES 
E-2.1 Purpose 


The limits specified under this clause are necessary 
in order to achieve suitable levels of repeatable test 
results, which can also be correlated among various 
test laboratories. These tolerances are not meant to 
represent a complete set of engineering 
specifications for test equipment, rather they should 
serve as guidelines for achieving reliable test results. 


E-2.2 Test Rims 
E-2.2.1 Width 


For passenger car tyre rims (C1 tyres), the test rim 
width shall be the same as the measuring rim 
determined in 6.2.2 of ISO 4000-1. 


For truck and bus tyres (C2 and C3), the rim width 
shall be the same as the measuring rim determined 
in clause 5.1.3 of ISO 4209-1. 


In cases where the width is not defined in the above 
mentioned ISO standards, the rim width as defined 
by one of the standards organizations as specified in 
E-5 may be used. 


E-2.2.2 Run-Out 


Run-out shall meet the following criteria: 


a) Maximum radial run-out: 0.5 mm; and 


b) Maximum lateral run-out: 0.5 mm. 


E-2.3 DRUM / TYRE ALIGNMENT 
E-2.3.1 General 

Angle deviations are critical to the test results. 
E-2.3.2 Load Application 


The direction of tyre loading application shall be 
kept normal to the test surface and shall pass through 
the wheel centre within: 


a) 1 mrad for the force and deceleration 
methods; and 


b) 5 mrad for the torque and power methods. 


IS 18258 : 2023 


E-2.3.3 Tyre Alignment 
E-2.3.3.1 Camber angle 


The plane of the wheel shall be perpendicular to the 
test surface within 2 mrad for all methods. 


E-2.3.3.2 Slip Angle 


The plane of the tyre shall be parallel to the direction 
of the test surface motion within 1 mrad for all 
methods. 


E-2.4 Control Accuracy 


Test conditions shall be maintained at their specified 
values, independent of perturbations induced by the 
tyre and rim non-uniformity, such that the overall 
variability of the rolling resistance measurement is 
minimized. In order to meet this requirement, the 
average value of measurements taken during the 
rolling resistance data collection period shall be 
within the accuracies stated as follows: 


a) Tyre loading: 


1) ForLI< 121, +20N or +0.5 percent, 
whichever is greater; and 


2) For LI> 121,+45 N or + 0.5 percent 
whichever is greater. 
b) Cold inflation pressure: + 3 kPa; 


c) Surface speed: 


1) + 0.2 km/h for the power, torque and 
deceleration methods; and 


2) +0.5 km/h for the force method. 
d) Time: 


1) + 0.02 s for the time increments specified 
in E-1.3.5 (b) for the data acquisition in 
the deceleration method in Aw/At form; 

2) + 0.2 percent for the time increments 
specified in E-1.3.5 (a) for the data 
acquisition in the deceleration method in 
dw/dt form; and 

3) + 5 percent for the other time durations 
specified in E-1. 


E-2.5 Instrumentation Accuracy 
The instrumentation used for readout and recording 


of test data shall be accurate within the tolerances 
stated in following table: 


Parameter 


Load index < 121 


Load index > 121 


Tyre load 


Inflation pressure +1kPa 


Spindle force +0.5 N or + 0.5 % ® 
Torque input + 0.5 Nm or + 0.5 % ® 
Distance +1 mm 
Electrical power +10 W 


Temperature 
Surface speed 
Time 
Angular velocity 


® whichever is greater; 


+10Nort0.5 %™ 


+30Nor+0.5% 
+1.5 kPa 

+1.0N or 0.5% ® 

+ 1.0 Nm or + 0.5% ® 
+1 mm 
+20 W 


+ 0.2 °C 
+ 0.1 km/h 


+0.01 s-+0.1 % -+10 s® 


+0.1 % 


® +0.01 s for the time increments specified in D-1.3.5 (b) for the data acquisition in the deceleration method in Aw/At form; 


© 40.1 percentfor the time increments specified in D-1.3.5 (a) for the data acquisition in the deceleration method in dw/dt form; 


and 


‘ + 10 sec for the other time durations specified in D-1. 


46 


E-2.6 Compensation for Load/Spindle Force 
Interaction and Load Misalignment (for the 
Force Method only) 


Compensation of both load/spindle force interaction 
(cross talk) and load misalignment may be achieved 
either by recording the spindle force for both 
forward and reverse tyre rotation or by dynamic 
machine calibration. If spindle force is recorded for 
forward and reverse directions (at each test 
condition), compensation is achieved by subtracting 
the reverse value from the forward value and 
dividing the result by two. If dynamic machine 
calibration is intended, the compensation terms may 
be easily incorporated in the data reduction. 


In cases where reverse tyre rotation immediately 
follows the completion of the forward tyre rotation, 
a warm-up time for reverse tyre rotation shall be at 
least 10 min for class C1 tyres and 30 min for all 
other tyre types. 


E-2.7 Test Surface Roughness 


The roughness, measured laterally, of the smooth 
steel drum surface shall have a maximum centreline 
average height value of 6.3 um. 


NOTE — In case where a textured drum surface is used 
instead of a smooth steel surface, this fact is noted in the test 
report. The surface texture shall then be 180 um deep 
(80 grit) and the laboratory is responsible for maintaining 
the surface roughness characteristics. No specific correction 
factor is recommended for cases where a textured drum 
surface is used. 


IS 18258 : 2023 


E-3 MEASURING RIM WIDTH 
E-3.1 Class C1 Tyres 


The measuring rim width R,, is equal to the product 
of the nominal section width Sy and the coefficient 
K3. It is rounded to the nearest standardized rim. 


Rm = Kz X SN 
Coefficient K2 for tyres mounted on 5° drop centre 


rims with a nominal diameter expressed by a 
two-figure code: 


Nominal aspect K, (rim/section width 


ratio ratio coefficient) 
95 to 75 0.7 
70 to 60 0.75 
55 and 50 0.8 
45 0.85 
40 to 30 0.9 
20 and25 0.92 


E-3.2 Class C2 and C3 Tyres 


The measuring rim width Rm is equal to the product 
of the nominal section width Sy, and the coefficient 
K,. It is rounded to the nearest standardized rim 
width. 


Rm = K4 X Sy 


Coefficients K, for determining measuring rim 
width: 


Tyre structure Type of rim Nominal aspect ratio Measuring rim/ section 
code H/S ratio K, 
100 to 75 0.70 
70 and 65 0.75 
60 0.75 
5° tapered 55 0.80 
50 0.80 
B,D, R 45 0.85 
40 0.90 
90 to 55 0.75 
60 0.80 
15 tapered 55 0.80 
(drop-centre) 
50 0.80 
45 0.85 
40 0.85 


NOTE — Other factors may be established for new tyre concepts (structures). 


IS 18258 : 2023 


E-4 TEST REPORT AND TEST DATA 
(ROLLING RESISTANCE) 


Part 1 - Report 


a) Testing Agency; 
b) Name and address of applicant; 
c) Test report no.; 


d) Manufacturer and brand name or trade 
description; 


e) Tyre class (C1, C2 or C3); 
f) Category of use; 


g) Rolling resistance coefficient (temperature 
and drum diameter corrected; 


h) Comments (if any); 
j) Date; and 
k) Signature. 


Part 2 - Test data 


a) Date of test; 


b) Test machine identification and drum 
diameter/surface; 


c) Test tyre details: 


1) Tyre size designation and 
description. 


service 


2) Tyre brand and trade description. 
3) Reference inflation pressure, kPa. 
d) Test data: 

1) Measurement method; 

2) Test speed, km/h; 

3) Load, N; 

4) Test inflation pressure, initial distance 
from the tyre axis to the drum outer 
surface under steady state conditions 
TL m; 

5) Test rim width and material; 

6) Ambient temperature, °C; and 


7) Skim test load (except deceleration 


48 


method), N. 
e) Rolling resistance coefficient: 


1) Initial value (or average in the case of 
more than 1), N/kN; 


2) Temperature corrected, N/kN; and 


3) Temperature and drum diameter 
corrected, N /KN. 


E-5 TYRE STANDARDS ORGANIZATIONS 


a) The Tire and Rim Association, Inc. (TRA); 

b) The European Tyre and Rim Technical 
Organisation (ETRTO); 

c) The Japan Automobile Tyre Manufacturers’ 
Association (JATMA); 


d) The Tyre and Rim Association of Australia 
(TRAA); 

e) South Africa Bureau of Standards (SABS); 

f) China Association for Standardization (CAS); 


g) Indian Tyre Technical Advisory Committee 
(ITTAC); and 


h) International Standards Organisation (ISO). 


E-6 DECELERATION METHOD: MEASUREMENTS 
AND DATA PROCESSING FOR DECELERATION 
VALUE OBTAINING IN DIFFERENTIAL FORM 
doydt 


E-6.1 Record dependency distance-time of rotating 
body decelerated from peripheral with a speed range 
such as 82 km/h to 78 km/h or 62 km/h to 58 km/h 
dependent on tyre class (E-1.3.2) in a discrete form 
(Fig. 6) for a rotating body: 


z = f(t,) 
where 
z = number of body revolutions during 
deceleration; and 
t, = end time of revolution number z in s 


recorded with 6 digits after zero. 


IS 18258 : 2023 


FIG. 6 DISTANCE TIME DEPENDENCY OF ROTATING BODY 


NOTE — The lower speed of the recording range may be 
reduced down to 60 km/h when test speed is 80 km/h and 
40 km/h when the test speed is 60 km/h. 


E-6.2 Approximate Recorded Dependency by 


Con 


tinuous, Monotonic, Differentiable Function 


E-6.2.1 Choose the value nearest to the maximum of 
z dividable by 4 and divide it into 4 equal parts with 
bounds: 0, 2;(t1), Z2(t2), Z3(t3), Z4(t4), 


E-6.2.2 Work out the system for 4 equations each of 


the form: 
B(Te-t 
cos BT; 
where 
A = dimensionless constant; 
B= constant in rev/s; 
Te = constant in s; and 
m = number of bounds shown in Fig. 6 


Insert in these 4 equations the coordinates of 4% 
bound above. 


E-6. 
the 


2.3 Take constants A, B and T, as the solution of 
equation system of E-6,2.2 using iteration 


process and approximate measured data by 
formulae: 
cos B(Te-t) 
= AX ——————— 
a(t) Ax In cos BT, 
where 
z(t) = current continuous angular distance in 


t 


number of revolutions (not only 
integer values); and 


= timeins. 


NOTE — Other approximating functions z = f(t,) may be 
used if their adequacy is proven, 


49 


E-6.3 Calculate the deceleration j in rev/s? by using 
following formula: 


Sn 2, w 
jJ=AB* + = 
where 


œ = angular speed in rev/s. 


œ is taken as follows: 


a) For the case Un = 80 km/h, = 22.222/R, 
(or R); and 

b) For the case Un = 60 km/h; œ = 16.666/R, 
(or R). 


E-6.4 Parameters for Estimating 


Estimate the quality of approximation of measured 
data and its accuracy by parameters given in E-6.4.1 
and E-6.4.2. 


E-6.4.1 Standard deviation in percentages: 


E-6.4.2 Coefficient of Determination 


za 4 _ mke- 
oo UPlz-z)? 
where 
got yng 4 “ais an 
Z=- de> > (1+2+ +n) g 


NOTE — The above calculations for this variant of the 
deceleration method for tyre rolling resistance measurement 
can be executed by the computer program ‘Deceleration 
Calculator’ downloadable from the WP.29 website as well 
as any software which allows the calculation of nonlinear 
regression. 


IS 18258 : 2023 


ANNEX F 
(Clauses 3.5, 6.4, 6.4.1.1 and 7.2) 


SNOW PERFORMANCE TESTING 


F-1 PROCEDURES FOR SNOW 
PERFORMANCE TESTING RELATIVE TO 
SNOW TYRE FOR USE IN SEVERE SNOW 
CONDITIONS 


F-1.1 Specific Definitions for Snow Test when 
Different from Existing Ones 


F-1.1.1 Test Run 


A single pass of a loaded tyre over a given test 
surface. 


F-1.1.2 Braking Test 


A series of a specified number of ABS-braking test 
runs of the same tyre repeated within a short time 
frame. 


F-1.1.3 Traction Test 


A series of a specified number of spin-traction test 
runs according to ASTM standard F1805-06 of the 
same tyre repeated within a short time frame. 


F-1.1.4 Acceleration Test 


A series of specified number of traction controlled 
acceleration test runs of the same tyre repeated 
within a short time frame. 


F-1.2 Spin Traction Method for Classes C1 and 
C2 Tyres [see 6.4 (b)] 


The test procedure of ASTM standard F1805-06 
shall be used to assess snow performance through 
spin traction values on medium packed snow (the 
snow compaction index measured with a CTI 
penetrometer shall be between 70 and 80). 


F-1.2.1 The test course surface shall be composed of 
a medium packed snow surface, as characterized in 
Table A-2.1 of ASTM standard F1805-06. 


F-1.2.2 The tyre load for testing shall be as per 
option 2 in paragraph 11.9.2 of ASTM standard 
F1805-06. 


F-1.3 Braking on Snow Method for Classes C1 
and C2 Tyres 


F-1.3.1 General Conditions 
F-1.3.1.1 Test course 


The braking tests shall be done on a flat test surface 
of sufficient length and width, with a maximum 


50 


2 percent gradient, covered with packed snow. The 
snow surface shall be composed of a hard packed 
snow base at least 3 cm thick and a surface layer of 
medium packed and prepared snow about 2 cm thick. 


The air temperature, measured about 1 m above the 
ground, shall be between - 2 °C and - 15 °C. The 
snow temperature, measured at a depth of about 
1 cm, shall be between 4 °C and - 15 °C. 


It is recommended to avoid direct sunlight, large 
variations of sunlight or humidity, as well as wind. 


The snow compaction index measured with a CTI 
penetrometer shall be between 75 and 85. 


F-1.3.1.2 Vehicle 


The test shall be conducted with a standard 
production vehicle in good running order and 
equipped with an ABS system. The vehicle used 
shall be such that the loads on each wheel are 
appropriate to the tyres being tested. Several 
different tyre sizes can be tested on the same vehicle. 


F-1.3.1.3 Tyres 


The tyres should be broken-in prior to testing to 
remove spew, compound nodules or flashes 
resulting from the moulding process. The tyre 
surface in contact with snow shall be cleaned before 
performing a test. Tyres shall be conditioned at the 
outdoor ambient temperature at least two hours 
before their mounting for tests. Tyre pressures shall 
then be adjusted to the values specified for the test. 


In case a vehicle cannot accommodate both the 
reference and candidate tyres, a third tyre (control 
tyre) may be used as an intermediate. First test 
control vs. reference on another vehicle, then test 
candidate versus control on the vehicle. 


F-1.3.1.4 Load and pressure 


For C1 tyres, the vehicle load shall be such that the 
resulting loads on the tyres are between 60 percent 
and 90 percent of the load corresponding to the tyre 
load index. The cold inflation pressure shall be 
240 kPa. 


F-1.3.1.4.2 For C2 tyres, the vehicle load shall be 
such that the resulting loads on the tyres are between 
60 percent and 100 percent of the load corresponding 
to the tyre load index. The static tyre load on the 
same axle should not differ by more than 10 percent. 


The inflation pressure is calculated to run at constant 
deflection. 


For a vertical load higher or equal to 75 percent of 
the load capacity of the tyre, a constant deflection is 
applied, hence the test inflation pressure shall be 
calculated as follows: 


P, = P. x (a7 


For a vertical load lower than 75 percent of the load 
capacity of the tyre, a constant inflation pressure is 
applied, hence the test inflation pressure shall be 
calculated as follows: 


P, = P. (0.75)!25 = (0.7) P. 


where 
P. = reference pressure corresponding to 
the maximum load capacity Qy; 
Q, = Static test load of the tyre; and 
Q; = maximun load associated to the load 


capacity index of the tyre written on 
the sidewall. 


Check the tyre pressure just prior to testing at 
ambient temperature. 


F-1.3.1.5 Instrumentation 


The vehicle shall be fitted with calibrated sensors 
suitable for measurements in winter. There shall be 
adata acquisition system to store measurements. The 
accuracy of measurement sensors and systems shall 
be such that the relative uncertainty of the measured 
or computed mean fully developed decelerations is 
less than 1 percent. 


F-1.3.2 Testing Sequences 


F-1.3.2.1 For every candidate tyre and the standard 
reference tyre, ABS-braking test runs shall be 
repeated a minimum of 6 times. The zones where 
ABS-braking is fully applied shall not overlap. 
When a new set of tyres is tested, the runs are 
performed after shifting aside the vehicle trajectory 
in order not to brake on the tracks of the previous 
tyre. When it is no longer possible not to overlap full 
ABS-braking zones, the test course shall be 
re-groomed. 


Required sequence is as follows: 


6 repeats SRTT, then shift aside to test next tyre on 
fresh surface 6 repeats Candidate 1, then shift aside 
6 repeats Candidate 2, then shift aside6 repeats 
SRTT, then shift aside 


F-1.3.2.2 Order of testing 


If only one candidate tyre is to be evaluated, the 


51 


IS 18258 : 2023 


order of testing shall be as follows: 


R1-T-R2 
where 
Ri = initial test of the SRTT; 
R2 = _ repeat test of the SRTT; and 
T = test of the candidate tyre to be 


evaluated. 


A maximum of two candidate tyres may be tested 
before repeating the SRTT test (for example, 
R1-T1-T2-R2). 


F-1.3.2.3 The comparative tests of SRTT and 
candidate tyres shall be repeated on two different 
days. 


F-1.3.3 Test Procedure 


F-1.3.3.1 Drive the vehicle at a speed not lower than 
28 km/h. 


F-1.3.3.2 When the measuring zone has been 
reached, the vehicle gear is set into neutral, the brake 
pedal is depressed sharply by a constant force 
sufficient to cause operation of the ABS on all 
wheels of the vehicle and to result in stable 
deceleration of the vehicle and held down until the 
speed is lower than 8 km/h. 


F-1.3.3.3 The mean fully developed deceleration 
between 25 km/h and 10 km/h shall be computed 
from time, distance, speed, or acceleration 
measurements. 


F-1.3.4 Data Evaluation and Presentation of Results 
F-1.3.4.1 Parameters to be reported 

F-1.3.4.1.1 For each tyre and each braking test, the 
mean and standard deviation of the mfdd shall be 


computed and reported. 


The coefficient of variation (CV) of a tyre braking 
test shall be computed as follows: 


Standard deviation(tyre) 


CV (Tyre) > Mean(tyre) 


F-1.3.4.1.2 Weighted averages of two successive 


tests of the SRTT shall be computed taking into 
account the number of candidate tyres in between. 


In the case of the order of testing R1-T-R2, the 
weighted average of the SRTT to be used in the 
comparison of the performance of the candidate tyre 
shall be taken to be: 


Wayg(SRTT) = (Ri + Ro)/2 


IS 18258 : 2023 


In the case of the order of testing R1-T1-T2-R2, the 
weighted average of the SRTT to be used in the 
comparison of the performance of the candidate tyre 
shall be taken to be: 


For comparison with the candidate tyre T1: 


2 1 
Wavg (SRTT) = gia + 3.2 


For comparison with the candidate tyre T2: 


Wavg (SRTT) =< Ry + =Ry 


where 
R, = mean mfdd for the first test of the 
SRTT; and 
R) = mean mfdd for the second test of the 
SRTT. 


F-1.3.4.1.3 The snow grip index (SG) in percent of a 
candidate tyre shall be computed as: 
Mean (candidate) 

Wavg (SRTT) 


SG (candidate) = 


F-1.3.4.2 Statistical Validations 


The sets of repeats of measured or computed mfdd 
for each tyre should be examined for normality, 
drift, eventual outliers. The consistency of the means 
and standard-deviations of successive braking tests 
of SRTT should be examined. The means of two 
successive SRTT braking tests shall not differ by 
more than 5 percent. The coefficient of variation of 
any braking test shall be less than 6 percent. If those 
conditions are not met, tests shall be performed 
again after re-grooming the test course. 


F-1.3.4.3 In the case where the candidate tyres 
cannot be fitted to the same vehicle as the SRTT, for 
example, due to tyre size, inability to achieve 
required loading and so on, comparison shall be 
made using intermediate tyres, hereinafter referred 
to as control tyres, and two different vehicles. One 
vehicle shall be capable of being fitted with the 
SRTT and the control tyre and the other vehicle shall 
be capable of being fitted with the control tyre and 
the candidate tyre. 


F-1.3.4.3.1 The snow grip index of the control tyre 
relative to the SRTT (SG/) and of the candidate 
tyre relative to the control tyre (SG2) shall be 
established using the procedure in F-1.3.1 to 
F-1.3.4.2. The snow grip index of the candidate tyre 
relative to the SRTT shall be the product of the two 
resulting snow grip indices. 


F-1.3.4.3.2 The ambient conditions shall 
be comparable. All tests shall be completed within 
the same day. 


52 


F-1.3.4.3.3 The same set of control tyres shall be 
used for comparison with the SRTT and with the 
candidate tyre and shall be fitted in the same wheel 
positions. 


F-1.3.4.3.4 Control tyres that have been used for 
testing shall subsequently be stored under the same 
conditions as required for the SRTT. 


F-1.3.4.3.5 The SRTT and control tyres shall be 
discarded if there is irregular wear or damage or 
when the performance appears to have been 
deteriorated. 


F-1.4 Acceleration Method for Class C3 Tyres 


F-1.4.1 Additional classification of C3 tyres 
[see 3.4 (c)], only applies for this test method, is as 
follows: 


a) C3 Narrow (C3N), when the C3 tyre nominal 
section width is lower than 285 mm; and 


b) C3Wide (C3W), when the C3 tyre nominal 
section width is greater or equal to 285 mm. 


F-1.4.2 Methods for Measuring Snow Grip Index 


Snow performance is based on a test method by 
which the average acceleration in an acceleration 
test, of a candidate tyre is compared to that of a 
standard reference tyre. The relative performance 
shall be indicated by a snow grip index (SG). 


When tested in accordance with the acceleration test 
in F-1.4.7, the average acceleration of a candidate 
snow tyre shall be at least 1.25 compared to one of 
the two equivalent SRTTs, ASTM F 2870 and 
ASTM F 2871. 


F-1.4.3 Measuring Equipment 


F-1.4.3.1 A sensor suitable for measuring speed and 
distance covered on snow/ice surface between two 
speeds must be used. To measure vehicle speed, a 
fifth wheel or non-contact speed-measuring system 
(including radar, GPS) shall be used. 


F-1.4.3.2 The following tolerances shall be respected: 


a) For speed measurements: + | percent (km/h) 
or 0.5 km/h whichever is greater; and 


b) For distance measurements: + 1 x 10! m 


F-1.4.3.3 A display of the measured speed or the 
difference between the measured speed and the 
reference speed for the test is recommended inside 
the vehicle so that the driver can adjust the speed of 
the vehicle. 


F-1.4.3.4 For Acceleration test covered in F-1.4.7, 
a display of the slip ratio of the driven tyres is 
recommended inside the vehicle and shall be used in 


the particular case of F- 1.4.7.2.1.1. 
i , wheel speed — vehicle speed 
Slip ratio = —————— 
vehicle speed 
where 


vehicle speed is measured as F-1.4.3.1; and 


wheel speed is calculated on a tyre of the driven 
axle by measuring its angular velocity and its 
loaded diameter 


Wheel speed = 2 x loaded diameter x angular speed 


where 


m = 3.141 6 (m/360 deg), loaded diameter in m 
and angular speed in rev/s (360 deg/sec). 


F-1.4.3.5 A data acquisition system can be used for 
storing the measurements. 


F-1.4.4 General Conditions 
F-1.4.4.1 Test Course 


The test shall be done on a flat test surface of 
sufficient length and width, with a maximum 
2 percent gradient, covered with packed snow. 


F-1.4.4.1.1 The snow surface shall be composed of a 
hard packed snow base at least 3 cm thick and a 
surface layer of medium packed and prepared snow 
about 2 cm thick. 


F-1.4.4.1.2 The snow compaction index measured 
with a CTI penetrometer shall be between 80 and 90. 
Refer to the appendix of ASTM F1805 for additional 
details on measuring method. 


F-1.4.4.1.3 The air temperature, measured about 1 m 
above the ground, shall be between - 2 °C and 
- 15 °C. The snow temperature, measured at a 
depth of about 1 cm, shall be between - 4 °C and 
- 15 °C. Air temperature shall not vary more than 
10 °C during the test. 


F-1.4.5 Tyres Preparation and Break-in 


F-1.4.5.1 Fit the test tyres on rims as per 
ISO 4209-1 using conventional mounting methods. 
Ensure proper bead seating by the use of a suitable 
lubricant. Excessive use of lubricant should be 


53 


IS 18258 : 2023 


avoided to prevent slipping of the tyre on the wheel 
rim. 


F-1.4.5.2 The tyres should be broken-in prior to 
testing to remove spew, compound nodules or 
flashes resulting from moulding process. 


F-1.4.5.3 Tyres shall be conditioned at the outdoor 
ambient temperature at least 2 h before their 
mounting for tests. They should be placed such that 
they all have the same ambient temperature prior to 
testing and be shielded from the sun to avoid 
excessive heating by solar radiation. The tyre 
surface in contact with snow shall be cleaned before 
performing a test. Tyre pressures shall then be 
adjusted to the values specified for the test. 


F-1.4.6 Testing Sequence 


If only one candidate tyre is to be evaluated, the 
order of testing shall be as follows: 


R1, T, R2 
where 
R1 = _ initial test of the SRTT; 
R2 = _ repeat test of the SRTT; and 
T = test of the candidate tyre to be 


evaluated 


A maximum of 3 candidate tyres may be tested 
before repeating the SRTT test (for example, R1, T1, 
T2, T3, R2). Recommendations are that the zones 
where acceleration is fully applied shall not overlap 
without reworking and when a new set of tyres is 
tested; 


The runs are performed after shifting the vehicle 
trajectory in order not to accelerate on the tracks of 
the previous tyre, when it is no longer possible not to 
overlap full acceleration zones, the test course 
should be re-groomed. 


F-1.4.7 Acceleration on Snow Test Procedure for 
Snow Grip Index of Classes C3N and C3W 


F-1.4.7.1 Principle 


The test method covers a procedure for measuring 
the snow grip performance of commercial vehicle 
tyres during acceleration, using a commercial vehicle 
having a traction control system (TCS, ASR, etc). 


Starting with a defined initial speed, the full throttle 
is applied to activate the traction control system, the 


IS 18258 : 2023 


average acceleration is calculated between two 
defined speeds. 


F-1.4.7.2 Vehicle 


F-1.4.7.2.1 The test shall be conducted with a 2 axles 
standard model commercial vehicle in good running 
conditions equipped with: 


a) Lowrear axle weight and an engine powerful 
enough to maintain the average percentage 
of slip during the test as required in 
F-1.4.7.5.1 and F-1.4.7.5.2.1; 


A manual gearbox (automatic gearbox with 
manual shift allowed) having a gear ratio 
covering the speed range of at least 19 km/h 
between 4 km/h and 30 km/h; 


Differential lock on driven axle is 
recommended to improve repeatability; and 


d) A standard commercial system 
controlling/limiting the slip of the driving 
axle during acceleration (Traction control, 
ASR, TCS, etc). 


b 


wm 


c 


S 


E-1.4.7.2.1.1 In the particular case where a standard 
commercial vehicle equipped with a traction control 
system is not available, a vehicle without Traction 
Control/ASR/TCS is permitted provided the vehicle 
is fitted with a system to display the percentage slip 
as stated in F-1.4.3.4 and a mandatory differential 
lock on the driven axle used in accordance with 
operating F-1.4.7.5.2.1. If a differential lock is 
available it shall be used. if the differential lock, 
however, is not available, the average slip ratio 
should be measured on the left and right driven 
wheel. 


F-1.4.7.2.2 The permitted modifications are as 
follows: 


a) Those allowing to increase the number of 
tyre sizes capable to be mounted on the 
vehicle; and 


b) Those permitting to install an automatic 
activation of the acceleration and the 
measurements. 


Any other modification of the acceleration system is 
prohibited. 


F-1.4.7.3 Vehicle fitting 


The rear driven axle may be indifferently fitted with 
2 or 4 test tyres if respecting the loading by tyre. The 
front steer non driven axle is equipped with 2 tyres 
having a size suitable for the axle load. These 2 front 
tyres could be maintained along the test. 


54 


F-1.4.7.4 Load and inflation pressure 


F-1.4.7.4.1 The static load on each rear driven test 
tyres must be between 20 percent and 55 percent of 
the tested tyre load capacity written on the sidewall. 
The vehicle front steer total static axle load should 
be between 60 percent and 160 percent of the driven 
rear total axle load. The static tyre load on the same 
driven axle should not differ by more than10 percent. 


F-1.4.7.4.2 The driven tyres inflation pressure shall 
be 70 percent of the one written on the sidewall. The 
steer tyres are inflated at nominal sidewall pressure. 
If the pressure is not marked on the sidewall, refer to 
the specified pressure in applicable tyre standards 
manuals corresponding to maximum load capacity. 


F-1.4.7.5 Testing runs 


F-1.4.7.5.1 Mount first the set of reference tyres on 
the vehicle and then on the testing area. Drive the 
vehicle at a constant speed between 4 km/h and 
11 km/h and the gear ratio capable of covering the 
speed range of at least 19 km/h for the complete test 
programme (for example, R-T1-T2-T3-R). The 
recommended gear ratio selected is 3"! or 4 and 
shall give a minimum 10 percent average slip ratio in 
the measured range of speed. 


F-1.4.7.5.2 In case of traction control system 
equipped vehicles (already switched on before the 
run) apply full throttle until the vehicle has reached 
the final speed. 


Final speed = Initial speed + 15 km/h 


No rearward restraining force shall be applied to the 
test vehicle. 


F-1.4.7.5.2.1 In the particular case of F-1.4.7.2.1.1 
where a standard commercial vehicle equipped with 
a traction control system is not available, the driver 
shall manually maintain the average slip ratio 
between 10 percent and 40 percent (controlled slip 
procedure in place of the full slip) within the 
prescribed range of speeds. If a differential lock is 
not available, the averaged slip ratio difference 
between the left and right driven wheel shall not be 
higher than 8 percent for each run. All the tyres and 
runs in the test session are performed with controlled 
slip procedure. 


F-1.4.7.5.3 Measure the distance and the time 
between the initial speed and the final speed. 


F-1.4.7.5.4 For every candidate tyre and the standard 
reference tyre, the acceleration test runs shall be 
repeated a minimum of 6 times and the coefficients 
of variation calculated for minimum 6 valid runs on 


the distance and the time should be lower than or 
equal to 6 percent. 


F-1.4.7.5.5 In case of traction control system 
equipped vehicle, the average slip ratio shall be in 
the range from 13 percent to 40 percent (calculated 
as per F-1.4.3.4). 


F-1.4.7.5.6 Apply testing sequence as defined in 
F-1.4.6. 


F-1.4.8 Processing of Measurement Results 


F-1.4.8.1 Calculation of the average acceleration, 


AA 


Each time the measurement is repeated, the average 
acceleration AA (77/7) is calculated as follows: 


2 2 
Sp — Sj 
2d 


AA = 
where 
d = distance covered between the initial speed s; 


and the final speed sp. 


F-1.4.8.2 Validation of results 


a) For the candidate tyres — The coefficient of 
variation of the average acceleration is 
calculated for all the candidate tyres. If one 
coefficient of variation is greater than 


IS 18258 : 2023 


6 percent, discard the data for this candidate 
tyre and repeat the test; and 


b 


wm 


For the reference tyre — If the coefficient of 
variation of the average acceleration for each 
group of minimum 6 runs of the reference tyre 
is higher than 6 percent, discard all data and 
repeat the test for all tyres (the candidate tyres 
and the reference tyre). 


In addition and in order to take in account possible 
test evolution, the coefficient of validation is 
calculated on the basis of the average values of any 
two consecutive groups of minimum 6 runs of the 
reference tyre. If the coefficient of validation is 
greater than 6 percent, discard the data for all the 
candidate tyres and repeat the test. 


Coef ficient of variation 


standard deviation 
= ——————— x 100 
average 


Corf ficient of validation 


average2 — averagel 
= x 100 
averagel 


F-1.4.8.3 Calculation of the average AA 


Calculation of average AA is done as per following 
table: 


Number of sets of candidate Set of candidatetyres to be Calculation of Rg 
between two successive runs of the qualified 
reference tyre 
1 Tl Ra = (R, + R2)/2 
(R1 — T1 — R2) 
ve Ra = R : R 
(R1-T1-T2-R2) | a=3z itz k 
T2 1 2 
Ra = 3 R, + 3 R, 
T1 3 1 
3 Ra = 4 R, + 4 R, 
(R1 — T1 — T2 — T3 — R2) T2 Ra = (Ri + R2)/2 
T3 
Ra FE 4 R, + 4 R3 


Rı 
R2 


F-1.4.8.4 Acceleration force coefficient (AFC) calculation 


average of the AA values in the first test of the reference tyre; and 


average of the AA values in the second test of the same reference tyre. 


Calculation on of AFC (Ta) and AFC (Ra) is done as follows: 


Tyre type 


Acceleration force coefficient 


(AFC) 


Reference tyre 


Candidate tyre 


AFC(R) = ®°/g 
AFC(T) ="*/g 


IS 18258 : 2023 


F-1.4.8.5 Calculation of the relative snow grip index 
of the tyre 


The Snow grip index represents the relative 
performance of the candidate tyre compared to the 


reference tyre. 
re a ee ac (T) 
now grip index = AFC 


F-1.4.8.6 Calculation of the slip ratio 


The slip ratio can be calculated as the average of Slip 
ratio as mentioned in F-1.4.3.4 or by comparing the 
average distance referred to in F-1.4.7.5.3 of the 
minimum 6 runs to the distance of a run done 
without slip (very low acceleration) 


Slip ratio (%) 


7 (“erase distance — No slip distance) $400 
g No slip distance 


No slip distance means the wheel distance is 
calculated on a run done with a constant speed or a 
continuous low acceleration. 


F-1.4.9 Snow Grip Performance Comparison 
between a Candidate Tyre and a Reference Tyre 
using a Control Tyre 


F-1.4.9.1 Scope 


When the candidate tyre size is significantly different 
from the reference tyre a direct comparison on the 
same vehicle may be not possible. This is an 
approach using an intermediate tyre, hereinafter 
called the control tyre. 


F-1.4.9.2 Principle of the approach 


The principle lies upon the use of a control tyre and 
2 different vehicles for the assessment of a candidate 


56 


tyre in comparison with a reference tyre. One vehicle 
can fit the reference tyre and the control tyre, the 
other the control tyre and the candidate tyre. All 
conditions are in conformity with F-1.4.7. 


The first assessment is a comparison between the 
control tyre and the reference tyre. The result (snow 
grip index 1) is the relative efficiency of the control 
tyre compared to the reference tyre. The second 
assessment is a comparison between the candidate 
tyre and the compared to the control tyre. 


The second assessment is done on the same track as 
the first one. The air temperature must be in the 
range of + 5 °C of the temperature of the first 
assessment. The control tyre set is the same set as 
the set used for the first assessment. 


The snow grip performance index of the candidate 
tyre compared to the reference tyre is deduced by 
multiplying the relative efficiencies. 


F-1.4.9.3 Selection of a set of tyres as a control tyre 
set 


A control tyre set is a group of identical tyres made in 
the same factory during one week period. 


F-1.4.10 Storage and Preservation 


Before the first assessment (control tyre/reference 
tyre), normal storage conditions can be used. It is 
necessary that all the tyres of a control tyre set have 
been stored in the same conditions. As soon as the 
control tyre set has been assessed in comparison with 
the reference tyre, specific storage conditions shall 
be applied for control tyres replacement. 


When irregular wear or damage results from tests, or 
when wear influences the test results, the use of the 
tyre shall be discontinued. 


IS 18258 : 2023 


F-2 PICTOGRAM DEFINITION OF ‘ALPINE SYMBOL’ 


Minimum 15 mm base and 15 mm height. This drawing is not to scale. 


F-3 TEST REPORTS AND TEST DATA FOR g) Snow index relative to SRTT according to 
C1 AND C2 TYRES 6.4.1.1: 


1) Test procedure and SRTT used 
h) Comments (if any); 
j) Date; and 


Part 1 - Report 


a) Test Agency; 
b) Name and address of applicant; k) Signature. 
c) Test report No.; 


Part 2 - Test data 
d) Manufacturer and brand name or trade 


description; a) Date of test; 
e) Tyre class; b) Location of test track: 
f) Category of use; 1) Test track characteristics: 
At start of tests At end of tests Specification 

Weather 
Ambient - 2°Cto- 15°C 
temperature 
Snow temperature - 4°Cto- 15°C 
CTI index 75 to 85 
Other 


c) Test vehicle (make, model and type, year); 

d) Test tyre details: 
1) Tyre size designation and service description; 
2) Tyre brand and trade description; 
3) Test tyre data: 


SRTT (1st test) Candidate Candidate SRTT (2nd test) 


Tyre dimensions 


Test rim width code 
Tyre loads F/R (kg) 
Load index F/R ( percent) 


Tyre pressure F/R(kPa) 


57 


IS 18258 : 2023 


e) Test results: mean fully developed decelerations (m/s?)/traction coefficient* 


Run number | Specification SRTT Candidate | Candidate | Candidate | SRTT (2nd test) 
(1st test) I 2 3 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
Mean 
Std-deviation 
CV (%) <6 % 
Validation SRTT 
(SRTT) <6 % 
SRTT 
average 
Snow index 1.00 
“Strike out what does not apply. 


F-5 TEST REPORTS AND TEST DATA FOR 
C3 TYRES 


Part 1 - Report 


a) Test Agency: 
b) Name and address of applicant: 
c) Test report No.: 


d) Manufacturer and brand name or trade 
description: 


e) Tyre class: 


f) Category of use: 


g) Snow index relative to SRTT according 
to 6.4.1.1: 


1) Test procedure and SRTT used 
h) Comments (if any): 
j) Date: 
k) Signature: 


Part 2 - Test data 


a) Date of test: 
b) Location of test track: 
1) Test track characteristics: 


At start of tests At end of tests Specification 
Weather 
Ambient temperature - 2°C to -15 °C 
Snow temperature - 4°C to -15°C 
CTI index 80 to 90 
Other 


c) Test vehicle (make, model and type, year); 

d) Test tyre details: 
1) Tyre size designation and service description; 
2) Tyre brand and trade description; and 
3) Test tyre data. 


58 


IS 18258 : 2023 


SRTT (Ist test) 


Candidate 


Candidate 


SRTT (2nd test) 


Tyre dimensions 


Test rim width code 


Tyre loads F/R (kg) 


Load index F/R ( per cent) 


Tyre pressure F/R(kPa) 


e) Test results: mean fully developed decelerations (m/s?) / traction coefficient*. 


Run number 


Specification 


SRTT 
(1st test) 


Candidate 
1 


Candidate 
2 


Candidate 
3 


SRTT (2nd test) 


HD] MY AJ WwW) DN] =e 


Mean 


Std-deviation 


CV (%) 


<6% 


Validation 
(SRTT) 


SRTT 
<6% 


SRTT 
average 


Snow index 


100 


59 


IS 18258 : 2023 


ANNEX G 
(Clause 5.2.2) 


INFORMATION TO BE SUBMITTED FOR TYPE APPROVAL OF TYRES 


G-1 The application for approval of a type of tyre 
with regard to this standard shall be submitted by the 
tyre manufacturer or by his duly accredited 
representative. It shall specify: 


a) 


g) 
h) 


The performance characteristics to be 
assessed for the tyre type, rolling sound 
emissions level and/or adhesion 
performance level on wet surfaces and/or 
rolling resistance level. Tyre snow 
performance level in cases of snow tyre for 
use in severe snow conditions; 


Name of manufacturer; 

Name and address of applicant; 
Address(es) of manufacturing plant(s); 
Brand name(s), trade description(s), trade 
mark(s); 

Tyre class (Class C1, C2 or C3): 

1) Section width range for class C1 tyres) 


NOTE — This information is required only for 
approval with regard to rolling sound emission 
level. 


Tyre structure; 
For Class C1 tyres, state whether: 


1) Reinforced (or extra load) in case of 
approval with regard to rolling sound 
emission level; 


2) Speed category symbol ‘Q’ or below 
(excluding ‘H’) or ‘R’ and above 
(including ‘H”) in case of snow tyres for 
approval with regard to adhesion on wet 
surfaces; 


For Classes C2 and C3 tyres, state whether: 


1) M+S marked in case of approval with 
regard to rolling sound emission level at 
stage 1; 


60 


G-2 


2) Traction in case of approval with regard 
to rolling sound emission level at 
stage 2. 


k) Category of use (normal, snow, or special); 
and 


m) A list of tyre size designations covered by 
this application. 
shall be 


The application for approval 


accompanied (in triplicate) by: 


a) 


b) 


c) 


Details of the major features, with respect to 
the effects on the performance that is, rolling 
sound emission level, adhesion on wet 
surfaces, rolling resistance and snow grip of 
the tyres, including the tread pattern, included 
in the designated range of tyre sizes. This may 
be by means of descriptions supplemented by 
technical data, drawings, photographs and 
Computer Tomography (CT), and must be 
sufficient to allow the Type Approval 
Authority or technical service to determine 
whether any subsequent changes to the major 
features will adversely affect the tyre 
performance. The effects of changes to minor 
details of tyre construction on tyre 
performances will be evident and determined 
during checks on conformity of production; 


Drawings or photographs of the tyre sidewall, 
showing the information given in G-1 (8) and 
G-1 (9) and the approval marking referred to 
in 4, shall be submitted once the production 
has been established, but no later than one 
year after the date of granting of type 
approval; and 


In the case of applications relating to special 
use tyres, a copy of the mould drawing of the 
tread pattern shall be supplied in order to allow 
verification of the void-to-fill ratio. 


IS 18258 : 2023 


ANNEX H 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Automotive Tyres, Tubes and Rims Sectional Committee, TED 07 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity (Caelestina Apts. S N 184], Near 
Sakhar Sankul Rambhu Kambale Path Shivaji 
Nagar Pune 411005) 


All India Motor Transport Congress, New Delhi 


Ashok Leyland Ltd, Chennai 


Association of State Road Transport Undertaking, 
New Delhi 


Automotive Components Manufacturers Association, 
(ACMA) 


Automotive Research Association of India, Pune 


Automotive Tyre Manufacturers Association, New Delhi 


Bajaj Auto Ltd, Pune 


Central Institute of Road Transport, Pune 


Directorate General of Quality Assurance, Ministry of 
Defence, New Delhi 


Elastomer Technology Development Society, (ETDS) 
Hero MotoCorp Limited, Dharuhera 


Indian Foundation of Transport Research and Training, 
New Delhi 


International Centre for 
Manesar 


Automotive Technology, 


Indian Rubber Manufacturers Research Association, 
Thane 


Indian Tyre Technical Advisory Committee, New Delhi 


International Centre of Automotive 


Manesar 
Kalyani Maxion Wheels Pvt Ltd 
Mahindra & Mahindra Ltd, Mambai 


Technology, 


Maruti Suzuki India Ltd, Gurugram 


Minda Kosei Aluminum Wheels Pvt Ltd, Bawal 


61 


Representative(s) 


SHRI D. P. SASTE (Chairperson) 


SHRI CHARAN SINGH 
SHRI M. MURLI (Alternate) 


SHRI V. P. GAUTAM 
SHRI N. MUTHU KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI R. CHANDRABABU 
SHRI ULLAS BABU (Alternate) 


SHRI UDAY HARITE 
SHRI SEEMA BABAL (Alternate) 


SHRI A. AKBAR BADUSHA 
SHRI V. S. KHARIRATKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJIV BUDHIRAJA 
SHRI T. C. KAMATH (Alternate) 


SHRI R. NARASIMHAN 
SHRI ARVIND V. KUMBHAR (Alternate) 


SHRI N. R. TIWARI 
SHRI V. D. CHAVAN (Alternate) 


CQAV 


SHRI T. CHAKRAVARTY 


SHRI PIYUSH CHOWDHRY 
FEROZ ALI KHAN (Alternate) 


SHRI S. P. SINGH 
SHRI J. S. WALIA (Alternate) 


SHRI AMIT KUMAR KARWAL 


DR. K. RAJ KUMAR 


SHRI V. K. MISRA 
SHRI NITEESH SHUKLA (Alternate) 


SHRI VIJAYANTA AHUJA 


SHRI SUNIL BHATAMBREKAR 


SHRI RAM SINGH 
SHRI VISHWANATHAN T. (Alternate) 


SHRI VIVEK TRIVEDI 
SHRI GURURAJ RAVI (Alternate) 


SHRI HEMANT PARKHI 
SHRI NARAYAN GIRI (Alternate) 


IS 18258 : 2023 


Organization 


Ministry of Commerce and Industry, Department for 
Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade, 
New Delhi 


Ministry of Road Transport & Highways, New Delhi 


National Automotive Testing and R and D Infrastructure 
Project, Indore 


Renault India Private Ltd. Mumbai 


Society of Indian Automobile Manufactures, New Delhi 


Steel Strips Wheels Ltd 
Skoda Auto Volkswagen India Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


Tata Motors Limited, Pune 

Toyota Kirloskar Motor Pvt Ltd, Bangalore 

Tractor Manufacturer’s Association, New Delhi 

Triton Valves Ltd, Mysore 

Vehicles Research & Development Establishment, 
Ahmednagar 


Volvo Group India Pvt Ltd, Bangalore 


Wheels India Ltd, Chennai 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


SHRI A. P. SINGH 
SHRI S. S. GUPTA 


DIRECTOR (TECHNICAL) 


DR. P. P. CHATTARAJ 


SHRI RAJENDRA KHILE 


SHRI P. K. BANERJEE 
SHRI AMIT KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI VIMAL P. ANAND 


SHRI MAKARAND BRAHME 
SHRI MILIND JAGATP (Alternate) 


SHRI P. S. GOWRISHANKAR 
SHRI AMIT JAIN (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJU M. 
SHRI VIETH R. GATTY (Alternate) 


SHRI PHILIP KOSHI 
SHRI MADHAV BHADE (Alternate) 


SHRI BHARATH CHANDRASHEKAR 
SHRI DEEPAK H. V. (Alternate) 


SHRI S. PAL 
SHRI P. P. MAHAJAN (Alternate) 


SHRI KARTHIK SARMA 
SHRI P. K. HUGAR (Alternate) 


SHRI SUNDARARAJAN T. 


SHRI R. R. SINGH, SCIENTIST ‘E’/DIRECTOR AND 
HEAD (TRANSPORT ENGINEERING) [REPRESENTING 


DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI R. R. SINGH 
SCIENTIST ‘E’/DIRECTOR 
(TRANSPORT ENGINEERING), BIS 


62 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TED 07 (13028). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8™ Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.L.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


