( Reaffirmed 2001 )

IS : 9876 - 1981

Indian

Standard

GUIDE TO THE MEASUREMENT OF AIRBORNE ACOUSTICAL NOISE AND EVALUATION OF ITS EFFECTS ON MAN
Acoustics Sectional Committee, LTDC 5
Chairman DR M. PANCHOLY Emeritus Scientist National Physical Laboratorv New Delhi * Members Representing

DR K. ACHYUTHAN Ministry of Defence ( R & D ) SHRI R. S. VOHRA ( Alternate) Ahuja Radios, New Delhi SHRI SANDEEP AHUJA SHRI S. P. JERATH ( Alternate ) COL T. R. BHALOTRA Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) LT COL KISHANLAL ( Alternate ) National Physical Laboratory, New Delhi DR A. F. CHHAPGAR SHRI TEK CHANDANI ( Alternate ) Department of Electronics, New Delhi DR P. N. GUPTA Electronic Industries Association Component SHRI R. K. JAIN ( ELCINA ), New Delhi SHRI L. K. VISHWANATH ( Alternate ) SHRI K. S. KALIDAS Railway Board, New Delhi SHRI V. JAYARAMAN( Alternate ) Botton Industrial Corporation, New Delhi SHRIJ. S. MONGA SHRI M. S. MONGA ( Alternate ) SHRI B. C. MUKHERJEE National Test House, Calcutta SHRIJ. K. BHATTACHARYA ( Alternate) All India Institute of Speech & Hearing, Mysore DR ( Miss ) SHAILAJA NIKAM Central Electronics Engineering Research Institute, SHRI K. D. PAVATE Pilani SHRI M. R. KAPOOR ( Alternate ) Films Division, 1 SHRI A. V. RAMANAN RESEARCH ENGINEER Directorate General of All India Radio, New Delhi Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi SHRI SARWAN KUMAR SHRI K. CHANDRACXUDAN ( Alternate )

( Continued on page 2 ) 0 INDIAN This publication is protected reproduction Copyright 1982 INSTITUTION ( XIV of 1957 ) and

STANDARDS

under the Indian Copyright Act of copyright

in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the under the said Act.

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement

IS :9876-1981 (Continued from
page 1 ) Representing Directorate Delhi General of Supplies & Disposals, New Board, New Delhi New Delhi

Members SHRI~M. SHANKARALINGAM SHRI R. S. ARORA ( Alternate ) SHRI M.N. SHUKLA SHRI S. K. TANDON (Alternate) SUPERINTGNDENTSURVEYOROF WORKS ( FOOD) SHRI L.K. VISHWANATH SHRI K. D'SA ( Alternute) SHRI R. C. JAIN, Head ( Electronics )

Posts and Telegraphs

Central Public Works Department,

Peico Electronics & Electricals Ltd, Bombay; and The Radio Electronics and Television Manufacturers' Association, Bombay Director General, IS1 ( Elc-oJ%io Member)

Secretary SHRI PAVAN KUMAR Assistant Director ( Electronics ), IS1

2

IS : 9876 - 1981

Indian

Standard

GUIDE TO THE MEASUREMENT OF AIRBORNE ACOUSTICAL NOISE AND EVALUATION OF ITS EFFECTS ON MAN
0. FOREWORD
Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 30 July 1981, after the draft finalized by the Acoustics Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. 0.2 The problems associated with the measurement of noise and evaluation of its effects are of increasing importance to the community, not only to specialists in acoustics, but also to a large number of individuals with more limited experience in this field. 0.3 Although noise-measuring equipment in common use is relatively simple to operate, a programme of noise measurements and the evaluation of the results obtained shall be planned carefully. The correct methods, scales and units shall be chosen and a number of precautions shall be observed in order that meaningful results may be obtained. 0.4 This standard outlines some of the basic problems associated with measurement of noise and evaluation of its effects on man and presents a summary of the methods in common use. 0.5 In preparing this standard, assistance has been derived from IS0 22041973 `Guide to the measurement of airborne acoustical noise and evaluation of its effects on man' issued by International Organization for Standardization. 0.6 In reporting the result of a test or analysis made this standard, if the final value, observed, or calculated, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. in accordance with is to be rounded off,

0.1 This Indian

1. SCOPE

1.1 This standard describes the general procedures of noise and evaluation of its effects on man.
*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised) .

for the measurement

IS : 9876 - 1981 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.1 For the purpose of this standard, in IS : 1885 ( Part III )* shall apply.
3. CLASSIFICATION 3.1 Most noise problems the terms and definitions covered

OF NOISE PROBLEMS
may be classified as follows.

3.1.1 Problems associated with the determination of the amount and character of noise emitted bygone or more noise sources, or with the prediction of the performance of one or more noise sources, under specified conditions. For problems of this group, the purpose of this noise measurement is to determine some physical quantity, usually the sound pressure level at a certain point or the sound power level of the source(s). The character of the noise may be described by the frequency spectrum and dependence on time of these levels and by the character of the sound field. 3.1.2 Problems associated with different effects of noise on man. the evaluation and prediction of the

For problems of this group, the purpose of the noise measurements is to obtain a quantity that relates the magnitude of the sound stimulus to the effects of noise on man. 3.2 Broadly speaking the problems of 3.1.1 are concerned mainly with the generation and transmission of noise, whereas the problems of 3.1.2 are concerned mainly with the reception of noise. It must be emphasized that these two categories are not mutually exclusive, because a particular noise problem is usually related to both categories. For example, the purpose of many noise abatement projects is to reduce the noise emitted by a source to a level at which the influence on man of the noise received is tolerable.

4. CLASSIFICATION

OF DIFFERENT

RINDS

OF NOISE

4.0 The character of a noise may be described by its frequency spectrum, the variations of level with time, and the character of the sound field. Many noises have a continuous spectrum, that is, the sound energy is rather evenly distributed over a large part of the audible frequency range. In some cases, discrete tones are clearly audible in the noise.
*Electrotechnical vocabulary

: Part III Acoustics. 4

IS : 9876 - 1981
The noises most frequently encountered in practice according to the following characteristic features. may be classified

4.1 Frequency Spectrum 4.1.1 Continuous Spectrum
4.1.2 Spectrum with Audible Discrete Tones

4.2 Dependence on Time

4.2.1 Steady Noise within the period

A noise with negligibly of observation.

small

fluctuations

of level

4.2.2 Non-Steady Jvoise the period of observation. 4.2.2.1 Fluctuating and to an appreciable

A noise whose level shifts significantly

during

noise - A noise whose extent during the period

level varies continuously of observation.

4.2.2.2 Intermittent noise - A noise whose level suddenly drops to the ambient level several times during the period of observation, the time during which the level remains at a constant value different from that of the ambient being of the order of magnitude of 1 s or more. 4.2.2.3 Impulsive noise-A noise consisting sound energy each of a duration less than about a) of one or more 1 s: bursts of

Quasi-steady impulsive noise - A series of noise bursts of comparable amplitude with intervals shorter than O-2 s between the individual bursts. An isolated burst of sound energy-The burst may be of constant or nearly be that of a decaying transient. envelope waveform of the constant amplitude, or it may

b)

4.3

Character of Sound Field
Free Field The sound field in an area far from~reflecting surfaces.

4.3.1

4.3.2 Reverberant Field over which the influence negligible.

That portion of the sound field in the test room of sound received directly from the source is

4.3.3 Semi-Reverberant Field - The enclosure with moderately reflecting

sound field surfaces.

prevailing

in

a

large

5

IS : 9876 - 1981
4.3.4 Hemispherically Divergent Field - The sound field of a source which is situated near to a hard reflecting plane (usually the ground) but free from other obstructions. 5. PHYSICAL

MEASUREMENTS
of measurement

OF NOISE
shall be chosen according to:

5.0 The method

a) the character b) the character c) the required problem. 5.1 Noise Problems

of the noise problem ( see 3 ) ; of the noise ( see 4 ) and the source; and degree of thoroughness of the description

of the noise

of 3.1.1 characteristics of the

5.1.0 The general problem is to determine the noise source and the noise emitted by the source. 5.1.1 Quantities to be Measured

5.1.1.1 For the solution of problems in this group, the sound pressure level ( expressed in dB re 20pN/ms ) is measured as a function of time. 5.1.1.2 The sound pressure level may be measured in a broad frequency band covering the whole of the audible frequency range or, alternatively, in narrow frequency bands. The width of these bands may be l/l or l/3 octave or narrower.

5.1.1.3
pressure

The term `band pressure level' is used to describe level measured in a particular band.

the sound

5.1.1.4 The measurement may also be made with a specified weighing network inserted in the measuring chain. The reading is then termed sound level.

NOTE- Weighting networks A and B as defined in IS : 9779 - 1981* and weighting network D are used. The readings are then termed A-weighted, B-weighted~sound level, etc and are expressed in decibels, commonly called dB (A), dB (B), etc. 5.1.2 Choice of Measuring Method
5.1.2.0 The choice of measuring method depends on the type of sound source and its environment, the character of the noise and the degree of thoroughness needed in the description.
*Specification for sound level meters.

6

IS : 9876 - 1981 5.1.2.1 Source and environment - The measuring positions are so chosen that significant influence from small irregularities of the shape of the source or from the presence of other objects or sources is avoided. If these interferences cannot be eliminated, their influence on the result must be determined.
5.1.2.2 Character of the noise - In 4, noises are listed according to their character in an order corresponding to the ease with which the noise measurements may be carried out. The procedures for measuring steady noise are well established and relatively simple. The methods for measuring impulsive noise are much more complicated and less well established. 5.1.2.3 Thoroughness of description -A thorough analysis of a noise problem requires recordings of band pressure levels in narrow frequency bands measured at suitable microphone locations over an appropriate time interval. For some problems, such a thorough description may be unnecessary. In such cases, a simplified measuring procedure may be entirely adequate for the purpose of the measurements. The method to be selected depends upon the description required for the particular noise problem 5.1.3 Methods of Measurement thoroughness of the under investigation.

5.1.3.1 Tfze survey method-This method requires the least amount of time and equipment. It may be used for comparisons between noise sources of similar characteristics. The sound field is described by the sound level as measured by a sound level meter. A limited number of measuring points is used and no detailed analysis of the acoustic environment is made. However, the time dependence of the noise being measured must be noted. Readings of the sound level meter give the sound pressure level weighted according to a standardized frequency-response curve. In these cases, the use of A or C weighting networks is recommended, although the use of other networks such as `linear' may be appropriate. For many practical cases, sound level C is a fair approximation to the overall sound pressure level. The A-weighted sound level is useful for assessments of human response ( see -6 ). The minimum requirements to the specifications meter are given in IS : 9779-1981*. of the sound level

This method is generally of limited value if corrective measures to reduce the noise are to be evaluated. It is not suitable for the measurement of impulsive noise.
*Specification for sound level meters.

7

IS : 9876 - 1981
5.1.3.2 The engineering method - In this method, the measurements of sound level or sound pressure level are supplemented by measurements of band pressure levels. The acoustic environment is analyzed to determine its effect upon the measurements. The measuring points and the frequency range are selected according to the characteristics of the noise source and the environment in which it operates. The time dependence of the level during the period of observation may be recorded. The specifications of the measuring instruments shall conform to IS : 9779-1981* and IS : 6964-19731_, where applic~able. The engineering method provides information that is usually sufficient for taking engineering action in many situations, for example, in~connection with noise abatement programmes. It is not suitable for the measurement of impulsive noise. 5.1.3.3 The precision method - This method cription of the noise problem as possible. gives as thorough a des-

The measurements of sound pressure level or sound level are supplemented by measurements of band pressure levels. Records are made over an appropriate time interval in accordance with the duration and fluctuations of the noise. The acoustic environment is carefully analysed and the measuring points and the frequency range are selected according to the characteristics of the noise source and environment. If possible, the effect of the environment on the measurements is quantified by carrying out the measurements under laboratory-controlled conditions, for example, in a free field or reverberation room. Use of the precision method is required in complex a thorough description of the noise field is needed. situations where

The instruments used shall preferably be in accordance with IS : 97791981* and IS : 6964-19737, but some problems, for example, in connection with the measurement of impulsive noise, may make the use of instruments with other specifications necessary. 5.1.4 Presentation of Results

5.1.4.1 From measurements made by the survey method, it is possible to calculate the mean sound level. Instructions for this calculation are to be found in IS : 6098-1971$.
*Specification for sound level meters. tspecification for octave, half-octave and third-octave band filters for analysis of sound and vibrations. ZMethods of measurement of airborne noise emitted by rotating electrical machinery. 8

IS : 9876 - 1981 5.1.4.2 From measurements made by the engineering and precision methods, it is possible to calculate the mean level of the noise either in broad or narrow frequency bands. If the environment is suitable, it is also possible to calculate the sound power level of the source and a measure of its directivity. Instructions for performing the calculations are given in IS : 4758-1968* and IS : 6098-1971t.
5.1.4.3 It is possible to evaluate the time distribution function of the levels of fluctuating and intermittent noise. In some cases, this function can be used for the computation of the level of a steady noise having the same effect as the noise under test. Instructions for performing the calculations are given in IS : 9989-1981: and IS ~7194-1973s. 5.1.4.4 From measurements made by the precision method, it is furthermore possible to evaluate the properties of impulsive noise and to make precise evaluations of the sound power level of the source and to determine its directivity, etc. 5.1.4.5 When data obtained this guide are intercompared or care shall be exercised to ensure the This precaution is necessary when values or with prescribed values. 5.2 Noise from measurements made according to compared with other acoustical data, validity of the comparison in all respects. the comparison is with other measured

'

Problems

of 3.1.2

5.2.1 The general problem is to determine the effects of noise on people. These effects cannot be measured directly with the currently available physical instruments, but the methods mentioned in 5.1.3 can be used to collect information from which approximate measures of noise on human beings can be obtained as described in 6. 6. EVALUATION BEINGS OF THE EFFECTS OF NOISE ON HUMAN

6.1 Quantities to be Determined 6.1.1 Among the quantities describing the beings are : a) the loudness level of the noise; b) the perceived noise level of the noise;
effect of noise on human

*Methods of measurement of noise emitted by machines. TMethods of measurement of airborne noise emitted by rotating electrical machinery. &Assessment of noise with respect to community response. &Assessment of noise-exposure during work for hearing conservation purposes.

9

IS : 9876 - 1981 c) the risk of damage and to the hearing mechanism caused by the noise;

d) the degree of annoyance and interference with human activities or example speech communications, work, rest or sleep ) caused bfY the noise: 6.2 Methods 6.2.1 The be measured of Determination of the Effects characterizing the effects available instrumentation. cannot psychophysical quantities directly with the currently

6.2.2 The best solution would be to present the noise to a sufficiently large and representatively selected group of persons placed in exactly the same physical, psychological and social situation as the people on whom the influence of the noise should be predicted. By observing the responses of the members of this group, it is possible to extract information on the effects of the noise in question. This is, however, a very cumbersome and time-consuming method which can be used only in very special situations where information of a fundamental nature is required. 6.2.3 These subjective measurements may, however, be replaced by objective measurements when it is possible to relate some physical properties of the noise to a scale for rating subjective effects. This would generally be possible only if a thorough knowledge of the influence of many physiological, psychological and social factors on the effect of noise on human beings were at hand. It must, however, be emphasized that present knowledge of the effect of-noise on man is very limited. `Conversion methods' relating physical properties of noise to subjective effects are available only in special cases. Some of the conversion methods commonly used are described below. The basic information is obtained by objective measurements as described in 5.1.3 and 5.1.4. 6.2.4 Generally, results obtained by the survey method are of limited value for the evaluation of the effects of noise on man. In many cases, a knowledge of the spectral distribution of the noise energy is needed, that is, the engineering or precision method must be used. In other cases, the supplementary information needed on the noise situation (distribution of levels of fluctuating noise, duration and repetition rate for intermittent and impulsive noise, character of background noise, etc) is obtainable only by the precision method. 6.3 Methods Approximate for Relating Physical Measure of Subjective Properties Effects of Noise to an

6.3.0 The conversion may be carried out by computation or by an electric network with specified characteristics included in the measuring instruments or by a combination of these methods. As a rule, the results are valid only in a limited range of situations for which the procedure is created. Even within this range they are generally of an approximate nature only. 10

IS : 9876 - 1981
6.3.1 Loudness Level and Loudness

6.3.1.1 The loudness level in phons of a sound signal is defined as the sound pressure level ( re 2 x 10-SN/m2 =20/pN/ms ) of a 1 kHz sinusodial frontally presented tone subjectively judged to be equally as loud as the signal under test. 6.3.1.2 The loudness in sones is a numerical designation of the strength of a sound which is proportional to its subjective magnitude. One sone is the loudness of a sound whose loudness level is 40 phon. 6.3.1.3 Methods for approximate calculation loudness of steady noise are given in `Indian calculating loudness level' ( under preparation ). of loudness level and Standard Method of

6.3.1.4 The data needed for the calculation are the levels of the noise measured in l/3 or l/l octave bands.

band

pressure

NOTE-The best agreement between the results obtained by calculation and those obtained bv , direct subiective measurements accordine to the definitions is obtained for steady noise signals having spectra without prominent narrow peaks. In some cases, discrepancies of several phons may be found between calculated values of loudness level and values measured according to the definition.
.a

6.3.1.5 Data obtained by sound level measurements, especially with A-weighting network, have been found useful for rank-ordering of noises with respect to loudness level as long as the noises are of a similar character. It must be emphasized that the values measured are not those of loudness level, but should be termed A-weighted sound level and expressed in decibels, commonly called dB ( A ). 6.3.2 Perceived Noise Level and Noisiness

6.3.2.1 The perceived noise level ( PNL ) of a sound signal in perceived noise decibels ( PNdB ) is the sound pressure level ( re 2 x 1O- 5N/ms = 20~ N/m2 ) of an octave band of frontally presented noise centred on 1 000 Hz subjectively judged to have the same perceived noisiness as the signal under test. 6.3.2.2 The noisiness in noys is a numerical designation proportional to the subjective magnitude of the nuisance of a noise. One noy is the perceived noisiness of a noise whose perceived noise level is 40 PNdB. 6.3.2.3 A method for the calculation of perceived noise level is given in `Indian Standard Procedure for describing aircraft noise around an airport' ( under Preparation ). The method is developed to describe aircraft noise. 11

IS : 9876 - 1981 6.3.2.4 The data needed for the calculation of perceived noise level are the band pressure levels of the noise measured in l/l or l/3 octave bands. The problem of establishing a better agreement between calculated and measured values of perceived noise level of aircraft is currently being considered. It is proposed to base the calculation on l/3 octave band, pressure levels and to include corrections for the presence of audible discrete tones and the duration of the overflight. The problem of establishing a simple method for direct, approximate measurement of perceived noise level of aircraft is also being considered. For this purpose, it is proposed to use a special weighting network in the measuring equipment ( D-weighting). 6.3.2.5 In most cases, A-weighted sound level may be used for the rankordering of noises with similar characteristics with respect to perceived noise level.
6.3.3 Permissible ( Low-Risk ) .Noise Exposures for Hearing Conservation

6.3.3.1 The susceptibility to damage of the hearing mechanism caused by noise exposure varies considerably between individuals and cannot be permissible limits for noise-exposure predicted in each case. Therefore, The problem is considered in must be set and used conservatively. IS : 7194-1973*, which gives a procedure for the evaluation of the risk of hearing impairment from noise-exposure during the work. Information on the sound level A and duration of the noise and the exposure during a typical week is used to calculate the level of a steady noise considered to be equally hazardous to hearing.
6.3.4 Annoyance Caused by .Noise

6.3.4.1 The problem of rating noise with respect to annoyance on the basis of physical measurements is so complicated that present-day knowledge allows only a very approximate solution. Some aspects of the problem are considered in IS : 9989-19817, which provides a basis for the establishment of permissible limits for noises in various situations by the competent authorities.
6.3.4.2 The method described is valid for the estimation of community response to noise both outside and inside residential premises, offices, business stores, restaurants, workshops, etc.
*Assessment of noise-exposure during work for hearing conservation purposes. *Assessment of noise with respect to community response.

12

IS : 9876 - 1981 6.3.4.3 According to IS : 9989-1981*, steady noise without audible discrete tones is rated by the sound level A. For steady noise with audible discrete tones, fluctuating, intermittent noise and certain sorts of impulsive noises, the level of a steady noise ( without audible discrete tone ) which is assumed to cause the same community response as the noise under test is calculated and used for the rating.
6.3.4.4 Where corrective measures are required, it may be necessary to perform the rating of the noise by means of a set of noise rating curves ( see IS : 9989-1981*) on the basis of measurements of band pressure levels. 6.3.5 Interference with speech communication caused by the noise may be estimated by calculating a factor called the articulation index. From this index, the speech intelligibility in the presence of the noise may be derived. The band pressure level of the noise as well as other information is required for the calculation. The detailed calculation procedure is described in the acoustic literature. The procedure is complicated and the best agreement between calculated and subjectively measured values is obtained for steady noise signals with broad band spectra. A simpler method based on measurements of band pressure levels in the octaves centred on 500, 1 000 and 2 000 Hz is also used. The average of these band pressure levels is called the Speech Interference Level ( SIL ). 6.4 General

Remarks

on Evaluation

Procedures

6.4.1 It is clear from this brief resume that the complicated nature of the physiological, psychological and physical processes makes it impossible for a single, simple method to be applicable to all types of noise problems.
6.4.2 Under some conditions, the survey method will yield data of great value in assessing the effect of a noise stimulus on human beings. 6.4.3 The engineering and precision methods are, however, of far wider applicability. From the data obtained using these methods, it is possible to calculate with reasonable accuracy some psychophysical quantities that are related to the effect of noise on human beings. 6.4.4 This standard summarizes a number of the better-established usages concerning the measurements of noise and evaluation of its effects on man. It does not claim to cover all cases nor to include certain procedures which are in different jurisdictions. Although the methods described here are incomplete in some respects, they will be found useful in many practical cases where action such as setting limits for noise levels is required. 6.4.5 It is necessary that current and future research lead to refinement of these methods. To avoid unnecessary proliferation and duplication, it is strongly recommended that emphasis both in research and practice be placed on the methods described in this standard. *Assessment of noise with respect to community response. 13

1NDIAN ON ACOUSTICS IS: 1301-1958 1490-1959

STANDARDS

Code of safety requirements for electric mains-operated audio amplifiers Recommendations for minimum performance requirements of mains-operated public address amplifiers 1819-1961 Recommendations for general requirements of public address amplifiers 1881-1961 Code of practice for installation of indoor amplifying and sound distribution systems 1882-1961 Code of practice for outdoor installation of public address systems Electrotechnical Vocabulary: 1885 I Part III/Set 1 j-1965 Phvsical acoustics ( Part III$ec 2 j-1966 Acoustical and electro-acoustical systems ( Part III/Set 4 )-1966 Sonics, ultrasonics and underwater acoustics ( Part III/Set 5 )-1966 Speech and hearing ( Part III/Set 6 )-1967 Acoustical instruments ( Part III/Set 7 )-1978 Music ( Part III/Set 8 )-1974 Architectural acoustics 2032 ( Part XII 1-1969 Graohical svmbols used in electro-technology: Part XH Electroacoustic transduckrs and'recording and reproducing syst&s Preferred frequencies for acoustical measurements 2264-1963 Mounting dimensions of loudspeakers (Jirst revision ) 2382-1970 3028-1980 Methods of measurements of noise emitted by motor vehicles (Jirst revision ) 3641-1976 Methods of measurement on hearing aids (&t revision ) Sound level meters for the measurement of noise emitted by motor vehicles 3931-1966 3932-1966 Sound level meters for general purpose use Method of measurement of acoustical noise emitted by ballasts for gaseous 4242-1967 discharge lamps 4406-1967 General requirements for hearing aids 4482-1967 Hearing aids 4755-1968 Reference zero for the calibration of pure-tone audiometers 4758-1968 Methods of measurement of noise emitted by machines Methods of measurement of airborne noise emitted by rotating electrical 6098-1971 machinery Method of measurement ofthe real-ear attenuation of ear protectors at threshold 6229-1971 Octave, half-octave and third-octave band filters for analysis of sound and 6964-1973 vibrations Megaphones 7136-1973 Assessment of noise-exposure during work for hearing conservation purposes 7194-1973 Standard hydrophone 7709-1975 7741 L-oudspeakers : ( Part I )-1975 General requirements and tests ( Part II )-1975 Direct radiator moving coil loudspeakers ( Part III )-1975 Pressure Unit operated horn loudspeakers ( Part IV )-1977 Loudspeakers for community radio receivers 8146-1976 Method of measurement of reverberation time~in auditoria 8159-1976 Scales and sizes for plotting frequency characteristics and polar diagrams 8225-1976 Method of measurement of absorption coefficients in a reverberation room 9098-1979 Pure tone audiometers 9167-1979 Ear protectors 9302 ( Part I )-1979 Characteristics and methods of measurements for sound system ~equipment : Part I General 9302 ( Part II j-1979 Characteristics and methods of measurements for sound system equipment: Part II Amplifiers Characteristics and methods of measurements for sound system 9302 ( Part III )-1981 equipment: Part III Microphones High-fidelity audio equipment and systems: Part III Loudspeakers 9551 ( Part III )-1979 9671-1980 Frequency weighting for the measurement of aircraft noise (D-weighting)

