**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 9330 (1979) : Terminology for parameters of waste heat 
boilers and boilers for special purposes [MED 1: Boilers 
and Pressure Vessels] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC 621M81-62-97/- 98: 00V4 IS: 9330 -1979 




Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2001 ) 

TERMINOLOGY FOR PARAMETERS OF 

WASTE HEAT BOILERS AND BOILERS FOR 

SPECIAL PURPOSES 



1. Scope — Covers the terminology for parameters of waste heat boilers and boilers for special 
purposes. Terminology for parameters of general stationary steam boilers is covered in a separate 
standard IS : 8595-1977 ' Terminology for parameters of stationary steam boilers '. 

2. Terminology 

2.1 Basic Parameters of Boilers — Pressure of main steam, temperature of main steam, temperature 
of feed water, process gas quantity, pressure of gas, inlet temperature of gas, composition and 
specific heat of gas quantity and quality of particulate matter in gas and source of heat input are 
the basic parameters of the boilers. 

2.2 Maximum Continuous Rating (MCR)-~ Maximum steam output in tonnes/hour (gross) which 
the boiler should give continuously for not less than 72 hours while maintaining the specified values 
of basic parameters. 

2.3 Gas Quantity — It is the quantity of gas in kg/s or m 3 /s at N. T. P., that is, entering the boiler. 

2.4 Pressure of Gas — Pressure of the gas ( gauge ) at the inlet to the boiler. This is measured at 
the place where the gas enters the boiler. 

2.5 Inlet Temperature of the Gas — Temperature of the gas at the inlet of the boiler. 

2.6 Exit Temperature of the Gas — The temperature of the gas at the exit of the boiler, that is, where 
it leaves the last heat transfering surface. 

2.7 Gas Composition — The composition of gas entering the boiler in percentage, by volume. 

2.8 Pressure of Main Steam — Pressure of the main steam ( gauge ) at the boiler outlet. It shall be 
measured before the main steam stop valve of the boiler. In the absence of the main steam stop 
valve, it is measured at the superheater outlet header of the boiler. In case of boilers without 
superheaters, the pressure is that of saturated steam. 

2.9 Temperature of Main Steam — Temperature of steam at the outlet of the boiler. It is measured 
at a place as close as practicable where the pressure of the main steam is measured. 

2.10 Temperature of Feed Water — Temperature of feed water at inlet to the boiler. In the case of 
boilers without economiser, it shall be measured before entry io the boiler drum. In case feed 
water passes through surface type attemporator or drum type water heater, the temperature shall 
be measured at inlet to the attemporator or feed heater. 

2.11 Specified Values of Basic Parameters — The values of the basic parameters specified to be 
maintained at maximum continuous rating of the boiler. 

2.12 Maximum Pressure of Main Steam — The lowest pressure (gauge) at which the safety valve 
connected immediately after the superheat is set to blow, if the boiler has no superheater then the 
maximum pressure shall be taken to be equal to the lowest pressure at which a drum safety valve is 
set to blow. 

2.13 Design Pressure — When the gas pressure exceeds steam pressure, pressure parts which 
encounter the gas shall have the design pressure 1 05 times the gas pressure specified. For 
pressure parts which encounter the steam alone, the design pressure is the maximum alSowabie 
working pressure ( gauge ) in the steam drum of the boiler. 

For once-through forced circulation boilers, the design pressure is ihe maximum allowable 
working pressure at the final superheater steam outlet. 

2.14 Calculation Pressure — The calculation pressure of any par s the design pressure (gauge) 
adjusted to take into account the pressure drops corresponding to the most severe conditions of 
pressure drop ar.d hydraulic head. 



Adopted 24 December 1979 



© February 19S0. ISI 



©T* 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 



