**************** 



*■ fe^K 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 11568 (1986): Forceps, Bone Holding, Semb's Pattern [MHD 
2: Orthopaedic Instruments, Implants and Accessories] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC 61 6'472"4 



IS: 11568- 1986 




Indian Standard 



( Reaffirmed 2002 ) 



SPECIFICATION FOR 
FORCEPS, BONE HOLDING, SEMB'S PATTERN 



1- Scope — Prescribes dimensional and other requirements for Semb ! s pattern bone holding 
forceps. 

2. Shape and Dimensions — As shown in Fig. 1. 



, RIVET, DIA 3 



50 mix. 




r 



SECTION XX 

7tO«5 .^ \f 



SECTION YY 







X 

20015 



All dimensions in millimetres. 
FIG. 1 FORCEPS, BONE HOLDING, SEMB'S PATTERN 



3. Material 



3.1 Arms — Stainless steel conforming to designation 30Cr13 or 40Cr13 of IS : 6603-1972 
'Specification for stainless steel bars and flats'. 

3.2 Screws — Stainless steel conforming to designation 20Cr13 or 30Cr13 of IS : 6603-1972. 

4. Workmanship 

4.1 The teeth of the jaws shall be well formed and clean. 

4.2 The two arms shall move freely and smoothly at the joint without undue play. 

5. Surface Condition — Ail surfaces shall be free from pores, crevices and grinding marks. The 
forceps shall be supplied free from residual scale, acid, grease and grinding and polishing 
materials. Compliance with these requirements shall be checked by inspection using normal vision 
( corrected, if necessary ). 



Adopted 21 March 1986 



® July 1986, ISI 



Gr 1 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 



IS: 11568 -1986 

5.1 Surface Finish — The surface finish shall be one of or a combination of the following: 

a) Mirror polished; 

b) Reflection-reducing, for example, satin finish, matt black finish; and 

c) An applied surface coating, for example, for insulation purposes. 

Note — The satin finish should be effaced by an appropriate procedure, such as grinding, brushing, electro- 
polishing and, In addition, satin finishing ( gtass beading or satin brushing ). The finish should be uniform and 
smooth and it should reduce glare. Instrument of mirror finish should be adequately ground to remove all surface 
imperfections and polished to remove grinding marks, resulting in a mirror finish. The mirror finish should 
be effected by an appropriate procedure such as polishing, brushing, electropoiishtng and mirror buffing. 

5.2 Passivation and Final Treatment — The forceps shall be treated by a suitable passivation 
process. 

Note 1 — Examples of methods of passivation are by electropolishing or by treating with 10 ( v/v ) nitric acid 
solution for not iess than 30 min at a temperature of not iess than 10°C and not exceeding 60°C. The forceps 
should then be rinsed in water and dried in hot air. 

Note 2— If the joints are lubricated, the lubricant should be non-corrosive and suitable for medical applica- 
tion according to the Indian Pharmacopoeia. 

6. Heat Treatment and Hardness — The forceps shall be heat treated to give a hardness of 380 
to 420 HV when tested in accordance with 15:1501-1968 'Method for Vickers hardness test for 
steel ( first revision )\ 

7. Tests 

7.1 Rigidity Test — Hold a piece of hardwood of minimum thickness of 12 mm in the jaws of the 
forceps. Apply a comprehensive force of 1 000 N ( 100 kgf ) to the handles of the forceps at the 
place of maximum convexity. Allow the force to act for two m inutes. On completion of the test the 
forceps shall show no sign of damage or permanent set. 

7.2 Corrosion Resistance Test — Test the forceps in accordance with IS: 7531-1975 Method for 
boiling and autoclaving test for corrosion resistance of stainless steei surgical instruments'. The 
forceps shall show no sign of corrosion after the test. 

8. Marking — The forceps shall be marked with the following: 

a) Manufacturer's name, initials or recognized trade-mark; and 

b) Country of origin. 

8-1 ISI Certification Mark — Details available with the Indian Standards Institution. 

9. Packing — As agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier. 

10. Sampling — Sampling procedure and acceptance criteria for the instruments shall be 
as agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier. However, a recommended scheme for the 
same is given in Appendix A. 

APPENDIX A 

{Clause 10) 

SAMPLING AND CRITERIA FOR CONFORMITY FOR FORCEPS, BONE HOLDING, 

SEMB'S PATTERN 

A-1. Lot — All the forceps of the same type shape and dimension, not exceeding 50, shall be 
grouped together to form a lot. Each lot shall be tested for the requirements of this specification. 

A-2, All the forceps in the lot shall be individually tested for the requirements of shape, dimen- 
sions for workmanship and finish. Any forceps failing in one or more requirements shall be 
rejected. 

A-3. Manufacturer shall certify that the material of arms and screws as prescribed in 3, 
A-4. From each lot, one sample forceps shall be drawn for conducting each of the tests on 
hardness, rigidity and corrosion resistance test. The samples shall pass the respective require- 
ments if the lot is to be accepted under this clause. 



EXPLANATORY NOTE 

Assistance has been derived from DIN 13187-1983 Medical Instruments, bone holding forceps, 
Type Semb, issued by the Deutches Institut fur Normung, West Germany. 



Printed at New India Printing Press. Khurja, India 



