IS 6531 : 1994 m*9 WFFJ
( Reaffirmed 2004 )

Indian Standard

CANALHEAD REGULATORSCRTTERIAFORDESIGN (First Revision )
UDC 626.112-55

Q BIS 1994

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR NEW DELHI

STANDARDS
SHAH 110002 ZAFAR MARG

April 1994

Price Group 5

Intake

Structures

Sectional

Committee,

RVD

11

FOREWORD This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, finalized by the Intake Structures Sectional Committee had been approved by the River Council. Regulator provided at the head of canal the following purposes: a) To regulate b) To control the supplies entering offtaking from a river is termed and been made in view of the experience The important modifications made in works for spate irrigation system has as canal head after the draft Valley Division It serves

regulator.

the canal:

silt entry into the canal.

This standard was first published in 1972. The present revision has gained during the course of these years in the use of this standard. the revision are given below: 1) Layout for curved been added. 2) Determination 3) Design criteria included. channel head regulator in case of head

of value of C has been for curved channel

modified. excluder for spate irrigation headworks has also been

sediment

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in value, observed accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )`. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

IS 6531 : 1994

Indian Standard

CANALHEADREGULATOWCRITBRlAFORDESIGN
/ First Revision )
1 SCOPE This standard covers the criteria canal head regulators. 2 REFERENCES The Indian Standards listed adjuncts to this standard: below are necessary for the design of respect to the axis of the diversion work. This may, however, be confirmed from model studies, if necessary. A typical layout of the canal head regulator is given in Fig. 2. Layout of canal head regulator in case of headworks with sediment excluder is given in Fig. 3. 4 HYDRAULIC DESIGN

IS No.
4997

Title
Criteria for design of hydraulic jump type stilling basins with horizontal and sloping apron Criteria for design canals and guidelines tion type of lining AND LAYOUT of lined for selec-

4.1 General The hydraulic design of consists of the following: a) Fixation through b) Fixation of sill; canal head regulator losses

: 1968

10430

: 1982

of pond level structures );

( including

of sill level, width of sill and shape

3 LOCATION 3.1 Location

The location of canal head regulator is interlinked with the location of diversion work. The head regulator should be located as close to the diversion structure as possible and preferably at the end of the outer curve ( convex bend ), if available, to minimize the sediment entry into the offtaking canal ( see Fig. 1A ). 3.2 Layout The canal head regulator should be properly aligned so as to reduce silt entry into the canal to `; minimum and avoid backflow and formation of stagnant zones in the pocket. To achieve this, the a& of canal head regulator may be located at an angle of SO" to 110" ( SM Fig. 1B ) with

number and width c) Fixa~tion of waterway, of spans and height of gate openings, requirements of breast wall, etc; d) Shape parts; of approaches and other -from from component flow flow

of structure e) Safety consideration; f

surface

)

Safety of structure consideration; and

sub-surface

g) Energy dissipation structures. 4.2 Pond Level

arrangements;

terminal

Pond level, in the under-sluice pocket, upstream of the camal head regulator should generally be

UPSTREAM

CANAL

+

Fm.

1A CANAL HEAD REGULATOR DOWNSTREAM A CONVEX BEND 1

IS 6531 : 1994
Q OF HEADWORKS

Fra. 1B ALIGNMENTOFHEAD REGULATOR

LOOSE

APRON

PERVIOUS

FLOOR

L

2A Typical
Plan of Head Regulator

2

IS6531:1994
SPACE FOR GATE HOISTING PLATFORM BREAST WALL GATE GROOVE

-AX15

L' BAFFLE

HEAD BLOCK

IMPERVIOUS FLOOR

Fro.

2B Typical Section 07 Head Regulator 2 LAYOUT OF CANAL HEAD REGULATOR

FOM TOT-

i\

C.C. BLOCKS
D/S LMMZHnni APRON U/S INVERTED FILTER U/S LAUNCHING APRON

\

31L-l EXCLUDER TUNNELS

Y x=I_

s
FLOW

3A Typical

Plan of Head Regulator

with Sediment

Excluder

obtained by adding the working head to the designed full supply level in the canal. The working head should include the head required for passing the designed discharge into the canal and the head losses in the regulator. If under certain situations there is a limitation of pond level, the full supply level should be fixed by subtracting the working head from the pond level. In regions of high altitude where there is a possibility of ice formation, a cover of ice of about 0.5 m may be added to the working head. 4.3 SZll Level

the full supply discharge in the canal at a specified pond level. To obtain control on entry of silt into the canal it is desirable that the sill of head regulator should be kept higher than the sill of under-sluices, as much as possible, commensurate with the economic waterway and the driving head available. If a silt-excluder is provided, the sill level of head regulator should be determined in conjunction with the design requirements of silt-excluder. 4.3.1 The required head over the sill ff, for passing a discharge Q, with an effective waterway L, should be worked from the following formula: Q= 3 CL,
ffe3'4

Sill level should be fixed by subtracting from pond level the head over the sill required to pass

IS 6531

: 1994
AXIS OF HEAD REGULATOR

t-

MAX. POND LVL AAMOURED STEEL PLATE

CEMENT CONCRETE LINW.TPANSiTlON PORTION ______ -______ BOULDER SET FACING i I I I * *t * PRESSWE I * RELiEF VALVE

l j/ I

SECTICW ._~ X -X --

GRANITE STONE LEVEL VAF1IES ~__

36 Longitudinal Section of Canal Head Regulator with Sediment Excluder Fra. 3 LAYOUT OF CANAL HEAD RECWLATOR WITH SEDIMENT EXCLUDER
where Q C JS = discharge = = effective in ms/s; ( see 4.3.1.1 ); waterway in m; and 4.3.2 a coefficient C = a coefficient;

L, = effective waterway in m; and HI and H, = total heads to the bottom and top
of the orifice.

He = required

head over the crest for passing a discharge Q, in m.

Width

qf Sill

4.3.1.1 In the formula given in 4.3.1 the exact value of C depends on many factors; such as head over the sill, shape and width of the sill (W), upstream slope (51) and downward slope (&) of the sill, height over the upstream floor (P) and roughness of its surface. Some values of C for varied % and -G-

Width of sill should be kept according to the requirements of the gates, trash and stop logs subject to a minimum of 213 He. 4.3.3

Shape of Sill

H

for

ungated

flow

and

for

The edges of sill should be rounded off with a radius equal to He. The upstream face should generally be kept vertical and the downstream sloped at 2 : 1 or flatter. 4.4 Having decided upon the effective waterway, the total waterway between the abutments including piers should be worked out from the following formula: Lt=L,+ where 2(.7VKEc, + Ila)&+ W

& = 0, zz = 2 and 3 are shown in Fig. 4. The discharge reduction factor for varied submergence ratios -zc be obtained from Fig. 5 [H* : depth

of tail wattr level above the crest 1. The values of C be determined by model studies where values based on prototype observations on similar structures are not available. But when the outflow is controlled by partly open gates, the condition similar to sluice flow developes, The required head in this case may be computed by the following equation:

Lt = total waterways, L, = effective waterways, JV=
K, = K-, = number of piers, coefficient contraction ( see 4.4.1 ), coefficient pier contraction abutment ( see 4.4.2 ),

Q = 213 6-2g.Le
where

( H18/a in ms/s;

H,sI= )

Q =

discharge

H B = head over crest, and W = total width of all piers.

IS 6531 : 1994
1.2 I

I

I,-

HORIZONTAL

CREST

I

I

I

Ha/w

Fro

4 RECOMMENDATION FOR COEFFICIENT OF DISCHARGE

FOR

VARIED I&, P

AND

W

4.4.1 R .ecommended

values of K, are as follows:

a)

For square nose piers with corners rounded with a radius equal to about 0.1 of the pier thickness: II, = 0.02 For rounded nose piers: K, = 0.01 For pointed x, nose piers: = 000 values of K, are as follows: head walls at

b)
c)

4.4.2

Recommended

a) For square abutments with 90" to the direction of flow:

b) For rounded abutments with head walls 90" to the direction of flow for O-5 He >
T >

a.t

O-15 H,

K, = 0.1
c) For rounded abutments where r > 0.5 He, and head wall is placed not more than 45O to the direction of flow: where r= abutment rounding radius.

4.5 Shape of Approaches nent Parts

L_
r ---

3

and Other Compo-

The shape of approaches and other component parts should preferably be fixed by means of model studies. However, for works of medium

IS 6531 : 1994 size the criteria adopted. given in 4.5.1 and 4.5.2 may be 4.6.4

Length and Thickness of Upstream &earn Loose Aprons

and Down-

4.5.1 At the upstream inlet a smooth entry should be ensured by providing circular, elliptical or hyperbolic transitions as shown in Fig. IA and Fig. 2. The splay may be of the order of 1 : I to 3 : 1. These transitions should be confirmed by model studies, where necessary. 4.5.2 At the downstream side, straight, parabolic or hyperbolic transitions should be provided as shown in Fig. 1A and Fig. 2. The splay may be of the order of 3 : 1 to 5 : 1. These transitions should be confirmed by model studies, where necessary. 4.5.3 Wing walls should normally be kept vertical up to the end of the impervious floor beyond which they should be flared from vertical to the actual slope of the canal section. However, in order to obtain greater economy the wing walls may be kept vertical up to the toe of glacis beyond which they may be flared gradually to l/2 : 1 at the end of irnpervious floor. In the remaining length, wing walls may be flared from l/2 : 1 to the actual slope of the canal section, 4.6 Safety Foundations tions of Structure from Surface on Permeable Flow Considera-

Just at the end of concrete floor on the downstream an inverted filter I.5~to 2 D long ( D being the depth of scour below bed ), consisting of 600 to 900 mm deep concrete blocks with open gaps ( 100 - 150 mm to be suitably filled with coarse material ) laid over 500 to 800 mm graded filter, should be provided. The graded inverted filter should conform to -the following design criteria:

D 15 of filter D 15 01 foundation

>4>

D 15 of filter D 85 ot foundation

The subscript to D ( 15 or 85 ) means the grain size than which the percentage indicated by the subscript is finer. 4.6.4.1 Downstream of the inverted filter, loose apron 1.5 D long cmsisting of either boulders of not less than 40 kg or wire boulder cratrs should be provided so as to ensure a minimum thickness of 1 m in launched position. 4,6.4.2 Upstream of the impervious floor, blocks and loose apron should be provided which should be similar to that provided in the corresponding weir or barrage. 4.7 Safety Foundation derations of Structure on Permeable from Sub surface Flow Consifrom 4.7.1

In the case of regulators on permeable foundations, the factors enumerated in 4.6.1 to 4.6.4 should be determined. In case of downstream non-erodible beds protective measures may not be necessary. 4i6.1

the factors enumerated For this, to 4.7.3 should be considered. 4.7.1

Exit Gradient at the End of Impervious Floor

Depth of UpJtream Cut-Off in Relation to Scour

side of the head regulator, cutoff should be provided and taken to the same depth as the cut-off stream of diversion work. 4.6.2

On the upstream

It should be determined from accepted formulae and curves. The factors of safety for exit gradient for different types of soils should be as follows: Shingle Coarse sand Fine sand 4 to 5 5 to 6 6 to 7

Basin Dimensions and Appurtenances
provided in accordance with 4.7.2

These should be IS 4997 : 1968. 4.6.3

Total Floor .Lenpth of Impervious Floor Depth of Downstream Cut-Off

and

Thickness of Floor on Sloping Reference to Hydraulic Jump

Glacis

with

The hvdraulic jump profile should be plotted under different conditions of flow. Average height of the jump trough should then be obtained by deducting the levels of the jump profile from corresponding hydraulic gradient line. This will be taken as the unbalanced head for which safety of glacis floor should be ensured. As a rough guide the unbalanced head may be assumed to be l/2 ( d, - dl ) where dl and d2 are conjugate depths at the beginning and end of the hydraulic jump. 7

These two parameters are inter-related. Total floor length can be decreased by increasing the depth of downstream cut-off and vice ver.ca, but increase in the depth of downstream cut-off should result in increase in the concentration of uplift pressures, specially in the lower half of the floor. A balance between the two should have to be arrived on the basis of economic studies and other requirements, if any. 4.7.2.1 Minimum of total floor should be the sum of: length required

a) horizontal floor in the downstream from surface flow considerations ( see 4.6 ),

IS 6531 : 1994 b) length required to accommodate glacis and crest; and sloping 5.2 Fundamental Principle

upstream of the crest or c) about 3 m extra, length required from other considerations. 4.7.2.2 Depth of downstream cut-off should be worked out for this floor length to ensure safe exit gradient. If depth of downstream cut-off so calculated is excessive, it can be reduced in increasing upstream floorlength. As a rough guide depth of downstream cut-off should not be less than ( d/2 + 0.5 ), where d is the water depth in metres corresponding to full supply discharge. 4.7.3 Thickness of Downstream to Uplift Pressure Floor with Reference

Streams carry most of sediment load of coarser grade near the bottom. If these bottom layers are intercepted and removed before the water enters the canal, most of the sediment load causing rilting up would be withdrawn. This is generally achieved by constructing: a) tunnel type sediment excluders suitablv located in front of different bays of the head regulators, and

b)

Uplift pressures at key points on the floor should be determined from the accepted curves and formulae, corresponding to the condition that there is high flood level in the river upstream of head regulator and no water in the canal downstream of head regulator. Upstream of sill, only nominal floor thickness of about 1 m should be provided. 5 OPERATION 5.1 Provision for Breast Wall

a curved channel with skimming weir towards the canal as shown in Fig. 3. It is recommended that hydraulic model tests be carried out to check the performance of the proposed design. Criteria for Sediment Excluder

6.3 Design 6.3.1 &poach

The river approach plays an important part and it should be kept straight to the mouth of the tunnels as far as possible. 63.2 Design of Tunnels Location and a> der tunnels number of tunnels - The excluare located in front of the canal head regulator and their alignment is generally kept parallel to the regulator. The number of tunnels is determined by the available discharge for escapages, approach conditions and length of the regulator; canal usually four to six tunnels are provided. Any change in the alignment, if found necessary, should be on smooth curves. Spacing and bell mouthing rfi tunnels - The tunnel nearest to the head regulator has to be of the same length as that of the regulator. The consecutive tunnels should be spaced at distances such that the mouth of the one nearer to the head regulator comes within the suction zone of the succeeding tunnel so that no dead zone is left between the two to permit sediment to deposit. The extent of suction and distance between the mouth of two tunnels should normally be determined by model. Generally a distance of about 12 m may be adequate. The tunnels should be suitably bell mouthed at the inlet to minimize entry losses and improve suction. Bell mouthing should be done within the thickness of divide wall and may be done on any suitable elliptical curve. Size of tunnels - Size of tunnels depends upon the number of tunnels, self-clearing velocity of flow required to be provided which may be kept 3 m/s for the alluvial and 4.0 to 4.5 m/s for the boulder stage

If the maximum flood level to be attained after construction of the weir is not very high as compared to the full supply level of canal, that is, if the difference is up to 1 m, gates may be carried right above the high flood level. But when the may be economy difference is considerable, achieved by limiting the height of gates and providing a breast wall to stop the floods. 5.2 Working Platform

b)

A bridge and working platform should be provided for the operation of gates. The height of working platform depends upon the travel of gates. When there is a breast wall, the gate has to rise up to its bottom whereas in other case it has to go above hiqh flood level. Working platform should be such that counter-weights are clear of water in the canal. 5.3 The canal head regulator may have to be operated under partially open conditions during high flood which may have to be taken under considerations while designing the height of gates. 6 SEDIMENT EXCLUSION DEVICES

6.1 Sediment excluder is a device constructed in the river bed in front of a canal head regulator to prevent, as far as possible, sediment entering into the offtaking canal. This sediment exclusion becomes necessary, where excessive sediment entry into the canal causes silting-up and gradually reduces its capacity. Such devices are necessary, if sediment entering the canal is harmful. 8

c)

IS 6531 : X994 river and the discharge available for escap age. Besides, the convenience of a man for inspection and repairs should also be kept in view. Roof and bed of tunnels - The roof slab of the tunnels should be kept flush with sill of the canal regulators and the bed kept at the upstream floor level of weir/anicut/ barrage. 6.3.6 Losses in Tunnels

These should comprise friction losses and losses at the bends and transitions and should be computed by the following formulae: a) Friction loss

e)

Exit - All the tunnels outfall into the stilling basin through one or two undersluice bays of the weir or anicut next to the canal regulator. It is usually one in case of sandy reaches and two in the case of rivers in shingle or bouhler stage. The tunnels should be suitably throttled laterally or vertically or both as the conditions may be to produce accelerating velocities in the tunnels; maximum being at the exit end so that sediment material once extracted does not deposit anywhere in the tunnels. tunnels should be Bend radius - Straight preferred for the sediment excluders; however, if a bend becomes inevitable. Its radius may vary from 5 to 10 times the tunnel's width. Tranjitions - All transitions to piers, in bellmouthing at top or sides should preferably be elliptical, the major axis being in the direction of flow and two to three times the minor axis. Control Structure

where hi = V = L = head loss in m, velocity length in m/s, of tunnel in m,

N I- rugosity coefficient values of rugosity coefficient ( .N ) for various surfaces should be taken as gi.ven in IS 10430 : 1982, and R c hydraulic mean depth. b) Loss due to bend hb = f ( V2/2g ). ( 8/180 ) where hb = loss Jue f g 0 r = = = 0.124 to bend, ( S/2r )lP, in degrees, centre line of due to gravity, in m, and

f)

+ 3.134

g)

acceleration

angle of deviation width of tunnel radius of bend along tunnel in m.

S =

6.3.3

The excluder tunnels are operated-by the undersluice gates. These should be regulated either for the tunnels to run full bore or to remain completely closed. 6.3.4 Outfall Channels

c) Transitional loss due to change in expansion ho-K(+) where X = (9)

of velocity

No separate outfall channel is required for the sediment excluders. As already mentioned above, these outfall into the river downstream of the weir or anicut through under-sluice bays. In the case of shingle or boulder bed rivers a provision of some additional contrivance, that is, a sort of guide wall in the stilling basin may become necessary to eliminate formation of big deposits there. 6.3.5 Escapage Head Discharge and Minimum M'orking

coefficient which may vary from 0.1 to 0.5 from gradual to abrupt transitions, transitional loss due to velocity in expansion, velocities transition, acceleration Criteria Excluder before and and change after of the

he 0 V, and Vz = g = 6.4 Design Sediment Headworks

due to gravity. for for Curved Channel Spate Irrigation

The seepage discharge is generally governed by sediment size and load. Escapage discharge of 15 to 20 percent of the canal discharge is generally required. A minimum of 0.5 to 0.75 m of working head is required for sediment excluders on sandy rivers and minimum of 1.0 to 1~25 m is required for excluders on shingle or boulder beds. 9

The layout of curved channel sediment excluder is shown in Fig. 3. Some factors relevant to such a design are: a) river flow variability, b) sediment c) availability transport rates in the river, purposes* of water for sluicing

IS 6531:1994
d) availability and of head for sluicing purposes, 6.4.2 Water Requirement for Sluice Flow

A sluice flow of about 10 to 20 percent of the canal flow be provided for sediment exclusion. 6.4.3 Tail Water Level

e) river mobility. 6.4.1 Principle of Design

Water surface in curved channel flow becomes super elevated ( higher on the outside ) and a spiral flow develops. The bottom current moves towards the inside of bend, and in this region the sediment will be moved away ~from the outside of the bend provided the current is sufficiently strong. For spate irrigation systems, the principle can be used by constructing a suitably curved local sluice and approach channel.

The efficiency of the curved channel sediment excluder is strongly dependent upon tail water level. For variation of tail water depths from 84 to 116 percent ( of weir crest height from downstream floor ) the efficiency varies from 75 to 30 percent. To preserve the curvature effect of the sluice channel velocities should not be too low and hence depths of flow should not be too large. 6.4.4 It is desirable of curved channel model studies. to verify the hydraulic design sediment excluder through

10

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and tittending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed oeriodicallv: a standard along with amendments IS reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are neehkd; if the review-indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. or Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments edition. This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot : No. RVD 11 ( 30 ).

Amendments Amend No.

Issued Since Publication

Date

of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Regional Central Eastern Northern Southern Offices : : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur NEW DELHI 110002 : l/14 C. I. T. Scheme CALCUTTA 700054 : SC0 445-446, Sector Shah

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Marg,

New Delhi

110002

Telegrams : Manaksaastha ( Common to all offices ) Telephone

Zafar

Marg Maniktola 160036 600113 37 84 99, 37 86 26, 53 38 43, t 53 23 84

331 01 31 331 13 75 37 85 61 37 86 62 53 16 4~

VII M, V. I. P. Road, 35-C, CHANDIGARH Road, MADRAS

: C. I. T. Campus, : Manakalaya, BOMBAY

IV Cross

235 02 16, 235 04 42 235 15 19, 235 23 15 632 92 95, 632 78 91, 632 78 58 632 78 92

Western

E9 MIDC, 400093

Marol,

Andheri

( East )

Branches

: AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

