IAT WAP IS 2442 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


fee err anita fect ee — 
ERA 


( TET FRAT ) 


d.c. Moving Coil Galvanometers — 
Specification 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 17.220.20 


© BIS 2023 


dit AH ST 
Ly BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


WM WH, 9 get TE TH AM, 28 Keelt. 110002 


MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


NGE aaa aal 


December 2023 Price Group 4 


Measuring Equipment for Basic Electrical Quantities Sectional Committee, ETD 12 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Measuring Equipment for Basic Electrical Quantities Sectional Committee had been approved 
by the Electrotechnical Division Council. 


This standard was first published in 1963. This revision has been brought out to bring the standard in the latest 
style and format of the Indian Standards. It also incorporates amendment No. 1 issued in 1980 to the last version 
of the standard. 


Galvanometers with widely differing characteristics are required for many types of applications requiring 
indication of very small current, voltage or charge. d.c. moving coil galvanometers are used both as null indicators 
and as deflectional instruments. Due to their application in many holds and the likelihood of considerable demand 
for them, this standard has been prepared to assist the indigenous manufacturers in achieving the required quality 
of the product. 


Galvanometers may be of pivoted or suspended types, with a mechanical or optical pointer system. Basically a 
galvanometer works on the same principle as a d.c. moving coil instrument but in the former the scales are only 
marked in convenient divisions and not in any electrical quantity, the important requirement being the sensitivity 
rather than long-term stability of readings. The requirements for the galvanometers, therefore, quite different from 
those for the indicating instruments mentioned above in this standard. 


This standard is chiefly intended to cover the technical provisions relating to the d.c. moving coil galvanometers, 
and it does not include all the necessary provisions of a contract. This edition does not include any significant 
technical changes with respect to the previous edition. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the results of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places 
retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 2442 : 2023 


Indian Standard 
d.c. MOVING COIL GALVANOMETERS — SPECIFICATION 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard gives the definitions of terms, 
requirements and tests for d.c. moving coil 
galvanometers. Both pivoted and suspended types of 
galvanometers with either mechanical or optical 
pointer systems are covered. 


1.2 This standard does not cover differential 
galvanometers. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standard given below contain provisions, which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions 
of this standard. At the time of publication, the 
editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent edition of 
this standard: 


IS No. Title 


IS 196: 1966 Atmospheric conditions for 
testing (revised) 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply: 


3.1 Galvanometer — An instrument intended for 
measuring or detecting currents that are usually very 
small. 


3.1.1 Moving Coil Galvanometer — A galvanometer 
in which the moving element, comprising a coil, 
moves in a constant magnetic field when a current 
flows through it. 


3.1.2 Differential Galvanometer — A galvanometer 
designed to measure the difference of two currents. 


3.1.3 Pivoted Galvanometer — A galvanometer in 
which the moving element is supported on pivot or 
pivots which are held in suitable bearings or jewels. 


3.1.4 Suspended Galvanometer — A galvanometer 
in which the moving element is suitably suspended. 


3.1.5 Mechanical Pointer — A needle like device 
attached to the moving element and moving over a 
scale to indicate the movement of the element. 


3.1.6 Optical Pointer — An optical device a 
component of which (generally a mirror) is attached 
to the moving element so that its movement is 
indicated by a spot of light moving over a scale. 


3.2 Sensitivity (or Factor of Merit) — The 
magnitude of the deflection produced by a given 
change in quantity measured. 


NOTES 


1 The sensitivity of a galvanometer is referred to as the 
quantity required for causing deflection of one millimetre. 
In the case of separate scale type galvanometer, the 
sensitivity is measured with a scale at a distance of one 
metre from the galvanometer. 


2 The following kinds of sensitivities may be distinguished. 


3.2.1 Current Sensitivity — This is the current 
required to give the deflection of one millimetre. All 
other expressions of galvanometer sensitivity are 
derived from the current sensitivity. 


3.2.2 Megohm Sensitivity — This expresses the 
resistance in megohms which shall be in series with 
a galvanometer in order that an impressed e.m.f. of 
one volt shall produce deflection of one millimetre. 
Neglecting the resistance of galvanometer coil itself, 
the number representing the megohm sensitivity is 
the reciprocal of the number representing the current 
sensitivity. 


3.2.3 Voltage Sensitivity — This is the voltage that 
shall be impressed in the circuit made up of a 
galvanometer coil and the external critical damping 
resistance in order to produce the deflection of one 
millimetre. The voltage sensitivity equals the 
product of the current sensitivity and the total circuit 
resistance. 


3.2.4 Ballistic Sensitivity — This is the quantity of 
electricity that shall be discharged through the 
galvanometer in order to produce the deflection of 
one millimetre. When critically damped, the 
sensitivity of a ballistic galvanometer is about a third 
of its undamped sensitivity. 


3.3 Resistance of Galvanometer — The resistance 
of the coil and the control springs or suspensions as 
measured at the galvanometer terminals. 


3.4 Period — The time for one complete undamped 
oscillation of the moving coil. 


IS 2442 : 2023 


3.5 Critical Damping — The least value of 
damping necessary to prevent oscillation. 


NOTE — In practice the galvanometer is used in a slightly 
underdamped condition. 


3.6 Zero Shift — The change in the rest position of 
the pointer from the zero position before after a 
deflection. 


NOTE — The zero shift may be due to the hysteresis in 
suspension or changing the residual magnetization of the 
moving element. 


3.7 Dead Beat Galvanometer — A galvanometer 
which is so damped that the oscillatory motion of its 
moving part rapidly dies away. 


3.8 Magnetic Shunt — An adjustable piece of 
magnetic material (soft iron) used to shunt the 
magnetic field of the permanent magnet there by 
varying the strength of the magnetic field in which 
the coil moves. 


3.9 Electrical Shunt — A resistor connected in 
parallel with the galvanometer in order to reduce the 
amount of current passing through the galvanometer 
coil. 


3.10 Critical Damping Resistance — The 
resistance of the circuit of the galvanometer 
corresponding with critical damping condition. 


3.11 Type Tests — Tests carried out to prove 
conformity with the requirements of this 
specification. These are intended to prove the 
general qualities and design of a given type of 
galvanometer. 


3.12 Routine Tests — Tests carried out on each 
galvanometer to check requirements likely to vary 
during production. 


4 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 


4.1 The galvanometer shall be constructed out of 
materials suitable for each purpose or use. 


4.2 The permanent magnets shall have high 
coercivity with the required flux density. 


4.3 The resistance wires used shall be suitable from 
the point of view of temperature co-efficient, 
thermal e.m.f. to copper, and resistivity. 


5 WORKMANSHIP AND FINISH 


5.1 All parts liable to rust or corrosion shall be given 
a suitable corrosion preventive finish. 


5.2 Magnets shall be well aged. 


5.3 Paint, lacquering or any other surface finish shall 
be hard and smooth so that clearing of accumulated 
dust shall be facilitated. 


5.4 Spring washers and lock nuts or similar devices 
shall preferably be used for fixing binding posts to 
ensure that they do not become loose in use. 


5.5 A device to lock the moving element in position 
during shifting or transport shall be provided in 
freely suspended type of galvanometers. For the 
freely suspended types there should be a limit stop 
beyond which the suspension cannot move. 


5.6 Freely Suspended type of galvanometers shall 
have levelling device to enable it to be adjusted to 
have the moving system in a freely hanging 
condition. 


5.7 The galvanometer case shall be so made as to 
prevent to ingress of dust and other particles. 


5.8 Soldering and brazing shall preferably be done 
with non-corrosive flux. When corrosive flux is used 
it shall be completely removed. Soldered joints shall 
present smooth and continuous appearance. All 
excess solder and flux shall be removed. 


5.9 A zero adjustment accessible from outside shall 
be provided. 


5.10 A convenient arrangement for shorting the 
terminals, when the galvanometer is not in use, 
should be provided. 


6 INFORMATION TO BE SUPPLIED 


The following information shall be supplied with 
the galvanometer: 

a) Galvanometer resistance; 

b) Periodic time; 

c) Sensitivity; and 


d) Critical damping resistance. 
7 MARKING AND INSTRUCTIONS 


7.1 The galvanometers shall be marked with the 
following: 

a) Name of manufacturer, or his trade-mark; 

b) Country of manufacture; 

c) Manufacturer's serial number and type; 

d) Nominal coil resistance; and 


e) Indication of current type (d.c. or a.c.). 


7.1.1 BIS Certification Marking 


The product(s) conforming to the requirements of 
this standard may be certified as per the conformity 
assessment schemes under the provisions of the 
Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and the Rules 
and Regulations framed thereunder, and the 
product(s) may be marked with the Standard Mark. 


8 TESTS 


The tests given in 8.1.3, 8.1.4, 8.1.5, 8.1.6 and 8.1.7 
shall be carried out at 27 °C (see IS 196 atmospheric 
conditions for testing). 


8.1 Type Tests 
8.1.1 Insulation Resistance Test 


When the moving system is insulated from the body 
of the galvanometer, the insulation resistance 
between the two terminals connected together and 
the metallic body or case when measured at 500 V 
d.c. after one minute of electrification shall be not 
less than 100 megohms. 


8.1.2 High Voltage Test 


When the moving system is insulated from the body 
of the galvanometer, no breakdown, arcing or 
sparking shall occur when 1 000 V RMS applied 
across the two terminals connected together and the 
metallic body or case for a period of one minute. 


8.1.3 Sensitivity Test 


The sensitivity of the galvanometer when new as 
3 i 

measured at = S > S and full scale deflections on both 

side of centre zero on the scale shall not differ by 

more than 5 percent of the stated value and shall not 

differ among themselves by more than 2 percent of 

the stated value. 


NOTE — The full scale deflection in the case of lamp and 
scale galvanometer shall be 10° from either side of zero. 


IS 2442 : 2023 


8.1.4 Periodic Time Test 


The measured periodic time of a galvanometer when 
new shall not differ from the stated value by more 
than 5 percent. 


8.1.5 Zero Shift Test (for Suspended Type 
Galvanometer Only) 


The zero position of the pointer shall be noted and 
the galvanometer given a full scale deflection on one 
side of zero. The cause of deflection shall be 
removed and the zero position noted again. The 
galvanometer shall then be redeflected to full scale 
in the opposite direction and reading repeated. The 
shift of the zero position of the pointer from the 
original position shall not exceed 2 percent of full 
scale reading in either direction. 


8.1.6 Needle Balance Test (for Pivoted Type 
Galvanometer Only) 


The departure from zero due to want of balance shall 
not exceed 2 percent of the full scale reading when 
the galvanometer is moved in any direction within 
an angle of 45 from the normal position of use. 


8.1.7 Test for Optical System (for Galvanometer 
with Optical Pointer) 


The component or components used in the 
galvanometer for use as optical pointer shall be 
capable of giving a clear and well defined pointer 
line whose thickness is not more than 1/10 of the 
distance of one smallest division on the scale when 
tested using the associated lamp, scale etc. 


8.2 Routine Tests 


The tests mentioned in 8.1.1, 8.1.3, 8.1.6 and 
8.1.7 shall be carried out as routine tests. 


NOTE — The full scale deflection in the case of lamp and 
scale galvanometers shall be 10° from either side of zero. 


IS 2442 : 2023 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Measuring Equipment for Basic Electrical Quantities Sectional Committee, ETD 12 


Organization 


Ministry of Communication and Information 
Technology, New Delhi 


All India Instrument Manufacturers and Dealers 
Association, Mumbai 


Automatic Electric Limited, New Delhi 
BSES Rajdhani Power Limited, New Delhi 


Calcutta Electric Supply Corporation Limited, 
Kolkata 


Central Electricity Authority, New Delhi 


Central Power Research Institute, Bengaluru 


Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, 
New Delhi 


CSIR - Central Scientific Instruments 
Organisation, Chandigarh 


CSIR — National Physical Laboratory, New Delhi 


Electrical Research and Development Association, 
Vadodara 


Electronics Regional and Test Laboratory (North), 
New Delhi 


Indian Electrical and Electronics Manufacturers 
Association, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 


Institute for Design of Electrical Measuring 
Instruments, Mumbai 


Larsen and Toubro Limited, Mumbai 


Meco Instruments Private Limited, Mumbai 


Ministry of Defence/DGQA, New Delhi 


National Test House, Kolkata 


Representative(s) 


SHRI R. P. SONDHI (Chairperson) 


SHRI GOLIYA P. C. 


SHRI RAVINDRA MISHRA 
SHRI BHIRUD S. G. 


SHRI NILANJAN SAHA 
SHRI SANTOSH CHATTOPADHAY (Alternate) 


MS SHIVANI SHARMA 
SHRI PAWAN KUMAR GUPTA (Alternate) 


SHRI J. SANTHOSH 


SHRI SHASHI MOITRA 


SHRI DHIRENDRA BANSAL 


DR SAOOD AHMAD 
DR SATYAKESH DUBEY (Alternate) 


SHRI NIRAV TAUNK 
MS VIDYA KAPSE (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHOK KUMAR ROHILLA 
SHRI MAHAVEER PRASAD SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHUTOSH VASISHT 
SHRI NAVDEEP SINGH (Alternate) 


PROF SHOURIBHRATA CHATTERJEE 


SHRI PRADEEP GUJARATHI 


SHRI PRABHAKAR C. 


SHRI KAMAL P. GOLIYA 


SHRI M. N. DAVAYA 
SHRI PRABHAS KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI A. DAS 
SHRI S. K. MENON (Alternate) 


Organization 
NTPC Limited, New Delhi 


Power Grid Corporation of India, Gurugram 


Rishabh Instruments Private Limited, Nashik 


Schneider Electric India Private Limited, 
Gurugram 


Shanti Electric Instruments Private Limited, 
Mumbai 


Sharmasons Sakova Instruments Private Limited, 
Ghaziabad 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 2442 : 2023 


Representative(s) 
SHRI NITIN GANGWAR 


SHRI NARENDRA K. BHASKAR 
SHRI DHYEYA R. SHAH (Alternate) 


SHRI AMOL A. DESHMUKH 
SHRI PRAVIN N. CHAUDHARI (Alternate) 


SHRI KUMUDHA V. 


SHRI RAVIKIRAN G. DESHMUKH 
SHRI SHAILESH BAWANKULE (Alternate) 


SHRI SATISH SHARMA 
SHRI MANISH SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI A. R. UNNIKRISHNAN, SCIENTIST ‘F’/SENIOR 
DIRECTOR AND HEAD (ELECTROTECHNICAL) 
[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI MOHAMMAD ISRAFIL 
SCIENTIST ‘D’/JOINT DIRECTOR 
(ELECTROTECHNICAL), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: ETD 12 (19502). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern :8® Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri | 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


