( Reaffirmed 2002 )

1s : 1885(Part l&IV) - 1%7

Indian Standard
ELECTROTECHNICAL
PART XIV
Elcctrotechnical
Shairmon Smu T.

VOCABULARY
POWER PLANTS
1

NUCLEAR

Standards Sectional Committee, ETDC
Rgresmling

V. BALAKIUSHNAN

Iicavy Elcctricals (India) Ltd. Bbopal

Directorate General of Posts R; Telegrapha (Lkpartsmtof Communications) Dnw.cro~ OPTeuxalu~xta (L) (Altnnntr) Indian Electrical Manufacturers' Asmciation, Calcutta SHar v. w. cH?sus-n smlt Y. P. KAUIIXX (Aknatr) Electronics and Radar Development Fatabliabnxnt (Mbktrr DmEcrOR of Defence) , Bangalore Primary Cells and Batteries Sectional Committee, ETDC 10, SHRI C. D. JOOLERIR ISI; and Secondary Cells and Battcriu Sectional Cammittee. ETDC 11, IS1 National Test Home, Calcutta SH~US. N. Muttm~ Geners~ Nomeoclature & Symbols Subcommittee, ETDC 1 : 3. PROP R. C. NAIUYANAN
SHRI

Mc?llbn1 Ssint S. K. BIIATIA idltemotc to Shri T. V. Balakrkhnan) AOO~ONAL Cnru E~omszn

SHIU v.

A. R. N~n*urur* ho Sam H. V. NAIUYANA IL\0 Sttm S. N. Vttaza (AlUmnIa) SKRl u. K. PAlwNtDxAN SHR~ R &~-UC Sear H. N. Vzxro~~~o (Alkmk)
v. RAO s. SAVAKOOR

Institution of Engineers (India), Calcutta Central Water & Power Comrnision (Power Wii) Transformen Sectional Committee, ETDC 16, IS1 Central Electra-Chemical Research Institute (CSIR), Karaikudi Department of Communications (Wireless Plannkg and Co-ordination Wii) 1nspccti0n wig, Directorate General of supplies & Dkposnb (Department of Supply, Technical Development & Materials Planning) Switchgear and Controlgear Sectional Committee, ETDC 17, ISI: and Power Frequency and Voltages Subcommitt.x, ETDC 1 : 1,IS1 National Physical Laboratory (CSIR), New Lklhi Electronic Equipment Sectional Commtttee, ETDC 24 ISI InmIaton and Accessories Sectional Committee. ETDk 3. ISI Rotating Macbinerv Sectional Committee, ETDC IS, IS1 Director General, ISI (Ee@cio M#mb#r)

SHRl u.

SHRI A. S. N~oanurrt SHR~A. P. SLETHAPATHY

(Alkmak)

R. K. Tumnr S. Tmn uvl%NKAlwzHARt v. vrt?waoPAw J. S. nvzxt Y. s. VENLATUWAPAn. Director (Eke tech) (Sswekwr)

General Nomenclature and Symbols Subcommittee, ETDC

1:3

cmwenu
Paor R. C. N.aa~wm Mcmbnr SHE' V. S. Bw.lh Ssntt S. IL JAM (Aknwfa) Sxar H. Rs KULPAIWI S~tu V. R. N.utuw (Akmalr) Stts.z P. H. NSHFJ s. RAxABluoa*N Stnu K. C. fLuwoaa Dn D. L. SvBpAmtANYAM Srtnt R. K. Tmm Delhi College of Engineering, Delhi Sicnu~ti~gineering & Mantdktmkg Co of India Lt&

Central Water & Power Co ltuni&ml (Power Ww) Voltaa Limited. Bombay Indian Itutitutc of Twbnolwy, New D&i Department of Commuttic?ti~ (P"~~`w$-d& Central Electronia Enolrcarne NPtlO

?iz&$Ll x.abaatoty
SHAH 110002

(CSIR). New Delhi

INDIAN
MANAK

STANDARDS
BEIAVAN, 9 BAHAJXJR DELHI NEW

INSTITUTION
ZAFAR MARG

IS : 1885 (Part XIV) - 1967

hdian
PART XIV

Standard
VOCABULARY
POWER PLANTS

ELECTROTECHNICAL
NUCLEAR

0.

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard (Fart XIV) was adopted by the Indian Stanaards Institution on 15 March 1967, after the draft finalized by the Electrotechnical Standards Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council. 0.2 This standard (Part XIV) follows, to a large extent, the definitions included in the draft recommendation by the International Electrotechnical Commission as contained in Dot: 1 (26) (Central Office) 238 which represents the consensus of international opinion on the subject. 0.3 It has not been found possible to prepare the electrotechnical vocabulary as a complete volume which is, therefore, being issued in several parts each having one or more sections. Other parts are given in Appendix A. 1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard (Part XIV) covers definitions of terms applicable nuclear power plants for generation of electric energy. 2. NUCLEAR 2.1 General 2.1.1 dtom - The smallest part of an element, with no net electric charge, which can participate in chemical combinations. 2.1.2 Ion-An electric charge. atom, molecule or group of molecules having a net PHYSICS to

2.1.3 Nucleus - The central part of an atom, possessing a positive charge and containing nearly all the mass of the atom. 2.1.4 Com@ouud .Nucfeus - The expression used in Bohr theory to define the excited nucleus formed when a particle is absorbed by a nucleus during a nuclear reaction. 2.1.5 A4ass .iVumber 2.1.6 &onL
.Number -

Total number of protons and neutrons in a nuclide. Number of protons contained in the nucleus.

2.1.7 Jvuclide - A species of atom characterized by its mass number, atomic number, and nuclear energy state, provided that the mean life in that state is long enough to be observable. 2

IS : 1885 (Part XIV) - 1967 2.1.0 Isotopes mass numbers. Nuclides having the same atomic number but different

2.1.9 Isotopic Abundance-Ratio of the number of atoms of a spedfkd isotope of an element to the total number of atoms of this element in a sample. Expressed in percent. 2.1.10 Abundance Ratio element. 2.1.11 2.1.12
Radionuclide Radioisotope -

Quotient of two isotopic abundance in a given

A radioactive nuclide. Radioactive isotope.

2.1.13 Parent; Radioactive Precursor (of a Radionuclide) -Radioactive nuchde which produces the radionuclide by one or several successive disintegrations. 2.1.14 Decay Product radioactive nuclide. Nuclide originating from the disintegration of a

2.1.15 Fission Fragments-The nuclei resulting from fission before they have undergone radioactive transformations. 2.1.16 Fission Products - The nuclides produced either by fission or by the subsequent radioactive disintegration of the nuclides thus formed. 2.1.17
Radioelement -

Radioactive

chemical element. disintegrating on a surface

2.1.18 Alpha, Beta and/or Gamma Emitter - Radionuclide with emission of alpha, beta and/or gamma radiation. 21.19 Active Deposit - Radioactive following radioactive decay of gas. products deposited

2.1.20 Radiation - The emission of energy in the form of particles of matter or in the form of an electromagnetic wave. 2.1.21 Alpha Particle -A helium-4 nucleus emitted during a nuclear transformation; by extension, any helium-4 nucleus. 2.1.22
Alpha-Radiation -

Alpha particles emerging from radioactive atoms.

21.23 Electron -An elementary particle having the smallest known Its mass is 9.108 x 1OS28gram. The charge charge of negative electricity. of electron e=1*6 x 10m20emu. 2.1.24 Beta Particle-An electron of either positive charge (p+) or negative charge (/3-), which has been emitted by an atomic nucleus or neutron in the process of a radioactive transformation. 2.1.25 2.1.26 neutron remains particle or upon
Positron -

It is identical to electron but has positive charge.

transformation of a nuchde or in which the atomic number changes by f 1, and the mass number Increase of atomic number occurs with negative beta constant. emission, decrease with positive beta particle (positron) emission electron capture.
Beta Disintegration-Radioactive

3

IS : 1885 (Part xl-v) - 1967 2.1.27 Beta-Ray Spccbum - Distribution, in energy or in momentum, of beta particles (not including conversion electrons) emitted by beta disintegration process. 2.1.28 Electron-Positron Pair - Electron and created, in a process called `pair production'. 2.1.m Photon Quantum of electromagnetic positron radiation. simultaneously

electromagnetic radiation produced by inter2.1.30 X-Radiation -An action of an electron with the coulomb field of a nucleus or by orbital electron transitions. 2.1.31 Gamma Radiation - Electromagnetic radiation process of nuclear transition or particle annihilation. emitted in the

2.1.32 Capture Gamma Radiation- Gamma radiation emitted imme$attly after the capture of a neutron by a nuclide. 2.1.33 Prompt Gamma Radiation- Gamma fission process without measurable delay. radiation accompanying associated the with

electromagnetic radiation 2.1.34 Bremsstrahlung -The the deceleration or acceleration of charged particles.

2.1.35 Photoclec&on - Electron emitted by some metals in a phenomenon called photoelectric tffect. 2.1.36 Photoneutron Neutron emitted during a photonuclear reaction. proton or a neutron. 2.1.37 .NwJeon -A

2.1.38 Proton - An elementary particle carrying the smallest charge of positive electricity and having a mass near that of the hydrogen atom. -1.672 x 1O-2* gram =I*007 59 atomic mass The mass of the proton is m,-units. 2.1.39 JVeutron - An elementary particle with no charge, having a mass of 1675 x 1O-24 gram or I.008 98 atomic mass units. 2.1.40 Neutron Excess number of protons. Number of neutrons in a nucleus in excess of tht

2.1.41 Fission Neutrans - Neutrons originating in the fission process (including both prompt and delayed neutrons) which have retained their original energy.
NopeThe restriction (JU 2.2.57). of this term to neutrons with fission spectrum is essential

2.1.42 Prompt Neutrons -Neutrons emitted only during the process of fission and do not include neutrons emitted by fission products in the process of their chain decay. 2.1.43 Delayed .Neutrons - Neutrons emitted by fission products in the process of their chain decay. 4

IS : 1885 (Part XIV) - 1967 21.44 Fast Xtutrons specified value. This dependent upon the dosimetry. In reactor

Neutrons of kinetic energy greater than some value may vary over a wide range and will be application, such as reactor physics, shielding, or physics the value is frequently chosen to be O-1 MeV.
-

21.45 Intermediate .Weutrons - Neutrons of kinetic energy between the energies of slow and fast neutrons. In reactor physics the range might be 1 eVto0.1 MeV. . 21.46 Resonance .Neutrons - Intermediate energy neutrons having energies from eV region to keV region, in which resonance of fissile and fertile materials lie. 2.1.47 Epicadmium Neutrons - Neutrons of kinetic energy greater than the cadmium cut-off energy. 2.1.48 Cadmium Cut-O$Neutron energy value below which the transmission factor through a cadmium sheet of specified thickness can be considered negligible. 2.1.49 Efictive Cadmium &t-0$That energy value which, for a given experimental configuration, is determined by the condition that, if a cadmium cover surrounding a detector were replaced by a fictitious cover opaque to neutrons with energy below this value and transparent to neutrons with energy above this vaIue, the observed detector response would be unchanged. of kinetic energy less than the 21.50 Subcadmium Neutrons -Neutrons cadmium cut-off energy. 2.1.51 Slow Neutrons - Neutrons of kinetic energy less than some specified value. This value may vary over a wide range and will depend on the application, such as reactor physics, shielding, or dosimetry. In reactor physics the value is frequently chosen to be 1 eV; in dosirnetry the cadmium cut-off energy is used. 2.1.52 Epithennal Neutrons - Neutrons of kinetic energy greater than that of thermal agitation; the term is often restricted to energies just above thermal, that is, energies comparable with those of chemical bonds. 2.1.53 Thermal Neutrons - Neutrons essentially in thermal equilibrium with the molecules of the medium in which they exist. 2.2 Interactions
2.2.1 Disordering-Displacement of an atom due to radiation from the position it occupies in a crystal lattice. 2.2.2 Wigner E$ect - In reactor operation, the change in physical properties of graphite resulting from displacement of lattice atoms by highenergy neutrons and other energetic particles. 25.3 Ionization - Ion formation by the division of molecules or by the addition of electrons to or separation of electrons from atoms, molecules or formations of molecules.

5

IS : 1885 (Part XIV) - 1967 2.2.4 Total Ionization a) Total electric charge of ions of the same sign produced by a moving particle which has lost its entire kinetic energy in its path. Total ionization for a given gas is nearly proportional to the initial energy, and nearly independent of the nature of the ionizing particle. It is often used as a measure of the energy of a particle. b) Total number of ion pairs produced by a charged particle along its trajectory. 2.2.5 Primary Ionization - In a counter tube, total ionization produced by the incident radiation prior to multiplication due to the gas. 2.2.6 S@$ic Ionization or Linear Ionization (at a Point) -The number of IO,, pairs produced in a given material by any radiation per unit length of its path. 2.2.7 PhotoeJectric Efect a) Ejection of bound electrons of a system under the influence of incident photons, in which all the energy (h V) of a photon is absorbed for every electron ejected. b) Ejection of a bound electron from an atom when a photon collides with the atom, in which the entire energy is transferred to the bound electron. c) The process in which a photon interacts with an atom transferring its entire energy to a bound electron which is subsequently ejected. 2.2.8 Photonuclear Reaction - Nuclear reaction resulting from the interaction between a photon and a nucleus. 2.29 &&ear Disintegration - Transformation of the nucleus, involving a splitting into two or more nuclei or particles with emission of energy; this transformation can be spontaneous, or induced by a nucleus or a particle. 23.10 Disintegration Con&W - Probability disintegrate spontaneously in unit time. 2.2.11 Disintegration Rate-Number occurring in a radioactive substance. that a radioactive atom will time
that of

of disintegrations

per unit

activity concept having been defined for a pure radionuclide, NOTE -The disintegration rate is for use in the case of a mixture of radionuclides.

2.2.12 Disintegration Energy - Energy released in a nuclear disintegration. 2.2.13 Radioactivity - The property of certain nuclides whereby particles or gamma radiation are spontaneously emitted or whereby orbital electrons of the nuclide are captured. 23.14 Natural Radioactivity - Spontaneous radioactivity of natural elements. 2.2.15 Induced Radioactivity - Radioactivity caused by bombarding nuclides with particles or radiation. 6

IS : 18% (Part XIV) - lW7 2.2.16 Radioative Dkcay - Transformation of a nuclide by spontaneous emission of particles with or without the emission of gamma radiation or by capture of an orbital electron of the nuclide.
2.2.17 Activation -- Process neutron bombardment. of inducing radioactivity, for example, by

2.2.18 Activity (of a Quantig of a Radioactive Nuclide) (A) -The quotient of ,&N+nt, where nJv is the number of nuclear transformations which A==J_X/A~, where At is very small. occur in this quantity in time At. 2.2.19 Curie (Ci) - The special unit of activity. 1 Ci==3*7 x lOI0 disintegrations per second 2.2.20 2.2.21 Specijic Activi& Nuclear activity per unit mass. per unit volume. of a radioactive the activity Unit-Volume Activity Nuclear activity

2.2.22 Activity Curve - Curve source as a function of time.

representing

2.2.23 Radioactive Half-Li&e - I'or a single radioactive decay process the mean time required for the activity to decrease to half its value by that process. 2.2.24 Exponential Decay (of a Quantity) accordance with the law: A = A,e-Al where A and A, are the respective values of the quantity at times t and zero. h is a constant depending on the nature of A and on the process that causes it to decrease, sometimes referred to as the `decay constant'. 2.2.25 Mean Life - The average lifetime for an atomic or nuclear system For an exponentially decaying system, the average time in a specified state. for the number of atoms or nuclei in a specified state to decrease by a factor bfe. 2.2.26 Neutron LX@sion - A phenomenon in which neutrons in a medium through process of successive scattering collisions with the atoms or molecules of the medium tend to migrate from one region to another. 2.2.27 Digitsion Coeficient .for Neutron Flux Density - The ratio of the neutron current density at a particular energy to the negative gradient of the neutron flux density at the same ener,gy in the direction of that current. 2.2.28 Build-up Factor --- In the passage of radiation through a medium, the ratio of the total value of a specified radiation quantity at any point to the contribution to that value from radiation reaching the point without having undergone a collision. 2.2.29 Albedo (.Neutron) - The probability under specified conditions a neutron entering into a region through a surface will return through surface. 7 that that Variation of the quantity A in

IS : 1885 (Part XIV) - 1967 22.30 Leakage (Reactor Theory) - The net loss of neutrons from a region of a reactor by escape across the bound&s of the region. 2.2.31 Capture - Any process by which an atomic or nuclear system acquires an additional particle. 22.32 Radiative Ca@ture emission of y-rays. 22.33 Resonunce Level to resonances. Capture of an incident particle resulting in the Energy level of a compound nucleus, giving rise

2.2.34 Resonance Capture - Capture of an incident particle at a resonance level of the resultant compound nucleus. 2.2.35 Neutron Absorption-Nuclear interaction in which the incident neutron disappears as a free particle even when one or more neutrons are subsequently emitted accompanied by other particles, for example, in fission. 2.2.36 Resonance Absorption - Capture of an incident particle at a resonance level of the resultant compound nucleus. 2.237 Attenuation - The reduction of a radiation quantity upon passage of radiation through matter resulting from all types of interaction with the matter. The radiation quantity may be, for example, the particle flux density or the energy flux density (see also 2.2.38). 22.38 Geometric Attenuation - The reduction of a radiation quantity due to the effect only of the distance between the point of interest and the source, excluding the effect of any matter present, (for example, the inverse square law for a point source). 2.2.39 Attenuation Coejkient - Of a substance, for a parallel beam of specified radiation, is the quantity p in the expression PAX for the fraction removed by attenuation in passing through a thin layer of thickness Ax of that substance. It is a function of the energy of the radiation. According as &X is expressed in terms of length, mass per unit area, or moles per unit area, p is called the linear, mass or molar attenuation coefficient. 22.40 Attenuation Factor - For a given attenuating body in a given configuration, the factor by_which a radiation quantity at some point of interest is reduced owing to the mterposition of the body between the source of radiation and the point of interest. 22.41. Absorption a) A phenomenon in which a beam of incident radiation transfers to the matter which it traverses some or all of its energy.
NOTEb) The compton effect is considered to be part of the absorption process.

For a specified particle, an atomic or nuclear interaction in which the incident particle disappears as a free particle even when one or more of the same or different particles are subsequently emitted. NOTE -. Scattering is not considcrcd to be a part of the absorption process. 8

Is : 1885 (Part XIV) - 1967
2.2.42 Exponential Absorptiorr - Decrease in radiation quantity (particle flux densities or energyflux density) of a beam of particles or photons during its passage through matter in accordance with the function: I=& w-here I = the energy flux density of the beam, x = measure of the amount of matter traversed, I,, = initial energy flux density, and TV= appropriate absorption coefficient. e-w

23.43 Absorption CoeJicient - Of a substance, for a parallel beam of specified radiation, the quantity p abs in the expression ,Uabs Ax for the fraction absorbed in passing through a thin layer of thickness &X of that substance. It is function of the energy of the radiation. According as 0% is expressed In terms of length, mass per unit area, or moles per unit area, ,Uabs is called the linear, mass or molar absorption coeflicient.
NOTE -

It

is that part of the attenuation coefficient resultingfrom absorptionprocesses

dY*

2.2.44 Scattering - A process in which a change in direction or energy of an incident particle is caused by a collision with a particle or a system of particles. 2.2.45 Coherent Scattering-A process in which radiation is scattered in such a manner that a definite phase relation exists between the scattered and incident waves. 2.2.46 Incoherent Scattering - A process in which radiation is scattered in such a manner that no definite phase relation exists between the scattered and incident waves. 2.2.47 Elastic Scattering - A scattering process in which the energy of a scattered particle is unchanged in the centre-of-mass system. 2.2,48 Inelastic Scattering - A scattering process in which the energy of a scattered particle is changed in the centre-of-mass system. This process can occur in either of the following ways: a) In radiative inelastic scattering - Some of the kinetic energy of an incident particIe in the centre-of-mass system goes into excitation of the target nucleus, followed by subsequent de-excitation through the emission of one or more photons. b) In thermal inelastic scattering - Energy is exchanged between a slow neutron or any other particle and molecules or lattices resulting in their extranuclear excitation.
2.2.69 Moderation -The process by which neutron energy is reduced through scattering collision:.

-

2.2.50

Nuclear Fusion Reaction-A

reaction 9

between

two light nuclei

16 : 1885 (Part XIV) - 1967 resubg in theproduction of at least one nuclear species heavier than either initial nucleus, together with excess energy.
~~$51 Mass Defect - Difference between the sum of the masses of the nucleons forming the nucleus and the mass of the nucleus.
NOTE - Originally this expression meant the difference between the physical atomic mass and the mass number.

2.2.52

Binding Etwrgy

a) For a particle in II system the system.

The net energy required to remove it from

b) `For a system -The net energy required to decompose it into its constituent particles. 22.53 Fertile - Of a nuclide, capable of beiig transformed, directly or Of a material, conindirectly, into a Sssile nuclide by neutron capture. taining one or\more fertile nuclides. 2.254 Fissionable-Of a nuclide, capable of undergoing fission by any process. Neutron capture is the most frequent cause of fission. division of a heavy nucleus into two (or 22.55 Aft&ear Fission -The sometimes more) parts with masses of equal order of magnitude; usually accompanied by the emission of neutrons, gamma rays, and, sometimes small charged nuclear fragments. process in which a neutron when it is 22.56 Neutron Multi#cation -The captured produces on the average through fission more than one neutron in a medium containing fissionable material. 2.2.57 Fission Spectrum Energy distribution of fission neutrons. 2.2.58 Fission Yield - Ratio of the number of fissions leading to a given nuclide, in a direct manner or by disintegration of other primary fission products, to the total_number of fissions. It may be expressed in percent. 2.2.59 Primary Fission Yield, Direct Fission Tield or Independent Fission Yield Ratio of number of nuclei of a given nuclide directly produced in fission to the total. 2.2.60 Cumulative Fission Yield - The ratio of number of nuclei of a given nuclide, either directly or indirectly produced in fission up to a specified time, to the total. If no time is specified, the yield is considered to be the asymptoiic value. 23.61 Chain Fission Yield - For a particular mass number `is the sum of the independent fission yields for all isobars of that mass number. 2.2.62 Fast Fission Fission caused by fast neutrons. 2.2.63 Prompt fleutron Fraction - The ratio of the mean number of prompt neutrons per fission to the mean total number of neutrons (prompt plus delayed) per fission. 10

IS:l885(Pa&xw)-1967 22.64 Delayed Neutron Fraction - The ratio of the mean number of delayed neutrons per fission to the mean total number of neutrons (prompt plus delayed) per fission.

2.2.65 Efictive Delayed .Neutron Fraction - The ratio of the mean number of fission caused by delayed neutrons to the mean total number of fissions caused by delayed plus prompt neutrons.
NOTE - The effective delayed neutron fraction is generally larger than the actual delayed neutron fraction.

2.2.66 Fissile - Of a nuclide, capable of undergoing fission by interaction with thermal neutrons.

2.2.67

Thermal Fission -

Fission caused by thermal neutrons.

2.3 Cross-Sections
2.3.1 Cross-Section or Microscopic Cross-Section - A measure of the probability of a specified interaction between an incident radiation and a target particle or system of particles. It is the reaction rate per target particle for a specified process divided by the flux density of the incident radiition (microscopic cross-section).
NOTE - Unless otherwise qualified the term `Cross-Section' shall mean `h!licroscopic Cross-Section'.

(1 barn=lO-zl

2.3.2 Barn -

A unit of area used in expressing a nuclear cross-section cm*).

2.3.3 Macroscopic Cross-Section - In reactor physics the term is applied to a specified group of target particles and implies sum of the cross-sections related to a certain type of interaction per unit volume of the target matter. 2.3.4 Activation Cross-Section -The cross-section for the formation radionuclide by a specified interaction. of a

2.3.5 Digkrential Cross-Section - The cross-section for an interaction process involving one or more outgoing particles with specified direction or energy per unit interval of solid angle or energy. 2.3.6 Doppler-Averaged Cross-Section - A cross-section averaged over energy, employing appropriate weighting factors, to take into account the effect of thermal motion of the target particles such that the product of the average cross-section so obtained and the flux density in the laboratory system gives the correct reaction rate. 2.3.7 Thermal Cross-Section neutrons. The cross-section for interaction by thermal

NOTE- Since thermal neutrons have different energy distributions in Werent situations (for example, at different temperatures), this is not a precise term,' and for this reason cross-sectlons for 2 200 m/s neutrons are commonly quoted.

2.3.8 Efictive

Thermal Cross-Section or Westcott Cross-Section -

A. fictitious

11

Is : 1885 (Part XIV) - 1967 .cross-section for a specified interaction which when multiplied by the conventional flux density gives the correct reaction rate.
NOTE- The use of this term is usually restricted moderated systems. to capture and fission in well-

23.9 Scattering Cross-Section -

The cross-section for the scattering process. The cross-section for the coherent The cross-section for the incocross-section for the elastic

23.10 Coherent Scattering Cross-Section scattering process. 2.3.11 Incoherent Scattering herent scattering process. 2.3.12 Elastic Scattering scattering process.
Cross-Section -

Cross-section -

The

2.3.13 Inelastic Scattering Cross-Section scattering process.

The cross-section for the inelastic The cross-section for

2.3.14 Radiative Inelastic Scattering Cross-Section the radiative inelastic scattering process. 2.3.15 Thermal Inelastic Scattering Cross-Section thermal inelastic scattering process.

The

cross-section for the

23.16 Transport Cross-Section -The total cross-section less the product of the scattering cross-section and the average cosine of the scattering angle in the laboratory system. The reciprocal of the macroscopic transport crosssection is the transport mean free path. 23.17 Group Transfer Scattering Cross-Section - The weighted `cross-section', characteristic of the energy group structure, that will for the transfer of neutrons by scattering from one specified group to specified .group. It is one element of the corresponding group scattering matrix. average account another transfer

23.18 Group Removal Crdss-Skction - The weighted average `cross-section', characteristic of arr energy group, that will account for the removal of neutrons from that group by all processes. 2.3.19 .Nonelastic (Interaction) Cross-Section - The difference between the total cross-section and the elastic scattering cross-section.
NOTE-The section. nonelastic cross-section is different from the inelastic scattering cross-

23.!20- Capture Cross-Section -The

cross-section for the capture process. The cross-section for the radiative

2.3.21 Radiative capture process.

Capture Cross-Section -

2.3.22 Neutron Absorption Cross-section - The cross-section for the neutron absorption process. It is the difference between the total cross-section and the scattering cross-section. 2.323
Fission Cross-Section -- The cross-section for the fission process.

12

Is:1885(Partxnq-1967 2.3.24 Alpha Ratio -As applied to fksionable nuclei, the ratio of the radiative capture cross-section to the fkion cross-section. 2.3.25 Total Cross-Section - The sum of the cross-sections for all the separate interactions between the incident radiation and a specified target. 3. REACTOR THEORY

3.1 Expressions Relating to Neutrons 3.1.1 Mean Free Path - The average distance that particles of a specifkd type travel before a specified type (or types) of interaction in a given medium. The mean free path may thus be specified for all interactions (such as toti mean free path) or for particular types of interaction such as scattering, capture or ionization. 3.1.2 Transport Mean Free Path port cross-section. The reciprocal of the macroscopic trans-

3.1.3 Slowing-Down Area - One-sixth of the mean square distance travelled by neutrons in an infinite homogeneous medium from their points of origin to the points where they have been slowed down from the initial energy to a specified energy. 3.1.4 Slowing-Down Length The square root of the slowingdown area. 3.1.5 Di$usion Area - One-sixth of the mean square distance travelled by a particle of a given type and class from appearance to disappearance (within the type and class) in an infinite homogeneous medium. 3.X.6 Dz&ion Length The square root of the ditrusion area. sum of the slowing-down area fi-orn fission 3.1.7 Migration Area -The energy to thermal energy and the diffusion area for thermal neutrons. 3.1.8 Migration Length The square root of the migration area. 3.1.9 Lethargy - The natural logarithm of the ratio of a reference energy to the energy of a neutron. 3.1.10 Average Logarithmic Energy Decrement-The increase in lethargy per neutron collision. mean value of the

3.1.11 Slowing-Down Power - For a given medium, the product of the average logarithmic energy decrement and the macroscopic neutron scat&ing cross-section. 3.1.12 JVeutronEnergy Croup - One of a set of groups consisting of neutrons having energies within arbitrarily chosen intervals. Each group may be assigned effective values for the characteristics of the neutrons within the grOUP* 3.1.13 Multigroup Model - A model which divides the neutron population into a finite number of energy groups with each group being assigned a single effective energy. 13

Is:1883(Partxrv)-1967 3.1.14 Generation Time-The mean time required for neutrons arising iiom fission to produce other fissions. 3.1.15 JVeutron Cycle -The average energy, interaction and migration history of neutrons in a reactor, beginning with fission and continuing until they have leaked out or have been absorbed. 3.1.16 JVeutronEconomy - Balance account, in a reactor, of the neutrons created and the neutrons lost, and problems related thereto. 3S.17 Beam - A unidirectional, magnetic radiation or of particles. or nearly unidirectional, flow of electro-

3.1.18 Neutron or Particle Current Density - A vector such that its component along the normal to a surface equals the net number of particles crossing that surface in the positive direction per unit area per unit time. 3.1.19 Neutron (Number) Density - The number of free neutrons per unit volume. Partial densities may be defined for neutrons characterized by such parameters as energy and direction.

of particles
umt area.

3.1.28

Particle Fluence or Fluence -At

a given point in space, the number or photons incident during a given time interval on a sphere of It is identical with the time integral of the flux density.

3.131 Particle Flux Density (cp) or Flux - At a given point in space, the number of particles or photons incident per unit time on a sphere of unit area. It is identical with the product of the particle density and the average speed. The term is commonly called `Flux', 3.1X2 Radiant Energy Flux Density (I) - At a given point in space, the quantity of'energy per unit time entering on a sphere of unit area. 3.1.23 Conventional Flux Den& or 2 200 Metre per second Flux Den.+ -A fictitious flux density equal to the product of the total number of neutrons per cubic-centimetre and a neutron speed of 2.2 x lo5 centimetres per second. 3X24
Age

a) One-sixth of the normalized second spatial moment of the neutron flux density (flux age) at energy E, or the neutron slowing-down density past energy E (slowing-down age), for a point isotropic neutron source, that is 1 j,Vf(E,
7 (E) = ??-j,~f(E, Y) r2dr t) r2dr

,

where
_f(E, r)

r = radial distance from the source, and = either the neutron flux density or the neutron slowingdown density as appropriate.

b) When Fermi age theory of slowing-down is applicable, the value of 14

IS : 1885 (Part XIV)

- 1967

the age is given by the following expression for the Fermi age (for a monoenergetic source at energy E,,), T(E, E,,) = where E' = D = xi = Z=, = the neutron energy, diffusion coefficient of neutron flux density, average logarithmic energy decrement, and scattering cross section per unit volume. E. D(E') Exit=,07 dE'

3.1.25 Disadvantage Factor - In a reactor cell, the ratio of the average neutron flux density in a material to that in the fuel. Usually, the term refers to the moderator material and to the thermal neutron flux density. 3.2 Expressions
Relating to Reactors

3.2.1 .Nuclear Energy -

Energy released in nuclear reactions or transitions.

3.2.2 Nuclear Chain Reaction (or Convergent Reaction) - A series of successive similar nuclear reactions in which every reaction in every generation givea rise to one or more agents which can trigger subsequent similar reactions. 3.2.3 Divergence Growth of a reaction rate with time. 3.2.4 Reactor Time Constant or Reactor Period-The time required for the neutron flux density in a reactor to change by a factor of e (2.718. . .). NOTE - The term `Reactor time constant' is preferred to `Reactor period'. 3.2.5 Critical - State of a nuclear chain reacting medium when ib (A reactor is critical when the effective multiplication factor equals unity. rate of neutron production, excluding neutron sources whose strengths are not a function of fission rate, is equal to the rate of neutron loss.) 3.26 Prompt Critical - State of a nuclear chain reacting medium when rendered critical by the use of prompt neutrons only. 3.2.7 Delayed Critical - State of a nuclear chain reacting medium when rendered critical predominantly by the use of delayed neutrons. 3.28 Critical Experiment-A test or series of tests performed with an assembly of reactor materials which can be gradually brought to the critical state for the purpose of determining the nuclear characteristics of a reactor. The experiment is usually performed at very low power. 3.2.9 Critical Equation - Any equation relating parameters of an assembly which shall be satisfied for the assembly to be critical. 3.2.10 Critical Mass - The minimum mass of fissile material which will sustain a nuclear chain reaction for a specified geometrical arrangement and material composition. 15

Is : 1885 (Part XIV) - 1967 3.2.11 Critical Size - The minimum physical dimensions of a reactor core or an assembly which can be made critical for a specified geometrical arrangement and material composition. 3.2.12 Relative Imjortance - For neutrons of type `A' relative to neutrons of type `B', the average number of neutrons with velocity and position `B' which shall be added to a critical system to keep the chain reaction rate constant after removal of a neutron with velocity and position `A'. 3.2.13 Importance Function - In a critical system, the average asymptotic number of neutrons in the system descended from a neutron of a given It is proportional to the adjoint of the neutron flux position and velocity. density. 33.14 Iterated Fission Expectation - In a critical reactor, the average value of the number of fissions per generation arising from neutrons of subsequent generations of a given neutron. Ftequently called `Iterated Fission Probability'. 3.2.15 Multiplication (Subcritical) - Given a subcritical assembly of reactor materials, the subcritical multiplication factor is the ratio of the number of neutrons maintained in the system by a neutron source to the number that would be maintained if the fissions were suppressed without making any other'changes in t!!e materials. 3.2.16 Exponential Ex@eriment - An experiment, performed with a subcritical assembly of reactor materials and an independent neutron source, used to determine the neutron characteristics of a configuration of these materials. With the usual placement of the neutron source (that is, thermal neutrons introduced through one face of a cube or end of a cylinder) the neutroq flux density in the assembly decreases exponentially with distance from the boundary adjacent to the source. 3.2.17 Exponential Assembly - A subcritical assembly used fol* an exponential experiment . 3.218 Material Bwkling - A parameter, Bs,,,, providing a measure of the multiplying properties of a medium as a function of the materials and their disposition. In age-diffusion theory BB, is the value of B2 satisfying the equation :
keep7 = I+BaLe

where

h- = infinite multiplication factor, 7 = the age, and L -= diffusion length of the neutrons.
Tlw equation is derived from one group theory.

NOTE-

A parameter, @g depending on the shape and the external dimensions of an assembly, for example, a reactor core. For a bare reactor. the constant B2, is given by the equation :
3.2S9 Geometric Buckling -

V2 cp(r)+B2T(r)
16

=

0

I� : 1885 (Part XIV) - 1967
where r = the radius vector, lvith the condition that the neutron Rux density q(r) is zero at the extrapolated boundary of the assembly.

3.2.20 Multi'lication Factor-The ratio of the total number of neutrons produced during a time interval (excluding neutrons produced by sources whose strengths are not a fimction of fission rate) to the total number of When neutrons lost by absorption and leakage during the same interval. the quantity is evaluated for an infinite medium or for an infinite repeating lattice it is referred to as the infinite multiplication factor (k,,), and when the quantity is evaluated for a finite medium it is referred to as the effective Also called `multiplication constant'. multiplication factor (ke,,). 3.2.21 3.2.22 Infinite Multiplication Constant EJective Multiplication Constant See 3.2.20. See 3.2.20.

3.2.23 Eta Factor -The average number of fission neutrons (including It isga function of the delayed neutrons) emitted per neutron absorbed. The term may be applied to a fissionenergy of the absorbed neutrons. able nuclide or to a nuclear fuel, as specified. 3.2.24 Fast Fission Factor - In an infinite medium, the ratio of the mean number of neutrons produced by fissions due to neutrons of all energies, to the mean number of neutrohs produced by thermal fissions only. 3.2.25 Reactivity - A parameter, p, giving the deviation from criticality Positive values correspond to a of a nuclear chain reacting medium. supercritical state and negative values to a subcritical state. Quantitatively

p =
where kL,, is the effective

1-Lk

Cff

multiplication

factor. of reactivity

3.2.26 Reactivity Tmperature Coeficient with respect to temperature.
NOTE--The temperature

The partial derivative

may be specified for some location or component.

3.2.27 Bum- Up - Nuclear transformation of reactor materials by neutron The term may be specified to fuel or absorption during reactor operation. other materia!s. 3.2.28 Bum- Up Fraction - The fraction, usually expressed as a percentage, of an initial quantity of nuclei of a given type which has under,gone burnup. 3.2.29 Spec$ic Burn-Up or Fuel Irradiation Level - The total energy that has Usually expressed been released per unit mass of fissile and fertile material. in `megawatt days per tonne'. 17

Is : 1885 (Part XIV) = 1967 3.2.30 S'ecz$c Power a reactor. 3.2.31 Dejletion - Reduction fied isotopes in a material. of the concentration by which the of one or more specicontents of a specified The poker produced per unit mass of fuel in

3.2.32 Enrichment-The process isotope in an element is increased.

NOTE - Enrichment bas also been taken to mean: a) isotopic abundance, b) enrichment factor, and c) enrichment factor minus one (dcgrceofenrichnunl). These usages should be avoided.

3.2.33 Conversion (Reactor Technology) i substance into a fissile substance.

Nuclear

transformation

of a fertile

3.2.34 Conversion Ratio - The ratio of the number of fissile nuclei produced by conversion to the number of fissile nuclei destroyed. The term can refer to an instant of time or to a period of time. 3.2.35 unity. 3.2.36 unity. 3.2.37 Breeding Breeding Conversion when the conversion ratio when ratio is greater than than

Ratio -The

conversion ratio AND

it is greater

Breeding Gain -

Breeding

minus one.

4. REACTOR

TECHNOLOGY

WORKING

4.1 Reactors 4.1.1 Ablear Reactor or Pile - A device in which a self-sustaining nuclear fission chain reaction can be maintained and controlled (fission reactor). The term is sometimes applied to a device in which a nuclear fusion reaction can be produced and controlled (fusion reactor).
4.1.2 Homogeneous Reactor - A reactor in which the core materials are distributed in such a manner that its neutron characteristics can be accurately described by the assumption of homogeneous distribution of the materials throughout the core. 4.1.3 Heterogeneous Reactor - A reactor in which the core materials are segregated to such an extent that its neutron characteristics can not be accurately described by the assumption of homogeneous distribution of the materials throughout the core. 4.1.4 Natural Lranium Reactor -- Reactor fed \vitll natural uranium. 4.1.5 Enriched Reactor natural uranium, enriched (uranium 233, plutonium, 4.1.6 Plutonium Reactor is the main fissile matter. Reactor fed with a nuclear fuel obtained from with uranium 235, or with any other fissile matter etc) added to it. Reactor fed \vith fssilc file1 of which plutonium

A r

Is : 1885 (Part XIV) - 1967 4.1.7 Fluidized Reactor - Reactor using a fuel of which certain characteristics are very nearly those of a fluid. 4.1.8 Circulating Reactor-Nuclear reactor in which the fissile matter circulates through the core. Usually this means using fissile matter in fluid form or in the form of small particles in suspension in a fluid. 4.1.9 Fast Reactor by fast neutrons. A reactor in which fission is induced predominantly

4.1.10 Intermediate Reactor or Intermedtate +ectrum Reactor-A reactor in which fission is induced predominantly by intermediate neutrons. 4.1.11 Epithermal Reactor-A predominantly by epithermal reactor in which_ the fission is induced neutrons.

reactor. in which fission is induced predo4.1.12 Thermal Reactor -A minantly by thermal neutrons. 4.1.13 Converter Reactor - A reactor whose purpose is to convert a fertile material into a fissionable material. 4.1.14 Breeder Reactor-A reactor which produces more fissile material than it consumes, that is, has a conversion ratio greater than unity. 4.1.15 Spectral' Shift Reactor - A reactor in which, for control or other purposes, the neutron spectrum may be adjusted by varying the properties or amount of moderator. 4.1.16 Power Reactor-A reactor whose primary purpose is to produce power,. Reactors in this class include: a) electricity production reactor, b) propulsion reactor, and c) heat-production reactor. 4.1.17 Research Reactor-A reactor of any power level used primarily as a Reactors in this class include : research tool for basic or applied research a) b) c) d) e) low-flux research reactor, high-flux research reactor, pulsed reactor, testing reactor, and zero-power reactor (may also be an experimental reactor).

4.1.18 Experimental Reactor - A reactor operated primarily to obtain reactor physics or engineering data for the design or development of a reactor or reactor type. Reactors in this class include: a) zero-power reactor (may also be a research reactor), b) reactor experiment, and c) prototype reactor. 4.1.19 Production Reactor - A reactor whose primary purpose is to produce iissile or other materials or to perform irradiation on an industrial scale. 19 .

IS : 1885 (Part XIV) - 1967 Unless otherwise specified the term usually refers to a plutonium-production reactor. Reactors in this class include:_ a) fissile-material production reactor, b) isotope-production reactor, and c) irradiation reactor. 4.1.20 Training Reactor -A reactor operated primarily reactor operation and instructing in reactor behaviour. 42 Constituent Parts which when for training in

43.1 Nuclear Fuel - Material containing fissile nuclides placed in a reactor enables a chain reaction to be achieved.

4.2.2 Enriched Material - Material in which the concentration of one or more specified isotopes of a constituent is greater than its natural value. 4.2.3 Depleted Material Material which has undergone depletion. 4.2.4 Fuel Element or Fuel Rod - The smallest structurally discrete part of a reactor which has fuel as its principal constituent. 4.2.5 Slug A small fuel element of cylindrical form. 4.2.6 Fuel Assembly - A fuel element or a grou of fuel elements in the form of cluster of rods or a bundle of plates, with al Pits accessories. 4.2.7 Cladding or Can-An external layer of material applied, usually to a nuclear fuel, to provide protection from a chemically reactive environment, to provide containment of radioactive products produced during the irradiation of the composite, or to provide structural support. 4.2.8 Plug a) Piece of material used for plugging a hole in a screen of protective material so as to prevent the passage of radiations. b) A part welded to the cladding, so as to make it efficiently radiation proof. 4.2.9 Channel 4.2.10 4.2.11 4.2.12 place.
Charge -

Duct provided in a reactor. The fuel placed in a reactor. Medium inside which chain fissions can take place. That region of a reactor in which a chain reaction can take

Actiue Core -

Core -

4.2.13 Cell (Reactor) - One of a set of elementary regions in a heterogeneous reactor each, of which has the same geometrical form and neutron characteristics as the other. 4.2.14 Reactor Lattice -- An array according to a regular pattern. of fuel and other materials arranged 20

IS : 1885 (Part XIV)

- 1967

4.2.15 Blanket - A region of fertile material placed around or within the core of a reactor for the purpose of conversion.

hole through a reactor shield into the 4.2.16 Irradiation Channel -A interior of the reactor in which irradiations are carried out. Sometimes called experimental hole. 4.2.17 Beam Hole - A hole through a reactor shield into the interior of the reactor for the passage of a beam of radiation for experiments outside the reactor. 4.2.18 Moderator - A material used to reduce by scattering collisions and without appreciable capture of the kinetic energy of neutrons. 4.2.19 Rejlector - A material or a body of material In nuclear reactor technology, this term radiation. designate a part of a reactor placed adjacent to the returning some of the escaping neutrons to the core collisions. 4.2.20 Secondary Coolant Circuit - A circulating heat from the primary coolant circuit. which reflects incident is usually restricted to core for the purpose of by means of scattering

system used to remove

4.2.21 Containment -- The prevention of release, even under the conditions of a reactor accident, of unacceptable quantities of radioactive material beyond a controlled zone. Also, commonly, the containing system itself.. 4.2.22 Shield-A body of material intended to reduce the intensity of radiation entering a region. 4.2.23 Thermal Shield - A shield intended to reduce heat generation by ionizing radiation in, and heat transfer to exterior regions. 4.2.24 Biological Shield-A shield whose prime purpose is to reduce ionizing radiation to biologically permissible levels. 4.2.25 Extrapolated Boundary - A hypothetical surface outside an assembly on which the neutron flux density would be zero if the flux existing a few mean free paths from the physical surface were extrapolated. 4.2.26 Reactor Vessel -The reactor core. 4.2.27 Neutron Converter-A produce fast neutrons. 4.3 Reactor
Operation

principal

vessel surrounding

at

east the

dev?ce placed in a flux of slow neutrons to

of emitting ionizing radiation.

4.3.1 Radiation Source -An

apparatus or a material emitting or capable material which is

4.3.2 Radioactive Source -Any quantity of radioactive intended for use as a source of ionizing radiation. 4.3.3 Sealed Source -

A hermetically encapsulated radioactive source. 21

IS : 1885 (Part XIV) - 1967 4.3.4 SourceRange -The range of reactor operation within which a supplementary neutron source is required to facilitate the measurement of neutron flux density.
43.5 Counter Range -The particle counter is required density. 63.6 reactor range of reactor power level within which a for adequate measurement of the neutron flux

Operating Range - The range of reactor power level within which a is designed to operate in a steady-state condition. the control or neutron

4.3.7 Power Range - The range of power level within which of a reactor is primarily based upon measurement of temperature flux density rather than time constant (period).

4.3.8 Time Constant Range or Period Range-The range of power level within which the reactor time constant (reactor period) rather than reactor power, is of primary importance for reactor control. 4.3.9 starting Reactor Regulation - Sequence of operations for the up the reactor and keeping it at the desired power level. purpose of

4.3.10 Reactor Control reactor, or the adjustment 4.3.11 tion. 4.3.12 position, Conjguration

The intentional variation of the reaction rate in a of reactivity to maintain steady-state operation. Reactor control by changing its configura-

Control -

Fuel Control -- Control of a reactor by adjustment of the properties, or quantity of fuel in such a way as to change the reactivity.

4.3.13 Moderator Control - Control of a reactor by an adjustment of the properties, position or quantity of the moderator in such a way as to change the reactivity. 4.3.14 Spectral Shift Control A special type of moderator control. 4.3.15 Absorpion Control-Control of a reactor by adjustment of the properties, position, or quantity of neutron-absorbing material, other than fuel, moderator and reflector material, in such a way as to change the reactivity. 4.3.16 Neutron Absorber (Material) -A material with which neutrons interact significantly by reactions resulting in their disappearance as free particles. 4.3.17 .Xeutrotl nbsorbel- (Objxt) - An object with which neutrons interact significantly or predominantly by reactions resulting in their disappearance as free particles without production of other neutrons. 4.3.18 Poiso.~ -A substance, which, owing section, reduces the reactivity of a reactor. 4.3.19 Burnable control long-term to its high absorption cross to help

Poison - Poison purposely included in a reactor reactivity changes by its progressive burn-up. 22

IS : 1885 (Part XIV) - 1967 4.320 XenonEffect - Phenomenon that takes place in thermal reactors due to a build up of xenon which is a very important nuclear poison.
4.3.21 Fluid Poison Control-Control of a reactor by adjustment of the position, or quantity of a fluid nuclear poison in such a way as to change the reactivity. The fluid poison may include soluble chemicals or particles in suspension. 4.3.22 Rejlector Control-Control of a reactor by adjustment of the properties, position, or quantity of the reflector in such a way as to change the reactivity. 4.3.23 Self-Regulation - An inherent tendency under certain conditions of a reactor to operate at a constant power level because of the e&ct on reactivity of a change in power level. 4.3.24 Control Member 07 Control Element-A movable part which itself affects reactivity and is used for reactor control. 4.3.25 Control Rod A control member in the fotm of a rod. a control member in the 4.3.26 Control Drive -A course of reactor control. device used for moving of a reactor

4.3.27 Coarse Control Member 07 Course Control Elemerltused for gross adjustment of the reactivity of a reactor distribution. 4.3.23 Fine Control - Fine regulation reactivity drift of small amplitude. for the

A control member or for altering flux of correcting

purpose

4.3.29 Fine Cotltrol Member or Fke Cotltrol Element or Regulating Member 07 Regulating Element--A control member used for small and -precise adjustment of the reactivity of a reactor. 4.3.36 Coarse Control (Shimming) - Coarse regulation for the purpose of correcting ,reactivity drift of major amplitudes spreading over a long period. 4.3.31 Shim Member or Shim Elemetzt -A control member used to compensate for long-term reactivity and flux density distribution effects in a reactor. 4.3.32 Emergency Shutdown 07 Scrti - The act of shutting suddenly to prevent or minimize a dangerous condition. 4.3.33 required. Emergency Shutdown Rod Safety member down a reactor action if

for immediate

4.3.34 Safep Member-A control member which, singly or in concert with others, provides a reserve of negative reactivity for the purpose 01 emergency shutdown of a reactor. 4.3.35 Reactor Safe0 Fuse -A self-contained device designed to respond to excessive temperature or flux in a reactor and to act to reduce the reaction 23

IS : 1885 (Part XIV)

- 1967 stored energy to a shield, espein

rate to a safe level. The device may or may not contain facilitate its operation. 4.3.36 Leakage (Shielding) --- Escape of radiation through cially by way of holes or cracks through the shield. 4.3.37 Radioactive ContaT ination - A radioactive materials or places where it is undesirable.

substance

dispersed

of 4.3.30 Decontamination Factor - The ratio of the initial concentration contamination of radioactive material to the final concentration arrived at through a process of decontamination. (The term may refer to a specified nuclide or to gross measurable radioactivity.) 4.4 Maintenance 4.4.1 Irradiation 4.4.2 exhibit Radiation exposure. A material of which one or more constituents Radioactive Material radioactivity.

NOTE- For special purposes such as regulation, this term may be restricted to radioactive material with an activity or a specific activity greater than a specified value.

4.4.3 Radiation Damage - Deleterious changes in the physical or chemical properties of a material as a result of exposure to ionizing radiation. 4.4.4 Radioactive Waste - Unusable processing or handling of radioactive 4.45 After-Heat the heat resulting from residual radiothe a) For a shut-down reactor, activity and fission. radioactive materials. materials obtained in the

b) For reactor fuel or reactor components after removal reactor, the heat resulting from residual radioactivity. 4.4.6 Hot -An expression commonly

from

used to mean `highly radioactive'.

4.4.7 Fuel Burn-Out (Reactor Technology) - In reactor technology, severe local damage of a fuel element, due to failure of the coolant to dissipate all the heat produced in the element. 4.4.8 4.4.9 Slug Burst Loading Occurrence Introduction of a leakage in the cladding. of the nuclear fuel into the reactor. for introducing for extracting the fuel into the fuel from radioactive filled

4.4.10 Fuel Charging Machine -Apparatus the reactor. 4.4.11 Fukl Discharging Machine -Apparatus a reactor. 4.4.12 material. 4.4.13 Cask A shielded container

used to store or transport large 24 container

Fuel Cooling Installation -A

or cell, usually

IS : 1885 (Part XIV) - 1967 with water, in which spent nuclear fuel is set aside until its radioactivity has decreased to a desired level. 4.4.14 Fuel Reprocessing - The processing of nuclear fuel, after its use in a reactor, to remove fission products and recover frssile and fertile material. 4.4.15 Filter -Absorbing matter through which radioactive material is passed to remove the absorbable constituents. 4.4.16 Cladding (Process) -The cladding. 4.4.17 Canning (Process) -The can. process of providing a material with a process of providing a material with a

APPENDIX (Clause 0.3)
PARTS

A
VOCABULARY vocabulary: vocabulary: Part Part I II

OF IS : 1885 ELECTROTECHNICAL

IS : 1885 (Part I)-1961 Electrotechnical Fundamental definitions IS : 1885 (Part II)-1961 Electrotechnical Machines and transformers

IS : 1885 (Part III/Set l)-1965 Electrotechnical vocabulary: Part III Acoustics: Section 1 Physical acoustics IS : 1885 (Part IV/Set l)-1965 Electrotechnical vocabulary: Part IV Electron tubes and valves: Section 1 Receiving valves IS : 1885 (Part IV/Set 2)-1965 Electrotechnical vocabulary: Electron tubes and valves: Section 2 X-ray tubes Part IV

IS : 1885 (Part V) - 1965 Electrotechnical vocabulary : Part V Quartz crystals IS : 1885 (Part VI)-1965 Printed circuits Electrotechnical vocabulary: vocabulary: Part VI

IS : 1885 (Part VII)-1965 Electrotechnical Semiconductor devices

Part VII

IS : 1885 (Part VIII) -1965 Electrotechnical vocabulary : Part VIII Secondary cells and batteries 25

IS : 1885 (Part XIV) - 1967
IS : 1885 (Part IX)-1966 Electrical relays *IS : 1885 (Part X)Electrical protection Electrotechnical Electrotechnical vocabulary: vocabulary: vocabulary: vocabulary: Part Part Part Part TX X XI XII

IS : 1885 (Part XI)-1966 Electrotechnical Electrical measurements IS : 1885 (Part XII)-1 966 Electrotechnical Ferromagnetic oxide materials

IS : 1885 (Part XIII/Set 2)-1967 Electrotechnical vocabulary: Part XIII Telecommunication transmission lines and waveguides: Section 2 Microwave transmission lines and waveguides.

*Under,preparation.

26

IS : 1885 (Part XIV) INDEX

- 1967

A Absorber Neutron (material) 4.3.1G Neutron (object) 4.3.17 Absorption 2.2.41 coefficient 2.2.43 control 4.3.15 Exponential 2.2.42 Neutron 2.2.35 Resonance 2.2.36 Abundance Isotopic 2.1.9 ratio 2.1.10 Activation 2.2.17 cross-section 2.3.4 Active core 4.2.11 deposit 2.1.19 Activity curve 22.22 ofa quantity ofa radioactive nuclide 2.2.18 Specific 2.2.20 Unit-volume 2.2.2 1 After-heat 4.4.5 Age 3.1.24 Albedo irt Neutron 2.2.29 Alpha emmittcr 2.1.18 particle 2.1.2 1 radiation 2.1.22 ratio 2.3.24 Area Diffusion 3.1 .r, Migration 3.1.7 Slowing-down 3.1.3 Assembly Exponential 3.2.17 Fuel 4.2.6 Atom 2.1.1 Atomic number 2.1 .G Attenuation 2.2.37 coefficient 2.2.39 factor 2.2.40 Geometric 2.2.38 Average logarithmic energy decrement 3.1. IO *Ruin for making alphabetical indrxes.

B

Barn 2.3.2 Beam 3.1.17 hole 4.2.17 Beta disintegration 2.1.26 emitter 2.1.18 particle 2.1.24 ray spectrum 2.1.27 Binding energy 2.2.52 Biological shiela 4.2.24 Blanket 4.2.15 Boundary extrapolated 4.2.25 Breeder reactor 4.1.14 Breeding 3.2.35 gain 3.2.37 ratio 3.2.36 Brcmsstrahlung 2.1.34 Buckling Geometric 3.2.19 Material 3.2.18 Build-up factor 2.2.28 Burnable poison 4.3.19 13urn-up 3.2.27 fraction 3.2.28 Burst. slug 4.4.8 C Cadmium cut-olr 2.1.48 EfYective 2.1.49 Canning (process) 4.4.17 Capture 2.2.31 cross-section 2.3.20 gamma radiation 2.1.32 Radiative 2.2.32 Resonance 2.2.34 (iell (reactor) 4.2.13 Chain fission yield 22.61 Channel 4.2.9 Irradiation 4.2.16 Charge 4.2.10 Circuit secondary coolant 4.2.20 Circulating reactor 4.1.8 Cladding or can 4.2.7 Cladding (process) 4.4.16 Coarse control 4.3.30 clement: member 4.327

27

IS : 1885 (Part XIV) - 1967
Coeflicient Absorption 2.2.43 Attenuation 2.2.39 Diffusion for neutron flux density 2.2.27 Reactivity temperature 3.2.26 Coherent scattering 2.2.45 cross-section 2.3.10 Compound nucleus 2.1.4 Configuration control 4.3.11 Cons&t Disintegration 2.2.10 Effective multiplication 3.2.22 Infinite multiplication 3.2.21 Constituent parts 4.2 Containment 4.2.21 ~n~ounation Radioactive 4.3.37 Absorption 4.3.15 drive 4.3.26 element 4.3.24 Fine 4.3.28 Fluid poison 4.3.2 I Fuel 4.3.12 member 4.3.24 Moderator 4.3.13 Reactor 4.3.10 Reflector 4.3.22 rod 4.3.25 Spectral shift 4.3.14 Conventional flux density 3.1.23 Convergent reaction 32.2 Conversion ratio 3.2.34 irt reactor technology 3.2.33 Converter Neutron 4.2.2,7 reactor 4.1.13 Care 4.2.12 Active 4.2.11 Counter range 4.3.5 Critical 3.2.5 Delayed 3.2.7 equation 3.2.9 experiment 3.2.R mass 3.2.10 Prompt 3.2.6 size 3.2.11 Cross-Section 2.3.1 Activation 2.3.4 Capture 2.3.20 Coherent scattering 2.3.10 Differential 2.3.5 Doppler-averaged 2.3.6 Effective thermal 2.3.8 Elastic scattering 2.3.12 Fission 2.3.23 Group removal 2.3.18 Group transfer scattering 2.3.17 Cross-Section f mntd1 Incoherent dcatterkg 2.3.1 I Inelastic scattering 2.3.13 Macroscopic 2.3.3 Microscopic 2.3.1 Neutron absorption 2.3.22 Nonelastic irt interaction 2.3.19 Radiative capture 2.3.2 1 Scattering 2.3.9 Thermal 2.3.7 inelastic scattering 2.3.15 Total 2.3.25 Transport 2.3.16 Cumulative fission yield 2.2.60 Curie (Ci) 2.2.19 c$w&ivity 2.2.22 Cadmium 2.1.48 Effective cadmium 2.1.49 Cycle Neutron 3.1.15

D Damage Radiation 4.4.3 Decay Exponential of a quantity 2.2.24 product 2.1.14 Radioactive 2.2.16 Decontamination factor 4.3.38 Decrement Average logarithmic energy 3.1.10 Defect Mass 2.2.51 Delayed critical 3.2.7 neutrons 2.1.43 fraction 2.2.64 Effective 2.2.65 Density conventional flux 3.1.23 Neutron (number) 3.1.19 Particle current 3.1. la Radiant energy flux (I) 3.1.22 2 200 metre per second flux 3.1.23 Depleted material 4.2.3 Depletion 3.2.31 Deposit Active 2.1.19 Differential cross-section 2.3.5 Diffusion area 3.1.5 coeflicient for neutron flux density 22.27 length 3.1.6 Neutron 2.2.26 Direct fission yield 2.2.59 Disadvantage factor 3.1.25 Disintegration Beta 2.1.26

28

IS : 1885 (Part XIV)
Disintegration ( contd) constant 2.2.10 energy 2.2.12 nuclear 2.2.9 rate 2.2.11 Disordering 2.2.1 Divergence 3.2.3 Doppla-averaged cross-section 2.3.6 Drive Control 4.3.26 Exponential (co&) Assembly 3.2.17 decay (of a quantity) 2.2.24 experiment 3.2.16 Expressions relating to Neutrons 3.1 Reactor 3.2 Extrapolated boundary 4.2.25 F

- 1967

E
Economy Neutron 3.1.16 Effect Photoelectric 2.2.7 wigner 2.2.2 Effective cadmium cut-off 2.1.49 delayed neutron fraction 2.2.65 multiplication constant 3.2.22 thermal cross-section 2.3.8 Elastic scattering 2.2.47 cross-section 2.3.12 Electricity production reactor 4.1.16 Electron 2.1.23 positron pair 2.1.28 Element Coarse control 4.3.27 Control 4.3.24 Fine control; Regulating 4.3.29 Shim 4.3.31 Emergency shut-down 4.3.32 rod 4.3.33 Emitter Alpha; Beta; Gamma 2.1.18 Energy Binding 2.2.52 Disintegration 2.2.12 Nuclear 3.2.1 Enriched material 4.2.2 reactor 4.1.5 Enrkbment 3.2.32 Epieadmium neutrons 2.1.47 Epithermal neutrons 2.1.52 reactor 4.1.11 Equation Critical 3.2.9 Eta factor 3.2.23 Expectation Iterated fission 3.2.14 Experimental Critical 3.2.8 Exponential 3.2.16 reactor 4.1.18 Exponential absorption 2.2.42

Factor Attenuation 2.2.40 Build-up 2.2.28 Decontamination 4.3.38 Disadvantage 3.1.25 Eta 3.2.23 Multiplication 3.2.20 Fast fission factor 3.2.24 neutrons 2.1.44 reactor 4.1.9 Fertile 2.2.53 Filter 4.4.15 Fine control 4.3.28 element; member 4.3.29 Fissile 2.2.66 material prodllction reactor 4.1.19 Fission _ Cross-section 2.3.23 expectation; Iterated 3.2.14 Fast 2.2.62 Fragments 2.1.15 Neutrons 2.1.41 Nuclear 2.2.55 products 2.1.16 spectrum 2.2.57 Thermal 2.2.67 yield 2.2.58 Chain 2.2.61 Cumulative 2.2.60 Direct; Independent; Primary 2.2.59 Fissionable 2.2.54 Fluence 3.1.20 Fluid poison control 4.3.2 1 Fhtidized reactor 4.1.7 FlW Conventional 3.1.23 density 3.1.20 Particle 3.1.21 Radiant energy 3.1.22 2 200 metre per second 3.1.23 Fraction Burn-up 3.2.28 Delayed neutron 2.2.64 Effective delayed neutron 2.2.65 Prompt neutron 2.2.63

29

IS : 1885 (Part XIV) - 1967
Fuel assembly 42.6 bum-out (Reactor technology) charging machine 4.4.10 cooling installation 4.4.13 discharging machine 4.4.11 irradiation level 3.2.29 reprocessing 4.4.14 Function Importance 3.2.13 Fuse Reactor safety 4.3.35 Intcrmcdiate neutrons 2.1.41 - Feeactor; spectrunl rractor 4.1 .lO ran 2.1.2 Ionization 2.2.3 Linear or Specilic (at a point) 2.2.6 primary 22.5 Total 2.2.4 Irradiation 4.4.1 ChanncJ 4.2.16 Isotope-production reactor 4. I, 19 Isotopes 2.1.8 Isotopic abundance 2.1.9 Iterated fission expectation 3.2.14 L Leakage (reactor theory) 2.2.30 (shielding) 4.3.36 Length Diffusion 3.1.6 IMigration 3.1.8 Slowing-down 3.1.4 Lethargy 3.1.9 Level Fuel irradiation 3.2.29 Resonance 2.2.33 Loading 4.4.9 Low-flux research reactor M Machine Charging fuel 4.4.10 Discharging fuel 4.4.11 Macroscopic cross-section 2.3.3 Maintenance 4.4 Mass Critical 3.2.10 defect 2.251 number 2.1.5 Material buckling 3.2.18 Depleted 4.2.3 Enriched 4.2.2 Neutron absorber 4.3.16 Mean free path 3.1.1 life 2.2.25 Member Coarse control 4.3.27 Control 4.3.24 fine control; Regulating 4.3.29

4.4.7

G Gamma emitter 2.1.18 radiation 2.1.31 General 2.1 Generation time 3.1.14 Geometric attenuation 2.2.38 buckling 3.2.19 Group _ Neutron energy 3.1.12 removal cross-section 2.3.18 transfer scattering cross-section

2.3.17

H Half-life Radioactivity 2.2.23 Heat After 4.4.5 production reactor 4.1.16 Heterogeneous reactor 4.1.3 High-flux research reactor 4.1.17 Hole Beam 4.2.17 Homogeneous reactor 4.1.2 Hot 4.4.6

4.1.17

I Importance function 3.2.13 Relative 3.2.12 Incoherent scattering 2.2.46 Cmss-section 2.3.11 Independent fission yield 2.2.59 Inelastic scattering 2.2.48 cross-section 2.3.13 Infinite multiplication constant 3.2.21 Installation Fuel cooling 4.4.13 Interactions 2.2

30

IS : 1885 (Part XIV) - 1967
2 200 metres per second fux density 3.123 Microscopic Cross-section 2.3.1 Migration area 3.1.7 length 3.1.8 Moderation 22.49 Moderator 42.18 control 4.3.13 Multigroup model 3.1.13 Multiplication (subcritical, 3.2.15 factor 3.2.20 N Natural radioactivity 2.2.14 uranium reactor 4.1.4 Neutron 2.1.39 absorber (material) 4.3.16 (object) 4.3.17 absorption 2.2.35 cross-section 2.3.22 albedo 2.2.29 convertor 4.2.27 current density 3.1.18 cycle 3.1.15 diffusion 2.2.26 economy 3.1.16 energygroup 3.1.12 excess 2.1.40 flux density Diffusion coefficient 2.2.27 fraction Effective delayed 2.2.65 multiplication 2.2.56 (number) density .3.1.19 Neutrons Delayed 2.1.43 Epicadmium 2.1.47 Epithermal 2.1.52 Expressions relating to 3.1 Fast 2.1.44 Fission 2.1.41 Intermediate 2.1.45 Prompt 2.1.42 Resonance 2.1.46 Slow 2.1.51 \ Subcadmium 2.1.50 Thermal 2.1.53 Nonelastic cross-section irl interaction 2.3.19 Nuclear Chain reaction 3.2.2 disintegration 2.2.9 energy 3.2.1 fission 2.2.55 fuel 4.2.1 fusion reaction 2 2.50 reactor 4.1.1 Nucleon 2.1.37 Nucleus 2.1.3 Compound 2.1.4 Nuclide 2.1.7 Number Atomic 2.1.6 Mass 2.1.5 0 Object Neutron absorber Operating range 4.3.6 Operation Reactor 4.3 4.3.17

P Pair Electron-position 2.128 Parent; radioactive precursor nuclide) 2.1.13 Particle Alpha 2.1.21 Beta 2.1.24 Current density 3.1.18 fluence 3.1.20 flux density 3.1.21 Parts Constituent 4.2 Path Mean free 3.1.1 Transport mean free 3.1.2 Photoelectric effect 2.2.7 Photoelectron 2.1.35 Photon 2.1.29 Photoneutron 2.1.36 Photonuclear reaction 2.2.8 Pile 4.1.1 Plug 4.2.8 Plutonium reactor 4.1.6 Poison 4.3.18 Burnable 4.3.19 Positron 2.1.25 Electron pair 2.1.28 Power range 4.3.7 reactor 4.1.16 Slowing-down 3.1.11 Specific 3.2.30 Primary fission yield 2.2.59 ionization 2.2.5 Canning 4.4.17 Cladding 4.4.16 Product Decay 2.1.14 Fission 2.1.16 Production reactor (of a radio-

4.1.19

31

Is:1885(PartxIv)-1967
Prompt critical 3.2.6 fraction 2.2.63 gamma radiation 2.1.33 neutron 2.1.42 Propulsion reactor 4.1.16 Proton 2.1.38 Prototype reactor 4.1.18 Pulsed reactor 4.1. I7 Reactor (mntd) Circulating 4.1.8 control 4.3.10 Converter 4.1.13 Electricity production 4.1.16 Enriched 4.1.5 Epithet-ma1 4.1.11 Experiment; Experimental 4.1.18 Expressions relating to 3.2 Fast 4.1.9 Fissile material production 4.1.19 Fluid&d 4.1.7 Heat-production 4.1.16 Heterogeneous 4.1.3 High flux research 4.1.17 Homogeneous 4.1.2 Intermediate; Intermediate spectrum 4.1.10 Irradiation; Isotope production 4.1.19 lattice 4.2.14 Low-flux research 4.1.17 Natural uranium 4.1.4 Nuclear 4.1.1 operation 4.3 period 3.2.4 pile 4.1.1 Plutonium 4.1.6 Power 4.1.16 Production 4.1.19 Propulsion 4.1.16 Prototype 4.1.18 Pulsed 4.1.17 regulation 4.3.9 Research 4.1.17 safety fuse 4.3.35 Spectral shift 4.1.15 Testing 4.1.17 Thermal 4.1.12 time constant 3.2.4 Training 4.1.20 vessel 4.2.26 Zero power 4.1.17 and 4.1.18 Reflector 4.2.19 control 4.3.22 Regulating dement; member 4.3.29 Regulation Self 4.3.23 Relative importance 3.2.12 Resonance absorption 2.2.36 capture 2.2.34 level 2.2.33 neutrons 2.1.46 Rod Control 4.3.25 Emergency shut-down 4.3.33

R Radiant energy flux density (I) 3.1.22 Radiation 2.1.20 Alpha 2.1.22 Capture gamma 2.1.32 damage 4.4.3 Prompt gamma 2.1.33 source 4.3.1 X- 2.1.30 Radiative capture 2.2.32 cross-section 2.3.2 1 inelastic scattering cross-section 2.3.14 Radioactive contamination 4.3.31 decay 2.2.16 half life 2.2.23 material 4.4.2 source 4.3.2 waste 4.4.4 Radioactivity 2.2.13 Induced 2.2.15 Natural 2:2.14 Radioelement 2.1.17 Radioisotope 2.1.12 Radionuclide 2.1.11 Range Counter 4.3.5 C&eesti;t t3.6 Power 4.3.; Source 4.3.4 Time Constant 4.3.8 Rate Disintegration 2.2.11 Ratio Abundance 2.1.10 Breeding 3.2.36 Conversion 3.2.34 Reaction Convergent; Nuclear chain 3.2.2 Nuclear fusion 2.2.50 Photonuclear 2.2.8 Reactivity 3.2.25 temperature coefficient 3.2.26 Reactor Breeder 4.1.14

32

4
S Safety member 4.3.34 Reactor fuse 4.3.35 Scattering 2.2.44 Coherent 2.2.45 Cross-section 2.3.9 Elastic 2.2.47 Incoherent 2.2.46 Inelastic* In radiative inelastic; In thermal inelastk 2.2.48 Scram ,4.3.32 Sealed source 4.3.3 Secondary coolant circuit 4.2.20 Self regulation 4.3.23 Shield 4.2.22 Biological 4.2.24 Thermal 4.2.23 Shim element; member 4.3.31 Shimming Coarse control 4.3.30 Shutdown Etn;~~;&.3.32 Size Critical 3.2.11 Slow neutrons 2.1.51 "lo-y-g;4;`;" length'3:1.4 power 3.1.11 Slug 4.2.5 burst 4.4.8 Source Radiation 4.3.1 Radioactive 4.3.2 range 4.3.4 Sealed 4.3.3 Specific activity 2.2.20 bum-up 3.2.29 ionization (at a point) 2.2.6 Spectral reactor 4.1.15 shift control 4.3.14 Spectrum Beta-ray 2.1.27 Fission 2.2.57 Subcadmium neutrons 2.1.50 IJ;Tt;eactor

IS : 1885(Part XIV) - 1967
T 4.1.17

cross-section 2.3.7 Inelastic scattering cross-section 2.3.15 neutrons 2.1.53 Time constant range 4.3.8 Gmeration 3.1.14 Total Cross-section 2.3.25 ionization 2.2.4 Training reactor 4.1.20 Transport cross-section-2.3.16 mean free path 3.12 U Unit-volume activity 2.2.2 1 V Vessel reactor 4.2.26 W Westcott cross-section 2.3.8 Wigner effect 2.2.2

X
Xenon effect 4.3.20 X - radiation 2.1.30

I

Yield Chain fission 2.2.61 Cumulative 2.2.60 Direct; Independent; Primam* o-o-59 Fission 2.2.58 2 Zero-power reactor 4.1.17 and 4.1.18

33

