( Reaffirmed 2002 )

IS : 9692 (Part

4) - 1987

Indian Standard
GUIDE ON MAINTAINABILITY
PART 4 TEST AND DIAGNOSTIC

OF EQUIPMENT
PROCEDURES

Reliability of Electronic and Electrical and Equipment Sectional Committee, Chairmcm
PIIOF S. SAMPATH Mambrrs Indian Institute

Components L'I'UC 3

Representing of Technology, Kanpur

A~DITWNAL DII~ECTOR, STANDAI~DS Railway Board ( Department of Railways), ( Ministry of Transport ) ( S&T ), RDSO JOINT DIREOTOR, STANDARDS ( S&T )-III, RDSO ( A[terno#a ) All India Radio, New Delhi SHRI s. P. BHATIKAR SHRI J. S. Sooo ( Altcrnatc ) Instrumentation Ltd, Kota SHIP V. C. RHANDARI SHRI I. S. SULAKH ( Altcrnatr ) Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd, klyderahnd SHXI CHARAN.IIT &No11 SHRI R. PARTHASAXATHY ( Altcrnatc ) Pcico Electronics & Electricals Ltd, 13omhay DH P. K. DUTTA SHBI S. P. GH~KKALINQARAM (Alternote ) Components Electronics Standardization Saw P. K. JAIN Organization, Ministry of Drferrce SHRI G. S. PAI ( Alternuts) Overseas Communication Services, Bombay SHRI R. K.JAYADEV SHRI DALJIT SIN~H ( Aftarnatc ) Association, Indian Electrical Manufacturers' SHRT M. S. KAMATH Bombay SHRI T. C. GOSALIA ( Alfcmole) Bharat Elrctronics Ltd, Bangalorp SBK~ C. KRISHNAXUBTHY SHRI N. DIIANBEKHARAN ( A[tcmatc) Radio Electronic & Television Manufacturers SARI S. P. KULKARNI Association, Bombay SRRI S. M. KKURSALE ( Altcrnatc ) Indian Telephone Industries Ltd, Bangalore SHRI LAKSHMINARAYANA SARI V. MWPHAIAH ( Altuna:s ) Elxrronics Corporation of India Ltd, Hytlerah,ld SHKI K. M. MANKA~ SHRI B. BHA~KAR RAN ( Alternats )

BUREAU

0 Copyright 1987 OF INDIAN STANDARDS

Thir publication is protected under the Indian Cdpyrighf Act i XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 9692 ( Part 4) - 1987

Members BHI~ R. K. MPX~RA

Rcprr3enfing

Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) LT-COL S. P. MUHGAI ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi Snnr D. C. MEHTA SHRI R. V. ISnAN (Akrraatc ) In personal capacity ( Deparfnienl of Ekctricol DR M. B. MICRA Insrifufc of Twhnology, Engineering, Indian

Kharagpur )
Test

SHRI B. C. MUKI~~~JEE
SIIRI K. 12.

National

House,

Calcutta

SHI<I Ii. N. hlul;HEltJEE
AYAVI)AKTTMI~I~AN

( Ahwfr
NAIR

)

SHRI C. l<AXIOANAT'HAN ( Alftrnafr ) Bhabha Sang D. V. PE.I.IIAI<
SHRl

Lucas-TVS

Ltd, Atomic

Madras Research

Centre, Trombay A. K. BABAR (.~~~frmafc) ISRO Satellite Centrc ( ISAC ), Bangalore SHHI K. RAMCOPAL _. . SHRI SlllARAN UP ( AffCrnUfC) and Centre for Aeronautical System Studirs SHI<I P. K. SH~;J<I,A Analysis ( CASSA ), Ministry of Defence and of Technical Development Directorate SHKI R. SI,MA SUNDAI<AM Ministry of Defence, Production ( AIR ), New Delhi SHRI R. S. YADAV (Alftmofc) Central Electricity Authority, New Delhi Sn ,<I H. C. Tiswnnr SHIII 1). P. SINIIA (~lffcrnafr ) Department of Telecommunication, New Delhi SHRI `r. S. VAsUI>EVAN SHWI A. V. KOCNIJINYA (Alfemale) Department of Electronics, New Delhi DH R. 1'. WAl,llWA SHRI E. G. NAQARAJAN (Alfcmnfc) Director General, BIS ( Ex-q@io Membrr ) SRRI N. SHINIVASAN, Director ( Electronics ) ( Secrsfary )

2

IS : 9692 ( Part 4 ) - 1987

Indian Standard
GUIDE ON MAINTAINABILITY
PART 4 TEST AND DIAGNOSTIC

OF EQUIPMENT
PROCEDURES

0.
0.1 This

FOREWORD

Indian Standard ( Part 4 ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 11 February 1987, after the draft iinalizcd by the Reliability Electronic and Electrical Components and Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. to make recommendal ions hJ1 the 0.2 This guide is intended standardization of maintainability practices, and to slimula~e itloas in Organizations accluiring itcrns frill find the the maintainability field. guide useful in assisting them in defining maintainat)ilit). I quit vmenr s Item suppliers will 1Jenefit f't-orri use of and associated programmes. the guide, gaining an understanding of the recluirements for achieving and verifying maintainability ob.jectives.

assistance has been clt.a\\.n li,orn 0.3 In preparation of this standard, IEC Dot 56 (Sectt ) 190 `Draft -Guide on maintairlahility of issued hlV International V equipment, Section 4 Diagnostic Testing', I<lcctrotechnical Commission ( IEC ).

1. SCOPE 1.1 This
standard ( Part 4) provides conccp!\ and \2.]lich are needed for proper operation ant1 describes methods to develop tllem. r(xIa~ed to test fllt~otiorrs tnainl (`nan(.c of \).hrcms

2. TERMINOLOGY

2.0 For the purpose
in addition
to those

of this slandartl the Follo~\~in~ terms ;ltl(l rlc*firlit iota, specified in TS : 1885 ( Parr 3!, )-1!)7!)* ~11;:ll ;rl~l)I) The Of' s[tccificall) application IO ensure that :tn iierll input
Part 3!1 Rcliabilitv of
electronic and

2.1 Calibration
accurate]).

-

krr<,\\ n
\\i:!

:111<1

measured

1" OI~LI~:(~

*Electrotechnical ( Jirsf rcvirion) ,

-~ vocabulary:

r,lm,r-trir:il I~I ms

3

IS : 9692 ( Part

4) - 1987

specifically known output which is accurately measured or indicated. Calil)ration includes adjustment or recording of corrections, as appropl,iate. 2.2 Check or physical 2.3 - An examination to determine integrity of an item. the functional capability

more

Functional functions

Check - A quanlitative check to determine of an item perform within specified limits.

if one OI

( Status Monitoring ) - A primary 2.4 Condition Monitoring maintrnance process under \vhich clata nn the whole population of items in service is analvzed to indicate whether some specifietl of tcclmical resource5 `is required. Not a preventive allocation maintenance ~)~`cxcss, condition monitoring allows failures to occur, and relies ul)on analysis of operating experience information to indicate the need for appropriate action.
NOTEFailure modes of condition adverse effect on operating safety. monitored items do not have a direct

2.5 Test Procedure - Individual tests to a schedule in order to obtain values procedure consists of individual tests.

pel,formed in a sequence or of stated parameters. A test

2.6 Testability - A design characteristic which allows the status inoperable, or degraded ) of a unit ( system, subsystem, ( operable, module or component ) and the location of any faults within the unit to I)e confidently determined in a timely fashion. overall testability measure lvhich 2.7 Test Effectiveness - An includes hardware design built-in-test (BIT) and test program set Test effectiveness measures include, but are not limited ( TPS ) tlesign. 10, lest thoroughness, test accuracy, and test rapidity. 3. GENERAL 3.1 l)ia#nostiC
ar1tl

Inaintcnance

concept purpose.

an important part in the Opel-ation 01 equipment. The maintenance necessary for this contains a II these types of tests deemed Some or all of the follo\ving may by required:
tcsling of' a systerll

constitutes

;I) 12lonitor operation specified corrective

certain perameters or the operation during the or their being Mithin in order lo ;rssure continuity limits and to foretell their trend so that possible action can be taken during scheduled down times; 4

bj Chck certain to determine

parametera
that the

during nouna\

dwn

time? irl o~.J\cT

required operating fault detection; c)

item bill function normall;: tfu:,inq the time or to subject the item for anticipated
lo isolate imminent

Perform a detection or analysis operation component determined to he subject to that has failed; and

a l)ar1 or failure or

d) Perform a check of the necessary parametc1.s folio\\ inq repair work to ensure their being \vithin specification limits and to check item normal operating parameters to en>ui'c tllat tile item has been restored to normal operational statu\. Procedures may he carried out manually or \tit11 test wllicll may contain different amounts of automation. equiprncnt

3.2 It is desirable that the design of an ilem faciliLatcs tile perI;, mance of` the tests described above. In case of a new design, lhis Illa? k,e accomplished by incorporating appropriate testabilii) I'e;~tut.cs ~II [he design; otllerwise, some features facilitating lesl ing can IW ;ttltlcd, I,ut there is less flexibilily in the abilily to change the rniiinten;,llc~c~ cr,nr:cpi. It is an impel-lant clcm~nt of' a mainlainalJilily ~ICI~I arnmc II, assure 111nt in each case appt~opriat e I:lult delection antI IocaliLation procedurs are available and capa/)lc of supl)orting n(airltcn;tnce testing. 3.3 Diagnostic `tests \vhich are introduced as parr of` the maintenance process of an item must always be compatible w.ilh the ovei,all maintenance concept. It is thereforc essential dial the maintenance This definition must include: concept be defined.ltvcl within tlic item a) Letlel of maintenance - Specify replacement at which maintenance action It-ill he ac:complislred-fill)assembly, module component assembly, o: individual par-t along with irem maintenance adjustment requil culent s. b) Line of maintenance - Identif'y rhe location ~11e1.c mainrenancc will be accomplished-item operational site, centralized maintenance facility, irpm suppliers plant, r!c. c) mmintenance facilities Test equ$ment und equipment and other maintenance facilities fault detection and location process,

(lie functional d) Function criticalily - Describe item's performance and the need for rapid with budget constraints. 5

IS : 9692 ( Part 4 ) - 1987 e) Test interfaces-Specify and 01 her measurement the item interface equipment. environment with test tests devices \vill be for be

f)

Tut

environment -

Identify

in which

accomplished. the number and skill requirements g) Personnel - Define and operational personnel who will maintenance pel,fi,rming the test and diagnostic procedures.

h) ,S0?/lrilnre .rzclport - Identify restrictions on special test facilities 01` special computer pro,!gams (compiler : test cliagnostics, I.equircd to use the fault detection and location etc:), procedllres. j ) Continuous monitoring of critical functions -- Identify those functions \Z hlch for safety or operational reasons are being continuously monitored, tllus influencing the test requirements. 4. TECHNICAL 4.1 Condition DIAGNOSTICS Monitoring

4.1.1 Condition monitoring is a type of diagnostic testing performed in order to determine the operational status of an item. It is often essentially dedicated to perfool III this accomplishetl I,y test systems funclion on a continuous or periodic sampling basis. These tests are usually dcsi~nc~d to give a go/no go answer. In the simplest form It may be an'intlicator light signifying an up state or measurmg a parameter, where it is required to be within given limits. 4.1.2 The selection of parameters depends on the purpose of the monitoring (safety, operational status, preventive maintenance). The requirements may thus come from conditions of intended use or its environment, or from needed assurance of item availability stemming from the condition some critical parts or components or the need to minimize down times.

of

4.2 Functional Check -The purpose of a functional check is the comparison of inrlividual item functions ( movement, flow, temperature, This elc) with specified performance Ftanclards. J~J'C'SSUTC, Vdta~f:, requires adherence to detailed tc\t px ocedures. 4.3 Fault Localization

4.3.1 li' it has been shown by condition monitoring or functional cllpck that an ilem docq not perform within stated limit?, then fault localization is per-formed to diagnose the faiiure, identify lllc unit r-equirinq rapctir or replacement.

IS : 9692 ( Part 4) - 1987 4.3.2 Similar test procedures may be used for condition monitoring, functional check and fault localization. The difference stems not from the type of test action but rather from the fact that fault localization tests tend to require more information about sub-item functional status. As a result, fault localization procedures tend to be more detailed, and contain more individual test routines. For fault localization, the sequence of testing may be conditioned on the results of prior tests, while condition monitoring and functional check mainly are high level tests normally performed in a fixed sequence. 4.3.3 Usually there is a pressing need to expedite these operations to that the system/equipment can be returned to an up btatc with the least possible delay. 4.3.4 Fault localization can be performed on all maintenance levels with similar test routines, depending on the degree of item breakdown for fault isolation purposes. 4.4 Calibration

4.4.1 Calibration is a specific diagnostic test function cvitb the purpose to ensure that an item remains in or returns to an operational This is accomplished by testing and appropriately balancing condition. individual subunit performance levels. 4.4.2 Calibration can be the last step in a repair process, or it can be performed without any preceding repair action on a periodical basis by adjusting for internal imbalances. 5. SPECIFIC 5.1 Sources REQUIREMENTS of Requirements fault detection sources: and

5.1.1 Requirements for condition monitoring, location procedures are given from two separate ai

Equipment auailabili~ requiremenls - T'hesc* hve tjecn given during the definition phase and have been further refined during design and development. The maintenance concept is specified at this time in correlation Mitt1 what is delegated to be tlone 0 1` t 11c by during the operational phase maintenance equipment. Test &clir~eness -Test effectiveness, as rneasuretl I)? the rapidit) al' the application, accuracy, thoroughness, and reflects on the ability to meet the availability requirements. necessary to the equipment Test engineering inputs are 7

b)

IS : 9692 ( Part 4 ) - 1987 designer to evaluate the necessary procedures. The maintenance plan must reflect the intended implementation including the allocation of necessary test sets and instructions to the assigned maintenance levels. 5.2 Test Effectiveness Requirements

5.2.1 The effectiveness of a test procedure encompasses the accuracy, thoroughness and rapidity with which the procedures may be applied The test procedures as applied to the item under test to an item. include an evaluation of the combination of test equipment, and test access of the item. 5.2.2 Major characteristics which can be measured include:

a) Accuracy of fault detection-This attribute is a probability and is defined as follows ratio of the average number of faults correctly verified to the average number of faults indicated by the test procedures. measure which expresses the b) Fault locating thoroughness -A degree to which the test procedure can identify or reveal all It is expressed as the ratio of possible faults within an item. the number of sub-item3 identifiable to the total number of replaceable sub-items as defined by the maintenance policy. c)

Test rapidity -

Expresses the mean time required to perform It is represented by the product of the the test procedures. average number of test steps required and the average time to perform an individual test. must be considered in context with Life

5.2.3 All test parameters Cycle Costs. 5.3 Test Procedure

Requirements requirements address the following

5.3.1 Test characteristics: a) Test

procedure interface devices,

b) Supporting c) Maintenance d) Personnel

test equipment, facilities, skills. and

5.3.2 Tests must be designed so that the item is not damaged from the test loading. Also cost, supportability, availability and portability of the test resources are factors to be considered.

8

IS : 9692 5.3.3 Finally
of performing

( Part

4 ) - 1987

removed

the ability to lest \vhile operating or the consequences tests where the <operation must be stopped or the item from characteristics of concern. AND PROCEDURES and Test Parameters

6. METHODS 6.1 Specification

of Testability

6.1.1 If the item user determines that the twtability .~nti 1c.t ' action ahould lx taken to u:;ite them parameters are of major concern, ;IS contractual requirements. This is accomplished I)y specifyillg: a) tcstal)ility design requirements for special lestability feature<. in terms of design CI itc:.ia

b) teslal)ility program recluil cments (planning aspect<, mc~rho& and procednrcs for testability analysis, test and evaluntiorl), c) factors associated with the maintenance concept (maintenance conditions and ~onst1 aints, test environment and intel.f',lcei;), il II<1 d) test effectiveness parameters in terms of minimum accel)table values for test accurxy, thoroughness and rapidity, including the requirement5 for assessment and vaiitlatinn and the acceptance met hods. 6.1.2 Typically, these parameters would be specified and evaluated for the total item. However, if significant difference in test, maintenance or design concepts exist, multiple values may be I equirecl. 6.2 Design for Testability \vhich provides for tlesign the folloiving design ftarures fun(.[~on to make fiinction matlr to

62.1 Testability is a design discipline featurrs supporting tests. ~1s a minimllm, should be considcrcd:

Ft~ncGor~aL lar/ilicwin~~- L2'lrt>never possible, each should he implrmenred on a Gn:le replaccaLle item If more than one fault isolation ~tr;liglllfor\\,ard. is placed on a replaceable ilern, provisions should be alloiv for tile independent tcstin,~ of each f`unrticm,

Pig~ical parliliolri,2$ - 711~ l)iiy sical part it ionirlg of a syst rni into items should I)e based, in part, upon the enhancemcwt of the fault isolation process.
E!e~~rz'cal partiticlnirtsq -

circuilry

to be tcstctl

Whenever possible, each Ijlock of J~f~ulcl be desi,qnctl to be isoiated from

IS : 9692 ( Part 4 ) - 1987 circuitry tri-state not I)eing tested through devices, relays, etc. the use cvf blocking gates,

d) Ini/iulizc~tlo?~ - The system or such that it has a \\,ell-defined fault isolation process. e)

equipment shall be designed initial state to commence the

?st control ( controllability ) - Special test input signals, clata paths, and circuitry shall he incorporated to provide the test whether built in lest or automatic test equipment, systems, component control over the internal item or sufficient operation for the detection and isolation of internal fauLts. Special attention is given to the independent control of clocks, feetlhack loops, and tri-state isolation ot breaking of components.

f)

`Test accm ( obsewabili@ ) - Test points, data paths, and circuitry shall be incorporated to provide the test system, whether built in tests 01 automatic test equipment, sufficient signature data for fault detection and isolation \vithin the item.

g) Par/ .ccler'tim - In selecting beL\\een parts, eacll I\.ilh satisfactor). pcrformancc cllal~acterislih, pt-eference shall IX given to integrated cil,cuits components and assembled items \vhich have satisfactory testallilit!; clial.~lctel.islics. h) Aulomalic test twt should mechanically to reduce or and expensive compatibility - Each item under eqnipmenl ( A`rE) be designed such that it is electricaIl>and compatible \\ith selected or available ATE so as eliminate the need for a large number of unique interface devices. into accounts as discipline shall \vith the normal

6.2.2 The test design considerations must be taken The testability early as possible in the design phase. be structured to be complementary and/or responsive acquisition process. 6.3 Testability Assessment Evaluation

and Verification

of testability and verification 6.3.1 Tllc~ iwcwrrien I, evaluation pat,anieters is an important slep in the process of achieving a hi,gh lesl Testability assessment and evaluation is accomplished by eflectiveness. a checklist of testability-related design issues \vhich are preparing relevant 10 the design ( JYY6.2 above ) and by. scoring tile degree 01` The assessment and evaluation of achicvc~mrnl for rach tlrxi<gn issue. test effectiveness during design requires that analysis be conducted to determine the capabilit). of the test procedures developed in terms of 10

IS:9692(Part4)-1987 The test thoroughness is .I thoroughness, accuracy, and rapidity. function of the test access internally to the item and the power of Accuracy can be evlauated the logic contained in the test procedures. by identifying the ambiguity associated \vith failure indication of the number of failed components that may be correctly identified by the Test rapidity estimation techniques may be proposed test procedures. used to determine the time required to exercise the test and diagnostic procedure. An Appendix example A. for a test effectiveness assessment is given in the

6.3.2 Test effectiveness demonstration may hc accomplished as part of a standard maintainability demonstration [ .s~e IS : 9692 ( Part ti )1983*J by placing a sample of relrresentative failures ( one at a time) With in an item to evaluate the capability of the test procedures. proper sample selection, an assessment of the test procedures may he developed in terms of the pnramctcrs of accuracy, thorou,ghness and I-apidity. 6.3.3 `I'hc ICSI types and procedures developed from the maintennncc concept need to be evaluated for completeness. The whole testing concept must be reviewed to determine whether the results from the This includes reliability nnd test will give the required information. completeness of the results when reviewed against what has already been done during the design and tlevelopment phase so that the to the confidence level deemed required availability is nlrtainecl necessary. 6.3.4 In this context, it is necessary to pay attention liarmful effects from loads and stresses nn the equipment. occur during loading of an item to find if it is within limits. Certain tests may be indivitluallv harmful due levels, where others may he 50 due to rcpe;itiveness. 6.4 Test Documentation to possible These may specification to excessive

6.4.1 Documentation for maintenance test pt'oc(`dttt'es iy typically contained in the accomplished by narrative and ~raplric descriptions teclmical data supplied \virh the item ( operating and maintcnattce ~hnll 1~ clear aucl concise nntl IN: manuals ). Procctlttt-es ccrntained intcrprrtable by mnintenancc l~crsonncl with I I aining and skill lcvcl t hc text mrty be .~\lternatively, specified in the maintenance concept. incorporated into a comput.er program (5) that can IX used to cons I 01 the sequencing of an autnniatic test equipment cmnnec~ecl I0 211 ilcni.

11

IS : 9692 ( Part 4 ) - 1987 A I'urlllcl~ altern,ltive is to incorporate the test logic into tlie item to Built-in-test is used to perform status perform a built-in-test ( BIT). although it also facilitates fault monitorimg as M.ell as failul~c~ detection, location and is sometimes LLWCI l'or that purpose. Each methodology has associated various cost and test capability chal,acteristics \vllicll must be reviewed II)- the custnmer to select the approach that best meets his needs. 6.4.2 All test pl,ocedures shall be validated by the suppliel, prior \`alidation consists to I)u).cI. acceptance to assure their accuracy. in the documentation of' implrrnentin,g the procedures as outlined to assure that 111~ tests are satisf'ncror),. 6.5 Test Procedures test ~~roceclure tes! \vill require of individual tests. is a series t!iL:l the follo\ving steps he defined An and

6.5.1 A individual

P~~parufion jUr lest -The initial conditions that must bc atTained to stat.1 tlie test; that is cont1.01 settinu,.s, that configllraticin, and test facilities requirrtl.

/`c~~j;tr~~7~~~ uj test +eration.c

c.;lntl.ols or attaciied

- The manipulation of twt equipment to do the te\t.

the

irem

E;aluutiun oftest rrsulf - Et-aluation of Llle test results observed determine if the item is against the requirements lo functioning correctly ancl itlentify the failed unit or additional tests tn be performed. X~cordin,~ oj` dak `I'esr

results

are recorded the individual ax appropriate

and documented. tests, the concerning test the

to identify-iiing 6.5.2 In addition procedures shall contain information appllcat ion sequence and schedule.

6.5.3 Automated p~occclut~~~s contain the same elements as manual (in 11a1.t j I)!, ;L except that the tests ai'tb initialcttl ;~nd interpreted he external to 111~~ item under brat systc~m. Tl~e tes[ system ma) test or hc inrorpoL-iltctl in a IJuilt-in-test capability,. then-selves take the form of coded 6.5.4 The test procedures The test used to control t hc lest logic. instt.1lc.l ion\ Illat are procedures normally are placed into the test system via some machine readable format; for example, punched cards, magnetic tape, etc. 12

IS : 9692 (Part
The item buyer may wish to develop test programs. to specify the computer

4 ) - 1987
used

language

6.5.5 An important consideration \vith these systems is the facilities Often 1hese required to maintain and modify the test procedures. procedures require changing; thus it is important that the users to accomplish the have a clear understanding of ~vhat is required Ideally, the user shall secure not only the test needed changes. procedures but also any support computer prOgrams required to Additionally, there may be develop nr modify these procedures. needs for diagnostic test routines for the automatic equipment itself.
65.6 Automated procedures may also require supporting manuals ant I use. l~ocument ation and their application tlcscribe tha! verification of these manuals are also required.

APPENDIX ( Chrse
TEST A-l. A-l.1 INTRODUCTION

A 6.3. I )
ASSESSMENT

EFFECTIVENESS

Some effectiveness maintenance A-2.

of the analysis methods that may he used These methods assessment are given belo\v. functional dependency chart and the dependency

for test include matrix.

FUNCTIONAL

DEPENDENCY

CHART

A-2.1 A functional

can be used to evaluate the dependency chart Completed, it can also fle access to a system for test purposes. usctl as a fault diagnostic aid and as a means to identify the need for further test points and pr ocetlures. A-2.2 In Fig. 2 the char1 skto\z.s the rclation~hip betlvcen I esr I)c)intj Out~Iuts. nnc 1 components, sysr em inputs, syrrtljolizes an input or Output; a circle, a compOnen1; ;~nd
a connection. tile

A
;i

Fig. 1 quare

triangle,

A-3. DEPENDENCY A-3.1
the the

MATRIX

a convenient tool to analyze A dependency matrix provides An esample of' accuracy and thoroughness of test procedures. 3, using the system dependency matrix IS provided in Fiq. 13

IS : 9692 ( Part
relationships relationship test points components

4) - 1987

In the left half of the figure, the provided in Fig. 1. between components, correctly functioning, and the is provided that is for test point T3 to test correctly C, C2 and C3 must be functioning properly.

FIG.

I SYSTEM RELATIONSHIPS

r
!NPU?

COMPONENTS

AN0

TEST

POINTS

I

1

Lb
A
B

cl-

/
I

I i
FIG. 2 FUNCTIONAL DEPENDENCY. 14 MATRIX

IS : 9692 ( Part 4 ) - 1987 right half of the dependency matrix is developed by assuming that each component foils one at a time and the resultant For example, failure of component test pattern would emerge. C3 would result in test points Tl and T2 testing correctly with the balance testing incorrectly. A-3.3 Test thoroughness is assessed with the matrix by determining if each replaceable sub-component has associated with it a unique test pattern. The ratio of those testable to the total provides the For example, thoroughness equals one since thoroughness measure. all components are testable. A-3.4 Accuracy is assessed by determining if there is ambiguity or In this example there common test patterns for multiple components. Therefore, accuracy is one. For a more complex is no ambiguity. system or systems with feedback ambiguity patterns are likely to be present. A-3.5 The assessment, selection. dependency matrix is valuable not only for test effectiveness but also is useful as a design aid, to assist in test point

A-3.2 The

15

INTERNATIONAL
Base Units QUANTITY Length Mass Time Electric currt`nt Thermodynamic temperature Luminous Amount intensity of substance Units

SYSTEM

OF UNITS

( SI UNITS )

CNIT
mefre kilogram second ampwe

SYMI%OL

m

kg
I

A K cd mol

kelvin candela mole

Supplementary
QUANTITY

UN11
radian steradian

Plane Solid

angle angle Units

Derived Force Energy Power Flux

QUASY ITY

UXIIT newton joule w.1tt w*ber tesla hertz sirm+ns volt paXa1

SYMlmL

DEE 1 N =

IXTION

J"
W T HZ s V Pa Wb

1 kg.m/s' 1 N.m 1 J/s 1 V.r 1 Wb m* 1 C,s (s-l) 1 A/\'

1J
I W 1 Wb= 1 `I` 1 Hz 1 S

=
= = = =

FELIX density Frequenr! Electric Pressure, condrrctance force stress Electromotive

IV
1 Pa

=
=

1 W/A
1 N/m"

