**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 12060 (1987) : Code of practice for selection of rotary 
vane feeders [MED 6: Continuous Bulk Conveying, Elevating, 
Hoisting Aerial Ropeways and Related Equipment] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC 62V86-067'2: 006-76 ' IS : 12060- 1987 



(Reaffirmed 1998) 
Indian Standard 



CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 
SELECTION OF ROTARY VANE FEEDERS 



£ 
E 
o 

u 
XI 

3 
CO 



1. Scope — Lays down the code of practice for the selection of rotary vane feeders commonly used 
for handling fine free flowing materials. 

2. Appilcation — Feeders covered by this standard are used where an air seal between the inlet of 
the feeder and the outlet of the feeder is required and where a close estimation of the material being 
discharged is important. By attaching a revolution counter to the feeder shaft and carefully calibrating 
the quantity delivered against revolutions per minute, a fairly accurate measurement of the discharge 
can be made. 

3. Type of Feeders— Basing on the construction of the feeders, these can be divided into 3 types 
{see Fig. 1 ). 

3.1 Type A — This is the most common type and used extensively for handling fine pulverized or 
granular material small enough in size and sufficiently friable so that lumps will not jam between the 
close fitting radial vanes and the housing. The material enters the housing from the top and as the 
rotor revolves each pocket discharges as it reaches the opening in the bottom. The small clearance 
between the vane and the housing prevents free passage of air between the inlet and outlet sides of 
the feeder. For dimensions of this type of feeder a reference may be made to IS : 12059-1987 
'Dimensions for rotary vane feeder'. 

3.2 Type B — This is a feeder with substantial clearance between the vanes and the housing on the 
feeding side which is used for lumpy or non-uniform material. This type provides adequate control of 
the flow of material with lumps of reasonable size and at the same time avoids chocking or jamming. 

3.3 Type C — This feeder is frequently used for handling materials which are stringy or have a tendency 
to mat or cling together. A feature to this arrangement is the counterweighted hinged vertical bin 
section above the rotor which restricts the flow of material under normal working conditions, but 
provide automatic means of relief if an oversized piece becomes lodged against the rotor. 

3.4 There are other types of rotor vane feeders which are used for special purposes: 

a) If the material is abrasive then outrigger bearings are essential. These are also essential for 
high temperature, pressure, contamination and for material with very small particle size thus 
tending to create large amount of dust. 

b) Very high tem.perature valves require special bearings and special materials of construction, 
like stainless steel. 

c) If material is likely to build up on rotor blades or casing or if very close sealing betvveen the 
Inlet and outlet sides of the value is required, then fitting of special tips on the rotor blades 
shall be necessary. 

4. Dimensions — The dimensions for the standard rotary vane feeders are given in IS : 12059-1987. 

5. Material — For all the above three types A, B and C, material of construction shall be as given 

below: 

Component Material 

Body FG 250 cast iron of IS : 210-1978 'Specification for grey iron castings 

{th/rd rev/s/'ony. 

Rotor FG 250 cast iron of IS : 210-1978. 

Shaft See IS : 9550-1980 'Specification for bright bars'. 

Bearing Roller bearings of IS : 6453-1984 'Technicel supply conditions for 

rolling bearings ( f/rst revision)\ 

5.1 Materials of construction of feeder and its components for hot, abrasive and corrosive applications 
shall be as agreed to between the purchaser and the manufacturer. 



Adopted 1 April 1987 



© February 1988, BIS 



Gr 2 



BUREAU OP INDIAN STANDAHUS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 3 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 



18:12060-1987 

6. Construction — Rotary vane feeders consist primarily of a number of vanes attached to central 
shaft which is supported on two bearings and which rotates inside a cast or fabricated housing. The 
drive to the shaft is usually by chain and sprockets from a geared motor. 

7. Capacity — The volumetric capacity of the vane feeder depends on the size of the rotor, that is, 
diameter x length and on the revolution per minute of the rotor. For the same size of the rotor, the 
capacity can be varied by varying the speed of the rotor. 

8. Speed of the Feeder — Usually the speed of the rotary vane feeder ranges from 5 to 40 rev/min. 
When selecting the speed of a feeder, it is important to bear in mind that a slow speed valve gives 
better sealing and that the volumetric efficiency decreases with an increase in speed. Table 1 gives 
the values showing the approximate efficiencies at different speeds. 

TABLE 1 EFFICIENCY FACTORS 



Vane Speed, rev/min 


up to 10 


Over 10 
up to 20 


Over 20 
up to 30 


Over 30 
up to 50 




Efficiency Factor 


Full head of material 
Manual tip in hopper 
Feed from conveyer 
Feed from cyclone collection 


0-95 
0-9 
0-9 
0*75 


0'75 
0-75 
0*76 
0-5 


0'65 
0-6 

0-5 
0-4 


0'5 
0-5 
0-4 
0- 33 



9. Data to be Supplied by the Purchaser and the Manufacturer — For the guidance of the manu- 
facturer, the purchaser shall furnish a list of relevant data of the feeder required by him. Similarly, to 
enable the purchaser to select a suitable feeder, the manufacturer shall furnish the relevant data-about 
the feeder manufactured by him. 

10. Marking — A rotary vane feeder shall be marked with its type capacity and speed. 



EXPLANATORY NOTE 
This standard is based on the information from manufacturers and purchasers organizations. 

2 



CO 






TYPE A 



TYPE B 



TYPE C 



Q. 



FIG. 1 ROTARY VANE FEEDER 



CO 






a> 



O 

o 



D 



CO 
00 



