**************** 



*■ fe^K 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



^^Eti^^tt^n f im^NS ^g^T^^i ra^g^^uiKS a raaa^ 



IS 8524 (1977) 
Industry] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



Solar Wax Extractor [FAD 3: Apiary 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



?TR TJ^ ^TT teMHI | ^t ^Wt ^m\ ^f ^TT ^T^?TT \' 

Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
SOLAR WAX EXTRACTOR 



IS: 8524- 1977 

( Reaffirmed 2004 ) 



UDC 638 171 3 




© Copyright 1977 
INDIAN STANDARDS I N SPf-lT 11 T I.O N 

MAJMl^-*m^AN\ 9 BAHADfR SHAH U All MARC 






NEW DELHI HI 



November 1 



IS: 8524-1911 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
SOLAR WAX EXTRACTOR 

Apiary Industry Sectional Committee, AFDG 11 

Chairman Representing 

Dr G. B. Deodikar Khadi & Village Industries Commission, Bombay 

Members 

Shri D. S. Ghadha Central Committee for Food Standards ( Ministry 

of Health and Family Welfare ), New Delhi 
Smt Debi Mukherjee (Alternate ) 
Diretob of Laboratories Directorate of Marketing and Inspection, 

Faridabad 
Shri K. N. Rustagi ( Alternate ) 
Dr N. P. Goyal Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana 

Shri B. P. Gupta Directorate of Fruit Utilization, Government of 

Uttar Pradesh, Ranikhet 
Shri K. M. Joyappa Department of Industries & Commerce, Govern- 

ment of Karnataka, Bangalore 
Apicultural Development Officer ( Alternate ) 
Dr R. P. Kapil Haryana Agricultural University, Hissar 

Db D. S. Gupta ( Alternate ) 
Shri J. L. Kaw J & K Khadi and Village Industries Board, 

Srinagar 
Shri O. P. Krishna Department of Agriculture, Government of 

Himachal Pradesh, Simla 
ShriJoginder Singh (Alternate) 
Dr N. G. Pant Indian Agricultural Research Institute ( ICAR ), 

New Delhi 
President Coorg Honey and Wax Producers' Co-operative 

Marketing Society Ltd, Virajpet 
Director ( Alternate ) 
Secretary Sambay Kutir Shilpanusthan Ltd, Sibsagar 

Shri P. L. Sharma Himachal Pradesh University, College of 

Agriculture, Solan 
Shri S, G. Shende Maharashtra State Khadi & Village Industries 

Board, Bombay 
Shri C. S. Bhambure (Alternate) 
Shri S. G. Shende All India Bee-Keepers' Association, Pune 



Dr R. P. Kapil ( Alternate ) 



( Continued on page 2 ) 



® Copyright 1977 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS: 8524 -1977 



( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members 
Special Officer 

Dr M. Swaleh 

Dr R. M. Berry ( Alternate ) 
Dr I. N. Tandon 



Representing 

Martandam Bee-Keepers' Co-operative Society 

Ltd, Martandam 
Forest Research Institute & Colleges, Dehra Dun 



Government/ Beekeeping Station, Jeolikote 
Shri Yogeshwar Singh ( Alternate ) 
Shri C. V. Thakar Khadi & Village Industries Commission, Bombay 

Shri K. V. Tonapi ( Alternate ) 
Shri T. Purnanandam, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Deputy Director ( Agri & Food ) 

Secretary 

Shri Manohar T. Santwani 
Deputy Director ( Agri & Food ), ISI 



Beekeeping Equipment Subcommittee, AFDC 11:2 



Convener 
Shri C. V. Thakar 

Members 
Shri K. M, Joyappa 

Shri J. L, Kaw 

Shri O. P. Krishna 



ShriJoginder Singh ( Alternate ) 
Shri Bimalendu Mondal 

Shri R. P. Phadke 
Shri A. M. Shah 

Shri Tirath Ram ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. L. Sharma 

Shri S. G. Shende 



Khadi & Village Industries Commission, Bombay 

Department of Industries & Commerce, Govern- 
ment of Karnataka, Bangalore 

J & K Khadi and Village Industries Board, 
Srinagar 

Department of Agriculturent Government of 
Himachal Pradesh, Simla 



24 Parganas Bee-Keepers' Co-operative Society 

Ltd, 24 Parganas ( West Bengal ) 
Khadi & Village Industries Commission, Bombay 
All India Bee-Keepers' Association, Pune 

Himachal Pradesh University, College of 

Agriculture, Solan 
Maharashtra State Khadi & Village Industries 

Board, Bombay 



IS : 8524 - \9l1 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
SOLAR WAX EXTRACTOR 

0. FOREWORD 

0*1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institu- 
tion on 12 Augest 1977, after the draft finalised by the Apiary Industry 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Agricultural and Food 
Products Division Council. 

0.2 Waxes secreted by different species of honey-bees have different 
physico-chemical characteristics and it is, therefore, advisable to extract 
the waxes from different Indian species separately instead of mixing them 
together. The uses of beeswaxes are numerous, pharmaceutical and 
cosmetic industries being the biggest consumers of beeswax. 

0-2.1 It is estimated that bees consume about 8 to 10 kg of honey and 
secrete 1 kg of wax. Old wax-combs which are neglected by bees are often 
attacked and eaten away by wax worms which is a loss to the beekeeper. 
Such old combs should not be left either in hives or open in the apiary, but 
wax should be extracted from them as early as possible. 

0.3 The advantages of solar wax extraction method outweigh the other 
method of extraction as the wax is melted and bleached to some extent 
and there is no deterioration of the physical or chemical properties of 
waxes. In our country there is considerable sunlight during the major 
part of the year and the solar wax extractor is a valuable equipment for 
the beekeeper. The old wax-combs, bridge or burr combs or cappings 
wax are soaked in water to remove water-soluble matter and are then 
placed in solar wax extractor kept in an inclined position facing the sun. 
The melted wax slowly flows out and accumulates in the wax receptacle. 

0.4 In preparing this standard, considerable assistance has been rendered 
by the Central Bee Research Institute, Pune of the Khadi and Village 
Industries Commission. 

0.5 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in 
accordance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value 
in this standard. 



*Rules for rounding of numerical values ( revised). 



IS : 6524 - 197? 



1. SCOPE 



1-1 This standard prescribes the requirements for solar wax extractor used 
for extracting beeswax from the wax-combs of honey-bees. 



2. MATERIAL 

2.1 The timber used shall be well-seasoned and non-warping, like (a^ 
teak (Tectona grandis Linn f. ), (b) piney ( Hardwickia pinnata Roxb. ), (c) 
pine ( Pinus longifolia ) or Toon ( Cedrela toona Roxb ) . 

3. SHAPE AND DIMENSIONS 

3.1 The shape and dimensions of the solar wax extractor should, as far as 
possible, be as given in Fig. 1. 



SHUTTER WITH DOUBLE 
GLASS WITH 5mm GAP 
IN BETWEEN TWO 




190 



-ADJUSTABLE FOLDING LEG 
FITTED WITH HINGES 

All dimensions in millimetres. 

Fin. 1 Solar Wax Extractor 



IS: 8524 -1977 
4. ESSENTIAL PARTS 

4.1 Outer Wooden Case — This should be made out of 25 mm planks 
of well-seasoned wood. The case should be of 400 mm length, 250 mm 
breadth and 200 mm height ( see Fig. 1 ). This case should be lined from 
inside with tinplate of 0*5 mm thickness. 

4.2 Cover — The cover for this case fitted with three hinges of 80 mm 
each should have a double glass fitted within the wooden frames. The 
thickness of the glass sheets shall be 1*5 to 2 mm and the space between 
the two glass sheets should be 5 mm. At the bottom of the case, adjustable 
folding leg-strip of 20x80 mm should be fitted with two hinges. When 
unfolded, this raises the height of the wooden case on one side and makes 
it inclinded for flow of the melted wax. The wooden case should be 
painted in black from outside. 

4.3 Semi-circular Tray — This should be made from 0*71 mm thick tin 
sheets. On one side, it shall be fitted with 0'4 mm thick wire-gauze. 
From the place where wire-gauze is fitted, the tinplate should be cut to get 
a beak to this semi-circular tray. Wax-combs should be put in this tray 
for melting. The flat and metal strips of the tray rest on the edges of the 
upper frame of the wooden case. 

4.4 Wax Receptacle — ■ This should be a rectangular tray of about 250 
mm length, 200 mm breadth and 100 mm height which should be kept 
below the beak of the circular tray. When in use, small quantity of water 
should be put in this tray so that melted wax floats over it and can be 
removed easily on solidification. 

5. WORKMANSHIP AND FINISH 

5.1 The solar wax extractor should be strong to withstand handling. The 
glass sheets should be fitted snugly. It shall be finished smooth and when 
the cover is put on the extractor there should be no slits anywhere between 
the wooden case and the cover. The extractor should be air-tight so that 
the heat created inside should not be lost due to convection currents. It 
should be painted in good black colour to absorb maximum heat. 

6. MARKING 

6.1 Each extractor shall be marked with the following particulars: 

a) Manufacturer's name or recognized trade-mark, 

b) Year of manufacture, and 

c) Batch or code number. 



IS: 8524 -1977 

6.2 Each extractor may also be marked with the ISI Certification Mark. 

Note — The use of ISI Cartification Mark is governed by the provisions of the 
Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act and the Rules and 
Regulations made thereunder. The ISI Mark on products covered by an Indian 
Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the 
requirements of that standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and 
quality control which is devised and supervised by ISI and operated by the 
producer. ISI marked products are also continuously checked by ISI for conformity 
to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a 
licence for the use of ISI Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers or 
processors, may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution. 

7. PACKING 

7.1 Each extractor shall be suitably packed as agreed to between the 
purchaser and the manufacturer. 



