I8:2099-1975

Indian Standard

( Reaffirmed 2002 )

METHOD FOR CALIBRATION OF HORIZONTAL AND TILTED OIL STORAGE TANKS f

First Revimn )

Third Reprint AUGUST 1991

TJDC 621.642.3:662.75:53.089.6

@ Copyright

1975

BUREAU

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH .ZAFAR MARG NEWDELHI

t&6

December

1975

I$ : 2099 - 1975

Indian Standard
METHOD FOR CALIBRATION OF HORIZONTAL AND TILTED OIL STORAGE TANKS

f First Revision)
Petroleum Measurements Sectional Committee, CDC 32
Chairman SHRI M. RAMA BRAHMAM Representing

Madras Refineries Ltd, Madras

DR M. S. NADKARNI ( Alternate to

Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) SHRI D. M. BANERJEE SHRI S. K. MAITRA ( Alternate ) Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenues ) SHRI N. R. BENJAMIN Oil & Natural Gas Commission, Dehradun SH~I S. N. BIIATTACHARYA SHRI P. N. SETHI ( Alternate) Esso Standard Eastern Inc, Bombay SHRI H. B. DESA~ Burmah-Shell Oil Storage & Distributing Co .of SHRI V. DHAWAN IndiaQd, Bombay SHRI K. S. SUBBANNA (Alternate) Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi SHRI K. B. GANESAN Indian Oil Corporation Ltd ( Refineries Division ), SHRI M. GOPAL New Delhi SHRI A. C. BHATYACHARJEE ( Alternate ) Ministry of Petroleum & Chemicals SHRI J. M. GUHA SHRI M. KURIEN ( Alternate ) SHRI V. H. KHAICHAR Caltex ( India ) Ltd, Bombay Srrm D. H. P. RATNASWAMI ( Alternate ) Cochin Refineries Ltd, Cochin SHRI V..N. KOTACIRI Sam V. B. MAINKAR Directorate of Weights & Measures, New Delhi Directorate of Supplies & Transport (Ministry of COL B. D. MISRA Defence ) LT COL K. K. MALHOTRA (Alternate) Indian Institute of Petroleum, Dehradun SHRI H. K. MULCHANDANI SHRI N. V. IYER ( #emate ) SHRI 0. P. PANDYA Railway Board, New Delhi SHR~V. S. RAMANATHAN Ministry of Finance ( Department of Revenues ) SHRI P. P. MATHEW ( Alternate )
( Continued on page 2 ) @ Copyright 1975

Shri M. Rama Brahmam )

This publication is protected under the llndian Copyright Act'( XIV OF 1957) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 2009-1975
(Continued from pap Members 1 ) Represanting

SHRI H. N. SEN Indo-Burma Petroleum Co Ltd, Bombay SHRI D. K. CHAUoHURY ( &crnafe ) DRB.S. SUBRAHMANYAM Assam Oil Co Ltd, Digboi SHRI G. C. GOSWAMI( Alfernafc 1 SUPERINTENDING EN~IN& `Central Public Works Department, New Delhi EXECUTIVE ENCII~EER ( Alternate ) DR G. M. SAXENA, Director General, IS1 ( Ex-o&o Member ) Director ( Chem )
SHRI S. C. KALRA

Assistant Director Calibration and Computation Subcommittee,

( Chem ), IS1 of Capacity CDC 32 Tables of Tanks

:2

Convener
SHRI H. J. REBELLO

Esso Stanoard

Refining Co of India Ltd, Bombay

Members SHR~ N. R. BENJAMIN SHRI V. DHAWAN SIIRI K. S. SUBBANNA SHRI G. S. HARNAL Ministry of Finance ( Department of Revenues ) Burmah-Shell Oil Storage & Distributing Co of India Ltd. Bombav
( AItcrnaic )

Indian Oil Corporation Ltd ( Refineries Division ), New Delhi SHRI I. D. CHAWDHRY( Alternate J kaltex ( India ) Ltd, Bombay SHRI V. g. KHARHAR ' SHRI D. H. P. RATNASWAMI ( Allernak ) Directoiate of Weights & Measures, New Delhi SHRI V.B. MAINKAR Army Headquarters ( Ministry of Dcfrnce ) SHRI S. S. RACHAVAN Ministry of Finance ( Department of Rrvenues ) SHRI V. S. RAMANATHAN Assam Oil Co Ltd, Dighoi DR B.S. SUBRAHMANYAM Central Public Work's Department, New Delhi SURVEYOR OF WORKS, CPWD,
CALCUTTA

SARI P. VISHWANATH

RAO

Oil & Natural

Gas~Commission,

Dehradun

2

I!Sr2009-1975

Indian Standard
METHOD FOR CALIBRATION OF HORIZONTAL AND TILTED OIL STORAGE TANKS

( First Revision)
0. FOREWORD 0.1This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 9 June l-975, after the draft finalized by the Petroleum Measurements Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division Council.
0.2 This standard was first published in 1961. It has been reviewed and revised in the light of experience gained and data collected. In this revised standard various characteristics, namely, conditions for calibration and recalibration, frequency of calibration and recalibration, datum plate and correction due to working pressure have been dealt precisely. 0.3 The problem of accurate measurement of bulk quantities of liquid petroleum products is not a simple one. Its solution involves accurate engineering and mathematical work, the skill of the experienced oil gauger, and the use of carefully standardized and calibrated equipment. Accuracy in measurement is essential in the sale, purchase and handling of oil. It not only obviates possible disputes between the buyer and the seller, but also provides the only reliable means of maintaining adequate control over storage and distribution losses. 0.4 The measurement of bulk quantities of liquid petroleum products involves various processes, such as temperature measurement of oils in tanks, calibration and computation of capacity tables of tanks, ~gauging of tanks and calculation of bulk quantities of oils in tanks. The need for accurate calibration of tanks cannot, therefore, be overemphasized. The object of this standard is, therefore, to lay down methods to be adopted uniformly in the country, which will enable accurate calibration of horizontal and tilted tanks. 0.5 Taking into consideration the views of producers, distributors and consumers, the Sectional Committee responsible for the preparation of this standard, felt that it should be related to the prevailing trade practices in the country in this field. Furthermore, due weightage had to be given to the need for international co-ordination among standards prevailing in 3

I!s12009-1975 different countries of the world in this field. These considerations led the Sectional Committee to base this standard on the Petroleum Measurement Manual issued by the Institute of Petroleum ( IP ), London, in 1969. 0.6 For computation be followed. ofcapacity tables for the tanks, IS : 2166-1963* shall

0.7 In reporting the result of a test made in accordance with this standard, if the final value; observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it, shall be done in.accordance~with IS : 2-19607.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard prescribes methods for calibration and recalibration of horizontal and tilted tanks by strapping and internal measurements. These tanks are meant for bulk storage of petroleum and liquid petroleum products. 2. CONDITIONS FOR MEASUREMENTS

2.1 All data and methods, whereby measurements are obtained, necessary for the preparation of calibration tables should be in accord.ancd with sound engineering principles. 2.2 When drawings for the tanks are available, all measurements shall be compared with those obtainable from the -drawings and measurements which show discrepancies on this comparison greater than the tolerance specified in 11.7 shall be verified. A similar process of check shall be employed in all cases in which reliable information beyond the measurements taken is available. 2.3 Measurements shall be taken only after the tank has been filled at least once at its present' location with the product to be stored to its working capacity or with water to its equivalent height, and such product or water has been held in the tank for at least 24 hours to allow for settling. 2.4 Liquid calibration shall be preferred for any tank or portion of a tank not susceptible to adequate or accurate measurement. 3. CONDITIONS FOR RECALIBRATION

3.1 Tanks shall be recalibrated in case of the following situations: a) When restored to service after being disconnected or abandoned,
*Method for computation of capacity tables for horizontaLand tilted oil storage tanks.

t Rules for rounding off numerical values (kised 4

).

rs : 2999
b) Whenever

- 1975

disassembled and re-erected or .moved bodily, and

c) In case of any change in the deadwood, for example, when concrete or other material is placed on the bottom or on the shell of the tank or when the tank is changed in any manner which would affect the incremental or total volume. 4. FREQUENCY OF CALIBRATION AND RECALIBkATION

4.1 The second. calibration calibration.

shall be carried out five years after the first

4.2 The third calibration shall be carried out ten years after the second if the variation observed at full product height is less than f 0.25 percent by volume during the second calibration as compared with the first calibration. Thereafter, subsequent calibrations shall be at ten-year intervals. 4.3 The third calibration shall be carried out after five years from the second if the variation mentioned in 4.2 is greater than & 0.25 percent. Such recalibrations shall be carried out at five-year intervals if the variation is greater than & 0.25 percent as compared with the previous calibration. However, if at any one calibration, the variation is less than f 0.25 percent as compared with last calibration, subsequent calibrations shall be at ten-year intervals. 5. INTERRUPTED MEASUREMENTS

5.1 If the calibration of a tank is required to be interrupted, it may be resumed with minimum delay without repetition of work previously completed provided that: a) there is no major change in equipment and, as far as possible, no change in personnel; b) all records of work done are complete and legible; and c) same hydrostatic head as before is maintained in the tank. 6. DESCRIPTIVE DATA

6.1 Complete descriptive data should be entered on the tank measurements record form being used. A recommended record form is shown in Table 1. 6.2 Supplement pencil sketches or notations each completed, identified, dated and signed, will form an important part offield data. These shall be made to indicate typical horizontal and vertical joints; number of plates per course ( ring ) ; location of courses ( rings ) at which thickness of plates changes; arrangement and size of angles at top and bottom of shell; location and sizes of pipes and manholes; dents and bulges in shell plates; direction of deviation from vertical; method used in by-passing a large. obstruction, such as clean-out box or insulation box located in the path of 5

1s : 2009 - 1975
TABLE 1 REcclMMwD ED RECORD

OF HORiZONTAL

FORM FOR MEASAND TlLTEJI TANK!3

I.Clause 6.1 )
Report No.

Tank No. (Old Tank No.) Owner's Name Plant or Property Name_. Location Manufactured Erected Prepare to. Nominal Gauging_ Tank Contents Gauge Dimension by Copia Incrementa in Diameter Length Fractions Description Table of Form or Size Desired by

NaIllC

Avg Liquid Temp, "C cm or mm Sample Temperature cm or mm

at Hydrometer Reading OC__ Height of Dipping Reference Point above Dipping Datum Point

Distance bf Dipping Reference Foint from both ends ( illustrate by the sketch ) cm or mm Service Course (Ring) Circumference A B C # A Diameter : Vertical Horizontal Diagonal (where the circumference is measured ) D E F COURSE (RING A--C ) NUMBER D E FY

_

,B

49

.. .. .. ..

.. .. .. .f

.. .. ., ..

.. ,. .. ..

.. .. .. ..

.. .. .. .. (Cmrinurd)

6

IS:2099-1975
TABLE1 RECOMMEND ED RECORD FORM FOR MEASUREOF HORIZONTAL AhID TILTED TANKS - Contd

Remaining dimensions to be indicated on dimensions lines shown in Fig. 1.

_/`JIpp'Nt

REFERENCE

mm,

-LENGTH OVERALL LENGTH

OF

CYLINDERICAL

PORTION-

i

-----------------------A

FIG. 1'

LOCATIONS OF MEAWREMENTS FOR HORIZONTAL TANKS
Width of Lap Exposed Length of Each Ring _Length of Head Extension for Dished Ends at Each End ~ --

Descriptions of Shell `Plates and *Joints: Ring (Course No.) Thickness Type of
Joint

A B C D E F ---_Depth of dished-end ( at each end ) Thickness of plate for dished-ends -_

_.--~~_-

--

Total length of shell ( dished-ends excluded ) ( illustrate by sketch ) tAmount of tilt from horizontal: TTape Used Date Checked For separate sheets. For each piece or item of of occurrences, and location related to other at Circumference

Tank Measured by Deadwood and tank commctio ns----use deadwood record description, size, number height measured data recorded. Explaqatory Notes on unusual features.

*Show sketches of vertical and horizontal joints at the back of this table.

tShow direction of lean on plan view sketched on back of this table.

7

IS i 2009 - 1975 a circumferential measurement; location of tape path; location and elevation of possible datum plate and all other items of interest and value which will be encountered. 6.3 All measurements made by the tank calibrator site and not subjected to subsequent correction. 7. DEGREE OF ACCURACY shall be recorded on

7.1 In order to obtain maximum obtainable accuracy in calibration tables, adjustments for effects of the following variables shall be incorporated in the tables: a) Expansion and contraction and temperature, of steel tank shell due to liquid heads

b) Tilt from level position, and c) Tank bottoms that are irregular in shape. NOTE - The degree of accuracy desire&or required in the completed calibration table for a specific tank will be the governing factor in determining the procedure to be foollowedto achieve the desired result. 8. EXPANSION AND CONTRACTION OF STEEL DUE TO LIQUID HEAD AND TEMPERATURE TANK SHELLS

8.1 These effects shall be eliminated by strapping the tank when it is at least two-thirds full with water or approximately full with the product ( see also 2.3 ). The strapping record shall include water or product level from a known reference point, temperature of the tank contents and of the atmosphere adjacent to the tank. 8.1.1 ~Temperature of Tank Shell - The shell temperature centigrade shall be determined as follows: tS i where ( tS ) in degree

tL + tA when tL and tA differ by less than 24% 2 '

tL = temperature ~ofthe liquid in degrees centigrade,
tA = temperature of ambient air in degrees centigrade, ts = temperature of the shell in degrees centigrade. and

8.1.1.1 If tL and tA differ by more than 24X, tS shall be measured at four or more points equally spaced around the tank and the average of these readings shall be' taken. tL. 8.1.1.2 For tanks with insulated shells, tS shall be taken as equal to 8

IS : 2009 - 1975
8.1.2 Correction Due to Working Pressure - If the working pressure, tank radius and shell thickness of the tank are known, the increase in shell If circumference because of internal pressure shall be `read from Fig. 2. If it the increase in circumference is less than 0.3 cm it shall be ignored. is 0.3 cm or more, it shall be averaged with the ze1.o pressure circumference and this average shall be further used in the volume calculations.

SECTION 9. GENERAL

I

CALIBRATION

BY STRAPPING

9.1 This-method is based on the measurement of external circumferences which are subsequently corrected to yield the true internal circumference. 9.2 Circumferences shall be measured given in 2.3 and 8.1. under conditions of liquid head as

circumference measurements 9.3 The stipulated number of external together with subsidiary measurements, where necessary, to correct for ~deviation of the' tape from the true circular path, shall be obtained as described in 11. 9.4 Where practical, an internal diameter shall be measured at the same longitudinal position as that at which one of the circumferences has been measured. The resulting internal diameters shall be compared and if a discrepancy is shown, the measurements shall be verified. 9.5 Other measurements required to enable a table of capacities to prepared are as follows and shall be obtained as described in 12 to 17: be

a) A representative number of diameters nernendicular to the tank axis-to yield a fair average `vertical' dia;&er, this should include` one measurement at the ~dip-point;

b) c) 4 4

Plate thicknesses and any other data external circumfcrance measurements ference;

required for converting to true internal circum-

The length of the cylindrical portion of the tank and, where the tank has lapped circumferential seams, the lengths of the several courses ( rings ) ; For other forms of ends For dished ends, the depth of `dishing'. such additional measurements as are necessary for accurate computation of the volume of the ends; The distances of the dip-point from the ends of the tank, and the level of the dip-point relative to the lowest point of a vertical diameter taken at either ,jf the extreme ends of the cylindrical part of the tank. The dip-point is defined as the point on the tank bottom on which the dip-stick will normally rest in subsequent routine oil measurement; 9

01'

c-4"
E z y" . k ii z 5 w 5 800 1000 1100

900

700

500~
049

il.21

0.23

O-25

O-27

' ' ' ' '
O-29 IN SHELL

0*31

o-33

o-35

o-37 cyn

INCREASE FIG. 2

CIRCUMFERENCE,

INCREASE IN SHELL CIRCUMFERENCE DUE TO PRESSURE

IS : 2009 - 1975

f) d

The dimensions of any deadwood, that is, any fitting or object which adds to or subtracts from the capacity of the tank, together with the levels affected; and The angle to the horizontal at which the tank is tilted.

9.6 It may be necessary in practice to refer all tank dips to a datum point other than the datum point ( or points ) used for the purpose of tank calibration ( for example, the tank bottom ). If so, the difference in level between these datum points shall be determined, either by normal surveying methods or by other suitable means. 9.7 The overall height shall be measured, using the dip-tape and dipweight, from the dipping datum poirTt mentioned in 9.6, to the reference point on the dip hatch ( the dipping reference point ). The overall height shall be recorded and marked on the tank at the dip hatch. 9.8 A sketch showing the locations of the required measurements ( see Fig. 1 ), and if the tank shape is abnormal in any way, notes with supporting measurements explaining these, shall be prepared, 10. EQUIPMENT

10.1 Steel Strapping Tape - Shall comply with the specifications given in Appendix A of IS : X07-1974*. The tape shall be greased well before use. 10.2 Spring Balance - Graduated to show every 0.1, kg from 0 to 10 kg It is preferable to have two for measuring the tension applied to the tape. balances. For detailed specifications refer to A-l.2 of IS : 2007-1974*. 10.3 Step Overs - As described in A-l.3 of IS : 2007-1974*. correct deviations of the tape from its normal circular path, ing over fittings or joints between plates. 10.4 tipTape and Dip-Weight given in IS : 3515-1966t. Complying with the This is to namely, passspecifications

10.5 Loops and Cords - One or more metal loops, sliding freely on the and manipulated by cords from each side, the loops to be passed tape, around the tank in order to even out the tension in the tape. 10.6 `Clamp - To grip the tape without kinking at intermediate in order to facilitate application of the necessary tension. 10.7 Steel Rule positions

10.8 Wooden Lath -A straight wooden lath of length approximately equal to but not less than the diameter of the tank to be measured.
*Method for calibration of vertical oil storage tanks (first r&n tSpccifieation for tapes for use in measurements of oil quantities. ).

11

IS : 2009 - 1975 10.9 Wire diameter. Il. A length of piano wire several metres longer than the tank

CIRCUMFERENCE

MEASUREMENTS

11.1 Riveted and Lap-Welded Tank - Circumferences shall be measured by three strappings per course ( ring ) in planes at right angles to the longitudinal axis of the tank at the following positions ( .see Fig. 3 ): a) 10 to 15 cm from the edges of the plates to which the two ends of the tank are attached, position of each course edge ( ring ), and overlap between COUIXS 10 to 15 cm from (wring). each of each

b) at the middle c)

__

__

_.

__+

. ..--.

LONG AXIS ---~---

--

All diiuyiom

in centimetres.

Fm. -3

LOCATIONS OF MEASUREMENTS FOR RIVETED AND WELDED TANKS

11.2 Butt Welded Tanks - Measurement of the circumference shall be taken 25 cm from each end of the tank, and additionally at eve+ 1.5 to 2 m of i,ts length. No measurement shall be taken nearer than 25 cm from any circumferential weld. 11.3 If for any reason it is impracticable, even with the use of the step-over ( see 11.8 ), to take a strapping at the normal position, it shall be taken as close to the position as practicable, but not nearer. the angle iron or seam than is specified in 11.1 and 11.2. The strapper's notes shall give the position at which this circumference has been measured, with the reason for abandoning the normal position. 11.4 If the tape is not in close contact with the surface of the tank throughout its whole path, a step-over shall be applied so that a correction may be 12

IS : 2009 - 1975
calculated to. adjust the gross circumference for this effect. The paths of the tape round each course ( ring ) shall be inspected and any lumps of paint, scale, etc, removed, before circumferences are measured. 11.5 Strapping Procedure

11.5.1 The tank shall be strapped by either of the methods described in 11.5.2 and 11.5.3. In either case a tension of 4.5 f 0.5 kg shall be applied to the tape and transmitted throughout its length by suitable means; for example by means of metal loops shding on the tape, the loops being passed arounrl the tank with the aid of light cords. 11.5.2 If the tape to be used is not long enough to encircle the tank completely, then after the position of the tape path has been chosen, fine lines shall bc scribed pcrpcndicular to this path, to allow the. circumference to be measured in sections. The scribed lines shall be drawn only in the Subject to 11.4, the external middle circumfcrcntial third of any plate. circumference of the tank is then the sum of the lengths between the scribed lines. The lines shall be scribed at such distances as will ensure that the whole of the length of the tape used is under the observation of one or other of the calibrators. 11.5.3 If the tape to be used is long enough to encircle the tank completely, 111en after the level of the tape path has been chosen, the tape is passed around the circumference and held so that the first graduated dccimetre lie; within the middle circumferential third of any plate. The other The tension is then applied end .of the tape shall be brought alongside. through the spring balances and transmitted throughout the length pf the tape. 11.6 Repetition of Measurement - After a circumference has been measured as described in 11.5.3, the tape shall be shifted a little around the tank, brought back to the position and tension applied as before 11.5.1, and the reading repeated. The final reading shall be the arithmetic average of the two readings. 11.7 Tolerances - Measurements considered satisfactory if repetition following tolerances: Circumference m up to 30 to 70 Over 30 to 50 Over50 Over 90 13 Over 70 to 90 shall be read to 1 mm and shall be as in 11.6 shows agreement within the Tolerance *: ;t* f f8 k.10 6

IS : 2009 - 1975 11.8 Use of StepOvers 11.8.1 Instructions given in 11.4.3 of IS : 2007-1974* are wholly applicable to horizontal and tilted cylinders, except that when calibrating a step-over interval the strapping tape shall not be applied to the tank circumference within 30 cm of any circumferential seam. 11.8.2 The step-over correction shall be included for all longitudinal In the case of longitudinal seams, provided seams wherever detectable. that the tape path'is entirely clear of rivet heads! the following procedure may be adopted. An average step-over correction may be determined for each course ( ring ) and multiplied by the number of seams per course ( ring ) to obtain the total correction to be applied to the measured circumference of that course ( ring ) to compensate for such overlaps. 11.8.3 For single obstructions, over shall be included. only step-over corrections of 2 mm or

11.8.4 The use of the step-over corrects crrcumferences for' the effect on them of longitudinal seam overlaps, but does not correct the tank tables for the effect as deadwood of internal projections of the seam edges. These shall be measured and accounted for as deadwood. 11.8.5 By choosing tape courses ( rings ) in order to avoid appurtenances, use of step-overs could be eliminated to a great extent. 12. DIAMETER MEASUREMENTS

12.1 The term vertical diameter is used in a nominal sense as applicable to both horizontal and tilted tanks to denote a diameter measured in vertical plane which bisects the tank longitudinally. It -will be understood, however, that all diameters shall be measured perpendicular to the tank axis. 12.2 Where circumstances permit, a vertical internal diameter shall be measured directly on each course _( ring ) ( see 20 ) at ~aposition corresponding to that at which an external crrCumf&ence has been measured. J.2.3 Where it is impracticable to measure these diameters directly, the best available method shall be used to obtain measurements from ~which For example, the average vertical diameter canbe accurately calculated. vertical measurements can be made from the dipping reference -point to: a) the bottom of the tank shell inside; and b) the top of the tank shell outside. The difference of these two measurements corrected will give the vertical internal diameter at that point, for plate thickness

*Method for calibration of vertical oil rtonge tanks (&St noirion ). 14

IS : 2009 - 1975 12.4 Similar
measurements should be made at any other top of the tank, such as manhole or vent pipe fittings. 12.5 In the case of an unburried diameter should also be measured ness or other information required openings in the

tank with flat ends, a vertical external at each end, together with' plate thickto convert it to an internal diameter.

12.6 If by reasons of local~distortions, any of these diameters is considered not representative of average conditions, this fact should be recorded together with the best estimate of the corrections involved. 12.7 The actual vertical diameter at the dip-point accordance with either 12.3 or 20. 13. should be measured in

OTHER

MEASUREMENTS

OF TANK

SHELL

PLATE

13.1 Plate ThicknessPlate thicknesses .are usually close to those given on the drawings. In all cases where the drawings are not available or cannot be accepted for the calculation of the tables by reasons of local regulations, the thickness of the~plates of each course ( ring ) shall be measured by the most practical method. If no places are free from visible effects of caulking, then the best possible estimate of the plate thickness shall be made.
13.1.1 Whenever the shell thickness is taken from drawings or by nondestructive techniques, then the paint film thickness should be added to the shell thickness. Further, the number of coats of paint applied should also For this, a suitable paint measuring be recorded in the data sheet. equipment shall be used. 13.2 Course ( Ring)

Lengths

13.2.1 When circumstances permit, the lengths of courses ( rings) shall be measured internally with the approved steel tape. The lengths corresponding to each internal plate edge are read to the nearest millimeter of the tape which shall be under the standard tension. The effective length of each course ( ring ) is then the difference between the two consecutive readings which include the course ( ring ).
13.2.2 When it is impracticable to measure the course ( ring ) lengths internally, they shall be measured externally to the nearest millimetre, due allowance being made for the effect of the seam overlaps. It shall be permissible to measure the course ( ring ) lengths at more than one position round the tank, and to average the results so obtained. 13.2.3 The overall measured. length of the tank including any dished ends shall be

15

Is : 2009 - 1975
14. MEASUREMENT OF DISHED ENDS

14.1 Additional plate. measurements are necessary when a tank has been constructed with dished ends. The two dished ends on any one tank are usually similar,`and measurements of one will be checked by' the measurement of the other. The method recommended for calculating the total capacity and partial capacities of dished ends is based on the assumption that the dished ends are paraboloids of revolution. In such cases, measurements other than the depth of dishing are unnecessary. Where the dished ends are shallow spherical caps the recommended method for calculating the total capacity and partial capacities may be considered to be sufficiently accurate; but when other methods of calculation are used or the dished ends are of a different shape such additional measurements shall be taken as are required for calculating the capacities. 14.2 The length of the cylindrical part of the tank shall be taken as including the cylindrical lips which are usually formed on the dished ends to allow these to be riveted or welded to the side plates ( see Fig. 1 ). If a line is scribed on each end defining the plane taken as separating the-domed from the cylindrical part of the dished ends, then the length of the cylindrical part of the tank will be the, minimum distance between these lines. The lines scribed need not completely encircle the tank. 14.2.1 The total calculated capacity of the tank is not greatly affected by slight errors in the position chosen for these lines, but once they have been chosen great care shall be taken that both the cylindrical length of the tank and the depths of dishing are measured from the same marks. 14.3 Lines defining the plane from which the depths of dishing are to be measured, having been scribed as in 14.2, the depths of dishing shall be determined as follows. 14.3.1 The top and bottom offset at right angles from the defined plane to the ,outer surface of each dished end are measured using a straight wooden lath or wire which is held so that the top and bottom offsets from this defined plane do not differ by more than 2 mm. To compensate for any lack of straightness in the lath, these measurements are then repeated using the other edge of the lath. The plate thickness at the centre of the dished end shall also be determined. The depth of dishing should be taken as the mean of the four offsets minus the plate thickness. 15. DEADWOOD 15.1 Deadwood is any fitting or other object which adds to or subtracts from the capacity of the tank. It seldom departs from the dimensions given on its detail drawings, and it is rarely necessary to measure it unless local regulations demand direct measurements. 16

1s: 2409-1975 15.2 Deadwood will be classified as taking effect with increase of dip vertically, namely, such items as internal bracing, pipes, etc, or circumferentially, namely, circumferential bracing. In general, for deadwood taking effect vertically, it is sufficient to measure, to the nearest 1 cm, the lowest and highest levels at which the deadwood begins to effect the capacity of the tank, but where the effect of the deadwood is large and when its shape is irregular, the deadwood shall be measured in such sections as will sufficiently allow for its varying effect on the tank capacity at various heights. 16. DATUM PLATE

16.1 The dgum plate is a level metal plate preferably attached to the tank shell located directly under the reference point to provide a fixed contact surface for the innage bob. 17. TILTED TANKS the angle at

17.1 In cases where the axis of the tank is not horizontal, which the axis is tilted to the horizontal shall be measured:

a) by filling a little water into the tank and taking the depth of the water at each end of the tank, or b) by using the survey methods for determining differences in level. One of the points on the bottom is taken as datum level, and

heights of others measured relatively to this, the lower end being clearly marked as shown in the sketch. The distances of the points from one or other end of the tank shall also be given as shown in the sketch. The points are taken along the lowest part of the tank; one at each end is sufficient unless the bottom is obviously irregular. bottom at the lower shall be

17:2 The height of the dip-point relative to the tank end shall be measured~in a similar manner. 17.3 The measured distance of the'dip-points with a steel tape. from

the ends of the tank

SECTION 18. GENERAL 18.1 This method

I; CALIBRATION BY INTERNAL MEASUREMENTS

is based on the measurement

of internal

diameters. at

18.2 Diameters shall be measured only after the tank has been filled least once, and when- the tank is clean, dry and gas free. 17

IS t 2009 - 1975
18.3 In addition to the measurements -diameter, perpendicular to the axis, ( see 12.7 ). 18.4 specified in 20.1 at the dip-point and 20.2, the actual shall be measured

AU Tanks
number of internal diameters shall be obtained as

18.4.1 The stipulated described in 20.

18.4.2 Where practicable, representative external circumference shall be measured ( see 11 ) at the same longitudinal position as that at which one of the sets of diameters has been measured. The resulting diameters shall be compared. If a discrepancy is shown the measurements shall be verified. 18.4.3 prepared Other measurements required to enable a table of capacities to be are as follows and shall be obtained as described in 20 to 24: Plate thicknesses and any other data required for converting external circumference measurements to true internal circumference; The length of the cylindrical portion of tank end, where the tank has lapped circumferential seams, the lengths of the several courses; dished ends, the depth of dishing. For other forms of ends such additional measurements as are necessary for accurate compensation of the volume of the ends;

4 b)

Cl For 4

The distances of the dip-point from the end of the tank, and the level of the dip-point relative to the lowest point of a vertical diameter taken at either of the extreme ends of the cylindrical part of the tank; dimensions of any deadwood, that is, any fitting object which adds to or subtracts from the capacity of the tank, together with the levels affected; and at which the tank is tilted. may be necessary in practice to refer all tank dips to a datum than the datum point or points used for the purpose of tank If so, the difference in level between namely, tank bottom. points shall be determined, either by normal surveying methods suitable means.

e) The f)

The angle to the horizontal

18.4.4 It point other calibration, these datum or by other

18.4.5 The overall height shall be measured, using the dip-tape and from the dipping datum point mentioned in 18.4.4, to the dip-weight, reference point on the dip hatch ( the dipping reference point ). The coverall height shall be recorded and marked on the tauk at the dip hatch. 18.4.6 A sketch (see Fig. 1 ) showing the locations of the required ineasurcments, and if the tank shape is abnormal in any way, notes with supporting measurements, where necessary, explaining these, shall be which give the required prepared. Alternatively, any measurements dimensions or allow them satisfactorily to be calculated, shall be taken,

.

18

IS : ~2009- 1975
19. EQUIPMENT 19.1 Steel Tape - Complying with the specifications given The tape shall be greased well before use. IS: 2007-1974*. 19.2 Dynamometer of IS: 2007-1974*. 19.3 Steel Rod in A-2.1 of

- Complying with the specifications given in A-2.2 This is used for applying tension to the steel tape.

-19.4 Steel Rule
20. DIAMETER MEASUREMENTS Tanks ( seeFig. 3 ) .

20.1 Riveted -and Lap-Welded

20.1.1 Diameter shall be measured in a plane at right angles to the longitudinal axis of the tank at the following three positions on each course ( ring j: a) 10 to 15 cm from the edges of the plates to which two ends of the tank are attached, b) at the middle c) position of the course ( ring ), and overlap between courses 10 to 15 cm from each ( rings ). edge of each

20.1.2 For each of the three planes on a course ( ring ) as specified above This at least four diameters shall be measured at the following positions. involves at least twelve measurements per course ( ring): a) one vertical,

b) one horizontal,

and bisecting these.

c) two at the angles approximately

If these mcasuremcnts show the tank to be irregular, additional diameters shall `be taken at positions approximately bisecting the angles between the diameters already measured. 20.2 Butt-Welded Tanks -One set of diameters measured as specified shall be taken 25 cm from each end of the tank, and an additional set of diameters at every 1.5 m or 2 m of its length; no measurements should be If the measuretaken nearer than 25 cm from any circumferential weld. ments show that the tank is irregular, additional sets of diameters shall be measured at intermediate positions along the length of the tank. 20.3 f Measurements by Steel Tape, Dynamometer and Steel Rule

20.3.1 All diameter measurements shall be made with a tension 4.5 All tape 0.5 kg applied to the tape as indicated by the dynamometer.
`Method for calibration of vertical oil storage tanks (Jirst rrvision ).

19

IS : 2009 - 1975 measurements shall be recorded as read, that is, without including the length of the dynamometer. The dynamometer length at 4.5 kg pull shall be determined accurately before it is put into commission and subsequently checked before and after the calibration of each tank, the final check being made before leaving the site. 20.3.2 Measurements shall be taken with the zero end of the steel tape attached to the dynamometer, one operator placing the dynamometer on the predetermined point and the second operator placing the rule-end-on to a point diametrically opposite. The tape with the graduated side wholly upwards is then pulled along the rule until the requisite tension is registered by the sounding of the bell in the dynamometer. The relative position of tape and rule is maintained by a firm grip until the rule is removed from the side of the tank and the measurement read on the tape at the end of the rule which was previously in contact with the tank side. The operation shall be repeated at the various positions at which measurements are requirThe measurements shall be recorded clearly in ed throughout the tank. white chalk on the steel plates in such a manner as to indicate the positions at which they were taken. 20.3.3 1 mm. Each measurement of diameter shall be recorded to the nearest

20.3.4 If a measurement is suspected of being inaccurate it shall be repeated and the first measurement shall be accepted if the second does not differ from it by more than 2 mm. 20.4 Measurements by Steel Rod and Rule

20.4.1 When a steel rod and rule are used, the rod shall be set upright in the tank at the position on the course ( ring ) whose diameter is required and the amount by which the tank diameter exceeds the known length of the steel rod is measured by means of the rule. The rod with the steel rule in position should be tilted about alon g the length of the tank until the minimum length is found, and then crosswise to the tank until the maximum is found. In the same vertical plane, the horizontal diameter of the tank shall be measured in a similar way, and also the two diameters at If these'measurements about 45" to the two diameters already measured. show the tank to be irregular, additional measurements shall be. taken in the same plane at positions approximately bisecting the angle between the diameters already measured. 20.4.2 1 mm. Each measurement of diameter shall be recorded to the nearest

20.4.3 If a measurement is suspected of being inaccurate it shall be repeated and the first' measurement shall be accepted if the second does not differ from it by more than 2 mm. 20.4.4 positions If for any reason it is impracticable to take measurements at the described above then the diameters shall be taken as close as 20

IS : 2009 - 1975
possible position 21. The leason to the proper position. shall be recorded in the field notes. for abandoning the normal

OTHER

MEASUREMENTS

ON TANK

SHELL

PLATE
shall be

21.1 Other measurements required done,in ~accordance with 13.

for the calibration

of the tank

22. MEASUREMENTS 22.1 Measurement
with the modification

OF DISHED

ENDS
in accordance with 14

of the dished end shall be done as given in 22.2.

22.2 Lines defining the plane from which the depths of dishing are to be measured, having been scribed as -in 14.2, the rod, wire or tape is held across the tank against the tip of the dished end or the edge of the plate on the end course ( ring ). With the rod, wire or tape in position, offsets are measured to the inner surface of the dished end, at the centre line of the tank and to the scribed lines. All offsets shall be measured normal to the rod, wire ur tape~and from the same face of the rod or tape.

23. DEADWOOD 23.1 Deadwood
24. shall be calculated as given in 15.

TILTED

TANKS
for tilted tanks shall be done in accordance with 17.

24.1 Measurements

21

BUREAU
Headquarters:
Manak Bhavan, 331

OF
9 Bahadur 01 31,

INDIAN
Shah Zafar 331 13 75

S TANDARDS
Marg, NEW DELHI 110002

Telephones:

Telegremrzfvlanaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone 331 01 31 331 1375 I 36 24 99

Regional~Offices:
Central Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 +E stern : 1 /14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola, CALCUTTA 700054 Nort hern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 Southern tWestern Branch : C. I. T. Campus, MADRAS 600113 Andheri

: Manak

: Manakalaya,
BOMBAY Offices:

E9 MIDC. 400093

Marol,

21843 3 1641 I 41 24 42 _ 41 25 19 I 41 29 l-6 ( East ), 6 32 92 95

IPushpak', Nurmohamed Shaikh AHMADABAD 380001 SPeenya lndust rial Area BANGALORE 560058

Marg,

Khanpur, I Tumkur Road I

2 63 48 2 63 49 $;; ki 667 16

1 st Stage,

Bangalore

Gangotri Complex. 5th Floor. Bhadbhada Road, T. T. Nagar, BHOPAL 462003 Plot No. 82/83. Lewis Road, BHUBANESHWAR 751002 531'5. Ward No. 29, R.G. Barua Road, 5th Byelane, GUWAHATI 781003 5-8-56C L. N. Gupta Marg ( Nampally Station Road ), HYDERABAD 500001 R14 Yudhister 117/418 Marg. C Scheme, Nagar. JAIPUR 302005 208005

5 36 27 3 31 77 23 1083 6 1 6 21 { 21 6 16 16 34 98 68 82 23 21 21 71 32 76 92 05 04 17

B Sarvodaya

KANPUR

Patliputra Industrial Estate, PATNA 800013 T.C. No. 14/1421. Universitv P.O.. Palayam TRIVANDRUM 695035 lmpection Offices ( With Sale Point ):

Pushpanjali. First Floor, 205-A West High Court Road, 2 51 71 Shankar Nagar Square, NAGPUR 440010 Institution of Engineers ( India ) Building, 1332 Shivaji Nagar, 5 24 35 PUNE 411005 -*Sales Office in Calcutta is at 5 Chowringhee Approach, P. 0. Princep 27 68 00
Street. Cakutta 700072 tsales Office In Bombay Bombay 400007 SSales Office in Bangalore `Bangalore 560002 is at Novelty Chambers, Grant Road, 89 66 28 22 36 71

is at Unity Building, NarasimharajaSquare, Unit, BIS, New Delhi,

Reprography

India

